THE Union of the two noble and illustre famelies of Lancastre and York,
being long in continual discension for the croune of this noble realm, with
all the acts done in both the times of the Princes, both of the one lineage
and of the other, beginning at the time of king Henry the fowerth, the first
aucthor of this division* and so successively proceadyng to the reign of the
high and prudent prince king Henry the eight, the vndubitate flower and very
heir of both the said linages. 1548.

To the most mighty, verteous and excellent prince Edward the sixth, by the
grace of God, king of England, France and Ireland, defendor of the Catholic
faith, and under God supreme head, of the churches of England and Ireland. Your
most humble subject Edward Halle, wishes health, honor and felicity.
Oblivion the cancard enemy to Fame and renoune the suckyng serpent of
ancient memory, the dedly darte to the glory of princes, and the defacer of
all conquestes and notable acts, so much bare rule in the first and second
age of the world, that nothing was set out to men's knowledge either how the
world was made either how man and beasts were created, or how the world was
destroyed by water til father Moses had by divine inspiracio^ in the third age,
invented letters, the treasure of memory, and set forth fine notable books, to
the great comfort of all people living at this day. Likewise Mercury in
Egipte invented letters and writing, which Eadmus after brought in to Greece.
So every nacio^ was desirous to enhaunce lady Fame, and to suppress that dedly
beast Obliuio^. For what diversity is between a noble prince and a poor
beggar, ye a reasonable man and a brute beast, it after their death there be
left of them no remembrance or token. So that evidently it appears that Fame
is the triumph of glory, and memory by litterature is the very dilator and
setter forth of Fame. How much therefore are princes, gouernoures and noble
men bound to them which have so lively set forth the lives and acts of
their parents, that all though they be ded by mortal death, yet they by
writing and Fame live and be continually present. If no man had written the
goodness of noble Augustus, nor the pity of merciful Traian, how should
their successors have followed there steps in virtue and princely qualities:
on the contrary part, if the cruelty of Nero, the ungracious life of
Caligula had not been put in remembrance, young Princes and frail governors
might likewise have fallen in a like pit, but by redyng their vices and seeing
their mischeueous end, they be compelled to leave their evil ways, and
embrace the good qualities of notable princes and prudent governors: Thus,
writing is the keye to enduce virtue, and repress vice, Thus memory makes
men ded many a thousand yer^ still to live as though they were present: Thus
Fame triumphs upon death, and renoune upon Oblivion, and all by reason of
writing and history.

Alas my sovereign Lord, my heart lamenteh to know and remember what rule
this tyrante Oblivion bare in this realm, in the time of the Britons. For from
the first habitacion of this land, no man of the Britons either set furthe
history of their beginning, or wrote the hole lives of their princes and
kings, except Gildas which inueighed against the evil doings of a few
tyrants and evil governors. In so much that Caesar writes, that when he was
in this realm, the people could not tell their lineage, nor their beginning. But
one Geffrey of Monmothe a thousand year and more after Julius Caesar, translated
a certain Britishe or Welshe book, conteinyng the coming of Brute with the
sequel of his lineage, till the time of Cadwalader, which Britishe book if it
had slept a little longer, Brute with all his posterity had been buried in the
poke of Oblivion, for lack of writing.

The strong Saxons, after they had gained this land, set up the ba^ner of
Fame, and had their lives notably written by diverse and sundery famous
clerks, even from their first entery into this land, till the first
Monarchy, and so sucessyuely. In the Normans time, many notable works has
been set furthe, some of one prince perticulerly, and some of mo: So that in
fine, all the stories of kings, from king Willyam the first, to king Edward
the third, be set ^urthe at length by diverse authors in the Latin toungue,
as by Matthewe of Paris sometime religious in saint Albons and other. After
whom Ihon Frossart wrote the lives of king Edward the third, and king Richard
the second, so compendeously and so largely, that if there were not so many
things spoken of in his long works, I might believe all written in his great
volumes to be as true as the Gospel. But I have read an old Proverb,
which says, that in many words, a lie or twain sone may escape. Sith the
end of Frossarte which ends at the beginning of king Henry the fourth, no
man in the English toungue, has either set forth their honors according to
their deserts, nor yet declared many notable acts worthy of memory dooen in
the time of seven Kings, which after king Richard succeeded: Except Robert
Fabian and one with out name, which wrote the common English Chronicle, men
worthy to be praised for their diligence, but far shotyng wide from the butte
of an history.

Wherefore most drad and benign sovereign Lord, lest cancarde Oblivion should
deface the glory of these seven Princes, to whom you be of all sides lineall
heir and very enheritour, I have compiled and gathered (and not made) out of
diverse writers, as well foreign as English, this simple treatise which I have
named the union of the noble houses of Lancaster and York, conjoined together
by the godly marriage of your most noble graundfather, and your verteous
grandmother. For as king henry the fourth was the beginning and rote of the
great discord and division: so was the godly matrimony, the final end of all
discencions, titles and debates.

Besechyng your high Majesty, to take this my simple and rube work,
according to your accustomed goodness in good part, not regardyng the thing,
but my good will to my native country, whose fame for lack of writing may
much be darkened and defaced, and thus I pray to the celestial Lord to send
you victory over your enemies, Peace with your confederates, love of your
subjects: and in conclusion, perpetual joy and eternal felicitee

RICHARD GRAFTON to the reader.
I Must crave of the most gentle reader, charitably to judge of me the
imprinter of this work, if ought herin shall be seen unto the of purpose to be
omitted either not sufficiently delated and set forth, or else somethyng to
plainly spoken, in the which might be noted affeccion, that thou will excuse me
therein, for I profess that I have as nere as in me lay, nether altered nor
added any thing of my self in the whole work, otherwise the^ the aucthor
writ the same. But this is to be noted, that the Aucthor thereof, who though not
to al me^, yet to many very well known, was a man in the later time of his life
not so paynfull and studious as before he had been: wherefore he perfited and
writ this history no farther then to the four and twenty year of king Henry
the eight: the rest he left noted in diverse and many pamphletes and papers,
which so digently and truly as I could, I gathered the same together, and have
in suchewise compiled them, as may after thesaied years, apere in this work:
but utterly without any addicion of mine. Therefore my request and desyr as a
foresaied, is, that thou will truly and charitably judge me: And so sone as my
leisure will serve, for thine ease and ready fyndyng of any thing herein
contained I purpose to gather an exact table of the whole work

The names of the aucthors as well Latin as other, out of the which this work
was first gathered, and after compiled and conjoined.
Latin aucthors.
Policronicon. Cronica Cronicarum. Nauclerus. Polidorus. Paulus Aemilius.
Voluteranus. Gauguinus. Albertus Krantz. Michael Ricius. Hector Boethius.
Ioannes Mayor. Abbas VVyssenbergensis. Carrion. Supplementum Cronicarum. Gesta
Tholosanorum. Cronica Brabancie.
French aucthors.
Enguerant de Munstrellet. Iean ^uchet. Iean Mayer de Belget. Argenton. Le Mere
de* Histories. Les annals de France. Les annals de Aquitayne. Les Cronique
de Britayne. Giles Corozett, Les Croniques de Normandi. Le Rosarie. Le
genolagie des Roys.
English writers.
Treuisa. Fabian. Sir Thomas Moore. Caxton. Ihon Hardyng. The Chronicles of
London. Ihon Basset. Balantyne. And out of other diverse Pamphlettes, the names
of whom are to most men unknown.
The names of the histories co^teigned in this volume.
An introduccion into the division of the two houses of Lancastre and york.
FINIS.
An introduccion into the history of King Henry the fourth.
WHat mischief has insurged in realms by intestine division, what
depopulacion has ensued in countries by civil discencio^, what detestable
murder has been committed in citees by separate faccions, and what calamitee
has ensued in famous regio^s by domestical discord and unnatural controversy:
Rome has felt, Italy can testify, France can bear witness, Beam can tell,
Scotland may write, Denmark can show, and especially this noble realm of
England can apparently declare and make demonstracion. For who abhors not
to express the heinous factes committed in Rome, by the civil war between
Julius Caesar and hardy Po^pey by whose discord the bright glory of the
triu^phant Rome was eclipsed and shadowed? Who can reherce what mische^es and
what plages the pleasant country of Italy has tasted and suffered by the
sedicious faccions of the Guelphes and Gebelynes? Who can report the misery
that daiely has ensued in France, by the discord of the houses of Burgoyne
and Orliens: Or in Scotland between the brother and brother, the uncle and the
nephew? Who can curiously endi^e the manifold battailles that were fought in
the realm of Beaine, between the catholics and the pestiferus sects of the
Adamites and others? What damage discencion has dooen in Germany and Denmark,
all christians at this day can well declare. And the Turk can bear good
testimony, which by the discord of christen princes has amplified greatly his
seigniory and dominion. But what misery, what murder, and what execrable
plagues this famous region has suffered by the division and discencion of the
renoumed houses of Lancastre and York, my wit cannot comprehend nor my
tongue declare nether yet my pen fully set furthe.

FOR what noble man lives at this day, or what gentleman of any ancient
stock or progeny is clear, whose lineage has not ben i^fested and plaged with
this unnatural division. All the other discordes, sects and faccions almost
lively florishe and continue at this present time, to the great displesure
and prejudice of all the christian public wealth. But the old divided
controversy between the fornamed families of Lancaster and York, by the union
of Matrimony celebrate and consummate between the high and mighty Prince King
Henry the seventh and the lady Elizabeth his most worthy Queen, the one being
indubitate heir of the house of Lancastre, and the other of York was suspended
and appalled in the person of their most noble ^uissa^t and mighty heir king
Henry the eight, and by him clearly buried and perpetually extinct. So that all
men (more clerer then the son) may apparently perceive, that as by discord
great things decaie and fall to ruin, so the same by concord be revived and
erected. In likewise also all regions which by deuisio^ and discencion be
vexed, molested and troubled, be by union and agreement releued pacified and
enriched.

BY union of the Godhed to the manhod, manne was joined to God which before by
the temptacion of the subtle serpente, was from him segregate and divided. By
the union of the catholic church and the outworne sinagoge, not only the hard
ceremonies and dedly peines of the Mosaicall law were clearly abholished and
made frustrate, but also christian liberty is inferred and Christ's religion
stablished and erected By the union of man and woman in the holy Sacrament of
Matrimony the generation is blessed, and the sin of the body clean extincte
and put away. By the union of marriage, peace between realm and realm is
exalted, and love between country and country is norished. By coniunccio^ of
matrimony, malice is extinct, amity is embraced, and indissoluble aliance and
consanguinite is procured. What profit, what co^mfort, what joy succeeded in
the realm of England by the union of the fornamed two noble families, you
shall apparently perceive by the sequel of this rude and unlearned history.
And because there can be no union or agreement but in respect of a division, it
is consequent to reso^ that I manifest to you not only the original cause and
fou^tain of the same, but also declare the calamities, trobles and miseries
which happened and chanced during the time of thesaid contencious discencion.

FOR the which you shall understand (according as it is in an Act of
Parliamente made in the first year of the reign of King Edward the fourth
specified and declared.) That the high and mighty Prince king Henry the third
of that name, The line of ^yng Henry the third.
had issue Edward his first begotten son borne at Westminster the eleventh
Kalendes of July in the vigile of Saint Mark and Marcilian in the year of
our Lord a thousand two hundrd.xxix. And Edmonde his second begotten son
borne on the day of saint Marcell in the year of our Lord a thousand two
hundred.xlv. Which Edward after the death of king Henry his father, was
entitled and called king Edward the first, and had issue his first begotten
son entitled and called after the death of king Edward his father, king
Edward the second, which had issue the right noble and honorable prince king
Edward the third which king Edward had issue Edward his first begotten son
prince of Wales, Willya^ of Hatfeld the second begotten son, Lionell duke of
Clarence the.iij. begotten son, Ihon of Gaunt duke of Lancaster the.iiij.
begotten son, Edmond of Langley duke of York the.v. begotten son, Thomas
of Wodstocke duke of Glocestre the.vj. begotten son, and Willyam of Wynsor
the.vij. begotten son. The said prince Edward died in y^ life of his father
king Edward the.iij. and had issue Richard borne at Bordeaux, which after the
death of king Edward the.iij. as cousin and heir to him, that is to say son
to the said Edward prince of Wales son to thesaied king Edward the third
succeeded him in royal estate and dignitee, lawfully entitled and called king
Richard the second and died without issue, Lionell duke of Clarence the third
begotten son of thesaied king Edward the third, had issue Philippe his only
daughter which was married to Edmond Mortymer earl of March and had issue
Roger Mortymer earl of March: which Roger had issue Edmond Mortimer earl of
March, Anne and Elienor, which Edmond and Elianor died without issue. And
thesaied Anne was married to Richard earl of Cambrige son to Edmond of Langley
duke of York the fifth begotten son of thesaid king Edward the third
which Richard had issue thee famous prince Richard Plantagenet duke of York
which had issue that noble prince king Edward the fourth father to Queen
Elizabeth united in matrimony to the high and sage prince king Henry the.vij.

Ihon duke of Lancastre had issue Henry earl of Darby, and Ihon earl of
Somersette. This Henry earl of Darby had issue, king Henry the fifth father to
king Henry the sixte which begat prince Edward that was slain at Tewkesbery,
and diseased without issue. Ihon the earl of Somersette before named, son to
Ihon duke of Lancastre, engendered Ihon duke of Somer^ette father to the lady
Margarete Countes of Richemonde mother to the noble and haute Prince King Henry
the seventh which espoused lady Elizabeth the heir of the illustre family of
York, by the which marriage the devise or badge of the house of Lancastre
which was the red Rose, was unite and joined with the white Rose, which was
the cognizance and ensign of the noble progeny of York, as by the genealogy
conteigned in the end of this work more plainly shall appear.

This aforenamed Henry earl of Darby being created alitle before duke of
Herfforde, aprudente and politic person, but not more politic then
well-beloved, and yet not so well-beloved of all, as of some highly disdayned,
began to consider with himself how that king Richard his cosyn german was
now brought to that trade of living that he little or nothing regarded the
counsel of his uncles, nor of other grave and sad persons, but did all
thing at his pleasure, setting his will and appetite instead of law and
reason. Wherefore on a day being in the compaigny of Thomas Mowbrey first
duke of Norffolke and earl Marshall, began to break his mind to him more
for dolor and lamentacion, then for malice or displeasure, rehersyng how that
king Richard little esteemed and less regarded the nobles and Princes of his
realm, and as much as lay in him sought occasions, invented causes and
practiced privily how to destroy the more part of them: to some thretenyng
death, to other manacyng exile and banishment, forgettyng and not remembryng
what blotte it was to his honor, and what detrimente and damage it was to the
public wealth, to suffer his realm to l^se the aunciente fame and pristinate
renoume by his sloth and negligence, and that all things both in the time of
peace, and also of war, as well in the realm as without, waxed worsse and
worsse, and had never prosperous success nor fortunate conclusion. And because
noble men murmured, and the common people grudged, and all men wondered at
his unprincely doings, he desired the duke of Norffolke, which was one of the
kings privy counsel and well heard with him, to advise the king to turn the
lefe and to take a better lesson. When the Duke of Norffolke had heard fully
his devise, he took it not in good part, but rekened yt he had gotten a pray
by the which he should obtain greater favor of the king then ever he had, and
so he at that time dissimuled the matter (as he was in deed both a deep
dissimuler and a pleasant flaterer.) And after when he had oportunite and
saw his time, was very glad (as tell tales and scicophantes be, when they
have any thing to instill in to the ears and heddes of Princes) to declare to
the king what he had heard, and to agrauate and make the offense the greater,
he much more added but nothing diminished.

This matter somewhat quickened and more tikeled the waueryng mind of king
Richard, and brought him into a great fury. But when the water of fumitory was
well disgested in his stomach, he determined to here both the parties
indifferently, and called to him the duke of Lancastre and his counsel, and
also the dukes of Herfforde and Norffolk, and caused the accusor to report
openly the words to him declared, which rehearsed them again as he had before
related to the king When Duke Henry heard the tale otherwise reported then he
either thought or said, somewhat unquieted for the novelty of the thing, or
troubled with anger for the untruth of the matter, stood still and paused a good
while lokyng steadfastly upon the king. And after y^ taking a good courage to
him, making low obeisa^ce, besought his highness to conceive no mistrust in him
til he had seen and herd more. Then turnyng himself to his accuser, declared
word by word what he had said showing the cause and occasion why he so spoke,
deniyng fiersly all the other new inue^cions alleged and proponed to his charge:
affirmyng y^ if the king would permit and suffer him he would prove his accusor
untrue, unjust and afalse forger of lies and sedicious tales by the stroke of a
spear and de^t of a swerd. The duke of Norffolke affirmed constantly his saying
to be true and refused not the co^bate. The king demanded of them if they
would agree between themselfes, which they both denied and threw down their
gages, by my truth quod the king, if you of your selfs will not agree I will
not study how to agree you: and then he granted the^ the battaill and assigned
the place to be at the city of Couentree in the month of August next ensuyng,
where he caused a su^pteous theater and listes royal gorgeously to be prepared.
At the day appointed the.ij. valiant dukes ca^ to Couentre, accompanied with the
nobles and gentiles of their linages which them encoraged and hertened to the
vtmoste. At the day of the co^bate and fight, the duke of Aumarle that day
high counstable, and theduke of Surrey that day high Marshall of England
entered into the listes with a great company of men apareled in silk sendall
embrodered with silver both richely and curiously, every man having a tipped
staff to keep the feld in order. About the time of prime came to the barriers
of the listes, the duke of Herfford mounted on a white corser barbed with blewe
and grene velvet embrodered sumpteously with Swannes and Antelopes of
goldsmithes work, armed at all poinctes. The Constable and Marshall came to
the barriers, demaundyng of him what he was, he answered: I am Henry of
Lancastre duke of Herfford, which am come hither to do my deuoyre against
Thomas Mowbrey duke of Norffolke as a traitor untrue to God, the king, his
realm and me Then incontinent he swear upon the holy Evangelists that his
quarrel was true and just, and upon that poyncte he desired to enter into the
listes. Then he put up his swearde which before he held naked in his hand,
and put down his viser, made a cross on his forhed, and with spear in hand
entered into the listes, and descended from his horse and set him down in a
chayer of grene velvet which was set in a trauers of grene and blewe velvet at
the one end of the listes, and there reposed himself expectyng and abydyng the
coming of his aduersye. Sone after him entered into the field with great
pomp King Richard accompaignied with all the pecres of his realm, and in his
compaignie was therle of sent Paul, which was come out of France in post to
se this challenge performed. The king had above ten thousand persons in
harness, least some fraie or tumultie might spryng amongst his nobles by
parttakyng or quarellyng. When the king was set on his stage which was richely
hanged and pleasantly adorned. A King at Arms made open proclamacion,
prohibityng all men in the name of the king and the high Constable and
Marshall to enterprise or attempt to approach or touch any part of the
listes upon pain of death, except such as were apoyncted to order and marshall
the field. The proclamacion ended, another Herald cried: behold here Henry of
Lancastre duke of Herfford appellant, which is entered into the listes royal
to do his deuoyre against Thomas Mowbray duke of Norffolke defendante, upon
pain to be proved falce and recreant. The duke of Norffolke houered on
horseback at the entery of the listes, his horse being barbed with crimosen
velvet embrodered richely with Lions of silver and Mulbery trees, and when he
had made his oath before the Constable and Marshall that his quarrel was just
and true, he entered the field manfully saying aloude, God aid him that has
the right, and then he departed from his horse and satte down in his chayer
which was Crimosen Ueluet, cortened about with white and read Damask. The
lord Marshall vewed their speres to see that they were of egall length, and
delivered the one spear himself to the duke of Herfforde, and sent the other
spear to the duke of Norffolke by a knighte. Then the Heraulte proclaimed that
the trauerses and chayers of the Champions should be removed, commaundyng
them on the Kings behalf to mount on horssebacke and adresse themselfes to
the battaill and combat. The duke of Herfforde was quickly horssed and closed
his bauier and cast his spear into the rest and when the trumpet, sou^ded, set
forward coragiously toward his enemy.vj. or.vij. paces. The duke of Norffolke
was not fully set forward when the king cast down his warder and the heraultes
cried ho, ho. Then the king caused their speres to be taken from them, and
commanded them to repair again to their chayers, where they remained two long
hours, while the king and his counsel deliberatly consulted what way was
best to be taken in so weighty a cause. Then the Heraltes cried silence and
sir Ihon Borcy secretary to the king red the sentence and determinacion of the
king and his counsel in a long roll, pronounsyng it after this manner. My
lords and masters I intimate and notify to you by the king and his counsel,
that Henry of Lancastre duke of Herfforde appellante: and Thomas duke of
Norffolke defendante, have honorably and valiantly apered here within the
listes royal this day, and have been ready to darraine the battaill like two
valiant knights and hardy cha^pions, but because the matter is great and
weighty between these two great princes, this is the order of the king and his
counsel, that Henry duke of Herfford for diverse consideracions and because
he has displeased the king, shall within.xv. days depart out of the realm
for term of ten years, without returnyng except by the king he be repealed
again and that upon pain of death. When the people which hertely loved the
duke of Herfford heard this cry, they were not a little amassed, and marueled
much that he which had done his deuor to the performance of his challenge
should be thus banished and exiled Then the herault cried again oyes, and the
secretary declared that Thomas Mowbrey duke of Norffolke by the ordinance of
the king and his cou^saill because that he had sown sedicion in this realm by
his words whereof he can make no proffe, shall a void the realm of England
and dwell in Hu^gery, Beam, Pruce or where he list, and to never return again
into England nor approach the co^fines nor borders of the same upon pain of
death, and that the king would stay the profits and revenues of his lands
in his hands till he had received such somes of money as the duke had taken
up of the kings treasorer for the wages of the garrison of Caleis which were
still unpaid. When these judgments were thus deuulged, the king called before
him the two exiles and made the^ swear that the one should never come into the
place where the other was (willyngly) nor keep company together in any foreign
region, which oath they received humbly and departed from the listes. It was
supposed that the king mistrusted that if they two should join in one again,
and conspire to be revenged against him, that they and their friends might
work him great trouble and calamitee, and for that cause to have devised
this oath. The duke of Norffolke which supposed to have been borne out by the
king, was sore repentant of his enterprise, and departed sorowfully out of the
realm into Almaine, and at the last came to Uenice where he for thought and
Melancoly deceassed, The duke or Herfforde took his leave of y^ king at
Eltha^, The Duke of Harforde banished the realm.
which there released four years of his banishment. And so he took his
journey and came to Caleis, and so into France, where he continued a while

Wondreful it is to write, and more strange to here, what nombre of people
ran in every town and street, lamenting and bewailyng his departure: As who
would say that when he departed, the only shield, defense and comfort of the
co^me^ people was vadid and gone, as though y^ son had fallen out of the
spear, or ye moon had lapsed from her proper epicicle.

When he was arrived in France, king Charles hearing the cause of his
banishement, which he esteemed very small and light, received him gently, and
him honorably entreteyned: In somuche that he had by favor obtained the
marriage of the only daughter of Iho^ duke of Berry uncle to the French king,
if king Richard had not cast astoppe in his way: For he well considered how
the comminaltie loved the duke, and how desirous they were of his return into
England, and then forseyng that if he should be joined with so great an
affinite as the blood of the house of Berry was in France, and afterward
sodeinly to return into England, it might fortune to redounde to his more
displeasoure then pleasour, wherefore he let the marriage to his own
destruction.

During ye first year of this dukes exile, his father Iho^ of Gau^t duke of
la^caster decessed, Ihon of G^unt Duke of Lancaster deceased.
and is buried on the north side of the high aultare of ye cathedral church
of seint Paul in London. The death of this duke abbreuiated the life of king
Richard, for he notwithstanding ye the duchy of Lancaster was to this duke
Henry laufully descended, not only seized without right or title all the
goods of duke Ihon his parent, but also defrauded his heir of his laufull
inheritance, receiving the rentes and revenues of al his patrimony, and giving
to other that which was not his, and distributed the dukes lands to his
paresites and flattereing foloers. This fact was adjudged to all the nobilitee
to be unlawful, unjust and ungodly, to deprive a man being banished out of
y^ realm without deserte, without culpe, and without cause, of his
inheritance and patrimony: but Edmund duke of York uncle to Henry now
lawfully duke of Lancastre, was sore moved with this chance to see the king
break and violate all laws, all justice and equite and after the murder of
his brother the duke of Glocestre, to spoil and rob the son of his other
brother. For he before this time as much as his patience could bear, did
tolerate and suffer the death of his brother, the exile of his nephiew, and an
hundred mo injuries, which for the leuitie and youth of the king, he remitted
and buried in oblivion. And therefore considering that the glory of the
public wealth of his native country was like to decay by reason that ye
king was not most ingenious, and had no man nere him that would boldly
admonish him of his office and duty, thought it the act of a wiseman in
time to get him to a resting place and to leave the following of such a doubtful
capitain which with a leade^ sword would cut his own throat bolle. Wherefore
he with the Duke of Aumarle his son went to his house at Langley, reioysyng
that there was nothing in the common wealth mishappened either by his device or
consent, and daily he lamentably desired aid of almighty God to turn away
from king Richard the dark cloud which he saw hangyng over his head.

In this season king Richard sailed into Ireland as diverse aucthors testify*
but what he did there, King Richard sailed into Ireland.
is no part of my process, which depends on the sequel of this division.
While king Richard was in Irelande, the grave persons of the nobility, the
sage prelates of ye clergy, the sad Magestrates and rulers of the cities,
tounes and comminaltie, perceiuyng daily more and more the realm to fall into
ruin and desolacion (in manner irrecurable as long as king Richard either lived
or reigned,) after long deliberacion, wrote into France to duke Henry, whom
they now called (as he was in deed) duke of Lancastre and Herfford, solicityng
and requiryng him with all diligent celeritie to conueigh himself into England,
promisyng him all their aid, power, and assistence, if he expellyng king
Richard as a man not mete nor convenient for so princely an office and degree,
would take upon him the Scepter, rule, and Diadem of his native country and
first nutritive soil. And for that cause they sent the reverent father Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of Cauntorbury with certain lords and citizens of diverse
cities and boroughes in habit palliate and dissimuled, into the city of
Paris, some going one way and some another, but all assemblyng together at the
house of Cluigny where the duke then soiourned.

When he saw the Archbishop his especial friend and looked on other his
fautours and lovers, if he thanked God no man ought to merueil, if he welcomed
these Ambassadors none need to wonder: but if he reioysed and applauded not at
their access and coming, wise men may think folly, and fools may laugh him
to skorne. When he was of them saluted, and they of him not only resaluted but
hertely welcomed and frendely entertained: The archbishop desiryng the duke
to absent al other persons then such aswer his companions, said these or like
words to him.

When your loving and natural kynsmen and countrymen most noble and mighty
prince, An (...) made by Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Cauntorbury to Henry
duke of Lancaster.
had much and long time considered and debated with themselfes of their
affairs and busynes in this tempesteous world and ceason (in the which no man of our nation is sure of his life, nor enjoys his lands and
seigniories without dread, nor possesses his mouables without terror or
fear, which outrageous doings many years occupied has brought the public
wealth of our abundant country almost to wrecke and utter exterminion) their
last ankerhold, refuge and comfort was to study and devise how to have a
governor and ruler which should excel and florishe in wisdom, policy and
justice above all other: By which reason a great number of the nobility and in
manner all the comminaltie, being led and persuaded (when they had well cast
their iyes and marked all the peers and nobles of the realm of England) they
could find no duke nor marquis, no earl nor other potentate within all the
realm, to whose Empire and authority they would be subject and vassals so
gladly as to yours: For this I assure you (and you know it as well as I) that
we miserable subjects have so long borne the yoke of wa^ton vnwitty king
Richard, and have patiently tollerat the parnicious persecucion of his gredy
and auaricious councellers, and have wynked at the pollyng and extorcion of his
unmeasurable officers, that our backs be so galdde that we can no more
suffer, and our chynne bones so weak that we can no longer carry. And therefore
necessity, and not will, reason, and not affeccion, constancy and not leuytie
enforces us to lament and desire your aid and comfort, to whom we be sent
by the most part of the nobilitee and also of the more part of the universal
comminaltie, to desire and require you to take upon you the high power,
governance and scepter of your native country and right inheritance, and the
same to govern, rule and defend according to your approved wisdom and long
experimented pollecie, whom we have ever known to be of that justice, of that
prudence and of that integritee that you will not command, admonyshe or
attempt any thing which shall not be just, honest and laudable: Which request
if you well consider and diligently ponder privily with your self, you shall
easily perceive that nothing more profitable, more honest, or more glorious can
by any ways happen or chance to you then to accept and conform your self to
the same. For what can you more desire and wish, then to command and do all
things according to right reason and honesty? We offer not to you gold,
silver, perle or precious stone, but our country, our bodies, goods and us
all to use as yours and not as ours, desiryng you to give to us in recompense,
indiffere^cy quietness and peace, and to restore to her seat and trone again
the lady instice which has so long been banished out of our nation, to
thentent that wise, sage and good persons (whose desire and appetite is ever
to live well) may honor, love and embrace you as a governor and king sent
from God, and that malicious and obstinate persons (whose conscience is
grudged with daily offenses, and whom the fear of justice and punishment
does continually vex and trouble, fearyng you as the skourge and plague of
their naughty doings and mischeuous acts) may either sone amend, or
shortly avoid your country and region. Now occasion is offered, refuse it not,
by the which your wisdom, pollecie and valiauntnes shall appear to the
universal world, by the which you shall not only bring us into an vnitre and
monacord, but also repress all sedicion and cancard dissimulacion: then the
noblemen shall triumph, the rich men shall live without fear, the poor and
nedy persons shall not be oppressed nor confounded, and you for your so doing,
shall obtein thanks of your creator, love of your people, favor of your
neighbors, fame and honor for ever. When the bishop had ended, the Duke
paused awhile, and then put of his hood and said.

My lord of Cauntourbury and you my other friends and lovers, your coming to
us is very pleasant, The answer of henry duke of Lancaster (...). E.
Aru^dell B of Cau^torbury.
but more joyous is your message, for we of our own natural disposicion for
the good will and syngular affection that you have ever borne to us, have
loved, embrased and highly esteemed you and all your doings. Surely we would
you knew with what sorrow and agony of mind we have borne your vexacions,
calamities and oppressions (as for the manifest injuries and obprobrious
offenses done and committed against us, as you know well enough, we wolle not
speak at this time) of the which we esteemed our self a partener, as a
thing common between us. For as it is hard that the head shall not feel when
the hand or any other membre is grieved of sick, so it is unlike that any
displeasure or discommoditee should happen to you with which we should not
taste in part, such agremente is emonge members, and such co^munitie is
among friends: Wherefore, neither for ambicio^ of worldli honor, nor for desire
of Empire or rule, or for affeccion of worldly riches and mucke of the world,
we wolle agree to your peticio^, but only to releue your miserable calamity,
to restore justice to her ancient rome and prehemine^ce, and to defend the
poor innocent people from the extort power of the gredy cormera^tes and
ravenous oppressors, requiryng you to join with us and we with you in
aduau^cyng forward this our incepted purpose and prete^sed entreprice.

When the duke had condiscended to the bisshoppes request, the bishop and his
accomplices departed into England, making relacion to their confederates of the
dukes agreement and pleasure, exhortyng every man to be pressed and ready at his
arryuall.

After their departure, the duke feigned to the French king that he would go
into Brytein to visit his friend duke Ihon of Brytein: The French king
thynking him to mean inwardely as he outwardly dissimuled, sent to the duke of
Britayne letters of comendacion in favor of the duke of Lancaster. But if he
had known that his intent was to trans^ret into England and depose his son
in law King Richard, he would suerely have stopped him a tide, and let his
purpose and passage. What should I say? ye which shall be, shall be. The duke
passed into Britayne and there conducted and waged certain men of war and
ships, The aryuyng and landyng of the Duke.
and with good wind and better speed sailed into England and landed at
Raue^spurre in holdrenes as most writers affirm. But some say that he landed
at Plymmoth, and other at Portesmouth, but where soever he arrived, sure it is
that he took land peaceably with out any againsaie or interrupcion. I will
not be tedious to you in rehersyng how the earls of Northumbrelande and
Westmerlande, the lords Percy, Rose, Willoughby and other resorted to him, and
taking an oath of him that he should not do to king Richard any bodily
harm, made to him homage and becam his liege men: I omyte how children
reioysed, how weme^ clapped there hands, and how men cried out for joy in
every town and village where he passed, I relinquishe farther the concourse of
people, the number of horses, which occurred to him as he iourneyed toward
London, reioysyng at his repair and coming to the City. I will not speak of
the procession and singing of the Clergy, nor of the pleasant salutacions nor
eloquent oracio^s made to him by the Prelacie, nor of the presents,
welcomynges, lauds, gratificacions made to him by the citiesens and
comminaltee of the city of London, but I will go to the purpose. When he was
come to London he consulted with his friends diverse days, to whom came Thomas
Earl of Arundell son to Richard of Arundell, by king Richard a litell before
put to death, which had lately escaped out of prison. When the Duke had
perceived the favor of the Nobility, the affection of the Clergy and the
sincere love of the comminalte toward him and his procedynges, he marched
foreward with a great company toward the West country, and in passing by the
way, the people assembled in great and houge multitudes (as the nature of the
common people is, ever desirous of new changes) calling him their king,
deprauyng and railyng on king Richard, as an innocent a dastarde, a meicocke
and not worthy to bear the name of a king. When he had assembled together a
convenient number of people for his purpose and was clearly determined to
depose king Richard from his rule and dignity, he proclaimed open war
against him and all his partakers fautours and friends. King Richard being in
Irelande was certified of the Dukes arrival, from whence (when he had pacified
the savage and wild people) he returned again into England, entending to
resist and defend the eminent peril and apparent ieopardy, and for the more
tuicio^ and safeguard entered into the strong castle of Flinte in North Wales.x.
miles distaunt from Chester. When king Richard perceued that the people by
plumpes fled from him to Duke Henry, he was amassed and doubted what council
sodeinlie to take, for on the one part he saw his title just, true, and
infallible, and beside that he had no small trust in the Welshemen, his
conscience to be clean pure immaculate without spot or envy: on the other
side, he saw the puissaunce of his adversaries, the sudden departing of them
that he most trusted, and all things turned vpsydoune, with these things he
being more abashed then encouraged, compelled by necessity, determined to keep
him self in that castle till he might see the world stable and in more
surety. For now he euidentely espied and manifestly perceived that he was
left, lowted and forsaken of them by whom in time he might have been aided
and relieved, and which now was to late and to far ouerpassed: and this
thing is worthy to be noted with a whitestone, of al princes rulers and men set
in auctoritee and rule, that this Duke Henry of Lancastre should be thus
called to the kingdom and have the healpe and assistence all most of all the
whole realm, which perchance never thereof once thought or yet dreamed: and
that king Richard should thus be left desolate void and desperate of all hope
and comfort, in whom if there were any offense, it ought more to be imputed to
the frailtee of his wanton youth then to the malice of his heart or
cankerdnesse of his stomach, but such is the frail judgment of mortal men
which vilependyng and not regardyng things present before their eyes, do
ever think all things that are to come to have a prosperous success and a
delectable sequcie. When the Duke of Lancastre knew that king Richard was
come to the castle of Flinte, which a man may call the dolorous Castle,
because there king Richard declined from his dignity and lost the tipe of his
glory and pre-eminence, he assembled together a great army in small space
lest he might give his enemies time to prevent his purpose and so to lose the
good occasion of victory to him given, came to the town of Bristowe where he
apprehended Willyam lord Scrope the kings treasurer sir Iho^ Busshe and sir
Henri Grene knights, and caused their heddes to be stricken of, and from thence
took his iourneie directly to Chester. When Thomas Percy Earl of Worceter and
great Master or lord Stuard of the kings household being brother to the Earl
of Northumberland hard tell of the dukes approach, bering displeasure to the
king because he had proclaimed his brother a traiter, brake before all the
kings household his white staff, which is the ensign and token of his office
and without delay went to duke Henry. When the kings familier seruitours
perceived this, they dispersed them selfs some into one country and some into
another.

The Duke came toward the castle of Flinte whereof king Richard being
advertised by council of Ihon Pallet and Richard Seimer his assured
s^ruauntes departed out of the castle and took the sands by the river of Dee
trusting to escape to Chester and there to have refuge and succoure, but or he
had far passed he was forelayed and taken and brought to the Duke, which sent
him secretly to the Tower of London. When the Duke had thus possessed his long
desired pray, he came to London in solemn estate and there called a
Parliament in the kings name, to the which many of the kings friends, but
more of his there appeared. There was declared how unprofitable king Richard
had been to the realm during his reign, how he subverted the laws, polled
the people and ministered Justice to no man but to such as pleased him. And to
the intent that the commons should be persuaded that he was an unjust and
unprofitable Prince and a tiraunte over his subjects, and worthy to be
deposed. There were set forth.xxxv. solemn articles very heinous to the
ears of men, and to some almost incredible: The very effect of which
articles I will truly report hereafter according to my copy.

the same, which being busy about the same commission, he with other

Item that he caused his uncle the Duke of Gloucester to be arrested

Item he assembled certain Lancashire and Cheshire men to the intent

Item although the king flateringly and with great dissimulacion

Item he has compelled diverse of the said lords servants and

Item where diverse were appointed to common of the estate of the

Item he uncharitably commanded that no man upon pain of loss

Item where this realm is holden of God, and not of the Pope or

Item although the duke of Lancastre had done his deuoir against

Item before the dukes departure, he under his broad seal licenced him to make
attourneis to prosecute and defend his causes: The said king after his
departure would suffer none attorney to apere for him but did with his at his
pleasure.

Item the same king put out diverse shriues lawefully elected and put in their
romes, diverse other of his own minions subuertyng the law contrary to his
oath and honor.

























fearyng the sequel of the matter submitted them selfs to his mercy whom he
fined and raunsomed unreasonably at his pleasure.

Item he craftily devised certain privy oaths contrary to the law,

Item where the Chancellor according to the law would in no

Item he banyshed the bishop of Canterbury without cause or judgment

Item the bishops goods he granted to his successor upon condition

Item upon the accusacion of the Archbishop, the king craftily persuaded

These be the articles of any effect which were laid against him, saving
four concerning the bishop of Caunterbury, which only touched hi^, but his
workyng unwrought king Richard from his crou^e.

AND for as much as these articles, and other hemous and detestable accusacions
were laid against him in the open parliament, it was thought by the most part
that king Richard was worthy to be deposed of al honor, rule and Pryncely
governance. And instruments autentike and solemn to depose, and other
instruments were made to certain persons for them, and all homagers of the
realm to resign to him all the homages and fealties dew to him as king and
sovereign.

But or this deposicion was executed in time, he came to Westminster and called
a great council of all the nobility and commons to the entente to conclude
and make expedicion of all things which before were purposed and set forward.

In the mean season diverse of king Richardes servants which by license had
access to his person, comforted, animated and encouraged him being for sorrow
withered, broken and in manner half dead, aduertisyng and exhortyng him to
regard his welthe and to save his life. And first they advised him willyngly
to suffer him self to be deposed both of his dignity, and deprived of his
riches: so that the duke of Lancastre might without murdre or battle obtain
the scepter and Diadem, after the which they well perceived he gaped and
thrusted by the mean whereof they thought be should be in per^^^ assurance of his
life long to continue, and therefore might commit him self to good hope, which
is the best fellow and companion that a man in adversity can associat or join
him self withal. Surely this council was both good and honest in so great an
extremity, but yet the full effect followed not as the sequel of the thing
shows and apparantely declares. What profit, what honor, what surety bad
it been to king Richard, if he when he might, which professed the name and
title of a king, which is as much to say, the ruler or keeper of people, had
excogitate or remembered to have been a keeper of ^is own hedde and life, which
now being forsaken, reject and abandoned of al such as he, being an evil
sheperd or herdeman, before time did not plie, keep and diligently ouerse was
easily reduced and brought into the hands of his enemies. Now it was no
mastery to persuade a man being desperate pensife and full of dolor, to
abdicate him self from his empire and imperial pre-eminence: so that in only
hope of his life and sauegard, he agreed to al things that of him were
demanded, and desired his kepers to show and declare to the duke, that if he
would vouchsafe to accord and come to him, he would declare secretly things to
him both profitable and pleasant. His kepers sent word of all his sayings to
the duke, which incontinent repaired to his chamber. There king Richard
co^moned with him of many things, and amongst all other affirmed those
accusacions to be to much true which the comminaltie of the realm alleged
against him: that is to say, that he had euel governed his dominion and
kingdom, and therefore he desired to be disburdoned of so great a charge and so
heavy a burdein, besechyng the Duke to grant to him the safegarde of his life,
and to have compassion of him, now as he before that time had been to him
bountiful and magnificent.

The duke biddyng him to be of good comfort and out of fear warranted him his
life, so that he would resign to him his scepter croune and dignity: also
nether to procure nor consent to any thing or act which might be hurtful or
prejudicial to his person or succession, to the which demaundes he granted
and freely condiscended and agreed.

THE Duke of Lancastre the next day declared all king Richardes hole mind to
the counsel, but especially to his uncle Edmunde duke of York (whose help he
much used) which hearing al things to be in a broyle, a few days before was
come to London. The nobles and commons were well pleased that king Richard
should frankely and freely of his own mere mocion, which they much desired
(lest it should be noysed and reported that he thereunto were enforced and by
violence constrained) resign his croune and depart from his regalitee.

Not long after he caused a great assemble to be appointed at the Tower of
London, where king Richard appareled in vesture and robe royal the diadem on
his head, and the scepter in his hand, came personally before the congregation
and said these words in effect. I Richard king of England Duke of France,
Aquitaine, and Lord of Ireland, confess and say before you my lords and
other our subjects, that by the hole space of.xxii. year in the which I have
obtained and possessed the rule and regiment of this famous realm of England,
partly ruled and (...) by the evil and sinister council of perverse and
flatteryng persons: and partly led by the frailty of young waueryng and
wanton youth, and with delectacion of worldly and volupteous appetite, have
omitted and not executed my royal office and bounden duty according as I
ought to have dooen, in ministeryng justice and prefermente of the common
wealth, which negligence I more then any of you as I think my self, do
sore repent and bewail, and specially because I am brought to this poyncte,
that I knowledge and confess my self, not worthy longer to reign nor to have
any farther rule. So that now I can another amend my misdedees, nor correct my
offenses which suerly I intended to do, and especially in my old age, in
the which evil things be accustomed to be amended, and the fautes and
offenses of youth, to be corrected and reformed. For what young man commonly can
befounde endued with so much virtue and so good qualities, which agitate and
pricked with the heat of youth, shall not turn and decline from the right
pathe and direct way, and yet when he comes to the more ripenes of years and
great gravity, does not amend and change into be^ter his old errates and
wanton acts, for experience teaches, that of a rugged colte, comes a good
horse, and of a shreude boy, proves a good man. But sith Fortune does not
permit and suffer me so to do, to thentent that the public wealth of this
realm may be helped and auansed by my mean, and after this not like again
to declyne and decay. And to the intent that it shall be lefull to you, to
elect and chose my cosyn germayne, Henry duke of Lancastre, a man mete for a
realm, and a prince apt for a kingdom, to your king and sovereign lord. I of
my own mere mocion and frewill, do put and depose my self out of all royal
dignite, pre-eminence and sofferaignitee, and resign the possession, title and
use of this realm, with all rightes there unto apperteigyng, into his hands
and possession. And then with a lamentable voice and a sorrowful countenance,
delivered his scepter and croune to the duke of Lancastre, requiryng every
person severally by their names, to grant and assente that he might live a
private and a solitary life, with the swetnesse whereof, he would be so well
pleased, that it should be a pain and punishment to him to go abroad, and
delivered all the goods that he had, to the some of three hundred thousand
pound in coin, beside plate and iuels, as a pledge and satisfaccion, for the
injuries and wrongs by him committed and dooen. But what soever was promised,
he was disceiued For shortly after his resignacion he was conueighed to the
castle of Ledes in Kent, and from thence to Poumffret where he departed out of
this miserable life, as you shall hear herafter.

The first year of The unquiet time of King Henry the fourth.
HEN the fame was dispersed abroad that King Richard had put him self from
his dignitee royal, The.i. year.
and resigned his scepter and diadem imperial, Henry Plantagenet borne at
Bolyngbroke in the County of Lyncolne, duke of Lancastre and Herfford earl of
Derby, Lecester and Lyncolne son to Ihon of Gaunt duke of Lancastre, with one
voice both of the nobles and commons, was published, proclaimed and declared
king of England and of France, and lord of Irela^de, and on the day of
saint Edward the confessor, was at Westminster with great solemnitee and
royal pomp, sacred, enoynted and crouned king by the name of king Henry the
fourth. But who so ever reioysed at this coronacion, or whosoever delighted at
his high promocio^, suer it is that Edmond Mortimer earl of March which was
heir to Lionell duke of Clarence, the third begotten son of king Edward
the third as you before have heard, and Richard earl of Ca^brige the son to
Edmond duke of York, which had married Anne sister to the same Edmonde, were
with these doings nether pleased nor content. In so much that now the
deuisio^ once being begone, the one lineage persecuted the other, and never
ceased till the heirs males of both the lines were by battaill murdered or by
sedicion clearly extinct and destroyed.

At the day of the coronacion, to thentent that he should not seem to take
upon him the croune and scepter royal without title or lawful claim but by
extorte power and injurious intrusion, he was advised to make his title as
heir to Edmonde, surnamed or untruly feigned Crouchebacke, son to king Henry
the third, and to say that the said Edmond was elder brother to king Edward
the first, and for his deformitee repudiat and put by from the croune royal to
whom by his mother Blanch daughter and sole heir to Henry duke of Lancastre,
he was next of blood and undoubtful heir. But because not only his fre^des
but also his privy enemies knew, that was but a title and that this title was
by inuentors of mischief feigned, imagened and published and were surely informed
not only that thesaid Edmond was younger son to king Henry the third
according as it is declared in the act of Parliament before recited. Also
having true knowledge that Edmond was nether Crokebacked nor a deformed
person, but a goodly gentil man and a valiante capitain, and somuche favored
of his loving father, that he to prefer him to the marriage of the Queen
dowager of Nauerne having a great liuelode, gave to him the county pala^tyne
of Lancastre with many notable honors, high seigniories and large privileges.
Therefore they advised him to make some other claim to the new obtained
regiment, and so caused it to be proclaimed and published that he challenged the
realm not only by conquest, but also be cause he was by king Richard adopted
as heir, and declared successor and of him by resignacion had accepted the
croune and scepter, and also that he was the next heir male of the blood
royal to king Richard.

After that he was crouned, he created his eldest son lord Henry, Prince of
Wales, duke of Cornwale, and earl of Chester, then being of the age of.xij.
years. This sol^^ite finished, he called his high court of parliament, in the
which it was demanded by the kings friends what should be done with king
Richard. The bishop of Carleile which was a man both well learned and well
stomacked rose up and said. My lords I require you take heed what answer you
make to this question. For I think there is none of you worthy or mete to give
judgment on so noble a Prince as king Richard is, whom we have taken for our
sovereign and liege lord by the space of.xxij. years, and I assure you, there
is not so rank a traitor, nor so arrante a thief, nor so cruel a murderer,
which is apprehended and deteigned in prisone for his offense, but he shall
be brought before the justice to hear his judgment, and yet you will
proceade to the judgment of an anointed king, and here another his answer nor
excuse. And I say that the duke of Lancastre whom you call king, has more
offended and more trespassed to king Richard and this realm, then the king
has other done to him or to us. For it is manifesty known that the duke was
banished the realm by king Richard and his counsel, and by the judgment of
his own father, for the space of ten years, for what cause all you know,
and yet without license of King Richard he is returned again into the realm,
ye and that is worse, has taken upon him the name, title and prehemie^nce of a
king. And therefore I say and affirm that you do apparently wrong, and manifest
injury to proceed in any thing against king Richard, without calling him openly
to his answer and defense. When the bishop had ended, he was incontinent by
therle Marshall attached and committed to ward in the Abbey of. S. Albones.

And then it was concluded, that king Richard should continue in a large
prisone, and should be plentifully served of all things necessary both for
viande and apparel, and that if any persons would presume to rere war or
congregate a multitude to releue or deliver him out of prisone, that then he
should be the first that should dye for that sedicious commocion. In this
Parliamente the Lord Fitzwater appeled the duke of Aumarle of high treason,
and offered to fight with him in listes royal. Likewise the lord Morley
appeled therle of Salisbury, and there were more then.xx. appellantes which
waged battaill in this parliamente. But the king pardoned all their offenses
saving the fautes of the lord Morley and therle of Salisbury, whom he committed
to ward, and after at the request of their fre^des, their offenses were remitted
and they delivered. He punished also extremely all such as were privy and
dooers of the homecide of Thomas his uncle late duke of Gloucester, which was
shamefully murdered before in y^ town of Caleis. Besides this, he auansed his
friends, and called out of exile Richard earl of Warwike, and restored the earl
of Arundelles son to his own possession and dignite, and many other. He took
into his special favor Ihon Hollande duke of Exceter and earl of Huntyngdone
half brother to king Richard, which had espoused the lady Elizabeth his own
sister. And being before capitain of Caleis, greatly moved and inwardly grieved
that King Richard his brother was amoued out of the seat royal, began to
reyse and stir up new mocions and fedicious faccions within the realm.
Wherefore to aduoyde such pestiterus dangers, the new king reconciled him to
his favor, and made him as he surely coniectured his perfect friend, where in
deed he was inwardly his dedly enemy. In this parliament were adnichilate all the acts pa^ed in the parliament holden by king Richard in the.xxj. year of
his reign, which was called the evil parliament for the nobilitee, the worse
for the menaltie, but worste of all for the co^monaltee. For in that
parliament, will ruled for reason, men alive were condemned without examinacion,
men dedde and put to execucio^ by privy murder were adjudged openly to die, the
hie prelate of the realm without answer was banished: An earl arraigned could
not be suffered to plede his pardon, and consequently one counsailer did al
thing, and all counsailers did nothing, affirmyng the saying of Esope, which
hearing his feloe to say that he could do all things, said he could do
nothing. When he had thus reconciled his nobilite, and gat the favor of the
spiritualte and wonderfully pleased the comonaltee, but not so much pleasyng
them, as the possessyng of the croune pleased himself and his friends, he of
them and by the favor of them both, for the auoydance of al claims, titles
and ambiguitees to be made unto the croune and diadem of the realm had his
dignitee ligne and succession enacted, confirmed and entayled by the assent of
the high court of Parliamente as follows word by word.

At the request and peticion as well of the nobility as of the commons in this
parliamente assembled, it is ordaigned and established that the enheritance of
the crounes and realms of England and of France, and of all other
lordshippes to the king our sovereign lord, as well on this side the seas as
beyond apperteignyng with their appurtena^ces, shall be united and remain in
the person of our sovereign lord the king, and in the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten. And especially at the request and assent aforsaid, it is
ordeigned, established, pronounced, enacted, written and declared, that my lord
Prince, Henry eldest son to our sovereign lord the king, shall be heir
apparante and successor to our said sovereign lord in thesaid croune,
realms and seigniories, to have and enjoy them with all their appurtenaunces
after the discease of our said sovereign to him and the heirs of his body
begotten. And if he die without heirs of his body begotten, that then the
said crounes, realms and seigniories with their appurtenances shall remain to
the lord Thomas, second son to our said sovereign lord and to the heirs
of his body begotten, and if he depart without issue of his body begotten, all
the premises to remaigne to lord Ihon his third son and to the heirs of
his body begotten. And if he dye without issue, then the crounes, realms, and
seigniories aforsaied with their appurtenances shall remain to the lord Humfrey
the.iiij. son to our said sovereign lord, and to the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten.

After which act passed, he thought never to be by any of his subjects
molested or troubled. But O Lord, what is the mutabilitee of fortune? O God
what is the change of worldely safety? O Christ what stablenes consists in
man's provision? Or what ferme suerty has a prince in his throne and degree?
Considryng this king having the possession of the croune and realm, and that
in open parliament, agreed to by the princes, condiscended to by the Clerks,
ratified by the commons, and enacted by the three estates of the realm, was
when he thought himself surely mortised in a ferme rock and immouable
foundation, suddenly with a trimbelyng quickesande and unsteadfast ground like
to have sonke^ or been overthrown. For diverse lords which were king
Richardes friends, outwardly dissimuled that which they inwardly conspired and
determined, to confound this king Henry to whom they had both sworn
allegance and done homage, and to erect again and set up their old lord and
friend king Richard the second.

In this case there lacked only an orgaine and conueighance both how secretly
to search and know the minds of the nobilitee, as all so to bring them to an
assemble and counsel, where they might consult and comen together, how to
bring to efficacite and effect, their long desired purpose and secret
enterprise. Se how the devil is as ready to set forth mischief, as the good
angel is to auance virtue. At this time was an Abbot in Westminster, a man of
aparant virtues, professyng openly Christ, christian Charitee, and due
subieccion and obeisance to his prince: which Abbot hearing king Henry once
say when he was but earl of Darby and of no mature age or grown grauitee,
that princes had to little, and religeons had to much, imagined in himself that
he now obteinyng the croune of the realm, if he were therein a long continuer,
would remove the great beam that then grieved his iyes and pricked his
conscience. For you must understand that these monastical persons, learned
and vnliterate, better fed then taught, took on the^ to write and regester in
the book of fame, the noble acts, the wise doings, and politic gouernances
of kings and princes, in which cronographie, if a king gave to them
possessions or granted them liberties or exalted them to honor and worldly
dignitee, he was called a saint he was praised without any deserte above the
Moon, his geanelogie was written, and not one jot that might exalt his fame,
was either for gotten or omitted. But if a christian prince had touched their
liberties or claimed any part justly of their possessions, or would have
intermitted in their holy francheses, or desired aid of the^ against his and
their common enemies. Then tongues talked and pens wrote, that he was a tirant,
a depresser of holy religion, an enemy to Christ's Church and his holy
flock, and a damned and accursed person with Dathan and Abiron to the deep
pit of hell. Whereof the proverb began, give and be blessed, take away and
be accursed. Thus the fear of lesyng their possessions, made them pay yearly
annates to the Romish bishop: thus the fear of correccion and honest restraint
of libertee, made them from their ordinaries, yea almost from obedience of
their princes to sue dispensacions, exempcions and Immunitees.

THIS Abbot that I spoke of which could not well forgette the saying of king
Henry, and being before in great favor and high estimacion with king Richard
called to his house on a day in the term season al such lords and other
persons which he either knew or thought to be as affeccionate to king
Richard, and envious to the estate and auancement of king Henry, whose names
were, Ihon Hollande duke of Exceter and earl of Huntyngdon, Thomas Hollande duke
of Surrey and earl of Kent, Edward duke of Aumarle and earl of Rutland son to
the duke of York, Iho^ Montagew earl of Salisbury, Hugh Spe^ser earl of
Gloucester, Ihon the bishop of Carleill, sir Thomas Blount and Magdalen one of
king Richardes chapel, a man as like to him in stature and proporcion in all
liniamentes of his body, as unlike in birthe dignitee or conditions. This Abbot
highly fested these great lords and his special friends, and when they had
well dined, they all withdrew themselfes into a secret chamber and sat down
to counsel, when they were set, Ihon Hollande duke of Exceter whose rage of
reuen gyng ye injury done to king Richard was nothing mitigate nor mollified,
but rather increased and blossomed, declared to them their allegiance
promised, and by oath confirmed to king Richard his brother, forgettyng not the
high promocions and notable dignities which he and all other there present had
obteigned by the high favor and munificent liberalitee of his said brother, by
the which they were not only by oath and allegiance bound, and also by
kindness and vrbanitee insensed and moved to take part with him and his friends,
but also bound to be revenged for him and his cause, on his mortal enemies and
dedly foes, in which doing he thought policy more meter to be used then
force, and some witty practice rather to be experimented then manifest
hostilitee or open war. And for the expedicion of this enterprise he devised
a solemn iustes to be enterprised between him and.xx. on his part, and the
earl of Salisbury and.xx. on his part at Oxforde: to the which triumph, King
Henry should be invited and desired, and when he were most busely regardyng
the marciall play and warly disporte, he suddenly should be slain and
destroyed. And by this means king Richard which was yet a live, should be
restored to his liberty and repossessed of his croune and kingdom, and
appoincted farther who should assemble the people, the number and persons,
which should accomplish and perform this invented assaie and policy.

THIS devise so much pleased the sedicious congregation, that they not only
made an indenture sextipartite sealed with their seals and signed with their
hands in the which each bound him self to other to endeavor them selfs
both for the destruction of King Henry and the creacion of king Richard, but
also swear on the holy Evangelists the one to be true and secret to the
other, even to the hour and point of death. When all things were thus
appointed and concluded the Duke of Exceter came to the king to Windsore,
requiryng him for the love that he bare to the noble acts of chivalry, that
he would vouchesafe not only to repair to Oxford to see and behold their man
lie feats, and warlike pastime: but also to be the discouerer and indifferente
judge (if any ambiguitee should arise) of their couragions acts and royal
triumph. The king seeing himself so effectuously desired, and that of his
brother in law, and nothing less imagenyng the^ that which was pretended,
gentelly granted and friendly condiscended to his request. Which thing
obtained, all the lords of this co^spiracie departed to their houses (as
theinoised) to set armorers on work for trimmyng of their harneis against the
solemn iustes. Some had the helm the visere the two bauiers and the two
plackardes of the same curiously graue^ and conningly costed: Some had their
collers fretted and other had them set with gilte bullions, one company had the
plackard, the rest, the port the burley, the tasses, the lamboys, the backpece
the tapull, and the border of the curace all gylte: And another band had them
all enameled Azure. One sort had the vambrases the pacegardes the grandgardes
the poldren, the pollettes, parted with gold and azure: And another flock had
them silver and sable: Some had the mainferres, the close gantlettes, the
guissettes the flancardes droped and gutted with red, and other had the^
spekeled with grene: one sort had the quishes, the greues, the surlettes, y^
sockettes on the right side and on the left side silver. Some had the spear,
the burre, the cronet al yelowe, and other had them of diverse colors. One band
had the scafferon the cranet, the bard of the horse all white, and other had
them all gilte. Some had their armyng sweardes freshly burnyshed and some had
the^ conningly vernished. Some spurs were white, some gilt, and some cole
black. One part had their Plumes all white, another had them all read, and
the third had them of several colors. One ware on his headpece his Ladies
sleue, and another bare on his helm the glove of his dearlyng: But to declare
the costly Bases, the rich bardes the pleasant trappers both of goldesmithes
work and embrawdery, no less sumptuously then curiously wrought, it would ask
a long time to declare, for every man after his appetite devised his fantasy
verifiyng the old Proverb, so many heads, so many wits.

The duke of Exceter came to his house and raised men on every side and
prepared horse and harneis, mete and apt for his compassed purpose. When the
Duches his wife which was sister to king Henry perceived this, she no less
trouble coniectured to be prepared against her brother the^ was in deed eminent
and at hand, wherefore she wept and made great lamentacion. When the duke
perceued her dolor, he said, what Besse, how chaunseth this, when my brother
king Richard was deposed of his dignity, and committed to hard and sharp
prison which had been king and ruled this realm nobly by the space of.xxii.
years and your brother was exalted to the throne and dignity imperial of the
same, then my heart was heavy, my life stood in ieopardie and my comb was
clearly cut, but you then reioysed laughed and triumphed, wherefore I pray you
be content that I may as well rejoice and have pleasure at the deliueryng and
restoryng of my brother justly to his dignite, as you were iocond and pleasant
when your brother unjustly and untruly deprived and disseazed my brother of
the same. For of this I am sure, that if my brother prospere, you and I shall
not fall nor decline: but if your brother continue in his estate and
magnifice^ce I doubt not your decay nor ruin, but I suspecte the loss of my
life, beside the forfeyture of my lands and goods. When he had said, he
kissed his Lady which was sorrowful and pensife, and he departed toward Oxforde
with a great company both of Archers and horsemen, and when he came there, he
found ready al his mates and confederates well appointed for their purpose,
except the Duke of Aumerle Earl of Rutland, for whom they sent messengers in
great haste. This duke of Aumerle went before from Westminster to se his father
the duke of York, and sittyng at diner had his counterpaine of the endenture
of the confederacy whereof I spoke before in his bosom.

The father espied it and demanded what it was, his son lowely and beningly
answered that it might not be seen, and that it touched not him. By saint
George quod the father I will see it, and so by force took it out of his
bosom, when he perceived the content and the six signs and seals set and
fixed to the same, whereof the seal of his son was one, he suddenly rose
from the table, co^maundyng his horses to be sadeled, and in a great fury
said to his son, thou trayter these, thou have been a traitor to king
Richard, and will thou now be falce to thy cosen king Henry? thou know well
enough that I am thy pledge borowe and mayneperner, body for body, and land for
goods in open parliament, and go thou about to sekemy death and
destruction? by the holy rode I had leauer see the strangeled on a gibbet. And
so the duke of York mounted on horsbacke to ride toward Windsor to the king
and to declare the hole effect of his son and his adherentes and partakers.
The duke of Aumerle seeing in what case he stood took his horse and rode another
way to Windsor, riding in post thither (which his father being an old man
could not do.) And when he was alighted at the castle gate, he caused the gates
to be shut, saying that he must needs deliver the keys to the king. When he
came before the kings presence he kneled down on his knees, besechyng him of
mercy and forgeuenes: The king demanded the cause: then he declared to him
plainly the hole confederacy and entier coniuracion in manner and form as
you have hard: Well said the king, if this be true we pardon you, if it be
fained at your extreme peril be it. While the king and the duke talked
together, the duke of York knocked at the castle gate, whom the king caused to
be let in, and there he delivered the endenture which before was taken from
his son, into the kings hands. Which writing when he had read, and seen,
perceiuyng the signs and seals of the confederates, he changed his former
purpose. For the day before he heryng say that the chalengers were al ready
and that the defenders were come to do their deuoir, purposed to have departed
toward the triumph the next day, but by his prudent and forecastyng council,
somewhat stayed till he might se the air clear and no darcke cloud nere to the
place where the listes were. And now being advertised of the truth and
verity, how his destruction and death was compassed, was not a lictell
vexed, but with a great and meruclous agony perturbed and unquieted, and
therefore determined there to make his abode not having time to look and gase on
Iustes and tourneis, but to take heed how to keep and conserve his life and
dignity, and in that place tarried till he knew what way his enemies would set
forward. And shortly wrote to the Earl of Northumberland his high Constable,
and to the earl of Westmerland his high Marshal, and to other his assured
friends of all the douteful danger and perelous ieopardie. The coniuratoures
perceiuyng by the lack of the duke of Aumerles coming, and also seeing no
preparacion made there for the kings coming, imagined with them selfs that
their enterprise was intimate and published to the king: Wherefore that thing
which they attempted privily to do, now openly with spear and shilde they
determined with all diligent celeritie to set forth and advance. And so they
adorned Magdaleue, a man resemblyng much king Richard in royal and princely
vesture, calling him king Richard, affirming that he by favor of his kepers
was delivered out of prison and set at liberty, and they followed in a quadrat
array to the intent to destroy king Henry as the most pernicious and venemus
enemy to the^ and his own natural country. While the confederates with this
new publyshed Idol accompanied with a puissant army of men, took the direct
way and passage toward Windsor: King Henry being admonished of their
approchyng, with a few horse in the night, came to the Tower of London
about.xii. of the clock, where he in the morning caused the Maire of the
city to apparel in armure the best and most courageous persons of the
city: which brought to him.iii.M. archers and.iii.M. bill men, beside them
that were deputed to defend the city,

The Lords of the confederacy entered the castle of Windsor, where they
findyng not their pray, determined with all speed to pass forth to London:
But in the way, changyng their purpose they returned to the town of Colbroke
and there tarried. These Lords had much people following them, what for fear
and what for entreatie surely beleuyng that king Richard was there present and
in company. King Henry issued out of London with twentye M. men and came to
Hounsloe Heath, where he pitched his camp, abidyng the coming of his enemies:
but when they were advertised of the kings puissaunce, or else amassed with
fear, or forthinkyng and repentyng their begone business, or mistrustyng their
own company and fellows, departed from thence to Barkamstede and so to
Aucester, and there the Lords took their lodgyng: The duke of Surrey earl of
Kent and the earl of Salisbury in one ynne, and the duke of Exceter and the
earl of Gloucester in another, and all the host lay in the feldes. The Baily of
the town with four score archers set on the house where the duke of Surrey and
other lay: the house was mannely assaulted and strongely defended a great
space: The Duke of Exceter being in another inn with the earl of Gloucester set
fire on diverse howses in the town, thinkyng that the assailantes would leave the
assault and rescue their goods, which thing they nothing regarded. The host
liyng without hearing noiseand seeing fire in the town, beleuyng that the king
was come thither with his puissaunce, fled without measure to save them
selfs. The duke of Exceter and his company seeing the force of the towns men
more and more encreace, fled out of the backeside entendyng to repair to the
army, which they found dispersed and retired. Then the duke seeing no hope of
comfort, fled into Essex, and the earl of Gloucester going toward Wales was
taken and beheaded at Bristowe. Magdalent fliyng into Scotland was apprehended
and brought to the Tower. The lords which fought still in the town of
Chichester were wounded to death and taken and their heads stricken of and sent
to London: and there were taken sir Bennet Shelley or cell, and sir barnard
Brokas and.xxix. other Lords Knights and Esquiers and sent to Oxford, where
the king then soiourned, where sir Thomas Blonte and all the other prisoners
were executed. When the Duke of Exceter hard that his accomplices were taken, and
his councellers apprehended, and his friends and alies put in execucion, he
lamented his own chance, and bewepte the misfortune of his friends, but most
of all bewailed the fatal end of his brother king Richard, whose death he saw
as in a mirror by his unhappy sedition and malicious attempt to approach, and
so wandering lurkyng and hidyng him self in privy places, was attached in
Essex, and in the lordshippe of Plasshey a town of the Duches of Gloucester and
there made shorter by the head, and in that place especially because that he in
the same Lordship seduced and falcely betrayed Thomas duke of Gloucester, and
was the very inward auctour and open dissimuler of his death and destruction.
So the common Proverb was verified, as you have done, so shall you feel. Oh
Lord I would wisshe that this example, of many highlye promoted to rule, might
be had in memory, the which mete and measure their own iniquity and il
doings, with force authority and power, to the intent that they by these
exaumples should auerte their minds from ill doings, and such ungodly and
execrable offenses. After this Magdalein that represented the person of king
Richard amongst the rebels, and diverse other were put in execucion, and all
the heads of the chief conspiratoures set on polles on London bridge, to the
fear of other which were disposed to commit like offense. The Abbot of
Westminster in whose house this traitorous confederacy was conspired, hearing
that the chefetains of his fellowship, were espied, taken and executed, going
between his monastery and mancion, for thought fell in a sudden palsy, and
shortly after without any speech ended his life: after whom the Bishop of
Carlisle more for fear then sickness, rendered his spirit to God, as one rather
desiryng to die by deaths darte, then temporal swearde. But now was come the
time when all the confederates and compaignions of this unhappy sedicion, had
tasted according to their deserts, the painful penance of their pleasante
pastime, or rather pestiferus obstinacy, that an innocent with a noce^t, a man
unguilty with a gilty, was pondered in an egall balaunce. For pore king Richard
ignorant of all this coniuracion kept in miserable captivity, knowing nothing
but that he saw in his chamber, was by king Henry adjudged to die, because
that he being singed and tickeled with the last crafty policy of his
enemies, would deliver himself outof all inward fear and discord, and clean
put away the very ground whereof such fruits of displeasure might by any way
be attempted against him, so that no man hereafter should either feign or
resemble to represente the person of king Richard: wherefore some say he
commanded, other talk that he condiscended, many write that he knew not till
it was dooen, and then it confirmed. But how so ever it was, king Richard
dyed of a violent death, without any infection or natural disease of the body.
The common fame is that he was every day served at the table with costely
meat like a king, to the intent that no creature should suspecte any thing done
contrary to the order taken in the parliment, and when the meat was set before
him, he was forbidden that he should not once touch it, ye not to smell to it,
and so died of famine: which kind of death is the most miserable, most
unnatural, ye and most detestable that can be, for it is ten times more
painful then death (which of all extremities is the most terrible) to die
for thirst standing in the river, or starve for hunger, besette with twenty
deintie disshes. One writer which seemed to have much knowledge of king
Rychardes affairs, says that king Henry sittyng at his table sore sighyng
said, have I no faithefull friend which will deliver me of him whose life will
be my death, and whose death will be the preseruacion of my life. This saying was
much noted of them which were present and especially of one called sir Piers
of Exton. This knight incontinently departed from the court with eight strong
persons and came to Pomfret, commaundyng that the esquier which was accustomed
to sewe and take the assaye before king Richard, should no more use that manner
of service, saying, let him eat well now, for he shall not long eat. King
Richard sat down to dinner and was served without courtesy or assay, he much
meruailyng at the sudden mutacion of the thing, demanded of the Esquier why
he did not his duty? sir said he, I am otherwise commanded by sir Pyers of
Exton, which is newely come from king Henry. When he heard that word, he took
the caruyng knife in his hand and struck the esquier on the head saying, the
deuell take Henry of Lancastre and the together: and with that word sir Piers
entered into the chamber well armed with.viii. tal men in harneis, every man
having a bill in his hand. King Richard perceuyng them armed, knew well that
they came to his confusion, and puttyng the table from him, valiantly took the
bill out of the first man's hand, and manly defended himself, and slew four
of them in a short space. Sir Piers benig so^what dismayed with his resistyng,
lepte into the chair where king Richard was wont to sit, while the other
four persons assailed and chased him about the chamber, which being unarmed
defended him against his enemies being armed, (which was a valiant act) but
in conclusion chasyng and traversing from the one side to the other, he came by
the chair where sir Piers stood, which with a struck of his Pollax felled him
to the ground, and then shortly he was rid out of the world, without either
confession or receipt of sacrament. When this knight perceived that he was
dead, he sobbed, wept, and rent his hear criyng, Oh Lord, what have we done,
we have murdered him whom by the space of.xxii. years we have obeyed as king,
and honored as our sovereign lord, now all noble men will abhor us, all
honest persons will disdain us, and all pore people will rail and cry out
upon us, so that during our natural lives, we shall be poincted with the finger,
and our posterite shall be reproved as children of Homecides, ye of Regicides
and prince quellers. Thus have I declared to you the diversities of opinions
concerning the death of this unfortunate prince, remittyng to your judgment
which you think most true, but the very truth is that he died of a violent
death, and not by the darte of natural infirmity.

When Atropos had cut the line of his life, his body was embaulmed and seared
and covered with lead al save his face (to the intent that al men might
perceive that he was departed out of this mortal life) and was conueighed to
London, where in the cathedral church of saint Paul he had a solemn
obsequie, and from thence conueighed to La^gley in Buckyngham shire, where he
was enterred, and after by king Henry the.v. removed to Westminster, and there
intombed honorably with queen Anne his wife, although the Scotts vntreuly
write that he escaped out of prisone, and led a verteous and solitary life in
Scotland, and there died and is buried in the black Friars at Sterlyng. What
trust is in this world, what surety man has of his life, and what constancy
is in the mutable comonaltie, all men may apparently perceive by the ruin of
this noble prince, which being an vndubitate king, crouned and anointed by
the spirituality, honored and exalted by the nobilitee, obeyed and worshipped
of the common people, was suddenly disceiued by them which he most trusted,
betrayed by them whom he had preferred, and slain by them whom he had brought
up and norished: so that all men may perceive and see, that fortune wayeth
princes and pore men all in one balance.

WHEN news of king Richardes deposyng were reported into France, king
Charles and all his court wondered, detested and abhorred suchean injury to
be done to an anointed king, to a crouned prince, and to the head of a realm:
but in especial Waleram earl of sent Paul which had married king Richardes
half sister, moved with high disdain against king Henry, ceased not to stir
and provoke ye French king and his counsel to make sharp war in England,
to revenge the injury and dishonor committed and done to his son in law king
Richard, and he himself sent letters of defiance to England. Which thing was
sone agreed to, and an army royal appoyncted with all speed, to invade
England. But the French king so stomacked this high disple sure, and so
inwardly conceived this unfortunate chance in his mind, that he fell into his
old diseace of the frenisy, that he had need according to the old proverb, to
sail into the Isle of Anticyra is an Isle in Asia, wherein grows an Herb y^
purges Mela^coly, and thereof ca^ the proverb, go sail to Anticira, as who
says, goo puro^ your Melancoly.
Anticyra, to purge his mela^colie humor, but by the means of his phisicions,
he was somewhat releued and brought to knowledge of himself. This army was come
down into Picardy, ready to be tra^sported into England, but when it was
certainly certified that king Richard was ded, and that their enterprise of his
deliverance was frustrate and void, tharmie scattred and departed a sonder.

BUT when the certainty of king Richardes death was declared to the Aquitaynes
and Gascons, the most part of the wisest men of the country, fell into a
great bodily fear, and into a dedly dread. For some lamentyng the
instabilitee of the English people, judged them to be spotted with perpetual
infamy, and brought to dishonor and loss of their ancient fame and glory,
for comittyng so heinous a crime and detestable an offense against their king
and sovereign lord. The memory whereof, they thought would never be buried or
extincted. Other fered the loss of their goods and liberties, because they
imagined that by this civil discencion and intestine division, the realm of
England should so be vexed and troubled, that their country (if the
Frenchemenne should invade it) should be destitute and left void of all aid
and succor of the English nation. But the citezens of Bordeaux took this
matter very sore at ye stomach, because king Richard was borne and brought up
in their city, lamentyng and criyng out, that sith the beginning of the
world, there was never a more detestable, a more vilanous nor a more heinous
act committed: which being sad with sorrow and enflamed with malencolie,
said that untrue, unnatural and unmerciful people had betrayed and slain,
contrary to all law and justice and honesty, a good man, a just prince and
politic governor. Besechyng God devoutly on their knees, to be the revenger
and punisher of that detestable offense and notorius crime.

WHEN the Frenchmen (which have iyes of the wakyng serpent, perceived the
dolor and agony that the Aquitaynes and Gascons were in for the death of their
prince, duke and countrymanne, they reioysed and aplauded in marvelous manners,
thynkyng with theimselfes that (the Gascons now abhorryng and detestyng the
English men more then a Dog or an Adder) they very easily might obtain the
whole country and douchie of Aquitaine, with the members and territories there
to apperteignyng, if they would either by entreatie or by invasion move the
people being now amassed and comfortles, as sheep without a shepeherd, or
beasts without an herdman. Wherefore in great haste and slow speed, Jews
duke of Burbon was sent to Angiers, and wrote to diverse citees and tounes on
the confynes of Aquitain and Gascon, exhortyng them with large promises and
flateryng words, to reuolte and turn from the English subieccion, and become
vassals to the croune of France. But al his glosyng words served little, and
al his fair promises profited much less. For the people knew that the
English yoke was but a fether, and the yoke of France, was more ponderus then
led, seeing daily how the French men vexed and molested there miserable people
with extreme exaccio^s and intolerable talleges, rasyng their skin to the
very bone, and their purses to the very botome wherefore they determined rather
to abide in their old subieccion and obedience, then for a displeasure
irrecurable to adventure themselfes on a new chance and a doubtful parell.

KING Henry being advertised of all the French attemptes and covert
conueighances, sent the lord Thomas Percy earl of Worceter with a goodly crewe
of soldiers into Aquitain, to aid and assist sir Robert Knolles his
leuetenante there, and to persuade and exorte the people to continewe in their
ancient liberty and dew obeisance. The earl arrived there, and so wisely
entreated the noble men, so grauously persuaded the magestrates of the citees
and tounes, and so gently and familiarly used and tracted the vulgar people,
that he not only appeased their fury and malice, but brought them to a
loving and uniform obeisance, receiuyng of them oaths of obedience and loyal
fealty, which done he returned again into England with great thanks. When
king Charles of France perceived that his purpose and attempt was frustrate
and came to no good conclusion in Aquitayne and that king Richard being dead,
his enterprise into England was of no value and of small purpose, he determined
with him self to invent some way how to have the Lady Isabell his daughter,
sometime espoused to king Richard restored to him again: and for that purpose
sent a solemn ambassade into England to king Henry, which gentely received
them, and gave in answer that he would send his commissioners shortly to
Caleis, which should farther common and conclude with them, not only that
request, but diverse other matters of great effect and efficacy. And shortly
after their departing he sent Edward duke of York, before called duke of
Aumerle, which succeeded in the said duchy his father Edmond duke of York, a
littell before disseased and Henry earl of Northumberland into the countrei of
Guisnes. The commissioners assembled at diverse places at sundry times. The duke
of Borbon above al things required in the name of the French king his master,
to have queen Isabell to him delivered. The Englishmen that to do continually
did deny, requiryng to have her married to Henry Prince of Wales, a man both in
blud and age to her in all things equal. But the French king that marriage
utterly refused, saying he would never join affinity after with the English
nation, because that the aliance had so unfortunate success.

Then they began to entreat a continual peace, which request the Frenchemen
refused, and in conclusion their agreed that the truce which was taken between
them and king Richard, for the term of.xxx. years, was renouate and
confirmed. Some authors affirm that there was a new leage concluded and
confirmed between both the realms during the lives of both the princes,
which seems to have a certain color of verity. For the king sent shortly
after the foresaid Lady Isabell under the conducte of the Lord Thomas Percy
earl of Worceter, associate with many noble and honorable personages, as well
of women, as men, having with her all the Iewelles ornaments and plate (with a
great surplusage given to her by the king which she brought into England) was
sent in solemn estate to Caleis, and there delivered to Waleran earl of
saint Paul Lieuetenant for the French king in Picardie, and so conueighed to
her father, which gave her in marriage to Charles son to Jews duke of
Orleaunce. The Frenchmen often times required king Henry to assign to her a
dower, but al was in vain, for the Englishemen answered that the matrimony was
never consummate, by reason whereof she was not dowable, by the very treaty of
the marriage concluded, and so this matter seized, and was no more moved. As the
old proverb says, after wind comes rain, and after one evil como^ly
ensues another, so during the time that king Henry was vexed and unquieted,
both within the realm and without.

OWN Glendor a squire of Wales, perceiuyng the realm to be unquieted, and
the king not yet to be placed in a lure and immovable seat, ente^dyng to
usurp and take upon him the principality of Wales, and the name and
pre-eminence of the same, what with fair flatteryng words and with large
promises, so enuegled entised and allured the wild and vndiscrite Welshmen,
that they took him as their prince and made to him an oath of aliegeance and
subieccion. By whose supportacion, he being elated and set up in aucthorite, to
the intent to be out of all doubt of his neighbors, made sharp war on
Reignolde lord Gray of Rithen and took him prisoner, promisyng him libertee
and dischargyng his ransom, if he would espouse and marie his daughter,
thynkyng by that affinity, to have great aid and much power in Wales. The
lord Gray being not very rich nether of substance nor of friends,
considering this offer to be the only way of his releffe and deliverance,
assented to his pleasure and married the damsel. But this false father in
law, this untrue, dishonest and perjured person, kept him with his wife still
in captiuitee till he died. And not content with this heinous offense, made
war on lord Edmond Mortimer earl of March, and in his own lordship of
Wigmore, where in a conflict he slew many of therles men and took him
prisoner, and fete ryng him in chains, cast him in a deep and miserable
dongeon. The king was required to purchase his deliverance by diverse of the
nobility, but he could not hear on that side, rather he would and wished al
his lineage in heaven. For then his title had been out of all doubt and question,
and so upon this cause as you hear, after ensued great sedicion.

THVS Owen Glendor glorifiyng himself in these two victories, invaded the
Marches of Wales on the West side of Seuerne, robbed vilages, brent tounes, and
slew the people, and laden with prays and bloody ^andes returned again into
Wales, never desistyng to do evil till the next year, that the king reised a
great army and puissance to resist and defend his malicious attemptes and
sedicious invasions, as after shall be declared. It was not sufficient in this
first year of king Henry, this realm to be troubled with domestical sedicion,
vexed with the crafty practices and inuencions of the French men, and invaded
and infested with the frantike waueryng Welshemen, but also fortune having envy
at the glory and fortunate procedyng of this man, must in his said first
year also, arm the Scotts with spear and shield against him and his realm,
whereof the occasion shall be to you declared according to the Scotticall
histories. A little before this time, George of Dunbarr earl of the Marches of
the realm, made means to king Robert of Scotland, that David his eldest
son might marie and espouse the earls daughter called Elizabeth, and
delivered for the performance of the same marriage, into the kings hands a
great some of money. When Archebaulde earl Douglas heard of this conclucion,
disdainyng therle of the Marches blud to be auaunced before his stock,
wherefore either by fair words, or else by disbursyng a greter some of money, he
so enuegeled King Roberte of Scotland, that David his heir refusyng the first
damsel, espoused Mariell the earl Douglas daughter. Therle of March desired
restitucion of his money, to whom the king gave many friuolus and trifelyng
aunsweres, wherefore he disdainyng so to be mocked and deluded of his money,
with his wife and family, fled into England, to Henry earl of Northumberlande,
entendyng with dent of swerd to revenge the injury and displesure to him by the
king committed and done, and so with the help of the borderers brent diverse
tounes, and slew many persons in the realm of Scotland.

KING Roberte being thereof advertised, first deprived the Earl George of all
his dignitees and possessions, and caused his goods to be confiscate, and
after wrote to the King of England, instantly requiryng him, if he would the
truce any longer to continue either to deliver into his possession the Earl of
March, and other traitors and rebels to his person and realm, or else to
banishe and exile them out of his realm, territories and dominions. King
Henry discretly answered the herault of Scotland, that the word of a prince
ought to be kept, and his writing and seal ought to be inuiolate, and
considering that he had granted a save conduite to the earl and his compaigny,
he would nether without cause reasonable break his promise, nor yet deface his
honor. Which answer declared to the king of Scotts, he incontinente did
proclaim and intimate open war, against the king of England, with blood fire
and sweard. King Henry perceiuyng, that policy preuenteth chance, gathred and
assembled together a great army, and entered into Scotland, burning towns
villages and castles, sparyng nothing but religious houses and churches, and
brent a great part of the tounes of Edenbrough and Lithe and beseged the
castle of Maidens in Edenbrough, in the end of September, whereof was capitain,
David duke of Rothsay and prince of the realm, and Archibalde earl Douglas,
with many hardy men. Roberte duke of Albanie, being appoyncted governor of the
realm, because the king was sick and unapt to rule, sent unto king Henry an
harrold, assuryng him on his honor that if he would abide and tarry his coming
and repair, which should be within six days at the most he would give him
battaill, and remove the siege, or else die for it.

The king being glad of these joyous good news, rewarded the herault with a
goune of silk and a chain of gold, promisyng him in the word of a prince,
not to depart thence but abide there, the coming of the governor. The six
days passed, ye six and sixtene to, the governor nether apered nor sent
word, the winter waxed cold, vitaile failed, men died of the flixe, it rained
every day so habundantly, that hunger and cold caused the king to break up
his siege, and to depart out of Scotland, without battaill or skirmish
offered. During which time both the Wardens of the Marches being with the
king, the Scotts made a rode into Northumberlande, and burned diverse tounes
in Bamborough shere, and shortly returned again, or else they had been trapped
and come to late home. When the king of England had dismis^ed his soldiers,
and discharged his army, the Scotts entendyng to be revenged of their great
domages to them by the English nacio^ done and committed by therle Douglas,
appoyncted two armies to invade England. Of the first was chieftain, sir
Thomas Halibarton of Dirlton, and Patrike Hebburne of Hales, which made a rode
into England, and returned with little loss and no great gain. After this the
^orsaid sir Patrike Hebburne, encoraged and boldened with the prosperous
success of this first journey, with a great army of the people of Lowdian
invaded Northumberlande, robbyng and spoylyng the country and departed
homeward, not without great gain of beasts and captives. But in the return
he was encou^tered with therle of Northumberlandes vicewarden, and other
gentilmen of the borders at a town in Northumberlande called Nes^it, and there
the Englshemen sore assailed, and the Scotts valiantly resisted, but after a
long fight, the victory fell on the English part, and as Ihon Mayer the Scot
writes, there were slain the flower of all Loughdean, and especially sir
Patricke Hebburne with many of his lineage. There were apprehended sir Ihon and
Willyam Cockeburne, sir Robert of Bas, Ihon and Thomas Hablincton esquiers, and
a great number of the common people. The earl Douglas sore being grieved with
the loss of his nation and friends, entendyng a requitement if it were
possible of the same, by the consent of the governor of Scotland, did gather
a houge army of twenty thousand talle men and more.

In the which army was Lord Mordake earl of Fife son to the governor of
Scotland, the earl of Angus, and many other earls and barons of the nobility
of Scotland. These valiaunte capitayns and courageous souldioures entered into
Northumberlande with banners displayed like men either apt or thynkyng them
selfs able to destroy the towns and spoil the country and Marches of
Northumberlande. When they were entered into England thinkyng no puissaunce able
to encounter with their force, out of a valey beside a town called Homeldon
issued suddenly the Lord Henry Percie, whom the Scotts for his haut and
valiant courage calledsir Henry hotspur, and in his company the Lord George of
Dunbar earl of March before banished Scotland, as you have heard, with all the
gentill men of Northumberland, and eight thousand men on horseback and on
foot. The encounter was sharp, the fight was dangerous, the long continuance
was doubtful, for some were felled and rescued, some in reseuyng other were
slain, other gredy of pray more then of strokes fled to se what baggages were
kept amongst the Pages. Thus with pure fightyng of the Englishemen, and fainte
hertes of the bragging Scotts, the brighte beam of victory shone on saint
Georges cross, and there were slain of men of great renoune and estimacion
sir Iho^ Swinton* sir Adam Gordon; sir Ihon Leuiston, sir Alexander Ransey of
Dalehowse, and.xxiii. knights moo, Whose names either for ignorance or for
fear of reproach, Hector Boece the Scottish archechronocler keeps in silence
and does omit, beside.x.M. commons. But there were taken prisoners, Mordacke
earl of Fife, Archebald earl Douglas, which in the combat lost one of his
eyes, Thomas earl of Murrey, Robert earl of Angus, and as other writers
affirm, the erls of Athell and Montethe with.v.C. other.

When the Lord Percy had thus obtained this glorious victory, he sent his
prisoners into diverse fortresses, and determined to subdue or destroy all the
countries of Lowdene and March, whose heads and Governors either he had slain
or by force taken captives. And so with a great power entered into Tiuedale
wastyng and destroiyng the hole country, and they beseged the castle of
Cokelaues, whereof was capitain sir Ihon Grenlowe, which seeing that his castle
was not long able to be defended co^pounded with the Englishmen that if the
castle were not suckered within.iii. months, that then he would deliver it into
the English men's hands. The captain thereof wrote unto the Governor,
which calling a great council, the most part advised him rather frankely
and freely to yield the castle, than to put in ieopardie and cast in hasard the
remnaunt of the florishyng nobility of the realm. So much was their courages
abated and their fumishe crakes refrigerat with the remembrance of the last
conflicte and batail. But the governor rebukyng their timorous hearts, and
Feminine audacitie (whether he thought so or no was a question) swear that if
no man would follow of the nobility he would do his deuoire to reskewe the
castle at the day. But his oath was nether kept nor broken, for he litell
preparyng and less entendyng the oath which he solemply made never set foot
forward during the first.ii. months, for the reisyng of the siege or reskewe
of the castle. But the English men being sent for to go with the king into
Wales, raised their siege and departed leauyng the noble men prisoners still
with the earl of Northumberland and the Lord Percie his son, which by the
king were commanded to keep them to his use, and not to deliver them without
his assent.

KING Henry forgot not his enterprise into Wales, The second year.
but made provision for men, municions and artillary mete and convenient for
so great a business, whereof the French king being advertised, sent privily
Lord James of Burbone earl of March and his two brethren Ihon and Jews,
with.xii.C. knights and esquiers to aid Owen Glendor against the invasions of
king Henry, he took shippyng with.xxx. sail at the mouth of Seine, and the
wynd was not favorable to his purpose for he could never approach the coaste
of Wales but came before the town of Plimmouthe in Devonshire, and there
leauyng his great ships liyng at ancre, in the night took land and brent,
spoiled and destroyed diverse small villages, and poor cotages, and robbed.v.
or.vi. littel Craiers and fisher botes laden with fysshe and corn. But while
he and his company like gredy wolfes were sekyng after their pray, the wind
rose high and a great tempesteous rage and furious storm suddenly flusshed
and drowned.xii. of his great ships which lay in the mouth of the haven
for his safeguard and defense. Whereof when the earl was advertised, and
perceuyng by the firyng of the beacons that the people began to assemble in
plumpes to encounter with him, and also seeing his power sore diminshed as well
by the slaughter of such as ranged abroad in hope of spoil and pray, as by
the furious rage of the unmerciful see and hydeous tempest, with much pain
and great labor took his ships again, and was not without ieopardie of his
life driven on the coast of Britain and landed at saint Malos. The French
king perceiuyng that this chance had il success, appointed one of his Marshals
called Memorancie, and the master of his Crosbowes with.xii.M. men, to sail
in to Wales, which took shippyng at Breast and had the wind to them so
prosperous that they landed at Milford haven, and leaving the castle of
Penbroke unassaulted, because it was well fortified, manned, and vitailed,
besieged the town of Harforde West which was so well defended by the earl of
Arundell and his power that they much more lost then gained. And from thence
they departed toward Owen Glendor whom they nominated prince of Wales, and
found him at the town of Dinbigh abidyng their coming with ten thousand men.
They were of him lovingly received, and gentelly enterteined, and when al
things were prepared, they passed by Glamorgan shire toward Worcester and
there brent the suburbs, but hearing of the kings approchyng suddenly
returned into Wales. The king with a great puissaunce followed and found them
embattailed on a high mountain, and a great valey between both the armies, so
that each army plainly perceived other, and every host looked to be assauted
of his adversary, and of the ground to take the most aduau^tage: thus they
continued eight days from morning to night ready to abide but not to give
battle. There were many fearce skirmishes and many propre feats of arms
daily done, which the French Croniclers more then the English writers can
report. For there were slain the Lord Patrioles of Tries, brother to the
Marshall of France, the Lord Mattelone and the Lord Uale and the bastard of
Burbon, with.v. hundred gentelmen.

The French men and Welshe men were sore trobeled and afflicted with famine,
that their hertes were appalled and their corages sore abated, for the king had
so stopped the passages that nether vitayl nor succor could by any way be
conueighed to the^. Wherefore of very necessity they were compelled either to
fight or flee: And so by the aduisement and council of the Marshall of
France, which put not to much confidence in the waueryng Welshemen, the hole
host departed theight day at midnight in the most secrets manner that they
could devise. The French men with littel rewards and no gain returned into
Britayne making small boast of their painful journey.

THE king seeing them departed, followed the^ into Wales, and chasing them from
hills to dales, from dales to woddes, from woddes to marshes, and yet could
never have them at any advantage. A world it was to see his quotidiane
remouyng, his painful and busi wanderyng, his troblesome and uncertain
abidyng, his continual mocion, his daily peregrinacion in the desert, felles
and craggy mountains of that bareine vnfertile and depopulate country. And
thus being tossed from country to country, from hill to vale, from marishe to
wod, from naught to worsse, without gain or profit, without vitayle or
succor, he was of necessity compelled to retire his army and return again
to Worcester, in which retournyng the Welshemen knowing the passages of the
country, took certain cariages of his laden with vitayle to his great
displeasure, and their great comfort. When he came to Worcester perceiuyng
winter to approach which season of the year is not convenient and proper for
men of war to lie in the feldes, and specially in such a barraine and hilly
country as Wales is, dispersed his army for that time and returned to London.
In the mean time while the king was thus occupied in Wales, certain malicious
and cruel persons enuiyng and malignyng in their hearts that king Henry
contrary to the opinion of many, but against the will of mo had so shortly
obteigned and possessed the realm and regalitie, blased abroad and noised
daily amongst the vulgar people that king Richard (which was openly seen
dead) was yet living and desired aid of the common people to reposesse his
realm and royal dignity. And to the furtheraunce of the fantastical
inuencion partly moved with indignacion, partly incensed with furious
inalencolie, set upon posts and cast about the streets railyng rimes,
malicious meters and tauntyng verses against king Henry and his procedynges. He
being netteled with these discourteous ye vnuertuous pricks and thorns, serched
out the authors, and amongst other were found culpable of this offense and
crime, sir Roger Claryngdon knight, and eight gray Friars which according to
their merits and deserts were strangeled at Tiborne and there put in
execucion. I may not here forget to show you how that king Henry sekyng now
affinity and frendshippe in Germany sent this year his eldest daughter
Blaunche accompanied with the Earl of Sommerset, the Bishop of Worcester, and
the Lord Clifforde, and other noble personages into Almaine. which brought her
to Coleyne, and there with great triumph she was married to Willyam Duke of
Bauier, son and heir to Jews of Bauier the Emperor, in which year also
died Lady Katherine Swinsford the third wife of Ihon of Gaunt duke of
Lancastre father to this king Henry, and was buried at Lincoln. In the same
year king Henry married Jane Duches of Britain late wife to Ihon duke of
Britain at the city of Winchester and with triumphal pomp conueighed her
through the city of London to Westminster, and there she was crowned Queen.

While these things were thus doing in England Waleran Earl of saint Paul
which had married the half sister of Richard, having a malicious heart and a
deadly hatred to King Henry, assembled a great company of men of war to the
number of.xvi. or.xviii.C. whereof the greatest part were noble men, and made
great provision of al things necessary for his feate and enterprise. And on
saint Nicholas day entered into his ships at Harflete and landed in the Isle
of Wight, and when he saw no apperaunce of defense, he burned two poor
villages and.iiii. simple cottages, and for great triumph of this noble act
he made.iiii. knights: but suddenly when he was aduertysed by his espials that
the people of the Isle were assembled and approached to fight with him. He with all haste possible took his ships and returned home again, wherewith the
noble men of his company were much discontente and displeased, considering that
his provision was great and his gain small or none. And in the same very season
Ihon Earl of Cleremount son to the Duke of Burbone, won in Gascoigne the
castelles of saint Peter, saint Marie and the new castle, and the Lord
Delabrethe won the castle of Carlaffin, which was no small loss to the
English nation: During which time died Philippe duke of Burgoin, and duke
Albert of Bauier Earl of Henault.

The third year. The.iii* year.

IN this year appeared a comete or blasyng Star of a houge quantity by a long
season which as the Astronomers affirmed, signified great effusion of man's
blud, which judgment was not frustrate as you shall perceive. For Henry earl of
Northumberland and Thomas earl of Worcester his brother, and his son Lord
Henry Percy called hotspur, which were to king Henry in the beginning of his
reign both fautours friends and aiders, perceiuyng now that he had pacified
all domestical sedicion and repressed his enemies, and reduced his realm to a
convenient quietness, began somewhat to envy the glory of him, and grudged
against his welthe and felicity. And specially grieved, because the king
demanded of the Earl and his son such Scottishe prisoners as they had
taken at the conflictes fought at Homeldon and Nesbit as you before have heard.
For of all the captives which were there taken, there was delivered to the
kings possession only Mordake earl of Fife son to the duke of Albanie
Governor of Scotland, for the king them diverse and sundry times of therle and
his son required. But the Percies affirmyng them to be their own propre
prisoners and their peculiar prays, and to deliver them utterly denaied,
insomuche that the king openly said that if they would not deliver them, he
would take them without deliverance. Wherewith they being sore disco^tent, by
the council of Lord Thomas Percy earl of Worcester, whose study was ever to
procure malice, and to set al things in broile and uncertainty, fainyng a
cause to prove and tempte the king, came to him to Wyndsor, requiryng him by
ransom or otherwise to cause to be delivered out of prison Edmond Mortimer
earl of March their cosyn germain whom (as they reported) Owen Glendor kept
in filthy prison shakeled with yrons, only for that cause that he took his
part, and was to him faithful and true. The king began not a litell to muse
on this request, and not without a cause, for in deed it touched him as nere as
his sherte, as you well may perceive by the Genealogy rehearsed in the beginning
of this story. For this Edmond was son to Earl Roger which was son to
Lady Philip daughter to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third son to king
Edward the third, which Edmonde at king Richardes going into Ireland was
proclaimed heir apparent to the croune and realm, whose Aunt called Elinor
this Lord Henry Percie had Married. And therefore the king litell forced although
that that lignage were clearly subverted and utterly extincte.

WHEN the king had long digested and studied on this matter, he made answer
and said that the Earl of March was not taken prisoner neither for his cause
nor in his service, but willyngly suffered him self to be taken, because he
would take no part against Owen Glendor and his accomplices, and therefore he
would nether ransom nor releue him, which fraud the king caused openly to
be published and diuulged, with which answer if the parties were angry doubt
you not. But with the publyshyng of the cautell, that the Earl of March was
willyngly taken, they ten times more fumed and raged in so much that sir Henry
hotspur said openly: Behold the heir of the realm is robbed of his right,
and yet the robber, with his own, will not redeem him. So in this fury the
Percies departed, nothing more mindyng then to depose king Henry from the high
tipe of his regalitie, and to deliver and set in his trone their cosyn friend
and confederate Edmonde Earl of March, whom they not only delivered out of
the captivity of Owen Glendor, but also entered into a leage and amity with
the said Owen against king Henry and al his friends and fautours, to the great
displeasure and long vnquieting of king Henry and his partakers. Here I pass
over to declare how a certain writer writes that this earl of March, the
Lord Percy and Owen Glendor were unwisely made believe by a Welsh Prophecier,
that king Henry was the Moldwarpe, cursed of Gods own mouth, and that they
three were the Dragon, the Lion and the Wolffe, which should divide this
realm between them, by the deuiacion and not deuinacio^ of that mawmet Merlin.
I will no^ rehearse how they by their deputies in the house of the Archdeacon
of Bangor, seduced with that falce fained Prophecy divided the realm amongst
the^, nor yet write how by a tripartie endenture sealed with their seals, all
England from Seuerne and Trent South and Eastward, was assigned to the earl of
March: Nor how all Wales and the lands beyond Seuerne Westward, were
appoincted to Owen Glendor, and all the remnaunt from Trente Northwarde to the
lord Percie. But I will declare to you that which was not prophesied, that is
the confusion destruction and perdicion of these persons, not only geuyng
credit to such a vain fable, but also setting it forward and hopyng to
attain to the effect of the same which was especial of the lord Percie and
Owen Glendor. For the earl of March was ever kept in the court under such a
keeper that he could nether do or attempt any thing against the king without
his knowledge, and died without issue, leuyng his right title and interest to
Anne his sister and heir, married to Richard earl of Cambrige father to the
duke of York, whose ofspryng in continuance of time, obteigned the game and
gat the garland. O ye waueryng Welshmen, call you these prophesies? nay call
them unprofitable practices. Name you them diuinacions? nay name them
diabolical devises, say you they be prognosticacions? nay they be pestiferous
publishinges. For by declaryng and credit giving to their subtle and obscure
meanynges, princes have been deceived, many a noble manne has suffered, and
many an honest man has been begyled and destroyed.

KING Henry knowing of this new confederacy, and nothing less myndyng then
that that happened after, gathered a great army too goo again into Wales:
whereof the Earl of Northumberlande and his son were advertised, by lord
Thomas earl of Wocester, and with all diligence raised all the power that they
could make and sent to the Scotts which before were taken prisoners at
Hamaldon for aid and men, promisyng the earl Douglas the town of Barwicke and
a part of Northumberlande: and to other Scotishe lords great lordshippes and
segniories, if they obteigned the upper hand and superioritee. The Scotts
allured with desire of gain, and for no malice that they bare to king Henry,
but somewhat desierous to be revenged of their old greues, came to the earl
with great compaignie, and to make their cause seem good and just, they
devised certain articles by the advice of Richard Scrope Archbishop of York,
brother to the lord Scrope, whom king Henry caused to be beheded at Bristow
as you have heard before. Which articles they showed to diverse noble men and
prelates of the realm, which fauouryng and concentyng to their purpose, not
only promised them aid and succor by words, but by their writing and seals
confirmed the same. Howbeit, whether it were for fear, either for that they would
be lokers on and no deed doers, nether promise by word or by writing was
performed. For all y^ confederates them aba^doned, and at the day of the
conflict left alone the earl of Stafford only except, which being of a haute
courage and hye stomach, kept his promise and joined with the Percies to his
destruccio^

THE lord Percy with therle Douglas and other earls of Scotland with a great
army, departed out of the Northparties, leuyng his father sick (which
promised upon his amendment and recovery without delay to follow) and came to
Stafford where his uncle therle of Worcester and he met, and there began to
consult upon their great affairs and high attempted enterprice, there they
exhorted their soldiers and compaignions to refuse no pain for the auancemente
of the common wealth, nor to spare no travel for the liberty of their
country: protestyngopenly that they made war only (to restore the noble
realm of England to his accustomed glory and fredo^, which was governed by a
tirant and not by his lawful and right king. The capitaines swear and the
soldiers promised to fight, ye and to dye for the liberty of their country.
When all things was prepared, they set forward toward Wales, lokyng every
hour for new aid and succors, noysyng abroad that they came to aid the king
against Owen Glendor. The king heryng of the earls approchyng, thought it
policy to encounter with the^ before that the Welshme^ should join with their
army, and so include him on both parts, and therefore returned suddenly to
the town of Shrewesbury. He was skantely entered into the town, but he was by
his posts advertised that the earls with baners displaied and battles
ranged, were coming toward him, and were so hot and so coragious, that they
with light horses began to skirmishe with his host. The King perceiuyng their
doings, issued out and encamped himself without the Estgate of the town.
Therles nothing abashed although their succors them deceived, embattailed
themselfes not far from the kings army. And the same night they sent the
articles whereof I spoke before, by Thomas Kaiton and Thomas Saluaine esquiers
to king Henry, signed with their hands and sealed with their seals, which
articles (because no Chronicler save one, makes mention what was the very
cause and occasion of this great bloody battle, in the which on both parts
were above forty thousand men assembled) I word for word according to my
copy do here reherce.

WE Henry Percy earl of Northumberland, high Constable of England, and Warden
of the West Marches of England toward Scotland, Henry Percy our eldest son*
Wardein of the East Marches of England toward Scotland, and Thomas Percy
earl of Worcester being proctours and protectours of the common wealth, before
our Lord Jesus Christ our supreme judge do allege, say and entende to prove
with our hands personally this instante day, against the Henry duke of
Lancastre, thy accomplices and favorers, unjustly presuming and named king of
England without title of right, but only of thy guyle and by force of thy
fautors: that when thou after thine exile did enter England, thou made
an oath to us upon the holy Gospelles bodily touched and kissed by thee at
Dancastre that thou would never claim the croune, kingdom or state royal
but only thine own propre inheritance, and the inheritance of thy wife in
England, and that Richard our sovereign lord the king and thine, should
reign during the term of his life, governed by the good counsel of the
lords sp^rituall and temporal. Thou have impri^oned the same thy sovereign
lord and our king within the toure of London, until he had for fear of
death, resigned his kingdoms of England and France, and had renounced all his
right in theforsaid kingdoms, and others his dominions and lands of beyond
the sea. Under coulor of which resig^acion and renunciaion by the counsel of
thy friends and comp^ices, and by the open noysyng of the rascal people by
thee and thy adherentes assembled at Westminster, thou have crouned thy self
king of the realms aforsaid, and have seized and entered into all the castles
and lordsh^ppes perteignyng to the kings croune, contrary to thine oath.
Wher^ore thou art forsworn and false.

ALSO we do allege, say and entend to prove, that where thou sworest upon
the same Gospelles in the same place and time to us, that thou w^uldest not
suffer any dismes to be levied of the Clergy, nor fiftenes on the people, nor
any other tallagies and taxes to be levied in the realm of England to the
behoffe of the realm during thy life, but by the consideracion of the three
estates of the realm, except for great need in cau^es of importance or for the
resistance of our enemies, only and none otherwise. Thou contrary to thine
oath so made, have done to be levied right many dismes and fiftenes, and other
imposicio^s and tallagies, as well of the Clergy as of the comonaltee of the
realm of England, and of the Merchants, for fear of thy magestie royal.
Wherefore thou art perjured and false.

ALSO we do allege, say and ente^de to prove, that where thou sworest to us
upon the same Gospelles in theforsaied place and time, that our ^oueraigne lord
and thine, king Richard, should reign during the term of his life in his
royal prerogative and dignitee: thou have caused the same our sovereign lord
and thine, traitorously within the tastell of Poumfret, without the consent or
judgment of the lords of the realm, by the space of fiftene days and so
many nights (which is horible among christian people to be heard) with
honger, thirst and cold to perish, to be murdered. Wherefore thou art perjured
and false.

ALSO we do allege, say and entend to prove, that thou at that time when our
sovereign lord and thine, king Richard, was so by that horrible murder ded
as above said, thou by extorte power, did usurp and take the kingdom of
England, and the name and the honor of the kingdom of France, unjustly and
wrongfully, contrary to thine oath, from Edmonde Mortimer Earl of March and
of Ulster, then next and direct heir of England and of France imediatly by
due course of inheritance after the deceasse of theforsaied Richard. Wherefore
thou art perjured and false.

ALSO we do allege, say and entend to prove as aforsaid, that where thou
made an oath in the same place and time, to supporte and maintein the laws
and good customs of the realm of England, and also afterward at the time of
thy coronacion thou made an oath, thesaied laws and good customs to keep
and conserve inuiolate. Thou fraudulently and contrary to the law of England
and thy fautors, have written almost through every shire in England to chose
such knights for to hold a parliament as shall be for thy pleasure and purpose,
so that in thy parliamentes no justice should be ministered against thy mind
in these our complaints now moved and showed by us, whereby at any time we
might have any perfight redress, notwithstanding that we according to our
conscience (as we trust ruled by God) have often times thereof complained, as
well can testify and bear witness the right reverend fathers in God Thomas
Arundell archbishop of Cau^torbury, and Richard Scrope, archbishop of York.
Wherefore now by force and strength of hand before our Lord Jesus Christ we
must ask our remedy and help.

ALSO we do allege, say and intend to prove, that where Edmond Mortimer earl
of March and Ulster, was taken prisoner by Owen Glendor in a pitched and
foughten feld, and cast into prisone and lade^ with iron fetters, for thy
matter and cause, whom falsely thou have proclaimed willyngly to yield himself
prisoner to thesaied Owen Glendor, and nether would deliver him thy self,
nor yet suffer us his kinsmen to ransom and deliver him: Yet notwithstanding,
we have not only concluded and agreed with the same Owen for his ransom at
our propre charges and expenses, but also for a peace between thee and thesaid
Owen. Why have thou then not only published and declared us as traitors, but
also craftily and deceitfully imagened, purposed and conspired the utter
destruction and confusion of our persons. For the which cause we defy thee,
thy fautoures and accomplices as comen traytoures and destroyers of the rea^me,
and the inuadours, oppressoures and confounders of the very true and right
heirs to the croune of England, which thing we entend with our hands to
prove this day, almighty God helpyng us.

WHEN King Henry had ouerseen their articles and defiance, he answered the
esquiers that he was ready with dent of sword and fierce battaill to prove
their quarrel false and feigned, and not with writing nor slanderous words, and
so in his righteous cause and just quarrel he doubted not but God would both
aid and assiste him, against untrue persons and false forsworn traitors:
with which answer the messengers departed. The next day in the morning
early, which was the vigile of Mari Magdalene, the king perceiuyng that the
battaill was nerer then he either thought or looked for, lest that long tariyng
might be a minishyng of his strength, set his battailles in good order:
likewise did his enemies, which both in puissance and courage were nothing to
him inferior. Then suddenly the trumpettes blew, the kings part cried saint
George upon them: The adversaries cried Esperaunce Percie, and so furiously the
armies joined. The Scotts which had the forward on the lords side, entendyng
to be revenged of their old displeasures done to them by the English nation,
set so fiercely on the kings forward, that they made them draw back, and had
almost broken their arraie. The Welshemen also which sith the kings
departure out of Wales, had lurked and lien in wooddes mountaignes and
marshes, heryng of this battaill toward, came to the aid of the earls, and
refreshed the weary people with new succurs. When a ferfull messenger had
declared to the king, that his people were beaten down on every side, it was no
need to bid him stir, for suddenly he approached with his fresh battaill, and
comforted, hertened and encouraged his part so, that they took their hertes to
them, and manly fought with their enemi^s. The prince Henry that day help
much his father, for although he were sore wounded in the face with an arow,
yet he never ceased either to fight where the battaill was most strongest, or
to courage his men where their hertes was most danted. This great battle
continued three long hours with indifferent fortune on both parts. That at
the last the king criyng saint George, victory, brake the arraie and entered
into the battaill of his enemies and fought fiercely, and auentured so far into
the battaill, that the earl Douglas struck him down and slew sir Water
^lonte, and three other appareled in the kings suite and clothyng saying: I
maruaill to see so many kings so suddenly arise again, the king was reised and
did that day many a noble feate of arms. For as the Scotts write and French
men affirm, all though that Englishemen keep silence, that he himself slew
with his hands that day *xxxvj. persons of his enemies, the other of his
part encoraged by his doings, fought valiantly and slew the lord Percie
called sir Henry hotspurre, the best capitain on the part adverse. When his
death was known, the Scotts fled, the Welshemen ran, the traitors were
overcome, then nether wooddes let, nor hills stopped the fearful hertes of
them that were vanquished to fly, and in that flighte therle Douglas, which
for have falling from the cragge of a mountagnie brake one of his genitals and
was taken, and for his valiantnes of the king freely and frankely delivered.
There was taken also sir Thomas Percie earl of Worcester and diverse other, on
the kings part were slain sir Water Blount and.xvi.C. other persons, but on
the part of the rebels were slain the earl of Stafford, the lord Percie and
above five thousand other, and as for the Scotts few or none escaped alive.

AFTER this glorious victory by the king obteigned, he rendered to almighty
God his humble and hertie thanks, and caused therle of Worcester the morrow
after Mary Magdaleine, at Shrewesbury ^o be drawn hanged and quartered, and
his head to be sent to London, at which place many mo capitaines were executed.
After this great battaill, he like a triumphante conqueror returned with
great pomp to London, where he was by the senate and magestrates solemply
received, not a little reioysyng of his good fortune and fortunate victory. But
before his departure from Shrewesbury, he not forgettyng his enterprise against
Owen Glendor, sent into Wales with a great a^my prince Henry his eldest son
against thesaid Owen and his sedicious fautors, which being dismayed and in
manner desperate of all comfort by the reason of the kings late victory, fled in
desert places and solitary caves, where he received afinall reward mete and
prepared by gods providence for such a rebel and sedicious seducer. For
being destitute of all comfort, dreadyng to show his face to any creature,
lackyng meat to sustain nature, for pure hunger and lack of fode miserably
ended his wretched life. This end was provided for such as gave credence to
false prophesies. This end had they that by diabolical deuinacions were
promised great possessions and seigniories. This end happens to such as
beleuyng such fantastical folies, aspire and gape for honor and high
promocions. When the prince with little labor and less loss, had tamed and
brideled the furious rage of the wild and savage Welshemen, and left governors
to rule and govern the country, he returned to his father with great honor
and no small praise. The earl of Northumberland heryng of the overthrow of his
brother and son, came of his own free will to the king, excusing himself as
one nether party nor knowing of their doing nor enterprice: the king nether
accused him nor held him excused, but dissimuled the matter for ij. causes, one
was he had Berwicke in his possession, which the king rather desired to have
by polici then by force: the other was that therle had his castelles of
Alnewicke, Warkeworth and other fortified with Scotts, so that if therle were
apprehended, all Northumberland were in ieoperdy to become Scottish. For these
cause y^ king gave him fair words and let him depart home, where he continued
inpeace a while, but after he rebelled as you shall perceive by the sequel of
this story.

The fourth year. The.iiii. yer^

THis year Waleram earl of sent Pole, considryng that he had defied king Henry,
and also that he had made diverse voyages, and done little damage to the
Englishnacion, and susteigned much loss, continuyng in his old malice
against the king of England, by the assent of the French king assembled a
great number of men of war, as.v.C. men of arms.v.C. Genewaies with
Crosebowes, and a.M. Flemynges on foot, and laid siege to the Castle of Mark
three leages from Caleis, within the territory of the king of England, the.xvi.
day of July, whereof was capitain Philip Halle esquier, with.lxxx. archers
and.xxiiii. other soldiers. Therle raised against the Castle diverse engines
but they prevailed not, for they within shot so fersly, and cast out stones so
incessantly, and took such pain that to the hearers it is almost incredible.
The earl perceiuyng that his feate had such success as he looked for, retired
with his men lodged in the town, fortifiyng the same for fere of rescous that
might issue from Caleis, the next day he gave a sore assaute again, and with
great force entered the utter court of the castle, and took therein a great
number of horse kyen and catell, at the which assaut sir Roberte Barenguile
cousin to therle was slain. The Same day a.C. Archers on horseback coming out of
Caleis, law and perceived the doings and demeanure of therle and his
compaignie, and toward night they sent an Heraulte certefiyng him that the^
would dine with him the next day: to whom he proudly answered, that he would
gladly receive them, and their dinnar should at their coming be ready prepared.
The next day ensuyng issued out of Caleis.CC. men of arms.CC. archers.CCC.
me^ on foot with.x. or, xii. Chariottes laden with vitail and artillery,
conducted by sir Richard Astone knight, leuetenant of the English pale for the
earl of Somerset capitain general of those marches: which in good order of
battaill marched toward their enemies, which before by their espials were
advertised of their coming, but that notwithstanding they issued not out of
their lodginges to encounter with them, but kept them self within their
closure. The Englishmen shot so sharply and so closly together, that the
Flemynges and fotemen began to fly, the men of arms feryng the slaughter of
their horses ran away with a light gallop the Genowais which had spent the
most part of their shot at thassaut made little defense and small resistance and
so all were slain and put to flight. The hasty and rash earl of sent Paul and
diverse other without any stroke given to their enemies fled to sent Omers, and
there were taken of the best of the army, as the French and Duche Chronicle
reports three or four score persons, amongst whom the capitain of Bullayne
was one, and many lords and kinghtes slain. After that the Englishmen had
taken all the carts municions and vitailes that their enemies had brought
thither, they returned to Caleis in great triumph, and within five days
after there issued out of the English pale, about the number of.v.C. men
toward Arde by night time, thynkyng to have found the town unprovided, but
sir Mansard de Boys and the lord Kygnie defended it and let the Englishemen of
their purpose, and so with loss of forty men they returned to Caleis: which
dedde persons were brent in an old house, because their enemies should be
ignora^te of the damage that the Englishemen had by them sustained. Therle of
sent Paul being at Terwin, imaginyng how to recover somewhat of his loss but
more of his honor, sent for a great compaignie of noble men and valiant
personages, and concluded to invade the Marches of his enemies. But the French
king considering the earls evil fortune and unfortunate chance, commanded him
to leave of his enterprise, with which he was sore displeased. Yet to avoid
perelles the, French king laid in garrison at Bullein and other places, the
Marquis of Pownt son to the duke of Bar, and therle of Dampnay, and sir Ihon
Harpadane a knight of great renoune and high estimacion. The king of England
circu^spectly forseyng things to come, and imagenyng that the Frenchemen
attempted some new enterprice, against him or his dominions beyond the sea,
sent.iiii.M. men to Caleis and to the sea, whereof.iii.M. landed at Sluice,
which besi^ged a castle standing at the mouth of the haven, and made diverse
assautes and lost diverse of their compaignie, but news were brought to them,
that the duke of Burgoyne had required license of the French king to besiege
the town of Caleis, for which cause they raised their siege, and returned to
the defense of that fortress and desired pray of the French nation.

The fifthe year. The.v year.

About this season Loys Duke of Orliaunce brother to the French King, a man
of no less pride then haute courage, wrote letters to King Henry aduertisyng
him, that he for the perfighte love which he bare to the noble feats of
chivalry and marciall acts, in auoidyng the slow worm and deadely Dormouse
called Idleness, the ruin of realms and confounder of nobility, and for the
obteignyng of laud and renoune by deades of arms and manly enterprises,
could imagine or invent nothing either more honorable or laudable to them
both, then to mete in the feld each part with an hundred Knights and
Esquiers, all being Gentlemen both of name and arms armed at al points and
furnished with spears, axes, swerdes and daggers, and there to fight and
combat to the yeldyng, and every person to whom God shall send victory to have
his prisoner, and him to ransom at his pleasure, offering him self with his
company to come to his city of Angulesme, so that the king of England would
come to the laundes of Bordeaux and there defend this challenge. The king of
England which was as grave and witty as the duke was light and courageous,
wrote to him again that he not a littell mused but much more meruailed that
the duke being sworn as well to him as to king Richard to mainteyne the peace
beetwene his brother the French king and them concluded, and to that had set
his sign and great seal, would now for vainglory under color of doing deeds
of Arms not only violate the peace and break the amity between them before
concluded, but also give an occasion of displeasure and ingratitude, by the
which in conclusion might rise mortal war and deadely enemitie, affirmyng
farther that no king anointed of very duty was either bound or obliged to
answer any challenge but to his pere of egall estate and equiuolent dignity,
and that no christian prince either ought or should consent to war or
effusion of christen blud but only for the defense of his realm, or for
conquest of his right, or for amplifiyng of Christ's faith and christian
religion, and not for pride, worldly ^ame and vainglory, declaryng also that
when opportunity of time and convenient leisure served, he would trans^ret and
pass the sea himself with such company as he thought most convenient into
his country of Gascoigne, at which time the Duke might set forward with his
band for the attainyng of honor and accomplishing of his courageous desire and
haute enterprise, promising in the word of a prince not thence to depart till
the duke either by fulfillyng his own desire, or by singular combat between
them two, only for auoidyng the effusion of Christen blood, should think
himself satisfied and fully answered. Howbeit, at that time he being enbusied
with weighty affairs and urgent causes concerning the public wealth of his
realm could neither apoint time nor place, protestyng that the deferryng of
time was nether for disdain nor yet for cowardnes, but only to abate the pride
of him which knowing not himself, nor fering reproach, regarded not his oath
writing nor seal. To this answer the duke of Orleaunce replied and king Henry
reioyned, which doings what for the unprincely tauntes and uncharitable
checkes in them co^teigned, and what for rehersyng again things to you here
before declared I omit and put in oblivion. The duke of Orleaunce not content
with the king of England, assembled an army of.vi.M. men and entered into
Guien and besieged the town of Uergy, whereof was Captain sir Robart
Antelfelde a valiant knight and an hardy captain, having with him only three
hundred Englishmen. The duke almost every day assaulted the town fiercely,
but they within the town conragiously defended the same: In so much that when
he had lien there three months and had lost many of his men and nothing
gotten, without honor or spoil returned into France. After this the Admiral
of Britayne which being highly elated and much encouraged because the last
year he had taken certain English ships laden with wine accompanied with
the Lord Castyll a valiant baron of Britain, and xii.C. men of arms, and.xxx.
ships, sailed from saint Malowes and came before the town of Darthmouthe
and would have landed, but by the puissaunce of the townsmen and aid of the
country, they were repulsed and put back in which conflicte the Lord of
Castle with his two brethren with four hundrede other were slain, and above
two hundred prisoners taken and raunsomed, whereof the Lord of Baqueuile high
Marshall of Britain was one, which was brought to the king and after redeemed.
The Admiral sorry of this unfortunate enterprise with much loss and no gain
returned hastily into his country King Henry being advertised of this attempt,
sent the Lord Thomas his son which after was duke of Clarence to the sea
with a great navy of ships to the intent either with battaill or depopulacion
of the sea coasts both of Britain and of France to revenge this injury and
invasion: he sailyng by the sea costs landed diverse times and fiered ships
and brent towns and destroyed people without favor or mercy, and when he
thought his quarrel well revenged he sailed toward England, and in his
retournyng he encountered with two great Carickes of Ieane laden with rich
merchandise and substancial stuf between whom was a great conflicte and a
blouddy battle, but after long fightyng, the Englishemen prevailed and brought
both the Carickes into Camber before Rye, where one of them by misauenture of
fire perished to the loss and no gain of both the parties. About this this
time Ihon duke of Burgoin which had long labored and now obtained license to
besiege the town of Caleis, preparyng enginnes, ladders, carts, and all other
instruments necessary and convenient for so great a feate and notorious siege,
and assembled at S. Omers vi.M. men of arms, xv.C. Crosbowes, beside.xii.M.
fotemen, having vitail Bumbardes and other municions of war sufficient and
convenient for his abroad blown enterprise. But when all things were prepared
and the hole army assembled he was by the French king and his council (which
put diffidence in the exploite of his glorious business) countermaunded and
prohibited farther to proceed in that weighty purpose: for the which cause he
conceived so great an hatred and deadely malice against the Duke of Orleaunce
(as the only stop and let of his glory and renoume) that he ever after not
only maligned and grudged against him and his procedynges, but also (as you
shall shortly hear) brought him to death and final destruction.

The sixth year. The.vi. year.

IN this year the Earl of Northumberland which bare still a venomous scorpion
in his cankered heart, and could not desist to invent and devise ways and
means how to be revenged of king Henry and his fautours, began secretly to
communicate his interior imaginacions and privy thoughts with Richard Scrope
Archbishop of York brother to William lord Scrop treasorer of England whom
king Henry (as you have heard) beheaded at the town of Bristow, and with
Thomas Mowbrey earl Marshal son to Thomas duke of Norffolke, for king Henry's
cause before banished the realm of England, and with the lords, Hastynges,
Fauconbridge, Bardolfe and diverse other which he knew to bear deadely hate
and inward grudge toward the king. After long consultacion had, it was finally
concluded and determined amongst them that al they, their friends and alies
with all their power should mete at Yorkes would at a day appointed and that
therle of Northumberla^d should be chefetaine and supreme governor of the
army, which promised to bring with him a great number of Scotts.

THIS sedicious conspiracy was not so secretly kept nor so closely cloked but
that the King thereof had knowledge, and was fully advertised. Wherefore to
prevent the time of their assembly, he with such power as he could suddenly
gather together with all diligence marched toward the North parties and used
such a celeritie in his journey that he was thither come with all his host and
power before the confederates heard any inkelyng of his marchyng forward, and
suddenly there were apprehended the Archbishop, the earl Marshal, sir Ihon
Lampley, and sir Robart Plumpton. These persons were arrained, atteinted and
adjudged to die, and so on the Monday ^n Whitson weke all they without the
City of York were beheadded. Here of necessity I ought not nor will not
forgeate how some folishe and fantastical persons have written, how
erronius Ipocrites and sedicious Asses have endited, how supersticious Friars
and malicious Monks have declared and diuulged both contrary to gods
doctrine the honor of their prince and common known verity that at the hour
of the execucio^ of this Bishop (which of the Execucioner desired to have five
strokes in remembrance of the five wounds of Christ) the king at the same
time sittyng at diner had.v. strokes in his neck by a person invisible, and
was incontinently strike^ with a leprey, which is a manifest lie as you shall
after plainly perceive. What shall a man say of such writers which took upon
them to know the secrets of Gods judgment? what shall men think of such
beastly persons which regardyng not their bounden duty and obeisance to their
prince and souerain Lord envied the punishment of traiters and torment of
offe^ders? But what shall all men conjecture of such which fauouryng their
own worldly dignity, their own private authority, their own peculiar profit,
will thus iuggle rail and imagine fantasies against their sovereign lord and
Prince, and put them in memory as a miracle to his dishonor and perpetual
infamy: Well let wise men judge what I have said. Beside these persons, diverse
other of thesaid conspiracy and faccio^, the lord Hastinges, the lord
Fauconbridge, sir Ihon Coluile of the dale, sir Ihon Griftith were beheaded at
Durham. Therle of Northumberland hearing his council to be reveled and his
confederates to be put to execucion and shameful death, fled into Scotland to
his old friend George of Dunbarre earl of the March, which the year before was
renoked out of exile and restored to his possessions name and dignity, where
he tarried till the next So^mer and then sailed into France and after into
Flaunders desyryng aid and assistence against king Henry, but when he saw
littel hope of comfort and that few willyngly were ententife to his request,
he accompanied with the Lord Bardolffe much dismayed and more desperate
returned again to his true friends into Scotland and there made his abode the
hole year abydyng the favor of Fortune and change of his unfortunate chance
during which time the king without any difficulty took into his possession
the town of Barwicke, the castelles of Alnewyke and all other Fortresses
appertainyng to the Earl: and liyng at Berwycke he caused to be put to death
the Barons son of Greystocke, sir Henry Beynton, and Ihon Blenkensoppe and
five other as fautoures and workers of this new invented conspiracy. When the
king had thus appeased and assuaged that late begone commocion, he sent his
son the prince of Wales accompanied with Edward duke of York and a great
puissance, to encounter with the Scotts which by promise were bound to aid and
assiste the confederates and rebels. But they hearing that the founders of
the war were apprehended and put to death, made no haste f^^ward but tarried
peacibly at home. So that the prince entryng into Scotland and findyng no
resistance, brent tounes spoiled villages and wasted the country every where
as he passed, which thing so much amassed the king of Scotts and his council,
that notwithstanding that he had gathered and appoincted a great host under
the conducte of the Earls of Douglas and Bowgham to resist the prince and his
invasions, yet they sent Ambassadors to him requiryng him of peace and final
concord, which request he utterly denaied, but at their humble peticion he
granted them a truce for certaie months, of the which they were both glad
and ioyouse, and so the prince laden with pray and spoil returned with great
gain to his father. While the prince thus infected the country of Scotland on
the land, sir Robart Umfreuile vice Admiral of England vexed the countries of
Fyffe and Loghdian on the sea coast, for he liyng in the Scottishe sea.xiiii.
days and every day landed on the one side or the other and took prays
spoils and prisoners ma^gre the great powers of the duke of Albanie and the
Earl Douglas, insomuche that he brent and took the town of Peples on their
fair day and caused his men to mete Clothe with their bows: and with great
gain retournyng to his ships brent the Galiet of Scotland with many other
vessels, and sent Clothe vitail and diverse Marchandises to every town in
Northumberland, setting thereon no great price: Wherefore the Scotts called him
Robyn mendmarket. The king about this time was newely unquieted and perturbed,
for notwithstanding this fortunate success that he had obteigned in all his
outward wars and interior affairs, yet some of his people bare such a
cankered heart toward him that to expel him from his rule and dignity they
left no occasion unsought nor device unattempted. For suddenly spra^ge out a
fame of an uncertain auctour that king Richard was yet living in Scotland, to
which fable such credit was given that if prudente policy had not forsene
the sequel, it had kendeled a greatter flame then within short space might
have well been quenched or extincte.

The seventh year. The.vii. year.

IN this summer, the Pestilenciall plage so infected the City of London and
the countrei round about, that the king durst not repair thither nor yet nere
to the confines of the same, wherefore he departing from the castle of Ledes,
determined to take ship at Quinboroughe in the Isle of Shepey, and to sail over
to Lie in Essex and so to Plasshey, there to pass his time til the plage were
seized: and because certain pirates of France were lurkyng at the Temmes
mouth waityng for their pray, Thomas Lord Camois with certain ships of
war was appointed to wafte over the king. When the king was on the sea, in
the midst of his journey, whether the wind turned, or that the Lord Camois
kept not a direct course, or that his ship was but a slugge. The Frenchemen
which by all similitude had knowledge of the Kings passage entered amongst
the kings navy and took four vessels next to the kings ship and in one
of the^ sir Thomas Rampston knight the kings vicechamberlain with all his
chamber stuff and apparel, and followed the king so nere that if his ship had
not been swift he had landed sooner in France then in Essex, but by gods
provision and fortunate chance he escaped the danger and arrived at his
appointed port. The king being sore moved with the lord Camois, caused him to
be atta^hed and endited that he condiscended and agreed with the Frenchemen
that the king in his journey should be intercepted and taken. On this poinct he
was arraigned the last day of October before Edmond earl of Kent that day high
stuard of the realm, on which day were he guilty or giltles, fautie or clear,
culpable or innocent of that fact and doing, he was by his peers found not
guilty and dismissed at the bar, having restitucion both of his lands
goods and offices. In this year king Henry not only desiryng new affinity
with foreign princes but also the preferment of his line and progeny, sent the
Lady Phylip his younger daughter to Ericke king of Denmark, Norwey and Swethen
which was conueighed thither with great pomp and there with much triumph
married to the said king, where she tasted both welthe, and woe, joy and pain.
About this season died sir Robert Knolles knight a man of great policy,
wisdom and experience in war, which had been a Capitayn from the time of King
Edward the.iii. till his latter days, in the which he being Governor of
Aquitayne encombred with age, resigned his office to sir Thomas Belfford a
valiant capytaine and returned to London, where he disseased and was
honorably buried in the Church of the White Friars.

The eight year. The.viii. year

YOu have heard before how king Robert of Scotland being very aged and
impotent, was not able to rule and govern his realm, and how Walter his
brother being by him created duke of Albani^, (which was the first duke that
ever was in Scotland) was made governor of his brothers country and dominion.
After which office and prehemine^ce by him obteigned, he so sore thirsted
after the croune and scepter royal that he cared little though the king his
brother, and his two sons had been at Christ's foot in heaven. And somewhat to
further his purpose, it unfortunately chau^sed that Dauy of Rothesay prince of
the realm and eldest son to the king, was accused to his father of diverse
heinous crimes, and in especial of lascivious and dissolute living, as
rauishyng of wives, deflouryng of virgins, and defilyng of maidens, wherefore
the king delivered him to his brother the governor, trustyng that by his good
counsel and discrete aduertisemente he would not only amend his life, but
also to fall to wisdom prudence and gravity. When the duke had possessed part
of his desired pray, he sent his nephewe from castle to castle, from prisone to
prisone, from place to place, and in conclusion lodged him in a toure within
the castle of Franckelande, where with famyne he caused miserably to end his
life, puttyng a poor woman to painful death, which gave to the Prince the
milk of her breasts by a read into the prisone. His death was long hidden from
the king his father, but in conclusion, the governor showed to the king how
diverse persons traitorously had murdered him, which were apprehended and
judged to die, and yet in their lives they never knew nor yet saw him. The
king notwithstanding his brothers excuse, doubted much thend of his other
son named James, wherefore he privily provided a ship, in the which he put
the child being then of the age of.ix. years, under the tuicion of the lord
Henry Senclere earl of Orkeney, willing him to co^uey the prince into y^ realm
of France if by any possibility he could thither attain. And if fortune
should drive him on ye cost of England, he wrote letters to the king of
England, y^ tenor whereof insueth.

ROBERT King of Scotts, A letter sent by the King of Scotts.
sends gretyng to King Henry of England, although by relacion of other
persons I have known before this time, what magnanimity, what clemency, and
other infinite virtues be planted and roted in your royal person, yet in the
voyage that you your self personally last made into Scotland, I have had
manifest and open experience of the same. For when you like our enemy invaded
our country, brent our tounes, and destroyed our people, yet by the favor that
you showed to such places and people which received and fostered your noble
father when he fled out of England (for fear of rebels which then sore
afflicted his land) we have received almost as much profit and advantage as
we did hurt and damage, by your terrible wars and bloody invasions.
Wherefore I cannot but laud and praise your highness and judge your noble heart
mete for a kingdom, but also I do love and will not cease to love you during my
natural life. And notwithstanding that realms and nations daily contend and
make war for glory rule and empire, yet to us both being kings, no such
occasion is given to do as they do, or to follow their steps or progression,
but we (which is the duty of a king) ought to strive who shall prosecute
other with most humain favor and continual clemency, and as much as we may
to be fellows, compaignio^s and alies, in singular love and perpetual amity.
And as for such causes as now be different and in discencion between us and
our realms for my part I shall endeavor my self to bring all things to a good
conclusion and mutual conformity. And because that I now am in the same
trouble and perplexity for my children, that your father was with the rebels
of England, I am compelled of very necessity to desire aid and seek comfort
of forain princes and strange nations. And although that by the help of God and
power of my people, I am able enough to keep the same against all outward
powers and forain attemptes. Yet from the secret malice of such as lurk and
be daily norished in my very bosom, I cannot keep them in suertie within
mine own dominion. And yet in no other place they can be from that
pestiferous conspiracy put in any sure defense or perfight sauegard, except
they be preserved by the faith and fidelity of good and just men. The world
this time is so full of malice, so replenished with rancor, that wheresoever
that gold or silver (which be instruments of mischief) may enter or
penetrate, there shall be found ministers prone and ready to do and perpetrate al
detestable crimes and mischeuous inuencions: But because I know and perceive
your person to be endued with so many notable virtues, and to be adorned with
such Magnanimity, fidelity, justice, clemency, and finally, not only to be
r^plenished with the whole compaignie and fellowship of the virtues Moral, but
also to be of that power, riches and puyssance that no prince in our time, may
to your highness be either compared or assimuled, I being by your noble and
notable qualities allected and encoraged, most hertely require your help and
humbly desire your aid, relefe and comfort. For mine eldest son David, (as I
suspect and as the fame runs, although I cannot yet thereof make a perfight
proffe) is murdered, by no comen murder, by no open thief, by no notorious
malefactor nor by no furious person, but by my brother his uncle which ought
to have protected and saved him, to whom I committed the governance of me, my
children, my whole realm and all that I had, which unnatural kinseman has
not only killed my child, but has shamefully slain and murdered him with the
most cruel and miserable kind of death, which is famyne. And so he, which
ought and whose duty was to have aduoyded and put from me the injuries of all
other persons, has afflicted me with the most contumely, the greatest
injury and manifest damage, that ever subject did attempt against his Prince,
or brother against brother, or enemy against kinseman. For he whom I made
governor to withstand the power and malice of mine outward enemies, compasses
and imagines how to destroy mine issue, and consequently mine own person.
Wherefore for the favor that you bear to justice sent by God to mankind, and
for the natural love and fatherly affeccion that you bear to your children and
posterity, I humbly require and hertely desire your magnifice^ce, that this
mine only child, not only may safely and surely live under your defense and
proteccion, but also that you of your accustomed goodness will vouchsaue to
preserve and defend this the only heir of my posterity from the malicious
attemptes of his cruel kynred and ambicious consanguinitie. And this the
rather, for the remembrance both of your fathers chance, which in his
necessity found much humanite in our nation, and also of the frailty of
worldly surety, which as soon changes from good to evil, and from evil to
worse, as the fair and redole^t flower this day florisheth, and to morrow
widreth and suddenly vadeth. Requiryng you to have in remembrance, that if
princes put their whole confidence only in their common people, which be more
variable then the Wethercocke or Wynd, and have no outward friends nor forain
amity, their empire is falling and their regiment very britell. But if princes
be coupled in the chains of indissoluble amite, and will mutually and
faithfully defend their comen enemies, and aduoyde their manifest injuries,
there is no power or strength of the comen people, that either can hurt or cast
them from the throne: in such a suertie is a king that so is garnished with
the love, favor and amity of outward princes and loving neighbors. Wherefore,
if it may seem expedient to your high wisdom, to here this my lowly request
and loving suete (which I think your clemency will not reject nor refell) my
desire is, that according to the last truce concluded between you and us, in
the which is conteigned that all men conueighyng letters from the one of us to
the other, should suerly and sauely pass and repasse without any
co^tradiccio^: That it would plese you not to break nor deny thesaid liberty to
this berer our only son, but for your honor to keep your promise sincerly
inuiolated and faithfully observed. And thus the gracious God preserve your
noble person in your royal estate long to continue.

WHEN all things necessary were prepared, the mariners halsed up their ankers
and departed from Bas castle with this young prince and Henry Percie son to
the lord Percie slain before at Shrewesbury, and by rigor of tempest were
driven on the cost of Holdernes called Flamborough head the.xxx. day of March,
where the young prince for to refreshe himself took land. He wroughte not so
privily, but he was known and taken with all his company, and conueighed to
the king being at Windsore, where he with dew reverence delivered his fathers
letter. When the letter was read and understand, the king assembled his
counsel to know what should be done with this noble enfant. Some to whom the
continual wars and daily battle was both displeasa^t and odious, affirmed
that there could not happen a better or a more surer occasion of peace and
amity between both the realms, which being so offered, they would in no wise
should be rejected but taken, considering that this prince was sent thither, in
trust of sauegard, in hope of refuge, and in request of aid and comfort
against his evil willers and malicous enemies: other (whose opinion took
place) affirmed him to be a prisoner and so to be ordered, for as much as he
was taken the war being open, and that his father did not only maintain
therle of Northumberland and other rebels within his country and give them
great honors, but also sent a great nombre of his nobilite against the king
at the battaill of Shrewesbery. Wherefore it was agreed that he should be
detained as a prisoner, lawfully taken and duly apprehended. When tidings of
this difinitiue sentence was showed to his father, he took such an inward
conceit and so sore a penciffenes, that he ended his natural life within a
few months after. Although the taking of this young prince, was at the first
time displeasant to the realm of Scotland: yet surely, after he and all his
region had great cause to rejoice and thank God of their fortunate chance
and good luck that insued. For where before that time the people of Scotland
were rude, rusticall, without any vrbanitie, having little lernyng and less good
manners, and good qualities least of all. This prince being.xviij. years
prisoner within this realm, was so instructed and taught by his scholemasters
and pedagoges appointed to him by the only clemency of the king, that he not
only flourished in good learning and fresh litterature (as the time then
served) but also excelled in all poynctes of Marciall feats, Musical
instruments, Poetical arts and liherall sciences. In so much that at his
return from captiuitee, he furnished his realm both with good learning and
civil policy, which before was barbarous, savage, rude and without al good
nurtur.

The nyneth year. The.ix. year.

THerle of Northumberland, which had been in France and other regions to
obteigne aid against king Henry, and had misled of his purpose, now put his
whole confidence in the Scotts, and in especial in his old friend George
earl of March, and so assembled a great power of the Sctotish nation to invade
Northumberland, and recovered diverse of his own castles and seign^ories, to
whom the people without nombre daily resorted. Where fore he entendyng to be
revenged of his old greues, accompaignied with the lord Bardolffe and diverse
other Scotts and Englishmen entered into York shire and there began to destroy
and depopulate the country. Whereof the king being advertised, caused a great
army to be assembled and marched toward his enemies, but or the king came to
Notyngham, Raufe Rekesbie shrife of York shire, in the midst of February
with the power of the country, suddenly set on therle and his compargnie, at a
place called Bramham More, where after long fightyng, the earl and the Lord
Bardolffe and many other were taken and brought to Yo^ke and there executed, and
their heddes sent to London.

AFTER this the king having knowledge that diverse pirates were wanderyng on the
cost of England, prepared a great army furnished with men, vitaile and
municions of war mete and convenient for such an enterprice, and in the
beginning of March sent to the sea, lord Edmond Hollande earl of Kent,
chieftain of that crewe and army. When the earl had searched all the coaste of
France, and had found not one pirate or s^a robber, he was advertised by his
espials that they heryng of his army, were diuerted to the parts of Britayn.
Wherefore the said earl entendyng to be revenged on them which he sought for,
made his course thither, before his arriual they had conueighed their ships
in to the havens, so that he could not fight with them on the sea, wherefore he
launched out his botes and with his fierce soldiers took land and fiercely
assaulted the town of Briake standing on the sea side. The citiezens threw
out dar^es, cast stones, shot quarelles and manfully defended their walls.
In which conflicte the earl received such a wound in his head that he
departed out of this world the.v. day after. The assailantes not dismayed but
set a fire with the death of their captain like men desperate still assaulted
the town and by fine force entered into the same and set it a fire and slew
all that would make any resistance, and for lack of a captain, the men of
war laden with prays and prisoners returned again into England.

THIS Edmond earl of Kent was in such favor with king Henry that he not
alonely advanced and promoted him to high offices and great preheminences,
but also by his mean and no small cost obteigned for him the eldest daughter
and one of the heirs of the Lord Barnabo of Millaine brother to Lord Galeace
whose son also called Galeace murderyng his uncle Barnabo made himself first
duke of Millaine, for which marriage Lord Barnabo paid to him an hundred M.
Duccates at the church of saint Marie Oueryes in Southwarke at the day of the
solempnite, by done Alpho^s de Caniola. This Lucie after the death of her
husband by whom she had no issue, was moved by the king to mary with his
bastard brother the Earl of Dorcet a man very aged and il visaged, whose
person nether satisfied her fantasy nor whose face pleased her appetite,
wherefore she preferring her own mind more then the kynged desire, delityng in
him the which should more satisfy her wanton pleasure then gain her any
profit, for very love took to husband Henry Mortimer a goodly young Esquier and
a bewtifull Bacheler. For which cause the king was not only with her
displeased but also for mariyng without his license he seassed and fined her
at a great some of money, which fine king Henry the.v. both released and
pardoned and also made him knight and promoted him to great offices both in
England and Normandy, which sir Henry had issue by this Lady, Anne married to
sir Ihon Awbemond mother to Elizabeth Chandos mother to Phillis married to sir
Dauie Halle captain of Caen, she had also issue Mari married to Ihon Cheddur
and Luce espoused to sir Ihon Cressy. This year by reason of Frost, sheep and
birds died without number, which continued fiftene weeks.

The.^. year. The.x. year.

About this time Ihon duke of Burgoine a man of a quick wit, desirous of
rule, and of an haute courage, being of great authority amongst the French
nation to whom civil discord was more pleasure then faternall amirie and
mutual concord, began sore to grudge and malign against Jews Duke of
Orleance brother to the French king, because that he was chief of the kings
council and ordered al things by his discrecion, because the king his brother
was (as you have heard) fallen into a frensy and therefore meddled in nothing.
The duke of Orleance on the otherside being highly set up in pride, began to
disdain and froune at the duke of Burgoin, because he perceived that he aspired
^gaped to have the supreme regimente in the public affairs and weighty
causes, thus the one would have no superior, and the other would have no pere.
This cancard disdain in short space grew to such a hate, that all the realm
of France was divided into two faccions, the one part favoring the duke of
Orleance, and the other enclinyng to the duke of Burgoyne, which division had
almost brought the realm of France to utter ruin and perpetual confusion.
The French king being somewhat amended of his dissease, heryng of this
controversy between these two princes, sent for them both to Paris, where he
reproved their pride, rebuked their malice, and taunted their ungodly doings,
in so much that all the nobility being present, judged the displeasure to
have been both forgotten and forgeuen. But high corages are not so sone
abated, nor roted malice is not in have plucked up, for the duke of Burgoyne
still co^passyng the destruction of the duke of Orleance, appoyncted a secret
friend called Raffe of Actouille, to bring his purpose to pass. This Raffe
forgettyng not his enterprise, assembled together a compaignie of such persons
as he most trusted, and as a Wolffe gredy of his pray, when the duke of
Orleance was coming from the court in the night season, he fiersly set upon
him and shamefully slew him. When this murder was published, the king
lamented, the nobles grudged, and the common people cried to God for vengeance.
The duke of Burgoyne justified this act by the mouth of Master Ihon Petit
doctor in deuinite, which wrested scripture and doctors so far out of course,
that his iustificacion within few years after was adjudged heresy by the whole
university of Paris. The French king, lest that greater mischief should ensue,
was compelled to hide and cloak his inward affeccion and dolorus heart and to
dissimule the matter, doubtyng lest the duke of Burgoyne whose heart and haute
courage he had well known before, (if he should proceade against him for this
evil act) would join and take part with the English nation against the
realm of France. Wherefore after long consultacion had by the entreatie of the
king and other Princes of the blood royal, Charles duke of Orleance son to
duke Jews lately murdered, and Ihon duke of Burgoyne were reconsiled and
brought to a fained concord and a fainte agremente, each of them taking a
corporal oath upon the holy Evangelists, never after to disagre or renew any
displeasure for any thing before passed. But what prevails an oath where
hertes still burn and malice continually smoketh, who cares for perjury when
apetite of reue^gyng daily increases.

IN this case was the duke of Orleance which perceiuyng the king his uncle to
bear with the duke of Burgoyne, and to let the detestable murdre of his father
so lightly pass without pain or punishment, alied and confederated himself
with the dukes of Berry and Burbon, and the earls of Alaunson and Arminacke,
which reised agreate puissance of people, and defied the duke of Burgoin and
his co^plices as their mortal foo and dedly enemy. The duke of Burgoine feryng
the sequel of the matter (because there was a macio^ of marriage to be had
between the prince of Wales and his daughter) was somewhat the bolder to send to
the king of England for aid and succors against his enemies. King Henry no
less forseyng then that which after ensued, which was that the discord of
these two great princes might turn his realm to profit and honor, sent to the
duke of Burgoine, Thomas earl of Arundell, sir Gilbert Umfreuile lord of Kyne,
sir Robert Umfreuile, and sir Ihon Gray with.xij.C. archers, which took
shippyng at Dover and landed at Sluice. When thenglishmen were arrived in
Flaunders, the duke of Burgoin with thenglishmen and all his power, rode day
and night til he came nere to Paris, and there the next day after with hard
fightyng and coragious shotyng, the Englishmen gat the bridge of saint Clow,
which passed over the river of Saine, and took and slew all the soldiers
which the duke of Orleance had left there in garrison to defend the bridge.
Amongst whom sir Mansard de Boys a valiant capitain was taken prisoner by the
Englishemen and highly raunsomed. But the duke of Orlea^ce and his compainy
which were like to have been compassed with their enemies, so that almost al
their ways of refuge were stopped and enclosed, in the night time made a
bridge over the river on the part of saint Denis street, and so escaped and
fled into the high countries. And after this conflicte the duke of Burgoyn
being now in his ruff thinkyng no man either in aucthorite or blood equiuolente
to his person, and blinded with a kall of vainglory before his iyes, took upon
him the hole rule and governance of the realm and ordered the king as pleased
him, and not to the kings will, and thinkyng that in so trobelous a season he
had unknit the knot of all ambiguities and doubts perceiuyng al things to
have better succeeded for his purpose then he before imagined, dismissed
Thenglishmen into their country giving to them hearty thanks and great
rewards. Which doing king Henry much disalowed, considering that he had sent
away his defense before the great brunt of the war were ouerpassed, and should
have taken head before what policy his enemies had practiced or what puissance
they had assembled. For he well remembered that one fair day assures not a
good Summer, nor one fliyng Swalow prognosticateth not a good year.

The eleventh year. The.xi. year.

King Henry now being quiet and not molested with civil discencion nor
domestical faccions, called his high court of parliamente, in the which after
he had concluded diverse Acts mete and expedient for the public wealth of his
realm and people, he exalted and promoted his three younger sons to hie
honors, as lord Thomas to the Duchy of Clarence, lord Ihon to the duchy of
Bedford, and lord Humfrey to the duchy of Gloucester, and lord Thomas his
half brother earl of Dorcet he made duke of Excester. Howbeit some writers
say he was erected to that estate and dignity by king Henry the.v. in the
first year of his reign, which thing is nether material nor disputable
considering he had none issue.

The twelfth year. The.xii. year.

VUhile these things were thus doing in England, Iho^ duke of Burgoyn which
ruled the roast and governed both king Charles the French king and his whole
realm, so much stomaked and envied the duke of Orlia^ce and his fautors that
he caused the French king in person to arm himself against them and their
adherentes, as traitors to him and apara^t enemies to the common weith, and sent
diverse capitaines to invade their lands and territories in the countrees of
Poytiers and Angulesme, and other seigniories aperteinyng and belongyng to the
homage and obeisance of the duchy of Aquitain and Guien. Wherefore the dukes of
Orleance, Berrie, and Burbon with their fre^des and alies, seeing that now their
only hope consisted in the king of England, sent to him Alberte Aubemound a
man of no less lernyng then audacite, and yet of no less audacitie, then wit
and policy, which in the name of the confederates offered certain co^dicions
as you shall here after according to mine aucthor truly reported, which were
made and concluded in the year of our Lord.M.CCCC.^ij. the.viij. day of May.

FIRST, thesaid lords offered that from thence forth they should expose and set
forth their own persons, finances and lands to serve the king of England his
heirs and successors, when souer they were required or called in all just
quarelles: which just quarelles the king of England shall take to aperteigne
to the duchy of Guyen with the appurtenances, affirinyng how thesaid duchy
perteigneth and ought to apertain to him of right by lineall heritage and
lawful succession, manifestyng from thence furthe, that they should not
blemishe nor spotte their truth nor fidelite to assist and aid him in
recoueryng the same duchy.

ALSO thesaied Lords offered their sons, daughters, nephews and neces,
parents and all their subjects, to contract marriage according to the
discrecion of the king of England.

ALSO they offered tounes castles tresures, and generally al their goods to
aid the King his heirs and successors for the d^fence of their rightes and
quarrels, so that the bond of their allegiance might be saved, the which in
another secret apointement they before had declared.

ALSO they offered to the king of England generally al their friends adherentes
alies and well willers to serve him in his quarrel for the recovery of the hole
Duchy of Guien.

ALSO to cease al fraud, the said lords recognized that they were ready, to
affirm the said Duchy of Guien to belong to the king of England, in like and
semblable wise in liberty and franchises, as ever any of the said kings
predecessors held or possessed the same.

ALSO the said lords knowledged that all the towns castles and fortresses that
they had within the Duchy of Guien, to hold them of the king of England as
the very true duke of Guien, promisyng all service and homages after the best
manner that in such case might be.

ALSO they promised to deliver to the king as much as lay in the^ all towns
and castelles apperteinyng to the roialtie and seignorie of England, which are
in number.xx. what towns and castles, and as to the regard of other towns
and fortresses which were not in their puissaunce and seigniory, they would
healpe the king of England his heirs and deputies to win them with men in
sufficient number at their propre charges and expenses.

ALSO the king of England was agreed that the duke of Berry his true Uncle and
Uassal, is one that holds lands or prehem^n^^ces by fealty or homage.
vassalle and the duke of Orleance his lubiecte and vassalle and the Earl of
Arminacke should hold of him by homage and fealty the lands and seigniories
hereafter following, that is to say the Duke of Berry to hold the County of
Pontiew during his life, and the duke of Orleaunce to hold the county of
Augulesme during his life only, and the county of Perrigot for ever, and the
Earl of Arminacke to hold.iiii. castles upon certain sureties and conditions
as by indenture should be appointed.

FOR the which offers couenauntes and agrementes they affirmed that the king of
England as Duke of Guien, ought to defend and succor them against all men as
their very Lord and sovereign, and not to conclude any treaty of leage with
the Duke of Burgoine, his brethren, children, friends or alies.

FVRTHERMORE, the king of England ought to aid the said Lords as his true
vassals in all their just quarrels for recoueryng of damages for injuries to
them wrongfully done.

ALSO they required the king of England to send to the^.viii. thousand men to
aid them against the Duke of Burgoine, which daily provoked the French king
to make open war on them, their lands and seigniories, promisyng farther to
dis^ource and pay all the costs and charges which the said army of Englishmen
should expend during their war, which letter was written the.viii. day of
May.

KING Henry lovingly received and gentely entertained this messenger Alberte,
and when he had well debated and considered the case, he first detesting the
abominable murder of the late duke of Orliaunce and seeing no Justice ministered
nor no punishment done for so shameful an act, having also approved
experience that the Duke of Burgoine would keep no longer promise then he him
self listed. And secondarily considering what large offers these Princes had
made to him both greatly to his honor and to the high profit and commodity
of his realm and subjects, thought that he was bound by the office of a king
to aid and succor them which cried for Justice and could have none, and in
especial because they in that point being his subjects and vassalles ought to
be defended in maintenance of his superiority and seigniorie: wherefore he
louyngly promised them aid and relefe. This return of the messenger was to
them as pleasant as is the deliverance of a captive from his sore imprisonment,
or of a merchant passing by the way beset about by Thieves, being reskewed by
his friends or companions. And not without cause, for the French king not of
his own courage animated, but maliciously ence^sed by the duke of Burgoyn,
persecuted the faction of the Orliaunces from city to city from town to
town, with such power and extremity that they were both of force and
necessity compelled to repair to the City of Bourges in Berry, and there to
appoincte them selfs ^ther to render or defend. Ye must understand that
princes sometime have Argus, the son of Aristor the.v. king of the Argiues, y^
(...) fain him to have had an hundred iyes, sygnifiyng there by his wysewme and
circumspeccion.
Argus iyes and Midas, the Poets fa^e to have long ears signifiyng hereby,
y^ kings hear far of.
Midas ears. For this feate was not so secretly wrought in England but it was
apparently espied in France, wherefore the French kings counsel sent the
Earl of S. Paul the old cankered enemy to the Englishmen into the parties of
Picardy with fiften C. horsemen and a great number of fotemen, he ordained
certain of his men to give assault to the town of Guisnes while he stood in a
stale to lie in wait for the relefe that might come from Caleis. The furious
Frenchmen brake a few old pales about pore men's gardens of Guisnes, but the
men of war of the Castle shot so fiercely at them with arowes and cast
out wildefier in such abundance that the assailantes were feign to retire.
And so the earl of saint Paul which never won gain but lost honor at the
English men's hands, returned not only with loss of his people but defrauded
of his desired pray, returned to the town of Saint Quintins.

The.xiii. year. The.xiii. year

THe French king in the mean season by the enticement of the duke of Burgoine
laid sege to the city of Bourges in Berry where the duke of Orleance and his
confederates had included and fortified themselves. When the King of England
was thereof aducrtised, he with all diligence sent forth his son Thomas duke
of Clarence, and Edward duke of York with.viii.C. horsemen and.ix. thousand
archers which took land in the bay of Hogs in Normandy by saint Waste in
the territory of Constantine. Thenglishemen swarmed like Bees round about the
country, robbyng Marchantes, spoilyng husbandmen and brennyng towns, and were
ioyously received of the Earls of Alau^son and Richmond fautors of the
Orliencial part. The council of France not willing that the Englishmen should
join or concur with the Dukes of Orleaunce and Berry or their accomplices,
caused a common fame (although it were not true) to be diuulged abroad that
there was a final peace and a perfect amity concluded between the French king
and his lords which lately were to him adversaries. When this fable was
notified to the Englishmen which were by hasty iourneis passed the river of
Leire, the^ spoiled the town and Monastery of Beauliew, and wasted with fire
and sword the countries of Touraine and Maine. Against whom the duke of
Burgoyn sent the lord of Rambures with a great army, which in short time was
before vanquished. The Dolphyn of France fearyng the doings of the
Englishemen concluded a feigned peace between the dukes of Orleaunce and
burgoyne and their adherentes, so that the duke of Orleaunce should without
delay dispatche out of the dominions of France all the English army. The duke
was not rich to pay, and the Englishmen were gredy to have, in so much that
they marchyng toward Guien in good order what by sackyng of towns and what
with raunsomyng of rich persons, gat great treasure and many good prays.
Beside this to the aid of the duke of Orliaunce king Henry sent to Caleis
therles of Kent and Warwike with.ii. thousand fightyng men which spoiled and
defaced the county of Bullenois, and brent the town of Samer de Boys and took
with assault the fortress of Russalte with diverse other. The duke of Orleance
which was daily called on to dispatche the Englishemen out of France, came to
the duke of Clarence and his army rendryng to the^ a M. gramercies and
disoursed to them as much money as either he or his friends might easily
spare: and for two hundred and.ix.M. Frankes which remained unpaid he
delivered in gage his second brother Ihon earl of Angules^e which was
Grandfather to Frances afterward French king and sir Marcell of Bourge, sir
Ihon of Samoures, sir Archibault of Uiliers and diverse other, which earl long
continewed in England as you shall perceive hereafter. When this agreement was
taken, the dukes of Clarence and York with great pray (rich prisoners, and
welthy hostages) came to Bordeaux making war on the frontiers of France, to
their great gain and profitable lucre. So by the only coming of the
E^glishmen into France the duke of Orliaunce was restored not only to peace
and quietness with all persons save the duke of Burgoyne: But also fell in such
favor with the king and the realm that he was of al men well-beloved, much
honored and highly esteemed, and so continewed till waueryng Fortune turned her
variable whele. For after this he being enemy to the English nation was
vanquished and taken prisoner and so remained in England above.xxiiii. years,
till the flower of his age was passed or sore blemyshed.

The fourtenth year. The.xiiii. year

AFter these great and fortunate chances happened to king Henry, he perfightly
remembering that there could be no more praise given to a prince then to execute
his office in administryng Justice which above al thing is the very necessary
minister to al people, entendyng to live in quietenes, being now delivered of
al Civil division and intestine discencion, with the which almost al
Christendom was infected and disturbed, not only to the great decay of Christ's
religion and Christian creatures but to the great exaltacio^ of Painim princes,
by the dilatyng of the pestiferus sect of the false counterfeit prophet
vainglorious Mahumet: called a great cou^sail of the three estates of his
realm, in the which he deliberately consulted and concluded as well for the
politic governance of his realm as also for the war to be made against the
Infidels, and especially for the recovery of the holy City of Jerusalem, in
which Christian wars he intended to end his transitory life, and for that
cause he prepared a great army, and gathered much treasure, entending to set
forward in the same spring time? But se the chance, what so ever man intends
God suddenly reuerseth, what princes will, god will not, what we think stable,
God suddenly makes muta^le, to the intent that Salomons saying might be found
true, which wrote that the wisdom of men is but folishnes before God. When
this Prince was thus furnyshed with treasure sufficient, with valiant
capitaines and hardy soldiers, with tall ships furnished with vitayles
municions and all things necessary for such a journey royal, he was taken
with a sore sudden disease and ^aied in his bed: which disease was no Lepry
stryken by the hands of God as folish Friars before declared, for the^ he
nether would for shame, nor for dehilitie was able to enterprise so great a
journey as in to Iewrie in his own person, but he was taken with a sore
Apoplerye is a (...) (...) of gross humo^s which fill the vessels of the head
from whence the felyng of the body comes. And therefore they which have this
dis^^ase are ^epriued of felyng, (...) and mouyng.
Apoplexye of the which he languished till his appoyncted hour, and had none
other grefe nor malady. During which lickenes as Auctors write he caused his
crown to be set on the pillowe at his beds head and suddenly his pange so
sore trobeled him that he lay as though al his vital sprites had been from him
departed: such chamberleins as had the cure and charge of his body thinkyng
him to be departed and dead covered his face with a linen cloth. The prince
his son being thereof advertised, entered into the chamber and took away the
crown and departed: the father being suddenly revived out of his trance
quickly perceived the lack of his crown, and having knowledge that the prince
his son had possessed it, caused him to repair to his presence, requiryng of
him for what cause he had so misused himself. The prince with a good audacitie
answered, sir to mine and al men's judgments you seemed dead in this world,
wherefore I as your next and aparant heir took that as mine own and not as
yours: well fair son said the king (with a great sigh) what right I had to it
and how I enjoyed it God knows, well quod the prince if you die king I will
have the garla^d and trust to keep it with the swerd against al mine enemies as
you have done: well said the king I commit al to god and remember you to do well,
and with that turned himself in his bed and shortly after departed to god, in a
chamber of the abbotes of westminster called Jerusalem the.xx. day of March in
the year of our Lord M.iiii.C.xiii. and in the year of his age.xlvi. when he
had reigned.xiii. years, v. months and odd days in much per plexitie and
littel pleasure, whose body with all funeral po^pe was co^ueighed to
Canterbury, and there solemply buried, leuyng behind him by the lady Marie
daughter to lord Hu^frey earl of Hereford and Northha^pton, Henry prince of
Wales, Thomas duke of Clare^ce, Iho^ duke of Bedford, Humfrey duke of
Gloucester, Blanch duches of Bauier and Philip Queen of Denmark, for by his
last wife Queen Jane he had no children. This king was of a mean stature well
proporcioned and formally compact, quick and deliver and of a stout courage.
After that he had apeased al civil disce^cions he showed him self so gentely
to all men that he gat him more love of the nobles in his latter days the^ he
had malice and il will of the^ in the beginning. When tidings of his death was
related to the duke of Clarence being in Aquitayn, he with all diligent
celeritie took ship with therle of Angulesme, and other his hostages and
returned into England to the great comfort of his brethren.

The end of the unquiet time of king Henry the fourth.
The victorious acts of King Henry the fifth.
HEnry Prince of wales, The.i. year.
son and heir to king Henry the.iiii. borne at Monmouth on the River of Wye,
after the obsequies of his noble pare^t sole^ply celebrate and su^pteously
finished, took upon him the high power and regiment of this realm of England
the.xx. day of March in the year after that Christ our savior had entered
into the immaculate womb of the holy Uirgin his natural mother a thousand
four hundred and xij. and was crouned the.ix. day of April then next
ensuyng, and proclaimed king by the name of king Henry the fifth. Before which
royal possession so by him obtained, diverse noble men and honorable
personages did to him homage, liege and swear dew obeisance (which thing had
not been before experime^ted) as to him in whom they conceived a good
expectacion both of his verteous beginnings and also of his fortunat success
in all things which should be attempted or begone during the time of his
prosperous reign and fortunate Empire.

THIS king, this man was he, which (according to the old Proverb) declared
and showed that honors ought to change manners, for incontinent after that he
was stalled in the siege royal, and had received the croune and scepter of the
famous and fortunate region, determined with himself to put on the shape of a
new man, and to use another sort of living, turnyng insolency and wildnes
into gravity and sobernes, and waueryng vice into constant virtue. And to
the^tent that he would so continue without going back, and not thereunto be
allured by his familier co^paignions, with whom he had passed his young age and
wanton pastime and riotous misorder (insomuche that for imprisonmente of one of
his wanton mates and unthrifty plaifaiers he struck the chief Justice with
his fiste on the face. For which offense he was not only committed to straight
prison, but also of his father put out of the preuy counsel and banished the
court, and his brother Thomas duke of Clarence elected president of the kings
counsel to his great displeasure and open reproach) he therefore banished and
separated from him all his old flatterers and familier compaignions, (not
unrewarded nor yet vnpreferred) inhibityng them upon a great pain not once to
approach either to his speech or presence, nor yet to lodge or soiourue within
ten miles of his court or mansion. And in their places he clected and chose
men of grauitee, men of wit, and men of high policy, by whose wise counsel
and prudente instruccion he might at all times rule to his honor and govern
to his profit. This prince was almost the Arabicall Phoenix, and emo^gest his
predecessors a very Paragon: For that he amongst all governors, chiefly did
remember that a king ought to be a ruler with wit, gravity, circumspeccion,
diligence and constancy, and for that cause to have a rule to him committed,
not for an honor, but for an onorarius charge and daily burden, and not to
look so much on other men's livings, as to consider and remember his own
doings and propre acts. For which ^use, he not to much trustyng to the
readiness of his own wit, nor (...) judgments of his own waueryng will,
called to his counsel su^^e prudent and politic personages, the which
should not only help to ease his charge and pain in supportyng the burden of
his realm and Empire, but also incense and instruct him with such good
reasons and fruitful persuasions, that he might show himself a synguler
mirror and manifest example of moral virtues and good qualities to his comen
people and loving subjects. For it is daily seen, that a vicious prince does
much more hurt with his pernicious example to other, then to himself by his
own peculier offense. For it is not so much evil as Cicero says (although
it be evil in it self) a prince to do evil, as he by his evil doings to
corrupt other, because it is daily seen, that as princes change, the people
alters, and as kings go, the subjects follow. For certainly he that is
preferred to high authoritee, is therefore much exalted and had in honor, that
he should rule, ouerse and correct the manners and co^dicions of the people, and
vigilantly to forsee and daily study how to acquire to himself laud and glory,
and to other profit and comodite, and not to delight in worldly pleasures
which are commen amongst the lowest sort of the vile and rusticall people.
And he that will do nothing nor can do nothing is more worthy to be called a
servant then a ruler, and a subject rather then a governor. For what can be
more shame or reproach to a prince, then he which ought to govern and rule
other shall by cowardnes, sloth and ignorance as a pupille not of.viij. or.x
years of age, but being of.xx or.xxx. years and more, shall be compelled to obey
and follow the wills of other, and be ruled and bear no rule, like a ward and
not like a garden, like a servant and not like a Master. Such a governor was
king Richard the second, which of himself being not of the most evil
disposicion, was not of so simple a mind, nor of such debilite of wit, nor
yet of so little heart and courage, but he might have demanded and learned good
and profitable counsel, and after advise taken, kept, retained and followed
the same: But howsoever it was, unprofitable counsailers were his confusion and
final perdicion. Such another ruler was king Edward the second, which two
before named kings fell from the high glory of fortunes whele to exstreme
misery and miserable calamitee. By whose unfortunate chance (as I think) this
king Henry being admonished, expulsed from him his old play fellows, his
preuie Sicophantes and ungracious guard as authors and procurers of al mischifes
and riot, and assigned into their places men of grauitee, persons of
actiuitee, and counsaillers of great wit and policy.

AFTER that he had laid this prudent and polletique foundation, he entendyng
in his mind to do many noble and notable acts, and remembryng that all goodness
comes of God, and that al worldly things and humain Acts be more weaker and
poorer then the celestial powers and heavenly rewards, determined to begin
with some thing pleasant and acceptable to God. Wherefore he first commanded
the Clergy syncerely and truly to preach the word of God and to live after
the same, so that they to the temporaltee might be the Lanternes of light and
mirrors of virtue. The lay men he willed to serve God and obey their prince,
prohibityng to them above al things breche of matrimony use of sweryng and
wilful perjury, exhortyng both to love toge there as man with wife or brother
with brother. Beside this he elected the best learned men in the laws of the
realm to the officies of justice, and men of good living he preferred to high
degrees and authoritee.

THE madness of the Welshemen and Scotts (whose often incursions and robberies
he well had in his fathers days experimented and assaied) he studied to assuage
and repress, to the intent that he being quiet in his own regions, might
either make outward war without doubt or dangier, or else for the commen
wealth of his realm to study how to encreace the glory of his seigniory, and
so both keep and conserve it.

WHEN all things were thus settled and framed to his purpose, he caused the
body of king Richard the second (...) removed with all funeral pompes
conueniente for his estate, from Langeley to Westminster, where he was
honorably enterred with Queen Anne his first wife in a solemn toumbe erected
and set up at the costs and charges of this noble prince king Henry.

ALTHOUGH this prudente prince and this pollitique governor had set and
established all things being in difference and variaunce within his own
peculier realms, countrees and territories and confines of the same: yet he
nothing less forgettyng nor no one thing more myndyng or desiring, then the
ceassyng of the long scisme and division sprung and continued in the catholic
church of Christian religion by the most ambicious desire and auaricious
appetite of certain persons calling themselfes spiritual fathers, but in
deed carnal coueteours and gredy glotto^s aspiryng for honor and not for
virtue to the proud see of Rome, desiryng more to pille then to profit
Christ's flock or Christian religion, having knowledge that a general
counsel was somoned to be celebrate and kept at the fair city of Constance
upon the river of Ryne, though that it was not his honor nor yet his ductie,
being thereof warned by the Emperor Sigismond to be as a hearer and no
partaker in so high a cause, and in especial in so high an assemble. Wherefore
he sent thither Richard earl of War^^ke and three bishops with other famous
prelates and doctors, besides knights and esquires to the number of eight
hundred horses. They were men so well appareled and their horses so richely
trapped, and all the compaignie so well furnished, that the Almaines wondered,
the Italians gased, and all other nations were astonnied to se such an
honorable compaignie come from a country so far distant. At this Sinody were
assembled (as one authore writes) CCC.xlvj. bishops, Abbottes and doctors
v.C.lxiiij: noble men, knights and esquires.xvj.M. beside servants which
(not accomptyng the towns men) were numbered.lxv.M. persons. These Ambassadors
were highly received of the Emperor Sygismond and of the Romish bishop called
Ihon the.xxiij. which in the same counsel for great and abominable crimes
and detestable offenses by him perpetrated and committed (of the which he could
not pourge himself nor make any defense) was by the same Sinody according to his
demerites put down and of his estate deprived. Gregory the.xij. was one of the
Scismatical number, fearyng shame more then regardyng his worldly affeccion did
put down himself of his own propre mocion from his foolish usurped name
and Popish dignitee. But Benedict the.xiii. still and stiffly affirmyng himself
to be the very Uiker of God, so much desired honor, and so much was wrapped
in his own folishe and fantastical opinion, that no friend could persuade him,
nor argument entice him, nor no reason refrain him from the same, and so
according to his desert by open judgment, against his will, lost both name and
honesty. And three years after Otho Columbe a noble Roman borne was elected
to the bishopric of Rome and named Martyne the fifth.

IN this cou^saill Ihon Wicliffe borne in England, and Ihon Husse and Iherom of
Prage were condemned to death. During this first year, sir Ihon Old Castle,
which by his wife was called lord Cobham, a valiant capitain and an hardy
gentleman, was accused to the Archbishop of Cauntorbury of certain poynctes of
heresy. Which bishop knowing him to be highly in the kings favor, declared
to his highness the whole accusacio^. The king first having compassion of the
noble man, required the prelates that if he were a straied sheep, rather by
gentleness then by rigor to reduce him to his old flock. After that he
sendyng for him, godly exhorted and louyngly admonished him to reconcile
himself to God and his laws. The lord Cobham not only thanked the king of
his most favorable clemencye, but also declared first to him by mouth and
afterward by writing the foundation of his faith, the ground of his belefe and
the botome of his stomach, affirmyng his grace to be his supreme head and
competent judge and none other person, offering an hundred knights and
esquires to come to his purgacio^, or else to fight in open listes with his
accusors. The king not only knowing the laws of the reame, but also persuaded
by his counsel, that heretical accusacions ought to be tried by the
spiritual prelates, sent him to the tower of London there to abide the
determinacion of the clergy according to the statutes in and for that case
provided. After which time the.xxiij. day of Septembre, a solemn session
was appoincted in the Cathedral church of saint Paul, and another the.xxv.
da of the said month in the hal of the Friars prechers in London, in which
places thesaid lord was examined, apposed and fully heard, and in conclusion
by the Archbishop denounced an heretic and so remitted again to the toure of
London: From which place, either by help of friends or corrupcion of kepers, he
privily escaped and came into Wales, where he temained by the space of three
years and more.

AFTER this time in a certain unlawful assemble was taken sir Robert Acton
knight, a man of great wit and possessions, Ihon Broune Esquire, Ihon Beuerley
clerk and a great number of other which were brought to the kings presence,
and to him declared the cause of their commocion and risyng: and accusyng a
great nu^bre of their sort and society (which confession because. I have not
seen, I leave at large.) After this folishe act, so many persons were
apprehended that all the prisons in and about London were replenished with
people. The chief of thein which were.xxix. were condemned by the clergy of
heresy, and attainted of high treason as mouers of war against their king by
the temporal law in the Guyld hall the.xij. day of December, and adjudged for
treason to be drawn and hanged, and for heresy to be consumed with fire
galowes and all: Which judgment was executed in Ianiuer following on thesaied
Robert Acton and the.xxviij. other

SOME say that the occasion of their death was the conueighance of the Lord
Cobham out of prisone. Other write that it was both for treason and heresy as
the record declares. Certain affirm that it was for feined causes surmised by
the spirituality more of displeasour then truth: the judgment whereof I leave
to men indifferent. For surely all conjectures be not true, nor all writings
are not the Gospel, and therefore because I was nether a witness of the fact,
nor present at the deed I ouerpasse that matter and begin another.

The second year. The.ii. year.

King Henry continually studiyng for the honor of himself and advancement of
his people, called his high court of parliament the last day of April in the
town of Leicester In the which parliamente many profitable laws were
concluded: and many peticions moved were for that time deferred. Amongst which
requests, one was, that a bill exhibited in the parliamente holden at
Westminster in the.xj. year of king Henry the fourth (which by reason that the
king was then vexed and troubled with civil division and domestical
dissencion, came to none effect) might now be well studied, pondered, regarded
and brought to some good conclusion. The effect of which supplicacion was,
that the temporal lands deuoutely given, and disordinatly spent by religious
and other spiritual persons, might suffice to maintein to the honor of the
king and defense of the realm, xv. earls, xv.C. knights.vj.M.ii.C. esquites,
and.C. almole houses for relief only of the poor impotente and nedy persons,
and the king to have clearly to his cofers twenty thousand pounds, with many
other prouilions and valewes of religioushouses which I ouerpasse.

THIS before remembered bill was much noted and feared emo^gest the religious
fort whom in effect it much touched, insomuche that the fat Ab^otes swet, the
proud Priors frouned, the poor Friars cursled the sely Nonnes wept, and al
together were nothing pleased nor yet content. Now to find a remedy for a
mischief and a rent to stop a wound, the Clergy myndyng rather to bow then
break, agreed to offer to the king a great some of money to stay this new
moved demand. The cause of this offer seemed to some of the wise prelates
nether decente nor convenient, for they well forsawe and perfightly knew that
if the commo^s perceived that they by reward or offer of money would resist
their request and peticion, that they stirred and moved with a fury would not
only rail and despise them as corruptours of Princes and enemies of the
public wealth, but would so cry and call on the king and his temporal
lords that they were like to lose both work and oil, cost and linyng:
Wherefore they determined to cast all chances which might serve their
purpose, and in especial to replenishe the kings brain with some pleasante
study that he should nether phantasy nor regard the serious peticion of the
importunate commons.

WHEREFORE on a day when the king was present in the parliament, Henry
Chicheley Archbishop of Cau^torbury thereto newly preferted, which beforetime
had been a Monk of the Carthusians, a man which had professed wilful
poverty in religion, and yet coming abroad much desired honor, and a man
much regardyng Gods law, but more loving his own lucre. After low
obeysaunce made to the king he said after this manner in effect. When Iconsider
our most entierly beloved and less drad sovereign lord and natural Prince,
The o^acion of Henry ^hicheley Archebishoppe of ^auntortrry
the loving mind, the daily labor and continual study which you incessantly
implore both for thaduanceme^t of the honor of your realm and also profit of
your people: I cannot nor ought nor, except I would be noted not only ingrate
to your royal person being my patron and preferrer, but also a neglecter of
my duty, a secret mummer of such things which touch both the inheritance
of your croune and the honor of your realm either hold my peace or keep
silence. For all authors agree that the glory of kings consists not only in
high blood and haute progeny, not in haboundant riches and superfluous
substance, nor in pleasant pastyme and joyous solace: But the very tipe of the
magnificence of a prince rests in populous rich regions, subjects and
beautiful citees and tounes, of the which thanked be God, although you be
conveniently furnished both within your realms of England and Ireland and
principalite of Wales, yet by lineal disce^t, by progeny of blud and by very
inheritance, not only the duchy of Normandy and Aquitaine with the counties of
Aniowe and Main and the countrei of Gascoyn are to you as true and vndubitate
heir of the same laufully deuoluted and lineally descended from the high and
most noble prince of famous memory king Edward the third your great
grandfather, but also the whole realm of France with all his prerogatives and
preheminences, to you as heir to your great grandfather is of right belongyng
and apperteignyng. In which realm, to rehearse what noble persons, what
beautiful cities, what fertile regions, what substancial marcha^tes, and what
plentiful rivers are conteigned and included, I assure you that time should
rather fail then matter should wax skant. The fraudulent Frenchmen to
defraude and take away your right and title to the realm of France, in the
time of your noble progenitor king Edward the third, alleged a law, untruly
fained, falcely glosed and Sophistically expounded, whereof the very words are
these, In terram ^alicam mulieres ne succedant, which is to say, let not women
succeed in the land The land Salique.
Salique. This land Salicque the deceitful glosers name to be the realm of
France. This law the Logical interpretours assign to direct the croune and
regalitie of the same region, as who would say that to that pre-eminence no
woman were hable to aspire, nor no heir Female was worthy to inherit. The
French writers affirm that Pharamond king of the French Gauls, first
instituted this law, which never was, should or might be broken. See now how
an evil gloss confounds the text, and a perciall interpretour marreth the
sentence, for first it is apparently known and by an hundred writers confirmed
that Pharamond whom they allege to be aucthour of this law was duke of
Franconia in Germany, and elected to be king of the Sicamb^es, which calling
them selfs Frenchmen had gotten a part of the Gaul Celtike between the
rivers of Marne and Seyn. This Pharamond disceased in the year of our
Lord.iiii.C. and, xxvi. long after whose death, Charles the great being
Emperor and many years making war on the Saxons did in bluddy battle
disperse and confound the whole puissaunce of that nation in the year of our
Lord viii.C and five, and brought them to the catholic faith and christian
conformity. After which victory certain soldiers as the French
Cronographiers affirm, passed over the water of Sala and there inhabited,
between the rivers of Elue and Sala, and were commonly called Sali Frenchemen or
Sali Gauls, which country now is the land of Mismie. This people had such
displeasure at the dishonest fashions of the Germain women, that they made a law
that the Females should not succeed to any inheritance within that land.

NOW with indifferent ears if you will note these two points you shall
casily perceive that the law Salicque was only fained and invented to put your
noble progenitors and you from your lawful right and true inheritance. For
they say that Pharamond made the law for the land Salicque, which the gloss
calls France. Then I demand of master Gloser or rather master Doctor
commenter, if I may call a commenter an open lier, whether Pharamond which
died iiii.C.xxi. years before the Frenchemen possessed the Gaul Salicque and
never saw or knew it, made a law of that thing which at that time was not
his nor inhabited by his people. Beside this, the realm of France which is
your patrimony is compact of.iii. Gauls, Belgique, Celtique and Aquitain, and
no part of Salicque: then may the gloser expound as well that Gaul Belgique is
the country of Bryttam, as to gloss that the land Salicque is the whole
realm and dominion of the croune of France. Wonder it is to see how the
Frenchmen Iuggle with this fantastical law, following the crafty hasarders
which vie a plai called see thou me or see thou me not. For when King Pepyn
which was Duke of Brabante by his mother Begga, and Master of the palayce of
France coueted the croune and scepter of the realm, the French nation not
reme^bryng this infringible law, deposed Childeryck the.iii. the very heir
male and undoubted child of the line of Pharamond and Clouis kings of France
by the cou^sail of ^achary then Bishop of Rome, and set up in trone this Pepyn
as next heir general descended of lady Blithyld daughter to king Clothayre
the first. Hugh Capet also which usurped the croune with out right or reason
on Charles duke of Lorayne the sole heir male of the line and stock of
Charles the great, after that he had shamefully murdered and in pitiful
prison by the procurement of the Bishop of Orleaunce destroyed the said
Charles, to make his title seem true and apere good, where in deed it was both
evil and untrue, to blind the opinions of the common people and to set a
glass before their eyes, co^ueighed him self as heir to the lady Lyngard
daughter to the king Charlemaine son to Jews the Emperor which was son to
Charles the great king of France. King Jews also the ninth whom the
Frenchmen call Saint Jews being very heir to the said usurper Hugh Capet,
could never be satisfied in his conscience how he might justly keep and
possess the croune and regalitie of the realm of France till he was
persuaded and fully instructed that Queen Isabell his graundmother was lineally
descended of Lady Ermengard daughter and heir to the above named Charles duke
of Lorayn, by the foresaid Hugh Capet of life and realm wrongfully deprived:
by the which marriage the bludde and line of king Charles the great was again
vnitedland restored to the Croune and Scepter of France, so that it more
clearer then the son, openly appears the title of King Pepyn, the claim of
Hugh Capet, the possession of king Jews, ye and of all the French kings to
this day, are derived, claymed and conueighed from the heir Female, and yet
they would bar you as though your great graundmother had been no woman nor
heir female, but a painted Image or famed shadow. If so many examples, if
such copy of presydentes collected out of your own histories and gathered
out of your own writers suffice not to confound your simple Salicque law
invented by falce fablers and crafty imaginers of you fablyng French men,
then here what God says in the book of Numeri. When a man dies without a
son, let the inheritance descend to the daughter: If your princes call them
selfs most Christian kings, let them follow the law of God before the law
of the Painym Pharamond.

Are not all laws discrepant from Gods laws euel, and to al Christen ears
odious and noisome? Are French women dyscended of the blud roial no
Christians, and not worthy to inherit in the realm of France? Is the realm
of France more noble then the kingdom of Judah of whom Christ descended by a
woman? When God said to Abraham that in one of his sede al nations should be
blessed, how came Christ of the seed of Abraham but only by that immaculate
Uirgin his glorious mother? Likewise, when the Prophet Michee said, thou tribe
of Judah art not the least of estimacion amongst the Princes of Judah, for out
of the shall come a captain which shall rule and direct my people of Israel.
How descended Christ from the rote of Iesse, and how was he duke and capitain
of the Israelites, and how descended he of the line of David: But only by his
mother a pure virgin and a married wife. Behold, by gods law, women shall
inherit Behold in France, Frenchemen have inherited by the only line of the
women, and yet Englishmen be prohibit to claim by the heir Female contrary
to the law of God and man. Wherefore regard well my sovereign Lord your just
and true title to the realm of France, by Gods law and man's law to you
lawfully diuoluted as very heir to Queen Isa^ell your great graundmother
daughter to king Philip the fair and suster and heir to.iii. kings disceasyng
without any issue. Which inheritance of the woman is declared to be ius^e by
the Mosaicall law and used and approved by the Gallican descent as I have
before declared. Therefore for Gods sake leese not your patrimony, disherite
not your heirs, dishonor not your self, d^^ninishe not your title, which
your noble progenitors so highly have esteemed. Wherefore auaunce forth your
banner, fight for your right, conquer your inheritance, spare not sword
blud or fire, your war is just, your cause is good, and your claim true: and
therefore courageously set forward your war against your enemies. And to the
intent that we your loving chapleins and obedient lubiectes of the spirituality
would show our selfs willing and desiryng to aid you for the recovery of your
ancient right and true title to the croune of France, we have in our
spiritual conuocacion granted to your highness such a some of money as never
by no spiritual persons was to any prince before your days given or advanced,
beside our daily prayers and continual precacions to God and his saints for
prosperus success to ensue in your merciall exploite and royal passage. When
the Archbishop had finished his prepared purpose, Raulfe Earl of Westmerland,
a man of no less gravity then experience, and of no more experience then
stomach, which was then high Warden of the marches toward Scotland, and
therefore thinkyng that if the king should pass over into France with his whole
puissaunce, that his power should be to weak to withstand the strength of
Scotland if they should invade during the kings ab^ence. Wherefore he rose up,
and making his obeisance to the king said.

SVRELY sir, The Oracio^ of Raufe earl of Westmerland.
as my lord of Canterbury has clerkely declared, the conquest of France is
very honorable, and when it is gotten and obteigned very profitable and
pleasant: But saving your graces reformacion, I say and affirm that to
conquer Scotland is more necessary, more apparante easy, and more profitable
to this realm then is the gain of France. For although I am not so well
learned as my lord Archbishop is, nor have not proceeded to degree in the
University, yet I have red, and heard great clarckes say, that strength
knitte and combined together is of more force and efficacy then when it is
severed and dispersed. As for an example, sprinkle a vessel of water and it
moisteth not, but cast it out wholly together and it both washes and
norisheth. This notable saying before this time has encoraged Emperors,
animated kings and allured princes to conquer realms to them adioynyng, to
vanquishe nations to their dominions adjacent, to subdewe people either
necessary for their purpose, or being to them daily enemies or continual
adversaries. For proof whereof, behold what was the chief cause and occasion
why rulers and governors so sore labored, thirsted and coueted to bring al
regions to them adioinyng into one rule or Monarchy? Was it not done to this
intent that the conquerors might have the only power and entier gubernacion of
all the lands and people within their climate, and govern the^ in time of
peace and also have their aid in time of war? Which monarchy was of that
majesty and estimacion in the world, that no otherforein prince or exterior
potentate either had audacitie or was able to attempt any thing within the
territory or region of the monarchial prince and adourned king. Let the
kingdom of the assiriens be your example, and if that suffice not, then look
on the Percians, after on the Greeks and lastly on the Romans, which ever
desired and coue^ed more to have the littel Isle of Scicile, the territory of
the Numidians and the mean City of the Samnites being daiely within their
kennyng and smell, rather then to obtein populous Gaul, plenteous Pannony, or
manly Macedony liyng far from sight and out of their circle or compass. This
desire seems to rise of a great prudent and vigilante policy, for as a prince
is of more puissaunce when his countries join, so is he of more strength when
his power is at hand. And as men lackyng comfort be more releued by friends
which be present, then by kinsfolk dwelling in foreign and regions far of.
So princes have commonly coue^ed and ever desired to se and behold their
dominions liyng nere about them, rather then to here by report from the
countries far distant from them. If this has been the pollecy of
conquerours, thappetite of purchasers and the study of gouerners, why does your
grace desire France before Scotland, or coue^ a country far from your
sight, before a realm under your nose? Do you not remember how the hole Isle
of Britain was one entier Monarchi in the time of your noble auncetor King
Brute first king and ruler of your famus Empire and glorious region: which
deuidyng his realm to his three sons gave to Lothryne his eldest son that
part of Britain that your highness now enjoys, and to Albanact his second
son he gave the country of Albany now called Scotland, and to Camber his
third son he gave the country of Cambria now called Wales: reseruyng
always to him and his heirs homage, lege and feaultie loiall for the same
countries and dominions. By this deuisio^, the glory of the monarchy of
Britayne was clearly defaced, by this separacion the strength of the Britishe
kings was sore diminished, by this dispersion intestine war began, and Civil
rebellion sprange first within this region. For while all was under one, no
nation durst either once invade or attempt war against the Britons: but
when the land was once divided and the monarchy undone, outward enemitie or
foreyn hostility not half so much infested, grieved or troubled the valiant
Brittons as their own neighbors descended of one parent, and come of one
progeny. For the Albanac^es otherwise called the false fraudule^t Scotts, and
the Cambers otherwise called the unstable Welshemen, did not alonly withdraw
their fealty, deny their homage, and refuse their allegiance due to the
kings of this realm, but also made continual war and destroyed their
tounes and slew the people of their neighbors and Britons. For which cause,
diverse of your noble progenitoures have not only made war and subdewed the
Scotts for the deniyng of their homage and stirryng of rebellion, but also
have deposed their kings and princes and erected and set up other in their
estates and dignities. Scater king of Scotts, for his rebellion was by
Dunwallo Moluncius your noble predecessor slain and extincted. King Arthure
also the Glory of the Brittons erected Angosile to the scepter of Scotland and
received of him homage and fealty. If I should rehearse how many kings of
Scotland have done homage to your ancient predecessors, or rehearse how many
Scottishe kings they have corrected and punished for their disobedience and
deniyng of homage, or declare what kings they as superior lords and high
Emperoures over the vnderkinges of Scotland, have elected and made rulers, to
the^tent that all people might manifestly perceive that it was more glorious,
more honorable and more famous to a King to make a King then to be a king hy
natural descent, I assure you, your ears would be more weary of hearing, then
my tongue would be fatigate with open truth tellyng. Your noble progenitour
king Edward the first couetyng to be superior and to surmount in honor, or at
the least to be equiuolent in fame with his noble ancestors and famous
progenitors, daily studied and hourly compassed how to bring the whole Isle
of Briteygne which by Brute was divided into three parts into one monarchy and
one dominion. After long study and great consultacion had, he subdewed
Wales, and tamed the wild people and brought that unruly part to his old
home and aunciente degree, which thing done he likewise invaded Scotland and
conquered the countreye to the town of Perch called Saint Ihons town
standing on the river of Tay, which he walled, diched and fortefied, rulyng
that part with English laws, English customs and by English Judges, and
was all most at a point thereof to have made a perfighte conqueste and a
complete Monarchy. But Oh Lord, hasty death which makes an end of all
mortal creatures, suddenly berefte him of his life and took away his spirit,
and so all things which he had devised, which he had ymagened and seriously
pretended, the small momente of an hour turned vpside down and suddenly
subverted. Since whose death your great Graundfather, ye and your noble father
have attempted to bring that runnegate region into his ancient course and
former line, as a thing both necessary, conueniente and mete to be joined and
united to this realm, and so not only to revive the old empire and famous
Monarchye, but also to unite and co^bine that virtue and strength which from
the time of Brute was dispersed and severed, in one body, in one head and one
corporacion. Wherefore, if to your high wisdom it seems not necessary taking
this term neccssary for needful to conquer the realm of Scotland as a
thing that needs must be done, yet will I not fly from my first saying, but
prove it necessary (as the logical paraphrasian and Philosophical
interpreters) do by a distinccion expound this term necessary to signify a
thing convenient: That the conquest in Scotland before the inuadyng of France
is most expedient, for experience teaches and reason agrees that every
person ente^dyng a purposed enterprise, or a determinate voyage should only
provide and make preparacion for all things requisite and needful for his
purpose or exployte, but also ought vigilantly to forsee with Lynt is a beast
like to a wolf, whose sight does perce al things.
Lincis iyes, and prevent and study with the serpentyne policy how to aduoyde
and refell all things which might either be an impediment to his progression
and setting forward or occasion of his return and loss of his enterprise,
least he leuyng behynd him an evil neighbor, a continual adversary and a
secret enemy, may as soon lose his own propre realm, as conquer and gain
the dominion of another: wherefore the trite and common adage says, leave not
the certain for the uncertain. Wherefore it is necessary that I enucleate and
open to you certain articles contained in the old league and amity between the
realms of France and Scotland, whereof the words be these.

THE war or iniurye moved or done by the Englishemen to one of

IF the Englishemen make war on the French nation, then the

LIKEVVYSE if the Scotts be molested by the English wars,

AND that none of both the nations shall either contracte or make

AND to thentent that this league and amitee should be kept inviolate Robert le
Bruise the usurper of Scotland willed by his testament two things in especial
to be observed, the one, never to break the treaty concluded with France:
The second never to keep peace or promise with Englishmen longer then the keeping
thereof were to them either profitable or necessary. Yet Ihon Mayer and other
Scottish writers color this cause, saying that he would have no peace
concluded with England above three years. But whatsoever writers write or
talkers say, they be to him most faithful executors and have never yet
broken his testament but daily keep his precept and commandment And for the
performaunce of this will and keeping of this league, none of your auncetours
ever invaded France, but incontinent the Scotts troubled and vexed England.
None of your progenitors ever passed the sea in just quarrel against the
French nation, but the Scottishe people in their absence entered your realm,
spoiled your houses, slew your people and took great prays innumerable, only
to provoke your ancestors for to return from the inuadyng of France. If I
should declare to you their comen breakyng of leagues, their crafty and
subtle dissimulacio^, their false fair promises often sworn and never kept,
I doubt not but you would ten times more abhor their doing, then I would be
ashamed of the tellyng. Therefore I say still, and affirm it necessary and
convenient to forse, that you leave no enemies behind at your back when you go
to conquer adversaries before your face. Beside this, if you consider the
daily charges, the inconstant chances that may happen, I think, yea and little
doubt but Scotland shall be tamed before France shall be framed. For if you will
invade France, account what number of ships must transport your army, recon
what charge of ancors, what a multitude of Cables, and what innumerable things
apperteigne to a navy. When you be there, if your men decay by sickness or by
sword, if vitaill fail, or if money wax skante, if the wind turn contrary
or an hideous tempeste arise, you shall be destitute of aid, provision and
treasure, which in a strange region are the confusion and defacyng of an
army. On the other side, if you invade Scotland, your men be at hand, your
vitaill is nere, your aid is ever at your back, so that in that voyage you
shall have haboundance in all things, and of nothing you shall have want. See
what an occasion fortune has offered unto you, is not their king your captive
and prisoner? Is not the realm in great division for the cruelty of the duke
of Albany, rather desiryng to have a forain governor, then a natural tyrant
Wherefore my counsel is, first to invade Scotland, and by Gods grace to
conquer and join that region to your Empire, and to restore the renoumed
Monarchy of Britayne to her old estate and pre-eminence, and so beautified
with realms and furnished with people, to entree into France for the
recoueryng of your righteous title and true inheritance, in obseruyng the old
ancient proverb used by our forfathers, which says, he that will France
win, must with Scotland first begin.

NO quod the Duke of Excester uncle to the King, An O^acion of the Duke of
Excester.
(which was well learned, and sent into Italy by his father entendyng to have
been a priest) he that will Scotland win, let him with France first begin.
For if you call to remembrance the common saying of the wise and expert
Philicions, which both write and teach, that if you will heal a malady you
must first remove the cause: If you will cure a lore, you must first take
away the humor that fedeth the place: If you will destroy a plant, pluck
away his sap which is his norisshyng and life. Then if France be the
nori^sher or Scotland, if the French pencio^s be the susteiners of the
Scottishe nobilitee, if the educacion of Scotts in France be the cause of
practice and policy in Scotland, then pluck away France and the courage of
the nobles of Scotland shall be sone daunted and appalled: Take away France
and the hertes of the comen people will sone decaie and wax faint: Pluck away
France and never look that Scotland will resist or withstand your power.
For when the head is gone, the body sone falls, and when the sap fails the
tree sone withers. Let men read the Chronicles and peruse our English
Chronographiers, and you shall sone find that the Scotts have seldo^ of their
own ^ocion invaded or vexed England, but only for the obseruyng of the
league in the which they be bound to France: For the Scotts are the shaft
and dart of the Frenchemen to shote and cast at their pleasure against the
English nation. And where they have invaded, as I cannot deny but they have
dooen, what glory or what profit succeeded of their entrep^ice, I report me to
their peculier histories. King Malcolyn invaded England, when king William the
^econd was making war in Normandy. David le Bruise also entered England, your
great graundfather king Edward the third liyng at the siege of Caleis. Was not
Malcolin slain beside Tinmouth and king David taken beside Durrham. Let the
governors of Scotland, (for the king is sure enough) enter into England on
that price and se what he shall gain thereby. What notable act were Scotts
ever able to do out of their own country and propre climate? Or when were they
able to co^ueigh an army over the sea at their own costs and expenses? Read
their own histories and you shall find few or none. Their nature and
condition is to tarry at home in idleness, ready to defend their country like
brute beasts, thinkyng their rusticall fassion to be high honesty, and their
beggarly living to be a welfare. Beside this, what ancient writer or
autentike historiographier either writ of them honor or once names them,
ex^pte saint Iherom, which says that when he was young, he saw in France
certain Scotts of the isle of Britain eat the flesh of men, and when they
came into the woods findyng there great heardes of beasts and flocks of
sheep, left the beasts and cut of the buttockes of the heardmen and the
pappes and breasts of the sheperdes women, extemyng this meat to be the
greatest deinties: And Sabellicus says that Scotts much delighte and
rejoice in liyng. You may now apparauntly perceive what puissaunce Scotland is
of it self, little able to defend and less able to invade like a noune
adjective that cannot stand without a substantive. If France be taken from
the^, of whom shall they seek aid? Denmark will the^ refuse because the king
is your brother inlawe: Portyngall and Castle will not them regard, both the
kings being your cosyns germain and auntes sons: Italy is to far: Germany
and Hungary be with you in league. So that of necessitee they in conclusion
destitute of all aid, deprived of all succoure, bereued of all friendship (if
France be conquered) must without war or dent of sword come under your
subieccion and due obeisance. And yet I would not in this your conquest,
France should be so much minded, that Scotland should be forgotten, nor
that your entier power should be sent into France and no defense left against
the invasions of Scotland. For of that might ensue this mischief, that if your
whole power were vanquisshed in France, the Scotts being elated by the victory
of their friends might do more displeasor to your realm in one year then you
should recover again in five. But sith God has sent you people, riches,
municio^s of war and all things necessary, either to invade both, or to
defend the one and penetrate the other. Pass the sea your self with an army
royal, and leave my lord of Westmerlande and other grave capitaines of the
North with a convenient nombre to defend the Marches if the subtle Scotts
encouraged by the Frenchmen will any thing attempt during your voyage and
absence. And this is to be remembered, if you get Scotland you have a country
barayne almost of all pleasure and goodness, you gain people savage, waueryng
and constant, of riches you shall have little and of poverty much: But if you
get France, you shall have a country fertile, pleasant and plentiful, you
shall have people, Civil, witty and of good order. You shall have rich
citees, beautiful tounes innumerable Castles.xxiiij. puyssaunt Duchies, lxxx.
and odd populous Countrees, and an hundred and three famous bisshoprickes, a.M.
and more fat Monastaries, and parish Churches (as the French writers affirm)
x.C. thousand and mo. This conquest is honorable, this gain is proffitable,
this journey is plesaunte, and therefore nether to be left nor forslewed.
Uitaill you shall have sufficient from Flaunders aid of men you may have
daily out of England, or else to leave a competente crewe in the Marches of
Caleis to refreshe your army and to furnishe still your number. Although the
cost in transportyng your me^ be great, yet your gain shall be greater, and
therefore according to the trite adage, he must liberally spend that will
plentefully gain. And because my lord of Westmerla^de has alleged that the
Romans desired the dominion of such as were under flight of their own Egle,
or whose possessions were a mote to their eye, as the Numidians and other
which he has wisely rehearsed. Behold the conditions of the counsailers and
the desire of the mouers, what persons were they which coueted their poor
neighbors rather then rich foreines? Men effeminate, more mete for a Carpet
then a Camp, men of a weak stomach desiryng rather to walk in a pleasant
gardein then pass the sees in a tempesteous storm, what should I say? Men
that would have somewhat and yet take litell pain, men that coueted things
nothing honorable nor yet greatly profitable. But I remember that the noble
Cato the Censor which when it was alleged in the Senate at Rome that Affrike
was far of, and the sea broad, and the journey perilous caused certain new
figs to be brought into the Senate, which grew in the territory of
Carthage, and demanded of the Senators how they liked the Figs? Some said
they were new, some said they were sweet and some said they were pleasant. Oh
qoud Cato, if they be new gathered, the^ is not the region farof where they
grew (^ kant three days sailyng) and if it be of no longer distance then so
nere to us be our enemies. If the figs be sweet, then is the soil delicious
and fertile. If the fygges be pleasante, then is the country profitable. If
you gain the Scicilians, you shall be rich men in corn. If you get the
Samnites you shall have plenty of oil. If you vanquishe the Numidians, you
shall have copy of beasts: but subdewe Carthage and conquer affricke, you
shall have not only Corn Oil and beasts, but gold, purple, precious stones,
Oliphantes and all things both necessary and pleasant. Therefore my council
is rather to seek riches being far distant then poverty liyng at hand, for
pain is forgotten ever where gain follows. This noble saying of sage Cato so
encouraged and inflamed the haut hertes and lusty courages of the manly
Romans, that they never desisted to persecute the people of Affricke till
Carthage was utterly destroyed and the whole country subdewed and brought
under the Romain Empire. Julius Ceasar also desired rather to conquer the
Brittons divided from the continent, ye and inhabityng almost in thend of the
world, rather then to gain the Pannonians adioynyng to Italy, saying, break
the stronger and the weaker will bow: Subdue the rich and the pore will yield
be lord of the lords and the vassalles must needs be subject, vanquish the
Frenchemen and the Scotts be tamed. This counsel of Cato, and this saying of
Caesar makes me both to speak and think that if you get France, ye get two,
and if you get Scotland you get but one When the duke had said and sat down,
his opinion was much noted and well digested with the king, but in especial
with his three brethren and diverse other lords being young and lusty, desirous
to win honor and profit in the realm of France, ensuyng the courageous acts
of their noble progenitors, which gat in that region both honor and renoune.
So that now al men cried war, war, France, France, and the bil put into
the parliament for desoluyng of religious houses was clearly forgotten and
buried, and nothing thought on but only the recoueryng of France according
to the title by the Archbishop declared and set forth. And so upon this
poynct after a few Acts for the public wealth of the realm condiscended
and agreed, the parliament was proroged to Westminster.

THE king like a wise prince and pollitique governor, entendyng to observe the
ancient ordres of famous kings and renoumed potentates used as well among
Paynimes as Christians, which is, not to invade another man's territory
without open war and the cause of the same to him published and declared,
dispatched into France his uncle the duke of Excester and the earl of Dorcet,
the lord Gray admiral of England, the Archbishop of Deuelin, the bishop of
Norwiche with.v hundred horse, which were lodged in the Temple house in Paris,
keeping such triumphante chere in their lodgyng, and such a solemn estate in
ridyng through the city, that the Parisians and all the French men had no
small meruell at their honorable fassions and lordly behaueors. The French
king received them very honorably, and sumpteously banquetted them, showing to
them goodly iustes and marciall pastymes, by the space of three days
together, in the which iustes the king himself to show his courage and
actiuitee to the Englishemen, manfully brake speres and lustely turneyed.

WHEN this great triumph and marciall disport was finished, the English
Ambassadors according to their commission, required of the French king to
deliver to the king of England the realm and croune of France with the entier
Duchies of Aquitain, Normandy and Aniowe, with the countrees of Poytieu and
Main and diverse other requests, offryng that if the French king would
without war of effusion of Christen blood render to the king their Master his
very right and lawful inheritance, that he would be content to take in
marriage the lady Katheryn daughter to the French king and to endewe her with
all the duchy and countrees before rehearsed. And if he intended not so to do,
then the king of England did express and signify to him that with the aid of
God and help of his people he would recover his right and inheritance
wrongfully with holden with mortal war and de^t of sword. The Frenchemen
were much abashed at these demaundes thinkyng them very unreasonable and
far excessive, and yet not willing to make any determinate answer till they
had farther brethed in so weighty a cause, prayed thenglishe Ambassadors to
say to the king their master that they now having no oportunitee to conclude
in so hie a matter would shortly send Ambassadors into England which should
certefy and declare to the king their whole mind, purpose and answer.

THE English Ambassadors nothing content with this doing departed into
England making relacion of every thing that was said or dooen. Here I
ouerpasse how some writers say that the Dolphyn thinkyng king Henry to be
given still to such plays and light folies as he exercised and used before
the time that he was exalted to the croune sent to him a tun of tennis balls
to play with, as who said that he could better skill of tennis then of war,
and was more expert in light games then marcial policy. Whether he were moved
with this unwise present, or espiyng that the Frenchemen dalied and vaynely
delayed his purpose and demand, was moved and pricked forward I cannot judge,
but su^e it is that after the return of his Ambassadors, he being of a haute
courage and bold stomach, living now in the pleasantest time of his age, much
desiryng to enlarge and dilate his Empire and dominion, determined fully to
make war in France, co^ceiuyng a good trust and a perfight hope in this
poyncte which he had before experimented, which is, that victory for the
most part follows where right leads, auaunced forward by Justice and set
forth by equity. And because many Frenchemen were promoted to Ecclesiastical
dignitees, some to benefices, some to Abbeies and priores within his realm and
sent daily innumerable somes of money into France for the relefe and aid of
their natural countremen and lineall kynsmen, he therefore for the public
wealth of his realm and subjects, ordeigned that no stranger here after,
should be promoted to any spiritual dignitee or degree within his realm
without his especial license and royal concent, and that all they that should
so be admitted, should find sufficient surety not to disclose ye secrets of
this realm to any forain or strange person, nor also to minister to them any
aid or succor with money or by any other mean. Beside this he assembled a
great puissance and gathered a great host through all his dominions, and for
the more furniture of his navy, he sent into Holand, zeland and Frizeland to
conduct and hire ships for the transportyng and conueighyng over his men and
municions of war, and finally provided for armure, vitaile, money, artillary,
carraiges, te^tes and other things necessary for so hie an enterprise: Which
provisions were sone blown into France and quickly known in Paris. Wherefore
the Dolphin who had taken on him the governance of the realm, be cause his
father was fallen again into his old infirmity, sent for the dukes of Berry
and Alaunson and all the counseil of France, to conclude what should be done
in so great a matter and so weighty a cause. After long co^sultacion, it was
determined to assemble people through the whole realm of France, to resist
and repulce the king of England and his puissaunce whenever he would arrive
or set foot in France, and also to fortify their tounes and stuff the^ with
garrisons and men of war, and farther by taxes and subsedies to leuy as much
money as by wit or policy could be devised or imagined. Moreover to stay the
king of England at home, it was polletiquely devised to send to him a solemn
Ambassade to make to him some offers according to the demaundes before
rehearsed. The charge of this Ambassade was committed to the earl of Uandosme,
to Master Wylliam Bouratier Archbishop of Bourgues and to Master Peter
Fremel bishop of Lysieux and to the lord of Yury and Braquemont and to
Master Gaultier Cole the kings secretory and diverse other. These
ambassadors accompanied with.CCC. and fifty horses passed the sea at Caleys
and la^ded at Dover, before whose arriual the king was departed from Wyndsor to
Winchester, entendyng to have gone to Hampton and to have viewed his navy, but
hearing of the Ambassadors approchyng, tarried still at Wynchester, where the
said French lords showed them selves very honorably before the king and the
nobility. And in the bishops hal before the king, sittyng in his throne
imperial and his lords spiritual and temporal and a great multitude of the
commons there for that intent assembled, At a time prefixed, the Archbishop of
Bourgesse made an eloquent and a long Oracion, dissuadyng war, and praisyng
peace, offering to the king of England a great some of money with diverse base
and pore countries with the Lady Katherin in marriage, so that he would dissolve
his army and dismiss his soldiers which he had gathered and made ready.

When this Oracion was ended, the king caused the Ambassadors to be highly
feasted, and set the^ at his own table, And at a day assigned in the foresaid
hall, the Archebishoppe of Cauntorbury made to their Oracion a notable answer:
theffecte whereof was, that if the French king would not give with his daughter
in marriage, the duchies of Acquitain, Normandy, Aniowe, and al other seignories
and dominions sometime apperteinyng to the noble progenitors of the king of
England, he would in no wise retire his army nor break his journey but would
with all diligence enter into the realm of France and destroy the people,
depopulate the country and subvert the tounes, with sword blud and fire, and
never cease til he had recovered his ancient right and lawful patrimony. The
king auowed the archbishops saying, and in the word of a prince promised to
perform it to the uttermost. The bishop of Bourgesse being in flamed with
anger that his purpose took none effect, desiryng license and pardon of the
king that he might speak: which once attained he very rashly and
irreverently said. Thynkest thou to put down and destroy wrongfully the most
christen king, our most redoubted souerain lord and most excellentest prince of
al christianity of blud and prehemine^ce Oh king, saving thine honor,
think thou that he has offered or caused to be offered to the lands,
goods, or other possessions with his own daughter for fear of the or thy
English nation, or thy friends or well willers or fautours. No no? but of
truth he moved with pity, as a lover of peace, to the intent that innocent
blud should not be dispersed abroad, and that christian people should not be
afflicted with battle and destroyed with mortal war, has made to the this
reasonable offers and this Godly mocion, puttyng his hole affiance in god most
puissant according to right and reason, trustyng in his quarrel to be aided and
supported by his beneuolente subjects and favorable well willers. And since we
be subjects and servants, we require the to cause us safely and surely
without damage to be conducted out of thy realm and dominions and that thou will write thine answer wholly as thou have given it, under thy seal and sign
manuell.

THE King of England nothing vexed nor yet moved with the presumptuous
sayings and proud bragges of the vnnurtered and unmannerly bishop, but well
reme^bryng king Solomon in the.xxiiii. of his Proverbs, which says, that
with discrecion wars must be taken in hand, and where many can give
council, there is victory, coldly and sobrely answered the bishop saying: My
lord, I littell esteem your French bragges, and less set by your power and
strength, I know perfightly my right to your region, and except you will deny
the apparent truth so do you, and if you neither do nor will know yet god and
the world knows it. The power of your Master you see daily, but my puissance
you have not yet tasted, If your master have loving ^rendes and faithful
subjects, I am I thank God not disgarnished nor unprovided of the same: But
this I say unto you, that before one year pass I trust to make the highest
croune of your country stoop and the proudest Miter to kneel down: And say
this to the usurper your Master that I within three months will enter into
France not as into his land, but as into mine own true and lawful patrimonye
entendyng to conquer it, not with braggyng words, flatteryng oracions or
colored persuasions, but with puissaunce of men and dent of sword by the aid
of God in whom is my whole trust and confidence. And as concerning mine
answer to be written, subscribed and sealed, I assure you that I would not
speak that sentence the which I would not write and subscribe, nor subscribe
that line to the which I would refuse to put my seal. Therefore your
saueconducte shall be to you delivered with mine answer, and then you may
depart surely and safely I warrant you into your country, where I trust
sooner to visit you then you shall have cause to salute or bid me welcome. With
this answer the Ambassadors sore dismayed, but more displeased (although they
were highly entertained and liberally rewarded, departed into their country,
relatyng to the Dolphyn and the kings council what they had done during the
time of their Ambassade.

After the french Ambassadors were departed, the king as I said before having
a great foresight and disposyng all things in an order forgettyng not the old
pranckes and sodeyn tricks of the variable Scottishe nation, appoincted the
earl of Westmerlande, the lord Scrope, the Baron of Greystocke and sir Robert
Umfreuile with diverse other hardye parsonages and valiant capitaynes to keep
the frontiers and Marches adioynyng to Scotland, which sir Robert Umfreuile on
the day of Mari Magdalene entered with the Scotts at the town of Gederyng,
having in his company only.CCCC. Englishemen, where he after long conflict and
doubtful battle slew of his enemies.lx. and odd, and took captynes.CCC.lx.
and discomfited and put to flight a thousand and moo, whom he followed in chase
alone.xii. miles, and so laded with prays and prisoners reculed again not
unhurt to the castle of Rokesbroughe, of the which at that time he was chief
captain and governor.

When the king had ordered all things for the tuicion and sauegarde of his
realm and people, he leauyng behynd him for governor of the realm, the Queen
his mother inlawe, departed to the town of Southhampton, entending there to
take ship, and so to transfrete into France. And to thentent he would steal
on the French king before he were ware of him, he dispatched Antelop his
pursuiuant at Arms with letters, the which the French cronographers declare
to be these.

TO the right honorable prince Charles our cossyn of France and adversary,
Henry by the grace of God king of England and of France. etc.

To deliver to every man his own, is a work of inspiracion and a deed of
sage council, for right noble prince our cosyn and adversary, sometimes the
noble realms of England and of France were united, which now be separated
and divided, and as then they were accustomed to be exalted through the
universal world by their glorious victories, and it was to them a notable
virtue to decore and beautifye the house of God, to the which apperteined
holiness, and to set a concord in Christ's religion. And by their agreeable
wars they brought fortunately the public enemies to their subjection: but
alas this fraternal faith is perverted to fraternal occasion as Lot persecuted
Abraham by humayne impulsion, but now the glory of fraternal love is dead,
and the descent of ancient human condition is departed, and mother malice
and Ire are resuscitate from death to life, but we call to wytnes the sovereign
judge in conscience, which will not bow either for prayer or for gi^^es, that
we to our power for pure love have proceaded by all means to peace and amite.
And since we have red in writing and by counsel have learned the just title of
our inheritance from us detained in prejudice of our ancient lineage, we be
not of so small a courage but that we will fight to death to obtain right and
justice: but by the authority written in the book of Deuteronomy, all men are
taught which come to besiege or assault any city or fortress, first to
offer peace And albeit that violence the rauisher of justice have taken away of
long time the noblenes of our croune and our just inheritance, yet we by
charity have done what we might to recover and bring our old inheritance to
the first degree and ancient estate, and therefore for fault of justice we may
return to arms. Wherefore, that our glory may be wytnes of our conscience
now and also by personal request, in the beginning of our journey to the which
we are toward for fault of justice, we exhort you in the bowelles of our
savior Jesus Christ, whose euangelical doctrine wills that you ought to
render to al men that which you ought to do, and so to do to us is the will of
God our sovereign lord and creator. And to thentent that theffusion of
Christen people should be exchewed which are the images of God, we have
demanded our right and restitucion of the same from us wrongfully withholden
and detained, or at the least of such things which we have so often times by
our Ambassadors and messengers required and instantly desired, wherewith we have
offered to be pleased, satisfied and contented for the only reverence of
almighty God and for the utility of a universal peace which we thought
should have ensued. And therefore we for our part because of a marriage to be had
and concluded between us, were determined to forsake and refuse the fiftye
thonsand crounes to us last promised and proffered, preferryng peace before
riches, and chosyng rather our rightful patrimony to us by our noble
progenitors lawfully deuoluted and descended with our cossyn your daughter the
fair lady Katherin, rather then for treasure and desire of money the
multiplier of iniquity, shamefully to dishenerite our self and the croune of
our realm which God forbid.

Youen under our privy seal at our Castle of Hampton on the sea side, the.v.
day of August.

WHEN the letter was presented to the French king and by his council well
ouerloked, he made answer to thofficers of arms that he had well perceived the
content of the letters, whereupon he would take advice and provide for the same
in time and place convenient, licensyng the messenger to depart at his pleasure.

The third year. The iii. year.

THis noble prince having his navy furnished, and al things necessary for
such a royal voyage, perceiuyng his fresh capitaines to complain that they
had lost so many months of the year in the which they might have done
diverse haute terprices in the lands of their enemies, and that nothing was to
the^ and more odius then prolongyng lingeryng of time, determined with all
diligence to cause his soldiers to enter his ships and so to depart.

SE the chance, the night before the day of departure appoincted, he was
credibly informed that Richard earl of Cambridge brother to Edward duke of
York and Henry lord Scrope and sir Thomas Gray knight had compassed his death
and final destruction: wherefore he caused them to be apprehended lamentyng
sore his chance that he should be compelled to loose such personages by whose
valiantnes and puissaunce he should be more dreadful and fearful to his foes
and enemies. When these prisoners were examined, they not only confessed the
co^spiracy, but also declared that for agreat some of money which they had
received of the French king, they intended either to deliver the king a live
into the hands of his enemies, or else to murder him before that he should
arrive in the duchy of Normandy. When king Henry hard al things opened which
he sore desired, he caused al his nobility to assemble before his majesty
royal, before whom he caused to be brought the three great offenders and to them
said: If you have conspired the death and destruction of me which am the head
of the realm and governor of the people, without doubt I must of necessity
think that you likewise have compassed the confusion of all that be here with
me and also the final destruction of your native country and natural region.
And although some private Scorpion in your hearts, or some wild worm in your
heads has caused you to conspire my death and confusion, yet you should have
spared that deuelish enterprice as long as I was with mine army which cannot
continue without a captain, nor be directed without a guide, nor yet with the
destruction of your own blood and nation you should have pleased a foreign
enemy and an ancient adversary. Wherefore seeing that you have enterprised so
great a mischief, so abominable a fact, to thentent that your fautors being
in the army may abhor so detestable an offense by the punishment of you,
have you to receive the pain that for your demerites you have deserved, and
that punishment that by the law for your offenses is provided.

WHEN these noble men were executed, the king said to his lords, se you not
the mad imaginacion of men which persecute me that daily study, and
hourly labor, to my great travail and unquietness for the advancement of the
public wealth of this realm and region, and for that cause I spare no pain
nor refuse no time, to thentent to do good to all men, and to hurt no man, and
thus to do is my duty and to this as I think am I borne. I pray to God that
there be none among you that be infected with so much untruth that had lever se
me destroyed and brought to confusion, rather then to se his country florishe
increased with honor and empire. I assure you that I conceive no such opinion
in any of you, but put in you both trust and confidence and if I may have your
help to beautify my realm and to recover again the old honor of mine
ancestors by subduyng the French nation, I for my self will forget al peril
and pain and be your guide lodesman and conductor. And if you draw back and
will not move forward, beleueue me, God will so dispose, that hereafter you
shall be deceived and sore repent had I wist. When the king had finished his
saying, all the noble men kneled down and promised faithfully to serve him and
duly to obey him, and rather to dye then to suffer him to fall into the hands
of his enemies.

THIS done, the king thought surely in his conceipte all sedicion to be drouned
and utterly extincte. But if he had cast his eye to the fire that was newly
kindled, he should have surely seen an horrible flame ince^sed against the
walls of his own house and family, by the which in conclusion his line and
stock was clean destroyed and consumed to ashes, which fire at that very
time paraduenture might have been quenched and put out. For diverse write that
Richard earl of Cambridge did not conspire with the lord Scrope and sir
Thomas Graye to murder king Henry to please the French king withal, but only
to thentent to exalte to the croune his brotherinlawe Edmond earl of March as
heir to duke Lyonel. After whose death considering that the earl of March
for diverse secret impedimentes was not hable to have generation, he was sure
that the croune should come to him by his wife, or to his children. And
therefore it is to be thought that he rather confessed him self for need of
money to be corrupted by the French king, then he would declare his inward
mind and open his very intent For surely he saw that if this purpose were
espied, the earl of March should have dronken of the same cup that he did, and
what should have come to his own children he much doubted. And therefore being
dedestitute of comfort and in despair of life, to save his children he feigned
that tale, desiryng rather to ^aue his succession then him self, which he did
in deed. For Richard duke of York his son not privily but openly claimed the
croune, and Edward his son both claimed and gained it as hereafter you shall
hear, which thing at this time if king Henry had foresene I doubt whether
either ever that line should have either claimed the garlande or gained the
game.

WHEN the wind was prosperous and pleasant for the nauye to set forward,
they waied up the Ankers and hoysed up their sails and set forward with.C.xl.
ships on the vigile of the Assumpcion of our Lady and took land at Caux,
commonly called Kyd Caux (where the river of Seine runs into the sea) without
resistance or bludsheddyng. The king was lodged on the shore in a small priory
with the dukes of Clare^ce and Gloucester his brethren: the duke of Excetter
and York, the earls, Marshal, Oxforde, Suffolk, Warwick and other lords
were lodged not far from him. The next day after, he marched toward the town
of Harflewe standing on the river of Seyne between two hills and besieged it
on every part. The captain of the town was the lord Escouteuile with the
lord Blaynuile of Hacqueuile, the lords of Harmanuile of Galarde Boys, of
Clear de Becton, of Adsanches, of Brian, of Gaucort, of Lisleadam and many
othrr.

THE French king being advertised of the kings arrival, sent in all the
have the lord Delabreche constable of France and the lord Bonciqualt
Marshall of France, the Seneschal of Henaude, the lord Ligny and diverse
other capitaines, which fortefied tounes with men vitaile and artillary on all
the sea coaste. And heryng that the king of England had besieged Harflew at his
first landyng, came to the castle of Cawdebec being not far from Harflewe, to
thentent to succor their friends which were besieged if they might by any
policy or inuencion, and if not, then they imagined how to sleye and hurt the
Englishemen when they went into the country on foragyng for beasts and
vitaill and so trappe and destroy them, for they co^strued with themselfes
that their vitaile would sone fail because of the air of the sea and smell of
the water. But they were deceived, for notwithstanding the provision and
policy of the Frenchemen, the Englishmen forrayed the country, spoiled the
villages and brought many a rich pray to the Camp be fore Harflewe.
Thenglishmen daily ceased not to assail the town, the duke of Gloucester to
who^ the order of the assault was committed, made three mines under the ground
and approached the walls with ordinance and engynes, and would not suffer
them within to rest at any time. The king liyng on the hill side with his
battle did not only keep the Frenchmen from succoryng of the town, but also
took away from the tounes men all the hope and trust of their succor, aid and
relief, and also all the gonnepouder that was sent by the French king to them
that were beseged was taken by thenglishmen. The capitaines of the French men
within the town perceived that they were not able to resist the continual
invasions and hourly assaults of the fierce Englishemenne, and knowing that
their walls were undermined and shortly like to fall, and feryng that might
happen of the chance if they should fortune to be overcome and taken by force,
desired of the king of England only truce for three days, promisyng that if
they were not reskewed within the same time, then they to yield themselfes and
the town their lives only saved. And to perform this, they delivered into the
kings possession.xxx. of the best capitaines and Merchants of the town.
The king of England accepted this offer, least he entendyng greater exploites
might lose his time in such small matters. When this composicion was agreed,
the lord Hacqueuile was sent to the French king to declare the necessite of
the town and the short time of the truce. To who^ the dolphin answered that
the kings power was not yet assembled in such a nombre as was convenient to
raise so great a siege. When the answer was reported to the capitaines, they
seeing no hope nor similitude of aid and comfort to them coming, after the
third day rendered to the king of England the town, being the.xxxvij. day
after that it was besieged, which was the day of saint Mawrice, to the
great abashement of all Normandy, for it was the sovereign port of all that
country. The soldiers were raunsomed and the town was sacked to the great
gain of the Englishemen. The king of England ordeigned capitain of the town
of Harflew his uncle Thomas duke of Excester which established his
leuetenaunte there Ihon Fastolffe with.xv.C. men and.xxxv. kinghtes, whereof the
Baron of Carew and sir Hugh Lutterell were two counsaillers. And because
diverse of his nobles liyng before Harflew were sick of the flixe and many were
ded, amongst who^ therle of Stafford, the bishop of Norwich, the lords Molins
and Burnell were four beside other. The king licensed the duke of Clare^ce his
brother, Ihon earl Marshall and Ihon earl of Arundel being infected with that
desease to return into England.

KING Henry not a little reioysyng of his good luck and fortunate success in
the beginning of his pretensed conquest, determined withal diligence to set
forward in performyng his intended purpose and warrely enterprise, but because
Winter approached faster and more furiously then before that time had been
accustomed, he was sore troubled and vexed. For the which cause he called
together all the Cheuetaines and men of policy in his army to consult upon the
procedyng forward and to be sure of way and ready passage. After long debatyng
and much reasonyng, it was as a thing both necessary and conueniente and
fully agreed and determined to set forward withal diligence before the dedde
time of Winter approached, toward the town of Caleis. And because their going
forward should be called of slanderous tongues a runnyng or fliyng away, it
was decreed that the whole army should pass the next way by land through
the midst of their enemies, and yet that iouruey was adjudged perilous by
reason that the number was much minished by the flyxe and other fevers, which
sore vexed and brought to death above.xv.C. persons, which was the very cause
that the return was sooner concluded and apoincted: but before his departing he
entered into the town of Harflew and went on foot to the church of saint
Martynes and there offered. And all the men of war which had not paid their
ransom, he swear them on the holy Evangelists to yield themselfes prisoners
at Caleis by the fea^^ of S. Martyn in November next, diverse of the burgesses
he highly raunsomed, and a great part of the women and children he expelled
the town, geuyng to every poor creature five sowse. The priests had license
to depart leuyng behind them their substance. The goods in the town were
innumerable which were al pray to the Englishemen, which sent the best into
England as a remembrance of good luck. There were two strong toures
standing on the haven side, which lokyng for aid did not yield ten days after
the town was rendered.

WHEN the king had repaired the walls, fortefied the bulwarks refresshed the
rampires and furnished the town with vitail and artillary, he removed from
Harflew toward Pountoyse, entendyng to pas the river of Some with his army
before the bridges were either withdrawn or broken. The French king hearing
that the town of Harfflewe was gotten and that the king of England was
marchyng forward into the bowelles of the realm, sent out proclamacions and
assembled people in every quarter, comittyng the whole charge of his army to
his son the Dolphin and the duke of Aquitayn, which incontinent caused the
bridges to be broken and all the passages to be defended, beside that they
caused all corn and other vitaill to be destroyed in all places where they
coniectured that thenglishmen would repair or pass through, to thentent that
they might either keep the^ in a place certain without any passage or departure,
and so to destroy them at their pleasures, or else to keep them in a strait
without vitailes or comfort, and so by famyne either cause them to dye or yield.

THE king of England afflicted withal these inco^moditees at one time was
nether dismayed nor discoraged, but keeping forth his journey approached to the
river of Some, where he perceived that all the bridges were by his enemies
broken and vnframed: wherefore he came to the passage called Blanchetaque where
king Edwardes great graundfather passed the river of Some before the battaill
of Cressy. But the passage was so kept that he could not pass without great
danger, considering that his enemies were at his back and before his face.
Wherefore he passed forward to Arannes, burning villages and taking great
booties, and every day he sent his light horsemen abroad to spy and seek
what perilles there were at hand, what embushmentes there were laid on the one side
or the other, and to find out where he might most sauely pas the river. The
espialles returned and declared for a truth that the country swarmed with men
of war, whereof he being advertised, set forth in good order, keeping still his
way forward and so ordered his army and placed his carriage, that having his
enemies on both sides of him, he passed so terribly that his enemies were afraid
once to offer him battaill, and yet the lord Delabreth Constable of France,
the Marshall Bonceqault, the earl of Uandosme great Master of France and the
lord Dampier Admiral of France, the duke of Alanson and the earl of
Richemonde withal the puyssance of the Dolphin lay at Abbeuile and durst not
once touch his battailles, but ever kept the passages and coasted alofe like
a hawk that likes not her pray. The king of England still kept on his
journey till he came to the bridge of saint Maxence, where he found
above.xxx.M. Frenchemen and there pitched his field, lokyng surely to be set on
and fought withal. Wherefore to encorage his capitaines the more, he dubbed
certain of his hardy and valiant gentlemen knights, as Iho^ lord Ferreis of
Groby, Reignold of Greistocke, Piers Tempest, Christopher Morisby, Thomas
Pikering, William Huddleston, Ihon Hosbalton, Henry Mortimer, Philip Halle and
William his brother, and Jacques de Ormo^d and diverse other. But when he saw ye
the Frenchmen made no semblance to fight, he departed in good order of battle
by the town of Amie^ce to a town nere to a castle called Bows, and there
lay two days, every hour lookyng for battaill. And from thence he came nere
to Corby where he was stayed that night by reason that the come^ people and
peysantz of the country assembled in great nombre, and the men of Arms of
the garrison of Corby skirmished with his army in the morning, which tariyng
was to him both joyous and proffitable, for there he discomfited the crew of
horsemen and drove the rustical people even to their gates, and also found there
the same day a shalow forde between Corby and Peron, which never was espied
before. At the which he, his army and cariages the night ensuyng passed the
great river of Some without let or daungier, the morrow after saint Lukes
day, determined withal diligence to pass to Caleis, and not to seek for
battle except he were thereto constrained and compelled, because that his army
by sickness was sore minished and appaired, for he had only two.M. horsemen
and.xiij.M. Archers, bill men and of all sorts. The Englishemen were afflicted
in this journey with an hundred discomodities, for their vitaile was in manner
all spent, and new they could get none, for their enemies had destroyed all
the corn before their coming: Rest they could take none, for their enemies were
ever at hand, daily it reined and nightly it fresed, of fuel was skacenes and
of fluxes was plenty, money they had enough but comfort they had none. And yet
in this great necessitee the poor folks were not spoiled nor any thing without
payment was of the^ extorted, nor great offense was done except one, which was
that a foolish soldier stale a pixe out of a church and irreverently did
eat the holy hosts within the same conteigned. For which cause he was
apprehended, and the king would not once remove till the vessel was restored
and the offender strangled. The people of the countrees there about hearing of
his straight justice and godly mind, ministered to him both vitailes and other
necessaries, although by open proclamacio^ they were thereof prohibited.

THE French king being at Roan, hearing that the king of England was passed
the water of Some, was not a little discontente, and assembled his counsel to
the number of.xxxv. to consult what should be done, the chief whereof were the
Dolphin his son whose name was Jews, calling himself king of Cicile, the
dukes of Berry and Britayn therle of Pontieu the kings youngest son and
diverse other, whereof xxx. agreed that the Englishmen should not depart
vnfoughten with all, and five* were of the contrary opinion, but the greater
number ruled the matter. And so Mountioye king at Arms was sent to the king of
England to defy him as the enemy of France, and to tell him that he should
shortly have battaill. King Henry soberly answered: Sir mine intent and desire
is none other, but to do as it pleases almighty God and as it becomes me, for
surely I will not seek your Master at this time, but if he or his seek me I will
willyngly fight with him. And if any of your nation attempt once to stop me
in my journey toward Caleis, at their ieoperdy be it, and yet my desire is that
none of you be so unadvised or harebrained as to be the occasion that I in my
defense shall color and make read your tawny ground with the deaths of
your selfs and theffusion of Christen blood. When he had answered the
harauld, he gave to him a great reward and lice^ced him to depart

WHEN the Lords of France heard the king of Englandes answer, it was
incontinent proclaimed, that all men of war should resort to the Constable
of France to fight with the king of England and his puissaunce. Whereupon all
men accustomed to bear Arinure and desirous to win honor through the realm of
France drew toward the feld. The Dolphyn sore desired to be at that
battle, but he was prohibited by the king his father, likewise Philip earl of
Charolous son to the Duke of Burgoyn would gladly have been at that noble
assemble if the duke his father would have suffered him, but many of his men
stale away and went to the Frenchemen.

THE King of England informed by his espialles that the day of battaill was
nerer then he looked for, dislodged from Bomyers and road in good arraie
through the fair plain beside the town of Blangy, where to the intent that
his army should not be included in a straight or driven to a corner, he chose
a place mete and conueniente for two armies to darrayne battle between the
tounes of Blangy and Agincourte, where he pight his field.

THE Constable of France, the Marshall, the Admiral, the Lord Rambures
Master of the Crossebowes and diverse lords and knights pitched their banners
nere to the banner royal of the Constable in the Countee of saint Paul
within the territory of Agincourte, by the which way the Englishemen must
needs pass toward Caleis. The Frenchemen made great fires about their
banners, and they were in number had.lx.M. horsemen, as their own historians
and writers affirm, beside footmen pages and wagoners, and all that night
made great chere and were very merry. The Englishmen that night sounded their
trompettes and diverse instruments Musical with great melody, and yet they
were both hungery, weary, sore traueiled and much vexed with cold deseases:
Howbeit they made peace with God in confessyng their sins, requiryng him of
help and receiuyng the holy sacrament, every man encouragyng and determinyng
clearly rather to die then either to yield or fly.

NOW approached the fortunate fair day to the Englishemen and the infest and
unlucky day to the French nobilitee, The battle of Agincourt
which was the five and twenty day of October in the year of our Lord Jesus
Christ a thousaude four hundred and fiftene, being then Fridaie and the day
of Crispin and Crispinian. On the which day in the morning, the French men
made three battles: In the Uaward were eight thousand Healmes of Knights and
Esquiers and four thousand Archers and fiftene hundred Crosebowes, which
were guyded by the Lord Delabret Constable of France, having with him the
dukes of Orleaunce and Burbone, therles of Ewe and Richmond the Marshall
Bonciqualt and the Master of the Crosebowes, the Lord Dampier Admiral of
France and other capitaines. And the earl of Uandosme and other the kings
officers with.xvj.C. men of Arms were ordered for a wyng to that battle. And
the other wyug was guided by sir Guyshard Dolphyn and sir Clugnet of Brabant
and sir Jews of Burbon with.viij.C. men of Arms, of chosen and elect
persons. And to break the shot of the Englishemen were appoincted sir Guyllia^
of Saue^sens with Hector and Philip his brethren. Ferry of Maylley and Alen of
Gaspanes with other.viij.C. men of Arms. In the middle ward were assigned as
many persons or mo as were in the formoste battaill, and thereof was the charge
committed to the dukes of Bar and Alenson, therles of Neuers, Uawdemont,
Blamou^t, Salynges, Grau^tpree and of Roussy. And in the rerewarde were all the
other men of Arms, guyded by the earls of Marle, Dampmartyne, Fawquenberge and
the Lord of Lourrey Captain of Arde, who had with him men of the Frontiers
of Bolonoys.

WHEN these battles were thus ordered, it was a glorious sight to behold
the^, and surely they were esteemed to be in number six times as many or more
then was the whole compaigny of the Englishmen with wagoners pages and all.
Thus the Frenchmen were every man under his banner only waityng for the blouddy
blast of the terrible trompet, and in this order they continued restyng
themselfes and reconcilyng every one to other for all old rancors and hatredes
which had been between them, till the hour between.ix. and.x. of the day.
During which season, the Constable of France said openly to the capitaynes
in effect as follows.

FRIENDS and companions in arms, The oracion of the Constable of France
I cannot but both rejoice and lament the chances and fortunes of these two
armies which I openly se and behold with mine iyes here present. I rejoice
for the victory which I se at hand for our part, and I lament and sorrow for
the misery and calamitee which I perceive to approach to the otherside: For
we cannot but be victours and triu^phant conquerors, for who saw ever so
florisshyng an army within any christian region, or such a multitude of
valiant persons in one compaignie? Is not here the flower of the French
nation on barded horses with sharp spears and dedly weapons? Are not here
the bold Britons with fiery handgo^nes and sharp swerdes? Se you not present
the practiced Pickardes with strong and weighty Crossebowes? Beside these, we
have the fierce Brabanders and strong Almaines with long pykes and cuttyng
slaughmesses. And on the otherside is a small handful of pore Englishmen which
are entered into this region in hope of some gain or desire of proffite, which
by reason that their vitaill is consumed and spent, are by daily famyn sore
wekened, consumed and almost without spirits: for their force is clerly abated
and their strength utterly decayed, so y^ or the battles shall join they
shall be for very feebleness vanquished and ouercom, and instead of men ye shall
fight with shadows. For you must understand, y^ keep an Englishma^ one month
from his warm bed, fat befe and stale drink, and let him that season taste
cold and suffer hunger, you then shall se his courage a bated, his body wax
lean and bare, and ever desirous to return into his own country. Experience
now declares this to be true, for if famine had not pinched them, or cold
wether had not nipped them surely they would houe made their progress farher
into France, and not by so many perilous passages retired toward Calays.
Such courage is in Englishmen when fair wether and vitaile follow them, and
such weakness they have when famine and cold vex and trouble them. Therefore
now, it is no mastery to vanquishe and overthrow them, being both weary and
weak, for by reason of feebleness and faintnes their weapones shall fall out of
their hands when they profer to strike, so that ye may no easelier kill a
poor sheep then destroy them being already sick and hungerstaruen. But imagyn
that they were lusty, strong and courageous, and then ponder wisely the cause of
their coming hither, and the meaning of their enterprice: First their king a
young striplyng (more mete for a tenice play then a warlike camp), claims
the croune, scepter and souereigntie of the very substance of the French
nation by battle: then he and his entende to occupy this country, inhabit
this land, destroy our wives and children, extinguishe our blud and put our
names in the black book of oblivion. Wherefore remember well, in what quarrel can
you better fight then for the tuicio^ of your natural country, the honor of
your prince, the surety of your children and the sauegard of your land and
lives. If these causes do not encourage you to fight, behold before your eyes
the te^tes of your enemies, with treasure, plate and jewels well stuffed and
richely furnished, which pray is surely yours if every man strike but one
stroke, beside the great raunsomes which shall be paid for rich capitaines and
welthy prisoners, which as surely shall be yours as you now had them in your
possession. Yet this thing I charge you withal, that in nowise the king him
self be killed, but by force or otherwise to be apprehended and taken to the
intent that with glory and triumph we may convey him openly through the noble
city of Paris to ou^e king and dolphyn as a testimony of our victory and
witness of our noble act. And of this thing you be sure, that fly they cannot,
and to yield to our fight, of necessity they shall be compelled. Therefore good
fellows take courage to you, the victory is yours, the gain is yours and the
honor is yours without great labor or much loss.

KING Henry also like a leader and not like one led, like a sovereign and not
like a souldior ordered his men for his most advantage like an expert captain
and a courageous warirer. And first he sent privily CC. archers into a low
medowe which was nere to the forward of his enemies, but separate with a great
diche, and were there commanded to keep them selves close till they had a token
to them given to shote at their adversaries. Beside this, he appoincted a
vawarde, of the which he made captain Edward duke of York which of a haute
courage had of the king required and obtained that office: and with him were
the lords Beaumond, Wylloughby and Fanhope, and this battle was al archers.
The middle ward was governed by the king him self with his brother the duke of
Gloucester, and the earls Marshal, Oxford and Suffolk, in the which were all the strong bilmen, The duke of Exceter uncle to the king led the rereward,
which was mixed both with archers and bilmen. The horsemen like wings went on
every side of the battle. When the king had thus ordered his battle, like a
puissaunt co^queror without fear of his enemies, yet considering the multitude
of them far to excede the small nombre of his people, doubtyng that the
Frenchemen would compass and beset him about, and so fight with him on every
side, to thentent to va^quish the power of the French horsemen which might
break the order and arraye of his Archers, in whom the whole force of the
battle did consist and in manner remain he caused stakesbound with iron
sharp at both ends of the length of v. or.vi. foot, to be pitched before the
Archers and of every side the footmen like an hedge, to the intent that if the
barde horses ran rashely upon them, they might shortly be gored and
destroyed, and appointed certain persons to remove the stakes when the Archers
moved, and as time required: so that the fotemen were hedged about with the
stakes, and the horsemen stood like a bulwerke between the^ and their enemies
without the stakes. This device of fortifiyng an army was at this time first
invented, but sense that time, they have imagined caltrappes, harowes and other
new tricks to defend the force of the horsemen so that if the enemies at
adventure run against their engines, either sodeinly their horses be wounded
with the stakes, or their feet hurt with the other engines, so that of very
necessity for pain, the sely pore beasts are compelled to fall and tumble to
the ground. When he had ordered thus his battles, he left a small company to
keep his camp and baggage, and then calling his capitaines and soldiers about
him, he made to the^ an hearty Oracion in effect as follows, saying.

VVELBELOVED friends and countrymen, The oracion of king Henry the fifth.
I exhort you heartely to think and conceive in your selves that this day
shall be to us all a day of joy, a day of good luck and a day of victory: For
truly if you well note and wisely considre all things, almighty God under
whose protection we be come hither, has appoincted a place so mete and apt for
our purpose as we our selves could nether have devised nor wished which as it
is apt and convenient for our small nombre and little army so is it unprofitable
and unmeet ^or a great multitude to fight or give batttaile in: and in especial
for such men in whom is neither constant faith nor security of promise,
which persons be of God neither favored nor regarded, nor he is not accustomed
to aid and succoure such people which by force and strength contrary to
right and reason detain and keep from other their just patrimony and lauful
inheritance, with which blotte and spotte the French nation is apparently
defiled and distained: so that God of his justice will scourge and aflicte them
for their manifest injuries and open wrongs to us and our realm daily
committed and done. Therefore puttyng your only trust in him, let not their
multitude fear your hearts, nor their great nombre abate your courages: for
surely old warlike fathers have both said and written that the more people that
an army is, the less knowledge the multitude has of material feats or
politic practices, which rude rustical and ignorant persons shall be in the
feld unto hardy capitaines and lusty men of war a great let and sore
impediment. And though they al were of like policy, like audacitie and of one
uniform experience in marcial affairs, yet we ought neither to fear them nor
once to shrink for them, considering that we come in the right, which ever of
God is favored, set forth and auansed: in which good and just quarrel al good
persons shall rather set both their feet forward, then once to turn their
one heal backward. For if you adventure your lives in so just a battle and
so good a cause, which way soever fortune turn her whele, you shall be sure of
fame, glory and renoune: If you be victors and overcome your enemies, your
strength and virtue shall be spread and dispersed through the whole world: If you
ouerpressed with so great a multitude shall happen to be slain or taken, yet
neither reproach can be to you ascribed, either yet infamy of you reported,
considering that Hercules alone was not equiuolent unto.ii. men, nor a small
handful is not equal to a great nombre, for victory is the gift of God and
consists not in the puissaunce of men. Wherefore manfully set on your enemies
at their first encountre, strike with a hardy courage on the false hearted
Frenchemen, whom your noble ancestors have so often overcome and vanquished.
For surely they be not so strong to give the onset upon you, but they be much
weaker to abide your strength in a long fight and tired battle. As for me I
assure you al, that England for my person shall never pay ransom, nor never
Frencheman shall triumph over me as his capitain, for this day by famous death
or glorious victory I will win honor and obtain fame. Therefore now ioyously
prepare your selves to the battle and courageously fight with your enemies,
for at this very time all the realm of England prays for our good luck and
prosperous success.

WHILE the king was thus speaking, each army so maligned and grudged at the
other being in open fight and evident appearance, that every man cried forth,
forth, forward forward. The dukes of Clare^ce, Gloucester and York were of the
same opinion, thinkyng it most convenient to march toward their enemies with all speed and celeritie, least in prolongyng of time and arguyng of opinions,
the French army might more and more increace and hourly multiply. Howbeit,
the king tarried a while least any ieopardy were not forsene, or any hazard not
prevented.

THE Frenchemen in the mean season little or nothing regardyng the small nombre
of thenglishe nation, were of such haute courage and proud stomachs that they
took no thought for the battle, as who say they were victours and ouercomers
before any stroke was stricken, and laughed at the Englishmen, and for very pride
thought the^ selves lifted into heaven iestyng and boastyng that they had
thenglish men enclosed in a straight, and had overcome and taken them without
any resistance. The capitaines determined how to divide the spoil: the
soldiers played the Englishmen at dice: the noble men devised a chariot how
they might triumphantly conueigh king Henrye being captive to the city of
Paris, criyng to their soldiers, have your selves to obtain spoil, glory and
honor, to thentent that we may study how to give you thanks for the great
gifts and rewards which we hope to receive of your great liberality. The
folishe folly of this vain solace brake out so far, that messengers were
sent to the cities and tounes adioynyng, willing them to make open plays and
triumphs, (as though that the victory were to them certain and no resistance
could appear) and also to give God thanks for their prosperous act and
notable deed, not remembryng that the whirlewynd shortly with a puff blew
away al their folishe joy and fantastical braggyng.

Of this doing you may gather, that it is as much madness to make a determinate
judgment of things to come, as it is wisdom to doubt what will follow of
things bego^ne. I may not forget how the Fre^chemen being in this pleasant
pastyme, sent a herault to king Henry to inquyre what ransom he would offer,
and how he answered that within.ii. or.iii. hours he hoped that it should so
happen that the Frenchemen should common rather with thenglishmen how to be
redeemed, then the Englishmen should take thought how to pay any rau^some or
money for their deliverance: asserteinyng them for him self that his dead
carrion should rather be their pray, then his living body should pay any
ransom. When the messenger was departed, the Frenchmen put on their
healmettes and set the^ in order under their banners, richely armed and
gorgeously trapped, and caused their trumpettes to blow to the battle.

THE Englishemen perceiuyng that, set a little forward, before whom there
went an old knight called sir Thomas of Herpingham, a man of great experience
in war, with a warder in his hand, and when he cast up his warder all the army
shouted, at the which the Frenchmen much marueiled, but that was a sign to
the Archers in the medowe, which knowing the token, shot wholly altogether at
the vaward of the Frenchmen. When they perceived the archers in the meadow, who^
they saw not before, and saw they could not come to them for a ditche, they
with all have set on king Henry's forward, but or they joined, the archers in
the forfront and the archers on the side which stood in the meadow, so wounded
the fotemen, so galled the horses and so combred the men of arms that the
fotemen durst not go forward, the horsemen ra^ne in plumpes without order, some
overthrew his fellow, and horses overthrew their masters: So at the first
ioynyng, as the Frenchemen were clearly discouraged, so thenglishmen were much
chered. When the French vaward was thus discomfited, the English archers cast
away their bows and took into their hands axes, malles and swords, bills
and other weapons, and therewith slew the Frenchmen till they came to the
middleward. Then the king approached and encoraged his soldiers, that shortly
the second battle was overthrown and dispersed not without great slaughter
of men: howbeit diverse being wounded were releued by their varlettes and
conueighed out of the field, for the Englishmen so sore labored with fightyng
and slaiyng, and were so busy in taking of prisoners that they followed no chase,
nor would once break out of the battle. The Frenchmen strongly westode the
fearcenes of Thenglishmen when they came to ha^dy strokes, so that the fight
was very doubtful and perilous. And when one part of the Frenchhorse men
thought to have entered into the kings battle, they were with the stakes
ouerturned, and either slain or taken.

THVS this battle continued.iii. long hours, some struck, some defended,
some foyned, some trauersed, some killed, some took prisoners noman was idle,
every man fought either in hope of victory or glad to save him self. The king
that day showed him self like a valiant knight, which notwithstanding that
he was almost felled with the duke of Alaunson, yet with plain strength he
slew.ii. of the dukes company and felled the duke: but when the duke would have
yielded him, the kings guard contrary to the kings mind outragiously slew him
And inconclusion, mindyng to make an end of that days journey, caused his
horsemen to fetch a compass about and to join with him against the rereward of
France: in the which battle were the greatest nombre of people. When the
Frenchmen perceived his intent, they were suddenly amassed and ran away like
sheep without array or order.

When the king perceived the banners cast down and the array was clearly
broken, he encoraged his soldiers and followed so quickly that the Frenchmen
trunyng to flight, ran hither and thither not knowing which way to take,
castyng away their armure and on their knes desired to have their lives saved.
In the mean season while the battle thus continued and that thenglishmen had
taken a great no^bre of prisoners, certain Frenchmen on horsbacke whereof were
captains Robinet of Borneuile, Rifflart of Clamas and Isambert of Agincourt
and other men of Arms to the nombre of.vi.C. horsemen: which fled first from
the field at their first coming, and hearing that the English tents and
pauilions were far from the army without any great no^bre of kepers or
persons mete and convenient for defense, partly moved and styrred with
coueteous desire of spoil and pray, and partly entendyng by some notable act
to revenge the damage and displeasure done to them and theirs in battle the
same day, entered into the kings camp being void of men and fortefied with
varlettes and lackeys, and there spoiled hales, robbed tents, brake up chestes
and carried away caskettes and slew such servants as they could find in the
tents and pauilions. For the which act they were long imprisoned and sore
punished and like to have lost their lives if the Dolphyn had longer lived.

WHEN the king by a fearefu^ messenger was of this evil act suddenly
aduertiled, and when the outcry of the lackeys and boys which ra^ne away for
fear of the robbers was heard into the field, saying that the Frenchmen had
robbed all the the tents and lodgings of the Englishmen, he fearyng least his
enemies being dispersed and scattered abroad should gather together again and
begin a new field: and doubtyng farther that the prisoners would either be an
aid to his enemies or very enemies to him if he should suffer them to live,
contrary to his accustomed gentleness and pity he commanded by the sound of a
trompet that every man upon pain of death should inco^tinently sley his
prisoner. When this dolorous decre and pitiful proclamacio^ was pronounced,
pity it was to se and loathsome it was to behold how some Frenchmen were
suddenly sticked with daggers, some were brained with polaxes, some were slain
with malles, other had their throtes cut and some their bellies paunched: so
that in effect having respect to the great nombre, few prisoners or none were
saved.

WHEN this lamentable manslaughter was finished, thenglishemen forgettyng
their wounds and huries and not remembering what pain they had sustained al
day in fightyng with their enemies, as men that were fresh and lusty, ranged
them selves again in array both pressed and ready to abide a new field, and also
to invade and newly to set on their enemies, and so courageously they set on
the earls of Maile and Fauconbrige and the lords of Louray and of Thine,
which with viC. men of arms had al day kept together and slew them out of
hand.

When the king had passed through the field and saw neither resistance nor
apparaunce of any Frenchmen ^auyng the dead corsses, he caused the retrayte to
be blown and brought al his army together about iiii. of the clock at after
noone. And first to give thanks to almighty God geuer and tri^utor of this
glorious victory, he caused his prelates and chapelaines first to sing this
psalm In exitu Israel de Egipto* etc. commaundyng every man to knele down on
the ground at this verse.

Non nobis domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam, which is to say in
English, Not to us lord, not to us, but to thy name let the glory be given:
which done he caused Te deum with certain anthemes to be song geuyng lauds
and praisynges to God, and not boastyng nor braggyng of him self nor his
human power.

THAT night he took refreshyng of such as he found in the French camp, and
in the morning Mou^tioy king at arms and.iiii. Heraultes came to him to know
the nombre of prisoners and to desire burial for them which were slain.
Before he could make any answer to the Heraultes, he remembryng that it is
more honorable to be praised of his enemies then to be extolled of his
friends: and he that praises him self lacks loving neighbors: wherefore he
demanded of the^ why they made to him that request, considryng that he knew
not certainly whether the praise and the victory were mete to be attributed to
him or to their nation. Oh lord quod Mountioy king at arms, think you us
officers of arms to be rude and beastial persons? If we for the affe^cion
that we bear to our natural country, would either for favor or mede hide or
deny your glorious victory: The fowls of the air, the worms of the ground
fedyng on the multitude of the ded carions, by your only puyssaunce destroyed
and confounded, will bear witness against us, ye and much more the captives
which be living and in your possession with their wives and little infauntes
will say we be open liers and untrue taletellers: Wherefore according to the
duty of our office which is or should be always indifferently to write and
truly to judge, we say, determyne and affirm that the victory is yours, the
honor is yours and yours is the glory, aduisyng you, as you have manfully
gotten it, so polletikely to use it. Well said the king, seeing this is your
determinacion, I willyngly accept the same, desiryng you to know the name of
the castle nere adioynyng. When they had answered that it was called Agyncourt,
he said that this conflict should be called the battaill of Agyncourt, which
victory has not been obteigned by us nor our power, but only by the suffraunce
of GOD for injury and untruth that we have received at the hands of your
Prince and his nation. That day he feasted the French officers of Arms and
granted to them their request, which busely sought through the field for
such as were slain, but the Englishemen suffered them not to go alone for they
serched with them and found many hurt but not in ieoperdy of their life, whom
they took prisoners and brought them into their te^tes.

WHEN the king of England had well refreshed himself and his soldiers and
had taken the spoil of such as were slain, he with his prisoners in good
order returned to his town of Caleis. When tidings of this notable victory
was blown into England, solemn processions and other praisynges to
almighty GOD, with bonefiers and dances were ordained in every town, city and
borough, and the Maire and the citezens of the city of London went the morrow
after the day of saint Simon and Jude from the Church of Saint Paul to the
church of S. Peter at Westminster in deuou^e manner, re^dryng to God their most
humble and hertie thanks for his haboundant grace and fortunate luck given
and sent to the king their sovereign lord.

WHEN the king of England was departed the sondaie toward Caleis, diverse
Frenchmen repaired to the plain where the battaill was and removed again the
ded bodies, some to find their lords and masters and them to conueigh into
their countrees there to be buried, some to spoil and take the relics
which the Englishemen had left behind: For they took nothing but gold,
silver, iuelles, rich apparel and costly armure. But the ploughmen and
peysantes spoiled the ded carcasses, leuyng them nether sherte nor cloute, and
so they lay stark naked till Wednesdaie. On the which day diverse of the
noble men were conueighed into their countrees and the remnant were by Philip
earl Charoloys (sore lamentyng the chance and moved with pitee) at his cost
and charge buried in a square plot of.xv.C. yardes, in the which he caused to
be made three pittes, wherein were buried by account.v.M. and viii.C. persons
beside them that were carried away by their fre^des and servants, and other
which being wounded to death died in Hospitalles and other places, which
grove after was made a church yard, and for fear of Wolves enclosed with a
high wall.

AFTER this dolorus journey and piteous slaughter, diverse clerckes of Paris
made many lamentable Uerses, complainyng that the king reigned by will, and
that cou^saillers were perciall, affirmyng that the noble men fled against
nature, and that the commons were destroyed by their prodigalite, declaring also
that the clergy were do^be and durst not say the truth, and that the humble
commons duly obeyed and yet ever suffered ponishement: For which cause by
persecucion divine, the less number vanquished, and the great was overcome.
Wherefore they concluded that al things was out of order, and yet there was no
man that studied to bring the unruly to frame. And no meruel though this
battaill were dolorus and lamentable to the French nation, for in it were
taken and slain the flower of all the nobilite of France, for there were taken
prisoners.

Charles duke of Orleaunce nephew to the French king. Ihon duke of Burbone.
Ihon of Craon lord of Dommart. The Lord of Fossenx. The Lord of Humyers. The
Lord of Roye. The Lord of Cauny. Sir Borsqueret lord of Ha^court The lord
of Noell called the whit knight and Bado his son. Lord Boncequalt Marshall
of France which died in England The young Lord of Dyn^hy. Sir Ihon of
Uawcort Sir Arthure Bremyer. Sir Ienet of Poys. The son and heir of the lord
Ligny Sir Gylbert de lawney The Lord Dancobe in Ternoys and diverse other to
the number of fiftene hundred Knights and Esquiers beside the commen people.
There were slain of nobles and gentlemen.
Charles lord Delabreth hie Constable of France. Jacques of Chastilon lord of
Da^pier Admiral of France. The Lord Rambures Master of the Cross bows. Sir
Guyshard Dolphyn great Master of France. Ihon duke of Alaunson Anthony duke
of Brabant brother to the duke of Burgoyn. Edward duke of Bar. Therle Neuers
brother to y^ duke of Burgoyn. Sir Robert Bar earl of Marle. The earl of
Uawdemont. The earl of Bawmont The earl of Graundpre. The earl of Roussy The
earl of Fauconberge. The earl of Foys. The earl of Lestrake The lord Boys of
Burbon. The Uidane of Amias The lord of Croye. The lord Belly. The lord
Dauxcy. The lord of Brenew. The lord of Paix standard berar The lord of
Crequy. The lord of Lowrey The Baily of Amience and his son The lord of
Raynuale. The lord of Lo^guale his brother The lord of Mawley and his son
The lord of Diuirie. The lord of Newffile The lord of Galigny, The lord of
Rocheguiche. The Uicedane of Lamoys The lord de Laligier The lord of
Baffremont. The lord saint Bris. The lord of Contes and his son The lord of
Nannes and his brother The lord of Ront. The lord of Applincort. lord
Delariuer with diverse othre which I leave out for tediousnes.
But surely by the relacion of the Heraultes and declaracion of other notable
persons worthy of credit as Enguerrant writes, there were slain on the French
part above ten thousand persons whereof were princes and nobles bearyng
banners Cxxvi. and all the remnant saving.xvi.C. were knights esquiers and
gentlemen: so of noble men and gentlemen were slain.viii.M.iiii.C, of the
which.v.C. were dubbed knights the night before the battle. From the field
escaped on live, the earl Dampmartyn, the lord Deiariuier, Clunet of Brabante,
sir Jews of Burbon, sir Galiot of Gauls, sir Ihon Dengermes and few other
men of name.

OF Englishemen at this battaill were slain Edward duke of York therle of
Suffolk, sir Richard Kikeley and Dauyga^me esquire, and of al other not
above.xxv. if you will give credit to ^uche as write miracles: but other
writers whom I sooner believe, affirm that there was slain above v. or vj.C.
persons, which is not unlike, considryng y^ the battle was earnestly and
furiously fought by the space of three long hours wherefore it is not
incredible nor yet impossible but more Englishmen then five and twenty were
slain and destroyed.

THIS battle may be a mirror and glass to al Christian princes to behold
and follow, for king Henry nether trusted in the puissaunce of his people, nor
in the fortitude of his champions, nor in the strength of his barded horses,
nor yet in his own policy, but he put in GOD (which is the corner stone
and immouable rock) his whole confidence hope and trust. And he which never
leaves them destitru^e that put their confidence in him, sent to him this
glorious victory, which victory is almost incredible if we had not ^edde in
the book of kings that God likewise had defended and aided them that only put
their trust in him and committed them selfs wholly to his governance.

AFTER that the king of England had refreshed himself and his soldiers in
the town of Caleis, and that such prisoners as he had left at Harfflew (as
you have heard) were come to him to Caleis: the.vi day of Nouembre he with all
his prisoners took shippyng at Caleis, and the same day landed at Dover, having
with him the ded bodies of the duke of York and the earl of Suffolk, and
caused the duke to be buried at his college of Fodrynghey, and therle at
Ewhelme. In this passage the seas were so rough and troubleous that two ships
laden with soldiers apperteignyng to sir Ihon Cornewal lord Fanhope, were
driven into zelande, howbeit nothing was lost nor no person was perished. The
king by soft iorneies with all his prisoners came to London and so to
Westminster, where he rested himself a convenient time to deliver his prisoners
to their kepers, and to se them all in save custody. Here I might declare unto
you if I would be tedious and prolixe, how the Mayre of London and the Senate
appareled in orie^t grayned Skarlet, how.iij.C. comoners clad in beautiful
Murrey well mounted and gorgeously horsed with rich collers and great chains
met the king at Blackhethe, reioysyng at his victorius return. How the clergy
of London with rich crosses, su^pteous copes and massy ce^sers received him
at.s. Thomas of Wateryng with sole^pne procession laudyng and praisyng God for
the high honor and victory to him given and granted: but all these things I
omit and return to the very matter.

WHEN the dolorus tidings of this bloody battaill was declared to the French
king being then at Roan, and with him the Dolphyn, the dukes of Berry and
Briteyne and his second son therle of Ponthew, if he lamented this chance
and cursed that evil day in the which he lost so many noble men, no man have
maruaill. And yet the dolor was not only his, for the ladies souned for the
deaths of their husebandes, the Orphalines wept and rent their hears for the
loss of their parents, the fair damoselles defied that day in the which
they had lost their paramors, the servants waxed mad for destruccio^ of their
masters, and finally, every friend for his friend, every cosyn for his alye,
every neighbor for his neighbor, was sorry, displeased and grieved. Wherefore the
French king and his counsel preceiuyng that the war was but newly begone, and
that toward them with evil speed, determined to provide for chances that
might follow, and to forsee things or they suddenly happened. And first he
elected his chief officer for the wars called the Constable, which was
therle of Arminack, a wise and a pollitique capitain and an ancient enemy to
thenglishmen, and sir Ihon of Corsey was made Master of the Crosbowes, and then
they fortefied tounes and furnished garrisons. While these things were thus in
workyng, either for Malencoly that he had for the loss at Agincourt or by some
sodein desease, Ihon Dolphyn of Uienoys heir apparaunte to Charles the French
king departed out of this natural life without issue, which was an happy
chance for Robynet of Bournouile and his compaignions as you have heard
before, for his death was their life, and his life would have been their death.

The fourth year. The.iiii. year

AFter this notable victory obteigned by the Englishmen and that king Henry was
departed into England, and the French king had made new officers in hope to
releue and set up again the old estate of his realm and country. Thomas
duke of Excester capitain of Harflew accompaignied with three.M. Englishmen made
a great road into Normandy, almost to the city of Roan: In which journey he
gat great habundance both of riches and prisoners. But in his return therle
of Arminacke newly made Conestable of France, entendyng in his first journey to win his spurs, and in his compaignie above.v.M. horssemen, encountered with
him. The skirmishe was sore and the fight fierce, but because the Englishemen
were not able to resist the force of the French horsemen, the duke to save his
men was compelled to retire, as pollitiquely as he could devise: But for all
that he could do, he lost almost.ccc. of his fotemen. The Frenchmen not
content with this good luck followed them almost to the Barriers of Harflew.
When the Englishemen within the town espied the chase, they issued out in good
order and met with their enemies, and not only slew and took a great number
of them, but also chaced them above eighte miles toward the city of Roan.

ABOVTE this ceason Sigismond Emperor of Almayn which had married Barbara
daughter to therle of zilie cosyn germain removed to king Henry (as by the
pedegre set out in the end of this book you shall plainly perceive) a man of
great virtue and fidelity, which had not only long labored to set an unity
and concord in Christ's church and christian religion, but also he sent
diverse Ambassadors as well to ye French king as to the king of England, because
he was far distaunt from their countries and regions to increase perfight
peace and reasonable unity. Wherefore, seeing that his Ambassade brought nothing
to conclusion, he in person came from the farthest part of Hu^gary into France
and after into England, intendyng to knit together all christen princes in one
line and amitee, and so being friends together, to make war and revenge their
quarelles against the Turk the persecutor of Christ's faith and enemy to all
christendom. With this noble Emperor came the Archbishop of Reins and
diverse other noble men, as Ambassadors from the French king into England. The
king of England for old amitee between the house of England and Beam, withal
his nobilitee him received on Blackheth the.vii. day of May, and brought him
through London to Westminster with great triumph, where Iustes, tournayes and
other marciall feats were to him with all joy and pleasure showed and set
forth. During which time there came in to England Albert duke of Hollande,
which also was friendly entreteigned. And these two princes were by the king
conueighed to Wynsore to. S. Georges feast, and elected compaignions of the
noble order of the Garter, and had the color and habit of the same to them
delivered, and satte in their stalles all the solempnitee of the feast: by the
which order they knowledged themselfes highly honored and much exalted. After
this solemn feast finished, the duke of Holland well feasted and greatly
rewarded, returned into his country. But themperor tarried still, never ceasyng
to declare and persuade what vtilitee, what goodness and what joy might ensue
if both the realms of England and France were brought to a final concord
and perfight unity. But the evil chance of the French nation was to his
purpose a bar and a let, because they were predestinate to suffer yet more
plagues and detrimentes of thenglishe people then before they had tasted. For
when concord was at hand and peace was enteryng into the gates, a new cause
of more discord and dissencion suddenly brake out and came to the kings
knowledge: for he being informed of the loss of his me^ at the conflict late
had in the territory of Roan (as you have heard) was so displeased and
unquieted that he would hear of no treaty, nor have once this word peace
named.

THE Emperor like a wise prince, seeing then the aspect of the planet reigned
contrary to his purpose, ceased to talk of that matter any more till another
day when the coniu^ccion should be in more meker signs stirryng to peace. And
so when a mete and convenient time came, he broched again the vessel of
concord and amitee, and put it in so fair a cup and presented it with such
pleasant words, that surely the king had tasted it sufficiently if ye
Frenchmen had not suddenly prepared a new army. For therle of Arminacke puffed
up with his last victory, although the honor were small and the gain less,
determined clearly to get again the town of Harflewe, wherefore as closely as
he could, he gathered together men in every part, and appoincted them all to
mete at Harflew at a day assigned. The appoinctment was kept and the town was
besieged both by water and land before the capitaines of the town knew
perfightly the first mocion. For Ihon Uicount Narbon Uiceadmirall of France
had brought the whole navy to the riuage and shore adioynyng to the town,
entendyng privily to have entered into the town on the water side or he had
been perceived. But his subtle ymaginacion took no place, for they which kept
the watch toure, suddenly perceiuyng their enemies to approach, rang the alarm
bell. The duke of Excester incontinent caused all his men to repair to the
walls, and fortified the gates, and dispatched a swifte Bark to king Henry
with letters, requiryng him of aid and succor. Although the Frenchemen
perceived that their wyly enterprise was known, and that the town could not
be taken and suddenly stolen as they had devised, yet they continued their
siege both by water and by land, and made diverse assaults, at the which if
they nothing gained, yet ever somewhat they lost. When these news were come to
the ears of king Henry, and that he knew that his people were in great
ieopardye except great diligence were used for their relief and deliverance,
he without delay apparelled a great navy and intended in person to minister
succors to his subjects so besieged. The Emperor Sigismond sagely disuaded
him and wisely counseled him not to adventure him self in that journey, but
only to send some valiant captain which shortly might appeace that furious
storm and quickly quench that blasyng flame: aduertisyng him that it was
neither necessary nor honorable for a prince in whom the whole weight and
charge of the common wealth consists, to adventure and hazard him self in
every peril and doutful chance. The king being persuaded with the reasonable
and loving aduertisment of his friend the emperor, appoincted the duke of
Bedforde his brother, accompanied with therles of March, Marshal, Oxford,
Huntyngdon, Warwick, Arundel, Salsbury, Deuonshyre, and diverse Barons with.CC.
sail to pass into Normandy for reskew of the town of Harflew. Which making
good expedicion shipped at Rye, and with a prosperous wind and a fresh gale
came to the mouth of the river of Seyn on the day of the Assumpcion of our
Lady. When the vicount Narbon perceived the English navy to approach, he
geuyng a token to al his company, coragiously set toward his enemies and gate
the possession of the mouth of the haven. When the duke of Bedford perceived
the navy of his enemies to come forward so fiersly, he set before certain
strong and well made ships, which at the first encountre vanquished and took
two French ships (whereof the capitaines were rash and somewhat to bold)
withal their soldiers and tackelyng. The duke followed inco^tinently with all
his puissance and like a valiant captain with great courage and audacitee,
set on his enemies: the fight was long, but not so long as perilous, nor so
perilous as terrible, for battles of the sea be ever desperate, for neither
the assailauntes nor defendantes look for any refuge, nor know any backdore how
to skape out. After long fight the victory fell to the Englishemen, and they
took and sonke almost all the whole navy of France, in the which were many
ships, hulkes and carikes to the nombre of five hundred, of the which.iii.
great carickes were sent into England. In the same conflict were slain of the
Frenchemen no small nombre, as it appeared by their bodies which swarmed every
day about thenglishe ships.

AFTER this victory fortunately obtained, the duke of Bedforde sailed by water
up to the very town of Harflew, and without let or impediment landed and
refreshed it both with vitaile and money. Which succors if they were welcome
to the duke of Excetter his uncle, I report me to them that have been in
necessity and would have gladly been refreshed.

WHEN the earl of Armynacke heard that the puissaunt nauye of France was
vanquished and taken, he raised his siege before the town and returned with
small joy to Paris, as he that had no hope nor saw any likelyhod or mean to
recover again the town of Har^^ew for which he so sore thirsted.

AFTER this discomfiture and great loss, the fortitude and strength of the
Frenchmen began to decay, and their braggyng beauty began to fade. For now
the princes and nobles of the realm fell into division and discord among them
selves, as who say, that the nobility studiyng how to revenge their old
injuries and displeasures, refused to take pain for thaduauncement of the
pulique wealth and sauegard of their country And for privy displeasure covert
or hatred, their power began to wexe so slender, and their liberty was brought
into such a malicious diversity and doubtful difference, that as herafter
shall be showed, it was merueil that their country was not brought to a
perpetual bondage: which thing no doubt had followed if king Henry had longer
lived in this mutable world. For notwithstanding that the duke of ^^leaunce
the captain and head of the one faction was at that time captive and prisoner
in England, yet there grew so much privy dipleasure and cankard hatred
between Charles the Dolphyn and Ihon duke of Burgoyne, that while the one
studied, compassed and devised how to overcome the other with armure or with
policy, with dissimulacion or crafty co^ueyaunce, every iorneiman of their
faction, and every noble man partaker with the one or the other, put all their
whole study and diligence to auance forward their sect and part, and not one of
them would take heed how to re^ist and refell the present ieopardye which was
coming out of England. And as one inconvenience suffered many to follow so was
it in France at this time, for the French king was not of good memory, the war
that was toward, seemed both doubtful and perilous, the princes were untrusty
and at discord, and an hundredth mo things which might bring the realm to
exstreme misery and utter distructio^ as after you shall hear.

WHEN the duke of Bedford had acheued his enterprise and performed his
commission, both in raisyng the siege of Harflew and vitaylyng of the town,
he with no small nombre of prisoners and great haboundance of pray as well in
ships as provision for the sea, (...) into England with great triumph and
glory. For that victory he was not so much thanked of the king his brother, as
lauded and praised by the Emperor Sigismond being to him a stranger, which
said openly, happy are those subjects which have such a king, but more happy
is the king that has such subjects.

WHEN the Emperor perceived, that to move farther a peace, was but a vain
request, and to tarry longer in England to procure an amity was but loss of
time, because he saw the Englishemens minds sore offended with the last siege
of Harflew, with which fact, he him self was not well content but greatly
moved: Therefore leauyng all treaty and persuasion, he entered into a league and
amity with the king of England. Which confederacy least it should be broken,
every of the contractors studied and devised all ways and means possible how
to observe it unviolated and preserve it unbroken: which plain meaning and
true dealyng was to the^ both after, not only much honor but great commodity.
When the Emperor had thus concluded a league with the king of England and had
done al things in England according as was thought necessary, he took his
journey homeward into Garmany, and the king partly to show him pleasure, and
partly because of his own affairs, associated him to his town of Caleys.
During which time the duke of Burgoyn offered to come to Caleys to speak with
the Emperor and the king because he heard speak of the league and confederacy
that was concluded between them. The king sent to the water of Grauelyng the
duke of Gloucester his brother, and the ear^e of March to be hostages for the
duke of Burgoyne, and sent also the earl of Warwick with a noble company to
conduct him to his presence At Grauelyng foorde the dukes met, and after
salutacions done, the duke of Burgoyn was conueighed to Caleys, where of the
Emperor and of the king he was highly feasted and welcomed. During which time
a peace was concluded between the king of England and the duke of Burgoyn for a
certain space, co^ce^nyng only the counties of Flanders and Arthoys, for the
which cause the French king and his son were highly displeased. The duke of
Gloucester also was received at Grauelyng by the earl Charoloys son to the
duke of Burgoyne, and by him honorably conueighed to S. Omers and there lodged
that night The next day the earl Charoloys came with diverse noblemen to visit
the duke of Gloucester in his lodging, and when he entered into the chamber the
dukes back was toward him, talkyng with some of his servants, and did not se
nor welcome the earl Charoloys at the first entrey: but after he said to him
shortly without any great reverence or coming toward him, you be welcome
fair cosyn, and so passed forth his tale with his servants. The earl
Charoloys for all his youth was not well content, but suffered for that time.

WHEN the duke of Burgoyn had done al things at Caleys that he came for, he
after the.ix. day returned to Grauelyng, where the duke of Gloucester and he
met again, and louyngly departed the one to Caleys and the other to saint
Omers: for the which voyage the duke of Burgoyn was suspected to be enemy to
the croune of France. After the dukes departing the Emperor was highly feasted
and rewarded, and at his pleasure sailed into Holand, and so road into Beam.
The king likewise took ship and returned into England on saint Lukes even, the
year of our Lord M.CCCC.xvii.

The fifth year. The.v. year.

IN this year the king assembled together his high court of Parliament and
there in open audience made to them a short and pithy Oracion, declaryng unto
them the injuries lately done and committed by the French nation, he showing
also the just and laufull occasion of his wars, signifiyng furthermore the
great discord and civil dissencion which reigned amongst the nobility of
France, rehersyng many things for the which it were very necessary and
nedeful to repress and overcome them withal their power and puissaunce, and
that without deferryng or prolongyng of time, desiryng the^ to provide for
money and treasure out of hand for the conduct and wages of soldiers, to
thentent that nothing should lack when they should be ready to set on their
enemies. His causes were so just and his demau^des so reasonable, that he had no
sooner spoken but it was assented, and he had no sooner demanded but it was
granted. And for to give men a courage for to go forth, money was first
gathered to make provision for all things necessary for such a royal voyage:
for surely there was no creature which with that war was either disco^tented
or displeased, for it seemed to al men no less profitable then honorable, nor
no less honorable then convenient.

IN this Parliament also Ihon duke of Bedford was made governor or regent of
the realm and head of the pulique wealth, which office he should enjoy as long
as the king was making war on the French nation. The king before he would
take his voyage, sent the earl of Huntyngdon to search and skoure the seas,
least any Frenchmen liyng in wait for him, might attrappe him suddenly or he
had any knowledge of their setting forward. This lusty earl called Ihon
Holand, son to the duke of Excetter behedded at Circiter in the time of king
Henry the fourth and cosyn to the king with a great nombre of ships searched
the sea from the one coast to the other. And inconclusion he encou^tred with.ix
great carickes of Ieane (which lord Jacques the bastard of Burbon had retained
to serve the French king) and set on the^ sharply, the conflict was great and
the fight long, but inconclusion the Frenchmen were overcome and fled, and.iii.
of the greatest carickes with their patrones, and Monsure Jacques de Burbon
their Admyral were taken with as much money as should have paid the soldiers
of the whole flete for half a year, and.iii. other carickes were bouged and
sent to the botome of the sea.

THE king hearing of this good chance, about the end of July took his ship
at Portesmouth, accompanied with the dukes of Clarence and Gloucester brethren
to the said king, the earls of Huntyngdon, Mershal, Warwike, Deuonshyre,
Salsbury, Suffolk and So^merset: The lords Rosse, Wylloughby, Fitzhugh,
Clynton, Scrope, Matriuers, Bourchier, Ferreys of Groby and Ferreys of
Chartley, Fanhope, Gray of Codnore, sir Gilbert Umfreuile, sir Gilbert Talbot
and diverse other: and so having wind and wether to his desire, he la^ded in
Normandy nere a castle called Touque, where he co^sulted with his capitaines
what way was best to be taken concerning their high enterprise.

THE Normans hearing of the kings arriual were suddenly stricken with a deadly
fear and were almost distracted from their senses for dred* wherefore like mad
men in desperacion they ran out of their houses, tounes and villages with
wives and children, bag and baggage into the walled tounes and fortefied
garrisons, cariyng with them corn, wine and vitaile necessary for their
sustinance and living, preparyng swords, hatchettes, crosbowes and al other
weapons mere to set back and resist their enemies, sent word to Charles the
French king, requiryng him to defend and preserve his loving subjects against
their cruel and fierce enemies. The men of war which were left in every
place to skoure the country, went into walled tounes with the rural
co^minaltee, to thentent to aid and assist the tounes men, for well they knew
that they were not able to resist their enemies being abroad in the field. So
were all the walled tounes and castles in Normandy and Main well furnished with
men and vitaile. The names of the French capitaines were to tedious to
rehearse, and therefore I ouerpasse them.

WHEN king Henry had taken counsel, he laid siege to the castle of Touque
being very well fortefied both with nature and man's art and began to assault
it: and although that they within valiantly defended it, yet by fine force he
overcame it, and took it, and them within to mercy, and made thereof capitaines
sir Robert Kerkeley knight, and after determined to besiege the strong town of
Caen, remembryng according to the duty of a good captain, that the
Frenchemen would come to healpe their friends being in need and exstreme
necessity: which thing he most desired and wished. And upon that purpose he
set forth toward Caen after the warlikest fashion, depopulatyng the country,
and destroiyng the villages on every part as he passed. The town of Caen
stands in a plain fertile country, no stronger walled then deep ditched,
well vitayled and replenished with people. For the citezens fearyng the kings
coming had provided for all things necessary and defensible. And as soon as the
king was come, he cast a deep trenche with a high mount to prohibit them
within the town to have any egresse or outward passage: and that done, began
fiercely to assault the town. But the men of the town were nothing abashed and
stood manly to their defense, abidyng all chances which might ensue. The
fight was fierce and every man took head to his charge. The Englishmen studied
all the ways possible to damage their enemies, some shot arrows, some cast
stones and other shot gonnes: some brake the walls with engynes and other
undermined: some set skalyng ladders to the wall, and other cast in wild fire,
every man labored to come to handstrokes, which was their desire. On the
other side, the Normans threw down great stones, bars of iron, darts, hot
pitche and burning brimstone and boylyng lead. diverse days this assault
continued, not to the little loss of the Englishmen, which took more harm of
the defe^ders then they gat hurt of the assailantes. When king Henry perceived
that the dice ra^ne not to his purpose, he abstained from the assault, and
determined by vnderminyng to subvert and overthrow the walls and towers of
the town. Wherefore withal diligence the pyoners cast trenches and the laborers
brought timber, so that within a few days the walls stood only upon posts,
to fall when fire should be put to it. The king caused his people to approach
the walls and to keep the citezens occupied, least either they should make a
cou^tremyne or be an immpediment to his workmen and laborers. Wherefore he
caused thassault to be cried again: then every man ran to the walls, some
with skalyng ladders, some with hokes and some with cords and plommetes, every
man desiryng to get upon the walls and with hand to hand to graple with his
enemy: The citezens manfully defended. While the fight was quick and fierce on
both parts, the Englishmen in diverse places perced and brake through the
walls, and diverse ouertures and holes were made under the foundation by the
pyoners, by the which thenglishmen might easily enter in to the town. The
king having compassion on the tounes men, desiryng rather to have them saved
then destroyed if they would humbly submyt the^ selves to his grace, and fearyng
that if the town by fine force should be spoiled and taken, that he should be
compelled to give it as a pray to his men of war to be sacked and destroyed,
sent them word by an Herault that yet was time of mercy and clemency if they
would incontinently render them selves and the town: But they obstinately
hopyng of succor, answered that they would stand at their defense. Then the
Englishmen again skaled the walls and enterprised to enter through the
trenches. The fight was sore by the space of an hour, the English men
coragiously enforced to enter, and the Normans manfully defended, but
inconclusion the Englishmen obtained.

WHEN the king was possessed of the town, he incontinently commanded al
harneys and weapons to be brought into one place, which with all diligence was
done without any resistance. Then the miserable people knelyng on their knees,
holdyng up their hands, cried mercy, mercy, to whom the king gave certain
comfortable words and bad them stand up. And then as he was ever accustomed to
do, he went on foot to the chief church in the town and rendered to God his
most hearty thanks for his prosperous success and fortunate chance. And yet
that same night he would not sleep, but commanded al his army to watch in
array, either least his men of war in the night time might fall to spoil and
sack, or else the citezens fearyng the sequel that might ensue would privily
steal and conueigh them selves away.

IN the morning he called all the ^agestrates and governors into the Senate
house, where some for their stony stubbernes and mad obstinacy were adjudged to
dye, other were sore fined and highly raunsomed. Then he calling together his
soldiers and men of war, both gave to the^ high lauds and praises for their
manly doings, and also distributed to every man according to his desert the
spoil and gain taken of the town and the tounesmen, chiefly because at that
assault he had tried to his honor their valiant corages and vnfearfull hertes.

IT is to be imagined that king Henry in this conflict would principally show
as well his own force as the puissance and experience in wars of his nation,
either to the intent that the Frenchemen should know that they met with such
an enemy as both was able to invade their country and defend their strength
and malice, or else not obliuious that in making of war every prince must
study to obtain fame and renoune: and as the old proverb says, of a thing
well begone, succedeth a prosperous end and a happy conclusion.

ALTHOUGH the town were won, yet the castle which was strong and well
fortified both with men and all things necessary for the defense, was yet in
the Frenchmens possession: The capitain where of, to thentent to show himself
valiant and not willing to break his oath, nether to waver from his
allegiance, bosted that he would rather dye in the defense then freely yield the
castle. King Henry was not minded to subvert the Castle (without which way it
was not easy to be won) because it was beautiful and necessary, both to
keep the town from going back, and also to defend the same when oportunitee
should serve: Which Castle if he distroyed, he of very necessitee must again
build and reedifie, or else another in the place. Wherefore he sent word to the
lord Mountayny being capitain, that if he would yield the castle by a day, he
should depart without damage, And if he would be foolish and obstinate, all
clemency and favor should be from him sequestered. When the capitain and his
compaignions had well digested his message, being in despair of comfort, upon
the condition offered, rendered the Castle and yielded themselfes. And so king
Henry obteigned both the town and castle of Caen.

WHILE the King of England was besiegyng this town, the Frenchmen had nether
a convenient host to resist their power, nor were ready or able to releue their
friends in this miserable necessite, because they had such division and
dissencion amongst themselfes, and a good cause why: for king Charles was of
so small wit by reason of his sickness, that he could not rule, and so he was
spoiled both of his treasure and of his kingdom, and every man spente and
wasted the common treasure. Charles the Dolphin being of the age of.xvi.
or.xvii. years only lamented and bewailed the ruin and decay of his
country: He only studied thaduauncement of the common wealth, and he only
devised how to resist his enemies: but having nether men nor money, he was
greatly troubled and unquieted. And in conclusion, by the counsel of therle
of Armynacke Constable of France, he found a mean to get all the treasure
and riches which queen Isabell his mother had gotten and horded in diverse
secret places: and for the common vtilite of his country he spente it wisely
in wagyng of soldiers and preparyng of things necessary for the war. The
queen forgettyng the great perel that the realm then stood in, but reme^bryng
y^ displesure to her by this act dooen, declared her son and the Constable to
be her mortal enemies, and promised that they should be persecuted to the
vttermoste. And even for very womanly malice, she set in the highest authority
about the king her husband, Ihon duke of Burgoyn geuyng him the regiment and
direccion of the king and his realm with all pre-eminence and souera^ntie. The
duke of Burgoyn having now the sword of authority, for the which he so sore
longed and glad to be revenged of his old injuries, began to make war on the
Dolphyn: and when he had once tamed and framed to his purpose this young
unbridled gentleman, then he determined as he might to refell and withstand
the come^ enemies of the realm. The Same or like reason moved the Dolphin, for
he myndyng first to repress and extincte the civil dissencion at home, before
he would invade forain enemies, prepared war to subdew and destroy duke Iho^
of Burgoyn as the chief head and leader of that wicked and great mischief:
Whereby the realm was much unquieted and more decayed, and in manner brought to
a final ruin and utter destruction. So France was inflamed and in every part
troubled with war and division, and yet no man would either provide in so great
a danger, nor once put forth their finger to hinder the mischief.

KING Henry not myndyng to lie still in Normandy, nor to leave his enterprice
unperformed, sent the duke of Clarence to the sea coast, which with great
difficulty gatte the town of Bayeux. The duke of Glocestre also with small
assault and less defense took the city of Liseaux. In the mean ceason King
Henry tarried still at Cane fortefiyng the town and the castle, and put out of
the town.xv.C. women and impotent persons, and replenished the town with
English people. While the king soiourned at Caen, he kept there a solemn
feast and made many knights, and beside that, he showed there an example of
great pitee and more devotion. For in searchyng the castle he found there
innumerable substance of plate and money belongyng to the citezens, whereof he
would not suffer one penny to be touched or conueighed away, but restored the
goods to the owners and delivered to every man his own When the fame of
gettyng of Caen was blown through Normandy, the Normans were so sore afraied
and so much abashed that you should not only have seen men, women and
children ronnyng in every way by great plo^pes from town to town, not
knowing whether to fly: but also the rural persons and huseband men drove
the beasts out of the villages into such places where they hoped of refuge or
defense: so that a man would have thought that Normandy had suddenly been left
desolate and void of people and catell. But when the rumor was spread abroad
of his clemency showed to captives and of his mercy granted to such as
submitted themselfes to his grace, all the capitaines of the tounes adioynyng
came willyngly to his presence, offryng to him them selfs, their tounes and
their goods. Whereupon he made proclamacion that al men which had or would
become his subjects and swear to him allegiance should enjoy their goods and
liberties in as large or more ample manner then they did before. Which gentle
entreteinyng and favorable ha^dlyng of the stubburne Normans, was the very
cause why they were not only content, but also glad to remove and turn from the
French part and become subjects to the croune of England.

WHEN king Henry had set Caen in a good order, he left there, for capitaines,
the one of the town and the other of the Castle, sir Gilbert U^freuile earl of
Kyne, and sir Gilbert Talbot: and made bailife there sir Ihon Pophane, and so
departed from Caen to Argenton which was shortly re^dred to him. Then all
these tounes following without stroke stricken yielded to him, in whom he made
captains these persons whose names ensue.

At Creuly, sir Henry Tanclux an Almaine. At Thorigny, sir Ihon Popham to whom
the town was given. At Boyeux, the lord Matrauerse. At Argenton, the lord
Gray Codner. At Chamboy, the lord Fizghugh, and made him lord of the same. At
Uernoyle in Perch, sir Ihon Neuell. At Ala^so^ the duke of Gloucester and his
leuetena^t sir Raufe Le^tal At Essay, sir William Hoddelston baylif of Alanson.
At Faloys, sir Henry Fitzhugh. At Cruly, sir Loys Robset. At Conde Norean, sir
Ihon Fastolffe.
Diverse tounes likewise yielded to the duke of Clarence wherein he put these
Capitaynes.
At y^ cite of Lisieux, sir Iho^ Kikley At Cowrton, Ihon Awbyn. At Barney,
William Houghton. At Chambroys, James Neuell. At Becheluyn, therle Marshall. At
Harecort, Richard Woduile esquyer. At Fangernon, Ihon saint Albon. At Creuener,
sir Ihon Kerby to whom it was given. At Annilliers, Robert Horneby. At Ragles,
sir Ihon Arthure. At Fresheney le Uicount sir Robert Brent.
Likewise diverse tounes in the country of Constantine were surrendered to the
duke of Gloucester, where he appoyncted these capitaines
At Cauenton, the lord Botraux. At Seint Clow, Reignold West. At Ualoignes,
Thomas Burgh. At Chiergurg, the lord Gray Codner and after his decease, sir
water Hungerford. At Pont Done, Dauy Howel. At the Hay Dupayes, sir Ihon Aston
Bailey of Constantine. At Co^sta^ces, the lord of Burgainy At Seint Saluiorle
Uicount, sir Ihon Robset. At Pontorso^, sir Robert Gargrane At Ham^ery the earl
of Suf^olke, lord of the same place by gift. At Briqueuile, thesaied Earl by
gift also. At Anranches, sir Philip Halle, Bailey of Alanson. At Uire the lord
Matrauers. At Saint James de Bewron, the same lord.
WHEN the King of England wanne thus in Normandy, his navy lost nothing on
the sea, but so skowred the stremes that nether Frencheman nor Briton durst
once apere, howbeit one day there arose so hideous a tempest and so terrible a
storm, that nether cable held nor anchor prevailed, so that if the earls of
March and Huntyngdon had not taken the haue^ of Southampto^, the whole navy
had perished and the people had been destroyed, and yet the sauegard was
strange: For in the same haven two Balyngers and two great Carickes laden with
marchaundise were drouned, and the broken Maste of another Caricke was blown
over the wall of Ha^pton (as diverse writers affirm) such is the power of the
wynd, and such is the rigor of the tempest. When the fury of the wynd was
assuaged and the sea waxed calm, therles of March and Huntyngdon passed over
the sea with all their compainy and landed in Normandy marchyng toward the
king, before whom the Normans fled as fast as the fearful hare does before
the gredy Greyhounde, or the sely Partridge before the Sparowhauke. And so they
passed through the country destroiyng of villages and taking pains till they
came to the king going toward Roan. During this marciall feactes and great
conquestes in Normandy, sir Ihon Oldecastle lord Cobham which was as you have
heard before was convicted of heresy, and proclaimed a rebel, and upon the same
outlawed and brake out of the toure, was now as his ^ortune chanced
apprehended in the Marches of Wales by the Lord Powes, and so restored to his
old lodgyng in the toure, where his kepers looked more narowly to him then
they did before. After which taking, he was drawn from the toure on a hardell
to Saint Giles^elde, and there hanged in chains, and after consumed with
fire. Well now leauyng the matters of England let us return to the affairs
in Normandy.

The si^t year. The.vi. year.

AFter king Henry had thus victoriously obtained so many tounes and so many
fortresses from the possession of his enemies, and that his great ^ame and
little per^onage was the whole terror and fear of the French nation, he
ymagined with himself that he had nothing do^n nor any thing gotten except he
brought the famous city of Roan being the Empery and diadem of the Duchy of
Normandy in to his possession and dominion, to the which out of every part
the Normans had conueighed their money Iewelles and household stuff: And which
city sith his first arriual they had not only walled and ^ortressed with
many rampires and strong bulwarks, but also with val^a^t capitaines and hardy
soldiers to no small number. Wherefore he set forward his army toward the
town called Pontlarche standing upon the River of Seyne.viij. mile from Roan
between Paris and Roan. When the Frenchemen which kept the passage heard of
the kings approchyng, they gathered together a great number of men of war
ready to defend and prohibit the passage, apointyng another a band of men if
they failed to keep the farther side of the bridge and to watch and hourly
attend that he nether by bote nor by vessel should eskape any manner of way.
When he came to the town, first he set forward toward the bridge, which
when he saw it so well defended that it would not without great loss be
obteigned, suddenly he blew the retraite and reculed almost a mile backward,
where in a pleasant place by the rivers side he pitched his Camp: and in the
night season, what with botes and barges, what with hoggeshedes and pipes he
conueighed over the broad river of Seyne a great compaignie of his army
without any resistaunce of his enemies. For they which were on the hetherside
of Seyne, thynkyng that thenglishmen had gone to conquer some other place
followed the^ not, but studied how to defend their town (which was enough for
them to do). When the king saw that his men were on the otherside of the water,
he the next day early returned to the town and assauted it on both the
sides. When thinhabitantes perceived that contrary to their expectacio^ they
were compassed and beset by their enemies and saw no hope of refuge or succor,
with humble heart and no great joy rendered up the town* And so the king having
no let or impediment determined to besege and assault the city and castle of
Roan for the which he had taken diverse long and tedious iornayes, and sent
before him his uncle the lord Thomas duke of Excester with agreat compaignie
of horssemen and Archers, which with banner displayed came before the town
and sent to the capitaines Wyndsore a heraulte at arms, willing them to
deliver the town to the king his Master, or else he would persecute them with
fire, blood and sword. To who^ they proudly answered, that none they received
of him, nor none they would deliver, except by fine force they were thereunto
compelled. And to declare themselves valiant capitaines and hardy men of war,
there issued out of the town a great band of men of arms and encou^tred
fiercely with the^glishmen, which like men nether afraied nor astonished
manfully them received and with fine force drove them into the town again,
leuyng with the Englishmen.xxx. of their compaignie prisoners and ded persons.
The duke with this good speed and proud answer of the French capitaines,
returned to the king to whom was rendered alitle before y^ town of Louiers,
which he gave to his said brother the duke of Clarence, which made there his
deputy sir Ihon Godard knight. The duke of Excester also had newly taken the
city of Eurcux and made capitain there sir Gilbert Halsall knight. When the
duke of Excester was returned to Pont^arch as you have heard, the capitaines of
Roan set fire on the suburbs, bet down Churches, cut down trees, shrede the
bu^shes, destroyed the vines round about the city, to thentent that
thenglishmen should have no relief nor comfort either of lodgyng or fuel.

WHEN the king heard of (...) dispitefull doings, (...)
he with his whole army removed from Pont^^rche, and the last day of July came
before the city of Roan and compassed it round about with a strong siege and
a fearful assaute. The king lay with a great puissaunce at the house of
Charitee on the East side of the city, and the duke of Clarence lodged before
the port of Caux on the West part of the city. The duke of Excester took his
place on the Northside at the port Denise: between the dukes of Excester and
Clarence was appoyncted the earl Marshall even before the gate of the castle,
to whom were joined therle of Ormond and the Lords of Haryngton and Talbot. And
from the duke of Excester toward the king were encamped the lords of Rosse,
Willoughby, Fitzhugh and sir William Porter with a great band of Northrenme^
even before the port saint Hillarij. Therles of Mortaint and Salsbery were
assigned about the Abbey of saint Kathermes. Sir Ihon Gray was lodged directly
against the Chapel called Mount. S Mighell, sir Philip Leche treasorer of the
wars kept the hill next the Abbey, and the Baron of Carew kept the passage on
the river of Said, and to him was joined a valiant esquire called Ienico,
which two capitaines valiauntly kept the riuage of the water of Said. On the
fartherside of the river were lodged therles of Warren and Huntyngdon, the
lords Neuell and Ferrers, sir Gilbert Umfreuile with a well furnished company
of warlik soldiers directly before the gate called port du Pont. And to the
intent that no aid should pass by the river toward the city, a great chain
of iron was devised at Po^tlarche and set on piles from the one side of the
water to the other, and beside that chain he set up a new forced bridge,
sufficient both for carriage and passage. At which therle of Warwick which
had gotten Damp^ro^t was sent to the town of Cawdebeck standing on the
riuerside between the sea and the city of Roan, which town he so hardly
assaulted, that the capitaines offered to suffer the English navy to pass by
their town without hurt or detriment to the city of Roan: And also if Roan
yielded, they promised to render their town without any fail or farther
delaie. And this composicion they sealed, and for performaunce of the same they
delivered pledges. This appoynctment the English navy to the number of.C.
sails passed by Cawdebeck and came before Roan and besieged it on the water
side. To this siege came the duke of Gloucester with therle of Suffolk and the
lord of Burgainy which had taken the town of Chierburgh and were lodged
before the port of Saint Hillarij nerer their enemies by forty rods then
any other persons of the army.

DVRYNG this siege arrived at Harflew the lord of Kylmaine in Ireland with a
band of.xvi. hundredth Ireshmen armed in mayle with darts and skaynes after the
manner of their country, all talle, quick and deliver persons, which came and
presented them selves before the king liyng still at the siege: of whom they
were not only gentely entertained, but also (because that the king was
informed that the French king and the duke of Burgoyn would shortly come, and
either raise the siege or vitaile or man the town at the North gate) they were
appointed to keep the Northsyde of the army, and in especial the way that
comes from the forest of Lions. Which charge the lord of Kylmaine and his
company joyfully accepted and did so their deuoyre, that no men were more
praised nor did more damage to their enemies then they did for surely their
quicknes and swiftnes did more prejudice to their enemies, the^ their great
barded horses did hurt or damage the nimble Irishme^.

THVS was the fair city of Roan compassed about with enemies besieged by
princes, and belet about both by water and land, having neither comfort nor
ai^e of king nor dolphyn. And although the army were strong without, yet within
there lacked neither hardy capitaynes nor manful soldiers. And as for people,
they had more then ynowe, for as it was written by him that knew the nombre and
had no occasion to err from the truth, there were at the time of the siege
within the city, of christen people CC. and ten thousand persons. Daily were
issues made out of the city at diverse ports, sometime thenglishmen gat, at
another time the Frenchmen saved, sometime neither of both either got or saved:
for surely the capitaines and men of war within the town setting more by
honor then by life, preferryng fame before worldly riches, dispisyng pleasure
and vilependyng fearful hearts, swear each to other never to render or
deliver the town while they might either hold sword in hand or put spear in
rest. The king of England being advertised of their haute courages and high
stomachs, determined to conquer them by famyne which would not be tamed by
weapon.

Wherefore he stopped all the passages both by water and land that no vitaile
could be co^ueighed to the city, he cast treaches round about the walls and
set them full of stakes and defended the^ with archers, so that they within
could have no way out either to invade their enemies (or if they could) to
depart and relinquishe their fortress and city.

One day tidings were feigned that the French king approached with all his power
to raise the siege and reskew the city: Wherefore king Henry commanded al men
to lie in their harneys lest they might by some subtle cautel be surprised
unware and taken unprovided. But the French king neither came nor sent, to the
great wonder of thenglishmen.

This siege thus continuyng from Lammas almost to Christmas, diverse enterprises
were attempted and diverse polices were devised how every part might damage and
hurt his adversary and enemy, but no part much reioysed of their gain.
During which time, vitayle began sore to fail within the town, so that only
vinegar and water served for drink. If I should rehearse according to the
writing of diverse authors, not only how dear dogs, rattes, myse and cattes
were sold within the town: but how gredely they were by the poor people eaten
and devoured, and also how the people died daily for fault of food, and how
young infa^tes lay suckyng in the streets on their mothers breasts liyng dead,
staruen for hunger, you would more abhor the loathsome doings then rejoice at
their miserable mischa^ce. The rich men within the town put out at the gates
the pore and indigent creatures which were by thenglishmen that kept the
trenches beaten and driven back again to the gates of the town, which
against them were closed and barred. So this miserable people uncomfortably
forsaken and unnaturally despised of their own nation and household fellows,
between the walls of their city and the tre^ches of their enemies lay still
criyng for help and relief, for lack whereof innumerable sely solles daily
died and hourly starued. Yet king Henry moved with pity and stirred with
compassion in the honor of Christ's nativity on Christmas day refreshed all the
poor people with vitayle to their great comfort and relief: for the which act
they not only thanked, lauded and praised the king of England, but also prayed
to God for his preseruacion and furtherance, and for the hynderance and evil
success of their unkind citezens and uncharitable country men. This miserable
famyne daily more and more encreasyng so daunted the hearts of the bold
capitaynes, and so abated the courages of the rich burgesses, and so turme^ted
the bodies of the poor citezens, that the stout soldier for faintnes could
ska^e welde his weapon, nor the rich merchant for money could not bye a
sheuer of bread: so that the co^minaltie cried to the captains, and the nedy
people besought the lords to have compassion on them, and to invent some way
for their succor and comfort. The gouernou^s of the town, after long
consultacion had, considering the great necessity that they were in, and seeing
none appearance of succor or relief, determined it both necessary and
convenient to treat with the king of England. And so upon Newyeres even there
came to the walls at the gate of the bridge diverse commisioners appoincted by
the capitaines, which made a sign to thenglishemen liyng without to speak
with some gentleman or other person of authority. The earl of Huntyngdon
which kept that part sent to them sir Gilbert Umfreuile, to who^ they declared
that if they might have a guide or a safeconduite they would gladly speak with
the king. Sir Gilbert promised not only to do their message, but also to
certify the^ of the kings pleasure and purpose. Which co^municacion ended,
he repaired to the duke of Clarence and other of the kings counsel,
aduertisyng the^ of the request of the citezens, which incontinent assembled
the^ selves in the kings lodgyng, where sir Gilbert Umfreuile wisely and
soberly declared to the king the minds and intentes of the citezens. The king
like a grave prince considering that a thing gotten without effusion of
Christen blood is both honorable and profitable, and saw that the haute
corages of the braggyng Frenchmen were now by his hard besiegyngsore abated and
almost tamed, thought it convenient to hear their lowly peticion and humble
request, and so willed sir Gilbert to advertise them that he was content to
hear.xii. of them which should be safely co^ueighed to his presence: With
this answer sir Gilbert departed and made relacion thereof to the capitaynes
standing at the gate. Which on the next day in the morning appointed.iiii.
knights.iiii. lernedmen and.iiii. sage burgesses al clothed in black to go to
the king of England. These.xii. persons were received at the port saint
Hillarij by sir Gilbert Umfreuile accompanied with diverse gentlemen and yomen
of the kings household, commonly called yomen of the croune, and conueighed to
the kings lodgyng, who^ they found at Mass. When the divine service was
finished king Henry gorgeously apparelled and sumpteously adourned came out of
his trauers, fiercely and princely beholding the French messe^gers and passe^
by them into his chamber. After him incontinently the.xii. ambassadors were
conueighed, amongst who^ one learned in the civil law, more arrogant then
learned, and yet not so arrogant as indiscreet said these words. Right high
and mighty prince, right noble and puissant king, if you will with your self
diligently consider wherein consists the glory of voctorye and the triumph of
a conqueror, you shall plainly perceive, that the type of honor is in the
tamyng of proud men, ouerco^myng of valiant soldiers and subduyng of strong
cities and populus regions, and not in ^laiyng christen people by hunger thirst
and famine, in which con^^^teth neither manhod, wit nor policy, Alas, regard
you your honor, and se yonder great multitude of miserable people criyng for
meat and weeping for drink and diyng for lack of succor and relief? What
glory sha^ you obtain in killyng of wretches by famyne, which death of all
deaths is most to be despised and abhorred. If you will show your (...)
charitable before God, or merciful before men, let al our poor pe^p^e which
will depart out of our city pass through your camp to get their living in
other places, and then manfully assaut our city, and by force (if you dare)
subdue and conquer it. And if your enterprise succeed ^ortunately (as a thing
that is very doubtful) in this doing you shall not only obtain worldly glory
and terrestrial victory for ouercommyng the strong and puissant men of arms
and the riche^cytie, but also merit much before God for deliueryng and having
compassion of the poor nedy and indigent persons. When this Orator had said,
the king, which no request less suspected then that which was thus desired,
began a while to muse: And when he had well perceived the crafty c^^tel and
fraudulent inuencion of the French messengers, he with a ^^erse countenance
and a hold spirit made to them this answer saying: Think you O fa^tastical
Frenchmen that I am so ignorant and so brutal that I cannot perceive your
double dealyng and crafty conueighaunce? Judge you me so simple that I know not
wherein the glory of a co^queror consists? Esteem you me so ignorant that I
perceive not what crafts and warlike pollices by strong enemies are to be
subdued and brought to subjection? yes, yes, I am not so loiteryng a truand as
to forgette so good a lesson. And if these things be to you blind and obscure
I will declare and open them to you. (...), the Goddess of battle.
The goddess of war called Bellona (which is the correctrice of princes for
right witholdyng or injury doing, and the plage of God for evil living and
untrue demeanor amongst subjects) has these.iii. handmaides ever of
necessity attendyng on her, blood, fire, and famine, which three damsels be
of that force and strength that every one of them alone is able and sufficient
to turment and afflict a proud prince: and they al joined together are of
puissance to destroy the most populous country and most richest region of the
world. If I by assaultyng of your town should seek your blood (although I
gained as I doubt not but I should) yet my gain were not clear without some
loss of my people. If I set your city on fire, and so consume it and you
also, then have I lost that precious jewel for the which I have so sore longed
and so long labored. Therefore to save mine own people (which is one poinct
of glory in a captain) and to preserve the town which is my lauful and just
inheritance: And to save as many of you as will not willyngly be destroyed, I
have appointed the make maid of the three damsels to aff^lict and plage you
till you be bridled and brought to reason, which shall be when it shall please me
and not at your appointment: And therefore I say and affirm that the gain of a
captain by any of these three handmaides is both glorious, honorable and
triumphant, but of all three the youngest maid is in all things most profitable
and commodious. Now to answer to your demaundes, as touching the pore people
liyng in the ditches, I assure you I more lament your lack of charity toward
your christen brethren ye and your own nation of one language and one
country, then I rejoice at the undoing of so many creatures and castyng away
of so many enemies. You like tirantes put the^ out of the town to thentent
that I should slay them, and yet I have saved their lives. You would neither
give them meat nor drink, and yet I being their mortal enemy have succored
and releued them: so that if any vncharitie be, it is in you, if any shame or
reproach be taken, receive it your self, for you be the doers. If I have done
them good let God reward me, for I look of them no thanks, if you have done
them evil so shall you be done to. And as to suffer your pore people to pass
out of the city through my camp, no no, I will not so accomplish your cloked
request, but you shall keep them still to help to spend your vitailes: And as to
assault your town, I will you know it that I am thereto both able and willing as
I se time and occasion: but seeing the choice is in my hand to tame you either
with blood, fire, or famyne, or with all, I will take the choice at my pleasure
and not at yours. And with that the king with a frownyng countenance departed
from them to his chamber and commanded them to dine with his officers.

WHEN he was departed, the Frenchmen began to marueil at his excellent wit,
and to muse at the hautnes of his courage, and after they had dined and
consulted together, they required once again to have access to his royal
presence, which when it was to them granted, they humblyng them selves on
their knees besought him to take a truce for.viii. days, in the which they
might by their commissioners take some end and good conclusion with him and
his counsel. The king like a piteous prince rather couetyng the preseruacion
of the people, then their destruction, after good deliberacion taken, granted
to them their askyng, with the which answer they ioyously returned.

AFTER their departure were appointed and set up.iii. rich tents, the one for
the lords of England to consult together, the second for the commissioners of
the city, and third for both parts to argue and debate the matter. The
commisioners for the English part were the earls of Warwike and Salsbury, the
lord Fitzhugh, sir water Hungerford, sir Gilbert Umfreuile, sir Ihon Robsert
and Ihon be Uasques de Almada. And for the French part were appointed sir Guy de
Butteler and.vi. other.

DVRYNG this truce, every day the commisioners met, the Englishmen accused and
the Frenchmen excused, the Englishmen demanded much, and the Frenchmen
proffered little. Thus with arguyng and reasonyng the.viii. day came and nothing
was done, nor one article concluded. Wherefore the Englishmen took down the
tents and the French men took their leave, but at their departing, they
remembryng them selves required the English lords for the love of God that
the truce might continue till the sun risyng the next day, to the which the
lords sone assented. When the Frenchmen were returned to Roan, suddenly in all
the town sprung a rumor that the truce was expired and nothing determined.
Then the poor people ran about the streets like frantike persons, shoutyng
and criyng and calling the captains and governors murderers and manquellers,
saying that for their pride and styffe stomach all this misery was happened in
the town, threatenyng to slay them if they would not agree to the king of
Engla^des demand and request. The Magistrates being amassed with the fury of
the people, called all the town together to know their minds and opinions.
The whole voice of the commons was to yield, yield, rather then starve. Then the
Frenchmen in the euenyng came to the tent of sir Ihon Robsert, requiryng him of
ge^tlenes to move the king that the truce might be prolonged for.iiii. days.
The king thereunto agreed and appointed tharchbishop of Cantorbury and the
other.vii. before named for his part, and the citezens appoincted an egal
number for them. So the tents were again set up, daily was assembles and
much treaty on both parties, and on the fourth day by the help of God, the
treaty was concluded and finished to the great reioysyng of the poor citezens,
the copy whereof follows word by word.

The appointmentes of the yeldyng up of the city and castle of Roan.
FIRST it is accorded that Guy de Botellier captain of the City and castle
of Roan with the consent of the noble citezens and other dwelling and being in
the said city and castle shall yield and deliver into the hands of the full
excellent king of England or other what so he be by him deputed, the city and
castle above said without fraud or male engine, what time after the mids of
the.xix. day of this present month of January our said lord the king will the
city and the castle to be delivered under manner and form within written.

ALSO it is accorded that the day and hour the said nobles and citezens and
other what so they be dwelling and being in the said city and castle shall
submit them in all things to the grace of our said lord the king.

ALSO it is accorded that from this hour unto real and effectual yeldyng of
the said city and castle, none of the said nobles or other being in the said
city or castle shall not go our of the foresaid city and castle without
special grace of our said lord the king.

ALSO it is accorded that from this hour unto the deliverance of the city,
every of the parties shall abstain from all deeds of war to make again that
other party of them.

ALSO it is accorded that the foresaid nobles, citezens and other being in the
said city and castle shall pay to our foresaid lord the king CCC. thousand
scutes of gold, whereof always two shall be worth an English noble, or in the
stead of every scute.xxx. great blankes white or.xv. grotes. Of which.CCC.
thousand scutes, the one half shall be paid to our said lord the king or to his
deputies within the city of Roan beforesayd the.xxii. day of this present
month of January, and that other half shall be paid to our said lord the king
or to his deputies in the feast of saint Matthew the Apostle next coming that
shall be the.xxiiii. day of February next, without any utter delay.

ALSO it is accorded that al and every horse, harneys, armures, artileries ^or
shot and all other habilimentes of war longyng to soldiers or other
strangers being in the said city and castle, shall be put together by them in
two houses by our said lord the king to be assigned, and they shall be delivered
by the captain of the said city to our for said lord the king after the
mids of the.xix. day of January thereupon to be required.

ALSO it is accorded that all and every armor, artilleries and all
habilimentes of war of the said castle shall be put together in one house within
the same castle, and they shall be delivered to our said lord the kyn^ or to
his deputies in that party, the day that the same castle shall be fallen to be
delivered to our said lord the king.

ALSO it is accorded that al and every armures, artilleries and other
habilimentes of war of thesaid city or of al manner of citezens and of al
other dwelling therein, by them shall be brought and put together in one house or
mo houses there by them to be delivered to our Lord the king, and by the
capitain of the same city shall be delivered to our forsaid Lord the king or to
his deputy in what time thesaid capitain by the party of our most doubtful
lord the king, after middaie of this present month of Ianuarij thereupon be
required, out take the armuries that belong to Merchants which were wont for
to sell them ceassyng fraud and maleengine. And if it befall any merchants
any such armures that be not theirs, under color of theirs to colouren or
hide^ in any manner, tho armures so hid and colored and al other what that they
been that diden, to our Lord the king shall been forfeted, and the body of the
same merchant to been ponished at the kings will.

ALSO it is accorded that in no manner shall be made, brennyng, hynderyng,

ALSO it is accorded that al and every chain that were wont to be laid

ALSO it is accorded that our forsaid lord the king shall have place

ALSO it is accorded that al and every subjects of our said lord the

ALSO it is accorded that all and every soldier and stranger being

ALSO it is accorded that al and every relics and other goods longyng them
to receive the deliverance of thesaid city.

ALSO it is accorded that the forsaid nobles, citeze^s and other within thesaid
city and Castle being, shall cause the same city and Castle before
thesaied.xix. day of this present month of Ianuarij sufficiently and honestly
to be made clean, and also diligently and honestly all the ded bodies now ded
and to be ded unto that day of deliverance of the said city honestly and
diligently shall do to be buried.

ALSO it is accorded that the forsaid nobles, citezens and all being in thesaid
city and castle furthwith shall receive and suffer to enter into the same city
al and every poor person being in the diches or about the diches of the same
cite, which for penury did go out of the same cite whom they shall be bound to
succor unto the.xix. day of Ianuarij above said, as they will answer to God
and to the king, and else they shall receive none other person into the same
city or castle unto the forsaied day without special license of our said
Lord the King, but if it hap any messenger or herald of the party adversary
of the king to come to the gates or diches of thesaid castle or city.

WHICH articles and apointme^tes as it is beforsaid, all and every in manner
as it is accorded, the forsaied capitain, nobles, citeze^s and other with in
thesaid castle and city being, well and truly without fraud or malengine to
hold, observe and keep they behoten, and tho to be kept and fulfilled they
bynden them. So but if it befall our forsaid most doubt full lord the king
that God forbid, to be overcome in battaill to him ymade by Charles his
adversary of France or the duke of Burgoyn or any other to come, the siege of
our lord the king to remove from the forsaid city, that nether theforsaid
capitain ne none of the nobles, citezens, soldiers or other being within
theforsaid city and Castle shall gone out, ne no manner help they shall deliver,
ner lean to them so again our lord the king coming in no manner wise.

ALSO that all these appoyntmentes, couenauntes and accordes and every of them
as it is beforsaied well and truly and unbroken be kept, and for the more
surety of the same couenauntes and accordes, the^^^^ aid capitain nobles and
citezens and other abouesaid shall be taken at the time ymediatly into the hands
of our lord the King.lxxx. notable pledges whereof.xx. shall be knights and
esquires and the remnant citezens of the same city, at their own costs to be
sustained.

ALSO for the party sothly of our most doubtful lord the King aforsaid,
graciously and ^eningly co^sidryng the meke submittyng and yeldyng of the same
city and Castle abouesaid, has granted that all and every person of what
estate or degree or condition that he be with in thesaid city and Castle
being, except certain persons within expressed that will become lieges and
subjects of our lord the king, and from hencefurth will dwell under his
obedience, shall have their heritages and goods, moueables and vnmoueables
within the duchy of Normandy constitute, and which before the date of these
present letters by our forsaid lord the king to other persons have not been
granted, except armurs and artillaries abouesaied, making and doing for their
heritages and their immovable goods to our forsaid lord the king the service
thereof accustomed, or to other to whom such manner services of the grant of
our lord the king owen to long.

ALSO it is granted on our lord the kings behalf that all the

ALSO it is granted and accorded on our lord the kings behalf

ALSO it is granted on our lord the kings behalf that the war

ALSO it is accorded on our lord the kings behalf that to theforsaied

And so theforsaied city was yelden to our sovereign lord the king upon s.
Wolstones day being the.xix. day of Ianuarij. and then afterward he gat many
strong tounes and Castles, as Deep, Caudebec, Torney and many mo as it shall be
after written.

WHEN the day apoynctment came, which was the day of. S Wolston, sir Guy de
Butteler and the Burgesses of the town in good order came to the kings
lodgyng, and there delivered to him the keys of the city and castle,
besechyng him of favor and compassion. The king incontinent appoyncted the duke
of Excester with a great compaignie to take possession of the town, which
like a valiant capitain mounted on a goodly courser and entered into the town
and so into the castle, and appoyncted watch and ward in every toure, bulwark
and fortress, and garnished the walls with banners, standers and peno^s of
the kings arms, badges and devises. The next day being Frydaie the king in
great triumph like a conqueror, acco^paignied with iiij. Dukes, x.
Earls.viii. Bishops, xvi. Barons and a great multitude of knights.
esquires and men of war entered into Roan where he was received by the Clergy
with.xlij. Crosses which sang diverse sweet so^ges, outwardly reioysyng what
soever inwardly they thought. Then met him the Senate and the burgesses of the
town, offering to him diverse fair and costly presents. In this manner he
passed through the city to our Lady Church, where with all solempnitie he was
received by the bishop and Cannons, and after he had said his Orisons, he
caused his chapelaynes to sing his Antheme Quis est magnus dominus. Who is so
great a Lord as is our God. etc. And that done he came to the Castle where he
continued a good space after, receiuyng homages and fealties of the burgesses
and tounes men, setting ordres emo^gest them and reedefied diverse fortresses
and toures. During which time he made proclamacion that al men which would
become his subjects should enjoy their goods, lands and offices, which
proclamacion caused many tounes to yield, and many men become English. At
which ceason the duke of Britain seeing that the power of France began to
decay, came to the king to Roan and concluded with him a league of his own
mere mocion: Fearyng that either he should afterward be compelled thereunto, or
else if he offered to late it would not be accepted.

WHEN the renderyng of Roan was blown through Normandy and the kings
proclamacion diuulged through the country, it is in manner incredible to hear
how many tounes yielded not once desired, and how many fortresses gave up
without contradicion, whereof I will show you a small nombre and the names of
them who were appoyncted capitaines of the same.

AT Caudebec, sir Loys Robsert. At Deep, William lord Burcher earl of Ewe. At
Ewe, the same earl. At Aubemerle, therle of Warwick and his deputy there sir
William Mountford. At Bell Encomber, Sir Thomas Rampston lord by gift. At
Lo^geuile, the capitain of Beffe earl thereof by gift. At the Roche Guyon, sir
Guy Butteler late capitain of Roan, and by the king lord of the same. At
Danuile, sir Christopher Bourden. At Couches, sir Robert Marbury At Chierburgh,
sir Iho^ Geddyng. At Bacquiuile, the lord Rosse, lord thereof by gift. At
Gaylard, the same lord. At Dangew, Richard Wooduile At Arques, sir James Fines
bailey of Caux. At Newcastle, sir Philip Leche. At Monceaux, the same sir Philip.
At Gourney, sir Gilbert vmfreuile At Estripagny, Richard Abraham esquire. At
Senclere Surgette, Willyam Basset. At Nanffle, therle of Worcester. At Gysors,
thesaid earl. At Maunt, therle of March. At Boncouilliers, Ihon Aburgh Baylife
of Gysors. At Uernon, sir William Porter. At Melans, sir Thomas Rampso^ after
him sir Ihon Fastolffe. At Homflewe, therle of Salsbury and after the duke of
Clarence by gift. At Bretnell, sir Henry Mortimer baylife of Homflew.
IF I should here rehearse what tounes were conquered, what fortresses were
yielded, and who were made capitaines of the same, this Pamphlet would turn to a
volume more tedious then pleasant, and therefore I over passing small names and
much doing, will return again to the principal things touching the sequel
of this history^. And who so desires to know all the circumstances of the
delivery, let him ouerloke the French writers, which to aduoyde shame
confess and write the veritee.

The seventh year. The.vii. year

WHEN the gettyng of Roan and the delivery of the other tounes were blased and
blown through the whole realm of France, wonder it is to tell and more to
believe how the hertes of the Frenchmen were suddenly heavy and their courages
sone coled, mournyng and lamentyng the iminent mischief which they saw by the
division of the nobilitee like shortly to fall on their heddes: and the more
sorowyng their evil chance because they saw no remedy prepared, nor yet none
help at hand thought on. But whosoever kicked or wynched at this matter, Ihon
duke of Burgoyn raged and swelled, ye and so much freated that he wist not
what to say and less to do: And no meruaill, for he was vexed and troubled
with a doble desease at one only time. For he only ruled both king Charles and
his, and did all things at his will whether reason agreed or no, and for that
cause he knew that he was nether free from dis^ain nor yet delivered from the
scope of malice. And therefore he imagined that all mischiefs and calamities
which chanced in the common wealth should be imputed and assigned to his
vnpolitike doing or to his negligent permission: wherefore he ymagined it
proffitable to the realm and to himself most auaylable, if he by any means
possible could devise, practice or invent any way or mean by the which he
might reconcile and join in amitee the two great and mighty kings of
England and of France. Which thing once obteigned and being delivered from
al fear of exterior hostilitee, he determined first to revenge his quarrel
against Charles the Dolphyn, and after to repress all causes of grudge or
disdain, and to recover again both the favor of the commonaltee and also to
put away al causes of suspicion or imagined infamy against him and his
procedynges. And inte^dyng to buyld upon this frail foundation, sent letters
and Ambassadors to the king of England, aduertisyng him that if he would
personally come to a communicacion to be had between him and Charles the
French king, he doubted not but by his only means, peace should be induced
and blouddy battaill clearly exiled.

KING Henry heard gentely the Ambassadors and agreed to their request and
desire, and so came to Maunte, where at the feast of Pentecost he kept a
liberal house to all comers, and sat himself in great estate. On which day
either for good service before by them dooen, or for good expectacion of things
to come, he created Gascon de Foys a valiant Gascoyn earl of Longeuile, and
sir Ihon Gray was likewise made earl of Tankeruile, and the Lord Burshier Earl
of Ewe. After this solemn feast ended, the place of the enteruiewe and metyng
was appointed to be beside Melaus on the river of Seyne, in a fair plain every
part was by commissioners appointed to their ground* The Frenchmen diched,
trenched, and paled their lodgings for fear of afterclappes: But the
Englishmen had their part only barred and ported. The king of England had a
large tent of blewe velvet and grene richely embrodered with two devises, the
one was an Antlop drawyng in an horse mill, the other was an Antlop sittyng in
an high stage with a branch of Olife in his mouth: And the tente was
replenished and decked with this poysie. After busy labor comes victorious
rest, and on the top and height of the same was set a great Egle of gold,
whose iyes were of such orient Diamondes that they glistered and shone over the
whole field.

THE French King likewise had in his park a fair pauilion of blew velvet
richely embrodered with flower deluse, on the top of the the same was set a
white Heart fliyng, made all of fine silver with wings enameled. Between these
two Camps or enclosers was appointed a tent of purple velvet for the
cou^sailers to mete in and every part had an egall nombre to watch on the night
and to se good order on the day.

WHEN the day of apoinctment approached, the king of England acco^paignied
with the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester his brethren, and the duke of
Excester his uncle, and Henry Beauford Clerk his other uncle which after was
bishop of Winchester and Cardinal and the earls of March, Salsbury and other
to the number of a thousand men of war, entered into his park and took his
lodgyng. Likewise for the French part, thither came Isabell the French Queen
because the king her husband was fallen into his old frenaticall desease having
in her compaigny the duke of Burgoyn and therle of Saint Paul, and she had
attendyng on her the fair lady Katheryn her daughter and.xxvi. ladies and
damoselles, and had also for her furniture a thousand men of war.

AFTER these estates had reposed themselfes one night in their tents, the next
day al such as were appointed repaired toward the pauilion ordained for the
consultacion. Where the king of England, like a prince of great stomach and no
less good behauor received humbly the French queen and her daughter and them
honorably embraced and familierly kyssed. The duke of Burgoyn made low curtesy
and bowed to the king, whom the king louyngly took by the hand and honorably
entertained. After salutacions and embrasynges finished, they fell to counsel
within the pauilion assigned, which was kept with a guard appointed by both
the parties that none but commisioners should once attempt to enter. After the
kings requests made and his demaundes declared, the French queen and her
company took leave louyngly of the king of England and returned to Ponthoyse to
certify her husband of her demaundes and claymes, And king Henry returned to
Mante. The next day after, they assembled again, and the French part brought
with them the lady Katherin, only to thentent that the king of England seeing
and beholding so fair a lady and so minion a damosel, should so be inflamed
and rapte in love, that he to obtain so beautiful an espouse, should the sooner
agree to a gentle peace and loving composicion. This company met together.viii.
several times, sometime the one part was more, and sometime the other. And
notwithstanding that the Englishmen and Frenchmen were lodged no great distance
a sunder, yet was there never fraye nor occasion of tumulte or riot provoked or
stirred of any of both the parties, which (both their natures considered) is
somewhat to be marueiled at.

IN this assemble many words were spent and no deeds done, many things
required and few offered, many arguments made and no conclusion taken. Some
authors write that the dolphyn on let this treaty sent to the duke of Burgoyne
sir Tauegny du Chastel, declaryng to him that if he would let this agreement, he
would common with him and take such an order, that not only they but the whole
realm of France should thereof be glad and rejoice: But what was the very
cause of the breche, no man certainly declares. When no effect ensued of this
long consultacion, both parties after a princely fashion departed, the
Englishmen to Mantes and the Frenchmen to Ponthoyse.

THE king of England was nothing pleased nor yet contented that this
co^municacion came to none end, Wherefore he mistrustyng the duke of Burgoyn to
be the very let and stop of his desires and requests, said unto him before his
departing: fair cousin, we will have your kings daughter and al things that we
damaund with her, or we will drive your king and you out of his realm. Well
said the duke of Burgoyn, before you drive the king and me out of his realm,
you shall be well weried, and thereof we doubt little.

AFTER this departure, the duke of Burgoyn being nobly accompanied, road to
the town of Melune where the dolphyn then soiorned where in the plain feldes
they.ii. like friends co^moned together and concluded apparently an open amity
and sure friendship, which was written by notaries and signed with their hands
and sealed with their great s^ales of arms, but as the sequel shows, heart
thought not that tongue talked, nor mind meant that hand wrote. This treaty was
concluded the.vi. day of July in the year of our lord 1419 and was proclaimed
in Paris, Amience and Ponthoyse.

THIS new alience notified shortly to the king of England liyng at Maunt,
which therewith was sore displeased, and not without cause For he perceived
that the force of these two princes were much stronger now being united in
one, then they were before being separated and divided. Yet notwithstanding
this great sworn and sealed amity, he nothing more minded then to set forward
his intented enterprise with the aid of God to perform his conquest maugre
and evil will and puissaunce of his enemies. Wherefore he sent the captain of
Bueffe brother to the earl of Foys newly created earl of Longuile with.xv.C.
men secretly to the town of Ponthoyse, which on Trinity sunday erly in the
morning came to the town, and so suddenly and so shortly set up their skalyng
ladders to the wall, that they were entered into the town or the watch
perceived them, criyng saint George, saint George The lord Lisleadam capitain
of the town perceiuyng the walls skaled and the market place gained, opened
the gate toward Paris, at the which he withal his retinue and diverse of the
tounes men to the nombre of.viii. thousand fled. For the Englishmen durst not
because their nombre was small ones divide them selves or fall to pilfryng, til
about prime the duke of Clarence came to their aid with.v. thousand men, and
by the way he encou^tred diverse burgesses of the town fliyng with all their
substance toward Beauuoys who^ he took prisoners and brought them again to
their old dwelling place. When the duke was come to Ponthoyse, he much
praised the valiantnes of the assailantes and gave to them the chief spoil of
the town and merchants, of the which they had great plenty and foyson. Then
the duke with a great puissaunce came before Paris and lay before the city two
days and two nights without any proffre either of issue by his enemies or of
defense if he had the same assauted, which he could not well do because it was
long and ample, and his no^bre small, and for so great an enterprise not
furnished: Wherefore seeing that his enemies durst not ones look on him, he
returned again to Ponthoyse, for the taking of which town, the country of
France, and in especial the Parisienswer sore dismayed and astonished, for there
was no fortress hable to resist or withstand. In so much the Irishmen
overcame all the Isle of France and did to the Frenchmen damages innumerable
(as their writters affirm) and brought daily prays to the English army. And
beside that, they would rob houses and lay beds on the backs of the kine
and ride upon them, and carry young children before them and sell them to the
Englishmen for slaves: Which straung doings so feared the Frenchemen within
the territory of Paris and the country about, that the rude persons fled out
of the villages withal their stuff to the city of Paris

THE French king and the duke of Burgoyn liyng at S. Denise hearing of al
these doings, departed in all the have with the queen and her daughter to Troys
in Champaigne, there taking great deliberacion what was best to be done,
leauyng at Paris the earl of S. Paul and the lord Lisleadam with a great
puissance to defend the city. At the same time the duke of Clarence took the
strong town of Gysors, and after that was taken the town of Gayllard: and all the tounes of Normandy shortly after were either taken by force or rendered,
except the Mount ^aint Michel, which because the gain thereof was very little
and the loss in assautyng seemed to be very much, and also it could do small
harm or none to the country adioynyng, was neither assaulted nor besieged.

AND thus as you have heard, was the duchy of Normandy reduced again into the
right line and restored to the possession of the right heir, which had been
^ro^ the time of king Henry the third, in the year of our lord 1255 wrongfully
detained from the kings of England.

THE wisemen of France sore lamentyng the chance of their country and the
misery of their people saw and perceived that they had puissance enough to
defend their enemies if they were at a perfect concord amongst them selves.
For they apparently saw that although there were a peace openly concluded
between the dolphyn and the duke of Burgoyn, yet they imagined that no good
fruit succeeded of the same for the duke either for secret displeasure that he
bare to the dolphyn, or for the doubt that he had of thenglishme^, never
assailed by him self the army of king Henry, nor never sent aid or succors to
the Dolphyn. Wherefore by means of friends a new co^municacion was appointed to
thentent that the corrupt dregs of their old malice and inward grudges
might be clearly cast out and extinct. The place of this metyng was appoincted
at the town of Monstrel fault Yonne, so called because a small brook called
Yonne runs there to the river of Sein over which river was made a bridge,
with diverse bars overthwart so that the princes openyng the bars might each
embrace and touch other, and keeping the bars shut, each might se and common
with other at their pleasure. The day was appointed when these.ii. great
princes should mete on this bridge, to thentent that al civil discord should
by this co^municacion be clear forgotten, or at the least should be suspended
till the enemies were vanquished and driven out of their countries and confines.
But this mocion worse succeeded then the entreators devised, for while every man
was fulfilled with hope of peace and concord, crafty imaginacion crepte out of
cancard displeasure had almost brought al things from liberty into bondage.

WHEN the day and place of the solemn enteruiewe was agreed and assigned,
Tauagny du Chastel, a man prompt and prone to al mischief, called to his
remembrance the shameful murder of Jews duke of Orleaunce (under whom he had
long been a captain) done and committed by this duke of Burgoyne as before
you have heard, determined with him self to revenge the death of his old
Master and lord. Some say that he was thereto stirred and provoked by the
dolphyn (and not unlike) for the dolphyn which bare a continual hatred to the
duke of Burgoyn, imagined paraduenture by this means to repress and subdue
the whole power and high pride of this duke, without any suspection of fraud
or reproach of untruth or vilany. Well the day came, which was the.xii. day of
August, and every prince with his nombre appointed came to this bridge. The
duke of Burgoyne being warned by his friends to keep his closure and the bars
on his side shut, little regarded his fre^desmonicion as a man that could not
avoid the stroke for him provided, and so opened the bars and closure and
came to the dolphyns presence, which was clean armed, and kneled down on the
one kne, showing to him great reverence and humility. The dolphyn showed him
no loving countenance, but reproved him, laiyng to his charge much untruth
and great dishonor. The duke again boldly defended his cause. Now the duke
during this co^municacion kneled still and his sword was at his back with
often turnyng and mouyng in answeryng the dolphyn and his counsel, and so he
put his hand back to pluck his sword forward: what quod sir Robert de
Loyer, will you draw your sword against my lord the dolphyn? when Tauagny du
Chastel apperceiued that an occasion was given to perform his enterprise,
incontinent he struck him with a hatchet on the head, so that he could not
speak, other standing by shortly dispatched him of his life. Diverse of his
part, thinkyng him not dead, began to draw weapon, amongst whom the lord
Nouale was slain, and the other taken. For this murder were condemned (but
not apprehended) by Parliament the president of Prouynce, the vicount of
Narbone, Guylliam Battelier, Tauagny du Chastel, Robert Loyre and.iiii. other.
This was the end of Ihon called the proud duke of Burgoyne, which more
regarded civil war and intestine dissencion, then his own life and welfare.
And this sodein death as I think came to him not without desert, for
shamefully murtheryng Jews duke of Orleance the French kings brother. Such
is the justice of God, that blood for the most part is recompensed with blood,
and unnatural homicide is requited with shameful death or soden destruction.

AFTER this heinous murder thus committed, I might rehearse how the dolphyns
servants despoyled the duke of all his garments to his sherte, and covered
his face with his hosen. I could declare how the dolphyn sent his letters to
Paris and other cities and tounes, publishyng untruly diverse opprobrious
words spoken, and diverse great and outrageous offenses done by the duke
against the king and the whole realm. I could further declare how the wisemen
of France detested and abhorred this abominable act, perceiuyng the end that
was like to ensue, and how the contrary side, which was the lineage of Orleance
reioysed and laughed at this miserable chance and sudden fall: but because
thenglish nation was party neither to the fact nor to the counsel, I will
declare what the king of England did after this notorious deed done and
committed.

The.viii. year. The.viii year

WHen Philip earl Charoloys son and heir to this duke Ihon, and now by this
murder and death of his father duke of Burgoyn and earl of Flanders was
informed liyng at Gaunt of this misfortune and final end of his noble parent
and loving father, he took the matter as he had cause, grievously and heavily,
insomuche that no man of his counsel durst ones speak to him, and in especial
the lady Michel his wife, sister to the dolphyn and daughter to the king, was
in great fear to be forsaken and cast out of his house and favor: But as all
things end, so sorrow asswageth. When his doloure was somewhat mitegate he
first by thaduise of his counseil received to his favor and company the fair
duches his loving wife, and after sent diverse not able ambassadors to the king
of England liyng at Roan to treat and conclude a peace between them both for a
certain space: To which request in hope of a better chance king Henry
agreed. After that knot knit, he kept a solemn obsequy for his father at
saint Uaas in Arras where were.xxiii. prelates with crosses: During which time
the earl of saint Paul and the Parisiens sent to him ambassadors to know
what they should do, and how they should defend them selves against the
Englishmen. He gently answered the messengers, that he trusted shortly by the
aid of God and license of the king to conclude a peace and perpetual amity to
their great comfort and relief. When these Ambassadors were departed to make
relacion to the Magistrates and governors of the city of Paris, he after long
co^sultacion had as well with men of the spirituality as temporal and lay
persons, sent the bishop of Arras and two notable persons to the king of
England with certain articles and clauses which the duke of Burgoyn offered to
him for very love as he said. The king of England considering with him self
that the duke of Burgoyn was a convenient organe and a necessary instrument to
conueigh his desires to his purpose, louyngly received and honorably
entertained the dukes ambassadors, declaryng unto them that he would without
prolongyng of time send to him his Ambassadors, which should open his lawful
requests and reasonable desires. With this answer, the dukes messengers
departed toward Arras. and incontinent after their departure, king Henry sent
the earl of Warwike and the bishop of Rochestre with many knights and
esquiers to the duke of Burgoyn, which to him declared the effect and purpose
of their ambassade and coming: he gently heard their requests, and some he
allowed and some he augmented, and some he altered and disalowed, but in
conclusion, by often sendyng between the king and the duke they were agreed, so
the king and his commons would assent. Now was the French king and the queen
and his daughter Katherin at Troys in Champaigne, governed and ordered by them
which would rather x. times spur forward the purpose and ententes of the
duke of Burgoyn then once with a bridle to pull back any one jot preferred by
him.

What should I say, a truce tripertited between the.ii. kings and the duke and
their countries was determined, so that the king of England should send in the
company of the duke of Burgoyn his Ambassadors to Troy in Cha^paigne
sufficiently authorized to co^clud so great a matter The king of England being
in good hope that al his affairs should prosperously succeed and go forward,
sent to the duke of Burgoyn his uncle the duke of Exceter, the earl of
Salsbury, the bishop of Ely, the lord Fanhope and lord Fitzhugh, sir Ihon
Robsert and sir Philip Hal with diverse doctors to the nombre of.CCCCC. horse,
which in the company of the duke of Burgoyn came to the city of Troys
the.xxi. day of March. The king, the queen and the lady Katherin them
received and heartely welco^med, showing great signs and tokens of love and
amity. After a few days they fell to counsel, in the which it was concluded
that king Henry of England should come to Troys and mary the lady Katherin, and
the king should make him heir of his realm, croune and dignity after his
death and departure out of this natural life with many other articles which
hereafter in a place more convenient you shall hear reher^ed.

WHEN all these things were done and concluded, the Ambassadors or England
departed toward their king, leuyng behind the^ sir Ihon Robsert to give his
attendaunce on the lady Katherin. When king Henry had heard his Ambassadors
rehearse the articles and points of the treaty and amity concluded, he
condiscended and agreed with all diligence to set toward Troys, lo^gyng for the
sight of his darlyng the fair lady Katherin. And although he reioysed that
all things succeeded more luckely to his purpose then he before imagined, yet
he trusted not somuche to the glosyng words and golden promises of the French
nation being his ancient enemies, that he would rashely adventure his person
without a perfect search and diligent inquiry of the doings and attemptes of
his doubtful and new reconciled friends, being warned and admonished by the
late mischance of Ihon duke of Burgoyn yet recent in every man's eye. But when
he saw the sun shine and air clear on every side, he accompanied with the
dukes of Clarence and Gloucester his brethren, the earls of Warwike, Salsbury,
Huntyngdon, Ewe, Tankeruile and Lo^guile and.xv. thousand men of war,
departed from Roan to Ponthoyse, and from thence to saint Denis two leagues
from Paris, and from thence to Pontcharenton where he left a garrison of men
to keep the passage, and from thence by Prouynce, he came toward Troys, where
the duke of Burgoyn accompaignied with many noble men received him two leagues
without the town and co^ueighed him to his lodgyng and his princes with him,
and all his army was lodged in small villages theraboute. And after he had
reposed himself, he went to visete the king, the queen and the Lady Katheryn,
whom he found in Saint Peter's Church, where was a joyous metyng, honorable
receiuyng and a loving embrasyng on both parts, which was the twenty day of
May. And there were the king and the lady Katherin made sure together before the
high Aultare, and on the third day of June next following, they were with all
solempnite espoused and married in the same Church. At which marriage the
Englishmen made such triumphs, pompes and pagiauntes as though the king of
all the world had been present. In so much (as three French writers affirm)
that the nobles of France more merueled at the honor and glory of the
Englishmen, then they disdeigned or maligned at their own fortune.

AND when these solemn ceremonies were honorably finished and the marriage
consummate, the two kings and their counsel assembled together diverse
days, wherein the former league and treaty was in diverse points altered and
brought to a certainty by the device of the king of England and his brethren.
When this great matter was finished, the kings swear for their part to observe
this agreement and league in all poynctes. Likewise swear the Duke of Burgoyne
and a great nombre of princes and nobles which were present, and that the
sooner because they marueiled before at his noble Acts dooen by king Henry, of
whom they had knowledge only by report, and now they more marueled when they
saw and beheld the honor, estate and wisdom of his person. But whether they
swear with outward countenance and inwardly thought the contrary, let them
which know the French constancy judge and tell truth. But assuredly they
perceived him to be prudent both in askyng and geuyng counsel. They saw
him expert and apt to marciall feats, and nymble in all things apperteignyng
to war. They thought him strong against all perelles and imagined him
fortunate in all chances and doings, wherefore as I said, they much marueled
at him, and more regarded his person. Then was he named and proclaimed heir
and Regent of France. And as the French king sent the copy of this treaty to
every town in France, so the king of England sent the same in English to
every city and market town to be published and deuulged, the very copy
whereof as it was then written, word by word ensues.

The Articles and appoynctmentes of the peace between the realms of England
and France.
HENRY by the grace of God king of England, heir and Regent of France, lord
of Irelande, to perpetual mind to Christen people and all tho that be under
our obeisance we notefie and declare that though there has been here a^orne
diverse treaties between the most excellent Prince Charles our father of
France and his progenitors for the peace to be had between the two realms of
France and England the which here before have borne no fruit: We
considering the great harms the which has not only fallen between these
two realms for the great division that has been between the^, but to all
holy church. We have taken a treaty with our said father, in which treaty
betwixt our said rather and us, it is concluded and accorded in the form
after the manner that follows.

FIRST it is accorded betwixt our father and us, that forasmuch as by the
bond of Matrimony made for the good of the peace between us and our most dear
beloved Katheryn daughter of our ^aied father and of our most dear mother
Isabell his wife, the same Charles and Isabell been made father and mother,
therefore them as our father and mother we shall have and worship as it sits
and seems so a worthy prince and princess to be worshipped principally before
all other temporal persons of the world.

ALSO we shall not distroble, disseason or letten our father aforsaid, but that
he hold and possede as long as he lives as he holds and possedeth at this
time the croune and the dignitee royal of France, and rentes and proffites
for the same of the sustenance of his estate and charges of the realm. And our
forsaid mother also hold aslong as she lives thestate and dignitee of Queen,
after the manner of the same realm with conuenable conuenience part of thesaid
rentes and proffites.

ALSO that the forsaid lady Katherin shall take and have dower in our realm of
England as Queen's of England here before were wont for to take and have, that is
to say, to the some of.xl.M. Scutes, of the which two algate shall be worth a
noble English.

ALSO that by the ways manners and means that we may without transgression or
offense of other made by us, for to keep the laws, customs, vsages and
rightes of our said realm of England shall done our labor and pursuit that
thesaid Katheryn al so sone as it may be done, be made su^e to take and for to
have in our said realm of England from the time of our death thesaied dower
of.xl.M. scutes yearly, of the which twain algate be worth a noble English.

ALSO if it hap thesaid Katheryn to ouerliue us, she shall take and have the
realm of France ymediatly, from the time of our death, dower to the some
of.xx.M. Frankes yearly of and upon the lands, places and lordshippes that
held and had Blaunch sometime wife of Philip Boseele to our said father.

ALSO that after the death of our father aforsaied, and from thence forward,
the croune and the realm of France with all the rightes and appurtenaunces
shall remain and abide to us and been of us and of our heirs for evermore.

ALSO forasmuch as our said father is witholden with diverse

ALSO that we of our own power shall do the court of the Parliament

ALSO we to our power shall defend and help all and every of

ALSO we diligently and truly shall travail to our power and do

ALSO we to our power shall provide, and do to our power that able

ALSO that we of our power so sone as it may commodiously be manner of
citees, tounes and Castles, places, countrees and persons within the realm of
France disobedient and re^elles to our said father, holdyng with them which
been called the Dolphin or Arminack.

ALSO that we might the more comodiously, surely and freely done exercise and
fulfill these things aforsaid. It is accorded that all worthy nobles and
estates of the same realm o^ France as well spirituals as temporalles, and also
citees notables and commonalties, and citezens, burgeis of tounes of the realm
of France, that been obeysaunt at this time to our said father shall make
these oaths that folowen.

FIRST to us having the faculty, exercise, disposicion and governance of the
forsaied common proffite to our hestes and commandments they shall mekely
and obediently obey and intend in all manner of thing concerning the exercise
of governance of the same realm.

ALSO that the worthy great nobles and estates of thesaid realm as well
spirituals as temporalles and also citees and notable commonalties and Citezens
and Burgeses of the same realm in all manner of things well and truly shall keep
and to their power shall do to be kept of so much as to them belongs or to
any of them all, those things that been apoyncted and accorded between our
forsaid father and mother and us, with the counsel of them whom us lust to
call to us.

ALSO that continually from the death and after the death of our said father
Charles, they shall be our true liegeme^ and our heirs, and they shall receive
and admit us for their ^iege and sovereign and very king of France, and for
such to obey us without opposicio^, contradiccion or difficultee, as they
been to our forsaid father during his life, never after this realm of France
shall obey to man as king or regent of France, but to us and our heirs. Also
they shall not be in counsel help or assente that we lose life or lymine, or
be take with evil taking, or that we suffer harm or diminicion in person,
estate, worship or goods, but if they know any such thing for to be cast or
ymagined against us, they shall let it to their power, and they shall done us
to weten thereof as hastily as they may by theimself, by message or by letters.

ALSO that all manner of conquestes that should be made by us in France upon
thesaied inobedientes out of the Duchy of Normandy shall be done to the proffite
of our said father, and that to our power we shall do that al manner of lands
and lordshipes that been in the places so for to be conquered longyng to
persons obeyng to our said father, which shall swear for to keep this
present accord, shall be restored to the same persons to whom they long to,

ALSO that al manner of persons of holy Church beneficed in the Duchy of
Normandy or any other places in the realm of France subject to our father and
favoring the party of the dukes of Burgoyne which shall swear to keep this
present accord, shall rejoice peaceably their benefices of holy Church in the
Duchy of Normandy, or in any other places next aforsaied.

ALSO likewise all manner persons of holy Church obediente to

ALSO that al manner of Churches, Uniuersitees and studies general,

ALSO by Gods help, when it happens us to come to the croune

ALSO that we shall enforce us and do to our power that recompense

ALSO during the life of our father in all places now or in time

ALSO that during our fathers life we shall not call ^e write as long as our
father lives.

ALSO that our said father during his life shall nempne, call, and write us in
French in this manner Nostre (...) filz Henry Roy Dengleterre beretere (...),
and in latin in this manner. Precharissimus filius noster He^ricus Rex Angliae
and here is Franciae.

ALSO that we shall put none imposicions or exaccio^s, or do charge the
subjects of our said father without cause reasonable and necessary, ne
otherwise then for common good of the realm of France, and after the saying
and askyng of the laws and customs reasonable, approved of the same realm.

ALSO that we shall travail to our power to the effect and intent, that by
thassent of the three estates of either of the realms of France and England,
that all manner of obstacles may be done away, and in this party that it be
ordeigned and provided that fro the time that we or any of our heirs come to
the croune of France, both the crounes that is to say of France and England
perpetually be together in one and in the same person, that is to say from our
fathers life to us, and from the term of our life thence forward in the
persons of our heirs that shall be one after another. And that both realms
shall be governed fro that we or any of our heirs come to the same, not
severally under diverse kings in one time, but under that same person which
for the time shall be king of both the realms and sovereign lord as it is
beforesaid, keeping nevertheless in all manner of other things to either of ye
same realms their rightes, liberties, customs, vsages and laws, not making
subject in any manner of wise one of the same realms to the rightes, laws or
vsages of that other.

ALSO that hence forward, perpetually shall be still rest, and that in all
manner of wise, discencions, hates, rancoures, enuies, and war^es between
the same realms of France and England, and the people of ^^e^ame realms,
drawyng to accord of the same peace may cea^e and be broken.

ALSO that there shall be for hence forward for evermore peace and tranquillitee
and good accord and common affeccion and stable friendship between the same
realms and their subjects beforesaied: the same realms shall keep themselves
with their counsel helps and common assistence against all manner of men that
enforce them for to done or to ymagine wrongs, harms, displeasours or
greuaunce to them or to either of them. And they shall be conuersaunt and
Marchandisen freely and surely together paiyng the custom dew and accustomed.
And they shall be conuersaunt also, that al tho confederates and alies of our
said father and the realm of France aforsaid, and also our confederates, of
the realm of England aforsaied, shall in.viij. months from the time of this
accord of peace as it is notified to the^, declare by their letters that they
wolle draw to this accord and woll be comprehended under the treaties and
accord of this peace, saving nevertheless either of the same Crounes, and also
all manner accions rightes and revenues that longen to our said father and his
subjects and to us and to our subjects again such manner of allies and
confederacies.

ALSO neither our father neither our brother the duke of Burgoyn

Also that we with assent of our said brother of Burgoyne and other

ALSO al manner of persons that shall be about our father to do him

ALSO that we for the things aforesaid and every one of the^ shall

HERE I ought not to forget how.ii. men named learned in both the laws, the
one called master Ihon Bouchet the Aquitanical writer and Archedeacon of Terbe,
and the other Master de Prato a solemn prothonotary his pratyng gloser, wrote
o^ this treaty and composicio^, and make thereof so a great matter as by the
making of this peace it should appear that England had no right to France, nor
by this grant nothing to England was given. First Ihon Bouchet says that
this treaty was the worst contract that ever was made for the kings of
England, for by this says he it is apparent that the king of England hah
neither title nor right to the croune of France but by this co^posicion, for
if they had right, why did they take it by co^posicion? upon this text Master
gloser says, that this composicion gives a new right, and if there were any
old it takes it away and gives a new, which new gift was of little value and
less afficacie in the law because the issue female may not enherite according
to the law Salique, and therefore he cannot make his daughter heir to the
croune of France. If I might be so bold I would axe Master Ihon Bouchet this
question: if a man wrongfully keep me out of the possession of my true and
lawful inheritance (with whom I am neither able with purse neither with power
to prosecute my cause before a competent judge by process of the law) will of
his own mere mocion (moved paraduenture with conscience) render to me my
right, so I will suffer him to enjoy my land during his life, or that I will
mary his daughter, have I this land by his gift or as a thing to me justly by
law and equity rendered and received. Likewise if a rich man owe to a poor
man an hundredth pounds, which is not able in substance or for fear of
displeasure dare not attempt any suyte or quarrel against his detter, if he will
offer to pay his money at days, to the which request the poor man agrees,
is this a new gift of the money or a payment of the det. In the first question
if the demau^dant had no title, how could he grant to him the accion of the
land during his life, and in the second, if the plaintiff had none interest
how could he give him days of payment and yet in both the cases if the one
part had no right why would the other make an offer or co^pound, for all
co^posicions have respect to a right precedent. But in this matter, who would
judge that a king of so great and puissant a realm with the asse^t of his
whole counsel would dishenerite his only son and surrendre his title without
an apparent right and open title known and showed by the party, for the old
proverb says, long sufferaunce is no acquittance, nor prolongyng of time
derogacion to right, also restitucion is no grant, nor payment of duty is no
gift. Doctors write and clerks afferme that these treaties, arbitrementes and
composicions be both godly, charitable and honest, both to restore the one
party to his ancient right (whether it be in lands or goods) and to
dispense and releue the other with the taking of the profits of the land and
vsyng in marchandies the occupacion of the money. Now to Master gloser which
affirms that a composicion takes away an old right and gives a new and that
this co^posicion is of no value: surely Master Ihon de Prato I would have such
a peuyshe proctor retained against me, for you say that every co^posicion
gives a new right and takes away the ancient title, yet you said before y^
this co^posicion neither gives nor can give any right, which co^clucion is
manifestly repugnant to the antecedent therefore you must be answered thus, if
nothing be given, nothing is taken away, and so consequently no co^posicion,
and if there be no co^posicion then remains still the old and ancient title
in the state that it was. Paraduenture Master gloser will say and allege the
title of England to be abrogated because the house of Ualoys may lawfully
prescribe against the kings of England and have had the possession forty
years and more, and so by this mean king Henry had no title to claim or
challenge any part of the realm of France. Then I pray you remember the years
and account the doings and you shall evidently perceive that king Edward the
third the very indubitate heir general to the croune of France King Richard
the second, king Henry the fourth and this noble king Henry the fifth never
desisted.vi. or.viii. years at the most either by battle or treaty to
challenge and claim their ancient right and old enheritaunce to the^ by queen
Isabel descended, so the title was ever in strife and never quiet till now the
right line is restored: And as for your law Salique put it in your boget among
lies and feigned fables. Thus you may se the affections of Frenchemen, that an
Archefoole cannot forge a lie for his pleasure, but a ^rothodawe will feign a
gloss to maintain his folish fa^tasie. Let us now leave these wylful writers
and return to the king of England, which after al the^e articles of the
treaty being concluded and sworn, made the French king, the duke of Burgoyn
and other the French lords a solemn and sumptuous supper and banquet, and
before their departing, he sadly and soberly said to them these words.

All my thought care and study is (you noble princes and men of high honor) to
invent the mean, study and way, how both my kingdoms by the benefit of
almighty God enlarged and amplified, by the co^^exyng and ioynyng the one to
the other may be left to my posterity clean and pure with out domestical
disse^cion or civil discord, to thentent that as no prince nor potestate has
at this day in all Europe a greater governance, a richer regiment nor a more
puissant empire: So I trust to leave it that hereafter there shall no power or
dominion be able to be to it compared or equyuolent. Wherefore, I entende first
to extirpate and pluck away the rotes and leuynges of the civil disce^cion in
this realm lately begone, which ly in the breast of Charles the kings son,
by your decre, judgment and assent, of the new state and dignity of the
dolphyn utterly deprived and disgraded, against whom it is convenient and
decent that you bear armure not so much to destroy and confound him, as to
bring him to do obaysance and reasonable co^formitie. What manner a prince
think you he would prove, when he should obtain and possess a kingdom,
which being but a lusty young striplyng not fearyng God nor regardyng his honor
contrary to his promise and against all human honesty, was not ashamed to
polute and stain him self with the blood and homicide of the valeaunt duke of
Burgoyn, O cancard stomach in the breast of a young prince, oh tyrannical heart
in the body of a gentle men, O untrue tongue in the mouth of a Christen men, a
Christian, no a Pagane which neglecting his honor, violatyng his promise and
dispisyng honesty, would procure or consent to so abominable a fact and
sedicious a murder. Wherefore these things well pondered and justly considered I
require you to join, stand, and cleue with me as the very heir and successor
of my dear and well-beloved father in law king Charles in this realm and
kingdom, first to my noble auncesters, and after to me by right title and just
claim lawfully descended. Grudge not I pray you because I that am an
Englishman shall succeed in the croune of France: I assure you I am not nor
will not be noted to be to you a mere alien and stranger, was not my great
grandfather king Edward the third son to queen Isabel daughter to Philip the
fair and sister and heir to.iii. kings of this relme dead without issue? was
not my great graundmother queen Philip descended of the noble house of Ualoys?
if the old and trite proverb be true that the woman's side is the surer side
and that the child follows the womb, although the one part be English yet
the surer part is French, and of the French flower budded and brought forth.
And therefore remember not that I am an English man, put out of your minds in
what country I was borne: and consider that I am a christen man and an
anointed king, to who^ by both the professions it apperteineth not only to
defend and protect their people and subjects from foreign powers and outward
invasions, but also to minister to them indifferent justice, to conserve them
in pollitike order and moderate quietness: and finally, according to their
desert and merits, the^ to promote, auance and prefer to riches, honors and
estates: which things if I would not do to you my trusty friends whose loving
hearts and beneuolent minds I shall never forgette nor put in oblivion, I
should not do my duty to God, I should not do the office of a king, nor I should
not do that which by the laws of nature and reason I ought to do, which is to
render kyndnes for kyndnes, goodness for desert, and honor for merit. Therefore
to conclude I humbly require you, to stand strong with king Charles my father
in law (who in the stead of mine own parent I worship, love and honor) in
this concord and agreement which I both call and trust to be a peace final, and
after his mortal end to love, serve and be true to me and my posterity, and I
assure you for my part that the Occean sea shall sooner leave his flowyng and the
bright sun shall sooner leave his shinyng, then I shall cease to do that which
becomes a prince to do to his subject, or that a father ought to do to his
natural child.

WHEN he had thus persuaded the nobility, he with all his army, having with
him that French king and the duke of Burgoyn came before the town of Seen in
Burgoyn which took part with the dolphyn: and after that he had destroyed the
country about it, at the.xv. day the town was yielded and there he made
capitain the lord Ienuale. And from thence he removed to Monstreau Fault yone,
where the duke of Burgoyn was slain as you have heard, which town was taken
by assault and many of the dolphyns part apprehended before they could get to
the castle. After the gettyng of the town, the castle which was newly
replenished with men and vitayle, denied to re^dre, and so it was strongly
besieged: during which assault the duke of Burgoyn was informed by diverse in
what place the duke his father was buried, whose corpse he caused to be taken up
and sered and so co^ueighed it to Diron in high Burgoyn and buried it by duke
Philip his father.

THE king of England sent certain of the prisoners that he had taken in this
town to advise the captain of the castle to yield the same, but they
obstinatly denied the request, geuyng opprobrious words to the kings Herault,
wherefore the king of England caused a gybbet to be set up before the castle, on
the which were hanged.xii. prisoners all gentlemen and friends to the
captain. When the lord of Guytry lieftenant of the castle perceived that by
no means he could be succored, and fearyng to be taken by force, he began
to treat with the king of England, which in.viii. days would take none of his
offers, but in conclusion he and his rendered them selves simply, their lives
only saved, and after.vi. wekes siege the castle was delivered, and the earl
of Warwike was made captain of the town and castle* which fortefied the
same with men, ordinance and artillery. From thence the king of England
departed to Molyn upon Seyne and besieged it round about in whose company were
the French king, the young king of Scotts, the dukes of Burgoyn, Clarence,
Bedford, and Gloucester.

The duke of Bar. The prince of Oreng. The earl of Niche in Auerne. Therle
of Huntyngdon. Therle of Stafford. Therle of Sommerset. Therle Marshal. Therle
of Warwike. Therle of Worcester. Therle of Suffolk. The archbishop of Britayne
earl of Yury. The lord Charles of Nauer. Therle of Perch. Therle of Mortaine.
Therle of Ormond. Therle of Desmond. Therle of Ewe. Therle of Tankeruile.
Therle of Longuile. Therle of saint Paul. Therle of Brain. Therle of Lig^y.
Therle of Uatedeuontur. Therle of Ioiuigny. The Lord Rosse. The Lord Matrauers.
The Lord Gray of Codnor. The Lord Bourchier. The Lord Audeley. The Lord
Wylloughby. The Lord Clynton. The Lord Deyncost. The Lord Clyfford. The Lord
Ferreys Groby. The Lord Ferreys of Chartley. The Lord Talbot. The Lord
Fitzwaren. The Baron Dudley. The Lord Mouerancy. The lord Aubemond of Normandy
The lord Beaucha^pe of Normandy The Lord Furniuale. The Lord Fitzhugh. The Lord
Fanhope. The Lord Scrope of Balos The Lord Scrope of Upsabe. The Lord Canneys.
The Lord Bardolf. The Lord Scales. The Baron of Care. The Lord Duras of Gascon
The Lord de la Laund Gascoy. The Lord Montferrant. The Lord Louel. The Lord
Botras of Burge. The Lord of Chastelon. The Lord Lis^eadam. The Lord Uergeer.
The lord of Crony. The lord sent George. The lord Pesunes. The lord Daugien.
The lord Tremoyle. The Lord Ienuale. Sir Ihon de Lawuoy. Sir Ihon Courcelles.
The lord of Barenbon. The lord of Ialous The lord Bonuile. Sir Guy de Bar. Sir
Ihon Fastolf. Sir Philip Halle. Sir Philip Leche. Sir Ihon Rodney Sir Morice
Brown. Sir Piers Tempest. Sir Robert Tempest. Sir Guy Moyle. Sir Ihon Stanley.
Sir Jews Mohu. and.xv. Master soldiers.
THESE valeaunt princes and noble men besieged the strong town by the space
almost of.vii. months, they without made mines, cast trenches and shot gunnes
daily at the walls, they within whereof the lord Barbason was chief captain
manfully defended the same, this every day was skyrmishyng, scalyng, and
assautyng, to the loss of both parties, but most of al to the loss of the^
within. During which siege the French queen and the queen of England, and the
duches of Burgoyn came diverse times to visit their husbands and se their
fre^des, whom the king of England so highly feasted, so louyngly entertained
and with so pleasant pastymes comforted them, that every creature of him
reported honor, liberality, and gentleness. This siege so long continued that
vitayles within the town began to fail, and pestilence began to grow, so
that the captain began to treat, and in conclusion the town was delivered
upon certain conditions, whereof one was that all that were concentyng to the
death of the duke of Burgoyn should be delivered to the king, whereof the lord
Barbason was suspected to be one, and so they were delivered to the king of
England, which sent the^ under the conduyte of the duke of Clarence his
brother to the city of Paris whereof the French king made him captain and he
took possession of the bastyl of saint Anthony, the Louure, the house of Neele,
and the place of Boys de Uynannes:

WHEN this town was thus yielded, the king of England made captain there
therle of Huntyngdon. From thence he departed with his army to Corbeil, where
the French king and the two queen's then soiorned, and from thence the.ii.
kings accompanied with the dukes of Bedford, Burgoyn, Gloucester and Exceter,
and therles of Warwike Salisbury and a great number of noble men and knights
set furthe toward Paris, whom the citezens in good order met without the gates
and the Clergy also with solemn processio^, all the streets were hanged with
rich clothes and the people in the streets shouted and clapped hands for
joy, the two kings rode together, the king of England geuyng the upper
hand to his father inlawe through the great city of Paris to our Lady
Church, where after they said there deuocions they departed to their
lodgings, the French king to the house of Saint Paul, and the king of
England to the Castle of Louure. The next day the two Queen's made their
entree into Paris and were received with like solempnite as their husbands were
the day before. If I should declare to you the great gifts, the costly
presents, the plenty of vitaile that was given to the king of England: or
rehearse how the conduites abundantly spouted out wine of diverse colors, or
discribe the costly pagiantes, the pleasant songs or sweet armony that were
showed song and played at diverse places of the city, or show the great
gladness, the hertie reioysyng and the great delight that the comen people had
at this concord and peace final, I should rehearse many things that you would
be weried both with the readyng and hearing.

DVRYNG the season that these.ii. kings thus lay in Paris, there was a great
assemble called, as well of the spirituality as of the nobility in the which
the two kings sat as judges, before whom the Duches of Burgoyn by her proctor
appeled the Dolphin and.vii. other for the murdre of duke Ihon her husband. To
the which appele the cou^saill of the other part made diverse offers of
amends, as well of foundacio^s of priests to pray for the solle, as
recompense of money to the widow and children, for the final determinacio^
whereof the kings took a farther deliberacion and appointed a farther day. To
the city of Paris at this time resorted the three estates of the realm, where
every person severally swear upon the holy Evangelists to keep, support,
maintein, and defend the treaty and peace final which was concluded between
the two princes and their counsels and thereto every noble man, spiritual
governor, and te^porall rulers set to their seals, which instruments were
sent to the kings treasury of his Exchequer at Westminster, sauely to be kept
where they yet remain. These two kings so^orned in Paris all the feast of
Christmas. The French King liyng at the house of S. Paul kept no estate nor
open court to no man except his household servants and men of base estate
frequented his house. But the King of England and his Queen, kept such
solemn estate, so plentiful a house, so princely pastyme, and gave so many
gifts that from all parts of France, noble men and other resorted to his
palice to se his estate and do him honor.

THEN the king of England took upon him as Regent of France to redress
causes, remove officers, reform things that were a miss, and caused a new
coin to be made called the Salute, where in were the Arms of France and the
Arms of England and France quarterly. And to set all things in a quietness,
he constituted sir Gilbert Um^reuile capitain of Me^un with a good number of
valiant soldiers, and the earl of Huntyngdon his cosyn germain was deputed
capitain at Boys de Uincens, and the duke of Excester with.v.C. men of war
was assigned to keep the city and town of Paris. When he had thus ordered his
affairs according to his device and order, he with the queen his wife his
princes and nobles departed from Paris and came to the city of Roan. But
before his remouyng, he caused process to be made against Charles called the
Dolphyn, co^maundyng him to apere at the table of Marble at Paris, where ^or
lack of aperance he was with all solempnitie in such a cause requisite,
denounced guilty of the murder and homicide of Ihon late Duke of Bugoyne, and
by the sentence of the court of parliament he was exiled and banished the
realm and territories of France, and deprived of all honores, names,
dignities and preheminences which he then had or herafter might have.
Wherefore the Dolphyn went into Lang^edoc and after to Poytiers gettyng to him
such friends as he could, and in especial he obteigned so highly the favor of
therle of Arminack that he not only took his part, but also releued him with
money, aided him with men and in his own person continually served him
against his foes and enemies.

WHILE King Henry soiorned in the city of Roan, he received homage of all the
nobles of Normandy: emo^gest whom therie of Stafford did homage for the county
of Perch, and Arthur of Britayn did homage for the county of Yury, which the
king before had given to them. He also ordained his leuetenaunt general both
of France and Normandy his brother Thomas duke of Clarence, and his deputy in
Normandy was the earl of Salisbury. When the feast of Christmas (which he kept
with all triumph and solemptie in his castle of Roan) was passed, he with the
queen his wife departed from Roan to Amie^s and so came to Caleis where he took
ship the morrow after Candelmas day and landed at Dover, and came to Eltham and
so through London to Westminster. Meruel it is to write but more meruel it was
to se, with what joy, what triumph, what solace and what reioisyng he was
received of al his subjects, but in especial of the Lo^doners, which for
tediousness I over pass. And no doubt England had great cause to rejoice at
the coming of such a noble capitain, so valiant a prince and so mighty a
conqueror, which in so small space and so brief time had brought under his
obeisance the great and puissant realm and dominion of France. And first to
render to God his creator most humble and hertie thanks, he caused solemn
processions to be observed and kept.v. days together in every city and town:
After that done he made great purueighance of all things necessary for the
coronacion of his Queen and spouse the fair lady Katheryn, which was done the
day of.s. Mathy the.xxiiij. day of February, on which sole^pne feast she was
co^ueighed on foot between.ii. bishops under a rich ca^apie from the great
halle at Westminster to. S. Peter's church, and there she was anointed and
crouned with all ye ceremonies to so great an estate aperteinyng or requisite.
After which sole^pnitie ended, she was again with great po^pe co^ueighed in to
westminster hall and there set in ye throne at the table of marble at the upper
end of the hall: whose service and sole^pnite who so list to read let him look
on the Chronicle of Robert Fabia^ which declares it at large.

The nynth year. The.ix. year.

WHile these things were thus dooyng in England, the duke of Clarence brother
to the king and his lieuetena^t general in France and Normandy, assembled
together all the Garrisons of Normandy at the town of Bernay, and from thence
departed into the country of Main, and at Pount de gene he passed the river
of You and rode through all the country to Lucie where he passed the River of
Loyre and entered into Aniowe, and came before the city of Angiers where he
made many knights, that is to say, sir William Rosse, sir Henry Godard, sir
Rowla^d Rider, sir Thomas Beaufforde called the bastard of Clarence and diverse
other, and after that he had forraid, brent, and spoiled the country he
returned with pray and pillage to the town of Beaufford in the valey, where
he was advertised that a great number of his enemies were assembled together at
a place called Bangie, that is to say, the duke of Alanson calling himself
leuetenant general for the Dolphyn

Therle of March in Auerne. Therle of Merle. Therle of Ponthiure. The Uicount
Thomars. The Uicount Chasteaulerat. The Uicount Damboyse. The Lord of Egle The
Bastard of Alanson. The Bastard de la March The Bastard of Uandosme The Lord
Champaine. Sir Anthony of Champayne. The Lord of Fountayes. The Lord of
Bellay. The Lord Dauerton. The Lord Rambures The Lord Tanagny de Chastell.
Sir Ihon Turmyn The Lord Dasse The Lord Buell The Lord Gauls. The Lord of
Graueney. The Lord dela Brete. The Lord de la Faiet Marshall to the Dolphyn.
The Baron of Coluces. The Lord Danzebost. The Lord Uipond Diagosales.
capitain of the Spaniardes And of the Scotts which were late come out of
Scotland to serve the Dolphyn Ihon earl of Boghan and Robert his brother,
sons to the gouer nor of Scotland. Archibald Douglas earl of wigto^
Alexander Lynsay brother to therle of Crayford. Sir Thomas Swynton. Sir William
Stuard. Sir Willyam Doglas Sir Ihon Turnebull. Sir Robert Lisle Sir William
Connyngham Sir Alexander Meldryne. Sir Alexander Hume Sir Ihon Balglauie. Sir
Willyam Lisle. Sir Ihon Haliburton Sir Ihon Crawforth. Sir William Candey Sir
Ihon Gray. Sir Ihon Commyn Sir Rober Boence Sir Archibalt Forbosse. sir Du^cane
Comine and many other.
THE duke of Clarence had a Lomberd resortyng to him called Andrewe Forgusa was
retained with the part adverse, of whom the duke inquired the nu^bre of his
enemies, to who^ he reported that their number was but small and of no strength
and far unmeet to compare with half the power of his puissaunt army, entisyng
and prouokyng him to set on the Frenchmen, warra^tyng him a famous victory and
a fair day. The duke geuyng to much credit to this traitor, like a valiant
and coragious prince assembled together all the horssemen of his army and left
the Archers behind him under the order of the Bastard of Clarence and two
Portyngales capitaines of Fresnye le Uicount, saying that he only and the
nobles would have the honor of that journey. When the duke was passed a straight
and a narowe passage, he espied his enemies ranged in good order of battaill by
the monicion of the Lombard which had sold him to his enemies, and thesaid
aduersaies had laid such bushementes at the straightes that the duke by no
ways without battaill could either retire or ^lie. The Englishemen seeing no
remedy valiauntly set on their enemies which were four to one, the battle was
^ierce and the fight dedly, never were so few men seen more coragiously to
defend theimselfes then did the Englishemen that day they fought and defended,
the slew and felled, but it auailed not, for they were repressed with a
multitude and brought to confusion. There were slain the duke of Clarence,
therle of Tankeruile, the Lord Rosse, Sir Gilbert U^ffreuile earl of Kent, and
sir Ihon Lumley, sir Robert Uerend and almost two thousand Englishmen, and
therles of Somerset Suffolk and Perch, the Lord Fitizwater, sir Ihon
Barkeley, sir Rauffe Neuell, sir Henry Iuglos, sir Willyam Bows, sir Willyam
Longton, sir Thomas a Borough and diverse other taken prisoners, and of the
Frenchemen were slain above.xij.C. of the best men of war so that they gained
not much. The Bastard of Clarence which tarried at Beauford was informed of
the number of the Frenchmen, wherefore he with all the Archers made have to
succor the Duke, but they came to late, for the Frenchmen hearing of the
approchyng of the Archers fled with their prisoners with all the have they
could, leuyng behind them the body of thesaid duke and the ded carions. When
the archers came and saw their enemies gone: Lord how they mourned and
lamented the evil chance of the deceived duke, but seeing no remedy, they took
the ded bodies and buried them all saving the dukes corpse, which with great
solempnitie was sent into England and buried at Cantorbury beside his father.
After this the Englishemen burnt and spoiled the country of Main and so
returned to Alaunson and there departed every man to his Garrison. This battle
was fought at Bawgy in Aniow on Easter even in the year of our Lord a
thousand.CCCC.xxj.

I lament the folly and foolishenes of this duke and I marvel at his vnwitty
doing and rash enterprise, that he would adventure his life and hazard his
compaignie leuyng behind him the Archers which should have been his shilde
and defense: What may be said, he desired honor and lost his life, he coueted
victory and was overcome, thus is the old proverb verified which says: If
sheep run wilfully amongst Wolves they shall lose either life or fell.

KING Henry being advertised of this unfortunate chance and deceatfull loss of
his loving brother, sent^ without delaie Edmond earl of Mortaigne and brother
to therle of ^omerset into Normandy, geuyng to him like authoritee and
pre-eminence as his brother the late deceassed duke of Clarence had or enjoyed.
After that he called his high court of Parliamente, in the which he declared
so wisely, so seriously and with so great a gravity the acts that were dooen
in the realm of France, the estate of the time present and what things were
necessary for the time to come (if they would look to have that Jewel and
high kingdom for the which they had so long labored and sought for) that the
comonaltie gladly granted a fiftene, and the Clergy beniuolently offered a
do^le disme, and because no delay should be in the kings affairs for lack of
payment, the bishop of Wynchester his uncle lent to him.xx.M. pound, to be
received of the same dismes. When all things necessary for this voyage were
ready and prepared, he sent his brother Ihon duke of Bedford with all his army
(which the Frenchmen write to be.iiii.M. men of Arms and.xx.M. Archers and
other) before him to Caleis. And he himself shortly after in the middle of May
passed the seas and arrived there in great triu^phe, where to him was showed
that the Dolphyn with.vij.M. men had besieged the town of Chartiers which was
manfully defended by the Bastard of Thyan and other set and appointed there by
the duke of Excester. King Henry not myndyng to lose so fair a town, with all
his Army departed in good order of battaill toward Paris, and at Mo^streull
there received him the duke of Burgoin, which from that place attended on the
king to Dowast in Ponthiew and so came to Abbeuile, and after the King took a
town of sir Jacques of Herecort called a Ferte, and there the duke departed
from the king for a six days promisyng on his honor by that day to return,
the king of England passed forward by Beauuoys Gisors, and from thence came
to Boys de Uincens where he found the French king and his Queen, whom he
louyngly saluted and they him again honorably received and highly feasted, and
thither came according to his appointment Philip duke of Burgoyn, where was
daily consultyng and he wisely deuisyng how to subdue and repress the
haultnes and force of the Dolphyn, having perfight knowledge that as long as he
either lived or wandered unbridled so long should never the treaty and final
peace be observed, wherefore he and the duke of Burgoyn appointed in all the
haste to fight with the Dolphyn and to reise the siege before Charters. The
King of England with all his puyssaunce came to the town of Naunte, and
thither repaired the duke of Burgoyn with.iiii.M. men, of whose coming the
king was not alitle reioysed, but or they from thence departed, they had
knowledge and true instruccion that the Dolphyn heryng of the puissant army of
the king, approchyng to give him battle, was reculed with his people toward
Towers in Towrayne. Wherefore the king of England incontinent, not only sent
the duke of Burgoyn into Picardy to resist the malice of sir Jacques Harcort
which daily inferred war and caused wast and destruccio^ in the same country,
but also appointed James king of Scotts to lay siege to the town of Driex,
which so sore by sword and engines enforced the inhabitants that after six
wekes passed, they delivered the same to the king of Scotts, to the behofe of
King Henry his sovereign Lord which made there of capitain the exle of
Worcester and baily there, sir Henry Mortimer. The king him self removed from
Nau^t and passed over the river of Leyre, following the Dolphyn toward Tours:
but he mistrustyng his power and puttyng diffide^ce in some of his own flock
fled to Burges in Berrie, and chosyng that place as his chief refuge and
surest fortress both for the situacion of the place and also for the
fidelity and constancy of the people, determined there to tarry till fortune
would turn her whele and look on him with some gracious look or loving
countenance, and therefore in a Jest he was commonly called the king of Burges
and of Berries. The king of England with all his puissance so fast followed the
fliyng Dolphyn, that vitail began to fail, and horssemen waxed scante: so that
he considering that Burges being the Dolphyns only succoure and refuge,
being well vitailed and well manned was more proffitable and auailable to the
defender, then to him that should make the assaute, wherefore he willing to save
his people from famyne whom he knew to be from the dent of the French sword
clearly exempt and untouched, returned over the river of Leyre and gat
Gasconeis upon Youne, and a town called the Kings New town, and diverse
other whose names now to reherce were more tedious then pleasant. But he
seeing the town of Meaux in Brye not to be a town replenished with enemies,
in the midst of his new gotten subjects determined to take away the open
scruple which might poison and infecte the members dwelling hard by, wherefore
he with these nobles following besieged thesaid city of Meaux.

Therle of Worcester. Therle of Yury Therle of Brayon. The Lord Clifford The
Lord Forniuall The Lord Louell The Lord Iwdeley The Lord Saint Mawre The
Lord Deyncort The Lord Zouche. The Lord Morley The lord Fanhope and his
son which died there. The Lord Ferreis of Chartley The Lord Botreux The
Lord Clynton. The Lord Harryngton The Lord Willoughby The Lord Fitzhewe,
the Kings Chamberlain Sir Ihon Germayn. Sir Ihon Fastolffe Sir Jews Robsert
Sir Willyam Gascoyn Sir Robert Harlyng. Sir william Philip and diverse other.
THIS town was no less vitailed then manned, and no better manned then
fortified, so that the king of England could nether have it to him delivered
at his pleasure, nor he could not gain it by assaut with out his great loss
and detriment. Wherefore he determined not to depart til he had either gained or
subverted the town. During this siege was borne at Wynsore on the day of. S.
Nicholas in November the kings son called Henry, whose Godfathers were Ihon
duke of Bedford and Henry bishop of Wynchester, and Iaquet Duches of Hola^d was
Godmother, whereof the king of England was certefied liyng at this siege of
Meaux. When he was advertised of this good fortune and happy chance that God
had sent him a son, he gave thanks to his Creator or redemer for the geuyng
to him so goodly an Ympe which should succeed in his croune and scepter. But
when he heard reported the place of his nativity, whether he fantasied some
old blind prophesy, or had some foreknowledge, or else judged of his sons
fortune, he said to the lord Fitzheugh his trusty Chamberlein these words. My
lord, I Henry borne at Monmoth shall small time reign and much get, and
Henry borne at Wyndsore shall long reign and al lose, but as God will so be
it. After the queen of England was thus delivered of her fair son she
returned into France first to her husband, and after to her father and mother
where she was on all parts so honorably received, so louyngly entertained and
so highly feasted that she appeared to be no less loved of her noble husband
then of her natural parents.

The tenth year.
OUryng the time of this siege, sir Oliver Many a valiant man of war of the
Dolphyns part, which before was capitain of the Castle of Faloys and yeldyng
it by composicion, swear never to bear Armure against the king of England,
assembled a great number of men of war as well of Britons as Frenchemen, that
is to say: The lord Mountburchier, the lord of Coynon, the lord of
Chastelgiron, the lord Tyntignace, the lord Dela Howssay and diverse other
which entered into the country of Constantine in Normandy, and robbed and
killed the Englishmen where they might either epsy or take them at their
advantage: but therle of Suffolk keeper of those Marches hearing of their
doings, sent for the lord Scales, Sir Ihon Aston bailey of Constantine, Sir
Willyam Halle, sir Ihon Banaster and many other out of the Errisons within that
territory, which encountered with their enemies at a place called le Park
Leuecque in English the bishops Park, there was a sore and a long fight, many
a propre feate of Arms was dooen that day and many a man was in that place
overthrown, the Englishmen only desired victory, and the Frenchmen desired a
safe return, but in conclusion the Frenchmen being not able to withstand the
charge that was laid to them began to fly, in which conflict and flight were
slain, the lord Coynon, the lord of Castle Giron, and three hundred other
and there were taken prisoners, the lord Dela Howsay and sir Oliver Manny
and.lx. other. The king being advertised of this good chance and happy journey,
sent sir Oliver Manny to him liyng before Meux, to whom he said, fair father
you have sworn and promised unto us that you would never make war nor bear
armure against us nor our subjects, ye are an ancient knight and ought to
have kept your faith and promise, which you have untruly and unhonestly broken
and violate, and yet we wolle not (although by the law of arms we might
lawfully so do) put you to death but grant to you your life, but we wolle
send you into England to learn you to speak English, and so shortly after
he was sent to London where for very shame and mere Malyncoly he died and was
buried in the White Friars.

THE Scotts write (believe them if ye will) that the King of England hearing
that the Dolphyn had sent for aid into Scotland and that he had retained them
in wages (for of their own ability they be nether able to send an army over
the sea, nor yet of substance to bear a continual war, for this all their
own histories declare and their Chronicles make mention, and yet the country
is not so poor but the people be as proud) sent one day for James the
Scottishe king and in the presence of his cou^saill declared to him what
humanite, what favor and what synguler affeccion king Henry his father bare
during his natural life toward thesaid king of Scotts: Puttyng him in
remembrance of the great love and manifold gratuites which he him self sith
the beginning of his reign had exhibited and showed to the same king James,
that nether he nor his father had any thing negligently omitted which either
might apperteigne to the office of a friend or to the duty of a tutor which
should love and cherishe his Orphane or pupile, promisyng him liberty with a
great reward if he would cause the Scotts which were adherentes to the
Dolphin to return a gain into their country and native region. To the which
request the king of Scotts with a very fresh heart answered saying: what your
noble father has dooen to me and what favor and benefit I have received at
your hands, I shall not nor will not when I may (I assure you) forget, and
when my power shall serve I shall not fail to recompense your doings with
like kyndnes. But of your request I marvel not alitle, first considering that
I am a prisoner and have no possession of my realm, seco^darely that I am as
yet nether sworn to my subjects, nor they by no oath of allegiance are bound
to obey my commandments: wherefore I desire you no more to move me inthis
thing which now I cannot do, and yet if I might I would first forese whether it
were to me honorable or to my realm honest to leave our old friend in his extreme
necessity without aid or comfort. With this answer the king of England was not
content (as the Scotts say), but after king James departing fro his presence,
king Henry said, happy shall they be which shall be subjects to such a king
that is endued with such wit and wisdom at these young years of age.

THE king of England liyng still before the town of Meux in Brye as you have
heard sore bet the walls with ordinance and cast down bulwarks and rampeyres
on every side of the town, and sore oppressed them within the town, whereof
hearing the lord of Offemond, with a company of chosen persons sent by the
dolphyn, came privily in the night to the walies and set up a ladder and diverse
of his company mounted up and entered into the town, and as he passed over a
plancke to come to the walls he fell into a deep ditche, the Englishemen
hearing this noise ran to the ditche where they took the lord of Ofmount and
slew diverse of his company which stood at defense. The captain within the
town perceiuyng that their succors were taken, plainly judged that the town
could not long continue, wherefore they caused all the goods of the town to be
conueighed into the market place, which was strong and well fortefied. The king
of England being thereof advertised, commanded in all have to give an assault
to the town, which was quickly done, so that the town by fine force was
within three hours taken and spoiled. And the same day the king besieged round
about the said Marketplace, and took the mylle adioynyng to the same. The
capitaines perceiuyng in what case they were, fearyng to be taken by assault,
began to treat with the king of England, which appointed the earl of Warwike
and the lord Hungerford to common with them and in conclusicion a treaty was
taken, and so the town and Marketplace with all the goods, were delivered
into the king of Englandes hands the.x. day of May, in the year of our lord
M.CCCC.xxii.

WHEN the delivery of the strong town of Meaux was published thorough the
country, all the tounes and fortresses in the Isle of France, in Lannoys, in
Brye, and in Champaine yielded them selves to the king of England, which
appointed in them valiant capitaines and hardy soldiers.

AFTER that king Henry had thus taken and possessed the town of Meaux and
other fortresses at his pleasure, he returned again to Boys de Uyncennes where
he found the French king and the queen and his wife which with all joy him
received, and so the.xxx. day of May being the vigile of Pentecost, the.ii.
kings and the queen's returned to Paris, where the king of England lodged in the
castle of Loure, and and that only by reason of bodily labor and unquietness
of mind, from the which no small noise could awake him, insomuche that when
his soldiers either sang in the nights or their minstreles played that all
the camp sou^ded of their noise, he then slept most sou^dly. His courage was
so constant and his heart so vnmutable that he cast away al fear, and dread
from him was banished. If any alarm were made by his enemies, he was first in
armure and the first that would set forward. In the time of war he gat
knowledge, not only what his enemiesdid, but what they said and intended, so
that al things to him were known, and of his devices few persons before the
thing was at the point to be done should be made privy. He had such knowledge
in orderyng and guydyng an army and such a grace in encouragyng his people,
that the Frenchmen said he could not be vanquished in battle. He had such wit
such prudence and such policy that he never enterprised any thing before he
had fully debated it and foresene all the main chances that might happen: and
when the end was concluded, he with all diligence and courage set his purpose
forward. Marvel it is to hear how he being a prince of honor, a prince of
youth, a prince of riches, did continually abstain from lascivious living and
blind avarice, yea, and in the time of loss he was no more sad then in the
time of victory, which consta^cy few men have or can use: Such a stable
stomach had he and such a gravity was given in the bottom of his heart.
What policy he had in findyng sudden remedies for present mischiefs, and
what practice he used in saving him self and his people in sudden distresses
except by his acts they did plainly appear, I think it were almost a thing
incredible. What should I speak of his bountefulnes and liberality no man
could be more gentle, more liberal nor more free in geuyng rewards to al
persons according to their deserts: Saying that he had lever dye the^ to be
subject to avarice, and that he never desired to have money to keep, but to
give and spend. He was mercyful to offenders, charitable to the nedy,
indifferent to al men, faithful to his fre^des, and fierce to his enemies,
toward God most devout, toward the world moderate, and to his realm a very
father. What should I say, he was the blasyng comete and apparent lantern in
his days, he was the myrror of Christendom and the glory of his country, he
was the flower of kings passed, and a glass to them that should succeed. No
Emperor in magnanimity ever him excelled. No potentate was more piteous nor
lord more bounteous, No prince had less of his subjects and never king
conquered more: whose fame by his death as lively florisheth as his acts in
his lifewer seen and remembered. When his death was published among the common
people, incontinent their hearts were appalled and their courages abated, their
dolor so much increased and their wits were so much troubled that they like
mad men rent their garments and tare their here, accusyng and blamyng fortune
which had taken away from them so precious a jewel, so noble an ornament and so
sure a defense: for no doubt as much hope as was taken away from the
Englishmen, for the gettyng of France by his sudden death, so much trust was
increased in the stomachs of the French nation, hopyng to recover their
ancient liberty and old parentage. For which cause some say that he was
poisoned, the Scotts write that he died of the disease of s. Fiacre, which is
a palsy and a cra^pe. Enguerant says that he died of S. Anthonies Fire, but
al these be but fables as many mo write. For Peter Basset esquire which at the
time of his death was his cha^berlain affirms that he died of a Plurisis
which at that time was so rare a sickness and so strau^g a disease that the
name was to the most part of me^ unknown and phisicions were acquainted as
little with any remedy for the same, and therefore every man judged as he
thought, and named a sickness that he knew, shotyng not nere the prick nor
understanding the nature of the disease. This king reigned.ix. years.v.
months and.xxiii. days and lived not full.xxxviii. years: he was of stature
more then the common sort, of body lene, well me^bred and strongly made a face
beautiful somewhat long necked, black heered, stout of stomach eloquent of
tongue, in marcial affairs a very doctor, and of al chiualry the very Paragone,
His body was enbaumed and closed in led and laid in a charet royal richely
apparaled with cloth of gold, upon the corpse was laid a representacion of his
person adorned with robes, diadem, scepter and bal like a king, the which
charet was drawn with.vi. horses richely trapped with several arms, the first
with the arms of S. George, the.ii. with tharmes of Normandy, the.iii. with
the arms of king Arthur, the: iiii. with the arms of S. Edward, the fifth with
the arms of France only, and the sixth with the arms of England and France,
On this Charet gave attendance James king of Scotts the principal morner, the
duke of Exceter Thomas his uncle, therle of Warwike Richard, therle of March
Edmond, therle of Stafford Humfrey, the earl of Mortaine Edmonde Beausford,
the lord Fitzhugh Henry, the lord Hungerford Water, sir Jews Robsert Burchier,
sir Ihon Cornewale lord Fa^hope, and the lord Crumwel were the other morners.
The lord Louel, the lord Audeley, the lord Morley, the lord Souche bare the
baners of saints and the Baron of Dudley bare the standerd and therle of
Longuile bare the baner. The Hachementes were borne only by capitaines to the
no^bre of.xii. and round about the charet rode.CCCCC. me^ of arms al in black
harnes and their horses barded black with the but of their speres upward. The
co^duit and order of all this dolorous dole was commanded to sir William Philip
treasorer of the kings household and to sir Wyllia^ Porter his chief caruer and
other, Beside this, on every side of the charet went.CCC. persons holdyng long
torches, and lords bearyng baners, banerols and penons. With this funeral
pomp he was conueighed from Boys de Uyncens to Paris and so to Roan, to
Abbeuile, to Caleys, to Dover and so thorough London to Westminster, where he
was buried with such solemn ceremonies, such mournyng of lords, such
prayer of priests, such lamentyng of commons as never was before that day
seen in the realm of England. Shortly after this solempnitie, his sorrowful
queen returned into England and kept her estate with the young king her son.
Thus ended this noble and puissant prince his most noble and fortunate reign
over the realm of England: whose life although cruel Atropos before his time
abbreuiated, yet neither fire, rust, nor frettyng tynne shall amongst
Englishmen either appall his honor or obliterate his glory which in so few
years and brief days achiued so high adventures and made so great a conquest.

The end of the victorious acts of king Henry the fifth.
The trobleous season of King Henry the sixth.
Death the determinate end of man's life, The.^. year.
and of al yearthly things the final point and prick, which favors
nether Emperor nor spares King, but at his pleasure confounds rich and
slaieth poor, vnbodiyng the solle of this godly prince this marcial capitain
and renoumed flower, not only dismayed and appalled the hertes and corages of
the English nation, but also pufte up and encoraged the minds and stomachs
of the Dolphyn and his proud people: The one part thynkyng, the keeping of
Normandy and other dominions to him gained to be very dangerus, The other part
trustyng the farther conquest in France not only to the doubtful, but to
their judgments apparently impossible: Yet the politic Princes and sage
Magestrates of the realm of England well remembryng things that were passed,
and sagely ponderyng the time present, but most of all prudently forscyng
chances iminent and perels at hand, to thentent to set the members of the body
steadfast under the hedde, Which as sheep without a sheperd far from the fold
might wandre and straie at large, caused young prince Henry, the sole orphane of
his noble parent king Henry the fifth, being of the age of.ix. months or
there about with the sound of trumpettes openly to be proclaimed king of
England and of France the.xxx. day of August, in the year of our
lord.M.ccc.xxii. by the name of king Henry the sixth, to the great reioysyng
and comfort of all the English nation.

AND the custody of this young prince was apoyncted to Thomas duke of Excester,
and to Henry Beaufford bishopp of Wynchester: the duke of Bedford was deputed
to be Regent of France, and the duke of Gloucester was assigned Protector of
England. Which taking upon him that office, least paraduenture he might
herafter repent his acts and doings, as a man remembryng other and forgettyng
himself, called to him wise and grave counsailers, by whose advise he provided
and ordained for all things which either redounded to the honor of the realm,
or seemed profitable to the public wealth of the same And when he had set in an
order al matters concerning the inward affairs of the realm of England, he
provided farther all things necessary and convenient for war and farther
conquest in France, and appoyncted valiant and expert capitaines which should
be ready when opportunity of time required, Beside this, he gathered great
somes of money to maintein the men of war, and left nothing forgotten that
might let or hinder his purposed enterprise.

WHILE these things were thus devised within the realm of England, the duke
of Bedforde Regent of France, no less studied then took pain, not only to
keep and order the countrees and regions by king Henry late conquered and
gained, but also determined not to leave of from daily war and continual
travail till the time that Charles the Dolphyn (which was now a flote,
because king Charles his father in the month of Octobre this present year, was
departed to God,) were either subdued or brought to dew obeisance. And surely
the death of this king Charles caused many alteracions and chaunges in the
realm of France, for a great part of the nobilitee which either for fear
of the puissance of the Englishemen, or for to please and follow the mind and
appetite of Charles the French king, took part with king Henry against the
Dolphyn: Heryng now of the French kings death, returned from the English part
and adjoined themselfes to the compainie of the Dolphyn, and diligently studied
how to vanquishe and drive away the English nation out of the territory of
France.

THE Duke of Bedford being greatly moved with these sudden chaunges,
fortified his tounes both with Garrisons and municions, and assembled together
a great army both of Englishmen and Normans, to whom he made a long oracion,
admonishyng them to observe and keep their oath and faith (which they had made
to the late king Henry and his heirs) inuiolate and unbroken, willing them in
no wise to be the occasioners or counsailers that young king Henry should be
deprived from his fathers lawful inheritance, by the hatred of certain
traitors Frenchemen which had renewed the old hatred being of late extinct
between the realms of England and of France, and studied to set al things
again in a broyle: requiryng them also to call to their memory how that the
realms of England and of France, the two most famous regio^s of all
Europe, by the benifite of almighty God, were of late so united connexed and
joined together in an eternal league and composicion, and so strongly
established that no worldly power were able or of puissaunce sufficient, to
resist or withstand the malice of the same: And although some times by chance
of war the loss might turn on their part, yet in conclusion the detriment
should be recovered and a surplusage gained. And if (according to their bounden
duties) they would honor serve and love young king Henry their sovereign
lord, and would diligently persecute and set on his enemies, they should not
only show themselves true and faithful subjects to their true and undoubted
king: But also should for their fidelity and good service receive of him
condign rewards, over and beside immortal fame and renoune.

THIS exhortacion stayed the hertes of many of the French capitaines, which
willyngly swear to King Henry feaultie and obedience by whose example the
comonaltie did the same. Thus all the people set in an order in the realm of
France, nothing was minded but war and nothing was spoken of but of
conquest. The Dolphyn which lay at this time in the city of Poytiers heryng
of the death of his parente had his heart mixed both with joy and sorrow: for
notwithstanding that he was sorrowful as a natural child which lamented the
death of his father, yet he was joyous that power and princely estate was now
to him happened by the which he judged that he should be the more able to
defend his enemies and recover more friends: and so calling together the
Princes of his faccion, caused himself to be proclaimed King of France by the
name of Charles the.vij. And the^ being in good hope of recoueryng his
patrimony and expellyng his enmies, with a haut courage prepared war and
assembled together a great army, and first the war began by light skirmishes,
but after it proceeded into main battles.

THE Dolphyn thynkyng not to make long delays in so great a cause, lest the
power of his enemies might daily be augmented, sent the lord Grauile to the
town of Pount Melance sta^dyng on the river of Seyne, which so suddenly came
to the same that he was on the walls or the soldiers within heard of his
approach, and so he took the town and slew a great nombre of the English
soldiers. When the Rege^t of France was advertised of this sudden enterprise,
he apoyncted the Lord Thomas Montacute earl of Salisbury, a man both for
his great policy and haute courage more to be compared to the old valiant
Romans then to men of his days, accompaignied with the earl of Suffolk, the
lord Scales, the young lord Pounynges, sir Ihon Fastolffe master of the
household with thesaid lord Regent, and diverse other to besige the town of
Pont Melance, which after two months was rendered to thesaid earl, and the
lord of Grauile swear to be true to the King of England ever after that day,
but shortly after he forgettyng his oath returned to his old master again. The
earl of Salisbury appointed sir Henry Mortimer and sir Richard Uernon to be
capitaines of that town. And from thence departed into Champaignie and there
besieged the town of Sens and took sir Guillam Maryn the capitain and slew
all the soldiers within the town, and made there capitaines sir Hugh Geddyng
and sir Richard awbemond.

THE Parisians which ever like the Wethercocke be variable and inconstaunt,
perceiuyng that the Dolphyn daily began to have more aid and power then he was
before accustomed, trustyng to return again under his obeisance and subieccio^
(which they both wished and desired) to the intent that it should not apere
to come of their desire and that their faith and fidelite should not be put in
the balance of diffidence with the English nation, sent diverse Senators of
their city as Ambassadors to the king of England, desiryng him of aid and
succor, to whom not only great thanks were rendered for dooyng their duty
of subieccio^, but also high feasts were made, and promises declared that if
they still continued in due obeisance, and were not adherent to the kings
enemies, yt neither succor should want, nor cost should be spared for their
comen comfort and public vtilite. With which answer the co^paigny outwardly
pleased (whatsoever they inwardly imagined) departed to Paris. In this season
Humfrey duke of Gloucester either blinded with ambicion or dotyng for love,
married the lady Iaquet or Iacomin daughter and sole heir to William of Bauier
duke of Holland, which was lawful wife to Ihon duke of Brabant then living.
which marriage was not only woundered at of the common people, but also
detested of the nobilite, and abhorred of the Clergy. But suerly the sweet
taste, of this pleasant marriage, brought after a sower sauce, both to the
amorus housbande, and to the wanton wife. For Ihon duke of Brabant, what with
force, and what with spiritual compulsaries, never left of, till he had
recovered his Lady out of the Duke of Gloucesters possession, as after you
shall here.

The second year. The.ii. year.

THese chau^ces thus happenyng as you have heard, Ihon duke of Bedford, Philip
duke of Burgoyn, and Ihon duke of Britayn, made an assemble and friendly
enteruiewe in the city of Amias, where they renewed the old league and
ancient amity made between the noble prince king Henry the fifth, and them,
before concluded: addyng thereto these co^dicions and agrementes, each of them
to be to other both friend and aider, and the enemy of the one to be enemy to
the other, and all they to be both friends and aiders to the king of
England, and well willing to his well willers, and auengers of his adversaries.
And because that affinity is an embracer of amity, there was concluded a
marriage between the duke of Bedford, and the lady Anne sister to the duke of
Burgoyn. When these agrementes were finished, the Regent departed to Troys in
Cha^pain, whether with high pomp was conueighed the lady Anne of Burgoyn,
which in the presence of her brother and her Uncle duke of Brabant, and of
therles of Salisbury and Suffolk, and of.ix.C. Lords knights and esquires,
she was married to Ihon duke of Bedford with such solempnitie, feste and
triu^phe, as before that time had not been seen of the Burgonions.

DVRYNG this triumph, the Parisia^s thinkyng to blind the iyes of the duke of
Bedford wrote to him, how diverse Castles and fortresses liyng round about
their territory, were replenished with his enemies, daily stoppyng their
passages, and robbyng their marchantes, to their utter undoing, if they by his
help were not relieved: fraudulently meaning, and falsely entisyng him to
absent himself from them, till their crafty conueighed purpose were compassed
and achiued. For diverse of them stubbernly beryng the yoke and subieccion of
the English nation perceiuyng the duke of Bedforde and the principal
capitaines of the Englishmen to be far from Paris, emploiyng themselfes to
joy and solace for the honor of this high marriage, conspired to bring into the
city Charles the Dolphyn calling himself French king, during the time of his
absence. And to thentent that their inverted purpose should succeed, they
thereof advertised the Dolphyn and his counsel appoyntyng the day of his
coming and the post of his enter. But no treason is commonly hiden nor no
sedicion long vnreueled, for Pies will chatter and Mice will pepe, but by whom
I cannot declare: The Regente was informed of all the secret confederacy and
sedicious faccio^, wherefore he meaning not to lose in short time, that which
in no small space was gained, put spurs to the horse, and with a great power
entered into Paris one day before the fair was apoinced, and two nights
before the lokyng for of his enemies, who^ being unprovided he suddenly caused
to be apprehended and taken, and openly put to execucion. After this ieoperdy
thus escaped, he put diffidence in all the Parisians trustyng little the
nobles and geuyng less credit to the commons, determined to fortify the
Garrisons of his own nation and all the Castles nere and adioynyng to the
city, which within small time were habundauntly furnished. And to avoid all
night watchers adioynyng to Paris and the confines of the same, he first took
into his possession either by assaute or composicion the town of Traynel and
Bray upon Seyne, and because two Castles the one called Pacy and the other
called Cursay were also evil neighbors to the Parisians, he sent sir Ihon
Fastolffe great Master of his household, with a notable army to besiege the
Castle of Pacy, which taking upon him that enterprise so handled his enemies
that the capitain named Guyllam Reymon esquire and all the garrison yielded them
symply to his mercy and discrecio^ whom he sent as prisoners to the city of
Paris, and after besieged the Castle of Coursay which to him was shortly
rendered upon like appoyntme^t, and so with pray and prisoners he returned to
the lord Regent his master. In this very season the Dolphyn sent lord Willyam
Stuard Constable of Scotland, and therle of Uentadore in Auergne and many other
nobles of his part to lay siege to the town of Craua^t in the cou^tie of
Auxerre within the parts of Burgoyn, whereof heryng the lord Regent and the
duke of Burgoyn they assembled a great army, the earl of Salisbury was
ordained capitain of the which with these valiant parsonages.

The lord Willoughby. The lord Pownynges. The lord Molyns. Sir Thomas
Rampston. Sir William Oldhaule. Sir Ihon Passheley. Sir Thomas Flemyng. Sir
Edmond He^on. Sir Ihon Gray Sir Reignold Gray. Sir Ihon Arthur Sir Henry Bisset
Sir William Peytow. Sir Richard Leke. Sir Gilbert Haliall. Sir Lancelot Lisle.
Thomas Aborough. William Glasdale. Matthew Gough. Didon Amore Richard Ap
Madocke. Dauy Loyd.
And of the Burgonions.
The lord Sent George, The earl of Ionignye The earl of Brain. The lord of
Castelyn Marshal of Burgoyne. The lord of Uergier his bastard. The lord of
Chastelon. The lord of Crouy. The lord Lisle Adam. The lord of Pesmes The
Bastard of Thyan. Sir Frances le Arragonoys. Ihon de Gyngie.
AND many other to the number (as well of Englishemen as Burgonions) of.xv.M.
men of war, which came in good array to give battaill to the besiegers of
the town of Crauant, and because the River of Youne which renneth by thesaid
town was between the English army and their adversaries, they could not well
assail their enemies which defended the banks and passages very strongly,
yet notwithstanding both horsemen and fotemen of the English part coragiously
put themself into the river and with fine force recovered the bank, whom the
Burgonions incontinent followed. When they were all gotten into the plain, the
Archers shot and the bilmen struck, and long was the fight in indifferent
judgment, but in conclusion the Frenchmen not able to resist the force and
abide the puissance of the English nation, were taken either slain or
discomfited, for in the mortal battaill were slain and taken to the number
of.viii.M. men, where of the names of the chief capitaines here shall apere.

Frenchemen slain.
Therle of Lestrake. Therle of Comygens. Therle of Tunier The lord Coquart de
Cameron. The Bastard of Arnynacke The Uicont of Towraye. The Bastard of Forest.
The lord de Port The lord Memora^cie. And xviii. hundred knights and
esquiers beside commons.
Taken prisoners.
The Constable of Scotland which lost his iye. Therle of Uantadore. Sir
Alexander Meldryne. Sir Jews Ferigny. And.xxii.C. gentlemenne of the French
nation taken.
Scotts slain.
The lord of sent Ihons town Sir Ihon of Balgrarie Sir Ihon Turnebull. Sir
Ihon Holiburton. Sir Robert Lile. Sir William Conyngham. Sir William Douglas
Sir Alexander Hune. Sir Willyam Lisle Sir Ihon Rocherforde. Sir William Cawford
Sir Thomas Seton Sir William Ha^molton and his son Ihon Pillot. And.iii.M.
Scotts slain.
Of Englishemen.
Sir Ihon Gray. Sir Wylliam Halle. Sir Gilbert Halsel. Richard ap Madocke.
and.xxi.C. other slain
AFTER this fortunate victory obtained, the Englishemen first gave great lauds
and thanks to almighty God and after entered into the town of Crauant much
praisyng the doings of the capitaines and the fidelity of the citezens, and
when they had set all things in an order they returned to Paris where of the
regent they were ioyously received, which there constituted therle of Salsbury
(as he was well worthy) vicegerent and lieftenaunt for the king and him in the
countries of France, Bry and Cha^paigne, and sir Ihon Fastolf he substituted
deputy under him in the duchy of Normandy on this side the river of Seyne, and
with that he deputed him governor of the countries of Aniow and Main, and
assigned able capitaines in every hold and fortress. Therle of Salsbury
which could not sleep in his great office of trust, laid siege to the town
and castle of Mou^taguillon in Bry, whereof were capitaines Pregent of Cotyny
and Guille Bourgoys Britons which valiantly defended the castle by y^ space of
v. months, but inco^clusion the assailantes were so fierce that they within
for safeguard of their lives rendered the hold, and the capitaines swear never to
bear armure against the Englishmen on this side the river of Leyre: during
which siege the earl of Suffolk took by force the castle of Coucy: and the
strong castle de la roche he gat by appointment in Mosconoys.

NOW must I go back to put you in memory how James king of Scotts being
both prisoner in the time of king Henry the fourth and also as subject to king
Henry the fifth his son, seruyng him in his wars in France till he departed
out of this transsitory life at Boys de Uyncens and so as chief morner attended
on the corpse of the said deceassed unto his burial, and after at Westminster
wasreleased of his captivity and restored to his realm and possession. For
the true knowledge thereof you shall understand that England demanded a small
ransom for so great a prince as the Scotts account their king (and the
Scotts were neither able nor offered no sum convenient) wherefore the counsel
of the realm of England grauously pondered and wisely considered that if by
conjunction of marriage, England and Scotland were perfectly knit in one, that
the indissoluble band of amity between the French and Scottishe nations
should be shortly broken and dissolved. Wherefore the protector of the realm of
England by the consent of the whole baronage of the same gave to him in marriage
the Lady Jane daughter to Ihon earl of Sommerset desceased, not only sister
to Ihon then duke of Sommerset but also cosyn germayne removed to the king and
nece to the cardinal of Wynchester and the duke of Exceter.

THE king of Scotts having great affection to this fair Lady, but much more
desiryng his deliverance and liberty, put in hostages for the residue of his
ransom because a great part thereof was deminished and abated for the money
allowed to him for his marriage, and so was delivered to depart at his pleasure.
Alack, the old proverbs be to true: an Ape although she be clothed in
purple, will be but an Ape, and a Scotte never so gentely enterteined of an
English prince will be but a dissimulyng Scotte. What kyndnes could be more
showed to a prisoner then to bring him up in good litterature? What love may
be more declared to a captive, then to instruct him in marciall feats and
warlike affairs? What favor can be more ascribed to a high and renoumed
prince, then to give in marriage to his vnderlyng and vassal his cosyn and
kinswoman of his royal parentage lawfully descended. All these kyndnesses
suffised not, nor all these gratuities auailed not to make this king James
friendly to the realm of England. For he notwithstanding his homage done to
the young Henry king of England and of France at his Castle of Wynsore this
present year, before three Dukes, two Archebishoppes, xii. earls.x.
bishops.xx. barons, and two hundred knights and esquires and mo, according
to the tenor here after foloyng.

I James Stuart King of Scotts, shall be true and faithful unto you lord Henry
by the grace of God king of England and France the noble and superior lord
of the kingdom of Scotland, and unto you I make my fidelity for the same
kingdom of Scotland, which I hold and claim to hold of you, and I shall
bear you my faith and fidelity of life and lymme and worldly honor against
al men, and faithfully I shall knowledge and shall do to you service due of the
kingdom of Scotland aforesaid. So God help me and these holy Evangelists

NETHER regardyng his oath, nor estemyng the great abundance of plate and rich
Clothes of Arras, to him by the mother and uncles of his wife liberally given
and friendly delivered (of which sort of riches few or none before that day
were ever seen in the country of Scotland) like a dog which has cast up
his stomach and returns to his vomet, or like a snake which after his
engenderyng with a Lampray takes again his old poison: After he had once taken
the air and smelled the sent of the Scottishe soil became like his falce
fraudule^t forfathers, an untrue prince and like his proud pratyng progenitors
took the image of a braggyng and bostyng Scot, newly alied himself with the
French nation. And yet what soever he did, his nation both write and
testify, that by the learning which he by the great benifite of the kings
of England during his captiuitee in this realm had obteigned, replenished his
country with good litterature, and by the nurture the which he was brought up
in England, he brought his people to ciuilitee: So that his captiuitee was to
his nation the greatest liberty that ever they could have, deliueryng them
from blind ignorance to Angelicke knowledge, reducyng them from bestiall
manners to honest behauor, and in conclusion causyng them to know virtue from
vice, policy from rudenes, and humain honesty from savage living. This was
the deliverance and the doings of James the first of that name king of
Scotts, which neither reigned very quietly, nor yet ever favored Englishemen
before the French people: saving that he having with him into his country a
young gentleman of Northumberland called Andrew Gray (which during his
captivity was his companion) promoted him to the marriage of the heir of the
lord of Fowls in Anguis, of the which the lord Gray of Scotland at this day
do descend.

The.iii. year. The.iii. year.

NOw leave I the doings of Scotland, and return to the affairs of England.
The duke of Gloucester being protector and governor of the realm, co^sideryng
that wood must be ministered to keep fire, and men ought to be sent to set
forward war, called to him the pieres and nobility of the realm, and by
their agrementes and devises, sent into France to the regent his brother.x.M.
men of war, which were of the same regent in the country of Paris louyngly
received, and according to their degres honestly entertained. During their
liyng in Paris, diverse chances happened in France, for even as Englishmen
valiantly won, and victoriously conquered tounes and castles with open war
and apparent conquest: so the Frenchmen fraudulently stale and couertely
obtained diverse fortresses and holds appertainyng to thenglish faccion, and in
especial the fair town of Compaigne, and the pretty town of Crotoy.

WHEN the duke of Bedford was advertised of these craftye tricks and sudden
invented trames, he sent forth an army, first to Compaigne, whereof was
captain the earl of Suffolk accompanied with therle of Liguy, and diverse
other capitaines of the Englishmen, which lay on the one side of the river of
Sohame, and on the other side lay the lord Lisle Adain, sir Thomas Raupstone,
and the provost of Paris. The Frechmen being strongly furnished and well
vitailed, coragiously defended the town against the assaila^tes. The
Englishmen perceiuyng that Guyllia^ Remond otherwise called Mariolayn, had been
the leder of the soldiers within the town, which before at Pacy was taken
prisoner by sir Ihon Fastolf, caused him to be sent for to Paris, and so
brought him to the seige, and set him in a chariot with a halter about his
neck, and co^ueighed him to the gibbet without the town, sending word to the
garrison within the town, that if they would not without delay re^dre the town
and fortress, they would incontinent stra^gle their old captain and chief
conductor. The soldiers within the town perceiuyng that if Guyllia^ Raymond
the only trust of their relefe, and the ancient friend in their necessity,
should suffer death, that then their hope of al aid were extinguished, and the
sure nutriment of their living was from them secluded: for the deliverance of
him and sauegarde of themselves, yielded the town: so that both he and they
might depart with horse and harnes only, in sure conduite and safetye: yet
long or the town of Compaigne was delivered, sir Philip Hal which was sent to
Crotoy by the lord regent with.viii.C. men to besiege the town, gat it by
assault suddenly, or the Frenchmen had either desposed their garrison, or
appointed their lodgings and took all the men of war and put them to
ransom. And so these.ii. tounes cowardly stolen, were manfully recovered,
but yet the writers of French fables to deface the glory of the Englishmen,
write and say that these tounes were yielded to the Burgonyons, which neither
had the keeping of them nor were soldiers to any other person but to the king
of England. While these things were thus doing in France, sir Ihon de la Pole
brother to therle of Suffolk captain of Auranches in Normandy, assembled all
the garrisons of the base Marches of the country of Aniow, and came before the
city of Angiers and brent the subbarbes, spoiled and destroyed the whole
country, and having as many prays and prisoners as his men might carry, he was
encountered by the earl of Aubemerle, the vicount Narbone and.vi. thousand
Frenchmen: which findyng the Englishmen out of arraye because of the carriage
of their great spoil, suddenly set on the^ and slew.CCC. persons and took
prisoners the said sir Ihon Delapole, sir Ihon Basset, Ihon Auford leuetenaunt
of Faloys, Ihon Clyfton, Henry Mortymer and.vi.C. other. Although the Frenchmen
gat this day in one place, yet they went not victorious away in another, for
the bastard de la Baulme and the lord Craignar capitaines of Courrallon with a
great band, made a road into Masconnoys, with whom by chance met Matthew Gough
and other Englishemen which were scouryng the country to se and hear news
of their enemies, there was a sore conflict and an hard encountre, the parts
in manner being of courage and nombre egal, but after long fight, the French men
almost al were slain and taken, and the bastard being well horsed fled after
whom followed with the fiersnes of his spurs Matthew Gough and chased him to
his castle gate and there took him as he would have hid him in the diche and
presented him to the earl of Salsbury, returnyng from Compaigne to Paris,
which not only gave to him the rightes belonging to the prisoner, but also
rewarded him with a goodly courser and highly exalted his name and manhood.

ABOVTE this season, Arthur brother to Ihon duke of Britain commonly called
the earl of Richemond, having neither profit of the name nor of the country,
notwithstanding that king Henry the.v. had created him carle of Yury in
Normandy and gave him not only a great pencion but the same town of Yury: yet
because his brother the duke of Brytaine fearyng the Englishmen now having
Normandye would smell and desire to taste the sweet soil of Britain, was late
(contrary to his leage and oath) returned to the part of Charles the dolphyn,
he like wise returned and craftly without cause fled into Flaunders and so came
to the dolphyn to Poytiers, which was more glad of his coming then if he had
gained a C.M. crounes, for the Britons which kept the town and castle of Yury
hearing that their master was joined with the dolphyn both kept the castle
against the duke of Bedford, furnishyng it daily with new people and municons,
and also infested, spoiled and robbed the country adioynyng, doing to the
Englishmen the most hurt and damage that either could be devised or imagined.

THE lord Regent being advertised of all these troubles and calamities,
assembled a great army both of Englishmen and Normans, entendyng to search the
dolphin in every part, to the^tent to give him battle in a pitched feld and so
to make a final end of his intended conquest. So having in his company therle
of Salsbury, therle of Suffolk, the lord Scales, the lord Wylloughby, the lord
pounyng, sir Reynold Gray, sir Ihon Fastolf, sir Ihon Saluayne, Lanslot Lisle,
sir Philip Halle, sir Ihon Pashely, sir Ihon Gray, sir Thomas Blunt, sir Robert
Harlyng, sir William Oldhal and many other valiant knights and esquiers to the
nombre (as the French writers testify) of xviii.C. men of arms and.viii.M.
archers and other, came before the town of Yury which was well defended: but
the Englishemen began to undermine the walls, so that they within were glad to
render the town upon condition, which was taken. Howbeit the capitaines of
the castle promised to yield if their fortress were not rescued at a day
assigned by the dolphyn with a number sufficient to raise the siege, and upon
this promise hostages were delivered into the possession of the lord regent. By
his license an herault was sent to the dolphyn to advertise him of the time
determined, the which hearing of the destresse that his people and ^rendes were
in, sent incontinent Ihon duke of Alanson his lieftenant general, therle Doglas
whom at that setting forth he made duke of Toraine, and therle Boughan, whom
then in hope of good speed he made Constable of France (which office he
enjoyed not fully an hundredth hours) and therles of Aumarle, Ua^tadoure,
Connerre, Maulieurier Forest, the vicountes of Narbon and Thouars, the lords
of Grauile, Gauls, Malycorne, Manny, Ballay, Fountains, Mountfort, and many
other noble knights and esquiers to the nombre of.xv.M. French men and
Britons and.v.M. Scotts whom the earls Doglas had transported late out of
Scotland more for need then for love.

THIS army royal approached within.ii. miles of Yury and sent.xl. light horsemen
to view and espy both the number and co^duit of the Englishmen. These spies
came very nere to the siege and were espied and chased to their companions
again, and declared all what they had seen and perceived. The duke of Alanson
seeing that he could not get any auantage of the Englishemen (although the
Dolphyn had given him in straight commandment to fight with the regent)
whether his heart failed or he thought to wait a more fortunate season for his
purpose and enterprise, retired back with his whole army to the town of
Uernoyle in Perch which belonged to the king of England, and sent word to the
garrison of that town that they had disco^fited and slain all the English army
and that the regent with a small number by swyftnes of his horse had saved him
self. The inhabitants of Uernoyle geuyng to light credit to the French
fablers, received the duke of Ala^son with all his army into the town and
submitted the^ selves to him. Which town he desired to have of the gift of
the dolphyn as his own inheritance and lawful patrimony. Now approached the day
of rescous of Yury, which was the day of our Lady the Assumpcion, at which day
no rescous appeared to sir Gerrard de la Pallier captain of the castle, which
being in despair of all aid and comfort, presented the keys to the duke of
Bedford and showed him a letter signed and sealed with the hands of.xviii.
great lordesh which the day before promised to give the duke battle and to
desolue the siege and raise the assault: Well said the duke, if their hearts
would have served, their puissaunce was sufficient ones to have proffered or to
have performed this faithful promise. But sith they disdain to seek me, God
and saint George willing I shall not desist to follow the tractes of their
horses till one part of us be by battle overthrown: and so he gave a
safeconduyte to the captain and other which would depart, but many of the
Britons within the castle of Yury seeing the faint hearts and the false
promises of the flatteryng Frenchmen submitted them selves to the lord regent
and swear to be true to the king and him, whom he gentely accepted and put them
in wages. Then he furnished the castle and town with a new garrison, and
incontinent he sent the earl of Suffolk with.vi.C. horses to espy where the
Frenchemen were lodged, which passed by Dampeuile, and came to Bretnel where he
heard news that the Frenchmen had taken Uernoile in Perch and were there yet
abidyng, whereof with all diligent celerite he sent word to the duke of Bedford,
which not mindyng to lose his long desired pray set forward in great have
toward his enemies. The Frenchmen hearing of his coming set their people in
array and made all one maine battile without forward or rereward, and appointed
certain Lu^bardes and horsemen to break the array of the Englishemen either
behynd or at the sides, whereof was captain sir Stephyn Uenoyles called the
hire. The duke of Bedford not ignorant how to order his men, made likewise
one entier battle and suffered no man to be on horse back, and set the
archers (every one having a sharp stake) both in the front of the battle and
on the sides like wings, and behynd the battle were the pages with the
chariottes and cariages, and all the horses were tied together either with the
reins of their bridles or by the tails, to thentent that their enemies should
not suddenly surprise or disturb them on the back behynd: and for to defend
the cariages were appointed two thousand archers. The Frenchmen at the first
light remembryng how often times in piched feldes they had been overcome and
vanquished of the English nation, began somewhat to fear, but when they saw
no remedy but to fight, they took good courage to the^ and set softely
forward. In which marchyng the Duke of Alaunson, sittyng on horseback said
to his capitaines.

^OVYNG compainions, O^acion of the duke of Alaunson.
and hardy soldiers, call to your remembrance, how the Englishemen have not
only gotten from us the noble isle of France, the duchies of Normandy and
Aniow, but also since their enterprise and conquest has both slain our
parents and killed our friends, yea, and has driven our natural Prince, and
very sovereign Lord from his chief habitacion and surest chaumber, the fair
city of Paris: which act never Pagan durst attempt or ever any prince was
able to acheue. Besides this, you se that the duke of Bedford Regent here for
the king of England, entendyng nothing more then the deposicion or the
destruction of our king and his nobility, and in final conclusion to bring to
extreme bondage all us, our wives and children, and all the people of this so
long renoumed region, by many hundred years called the realm of France,
which is as much to say, as a fre country, or a frank land. Alas, shall
your king now be made a subject, shall your peers and nobilitee be made
vassals, and you also slaves and bondmen to a foreign nation? Where is the
liberty of France and where is the ancient fredome? When you defended your
fraunchises, and when your hearts served you: your King ruled kings, your
princis possessed the empire, and your nation subdued Germany, conquered Italy,
and overcame the proud Spanyardes. Shall we now, falling out of kind from our
fathers, fear the puissaunce of the arrogant Englishemen, being men of no
forecast, nor of no excellent wit, long in gettyng and shortly lesyng? Will
you now suffer the old glory of France to be put in oblivion? will you have
an English infant, which lives with pappe to be your king and governor?
Will you live in servitude of a barbarous nation, in whom is neither
bountifulnes nor honor? Clerckes say, that the greatest plague, that ever God
scourged with the Israelites, was, when he permitted them to be carried from
their native country to the bondage of Babylon, where they lived in captivity
by the space of many years. What can be a more greater scourge, then to have a
foreign ruler in a free region? What dishonor can there be more to a country,
then to have the nobility put back from rule, and to be governed by
strangers. Believe me believe me, it is to us all one blot, to be a slave in
Turkeye, under the Turkishe bondage, and to be a free man in France under the
English liberty. Of this point you be sure: if they gain this battaill, they
be not unlike to obtain the whole region: which if they get, then is the
enheritaunce theirs: then be all the riches theirs, and then all the people be
their subjects. If they be rulers, fare well the frank and French liberty:
If they be lords, welcome English servitude. So that now we stand al on this
point, either to be free or bondmen. Which term of bondage is so detested of
all nations, that there can be no more reproach to a man then to call him a
villain or a bondsman. Therefore manly defense must only withstand this
mischief, and hearty courage must drive back this immine^t plage. This is the
day either of our deliverance out of vile servitude, or the day of our entry
into the vale of bondage. The conclusion of this battaill is very doubtful,
for if we be vanquished, the gain for our side is almost without recovery,
co^sidryng, that here be the best men, and wisest capitaines under our king:
And if we get the upper hand, our heddes shall be free and out of the English
yoke. And although the duke of Bedforde has here with him, all the power that
he can gather on this side the sea, yet I assure you, (God willing) I will not
turn one foot backward for fear of him, or his picked army. Therefore I
exhort you to remember, your wifes, your children and your selfs. Fight
manfully and stick each to other for the liberty of our country: I doubt not
but the victory shall be ours, and the honor shall be our kings. For if this day
we vanquishe him and sparcle his army, we shall so diligently follow Fortunes
good grace, that not only France to us shall yield, and Normandy bow, but we
shall recover again al our citees and tounes, which out of our possession were
gained, before any aid can come to rescue out of the poor isle of England.
Now considering, that we hang in the ballaunce between honor and shame,
liberty and bondage, gain or loss, let every man take heart and courage to
him, little regardyng, or caryng, either for death, or the force of his enemies,
and with a manly countenance march forth toward our foes.

THE Englishemen perceiuyng their great nombre, and knowing that the chief
strength consisted in the Scotts, began somewhat to stay and consult, what was
most expedient to be done. The duke of Bedford sittyng on a baye courser in
the mids of the battaill under a ba^ner euriously beten with his Arms, not
content with their whisperynges and protractyng of time, said unto them with
an audible voice.

YOU valiant capitaines and hardy soldiers, The orarion of the Duke of
Bedforde.
my loving compaynins in arms, and friendly fellows. If you consider with your
self what day this is: What honor and what profit we shall get by our
travail and pain, I doubt not but where you now stand still musyng, you would
run forth a galloppe, and where you run on your fete, you would, if you had
wings, fly as fast, as ever did Hawk to his pray. For great is the honor
that is gotten with pain, and sweet is the lucre, that is gained with
travail, for you must remember, that nothing is well done, if it grow not to
a good conclusion: and thing were as good never to be begone, as never ended. My
brother our late sovereign lord, (whose soul God pardon) has entered into
this country, as into his own lawful inheritance: and first conquered
Normandy, and after by agreement of king Charles the usurper, he was by assent
of the nobilitee, agreement of the Clergy, and special request of the
commonaltie, restored to his rightful inheritance, and lawful patritrimony,
which by his death is returned and come to my nephewe our most redoubted
sovereign. The beginning of this conquest was good, and the sequel better,
yet rests the final knot to be knitte, and the last lock to be shut up. For
if we suffer Charles the dolphyn, which now usurps the name, and estate
royal of this realm of France, to proceade farther in his purpose, or to
gather more puyssaunce, or allure more people, I cannot tell then what feats
flattryng fortune will work: and of this I am sure, that if we suffer his fire
still to flame, as it has begone, we shall have skant water to quench out
the same. Here he has assembled all the French men that he can get, and for
lack of aid, he has retained the Scotts: croppe him now at the beginning
and he shall grow no more: let him grow farther and he will pass our reach:
distomfite him now and bring our conquest to a conclusion: let him alone now,
and we shall be new to begin. Therefore I say, it is wisdom to take occasion,
when the hery side and not the balde side is proffered. If we fear the
multitude, remember our own victories, which we have ever obtained by less
nombre, and not by the greater. If we fear death, remember the glory and
immortal fame, that shall succeade of our valiant acts, if we sell our life's
so dear. If we shall be slain, considre I have a king to my nephew, and a duke to
my brother, and two noble uncles, and you have friends, kynsemen and children,
which will revenge our death, to the uttermost point: therefore I say let every
man this day do his best. For this is the day of thed of our great travail,
the day of our great victory, and the day of our everlasting fame: Therefore
good fellows, put your only trust in God, call to him for aid boldly, and
march forward hardly, for our enemies be at hand.

HE had skace ended his exhortacion, but the Englishmen being encouraged with
his prudent persuasion, set on their enemies, criyng, Saint George, Bedford.
And the Frenchemen likewise cried, Mou^tioye, saint Denise. Then the arrows
flewe out of the long bows on the one part, the quarrelles out of the cross
bows on the other part. After they came to hand strokes: great was the
fight, and terrible was the battaill, with so indifferent judgment of victory,
that no heraulde could determyne to which part Fortune most showed her
loving countenance. For on both sides men were slain and wounded, and on both
parts some were felled and recovered, thus still in a doubtful judgment, the
battaill continued about three hours. The duke of Alau^son in the mean
season never ceased to exhort and pray his people manly to fight, and not to
suffer their enemies, (which were at the very point to be overcome) by their
faint hearts to be victors, and ouercommers. Likewise the duke of Bedford rode
about his army, refreshyng the weak with fresh men, and encoragyng his
people with most plesaunt words: But at the last, when he perceived the
Frenchmen, what with heat, and with trauaill, to wax weary and faint, and not
to be so fresh as they were before (for surely the nature of the Frenchmen, is
not to labor long in fightyng, and much more braggeth then fights) he with all his strength set incontinent on them with such a violence, that they bare
them down to the ground by fine force. The French horsemen that day did
little service: for the archers so galled their horses, that they desired not
much to approach their presence. This battaill was fought the.xxvij. day of
August, in the year of our Lord.M.CCCC.xxv. in the which battaill were slain.

Of Frenchemen.
The earl of Aumerle. The earl of Uentadore. The earl of Forestes. The earl of
Mary. The lord Grauile. The lord Gauls. The lord Fountaynes. The lord of
Amboys The Uicount Thouars. The lord Mounteney The lord of Combreste The
lord of Brunell. The lord Tumblet. The lord of Poysy. And three hundred
knights beside. The Uicount Nerbon whose body was hanged on a gibbet, because
he was one of the murtherars, of the duke of Burgoyne.
Of Scotts also were slain.
Archibald earl Douglas made duke of Toroyne. James Douglas his son earl of
Nigton. Ihon the earl of Boughem newly made Constable of France. Sir Alexandre
Meldryne Sir Henry Balglauie Sir Ihon Sterlyng. Sir William of Homelsdone Sir
James Graye. Sir Robert Kanden. Sir Alexander Lynsaie. Sir Robert Steward. Sir
Robert Swinton, and.xxvij. hundred Scotts of name and arms, besides other.
IN this battaill were slain by the report of Montioye king at arms in France,
and the English herauldes there present, of Frenchemen and Scotts.ix.
thousand and seven hundred, and of the Englishmen xxj. hundred, but no man of
name. saving.v. young esquiers. And there were taken prisoners, Ihon duke of
Alaunson, the bastard of Alaunson, the lord of Fayect, the lord of Hormit,
sir Piers Harison, sir Loys de Uancort, Sir Robert Brusset, sir Ihon Turnebull
a Scot, and two hundred gentlemen besides common soldiers.

AFTER that the Duke of Bedforde had thus obtained the upper hand of his
enemies, and discomfited the only strength of the dolphin he upon his knees
rendered to almighty God his hearty thanks, not without effusion of tears.
Then he commanded all the Frenchemen within the town of Uernoile, to go out
and depart, or else to abide their adventure. They perceiuyng the evil success
of their bostyng enterprise, and seeing no mean, whereby in so low an ebb,
they might be aided, delivered up the town, and went furthe out of the same,
their life's saved. Of which town the lord Regent constituted capitain, sir
Philip Hall, and so departed from thence to the city of Roan, where, with
triumph (and not unworthy) he was ioyously received and honorably feasted. And
after all things there set in an order, he removed to Paris.

HERE you may see what succeeded of the spirit of false Prophecy. For the
duke of Alaunson thinkyng it to be predestinate by the bodies above, that he
should overcome, and conquer the duke of Bedford, bosted (as you have heard)
to the Burgesses of Uernoile, that he had disco^fited the Regent of France
with his whole army, before the town of Yury: Not knowing, that Mars the God
of battaill being angry with his liyng, appointed, not only all his puyssaunce
to be vanquished before Uernoile, but also himself, and his bastard uncle,
there to be taken, and brought into bondage. So it is often seen that he,
which rekeneth without his host, must reken twyse, and he that fisheth
before the net, may lose, but nothing gain. When this victory was published
through France, how the common peope lamented their miserable destiny, how the
nobility mistrusted their own estate, and how the Dolphyn was abashed, yea,
more then abashed, wonderful it were to write, but more merueilous for to
hear. For he was driven out of all the countries apperteinyng to the croune of
France, and might resort to no countries, except to Burbonoys, Aluerne, Berry,
Poyctou, Towrayn, a part of Aniow and Barrayn, and Longnedoe. And because
diverse of his friends, which were advocates in Paris, exiled themselves from
the parliament of Paris, which was with all rightes, and iurisoiccions there
unto belongyng, kept, and holden in the name of king Henry the sixte, as
lawful heir and very king of the realm of France: he therefore to show
himself as a king, erected his court of Parliament, his Chauncery, and all
other courts in the city of Poytiers, and there established his great seal,
with all due circumstaunces thereunto aperteinyng, which there continued by the
space of.xiiij. years, as you shall after hear declared. The duke of Bedford
liyng at Paris, entendyng there to bring to obeysaunce Charles the dolphyn, or
else to drive him out of his little cony holds, and small countries, sent the
lord Scales, sir Ihon Montgomerey, sir Ihon Fastolfe, with two thousand men,
to conquer the countries of Aniow and Mayn, which without assault had
rendered to the^ the strong castles of Beamount le Uico^t, Teune, Silly, Oste,
Courceriers, Roussy, Uasse, Couetemena^t and twenty other, which for
prolixitie of time, I think necessary to be omitted. For surely the English
puyssaunce was so tried, proved, assaied, and spread abroad throughout all
France, that the French me^ thought that in conclusion the English men would
have, or should have al things, which they either wisshed or enterprised. The
duke of Bedford yet thirstyng after more good fortune, sent the earl of
Salisbury, with a great army accompained with the lord Scales, and other
approved capitaines, (whose names you have heard before) into the countrees of
Aniow and Mayn, which were evil neighbors to the duchy of Normandy: in which
army were x.M. men of war or there about. These lusty capitaines entered first
into the country of Main, and beseged the rich and strong city of Mauns,
the chief town and emperie of all that country and region. And although the
citezens, as well for the sudden access of their enemies, as for the fear of
the name of therie of Salisbury (which was both dread of his enemies, and
honored of his friends,) were somewhat amassed and astonished: Yet their capitaines
named sir Baldwyn of Champaigne lord of Toisse, sir Guilliam de Marignie, and
sir Hugh de Goos, studied and muented all ways possible how to defend
themselfes, and do damage and harm to their enemies: and surely, they had
within the town a crewe and a compainei of warlike and practiced soldiers.
The Englishemen approached as nigh to the walls as they might without their
loss and detriment, and shot against their walls great stones out of great
gonnes (which kind of engines before yt time, was very little seen or heard of
in France,) the strokes wh^rof so shaked, crushed and riued y^ walls, that
within few days, the city was dispoyled of all her toures and outward
defenses. The citezens of Mauns much merueilyng at these new orgaynes, both
seeing their destruccio^ iminent, and desperate of all aid and succor, offered
the town upon this condition: that all persons which would tarry within the
town might abide, and all that would depart with horse and harnessse only,
should be permitted: which offers were accepted, and the town rendered, whereof
the earl made capitain therle of Suffolk, and his liuetenaunt sir Ihon
Fastolfe. After this the said earl of Salis^ury besieged the fair town of
saint Susan, whereof was capitain, Ambrose de Lore, a man of no less
audacitie then policy, accompainied with a great nombre of hardy men of
war. When the the earl of Salisbury had both viewed and seen the situacion
and nature of the place, he determined to assault it in that place which was
most weak and worn: and so the trompettes blew to the assault, an^ scalyng
ladders were raised to the walls, and the Englishemen with great noise began
to clime and ascend. The soldiers which durst not come out of the town to
encountre with the English army, manfully ran to the walls to resist and
defend the assaylantes. And so all that day the assault with many aduenturrs
still continued, and although the inhabitauntes and citezens were sore wounded,
they never let of both to defend theimselfes, and to anoye and hurt their
enemies. When therle perceived that by this light assault and slight skirmishe
he lost somewhat, and gained nothing, he made a wall and cast a trenche round
about y^ town: and caused his great ordynance to be shot at that part of the
wall which was most teble and slender, and so daily and nightly he never
ceased to beat, and break down the wall and toures: so that within two
days the most part of the wall was persed and cast down to the ground. When
the capitain perceived these new feats, he began to entreat, and offered for
himself and his soldiers, two thousand crounes, so that they might depart in
their doublettes only* so their lives were saved, which some because winter
aproched, was taken, and the town yielded. Of the which town he made
capitain, sir Ihon Popham, a valiant and a circu^spect knight. After that the
said earl besieged the town and castle of Mayon la Iuhez, wherein was capitain
the lord of Escotaiz: which town after the space of five wekes was yielded
(the life's of the defendors only saved.) To the keeping whereof he appointed
sir Ihon Montgomery knight. And after the feast of the purificacion of our
lady, he besieged the castle de lafort Barnard: during which siege, a sale was
made of the town of Alanso^, being in the Englishmens possession by a Gascoyn
and one of the gariso^ there, for.iiii.C. crounes, to Charles de Uilliers,
Peter le Beuffe, and other French capitaines. When the day was appointed of
the deliverance both of the town and the money, the Gascoigne opened and
discovered the whole agreement to the earl of Salisbury: which ordained the
lord Willoughby and sir Ihon Fastolfe with two thousand Englishemen to
encountre with the buyers of the kings town of Ala^son. At the day appointed
and time assigned, Charles de Uilliers chief merchant of this rich
enterprise, early in the morning with two.C. horssemen, and three hundred
footmen approached nere the town, and abidyng for the Gascoyne, he there
displaied his banner, thynkyng triumphantly to enter into the town: but it
happened otherwise. For or they were ware, or suspected any rescues, they were
environed with the English army, and slain and taken every creature, save
Peter Danthenazy and.xxv. other, which by the swiftnes of their horses saved
the^ selfs.

AFTER this conflict ended, the lord Willoughby with his company returned to
therle of Salisbury, before the town le Fort Barnard: the capitaines whereof
considering, that there was no hope of succor to be sent to them, and that
their vitaill diminished, and that they were not long able to abide the hard
assaults of the English nation, rendered the town and castle, reseruyng to
them their horse and harneis only, which town therle received to the use of
the king: But the regent for the valiant service done by the earl, gave
the same town to him and to his heirs for ever. Beside this therle partly by
assault, partly by composicion, took diverse other tounes, as saint Kales,
where he made capitain, Richard Gethyne Esquier, Thanceaux Lermitage, where he
made governor, Matthewe gough, Guerlande, of the which he assigned ruler, Ihon
Banaster, Malicorne, whereof he made capitain, William Glasdale esquier, Lisle
soubz Boulto^, whereof was made capitain, sir Lancelot Lisle knight,
Lowpellande, whereof was made capitain, Henry Branch, Mountseur, of the
which was made Constable, sir William Oldhall knight, la Suke, was assigned to
the keeping of Iho^ Suffolk esquier, and beside this, above.xl. castles and
piles were overthrown and destroyed. When the fame and report of these news
were blown through France, some f^^ated, some feared, and some raged for
anger: But the verity of al things being by the duke of Bedford declared into
England, all men reioysed and were very glad: not only for the conquest of so
many tounes, but also that God had sent them victory in a pitched field, and
in a mortal battaill. Wherefore general processions were commanded, to render
to God almighty humble and hearty thanks, by whose only gift, and not by power
of man, these notable victories were gotten and achiued.

IT is not convenient, that I should talk so much of France, and omit al
things done in England. Wherefore, you shall understand, ye about easter this
year, y^ king called his high court of parliament, at his town of Westminster,
and coming to the parliament house he was conueighed through the city upon a
great courser with great triu^ph, which child was judged of al men, not only
to have the very image, y^ lively portra ture, and lovely countenance of his
noble parent and famous father, but also like to succeed, and be his heir in
all moral virtues, marcial Policies, and Princely feats, as he was undoubted
inheritor to his realms, seigniories and dominions. In which parliament was
granted to the king a subsidy of.xii. d. of the pound, toward the
mainteinaunce of the wars, of all marchaundise coming into this realm, or
going out of the same, besides other somes set on every tonne of liquor and on
every sack of woolle, as well of English men, as of strangers. During which
Parliamente came to London, Peter Duke of Quymber, son to the king of
Portyngale, and cousin germain removed to the king, which of the duke of
Excester and the bishop of Winchester his uncles, was highly fested, and
liberally rewarded, and was elected into the noble order of the Garter. During
which season, Edmonde Mortimer, the last Earl of March of that name (which
long time had been restrained from his liberty, and finally waxed lame)
disceased without issue, whose inheritance descended to lord Richard
Plantagenet, son and heir to Richard earl of Cambridge, beheded, as you have
heard before, at the town of Southha^pton. Which Richard within less
then.xxx. years, as heir to this earl Edmond, in open parliament claimed the
croune and scepter of this realm, as herafter shall more manifestly appear. In
the time of which Parliament also, whether it were, either for deserte or
malice, or to avoid things that might chance, according to a proverb,
which says, a dead man does no harm: Sir Ihon Mortimer cousin to the said
earl was attainted of treason and put to execucion: of whose death no small
slander arose amongst the common people.

AFTER all these acts done in England, and in France, Humfrey duke of
Gloucester, with the lady Iaquet his supposed wife, passed the sea, and came to
Mons in Henawde, and there by force took all such lands, as Ihon duke of
Brabant her first husband had in possession of the said lady Iaquet, which
doing, Philippe duke of Burgoyne, being great friend to the duke of Brabant,
much disdained and more frouned at, and thought for the old love and
familiarity, that he hare to the duke of Gloucester, that he would by friendly
monicion, turn him from his dishonest and ungodly life, to a reasonable
reformacion, and brotherly conformity. Wherefore he wrote louyngly to him,
that he should utterly leave of, any further to follow the new attempted
enterprise, aduertisyng him, and protestyng openly, that the vsurpyng and
wrongfully withholdyng of another man's possession, was not so vile and
slanderous, as the defilyng of a pure and clean bed, and adulteriously
keeping the wife of his christian brother. The duke of Gloucester being in this
case very wilful, either blinded with dotage, or inflamed with coueteousnesse
of his wifes possessions, regardyng neither the admonishement of the duke of
Brabant, nor yet the godly aduerti^ement of the duke of Burgoyn, swear that he
would not leave of to make farther war, till he had expulsed the duke of
Brabant, out of his wifes seigniories, territories and dominions. Wherefore, the
duke of Burgoyn assembled together a great army to make war on the duke of
Gloucester, in the cause and quarrel of the duke of Brabant his friend and cosyn.
The duke of Gloucester, partly for great affairs, that then were imminent in
the realm of England, and partly to assemble more people, to resist and
withstand the power of the dukes of Burgoyn and Brabant, left his wife at Mons
in Henaude, with the lords of the town, which swear to him, to defend and
keep her against all men, till the time of his return. Wherefore he leauyng
with her two thousand Englishmen, departed to Calice, and so into England.

WHEN he was gone, the duke of Burgoyn so threatened, so vexed, yea, and
almost so famished them within the town of Mons, that they delivered into his
possession the lady Iaquet or Iacomyne: which incontinent sent her to Gaunt,
where she disguised her self in a man's apparel, and so escaped into a town of
her own in Zelande, called Zirice, and from thence she was conueighed to a
town in Hollande called Tregowe, where she was honorably received, and there
made herself strong to withstand her enemies: And for her succor the Duke of
Gloucester sent to her five hundred me^. The dukes of Burgoyn and Brabant left
her not all in quiet, but brent her tounes in Holland, and slew her people in
Zelande to her great detriment and displeasure. But inconclusion, this matter
was brought before Martyn the.v. bishop of Rome: which adjudged the first
matrimony with duke Ihon of Brabant, to be good and effectual, and the second
espousals celebrated with duke Humfrey of Gloucester, to be of no value, force
nor effect: and that if the duke of Brabant died, it should not be lawful to
the duke of Gloucester, to mary again with the lady Iaquet. The duke of
Gloucester obeiyng to this sentence, began to wax loathe of his supposed
wife, by who^ he never had profit but loss: for whose cause his friends
became his enemies, and for whose sake he was openly slaundered. Wherefore he,
by wanton affeccion blinded, took to his wife Elianor Cobham daughter to the
lord Cobham, of Sterberow, which before (as the fame went) was his sovereign
lady and paramour, to his great slander and reproach. And if he were unquieted
with his other pretensed wife, truly he was ten times more vexed, by occasion
of this woman, as you shall herafter plainly perceive: so that he began his
marriage with evil, and ended it with worse. The Lady Iaquet after the death of
Ihon duke of Brabant, married a gentleman of mean estate, called Fra^ke of
Bursellen, for the which cause the duke of Burgoyn imprisoned her housbande,
and left her in great trouble: such was the end of these two marriages.

The fourth year. The.iii^. year.

A Little before this time, sir Thomas Rampstone, sir Philip Branche, sir
Nicholas Burdeit, and other Englishemen to the nombre of.v. hundred men,
repaired and fortified the town of saint James de Leitron, on the frontiers
of Normandy, adioynyng to Britayn. Arthure earl of Richemond and Jury brother
to the duke of Britayn, which like an untrue gentleman, sworn and forsworn
to the king of England, suddenly fled to Charles the Dolphyn: which much
reioysyng of his favor and amity, gave to him the Constableship of France
which therle of Boughan slain before at Uernoyl, a small time occupied, and
less space enjoyed. This new Constable not a little joyful of his high office,
thought to do some pleasure to y^ dolphyn his master, and to aduau^ce his name
at the first entry into his authority, he imagined no enterprise to be to him
more honorable, nor to his prince more acceptable, then to avoid and drive out
of the town of saint James de Beueon, all the English nation. So in hope of
victory gathered together above.xl.M. men, of Britons, Frenchemen and Scotts,
and environed the town of saint James, or saint Jacques de Beuron, with a
strong siege. The Englishemen within, which in nombre passed not vj.C. men,
manfully defended the daily assaults of the fierce French men. The
Englishemen consulted together what way was best to be taken: and after long
debatyng, they determined to issue out of y^ town and to fight with their
enemies. So on a day, when the Britons were weried with a long assault,
toward the euenyng the Englishemen came out of the town, one part by the
posterne of the Castle, and another part by the gate of the town, criyng
saint George, Salisburye: and set on their enemies both before and behind.
The Frenchemen seeing the courage of the Englishemen, and hearing their cry,
thynkyng that therle of Salisbury was come to raise the siege, ran away like
sheep, and there were taken, slain and drouned in the water, of them.iiii.
thousand men and mo. Besides this, these ioly gallantes left behind them for
have, all their tents.xiiii. great gonnes, and.xl. barrelles of powder.CCC.
pipes of wine, CC. pipes of biscuit and flower, CC. frailes of Figs and
resons, and.v.C. barrelles of heryng.

THE Frenchmen (being thus vanquished) fell in division amongst theimselfes:
the one laiyng to the charge of the other, the loss of their men and the cause
of their fliyng. Such is ever the chance of the war, that when victory is
obtained, the most coward and faint hearted boy will boste and brag, and when
the battaill is lost, the fault is assigned to the best, and not to the
wourste. The new Constable was sore dismayed and much ashamed of this
discomfiture and shameful flight, but there was no remedy but patience: But to
the intent to blotte out and deface this shamfull fliyng with a notable
victory, he with a great army entered into the country of Aniowe, and burnt,
spoiled and destroyed two or three at the most, little poor thetched villages:
Which small act done, his malice was quenched, and his old grief (as he
thought) victoriously revenged.

IN this season fell a great division in the realm of England, which, of a
sparcle was like to grow to a great flame: For whether the bishop of
Winchester called Henry Beaufort, son to Ihon Duke of Lancastre, by his third
wife, envied the authoritee of Humfrey duke of Gloucester Protector of the
realm, or whether the duke had taken disdain at the riches and pompous estate
of the bishop, sure it is that the whole realm was troubled with them and
their partakers: so that the citezens of London fearyng that that should ensue
upon the matter, were feign to keep daily and nightly, watches, as though their
enemies were at hand, to besiege and destroy them: In so much that all the
shoppes within the cite of London were shut in for fear of the favorers of
those two great personages, for each part had assembled no small nombre of
people. For pacifiyng whereof, the Archbishop of Cantorbury, and the duke of
Quymber called the prince of Portyngale, rode eight times in one day between
the two adversaries, and so the matter was stayed for that time. The bishop
of Winchester not content with his nephewe the lord Protector, seute a letter
to the Regente of France, the tenor whereof insueth.

RIGHT high and mighty prince, and my right noble and after one, leuest lord,
I recommend me unto you with all my heart. And as you desire the welfare of the
king our sovereign lord, and of his realms of England and France, and your
own health and ours also, so have you hither. For by my troth if you tarry, we
shall put this land in adventure, with a field, such a brother you have here,
God make him a good man. For your wisdom knows, that the profit of France
stands in the welfare of England, etc. Written in great have on Alhallow
even. By your true servant to my life's end. Henry Wynchester.

THE duke of Bedford being sore grieved and unquieted with these news,
constituted the earl of Warwick, which was lately come into France, with
six thousand men his liuetenaunte in the French dominions and in the duchy
of Normandy, and so with a small company, he with the duches his wife, returned
again over the seas into England and the tenth day of January, he was with all
solemnity received into London, to whom the citezens gave a pair of basynnes,
and a thousand mark in money, and from London he rode to Westminster, and was
lodged in the kings palaice. The, xxv. day of March after his coming to
London, a parliament began at the town of Leicester, where the Duke of Bedford
openly rebuked the Lords in general, because that they in the time of war,
through their privy malice and inward grudge, had almost moved the people to
war and commocion, in which time all men, ought or should be of one mind,
heart and consent: requiryng them to defend, serve and dread their sovereign
^orde king Henry, in perfourmyng his conquest in France, which was in manner
brought to conclusion. In this parliament the Duke of Gloucester, laid certain
articles to the bishop of Wynchesters charge, the which with the answers
herafter do ensue.

The articles of accusacion, and accord, between my Lord of Gloucester, and my
lord of Wynchester.
HEre insueth the articles, as the kings counsel has conceived, the which
the high and mighty prince, my lord of Gloucester, has furmised upon my Lord
of Wynchester Chancellor of England, with the answer to the same.

FIRST, where as he being protector and defendor of this land, desired the
toure to be opened to him, and to lodge him therein, Richard Woodeuile esquire,
having at that time the charge of the keeping of the toure, refused his desire,
and kept the same toure against him, unduly and against reason, by the
commandment of my said Lord of Winchester: and afterward in approuyng of
thesaid refuse, he received thesaid Wodeuile, and cherished him against the
state and worship of the king, and of my said lord of Gloucester.

ITEM my said lord of Winchester, without the advice and assente of my said
lord of Gloucester, or of the kings counsel, purposed and disposed him to
set hand on the kings person, and to have removed him from Eltham, the place
that he was in to Windsore, to the intent to put him in such governance as
him list.

ITEM, that where my said lord of Gloucester, to whom of al persons or that
should be in the land, by the way of nature and birthe, it belongs to se
the governance of the kings person, informed of the said undue purpose of my
said lord of Winchester, declared in the articles next above said. And in
lettyng thereof, determinyng to have gone to Eltha^ unto the king, to have
provided as the cause required. My said lord of Winchester, untruly and
against the kings peace, to the intent to trouble my said lord of Gloucester
going to the king purposyng his death in case that he had gone that way, set
men of arms and archers, at the end of London bridge next Southwerke: and in
forbarryng of the kings high way, let draw the cheine of the stulpes there,
and set up pipes and hardelles, in manner and form of Bulwarks: and set men in
chambers, sellers and windows, with bows and arrows and other weapons, to
thentent to bring to final destruction my said lord of Gloucesters person,
as well as of those that then should come with him.

ITEM my said lord of Gloucester says and affirms, that our sovereign

ITEM our sovereign lord that was, king Henry the fifth, said unto

The answer of the bishop.
HEre ensues the answers and excusacious made by my lord of Wynchester
Chancellor of England, unto the causes and matters of heuinesse, declared in
articles against him, by my lord of Gloucester.

FIRST, as of the refuse made unto my Lord of Gloucester, of openyng
straightly charged by thesaied counsel, that during that time of his said
charge, he should not suffer any man to be in the toure stronger then himself,
without especial charge or commandment of the king by thaduise of his
counsel.

ITEM that after, sone upon the coming of my said lord of Gloucester into
this land from his country of Henawd, the said lords of the kings
counsel were informed, that my said lord of Gloucester, grudged with thesaid
manner of enforcyng the toure, and let say to the^ of London, that he had well
understand, that they had been heuyly thretened for the time of his absence,
and otherwise then they should have been if he had be in this land. Wherefore he
was right evil contented, and especial of the said forcyng of the toure, set
upon the^ in manner of a chaste vilain. Considering the good equity and truth
that they had always kept unto the king, offering them thereupon remedy if they
would.

ITEM, that after this, Richard Scot liuetenaunt of the toure, by the
commandment of my said lord of Gloucestre, brought unto him Friar Randolfe,
the which had long before confessed treason, done by him against the kings
person that dead is, for the which knowledge he was put to be kept in the
said toure, and straightly commanded under great pain given unto the said
Scotte, to keep him straightly and surely, and not to let him out of the said
toure, without commandment of the king, by thaduise of his counsel. The
which said Friar Randolf, my said of lord Gloucester kept then with himself
(not wittyng the said Scot) as he declared unto my said lord of Winchester.
Sone after that he had brought the said Friar Randolf unto my lord of
Gloucestre, saying unto my said lord of Winchester, that he was undone but he
helped him, and expressed as for cause of the said withholdyng of Friar
Randolf: And saying more over, that when he desired of my said lord of
Gloucestre, the deliverance of the said Friar Randolfe, to lead him again
unto the toure, or sufficient warraunt for his discharge, my said Lord of
Gloucestre answered him, that his commandment was sufficient warraunt and
discharge for him. In the which thing above said, it was thought to my Lord
of Wynchester, that my said lord of Gloucester, took upon him further then
his authority stretched unto, and caused him for to doubt and dread, lest
that he would have proceaded further. And at such time as the said Woodeuile
came unto him to ask his advise and counsel, of lodgyng of my said lord of
Gloucester into the toure: he advised and charged him, that before he suffered
my said lord of Gloucester or any person lodge therein stronger then himself,
he should puruey him a sufficient warraunt thereof, of the king by thaduise of
his counsel.

ITEM as to the said article of the foresaied causes of heuinesse, my said
Lord the Chauncellor answers, that he never purposed to set hand on the
kings person, nor to remove him, or that he should be removed, or put in any
manner of governance, but by thaduise of the kings counsel. For he could not
conceive any manner of goodness or of advantage that might have grown unto him
thereof: But rather great perell and charge, and hereof my said Lord of
Winchester is ready to make proof in time and place convenient.

ITEM, as to the third article of the forsaid causes and heuinesse, my

ITEM, that in the time of thesaied Parliament diverse persons of

ITEM, that after the coming to London of sir Raufe Botiller and

ITEM, that after the Mo^daie next before Alhallowen day last past

ITEM that on the morrow, being Tewesday next following early, my said lord
of Gloucester, sent unto the Maire and Aldermen of the said city of London,
to ordain him unto the nombre of three hundred persons on horssebacke, to
accompany him to such place as he disposed him to ride, which (as it was
said) was unto the king, to thentent to have his person, and to remove him
from the place that he was in, without assent or advise of the kings counsel,
the which thing was thought unto my said lord the Chauncellor, that he ought
in nowise to have done, nor had not been seen so before.

ITEM that my said lord the chauncellor, considering the things above said,
and doubtyng therefore of perelles that might have insued thereof, intendyng to
purueye there against, and namely for his own surety and defense, according
to the law of nature, ordained to let that no force of people, should come on
the bridge of London toward him, by the which he or his might have been
indaungered or noyed, not intendyng in any wise, bodily harm unto my said
lord of Gloucester, nor to any other person, but only his own defense and
eschewyng the perell abouesaied.

ITEM as toward the fourth and fifth of the said articles, my lord the
Chauncellor answers, that he was ever true, to al those that were his
sovereign Lords, and reigned upon him, and that he never purposed treason nor
untruth against any of their persons, and in especial against the person of
our said sovereign lord king Henry the fifth. The which considering the
great wisdom, truth and manhod, that all men knew in him, ne would not
for the time that he was king, have set on my said lord the Chauncellor so
great trust as he did, if he had found, or thought in him such untruth.
The which thing my said Lord the Chauncellor, offered to declare and show,
as it belongs to a man of his estate to do, requiryng thereupon my lord of
Bedford, and all the lords spiritual and temporal in this parliament, that it
might be seen, that there were judges convenient in this case, that they would
do him right, or else that he might have leave of the King by their advise, to
go sue his right, before him y^ ought to be his judge.

AND as toward the letter sent by my lord of Winchester, unto my lord of
Bedford, of the which the tenor is before rehearsed, of the which my lord of
Gloucestre complained him of the malicious and untrue purpose of my said lord
of Winchester, as toward the assemblyng of the people and gatheryng of a feld
in the kings land, in troublyng thereof, and against the kings peace: My said
lord of Winchester answers, that of his said letters duly understand, and
in such wise as he understood and meant in the writing of them, it may not
reasonably be gathered and taken, that my said lord of Winchester, intended
to gather any feld or assemble people, in troublyng of the kings land, and
against the kings peace, but rather he purposed to acquit him to the king in
his truth, and to keep the rest and peace in the kings land, and to eschew
rebellion, disobedience and all trouble. For by that that in the beginning of
the said letter, he calls my said lord of Bedford, his leuest lord, after
one, that is the king, whom he ought to except of duty of his truth, the
which he has ever kept and will keep.

MOREOVER in the said lettre, he desires the coming

Beit known to all folks, that it is the intent of my lord of Bedford, by my
said lord of Bedford, and by my said lords spiritual and temporal, an oath
to be made, in form that follows, that is to say.

The Oath of the lords.
THat my said lord of Bedford, and my said lords spiritual and temporal,
and each of them, shall as farfurth as their connynges and discrecions suffisen,
truly, justly and indifferently, cou^saill and advise the king, and also
proceed and acquit them self, in all thesaid matters and quarelles, without
that they, or any of them, shall privily and appertly, make or show himself
to be party or parciall therein, not leuyng or eschewyng so to do, for
affeccion, love, mede, doubt, or dread of any person or persons. And that
they shall in all wise, keep secret all that shall be commoned by way of
counsel, in the matters and quarrelles above said, in the said parliament,
without that they or any of them shall, by word, writing of the king, or in
any wise open, or discover it to any of thesaid parties, or to any other person
that is not of the said counsel. But if he have a special commandment or
leave thereto of the king, or of my said lord of Bedforde, and that each of
them shall, with all his might and power, assist by way of counsel, and else
show it unto the King, my lord of Bedforde, and to the rest of my said
lords, to put the said parties to reason, and not suffer that any of the said
parties, by them or by their assistentes, proceed or attempt by way of feit
against the kings peace: nor help, assiste, or comfort any of them thereto,
but let them with all their might and power, and withstand them, and assist
unto the king and my said Lord of Bedforde, in keeping of the kings peace,
and redressyng all such manner of procedyng by way of feit or force.

The Dukes.
The Duke of Bedford. The Duke of Norffolke. The Duke of Excestre.
Bisshoppes.
The Archbishop of Cantorbury. The Bishop of Carlisle. The Bishop of Bathe.
The Bishop of Landaffe. The Bishop of Rochestre. The Bishop of Chichester. The
Bishop of Worcester. The Bishop of Saint Dauies. The Bishop of London The
Bishop of Duresine.
Earls.
The Earl of Northumberlande. The Earl of Stafforde. The Earl of Oxforde.
Lords.
The Lord Hungerforde. The Lord Tiptoft. The Lord Ponynges. The Lord
Cromewell. The Lord Boroughth. The Lord Louell. The Lord Botreux. The Lord
Clynton. The Lord Zouche. The Lord Audeley. The Lord Ferreis of Groby. The
Lord Talbot. The Lord Roos. The Lord Gray. The lord Gray of Ruff. The Lord
Fitzwalter. The Lord Berkeley.
Abbottes.
The Abbot of Waltham. The Abbot of Glaustinbury. The Abbot of saint
Augustines in Cantorbury. The Abbot of Westminster. The Abbot of Saint Mary's
in York. The Abbot of sain^te Albons, not sworn, because he was not present.
WHICH oath in manner and form above rehearsed, all the lords as well
spiritual as temporal, being in this parliament at Leicester assembled the
fourth day of March, promised upon their faith, duty and allegeaunce,
which they owe to the king their sovereign Lord, truly to observe and keep,
according to the true meaning and purport of the same.

The Arbitrament.
IN the name of God, we Henry Archbishop of Cantorbury, Thomas Duke of
Excester, Ihon Duke of Norffolke, Thomas bishop of Duresme, Phillip bishop of
Worcester, Ihon bishop of Bathe, Humfrey earl of Stafford, William Alnewike
keeper of the kings privy Seal, Rauffe lord of Cromwell, arbitratoures in
all manner of causes, matters and quarrels of heuinesses and greuaunces, with all
incidentz, circumstaunces, dependentes, or connexes, being and ha^gyng between
the high and worthy prince Hu^frey Duke of Gloucester, on the one party, and
the worshipful father in God, Henry bishop of Winchester and Chauncellor of
England, on the other party, by either of them for the peacyng of the said
quarelles and debates, taken and chosen in manner and form, as it is contained
more plainly in a comprimesse made thereupon, of the which the tenor shows in
this form.

NEMORADVM the.vii. day of March, in the.iiii. year of our sovereign Lord
the king, Henry the sixth. The high and mighty prince Humfrey duke of
Gloucestre, at the reverence of God, and for the good of the king our
sovereign Lord in this land, and namely at the reverence, and specially at
the request and prayer of the mighty and high prince, my lord of Bedford his
brother, agreed him to put and puts all manner matters and queralles in
deed, with all their incidentez, circumstaunces, dependentz and connexes, that
touchen him and his person, that he has in anywise, do, or feleth him grieved,
or heavy against my lord his uncle, my Lord of Winchester. Or else that my
Lord of Winchester finds him grieved against him, in as much as they touch
him or his person, fro the beginning of the world unto this day. In the advice, ordinance and arbitrament of the worthy father in GOD Henry Archbishop
of Cantorbury, the high and noble prince Thomas duke of Excester, and Ihon duke
of Norffolke, the worshipful father in god Thomas bishop of Duresme, Philip
bishop of Worcester, Iho^ bishop of Bathe. The noble lord Humfrey earl of
Stafford, the worshipful persons, Master William Alnewike keeper of the kings
privy seal, and Raufe lord Crumwel, promisyng and behightyng, by the faith of
his body, and word of his princehode and kings son, to do keep, observe and
fulfill, for him and in his behalf, all that shall be declared, ordained and
arbitred, by the forsaid Archbishop, Dukes, bishops, Earl, Keeper of the
privy seal, and Lord Cru^well, in all matters and querelles above said:
Grauntyng also and promisyng over that, to be comprehended in the forsaied
arbitrament, as toward puttyng away all heuinesse or displeasures in any wise,
contained by my lord of Gloucester, against all those that have in any wise
assisted, counseled, or favored unto his said uncle of Winchester, and as
toward any matters, that be touching my Lord of Gloucester, remitteth it and
the governance thereof unto the king and his counsel, they to deem it by the advice of his counsel, as him thinks it to be done. In witness of the
which thing, to this present compromise, my said lord of Gloucester, has
subscribed his name with his own hand, Humfrey Gloucester. And in like form,
my Lord of Winchester in another compromise, has subscribed with his own
hand, under the word of priestehod, to stand at the advice, ordinance and
arbitreme^t of the persons abouesaied, Mutatis Mutandis.

THE causes beforsaied and querelles by us seen, heard, and diligently examined
and decreed, by the assent of the said parties, ordeine and award, that my
lords of Gloucester and of Winchester, for any thing done or spoken, by that
one party against that other, or by any of theirs or any other person or
persons, before the vii. day of this present Month of March, never here
after take causes, querelles, displeasures or heuinesses, that one against the
other, ne nether against the counsailers, adhere^tes or favorers of that other,
for any thing or things that are past. And that my said lord of Gloucester,
be good Lord to my said Lord of Winchester, and have him in love and
affeccion as his kynseman and Uncle. And that my said Lord of Winchester,
have to my said Lord of Gloucester, true and sad love and affeccion do and
be ready to do to him such service, as apperteineth of honesty to my said
Lord of Winchester and his estate to do. And that each of them be good
Lord unto all those adherentes, counsailers and favorers of that other, and
show them at all times favorable love and affeccion, as for any thing done by
them, or said before the seventh day of March.

AND we decre, ordain and awarde, that my said Lord of Wynchester, in the
presence of the King our sovereign Lord, my Lord of Bedforde, and my Lord
of Gloucester, and the resydue of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons being in this present Parlyamente, say and declare in manner and
form that follows.

MY sovereign Lord I have well understand, that I am noysed among the states
of your land, how that the king our sovereign lord that was that time, being
prince and lodged in the great chamber at Westminster, by the baiyng of a
spanyell, there was on a night taken, behynd a tapet in the same chamber, a man,
that should have confessed, that he was there by mine excitacion and procuryng
to have slain the foresaied Prince there in his bed, whereupon thesaied earl,
let sack him furthwith, and drouned him in the Thamise. And furthermore I am
accused, how that I should have stirred the king that last died, the time also
that he was Prince, to have taken the governance of this realm, and the
croune upon him, living his father the same time being king: Through which
language and noysyng, I feel my name and fame greatly enblemisshed, in diverse
men's opinions. Where upon I take first God to my witness, and afterward
all the world, that I have been at all times, and am true lover and true man,
to you my sovereign Lord, and shall be all my life. And also I have been to my
sovereign lord, that was your father, all time of his reign, true man: and
for such, he took trust and cherished me to his lives end, and as I trust no
man will affirm the contrary, nor never in my life procuryng, nor imagenyng
death nor distruccio^ of his person, ne assentyng to any such thing, or like
thereto, the time that he was King or Prince, or else in other estate. And in
like wise, I was true man to King Henry the.iiij. all the time that he was my
sovereign lord, and reigned upon me: In which matters, in all manner of wise,
that it likes to you my sovereign lord for to command me, I am ready for
to declare me: And further more, where, how and when, it shall like you by
thaduise of your counsel to assign me. Wherefore, I beseech you my
sovereign Lord, as humbly as I can, considering that there is no grounded
process, by the which I might lawfully, in these matters above said be
convict, blessed be God, to hold me and declare me, by thaduise of all the
lords spiritual and temporal, being in this present Parliament, true man to
you my sovereign lord, and so to have been unto my sovereign lords that were
your father and grau^dfather, and true man also, to have been at all times unto
his said father, whilst he was Prince, or else in any other estate, the said
slander and nosyng notwithstanding. And this same declaracion to be enacted,
in this your said present parliament.

THE which words declared in manner as it is above said by my said lord of
Winchester, it seems to my said lords the arbitratours, that it is fittyng
that my said lord of Winchester draw him a part, and in the mean time, the
Lords being present, be singulerly examined thereupon and say their advise:
And if it be assented by them, in manner as my said lord of Winchester
desires, let him be called again, and that then my lord of Bedford, then have
these words in effect yt folowe^

FAIR uncle, my Lord, by the advice of his counsel, has commanded me to
say to you, that he has well understand and considered all the matters which
ye have here openly declared in his presence, and thereupon ye desire a
peticion that he will declare you, and by the advice and assent of the lords
spiritual and temporal, being in this present Parliamente, he declares you
a true man to him, and that ye have so be to my lord his father and his
graundfather, and also true man to my Lord his father whiles he was Prince or
else in any other estate, thesaied dis^aunder and noysyng notwithstanding: And
will that thesaied declaracion be so enacted in this present Parliament. After
the which words thus said, as before is declared, by thesaied lords
arbitratours, that my said lord of Winchester, should have these words that
follows, to my said lord of Gloucester.

MY Lord of Gloucester, I have conceived to my great heuinesse that ye should
have received by diverse reports, that I should have purposed and imagined
against your person, honor and estate, in dyuer^e manners, for the which ye
have taken against me great displeasure Sir I take God to my witness, that what
reports so ever have been to you of me, paraduenture of such as have had no
great affeccion to me, GOD forgive it them, I never imagined, ne purposed any
thing that might be hynderyng or prejudice to your person, honor, or estate.
And therefore, I pray you that ye be unto me good lord from this time furthe,
for by my will I gave never other occasion, nor purpose not to do hereafter
through Gods grace.

The which words so by him said, it was decreed by the said arbitratours,
that my lord of Gloucester should answer and say.

Fair Uncle, sith ye declare you such a man as ye say, I am right glad that
it is so and for such a man I take you.

And when this was done, it was decreed by the said arbitratours that every
each of my lords of Gloucester and Winchester should take either other by the
hand, in the presence of the king and all the parliament, in sign and token
of good love and accord, the which was done and the Parliament was adiourned
till after Easter.

When the great fire of this discencion, between these two noble personages,
was thus by the arbitratours to their knowledge and judgment, utterly quenched
out, and laid under board all other controversies between other Lords, taking
part with the one party or the other, were sone apeased and brought to
concord. For joy whereof, the king caused a sole^pne feast, to be kept on
Whitson sondaie, on the which day, he created Richard Plantagenet, son and
heir to the earl of Cambridge (whom his father at Hampton, had put to
execucion, as you before have heard) Duke of York, not forseyng before, that
this preferme^t should be his destruction, nor that his sede should, of his
generation, be the extreme end and final confusion. He the same day also
promoted Ihon Lord Mowbrey and Earl Marshall, son and heir to Thomas duke
of Norffolke, by king Richard the second exiled this realm and dominion, to
the title, name, and style of the Duke of Norffolke, during which feast, the
Duke of Bedforde adourned the king with the high order of knighthode, which on
the same day dubbed with the sweard these knights whose names ensue.

Richard Duke of York. Ihon Duke of Norffolke. The earl of Westmerlande. Henry
lord Percie. Ihon lord Butler, son to therle of Ormond. The lord Rosse.
The lord Matrauers. The lord Wells. The lord Barkeley. Sir James Butler.
Sir Henry Graye of Tankaruile Sir Ihon Talbot. Sir Raufe Graye of Work. Sir
Robert Ueer. Sir Richard Gray. Sir Edmond Hungerford. Sir Water Wyngfeld. Sir
Ihon Butteler. Sir Reignold Cobham. Sir Ihon Passheleue. Sir Thomas Tunstall.
Sir Ihon Chedeocke. Sir Raufe Langstre. Sir William Drurye. Sir William Ap
Thomas. Sir Richard Caruonell. Sir Richard Wooduile. Sir Ihon Shirdelow. Sir
Nicholas, Blunket. Sir William Cheyney. Sir William Babyngto^ Justice. Sir
Raufe Butler. Sir Robert Beauchapme. Sir Edmond Trafford. Sir Ihon June chief
Baron, and diverse other.
AFTER this solemn feast ended, a great aid and subsidye was granted, for
the continuance of the conquest in France, and so money was gathered, and men
were prepared in every city, town and country: during which business, Thomas
duke of Excester, the sad, wise and well learned cou^sailer, great uncle to
the king, departed out of this mortal life, at his manner of Grnewiche, and was
with all funeral pomp, conveyed through London to Berry, and there buried. In
which year also died the Lady Elizabeth his half sister, and of the whole
blood with king Henry the.iiij. married to lord Ihon Hollande duke of Excester,
and after to the lord Fanhope, buried at the Black Friars of London.

WHILE these things were thus appoyntyng and concludyng in England: The earl
of Warwick leuetenaunt for the Regente in the realm of France, entered into
the country of Main, and besieged the town of Chasteau de Loyre, the which
shortly to him was re^dered whereof he made capitain Matthew Gough esquire.
After that, he took by assaute the castle of Mayet, and gave it for his
valeauntnes to Iho^ Winter esquire, and after that he conquered the castle of
Lund, and made there governor, William Gladdisdale gentleman. At which place
he was informed, that the Frenchemen were assembled together, in the country
of Beausse, wherefore like a valiant capitain, he with all his power marched
thetherwarde, to encountre with his enemies, and to fight with his adversaries,
which having knowledge of his approchyng, fled, and durst not abide the
trial, nor ieoperde the adventure, and in his returnyng, he beseged the Castle
of Montdublean, whereof was capitain sir Roberto^ des Croix, which siege
continued three wekes, but in conclusion the Englishemen, so sore charged them
with in, that the capitain with his whole company, were content to yield the
castle, their lives, horse and harneis, only re^erued: Which to them was
after long consultacion had, and many agrementes made, frankely granted. And
the said earl of Warwick, leauyng there the valeaunt lord Willoughby,
returned again to Paris. During which season, he was ordained by the assent of
the three estates of the realm of England to be governor of the young king, in
like manner as the noble Duke of Excester before his death was appointed and
assigned, but yet he tarried still in France, and did there no small service as
you shall here after perceive.

The fifth year. The.v. year.

THE Regent of France thus being in England, means was made by the Duke of
Burgoyne, for the delivery of the Duke of Alanson, which was taken prisoner at
the battaill of Uernoyle the last year. So he for the some of two hundred
thousand crounes, was delivered and set at large: but neither for release of
all or abatement of part of his ransom, he would in no wise acknowledge the
king of England, to be his liege and sovereign Lord: Such affeccion bare
he to the Dolphyn, and such troth showed he to his natural country. When all
things were concluded, ordered and established, both for the conseruacion of
peace and tranquillity within the realm of England, and also for the
maintenance of war, for the final gainyng of the region of France: The
Duke of Bedforde and his wife, took their leave of the King, at Westminster
and landed at Calice, with who^ also passed the seas, Henry bishop of
Winchester, which in thesaied town was invested with the Habit, Hatte and
dignity of a Cardinal, with all Ceremonies to it appertainyng. Which degree,
king Henry the fifth knowing the haute courage, and the ambicious mind of the
man, prohibited him on his allegeaunce once, either to sue for or to take,
meaning that Cardinals Hattes should not presume to be egall with Princes.
But now the king being young and the Regent his friend, he obtained that
dignity, to his great profit, and to the empouerishyng of the spirituality.
For by a Bull legatyue, which he purchased at Rome, he gathered so much
treasure, that no man in manner had money but he, and so was he surnamed the
rich Cardinal of Winchester, and nether called learned bishop, nor verteous
priest.

AFTER that, the duke of Bedford was returned into France, the lord of
Rustinan Marshall of Britayn, assembled a great company of the Britishe
nation, which fortefied and repaired the town of Pountorson, and after
thesaied Marshall, with a thousand men entered into the country of Constantyne
in Normandy, and came before the town of Auranches. Thenglishmen within the
garrison, issued out and boldly fought with their enemies: but after long
conflicte and many strokes given, the Britons were over come, and the lord
Rustynan taken, and the most part of his people slain. The Duke of Bedforde
hearing that the town of Pountorson was newly fortified and strongly defended,
sent thither the earl of Warwick, accompanied with the lord Scales, and
diverse other valiant capitaines and soldiers, to the nombre of.vij.
thousand men to besiege the town, which so environed it on every part, that
neither man could steal out, nor beast could pass in. The siege long
continuyng, vitaill began to wax scant in the English army, wherefore the
Lord Scales having in his company, sir Ihon Harpeley Bailey of Constantine, sir
William Brearton Bailey of Caen, sir Raufe Tesson, sir Ihon Carbonell and.iii.
thousand good men of war, departed from the siege to get vitail, powder and
other things necessary for their purpose and enterprise. And as they were
returnyng with their carriage on the sea cost, nere to. S. Michaels Mount, they
suddenly were encountered with their enemies, whereof the chief were, the Baron of
Coloses, the lord Dausebost capitain of thesaid Mount the lord Mountabon, the
lord Mountburchier, the lord of Chasteau Giron, the lord of Tyntygnat, the
lord of Chasteau Brian with.vi.M men of war. The lord Scales and his company
(seeing that they were compassed on every side with deadly daungiers, for the sea
was on the one side, and their enemies on the other, and no mean way to
escape of fly, descended from their horses and like gredy Lions, together in
an unpeaceable fury, set on their enemies. The skirmishe was strong and the
fight was fierce, the Englishmen kept themselfes so close, that their enemies
could have no auantage of them. At the last the lord Scales cried S. George,
they fly, with that thenglishmen took such a courage, and the Frenchmen that
fought before, were so dismayed that they began to fly. The Englishmen leped
again on horssebacke, and followed them, and slew and took above.xi.C.
persons, amongst who^ were taken, the Baron of Colsoes, and the lord of
Chasteau Brian and xxx. knights.

AFTER this victory, the Lord Scales with his vitailes, provision and
prisoners, returned to the siege, where he was of the Earl and other noble men,
ioyously received and for this notable fact, highly magnified and preysed.
While the siege thus continued before Pountorson, Christopher Hanson and other
soldiers of the garrison of. S. Susan, made a rode into the country of Anioy,
and came to a Castle called Ramffort, which castle was so privily scaled, that
the capitain with in and his company, were taken or slain before they knew of
their enemies approchyng. When knowledge of this feate was made open to the
Frenchemen, which were assembled to the nombre of.xx.M. to reyse the siege,
and break up the camp, liyng before the town of Pountorson, they left that
journey for a time, and returned to the Castle of Ramffort, and besieged
the same by the space of ten days.

THE Englishemen considering the multitude of the enemies, and the far
absence of their friends, began to treat with the Frenchmen and so upon
condition to depart with bag and baggage, horse and harnes, they rendered up
the castle, and departed with more riches then they brought, which castle thus
possessed by the Frenchemen, they forgot the reskew of Pou^torson, and brake up
their army. But sone after, the lord of Raix, calling himself liuetenaunt
general for the dolphin, accompanied with the lord Mount Iehan, the Lord
Beaumanoire, and the lord Tussye, and other to the no^bre of three thousand
persons, entered into the country of Mayn, and laid siege to the castle of
Malycorne, whereof was capitain an Englishma^, called Oliver Osbaters^y, which
castle with the capitain, was by force taken and obtained: in like manner they
took the little castle of Lude, and there in William Blackeborne leuetenaunt for
William Glasdale esquire, and put him to rau^some, and slew al his soldiers.
After this victory, in the which they much gloried; the Frenchmen perceiving
that therle of Warwick continued still his siege before the town of
Pountorson, and knowing by their espials, that the Englishmen were determined to
give them battaill, if they once attempted to raise the siege, and therefore
fearyng to fight in an open battaill, reculed back again to the dolphyn with
little gain and small honor. The Frenchmen and Britons being straightly besieged
within the town of Pountorson, perceiuyng no likelyhod of succors to come, and
seeing the English army daily did increase, fearyng the sequel thereof, if they
by violence should be taken and vanquished, they offered the town, so that
they might depart with horse and harnes only: which request (after long suit
and peticion) to them was hardely granted. The Earl like a valiant capitain,
entered into the town and there appointed for governors, the lord Roos, and
the lord Talbot, and leuyng there a convenient garrison, returned to the lord
Regent.

AFTER the taking of this town, there was a league, and a treaty concluded
between the Regent and the duke of Britayn, by the which agreement both the
tounes of Pountorson and. S. James de Beuron were beaten down to the ground and
clery defaced. After the lord of Raise was departed out of the territory of
Main as you have heard, Christopher Hanson, Phillip Gough, Martyn Godffrey
called the scaler, and diverse other of the garrison of. S. Susan, to the
nombre of.xxx. archars, went out in a morning to seek their adue^tures, and
came nere to the Castle of saint Laurence de Mortiers (at the same very season)
when sir James de Sepeaulx capitain of the same, was gone out of his Castle with
the greatest nombre of his retinewe, to a Church directly against the castle.
In the mass time, thenglishmen entered by subtlety into the gate and so gat
the dongeon. And when sir James returned from Mass, as he entered into the
gate he was taken, and his men fled, and so was the castle furnished with
Englishmen, and capitain thereof was appointed, sir William Oldhaule.

THE same season, sir Ihon Fastolfe, governor of the countries of Aniow and
Maine, assembled a great puissaunce of men of war, and laid a siege before
the castle of saint Owen Destays, beside the town of Lauall, whereof was
capitain sir Guillam Orange, which, after ten days besiegyng, rendered the
castle, their lives and armure only except: howbeit one railyng and slanderous
person was put to terrible execucion. And from thence, thesaid sir Ihon
removed to the strong castle of Grauile, and after.xii. days, they within
offered to yield the castle by a day if they were not succored by y^ dolphin or
his power. The offer was taken and pledges delivered, which were Guilla^
Cordouen, and Ihon de Maisierie esquiers. After these pledges delivered, sir
Ihon Fastolffe returned in post to the regent, aduertisyng him of this
composicion and agreement: wherefore thesaid lord, reised a great power, to
fight with the French men at the day appointed, and in his company, were the
earls of Mor^aigne and Warwick, and the lords Roos, and Talbot, sir Ihon
Fastolffe, sir Ihon Aubemond, sir Ihon Ratelife, and diverse other, to the
nombre of twenty thousand men, and so marched forward in hope to mete and
join battle with their enemies. But their adversaries, which were not far
of, durst not approach, wherefore the Regent sent sir Ihon Falstolffe
incontinent to receive the castle: but they within (contrary to their promise
and appointment) had newly vitailed and manned the place, and so forsaking
their pledges and fellows in arms, refused to render the fortres according to
the appointment: wherefore the pledges were brought before the sight of them
within the castle, and there openly put to death. After this, the lord Talbot,
was made governor, of Aniow and Main, and sir Ihon Fastolffe was assigned to
another place: which lord Talbot, being both of noble birthe, and haute
courage, after his coming into France, obtained so many glorious victories of
his enemies, that his only name was, and yet is dredful to the French nation,
and much renoumed amongst al other people. This ioly capitain, and son of
the valiant Mars, entered into Mayn and slew men, destroyed castles, and brent
tounes, and in conclusion, suddenly took the town of Lauall: but the lord
Loghac, and diverse other, retrayted them selfs into the Castle, and there
remained eight days. During which time, it was agreed, that al capitaines,
Burgesses, and men of war, which were within the Castle, should depart with
bag and baggages, paiyng to the lord Talbot for all things, one hundred
thousand Crounes. And the Castle so being delivered, was committed to the
keeping of Gilbert Halsall, which after, was slain at the siege of Orleance,
for whom was made capitain Matthew Gough, which being at the journey before
Senlies, by treason of a miller that kept a mil adioynyng to the wall, the
Frenchemen entered into the town, and brought it into their subieccion and
obeysaunce.

THE duke of Bedford, was advertised by his espials, that the town of
Montarges, which was in the territory of Orleance, was but slenderly kept and
smally furnished, and that it might be taken with little pain and no loss. The
Regent glad of these news, sent therle of Suffolk, sir Ihon Pole his brother,
and sir Henry Bisset, with six.M. men to assaute the town, but when they came
thither and found the town better manned and more strongly defenced, then
their expectacion imagined, they gave no assaute but laid siege about the
town, and therle of Warwick was appointed to lie with a great number of
men of war, at saint Mathelines de Archamp, to encountre the Frenchmen if
they would attempt to aid or vitaill those that were enclosed within the town.
This fortress stood in such a place, that what with waters and what with
marshes, the army must sever in three parts, so that the one could not easily
help the other, but either by boats or bridges, so the town was besieged by
the space of two months and more. In the mean season, Arthur of Britayne,
Constable for the dolphyn, sent thither in all have, the lord Boisac Marshall
of France, Stephin le Hire, Ponton de Sentrayles, the lord Grauile, and
diverse other valiant horssemen, to the number of three thousand and above,
which privily in the night, came on that side where sir Ihon de la Pole and
sir Henry Bisset lay, whom they found out of al order and without any watch.
So the Frenchemen entered into their lodges and slew many in their beds,
they spared no man, for the resistance was small. Sir Iho^ Delapole with his
horse saved himself, and fled over the water to his brother, and sir Henry
Bisset escaped by a boat and eight with him. The residue which would have
passed the bridge and joined with the earl of Suffolk, fled in such plumpes
over the bridge, that the timber brake and a great nombre was drouned so, ye
there were slain and drouned.xv.C men. The earl of Warwick hearing of this
chance, departed from saint Mathelyn with all diligent speed, and came before
Montarges offering battaill to the French capitaines, which answered that
they had manned and vitailed the town, and ente^ded to do no more at that time.
Thenglishmen seeing that their travail should be in vain, came back softely
again with all their ordinance to the duke of Bedforde.

IT should seem that fortune at this time would not, that the French men
should have one joyful day, but the same also should be myngled with dolor or
displeasure. For at this very time, sir Nicholas Burdett appointed by the duke
of Somerset, to vex and trouble his enemies in the costs of Britayne, sent
light horssemen into every part, vexyng the people and wastyng the country.
All tounes that he passed by were burnt, al and buildings spoiled and robbed,
prisoners and prays were abundantly taken, small villages were destroyed and,
great tounes were raunsomed, and so without hurt or damage, thesaid sir
Nicholas returned into Normandy. This mischance being declared to the Constable
of France and the other capitaines, cut their combs and plucked down their
hearts, which were set on so merry a pynne, for the victory of Montarges, that
they were in manner, like desperate persons, loathe to attempt any fa^ther
enterprise against the English nation, saying: that God was turned English,
and the devil would not help France.

THE duke of Alau^son, which as you have hard, was late delivered out of
England, revived again the dull spirits of the Dolphyn, and the fainte hearts
of his capitaines, promisyng to them great victory with little trauail, and
much gain with small labor, wherefore in hope of good luck, he determined to do
some notable feate against thenglishe men. Then happened a chance unlooked for,
or unthought of, even as they would have whisshed or desired, for not only the
Magistrates, but chiefly the spiritual persons of the city of Mauns, knowing
that the duke of Britayne and his brother, were reuerted and turned to the
French party, began sore to mourn and lament that they were subjects and
vassals to the yoke and power of the Englishemen. Wherefore they determined and
fully concluded, to advertise of their minds and determinacions, the
capitaines of Charles y^ dolphyn, (of the^ called the French king) and so by
certain false Friars, thereof wrote humble and loving letters. These news
pleased much the French capitaines, but no less you may be sure the Dolphyn
himself, as a thing descended from heaven, of them unsought, vnimagined and
not devised. Wherefore to take opportunity when time served, and not to lose so
great a benefit so honestly offered, the lords Delabreth and Fayet, Marshals
of France, accompanied with the lords of Monte Ihan, of Bu^l Doruall, Torsye
and Beaumamoyre the Heir, and Gullyam his brother, and five hundred other
hardy capitaines and valiant soldiers, took upon them this enterprise,
sendyng great thanks and lauds to the Clergy and citezens, for their
assured ridelitie to their sovereign lord, promysyng them to be there at the
day appointed, not doubtyng to find them ready according to their promise,
gladly to receive them.

WHEN the day assigned and the night appointed was come, the French
capitaines privily approached the town, making a little fire on an hill in the
sight of the town, to signify their coming and approchyng. The citeze^s,
which by the great church were loking for their approach, showed a burning
Cresset out of the steple, which suddenly was put out and quenched. What
should I say, the capitaines in horssebacke came to the gate, and the traitors
within slew the porters and watch men, and let in their friends, the footmen
entered first, and the men of arms waited at the barriers, to the intent that
if much need required or necessity compelled, their might fight in the open
feld. And in the mean season many Englishmen were slain, and a great claymor
and a houge noise was hard through the town, as is wont and accustomed to be
in a town, by treason suddenly surprised and taken: but what was the cause of
the cry, or beginning of the noise, few except the confederates, either knew
or perceived. For the remnaunt of the citezens being no partakers in this
faccion, imagined that the Englshmen had made havoc in the town and put all
to the sweard. The Englishemen on the othersyde, judged that the citezens had
begone some new rebellion against them, or else had striuen amongst
theimselfes. The earl of Suffolk, which was governor of the town, hearing
the clamor and noise of the people, having perfect knowledge of such as
escaped from the walls, in what case the city stood in, without any tariyng
or prolongyng of time, entered into the Castle which stands at the gate of
Saint Uincent, whereof was Constable Thomas G^wer esquier: whether also fled so
many Englishemen, that the place was pestured, and there if they were not
rescued, likely to be famished: but surely they were sore assauted and
marueilously hurt, with the shot of the alablasters and cross bows, but they
defended theimselfes so manfully, that their enemies gat small advantage at
their hands. But all their hardines had not served, nor all their policy had
not defended them, if they had not privily sent a messenger to the lord
Talbot, which then lay at Alanson, certefiyng him in what case they stood,
for vitaill had they none, municio^s failed, and the Castle was almost
undermined, so that yeldyng must follow, and resistaunce could not prevail.
The lord Talbot heryng these news, neither stepped nor banquetted, but with all
have assembled together his valiant capitaines, whose names you have before
often times heard rehearsed, to the nombre of vii. hundred men of war, and in
the euenyng departed from Alanson, and in the morning came to a castle called
Guyerche two miles from Mauns, and from thence sent as an espial Matthew
Gough, to epsy the governance of the enemies, and if he might to show to his
countrymen that he was at hand to be their aid and rescowes. Matthew Gough
so well sped, that privily in the night he came into the castle, where he knew
how that the French men being lords of the city, and now castyng no perels
nor fearyng any creature, began to wax wanton and fell to riote, as though
their enemies could do to them no damage: thynkyng that the Englishemen which
were shut up in the Castle, studied nothing but how to escape and be
delivered. When Matthew Gough had known all the certainty and had eaten a
little bread and drunk a cup of wine to comfort his stomach, he privily
returned again, and within a mile of the city met with the lord Talbot and
the Lord Scales, and made open to them al thing according to his credence,
which to speed the matter, because the day approached, with all have possible
came to the posterne gate, and alighted from their horses, and about six of
the clock in the morning they issued out of the castle criyng saint George,
Talbot. The French men which were scace up, and thought of nothing less then
of this sudden approchment, some rose out of their beds in their shertes, and
lepte over the walls, other ran naked out of the gates for saving of their
lives, leuyng behind them all their apparel, horses, armure and riches,
none was hurt but such, which either resisted or would not yield, whereof some
were slain and cast in prisone. There were slain and taken four hundred
ge^tlemen and the villains frankely let go. After this, inquisicion was made
of the authors of this ungracious coniuracion, and there were accused thirty
citezens, twenty priests and fiftene Friars, which according to their
deserts were put in execucion.

The sixth year. The.vi. year.

THE city of Mauns thus being reduced into the English men's hands, the
Lord Talbot departed to the town of Alanson. After which marciall feat manly
acheued, the earl of Warwick departed into Enlande, to be governor of the
young king, in stead of Thomas duke of Excester, late departed to God. In
whose stead was sent into France, the lord Thomas Mountacute earl of
Salisbury with five thousand men, which landed at Calice and so came to the
Duke of Bedford in Paris. Where he consultyng with the duke of Bedforde,
concerning the affairs of the realm of France: seeing all things
prosperously succeed on the English part, began meruailously to phantelic the
city and country of Orliance, sta^dyng on the river of Loyre. But because the
cite was well fortified both by the nature of the situacio^ of the place, and
by the policy of man, he imagined it not the work of one day, nor the
study of one hour. Wherefore he remitted it to a farther deliberacio^, yet he
was the man at that time, by whose wit, strength and policy, the English
name was much fearful and terrible to the French nation, which of himself
might both appoint, command and do all things, in manner at his pleasure, in
whose power, (as it appeared after his death) a great part of the conquest
consisted and was esteemed, because he was a man both painful and diligent,
ready to withstand things perilous and imminent, and prompt in counsel, and
with no labor be weried, nor yet his courage at any time abated or appalled, so
that all men put no more trust in any one man, nor no synguler person gat more
the hearts of all men. After this great enterprise, had long been debated and
argued, in the privy counsel, the earl of Salisburies devise, (although it
seemed hard and strange to all other, and to him as it were a thing
predestinate very easy) was granted and allowed, which enterprise was the
final conclusion of his natural destiny; as you shall shortly perceive. Thus
he replenished with good hope of victory, and furnished with artilery, and
municions apperteinyng to so great a siege, accompanied with the earl of
Suffolk and the lord Talbot, and with a valiant company, to the nombre of
ten thousand men, departed from Paris and passed through the country of
Beause. He took by assaute the town of Yainuile, but the Frenchmen fled into
the Castle, and there continued five days, at the end whereof they rendered
themselfes symply: of thesaid nombre, some were put to death for certain causes,
and some were taken to mercy. He took also the town of Bawgency, sufferyng
every man, which would become vassaile and subject to the King of England, to
enherite their lands and enjoy their goods. The tounes of Meun upon Loyre and
Iargenan, hearing of these treatise, presented to him the keys of the town,
upon like agreement and egall conditions.

AFTER this in the month of Septembre, he laid his siege on the one side of
the water of Loyre, before whose coming, the Bastard of Orleaunce, and the
bishop of the city and a great nombre of Scotts, hearing of therles intent,
made diverse fortificacions about the town and destroyed the suburbs, in the
which were twelfe parish churches and four ordres of Friars. They cut also
down all the vines, trees and bushes within five leages of the town, so that
the Englishmen should have neither comfort, refuge nor succor.

HERE must I a little digress, and declare to you, what was this bastard of
Orleance, which was not only now capitain of the city, but also after, by
Charles the sixth made earl of Dunoys, and in great authority in France, and
extreme enemy to the English nation, as by this story you shall apparauntly
perceive, of whose line and steme dyscend the Dukes of Longuile and the Marquis
of Rutylon. Jews Duke of Orleance murdered in Paris, by Ihon duke of
Burgoyne, as you before have hard, was owner of the Castle of Concy, on the
Frontiers of France toward Arthoys, whereof he made Constable the lord of
Cauny, a man not so wise as his wife was fair, and yet she was not so fair,
but she was as well beloved of the duke of Orleance, as of her husband. Between
the duke and her husband (I cannot tell who was father) she conceived a child,
and brought furthe a pretty boy called Ihon, which child being of the age of
one year, the duke disceased and not long after the mother, and the Lord of
Cawny ended their lives. The next of kynne to the lord Cawny challenged the
enheritaunce, which was worth four thousand crounes a year, alledgyng that
the boy was a bastard: and the kynred of the mothers side, for to save her
honesty, it plainly denied. In conclusion, this matter was in contencio^ before
the Presidentes of the parliament of Paris, and there hang in controversy till
the child came to the age of eight years old. At which time it was demanded
of him openly whose son he was: his fre^des of his mothers side advertised
him to require a day, to be advised of so great an answer, which he asked, and
to him it was granted. In y^ mean ^eason his said friends persuaded him to
claim his inheritance, as son to the Lord of Cawny, which was an
honorable living, and an ancient patrimony, affirming that if he said
contrary, he not only slau^dered his mother, shamed himself, and stained his
blood, but also should have no living nor any thing to take to. The
scholemaster thinkyng y^ his disciple had well learned his lesson, and would
rehearse it according to his instruccio^, brought him before the Judges at the
day assigned, and when the question was repeted to him again, he boldly
answered, my heart gives me, and my noble courage tells me, that I am the
son of the noble Duke of Orleaunce, more glad to be his Bastrde, with a mean
living, then the lawful son of that coward cuckolde Cauny, with his four
thousand crounes. The Justices much merueiled at his bold answer, and his
mothers cosyns detested him for shamyng of his mother, and his fathers supposed
kin reioysed in gainyng the patrimony and possessions. Charles duke of
Orleance heryng of this judgment, took him into his family and gave him great
offices and fees, which he well deserved, for (during his captivity) he
defended his lands, expulsed thenglishmen, and in conclusion procured his
deliverance.

THIS coragious Bastard, after the siege had continued three wekes full, issued
out of the gate of the bridge, and fought with the Englishemen, but they
received him with so ^ierce and terrible strokes, that he was with all his
company compelled to retire and fly back into the city: but the Englishemen
followed them so fast, in killyng and taking of their enemies, that they
entered with them the Bulwark of the bridge, which with a great toure,
standing at the end of the same, was taken incontinent by thenglishmen. In which
conflict many French men were taken, but mo were slain, and the keeping of the
toure and Bulwerke was committed to William Glasdale esquier. When he had
gotten this Bulwark, he was sure that, by that way neither man nor vitaill
could pass or come. After that, he made certain Bulwarks round about the
city, castyng trenches between the one and the other, laiyng ordinance in
every part, where he saw that any battery might be devised. When they within
perceived that they were environed with fortresses and ordinance, they laid
gonne against gonne, and fortefied toures against bulwarks, and within made
new rampires, and builded new mudwalles to avoid crackes and breches, which
might by violent shot suddenly ensue. They appointed the Bastard of Orleance,
and Stephin Ueignold called the Heir, to se the walls and watches kept, and
the bishop saw y^ thinhabita^tes within the cite: were put in good order, and
that vitaill were not wantonly consumed, nor vainly spent.

IN the toure that was taken at the bridge end, as you before have heard,
there was a high chamber having a grate full of bars of iron by the which a
man might look all the length of the bridge into the cite at which, grate many
of the chief capitaines stood diverse times, vieuyng the cite and deuisyng in
what place it was best assautable. They with in the city perceived well this
totyng hole, and laid a piece of ordinance directly against the wyndowe. It so
chanced that the.lix. day after the siege laid before the city, therle of
Salisbury, sir Thomas Gargraue and William Glasdale and diverse other, went
into thesaid toure and so into the high chamber, and looked out at the grate,
and with in a short space, the son of the Master gonner, perceived men lokyng
out at the wyndowe, took his match, as his father had taught him, which was
gone down to dinner, and fired the gonne, which brake and sheuered ye iron
bars of the grate, whereof, one struck therle so strongly on the head, that it
stroke away one of his iyes and the side of his cheke. Sir Thomas Gargraue was
likewise stricken, so that he died within two days. Therle was conveyed to Meum
upon Loyre, where he lay being wounded.viij. days, during which time, he
received devoutly the holy Sacraments, and so commended his soul to almighty
God, whose body was conveyed into England, with all funeral and pomp, and
buried at Bissam by his progenitors, leuyng behind him, an only daughter named
Alice, married to Richard Neuell, son to Raufe earl of Westmerland, of whom
hereafter shall be made mention. What detriment, what damage, what loss succeeded
to the English public wealth, by the sudden death of this valiant
capitain, not long after his departure, manifestly apered. For high
prosperttie, and great glory of the English nation in the parties beyond the
sea, began shortly to fall, and little and little to vanishe away: which
thing, although the English people like a valiant and strong body, at the
first time did not perceive, yet after ye they felt it grow like a pestilent
humor, which succesciuely alitle and little corrupts all the members, and
destroys the body. For, after the death of this noble man, fortune of war
began to change, and triumphant victory began to be darckened. Although the
death of therle were dolorous to all Englismen, yet surely it was most
dolorous to the duke of Bedford, regent of France, as he which had lost his
right hand or lacked his weapon, when he should fight with his enemy. But
seeing that dedde men cannot with sorrow be called again, nor lamentacion for
dedde bodies cannot remedy the chances of men living: he (like a prudent
governor and a pollitique patron,) appointed therle of Suffolk to be his
leuetenaunt, and capitain of the siege, and joined with him the lord Scales,
the lord Talbot, sir Ihon Fastolfe, and diverse other valiant knights and
esquiers. These lords caused bastiles to be made round about the city, with
the which they troubled their enemies and assauted the walls, and left
nothing unattempted, which might be to them, any advantage, or hurtefull to
their enemies.

IN the time of lent, vitaile and artillery, began to wax scant in the
English army, wherefore therle of Suffolk appointed sir Ihon Fastolfe, sir
Thomas Rampsto^, and sir Phillip Hal with their retinewes, to ride to Paris to
the lord Regent, to inform him of their scarsenes and necessity. Which
being thereof informed, without any delay or prolongyng, provided vitaile,
artillery and municions, necessary and convenient for so great an enterprise,
and laded therewith many chariottes, carts, and horses, and for the ^ure
co^duite, and sauegard of the same, he appointed sir Simon Morhier Provost of
Paris, with the guard of the city and diverse of his own household servants,
to accompany sir Ihon Fastolfe and his co^plices, to the army liyng at the
siege or Orleaunce. The which departed in good order, to the nombre of.v.
hundred men of war, beside wagoners out of Paris, and came to Yaynuile in
Beausse, and in a morning early in a great frost they departed, from the place
toward the siege, and when they came to a town called Ronuray, in the lau^des
of Beausse, they perceived their enemies coming against them, to the nombre
of.ix. or.x.M. Frenchemen and Scotts: the capitaines whereof was Charles of
Cleremo^t, son to the duke of Burbon, then being prisoner in England, sir
William Steward Constable of Scotland, alitle before delivered out of
captivity, the earl of Pedriacke, the lord Ihon Uandosme, Uidane of Charters,
the Lord of Touars, the lord of Lohat, the lord of Eglere, the Lord of
Beaniew, the Bastard Tremorle, and many other valiant capitaines. Wherefore sir
Ihon Fastolfe and his companions, set all their company in good order of
battaill, and picked stakes before every Archer, to break the force of the
horsemen. At their backs they set all their wago^s and cariages, and within
them they tied all their horses, so that their enemies could nether assail
them on the backeside, nor yet spoil them of their horses, and in this manner
they stood still, abidyng the assaute of their adversaries. The Frenchemen (by
reason of their great nombre) thinkyng the victory to be in their hands,
egerly like Lions set on the Englishemen, which with great force, them
received and manfully defended: for it stood them upon, considering the
inequality of the nombre. And after long and cruel fight, the Englishmen
drove back and vanquished the proud Frenchemen, and compelled them to fly.
In this conflicte were slain, Lord Willyam Steward Constable of Scotland and
his brother, the lord Doruall, the lord Delabret, the lord Chasteanbrian,
sir Ihon Basgot, and other Frenchemen and Scotts, to the number of.xxv.C. and
above.xj. hundred taken prisoners, although some French writers affirm the
nombre less.

AFTER this fortunate victory, sir Ihon Fastolfe and his company (of the which
no man of any reputacion was either slain or taken,) came with all their
cariages, vitaile, and prisoners, to the siege before Orleance, where they were
ioyously received and welcomed of all the soldiers. This conflict (because the
most part of the carriage was heryng and leuten stuff,) the Frenchmen call, the
unfortunate battle of herynges.

THE Earl of Suffolk, being thus vitailed, continued his siege, and every
day almost, skirmished with his enemies, which, being in despair of all
succors, began to common amongst theimself, how they might render the town,
to their most honor and profit. After much reasonyng, and long debatyng
amongst the capitaines, and the magistrates of the town, what way was best to
be followed: Some affirmed it not only to be shameful and dishonorable, but
also unnatural and unreasonable, to yield the town to the Englishemen, being
neither friends nor favorers of the French nation: other, fearyng the victory
of the Englishmen, imagined, that if they by force possessed the city, they
would do to them as tyrants be accustomed to serve, wilful and obstinate
people, and therefore they thought it a great folly and a notable lightness,
not to beware the one, as to deny or refuse the other. But when they saw, that
their glory must needs decline to a shame and reproach, they thought to find a
mean way to save themselfes, and their cite from the captivity of their
enemies, and devised to submit their city themselves, and al theirs under the
obeisance of Phillip duke of Burgoyn because he was brought out of the stock
and blood royal of the ancient house of France: thinkyng by this means (as
they did in deed) to break or minishe the great amity between the
Englishemen and him.

AFTER this point concluded, they made open and sent to the duke al their
devises and intentes, which certified the^ that he would gladly receive their
offer, so that the Regent of France would thereto agree and consent. And
thereupon dispatched certain ambassadors to the duke of Bedford, to whom these
news were strange and not very pleasant, upon which point, he assembled a
great counsel. Some thought that manner of yeldyng to be both honorable and
profitable to the king of England, by reason whereof, so great a city, and so
rich a country, should be brought out of the possession of their enemies,
into the hands of their trusty friends, without farther cost or bloodshed. The
Duke of Bedford and other, were of a contrary opinion, thinkyng it both
dishonorable and unprofitable to the realm of England, to se a cite so long
besieged at the costs and expenses of the king of England, and almost brought
to the point of yeldyng, to be yielded to any other fore^ prince or potestate,
and not to him or his Regent, the example whereof might provoke other tounes
herfater to do the^ame. This reason took place, and the Regent answered the
dukes ambassadors, that it was not honorable nor yet co^sonaunte to reason,
that the king of England should beat the bushe and the duke of Burgoyne
should have the birds: Wherefore sith the right was his, the war was his, and
the charge was his, he said that y^ city ought not to be yielded to no other
person, but to him or to his use and profit. By this little chance, succeeded a
great change in thenglishe affairs, for a double mischief of this answer rose
and prangout. For first the duke of Burgoyne, began to conceive a certain
priuye grudge against thenglishmen for this cause: thynkyng the^ to envy and
bear malice against his glory and profit, for the which in continuance of
time he became their enemy, and ^leued to the French King. Secondly, the
Englishemen left the siege of Orleaunce, which by this treaty they might have
had to friend, or to have continued neutre, till their Lord the duke of
Orleaunce, or the earl of Angulosie his brother were deliue red out of the
captivity of the English people. But if men were angels and for^aw things to
come, they like beasts would not run to their confusion: but fortune which
gideth the destiny of man, will turn her whele as she lists, who soever
says nay.

WHILE this treaty of the Orleaunces was in hand, Charles the dolphin, daily
studied and hourly labored, to pluck the favor and hearts of the nobility of
France, from the English nation, to the intent, that he might assemble a
puyssance, sufficient to relefe his friends, being shut up in the city of
Orleau^ce. While he was studiyng and compassyng this matter, there happened to
him, a strange chance, of the which I will write alitle, because some of the
French aucthours, and especially, Ihon Bouchet, of it writes to much.

FOR as he and other say, there came to him being at Chynon, a maid of the age
of.xx. years, and in man's apparel, named Ione, borne in Burgoyne in a town
called Droymy beside Uancolour, which was a great space a cham^erleyn in a
commen hostrey, and was a rampe of such boldness, that she would course
horses and ride them to water, and do things, that other young maidens, both
abhorred and were ashamed to do: yet as some say, whether it were because of her
foul face, that no man would desire it, either she had made a vow to live
chaste, she kept her maydenhed, and preserved her virginity. She (as a
monster) was sent to the Dolphin, by sir Robert Bandrencort capitain of
Uancolour, to who^ she declared, that she was sent from God, both to aid the
miserable city of Orleaunce, and also to remit him, to the possession of his
realm, out of the which, he was expulsed and ouercomed: rehersyng to him,
visions, trau^ses, and fables, full of blasphemy, supersticio^ and hypocrisy,
that I marvel much that wise men did believe her, and learned clerks would
write such fantasies. What should I rehearse, how they say, she knew and
called him her king, whom she never saw before. What should I speak how she
had by reuelacion a sword, to her appointed in the church of saint
Katheryn, of Fierboys in Torayne where she never had been. What should I write,
how she declared such privy messasges from God, our lady, and other saints,
to the dolphyn, that she made the teres run down from his iyes. So was he
deluded, so was he blinded, and so was he deceived by the devils means which
suffered her to begin her race, and inconclusion rewarded her with a shameful
fall. But in the mean season such credit was given to her, that she was
honored as a saint, of the religious, and believed as one sent from God of the
temporaltie, in so much that she (armed at all points) rode from Poytiers to
Bloys, and there found men of war vitail, and municions, ready to be conveyed to
Orleau^ce. The Englishmen perceiuyng that they within could not long continue,
for fault of vitaile and powder, kept not their watch so diligently as they
were accustomed, nor scoured not the country environed, as they before had
ordained; which negligence, the citezens shut in perceiving, sent word thereof
to the French capitaines, which with Pucelle in the dedde time of the night,
and in a great rain and thundre, with all their vitaile and artilery entered
into the city, if they were welcomed marueill not. For folks in great
trouble, be joyous of a little comfort. And the next day the Englishemen
boldly assauted the town, promisyng to them that best scaled the walls
great rewards. Then men mounted on ladders coragiously, and with gonnes,
arrows and pikes, bette their enemies from the walls.

THE Frenchemen, although they marueiled at the fierce fightyng of the English
people, yet they were not amassed, but they defended them selfs to the dark
night, on which day, no great private feate worthy of memory, was either
attempted or done. The Bastard of Orleaunce (seeing the puyssaunce of thenglishe
nation) began to fear the sequel of the matter: wherefore he sent word to the
duke of Alaunson, aduertisyng him in what case the town then stood, and that
it could not long continue without his hasty speed, and quick diligence.
Which delaiyng no time nor deferryng no space, came with all his army within
two leagues of the city, and sent word to the capitaines, that on the next
morrow they should be ready to receive them. Which thing, the next day they
accomplished, for the Englishemen thought it to be much to their avail, if so
great a multitude entered into the city, vexed with famyne and replenished
with scarsenes. On the next day in the morning, the Frenchemen alt^gether
issued out of the town, and assauted the fortress or Bastile, called the
Bastyle of saint Loure, the which with great force and no little loss they
took and set it on fire, and after assauted the toure at the bridge foot,
which was manfully defended. But the Frenchemen being more in nombre, so
fiercely assauted it, that they took it or the Lord Talbot could come to
succors: in the which Willyam Gladdisdale the capitain was slain, and the
Lord Morlyns, and the lord Pownynges also.

THE Frenchemen puffed up with this good luck, seeing the strong fortres was
vngotten, which was under the defense of the lord Talbot, fetched a compass
about, and in good order of battle marched thither ward. The lord Talbot
like a capitain, without fear or dred of so great a multitude, issued out of
his Bastile, and so fier^^y fought with the Frenchemen, that they not able to
withstand his puyssaunce, fled (like sheep before the Wolffe) again into the
city, with great loss of men and small artilerie: and of the Englishemen were
lost in the two Bastyles six hundred presones. Then the earl of Suffolk, the
Lord Tolbot, the Lord Scales, and other capitaines, assembled together, where
causes were showed, that it was both necessary and conueniente either to leave
the siege for ever, or to defer it till another time, more luckey and
conueninet. And to the intent that they should not seem either to fly or to
be driven from the siege by their enemies, they determined to leave their
fortresses and Bastyles, and to assemble in the plain feld and there to abide
all the day, abidyng the outcommyng and battle of their enemies. This
conclusion taken, was accordyngly executed. The Frenchemen, weried with the
last bickeryng, held in their heddes and durst not once appear: and so they
set fire in their lodgings, and departed in good order of battle from
Orleaunce. The next day which was the.viij. day of May, the Earl of
Suffolk, ridyng to Iargeaux with.CCCC. Englishemen, and the lord Talbot with
another company returned to Meum. Which town, after that he had fortified, he
incontinent, assauted and wan the town of Lauall and the Castle, sore vexyng
and punishyng the tounes men, for their hard hearts, and cancard obstinacy:
and leauyng there a garrison, reculed to Meum.

AFTER this siege thus broken up, to tell you, what triumphs were made in the
city of Orleaunce, what wood was spente in fires, what wine was drunk in
houses, what songs were song in the streets, what melody was made in Tauernes,
what roundes were daunced in large and broad places, what lights were set up in
the churches, what anthemes, were song in Chapelles, and what joy was showed in
every place, it were a long work and yet no necessary cause. For they did, as
we in like case would have dooen, and we being in like estate, would have done
as they did. After that the Englishmen, were thus retired from the siege of
Orleaunce, and severed themselfes in diverse tounes and fortresses, holdyng on
their part: The duke of Alaunson, the Bastard of Orleaunce, Ione the puzell,
the lord of Gancort, and diverse other French men, came before the town of
Iargeaux, where the Earl of Suffolk and his two brethren soiorned the.xij.
day of June, and gave to the town a great and a terrible assaut, which the
Englishmen, (being but a handful) manfully defended on three parts of
the same. Poyton of Sentrailes, perceiuyng one part of the town to be
undefended, scaled the walls on that part: and without any difficulte took the
town, and slew sir Alexander Pole brother to therle, and many other, to the
nombre of two hundred: but they not much gained, for they lost.iii.C. good men
and more. Of thenglishmen were taken.xl. beside his brother Iho^. After this
gain and good luck, the Frenchemen returnyng toward Orleaunce, fell in
contencion and debate, for their captives and prisoners, and slew them all,
saving the earl and his brother.

The seventh year. The.vii. year.

AFter the gaynyng of the town of Iargeaux, the same army came to Meum, and took
the toure at the bridge, and put there in a garrison, and from thence removed
to Bangency. Which garrison, being not vitailed rendered the town, so that
they might depart with bag and baggage, frankely and freely: which desire to
the^ was granted. At this town of Bangency, met with the duke of Alaunson,
Arthur of Britayne the false forsworn gentleman to the king of England, newly
made Constable of France (as you have heard,) with whom was the lord Delabret
with.xij.C. men: to whom daily repaired fresh aid out of every part, as the
Earl of Uandosme, and other, to the nombre of.xx. or.xxiij.M. men. All these
men of war, determined to go to Meum, and to take the town, but they were
informed, that the Englishemen, had left the town desolate, and were returned
to the lord Talbot to Ieneuile. Then they concluded to pass toward that
town. But, as they marched forward upon a Saterdaie, they had perfect
knowledge, that the lord Talbot with.v. thousand men, was coming to Meum.
Wherefore, they intendyng to stop him a tide, conveyed their company to a small
village called Patay, which way, they knew that the Englishmen must needs
pass by. And first they appointed their horsemen, which were well and richely
furnished, to go before, and suddenly to set on the Englishemen, or they were,
either ware or set in order. The Englishmen coming forward, perceived the
horsemen, and, unaginyng to deceive their enemies, commanded the fotemen, to
enuirone and enclose themselves about, with their stakes, but the French
horsemen came on so fiersly, that the archers had no leyser, to set themselfes
in a raie. There was no remedy, but to fight at adventure. This battaill,
continued by the space of three long hours. And, although thenglishmen were
ouerpressed, with the nombre of their adversaries, yet they never fled back
one foot, til their capitain the lord Talbot, was sore wounded at the back,
and so taken. Then their hearts began to faint, and they fled, in which
flight, there were slain above xii.C. and taken.xl. whereof the lord Talbot, the
lord Scales, the lord Hungerford, and sir Thomas Rampston, were the chief:
howbeit diverse archers which had shot all their arrows, having only their
swerdes, defended the^self, and with the help of some of the horsemen, ca^ safe
to Meu^.

WHEN the fame was blown abroad, that the Lord Talbot was taken, all the
Frenchmen not alitle reioysed, thinkyng surely, that now the rule of the
Englishmen, should shortly assuage and wax faint: for fear whereof, the tounes
of Ieneuile, Meu^, Fort, and diverse other, returned from the English part,
and became French, to the great displeasure of the Regent. From this
battaill* departed without any stroke stricken, sir Ihon Fastolffe, the same year
for his valiauntnes elected into the order of the Garter. For which cause the
Duke of Bedford, in a great anger, took from him the Image of saint George,
and his Garter: but afterward, by mean of friends, and apparent causes of good
excuse by him alleged, he was restored to the order again, against the mind of
the lord Talbot.

CHARLES, calling himself French King, being advertised of this victory,
thought now, that al things succeeded, according to his opinion and good hope,
which ever, was of that hie courage and haut mind, that in his most
adversity, he never dispaired in good luck a^ length: so that the Earl of
Salisbury being dedde, and the lord Talbot living in captivity, (which were y^
glory of his enemies) he thought to enterprise great and weighty things, where
before he medeled with small and little doings. For fulfillyng of his mind and
appetite, he determined, first to conquer the city of Reins, to the intent,
that he being there, might according to the fashion of his progenitors, with
all accustomed Ceremonies, be sacred and anointed king with the holy ampulle,
that all men might se and perceive, that he was, by all laws and decrees, a
just and a lawful king. Wherefore he assemblyng to gether a great army, and
having in his company Ione the Puzel, whom he used as an oracle and a
southsaier, passed through Champaigne, by the town of Anxer. They within, sent
to him messe^gers, praiyng him of certain days of abstine^ce of war, in the
which (if they were not rescued) they promised to render the town. He not
willing to recompense with ingratitude, the loving hearts of the citezens,
granted gently to their peticion, and leuyng there certain persons, to se that
they should not iugle with him, departed from thence to Troys, being the chief
city of Cha^paigne, which he besieged.xii. days. Sir Phillip Hal capitain
there, unprovided both of vitaill and men, mistrustyng, that aid would not
come in time, upon co^posicion rendered the town, so that he and his, with all
their moucables might in sauetie depart the city: which demand was agreed
to. After that Troys was yielded, the commonaltie of Chalons, rebelled against
sir Ihon Awbemo^d their capitain, and constrained him to deliver the town upon
like co^posicion, which against his will, he was fain to do: and likewise did
the citezens of Reyns, desiryng him to give saueconduite to all Englishemen,
safely to depart.

WHEN he had thus conquered Reyns, he in the presence of all the noblemen of
his faccion, and the dukes of Lorayne and Bar, was sacred king of France, by
the names of Charles the.vi. with all rites and ceremonies thereto apperteinyng.
They of Anxer which were not rescued within the time appointed, brought the
kayes to him, and submitted theimselfes to his obeysaunce: likewise did all the
citees and tounes adioynyng, geuyng thanks to almighty God, which having
compassion of their misery, had restored them to liberty and fredome. The Duke
of Bedford, hearing that these tounes and soyssons also, had returned to the
part of his adversaries, and that Charles late Dolphyn had taken upon him the
name and estate of the King of France, and also, seeing that daily, citees and
tounes returned from thenglishe part and became French, as though the
Englishmen had now lost al their hardy chieftaines and valiau^t men of war,
espied and evidently perceived, that the last and vettermoste point of
recovery, was driven only to overcome by battaill, and to subdue by force. By
which victory, (as he put his confidence in God) he trusted not only to
scourge and plague the citees, which were so suddenly chaungeable, but also to
assuage and caulme the haute courage of the new sacred French King and his
companions. Wherefore, he having together.x.M. good Englishemen, (beside
Normans) departed out of Paris, in warlike fashion and passed through Brye to
Monstrean Faultyow, and there sent by Bedforde his herault letters to the
French king, alledgyng to him that he contrary to the laws of God and man,
yea, and contrary to the final conclusion, taken, concorded, and agreed
between his noble brother king, Henry the fifth, and king Charles, the.v.
father to thesaid now v^urper, leuyng all humayne reason and honest
communicacion, (which sometime appeaseth debates and pacifieth strifes) only
allured and intised by a deuilishe wytche, and a sathanicall enchaunterese, had
not only falsely and craftily, taken upon him, the name, title and dignity of
the king of France: But also had, by murder, stelyng, craft, and deceiptful
means, violently gotten, and wrongfully kept, diverse citees and tounes,
belongyng to the king of England, his most best beloved lord, and most
derest nephew. For pro^e whereof, he was come down from Paris, with his army,
into the country of Brye, by dent of sword and stroke of battaill, to prove
his writing and cause true, willing his enemy to chose the place, and he in
the same, would give him battle.

THE new French king, departing from his solemn Ceremonies at Reins, and
remouyng from thence to Dampmartine, studiyng how to compass the Parisians,
either with money, or with promise, was somewhat troubled with this message,
howbeit, he made a fresh countenance, and a French brag, answeryng to the
herault: that he would sooner seek his Master, and the Duke should pursewe him.
The duke of Bedford hearing his answer, marched toward him, and pitched his
feld in a strong place, and sent out diverse of his raungers, to provoke the
Frenchmen to come forward. The French king was in manner determined to abide
the bettaill, but when he hard say by his espialles, that the power and nombre
of the Englishemen, were to his army equal in power, he determined that it was
more for his profit, to abstain from battaill without danger, then to enter
into the conflicte with ieopardy: fearyng, least that with a rash courage, he
might overthrow al his affairs which so effecteously proceeded. And so well
advised, he turned with his army, alitle out of the way. The duke of Bedford
perceiuyng his faint courage, followed him by mountains and dales, till he came
to a town in Bar, not far from Senlys, where he found the French king and
his army. Wherefore he ordered his battle, like a man expert in marciall
science, setting the archers before, and himself with the noblemen in the main
battaill, and put the Normans on both sides for the wings. The French king
also ordered his battles, according to the devise of his capitaines. Thus,
these two armies without any great doing, (except a few skirmishes, in the
which the dukes light horsemen did very valiauntly) lay each in sight of
other, by the space of two days and two nights. But when the French king
saw, and perceived, how glad, how diligent and coragious the Englishmen were to
fight and give battle, he imagened that by his tariyng, one of these two
things must needs chance: that is to say, either he should fight against his
will, or lie still like a cowarde, to his great rebuke and infamy. Wherefore
in the dedde of the night, (as privily as he could) he brake up his camp and
fled to Bray. When this flight was perceived in the morning, the Regent could
scace refrain his people, from following the French army, calling them,
cowardes, dastardes, and loutes, and therefore, he perceiving that by no means,
he could allure the new French king to abide battaill, mistrustyng the
Parisia^s, and geuyng no great credit to their fair, sweet, and flatteryng
words, returned again to Paris, to assemble together a greater power, and so
to prosecute his enemies.

IN this season, the Bohemians, (which belike had espied the usurped
authority of the bishop of Rome) began to rebel against his sea, which, (as
Eneas Siluius does report) were fallen into certain sects of heresy.
Wherefore, Martyn the fifth bishop of Rome, wrote unto them to abstain from
war, and to be reconciled by reason, from their damnable opinions. But they,
(being persuaded to the contrary) neither gave ear unto him, nor yet obeyed
his voice. Wherefore the bishop of Rome, wrote to the princes of Germany, to
invade y^ realm of Beam, as the den of heretics, and cave of deuilishe
doctrine. Beside this, he appointed Henry bishop of Winchester, and Cardinal
of. S. Eusebie, a man very well borne, (as you have hard) but no better borne
then high stomacked, and yet no higher stomacked, then abundantly enriched, to
be his legate in this great journey, and to bring out men from the realm of
England, into the country of Beam. And because the war touched religion,
he licenced thesaid Cardinal, to take the tenth part of every spiritual
dignity, benefice, and promocio^. This matter, was declared in open Parliament
in England, and not dissented, but gladly assented to, wherefore the bishop
gathered the money, and assembled four thousand men and mo* not without great
grudge of the people, which daily were with tallages and aides weried, and
sore burdened. And when men, municions, and money were ready for his high
enterprise, he with all his people came to the sea stronde at Dover, ready to
pass over the sea into Flaunders.

BUT in the mean season, the Duke of Bedforde considering, how tounes daily
were gotten, and countries hourly won in the realm of France, for lack of
sufficient defense and nombre of men of war, wrote to his brother the duke of
Gloucester, to releue him with aid, in that tempestious time and troubelous
season. When this letter was brought into England, the duke of Gloucester was
not alitle amassed, because he had no army ready to send at that time: for by
the reason of the Crewe, sent into Beam, he could not suddenly reyse a new
army. But because the matter was of such importance, and might neither be,
from day to day differred, nor yet long delaied, he wrote to the bishop of
Winchester, to pass with all his army toward the duke of Bedford, which at
that time had both need of men and assistau^ce, considering that now, all
stood upon loss or gain: which thing done, and to his honor acheued, he
might perform his journey against the ungracious Bohemians. Although the
Cardinal was somewhat moved with this countermaunde, yet least he should be
noted, not to aid the Regent of France, in so great a cause and so necessary
an entreprise, he bowed from his former journey, and passed the sea with all his
company, and brought them to his cosyn, to the city of Paris.

CHARLES the French King, having knowledge in the mean season by his
espialls, which went round about the country, to intise and solicit tounes
and citees, to return from the English part, and become French, that the
inhabita^tes of Champeigne, and Beuauoys ought him great love and synguler
favor, and gladly coueted to renounce the subieccion of England, and to be
under his proteccion, and also offered to open him their gates, so that they
should not thereby, be in ieoperdy of their life's and loss of their goods,
with all have and diligence removed toward Champeigne. The duke of Bedford
being advertised of his progress, and having his army augmented, with the new
aid, which the cardinal had of late conducted, marched forward with great
speed to encountre and give battaill, to his mortal enemy the French king.
When the duke was come to Senlys, the Frenchemen were lodged on the
Mountpilioll. between Senlis and Champiegne. Every army knew of other, and
every host might behold other. Then the ca^pes were trenched, and the battles
pitched, and the feldes ordered. Thus, these great armies lay two days,
nothing doing but with skirmishes, in the which the Normans sore vexed the
Frenchemen. Wherefore the lord Regent, gave to them many high lauds and
praisynges, and determined surely the next day, to set on the French king in
his ca^pe, if he would not remove out, and abide battaill. But while king
Charles did politiquely consider, what a variable lady, Fortune was, and what a
sudden and unthought chance of a small thing, might do in a battaill: for the
detrimentes and overthrows, that he and his nation had taken and tasted by
thenglishemen, were to them a lernyng, an example and a plain experiment, to
avoid open ioynyng, mutual conflict, and force to force. And beside that, he
had by his explorators and spies, plain and perfect knowledge, y^ many and
diverse citees and tounes in France, abhorryng thenglishe liberty, and
aspiryng to the French bondage and native servitude, (according to the nature
of Asses, which the more they be charged with, the more they desire) would,
(when they saw their time) not only rebel and return to his faccion and
part, but also were ready to aid and assiste him, in recovery of his desired
realm and ancient dominion, in expellyng also the English nation, out of the
territories of France. And therefore, he imagined that the duke of Bedforde,
was so hasty to give him battaill, thynkyng, that if he then were overcome, the
game had, for the Englishemen been clearly gotten, and to the Frenchemen, a
perpetual checkemate. Wherefore he determined never, (except very necessity
compelled or constrained him) to fight in open battaill with the Englishmen,
nor by a feld to adventure his realm with the^, of whom his predecessors so
often times had been vanquished. Wherefore, like a carpet capitain, he in the
night, removed his camp and fled to Crespy, and yet his no^bre was double to
the English army. The duke of Bedforde, seeing that the French king, was thus
cowardly retrayted, and as a man, which durst not once assaie the stroke of
an English arm, shamefully reculed: with all his power and army, returned
again to Paris, sore suspectyng the deceiptfull faith of the pollitique
Parisians. The bishop of Winchester, after the French kings flight, went into
Beam, and there did somewhat, but what it was, authors keep silence, and so do
I: But shortly, he without any great praise, and small gain, returned into
England, more glad of his retraite, then of his aduau^syng forward. Sone
after, the bishop of Rome without his agreement, vnlegated him, and set another
in his stead and authority, with which doing, he was neither content nor
pleased.

The eight year. The.viii. year

ON the vi. day of Nouembre, being the day of saint Leonard, king Henry, in
the eight year of his reign, was, at Westminster with all pomp and honor,
crouned king of this realm of England. At which coronacion, to rehearse the
costly fair, the delicate meat, the pleasant wines, the nombre of courses,
the sorts of dishes, the labors of officers, the multitude of people, the
estates of Lords, the beauties of Ladies, the riches of apparel, the curious
devises, the solemn banquettes, it would ask a long time, and weary you:
Wherefore leauyng the pleasant pastyme in England, I will return to the
troubleous wars in France.

AFTER that the French king was fled from the duke of Bedford, (as you have
hard before) and was come to Crespy in Ualoys, he was credibly informed, how
the citezens of Champaigne, desired greatly to be under his governance and
subieccion. Wherefore, he mindyng not to lose so fair an offered prey, ceased
not, til he came to the town, where, with all reverence and benignity, he was
received and welcomed. And after that, were rendered to him, the tounes of
Senlis and Beauoys. And the Lord Longuenall took by stelth, the castle of
Aumarle and slew all the Englishemen, and in short space, the lord Barbasan,
which long had been prisoner in the Castle Gaylard, so much, what with fair
words and large promises, persuaded his kepers, that he not only delivered his
own person, but also caused the town, to turn from thenglishmen, to the
part of king Charles his Master. Which king, although he much reioysed, at
the good success, that Fortune had to him sent, yet he was somewhat desperate,
how to recover his country from the possession of the Englishemen, except he
vnknitted the knotte and league, between the duke of Burgoyn and them.
Wherefore, he sent his Chauncellor, and diverse Ambassadors to the duke of
Burgoyn, first, excusing himself of the death and murder, of duke Ihon his
father, and after, declaryng to him, that there could be nothing more foul,
more dishonest, nor more detestable, then, for his own peculiar cause, and
private displeasure, to join with his ancient enemies, and perpetual
adversaries, against his native country and natural nation: not only
requiryng him, of concord, peace, and amity, but also promisyng golden
mountains, and many more benefits, then at that time, he was either able or
could perform. This message was not so secret, nor the doing so closely
cloked, but the Duke of Bedford, thereof was plainly informed. Which, being
sore troubled, and unquieted in his mind, because he saw the power of
thenglishe nation, daily wax less, he, of al things, first forseyng, if any
loss should of necessity chance, of those tounes and countries, which his
noble brother, king Henry the fifth had conquered, in the very country of
France, for lack of tuicion or defense: yet for an ankerhold, he determined
to keep, possess, and defend, the Duchy of Normandy, the old inheritance
and aunciente patrimony, of the kings of England, and from them only, by
force and not by justice, by violence and not by right, sith the time of King
Henry the third, (the deuilishe division then reignyng in the realm)
wrongfully detained, and injuriously usurped. Wherefore, he diligently
prouidyng, for things that might chance, appointed governor of the city of
Paris, Jews of Luxenberough, bishop of Turwine and Ely, being Chauncellor of
France, for the king of England, a man of no less wit, then of birthe, leuyng
with him, a convenient nombre of Englishemen to defend both the city and
territory of Paris, and the isle of France then being in the Englishmens
possession and governance.

THESE things thus ordered, he departed from Paris, into Normandy, and called
at Roan a parliament, of the three estates of the duchy, in the which he
declared unto them, the great liberties, the manifold priueleges, the
innumerable benefits, which they had received of the kings of England,
during the time, that they were possessors and lords of the same duchy, not
puttyng in oblivion, the misery, bondage, and calamity, which they had
sustained, by the intolerable yoke and daily tributes, continually laid in
their necks like Asses, by the cruel and coueteous Frenchemen: and puttyng
them also in remembrance, how the kings of England, were not only brought
forth and disce^ded, of the Normans blood and progeny, but were the very true
and undoubtful heirs, to the same country and duchy, lineally succedyng and
lawfully discendyng from Rollo the hardy, first duke and prince of the same
dominion: Requiryng them farther, to live in love and amity amongst them
self, to be true and obedient, to the king their sovereign Lord, and to keep
their oath and promise, made and sworn to his noble brother, king Henry the.v.
promisyng to them, English liberty and priueleges royal. While the duke of
Bedford was thus, intertainyng and encoragyng the Normans, Charles the new
French king, being of his departure advertised, longyng and thrystyng for to
obtain Paris, the chief city and principal place of resort, within the whole
realm of France, departed from the town of Senlis well accompanied, and came
to the town of saint Denise, which he found desolate, and abandoned of all
garrison, and good governance. Wherefore, with out force and small damage, he
entered into the voyed town, and lodged his army at Mountmartyr, and
Abberuilliers, nere adioynyng, and liyng to the city of Paris. And from
thence, sent, Ihon duke of Alaunson, and his sorceresse Ione, (called the
maid, sent from God) in whom, his whole affiaunce then consisted, with three
thousand light horsemen, to get again the city of Paris, either by force, or
by fair flatteryng, or reasonable treaty, and after them, he without delaie
or defer ryng of time, with all his power, came between Mou^tmartyr and Paris,
and suddenly, appproched the gate of saint Honor, setting up ladders to the
walls, and castyng faggottes into the diches, as though, he would with a
French brag, suddenly have gotten the fair cite. But thenglishe capitaines,
every one keeping his ward and place assigned, so manfully and fiersly, with a
noble courage, defended themselfes, their walls and toures, with the assistence
of the Parisians, that they rebutted and drove away the Frenchmen, and threw
down Ione, their great goddess, into the botome of the town ditche, where
she lay behynd the back of an Ass, sore hurt, till the time, that she all
filthy with mire and durte, was drawn out, by Guyschard of Thienbrone,
servant to the duke of Alaunson. The French King, seeing the great loss,
that he had sustained at this assaut, and accounted, his pretensed conquest, in
manner impossible, leuyng the dedde bodies behind him, and taking with him, the
wounded capitaines, which were of no small nombre, returned into Berry. But in
the mean way, the citezens of Laignie, became his subjects, and made to him
an oath, promisyng to continewe from thence forth to him, both true and
obedient.

THE Duke of Bedford, being in Normandy, and hearing of this sudden attempt,
lost no time, nor spared no travail, till he came to Paris. Where he, not only
thanked the capitaines, and praised the citeze^s for their assured fidelity
and good will, toward their king and sovereign lord, but also extolled their
hardines, and manly doings, above the Stars, and high elements: promisyng
to them, honor, fame, and great aduauncementes. Which gentle exhortacion, so
incoraged and inflamed the hearts of the Parisians, that they swear, promised,
and concluded, to be friends ever to the king of England and his friends, and
enemies always to his foes and adversaries, making proclamacion by this style.
Friends to King Henry, friends to the Parisians, enemies to England, enemies to
Paris. But if they spoke it with their hearts, either for fear, that Charles
the French king, should not punish them, if he once obtained the
superiority, over their city, and town, or that they flattred thenglishmen,
to put themselfes in credit with the chief capitaines, you shall plainly
perceive, by the sequel of their acts

SONE after these doings, came to Paris with a great company, Phillip duke of
Burgoyn, which was of the Regent, and the lady his wife, honorably received,
and highly feasted. And after long consultacion had, for recoueryng of the
tounes, lately by the French king stolen and taken, it was agreed, that the
duke of Bedford, should rail an army, for the recovery of thesaid fortresses,
and that the duke of Burgoyne, should be his deputy, and tarry at Paris, for
the defense of the same. After this great bu^inesse, thus concluded, and
appointed, the Duke of Bedforde himself, without any great resistaunce,
recovered again the town of saint Denise, and diverse other Castles. And
after that done, he sent the Bastard of Clarence, to lay siege to the Castle
of Toursie, being both by the natural situacion, and man's policy, very
strong, and in manner unable to be beaten down. The siege continued six
months, but in conclusion, the capitain discomfited of al releue and succor,
rendered the fortress, the life of him and his soldiers only saved. Which
offer was taken, and the castle raised, and cast down to the ground. During
this siege, sir Thomas Kiriell knight, with four hundred Englishemen, departed
from Gourney in Normandy, and rode by Beauoys, spoylyng, robbyng, and wastyng
the country, to the suburbs of Cleremount. Whereof, hearing the Earl of
the same town, assembled all the men of war, of the garrisons adioynyng, to
fight with thenglishmen: and so the Frenchemen with all diligence ^et forward,
and found their enemies in a straight place, nere unto Beauois. The earl of
Cleremount seeing, that he could not hurt them, with his men of arms, by
reason of the straight, came down on foot with all his company, and fiersly set
on the Englishmen. The fight was fierce, and the advantage doubtful. But in
conclusion, the archers shot so terriblie, that the Frenchmen, not able to
abide the smart, and gauls of the arrows, fled a pace, and the Englishmen
leuyng the straight, leped on horseback, and followed the chase. In the which
were taken two hundred prisoners, and thrice as many slain. The Earl, by the
swiftness of his horse, escaped his enemies, and came to the town of
Beauoys: and so sir Thomas Kiriell, with plenty of spoil and prisoners,
returned to Goruay, renderyng to GOD his hearty thanks, for that good chance
and happy victory.

YET Fortune sent not this good luck alone, for therle of Suffolk at the same
very season, besiegyng the town of Aumarle, whereof was capitain the lord
Rambures, (after.xxiiii. great assautes given to the fortress) had the town
and castle to him symply rendered. Wherefore, he caused.xxx. of the tounes men,
for their untruth, to be hanged on the walls, and all the rest he raunsomed,
and sent the capitain into England, where he remained six years continually,
and after by excaunge was delivered. After this, the earl fortified the town,
with men, municions and vitaile, and so by a little and little, the Englishmen
recovered again many tounes, which before they had lost, without any great
loss of their people. Which thing, the Frenchemen well considering, imagined
by what means, how to get again the town of Laual, which y^ lord Talbot
(before as you have hard) gat, by scalyng in a night. Wherefore, to possess
their desired prey, they with money, and gay promises, first corrupted a
Miller, that kept a Mil adioynyng to the wall, so that the Miller, suffered the
lord Homet with three hundred other, to pass through his Mill into the town,
in a very dark night. When they were entered, they slew the kepers of the
gate, and let in the Lord Bertrand be la Ferrier, with five hundred men of
arms: which either slew or took prisoners, all thenglishemen within the
town. And shortly after, sir Stephin de Uignoles called the Heir, took by
scalyng, the town of Lonuiers in Normandy, and did much damage, to all the
tounes adioynyng.

The nynth year. The ix. year.

WHile these chances happened, between the Englishmen and Frenchemen, Phillip
duke of Burgoyne, married the Lady Isabell, daughter to Ihon, King of
Portyngall, and great aunte to the king of England. In honor of which
marriage, he instituted and began an order of.xxxvi. knights without reproach,
called the order of the golden flece, and devised statutes, mantels, collers,
and Ceremonies for the same, much like to the ordinances, of the noble order
of the Garter begone in England, almost an hundred years before the
inuencion, of this fraternity and friendship. On the which wife, he begat, the
hardy duke Charles, father to Marie, after married to Maximilia^ king of the
Romans, as (when place requires) shall be hereafter to you declared.

IN this very season, the Englishemen in the cold month of Decembre, besieged
the town of Laigny, in the which was the Puzel and diverse other good
capitaines. But the weither was so cold, and the rain so great and so
continual, that they, of force compelled, not by their enemies, but by
intemperate season, reised their siege: and in their return, Puzell and all
the garrison within the town, issued out and fought with thenglishmen, where,
(after long fightyng) both parties departed without either great gain or
loss. After this enterprise done, the duke of Burgoyne, accompanied with the
earls of Arundell and Suffolk, and the lord Ihon of Luxenbrough, and with a
great puissaunce, besieged the town of Champeigne: which town was well
walled, manned, and vitailed, so that the besiegers, must either by assaut or
long tariyng, weary or famishe them within the town. So they cast trenches,
and made moynes, and studied all the ways that they could devise, how to
compass their conquest and enterprise. And it happened in the night of the
Assencion of our lord, that Pothon of Xentraxles, Ione the Puzell, and five or
six hundred men of arms, issued out of Cha^peigne, by the gate of the bridge
toward Mowntdedier, intendyng to set fire in the tents and lodgings of the
lord of Baudo, which was then gone to Marigny, for the Duke of Burgoyns
affairs. At which time, sir Ihon of Luxenborough, with eight other gentlemen
(which had riden about the town to search and vieue, in what place the town
might be most aptly and conveniently assauted or scaled) were come nere to the
lodges of the lord of Baudo, where they espied the Frenchmen, which began to
cut down tents, overthrow pauilions, and kill men in their beds. Wherefore,
shortly they assembled a great nombre of men, as well English as Burgonions,
and coragiously set on the Frenchmen. Sore was the fight and great was the
slaughter, in so much that the Frenchemen, not able longer to endure, fled
into the town so fast, that one let the other to enter. In which chase
was taken, Ione the Puzell, and diverse other: which Ione was sent to the duke
of Bedford to Roan, where, (after long examinacio^) she was brent to ashes. This
wytch or manly woman, (called the maid of GOD) the Frenchemen greatly
glorified and highly extolled, alledgyng that by her Orleau^ce was vitailed: by
her, king Charles was sacred at Reins, and that by her, the Englishemen were
often times put back and overthrown. O Lord, what dispraise is this to the
nobility of France? What blotte is this to the French nation? What more
rebuke can be imputed to a renoumed region, then to affirm, write and
confess, that all notable victories, and honorable conquestes, which neither
the king with his power, nor the nobility with their valiantness, nor the
counsel with their wit, nor the co^monaltie with their strenght, could
compass or obtain, were gotten and achiued by a shepherdes daughter, a
chamberlein in an hostrie, and a beggars brat: which blindyng the wits of
the French nation, by reuelacions, dreams and fantastical visions, made the^
believe things not to be supposed, and to give faith to things impossible.
For surely, if credit may be given to the acts of the Clergy, openly done,
and commonly showed, this woman was not inspired with the holy ghost, nor sent
from God, (as the Frenchemen believe) but an encha^teresse, an orgayne of the
devil, sent from Satan, to blind the people and bring them in vnbelife: as by
this letter, sent from the king of England, to the duke of Burgoyn, to you
evidently shall appear.

MOST dear and well-beloved uncle, the fervent love and great affeccion, which
you (like a very catholic prince) bear to our Mother holy Church, and to
the advancement of our faith, does both resonably admonish, and friendly
exhort us, to signify and write unto you, such things, which, to the honor
of our Mother holy Church, strengthenyng of our faith, and pluckyng up by the
rotes, of most pestilent errors, have been solemply done within our city of
Roan. It is commonly renoumed, and in every place published, that the woman,
commonly called the Puzell, has by the space of two years and more, contrary
to Gods law, and the estate of womanhed, been clothed in a man's apparel,
a thing in the sight of God abominable. And in this estate, carried over and
conveyed, to the presence of our chief enemy and yours, to whom, and to the
prelates, nobles, and commons of his part, she declared that she was sent from
God, presumptuously making her vaunt, that she had communicacion personally,
and visibly with saint Michaell, and a great multitude of Angels, and
saints of heaven, as saint Katheryn, and saint Margarete: by the which
falshode and subtilitie, she made diverse believe, and trust in her faith,
promisyng to them, great and notable victories, by the which mean, she did
turn the hearts of many men and women, from the truth and verity, and
converted them to lies and errors. Beside this, she usurped a cote of arms,
and displaid a standard, which things, be apperteinyng only to knights and
esquiers: and of a great outrage, and more pride and presumpcio^, she
demanded, to bear the noble and excellent Arms of France, which she in
part obtained, the which she bare in many skirmishes and assautes, and her
brethren also (as men report) that is to say: the feld azure, a swerd, the
point upward in pale silver, set between two flower deluces, firmed with a
croune of gold. And in this estate, she came into the feld, and guided men of
war, and gathred companies, and assembled hosts to exercise unnatural
cruelties, in sheding of christen blood, and stirryng sedicions, and commocions
amongst the people, inducyng them, to perjury, rebellion, supersticio^ and
false error, in disturbyng of peace and quietness, and renewyng of mortal war.
Beside this, causyng her self to be honored and worshipped of many, as a woman
sanctified, and dampnably openyng, diverse imagined cases long to rehearse, in
diverse places well known and apparently proved. Whereby, almost al
Christendom is slaundered. But the divine puissaunce, having compassion upon
his true people, and willing no longer to leave them in peril, nor suffer the^,
to abide still in ways dangerous, and new cruelties, has lightly permitted,
of his great mercy and clemency, thesaied puzell to be taken in your host and
siege, which you kept for us before Champeigne, and by your good mean,
delivered into our obeysaunce and dominion. And because, we were required, by
the bishop of the Dioces, where she was taken, (because she was noted,
suspected, and defamed to be a traitor to almighty God) to deliver her to him,
as to her ordinary and Ecclesiastical judge: We, for the reverence of our
Mother holy Church, (whose ordinances we will prefer, as our own deeds
and wills, as reason it is) and also for the advancement of Christen faith,
bayled thesaied Ione to him, to the intent that he should make process against
her: not willing any vengeance, or punishme^te to be showed to her, by any
officers of our secular Justices, which they might have lawfully and
resonablie done, considering the great hurtes, damages* and inco^ueniences,
the horrible murders, and detestable cruelties, and other innumerable
mischiefs, which she has committed in our territories, against our people,
and obedient subjects. The which bishop, taking in company to him, the Uicar
and inquisitor of errors, and herisies, and calling to them, a great and
notable nombre of solemn doctors, and masters in divinity, and law Canon,
began by great solempnitie, and gravity, accordyngly, to proceed in the cause
of the said Ione. And after that, thesaid bishop and inquisitor, judges in
this cause, had at diverse days ministered, certain interrogatories to the
said Ione, and had caused the confessions and assercions of her, truly to be
examined by thesaid doctors and masters, and in conclusion generally, by all
the faculties of our dear and well-beloved daughter the Uniuersity of Paris.
Against whom, (the confessions and assercio^s, maturely and deliberatly
considered) the Judges, Doctors, and all other the parties aforesaied, adjudged
the same Ione, a supersticious sorceresse, and a diabolical blasphemeresse of
God, and of his saints: and a person scismatike and erroneous, in the law
of Jesus Christ. And for to reduce and bring her again, to the communion and
company, of our Mother holy Church, and to purge, her of her horrible, and
pernicious crimes and offenses, and to save and preserve her soul, from
perpetual pain and dampnacion, she was most charitably and favorably
admonished and advised, to put away and abhor, all her errors and erroneous
doings, and to return humbly to the right way, and come to the very verity
of a Christen creature, or else to put her soul and body in great perell and
ieoperdie. But all this notwithstanding, the perelous and inflamed spirit of
pride, and of outrageous presumpcio^, the which continually enforces himself,
to break and dissolve the unity of Christen obedience, so clasped in his
claws, the heart of this woman Ione, that she, neither by any ghostly
exhortacion, holy admonicion, or any other wholesome doctrine, which might to
her be showed, would mollify her hard heart, or bring her to humility. But
she advanced and auowed, that all things by her done, were well done: yea, and
done by the commandments of GOD, and the saints before rehearsed, plainly
to her apperyng: Referryng the judgment of her cause, only to God, and to no
judge or counsel, of the Church militant. Wherefore, the Judges
Ecclesiastical, perceiuyng her hard heart, so long to continue, caused her to
be brought forth, in a common auditorie, before the Clergy and people, in a
great multitude, there, for that purpose assembled. In which presence were
opened, manifested, and declared, solemply, openly, and truly, by a master in
divinity, of notable learning and virtuous life, to the advancement of the
catholic faith, and extirpyng of errors and false opinions, all her
confessions and assercions, charitably admonishyng, and persuadyng her to
return, to the union and feloship of Christ's Church, and to correct and
amend, the fautes and offenses, in the which she was so obstinate and blind.
And according to the law, the Judges aforesaid, begainne to proceed and
pronounce the judgment and ^entence, in that case of right apparteining. Yet,
before the Judge, had fully declared the sentence, she began somewhat to abate
her courage, and said that she would, reconcile her self, to our Mother the
holy Church, both gladly and wyllyngly. The Judges, and other Ecclesiastical
persons, gentely received her offer, hopyng by this mean, that both her body
and soul, were gotten again out of eternal loss and perdicion. And so, she
submitted her self, to the ordinance of the holy Church, and with her mouth,
openly revoked, her errores and detestable crimes: and the same, abiured openly,
signyng with her hand, thesaied abiuracion, and reuocacion. Where upon, our
Mother holy Church, being pitiful and merciful, glad and reioysyng of a
sinner, that will convert, willing the strayed sheep to return again to his
fold and flock, conde^pned thesaid Ione only to do open penance. But the
fire of her pride, which was in her heart, suddenly brast out into hurtful
flames, blown out by the belowes of envy: and incontinent after, she took
again, all her errors and false opinions, by her before, adiuered and revoked,
for which causes, according to the judgments and institucions of holy
church, to the intent that she, herea^ter should not defile, any other membre
of the flock, of our Lord Jesus Christ: was again exhorted, and preached to
openly. And because she still was obstinate, in her trespaces and villainous
offenses, she was delivered to the secular power, the which condemned her, to
be brent, and consumed her in the fire. And when she saw that the fatal day
of her obstinacy was come, she openly confessed, that the spirits, which to
her often did appear, were evil and false, and apparent liers, and that their
promise, which they had made, to deliver her out of captivity, was false and
vnt rue: affirmyng her self, by those spirits to be often beguiled, blinded,
and mocked. And so being in good mind, she was by the Justices, carried to the
old market, within the city of Roan, and there by the fire, consumed to
ashes, in the sight of all the people.


THIS letter, the king of England, sent not only to the Duke of Burgoyne,
and other Princes, to declare the verity of the matter, and the administracion
of Justice, but to admonish all rude and ignorant persons, in all other
countries, to refrain, from the credit and belefe of the sayings, of such
profane prophesies, and crafty imageners, as this peuishe painted Puzel was.
Yet notwithstanding, this lawful process, this due examinacion and public
sentence, Tho^ Buchet, and diverse French writers affirm her to be a saint
in heaven. But because, it is no point of our faith, no man is bound to believe
his judgment, although he were an Archedeken. But Paulus Emilius, a famous
writer, rehersyng that the citezens of Orleaunce, had builded in the honor of
her, an Image or an Idol, says: y^ Pius bishop of Rome, and Anthony bishop of
Florence, much merueiled and greatly wondered at her acts and doings. With
which saying, I can very well agree, that she was more to be marueiled at, as
a false prophetisse, and seducer of the people: then to be honored or
worshipped as a saint sent from God into the realm of France. For of this I
am sure, that all ancient writers, as well divine, as profane, allege these
three things, beside diverse other, to apparteine to a good woman. First,
shamefastness, Three properties that appertain to a good woman.
which the Romain Ladies ^o kept, that seldom or never they were seen openly
talkyng with a man: which virtue, at this day amongst the Turks, is highly
esteemed. The second, is pity: which in a woman's heart, abhorteth the
spillyng of the blood of a poor beast, or a sely bird. The third, is womanly
behauor, aduoydyng the occasion of evil judgment, and causes of slaundre. If
these qualities, be of necessity, incident to a good woman, where was her
shamefastnes, when she daily and nightly, was conversant with comen soldiers,
and men of war, amongst whom, is small honesty, less virtue, and
shamefastness, least of all excercised or used? Where was her womanly pity,
when she taking to her, the heart of a cruel beast, flewe, man, woman, and
child, where she might have the upper hand? Where was her womanly behauor,
when she cladde her self in a man's clothyng, and was co^uersaunt with every
losell, geuyng occasion to all men to judge, and speak evil of her, and her
doings. Then these things, being thus plainly true, all men must needs
confess, that the cause ceasyng, the effect also cease: so y^, if these
moral virtues lackyng, she was no good woman, then it must needs, consequently
follow, that she was no saint.

NOW leuyng this woman, consumed to ashes, let us return again, to the
siege of Compeigne, which still continewed. During which time, the Regent
sent to the Duke of Burgoyne, liyng at the siege, the earl of Huntyngdon, sir
Ihon Robsert, with a thousand Archers, which daily skirmished, with them of
the town, and made such Bastiles and fortresses, that the town must needs be
rendered, or else they within, famished. But se the chance, when victory was at
hand Tidings were brought to the duke of Burgoyn, that Phillip duke of
Brabante, was departed out of this world, leuyng behind him, no heir of his
body: To whom, thesaied duke pretended to be next heir. Wherefore, he taking
with him, his best capitaines, of the recovery of ^o great a duchy, departed
from the siege, leuyng his poor people behynd him, and ordained in his place,
for his leuetenaunt, sir Ihon Luxenborough, which being, of small strength and
less courage, after the dukes departing, advised the Englishmen, to depart for
that time, till the next summer: which thereto at the first, would in nowise
agree. But there was no remedy, for he was capitain general, and had the
ordinance under his rule, so that without that, they could nothing do:
Wherefore, in great displeasure, they returned into Normandy. After whose
departure, the capitain set fire in all the bastiles, and secretly departed,
leuyng behind him, diverse pieces of ordinance, for lack of carriage. With
which return, the dukes of Bedford and Burgoyn, were sore displeased: for if he
had continued his siege, eight days longer, the town had been rendered,
without dent of swerd. For pestilence and famyne, had almost consumed all the
soldiers, and left the town, with out sauegard or defense.

AFTER this siege broken up, Ihon duke of Norffolke, took again the tounes of
Da^pmartyn, and the Chasse Mongay, and diverse other tounes. And therle of
Stafford, took the town of Brie, in County Robert, and from thense, forraged
all the country to Sens, and after took Quesnoy in Brie, Grand Puys, and
Rampellon, with many prisoners as sir Jacques de Milly, and sir Ihon de la Hay.
During which time the Frenchemen took Louiers, and Uilluense. And then the
town of Melune rebelled, and had such aid, of other tounes adioynyng, that
the English soldiers, were feign to leave Melune, Morret, and Gorbell. Thus,
according to the chance of war, the one part gat, and the other lost. Thus the
English affairs (as you have hard) within the realm began to waver, and wax
variable, which caused the English capitaines, to be of diverse opinions. For
one part, being sorry and pensive, adjudged the things present, light and of no
moment, in comparison of them which they saw likely to follow: and another
sort, adjudged that present time, to be most ieoperdus, and most repleted
with perilles: Because they saw, the power of their enemies, now increased,
and their own strength rather decayed, then co^serued. And so every man
studiyng on this business, advised secretly with himself, what counsel was
best to be taken, and what way was best to be followed, to remedy these
things, thus waueryng, in a doubtful balance. And then it was concluded, tha
it was most apt and mete, for the time present, that king Henry in his
royal person, with a new army, should come down into France, partly to
comfort and visit his own subjects there: partly, either by fear or favor,
(because a child, of his age and beauty, does commonly allure to him, the
hearts of elder persons,) to cause the Frenchemen to continue, in their due
obeysaunce toward him. Wherefore, after a great host, convenient for that
purpose, assembled, and money for the maintenau^ce of the war, ready gathered,
and the realm set in an order, and the Duke of Gloucester, appointed
governor (which during the kings absence, appeased diverse riottes, and
punished many offenders,) the king with a great power, took shippyng at
Dover, and landed at Calice, and there tarried a good space* and from thence, he
removed to Roan, where, with all triumph, he was received, and there soiorned,
till the midst of August, his nobles daily consultyng, on their great
business, and weighty affairs.

The tenth year. The.x. year.

IN the month of Nouembre, he removed from Roan to Ponthoise, and so to
saint Denice, to the intent to make his entry, into the city of Paris, and
there to be sacred king of France, and to receive, the scepter and Croune of
the realm and country.

THERE were in his company, of his own nacio^, his uncle the Cardinal of
Winchester, The coronaci^n of king Henry the vi. in Paris.
the Cardinal and Archebishoppe of York, the Dukes of Bedforde, York, and
Norffolke, the Earls of Warwick, Salis^ury, Oxford, Huntyngdon, Ormond,
Mortayn, Suffolk, and of Gascoynes, the Earl of Longuile, and March, beside
many noble men of England, Guyan, and Normandy. And the chief of the French
nation, were the dukes of Burgoyn, and Jews of Luxenbrogh Cardinal and
Chauncellor of France for king Henry, the bishops of Beauoys and Neyon, both
peers of France, beside the bishopp of Paris, and diverse other bishops,
therle of Uaudemount, and other noble men whose names were very tedious to you
to here rehearsed. And he had in a guard, about his person, three thousand strong
archers, some on horseback, and part on foot. And as he was coming, between
saint Denice and Paris, he was met at the Chapel, in the mean way, by Sir
Simon Moruer provost of Paris, with a great company, all clothed in read
Satin, with blewe whoddes, which did to him, due reverence and low
obeysaunce. After whom, came diverse rich and notable burgesses, of the town
of Paris, all appareled in Crimosyne clothe. After they had done their
reverence, there approached to the king, the.ix. worthies, ^ittyng richely on
horseback, armed with the arms to them apperteinyng. Next after them, came
the knight of the watch, for the provost Merchants, and with him, all the
officers of the court, appareled in blewe, and hattes read. And in a long
space after, came Master Phillip de Noruillier, chief president of the
Parliament, appareled in a robe of estate: and all the other presidentes of the
parliament, clothed in robes of scarlet, and in like robes followed the Lords
of the Chamber of accomptes, and of the finaunce, the Masters of the Requests,
the secretaries, and Regesters, and every company, as their course came,
saluted the king, with eloquent oracions, and heroical verses, and so conveyed
him to the gate of saint Denice, where the prouoste, of the Merchants, and
the Shrefes of the town, received him with a Canapie of blewe velvet, richely
embraudred, with flower of delices gold, and bare the same over him, through the
town, which on every side, was hanged with rich clothes of Arras and
Tapissrie. And at every port and bridge where he passed was set a pageaunt, of
great show and small cost, which, because they were but trifles, I over
pass, and speak but of one devise, made before the gate of the Chastelet,
whereupon a stage stood, a goodly child, clothed with habit royal, set full
of flower delices, having two Crounes on his head, representyng the young king,
and on his right hand, stood two noble personages, in the arms of Burgoyne
and Flaunders: and on the left side of him, stood three personages, clothed
in the Arms, of Bedforde, Salisbury, and Warwick, which to him deliuerd, the
sword of England. This pagiaunt was well regarded, and highly praised. From
thence he departed to the palace, and offered in the Chapel, and from thence
he departed, to the house of Tournelles, and there took his repast. And after
din- Isabell, late wife to king Charles, his grandfather, long before
disceased. And the next day he was conveyed, to Boys de Uyncennes, where, he
reposed himself, till the.xv. day of Dece^bre: on which day, he returned to
the palaice of Paris. And on the.xvij. of thesaied month, he departed from the
place, in great triumph, honorably accompanied, to our Lady church of Paris:
where, with all solempnitie, he was anointed and crouned king of France, by the
Cardinal of Winchester: (the bishop of Paris, not being content, that the
Cardinal should do such a high Ceremony, in his Church and iurisdiccion.) At
the offering, he offered bread and wine, as the custom of France is. When the
divine seruise was finished, and all Ceremonies due, to that high estate were
accomplished, the king departed toward the palaice, having one croune on his
head, and another borne before him, and one scepter in his hand, and the second
borne before him. What should I speak, of the honorable service, the dainty
dishes, the pleasant conceiptes, the costly wines, the sweet Armony, the
Musical instruments, which were seen and showed at that feast, sith all men
may conjecture, that nothing was omitted, that might be bought for gold, nor
nothing was forgotten, that by man's wit could be invented. Yet this high
and joyous feast, was not without a spotte of displeasure, for the Cardinal of
Wynchester, which at this time, would have no man to him egall, commanded the
duke of Bedforde, to leave of the name of Regent, during the time that the king
was in France: affirmyng the chief ruler being in presence, the authority of
the substitute, was clearly derogate: according to the common saying: in the
presence of the high power, the small authority gives place. The duke of
Bedford, took such a secret dispeasure with this dooyng, that he never after
favored the Cardinal, but repugned and disdained at all things that he did or
devised. And so because the Cardinal would have no temporal Lord, either to
him superior, or with him egall, he set forth this proud and arrogant
conclusion, through which unhappy division, the glory of thenglshemen within
the realm of France, began first to decay, and vade away in France.

THE next day after this solemn feast, were kept triumphant Iustes and
Turneis, in the which, the Earl of Arundell, and the Bastard of Sent Polle, by
the judgment of the Ladies, wan the price, and gat the honor. When he had
kept open house to all comers, by the space of xx. days, because the air of
Paris, was somewhat contrariaunt to his pure complexion, he was advised by his
counsel, to return to Roan. But before his departure, he caused all the
nobility, the preside^tz of the parliament, the prouostes of the city and of
the Merchants, and the chief burgesses of the town and city, and all the
doctors of the university, to be assembled in his presence: to whom the duke
of Bedford said in this manner.

IT is not unknown to you all my lords, An Oracion of the duke of Bedforde,
made to the Parisians.
as well spiritual as temporal, how this noble region and famous country, of
antiquity called Gaul, and now France, sith the time of Charles, surnamed
the Great, being both Emperor of Rome, and king of this realm, has been
accounted, reputed, and renoumed, the most christen region, and famous
seigniory, within the circle of al christendo^, yea, and within the whole part
of Europe, and not vndeseruyngly, for.iij. causes. First, for your sincere
faith and obedient love, toward your savior and redemer Jesus Christ. The
second, for obseruyng your fidelity and due obeysau^ce, to your kings and
sovereign Lords. Thirdly, for keeping and performyng your promises and
agrementes, as well by word as by writing: from the which no Pagane, nor
honest Christian, will or should disagree. This famous renoume and immaculate
honor, so long continewyng without reproach or blotte: I think, yea, and doubt
not, but you will to the death, keep, defend, and observe, as your noble
parents and ancient progenitors, before you (to their ineffable praise) have
used and accustomed. Wherefore, since it is not unknown to all you, that the
noble and virtuous prince, king Henry the fifth, my most dearest and
well-beloved brother, was the very true inheritor, and the vndoubt full
successor, to the croune of this realm of France, as cousin and heir to Lady
Isabell, daughter and sole inheritrice, to king Phillippe the Fair. For the
recovery of which right and title, what pain he took, and what charge he was
at, I well know, and some of you have felt, as a great scourge to your
nation, only provided by God, to afflicte and punish them: which will
withhold and usurp, other men's rightes, possessions, and inheritance. But
God our savior and redemer, (which will not suffer his people, intendyng to
convert, to be dampened for ever, but gently calls them to mercy and
salvation) of his great goodness and gentleness, willed the holy ghost, to shed
and pour, into the heart of the noble prince, king Charles, your late
well-beloved and most drad sovereign lord, the knowledge of the lawful line,
and of the true pathe of the inheritance, of the croune and scepter of this
realm. Which virtuous man, having neither an heart hardened in his own
opinion, nor a mind ambicious of Empire, (as many tyrauntes, and couetouse
princes, before this day, have had, used, and accustomed) for aduoydyng
farther effusion of christen blood, and for the salvation of his soul, without
battaill, or stroke of weapon, was content, (upon an honorable co^posicion) to
restore the lawful inheritance to the true heir and to render his title to
the right lignage, and undoubted line. Which treaty and final composicion,
was nether wantonly ouerloked, nor unwisely ouersene. For all the noble peers,
of this realm, both spiritual and temporal, yea, and the most part of the
nobility, (except a certain wild and wilful persons) with the whole
co^munaltie, (in who^ the very base and burden of the realm does consist) not
only by word, but by ancient writing, signed with their hands, and
strengthened with the seals of their arms, here ready to be showed, have
frankly and freely, with out scruple or contradiccion, agreed, and affirmed
the same. By which composicion, (as the mirror and plain show and token, of
king Henry's right) he was by the three estates, assigned, and allowed, as
heir apparent to thesaid king Charles, lately deceassed. But cruel death
seperatyng his body from his soul, long before the expectacion of his people,
suffered him not to possede and enjoy, the title and regalitie, of this his
due inheritance, and succession royal. Yet, God willing not the stock, of so
noble, so famous, and so virtuous a prince, to remain bareyn without budde or
flower, has sent to him, and from him to you a flourishing child, a godly
prince of both the noble houses, of England and France, indifferently
descended: as who would say, that by nature, he is neither perfect English,
nor perfect French, but a man indifferent, called an English Frencheman, and
a French Englishman. Which noble prince, and your sovereign Lord, you may
with glad hearts, and loving countenaunces, se, hear, and behold. And as for
his honorable behauor, and princely majesty: few princes of full and ripe
age, be to him comparable, or equipollent. As for his beauty and other gifts
of nature, scace Absalon can be to him assembled. But, having respect to the
virtuous disposicion, the Godly mind, and sincere conscience, of so noble a
child and princely infant, I surely think, and perfectly believe, that he is
above all other, the blasyng Star, and the unmatched Paragon. This precious
stone and noble Iuell, is not only come out of his natural country, and
nourishyng Region, to receive the Croune and possession, of this his realm and
dominion, but also, (like a good shepeherde) to vieue, se, and know you, as
his well-beloved flock, and most desired subjects: and you likewise, (as
loving and obedient vassals) to behold, and know your sovereign lord and
prince, to the intent, that as you, above all other nations, as well christen as
Ethenicke, have served, loved, and obeyed, your rulers and Kings, before these
days: so, he now doubts not, but to find you as loving to him, as the Turtle
to her make, as sure to him, as the Adamant to the stele, and as permanent in
his obedience, as the hard mountain of Olympe, which, neither craft nor
engyne can either consume, or remove. And al mistrust of your ingratitude, is
clearly banished from his heart: considering, that he knows, that you daily
hear it preched, that you should fear God, and honor your king, and that he,
which is in stubburnesse and obstinacy toward his prince, is disobedient
toward God. For the Prince in earth, is the Uicar of GOD, and hedde and
shepherde of Christ's flock: to who^ both spiritual persons and temporal,
be subjects, and inferiors in all causes of rule and governance. And although
some persons within this realm, seduced more by fantastical error, then
obstinate arrogance, have taken part, and entered into amity with Charles de
Ualoys, untruly calling himself the French king: yet the very true and
undoubtful prince, and our sovereign Lord, here being present, is resolved
and content, to remit and pardon their offenses and crimes, so that they within
twelfe days, return to the true fold, and forsake the infected flock, and
sedious company. Wherefore, his request is at this time, that you, for the
fidelity, which you have ever borne to him, and for the love, that he has,
and still intends to bear to you, will vouchesafe hereafter, without lettyng
of time, diligently study, and busely take pain, both to keep his loving
subjects in good order, and due obeysaunce toward him, and also to se them
live in mutual amitic and brotherly concord, between them selfs: not
forgettyng, that the old proverb, which says: inward discord, brings
realms to ruin. Which honorable requests, if you acco^plishe and perform,
(as of your very bounden duty, you be bound in deed) you shall deserve so
much favor, of your king and sovereign Lord, that to al your honest
requests, his ears shall be open, and to al your reasonable desires, his mouth
shall not be stopped. And thus he wissheth you, health in bodies, increase in
your substance, and to your souls, ^oye and felicity without end
perpetually.

WHEN the duke had finished and ended this his oracion, the people being glad
and reioysyng at his sayings, cried; live king Henry* live King Henry. After
which cry passed, the noble men, as well of France and Normandy, did to him
homage, and the common people* swear to him feaultie: to whom, (although he were
a child) he gave both pleasant and fair words, with hearty thanks, and many
gratificacions, to the great admiracion of the French people.

AFTER he had feasted, the nobles and commons of France, within the city of
Paris, he with a great company, departed from thence, and by small iorneis
came to Roan, where, he celebrated with great solempnitie, the high feast of
Christmas. While these noble Ceremonies were thus in doing, in the city of
Paris, sondery chau^ces, diversely happened in several places, to the displeasure
of the one part, and to the gain of the other. For sir Frances Surrien
Arragnoys, a noble capitain in Normandy, took by force and policy, the town
of Mountarges, with a great prey of treasure and prisoners, and therein he put
a garrison, and vitailed the town, to the great displeasure of the French
King. About the same season, the Earl of Arundell, being truly informed, that
the lord Bousac, Marshall of France, was come to Beauoys, intendyng to do
some feate in Normandy, assembled the nombre of three and twenty hundred men,
and laid himself priuelie, in a close place, nor far from thesaied town,
and sent a great nombre of light horssemen, to run to the barriers of the
city. The Frenchmen, like valiau^t men of war, issued out, and manfully
fought with the Englishemen: which suddenly fled, toward the stale. The
Frenchmen, coragiously followed, thinkyng the game gotten on their side: but
when they were entered, into the straight, therle set freshely on them, so that
after long fightyng, there were slain and taken, in manner all the Frenchmen, save
a few, which fled into the town, with the Marshall. Emo^gest the capitaines
was found prisoner, the valiant capitain, called Poynton of Sanctrailes,
(which without delay,) was exchaunged for the lord Talbot, before taken
prisoner, at the battaill of Patay. There was also taken one, called the
shepherd, a simple man, and a sely soul, whom, the Frenchmen reputed, to be of
such a holiness, that if he touched the wall of a town, of their enemies,
that incontinent, it would fall to the ground, and ouerturne. Such false
fantastical fainers, were at that time much regarded, and no less believed
in France.

THIS chance succeeded not, fortunatly alone: for Richard Beauchampe Earl of
Warwick, had a great skirmishe, before the town of Gourney, where he
disco^fited and repulsed his enemies, and beside the carions, which were left
dedde on the ground, he took prisoners, three score horssemen, all gentlemen
of name and arms. Like chance of infortune, happened at the same time, to
Renate or Reyne duke of Bar, a great friend to Charles the French king, both
in lendyng him money, and also in ministeryng to him aid and succors. This
Duke bearyng displeasure, to Anthony Earl of Uaudemont, his cosyn and kynsman,
gathered together a great army, and besieged the town of Uaudemont. Therle,
before the dukes approchyng, to thentent y^ he would not be enclosed and
compassed about by his enemies within a wall, leauyng behind him, a convenient
crew of men of war, to defend the town for a time, with all diligence rode
to the dukes of Bedford and Burgoyne, being then at the great triumph at
Paris, whose part he had euertaken, After long consultacion, it was agreed that
sir Ihon Fastolffe, should go with him, having in his company six hundred
Archers, and the duke of Burgoyne sent to him, his Marshall, called sir Anthony
Doulongon, with.xv. hundred men. The elre of Uaudemont thus being accompanied,
marched toward his enemies. Duke Reine, hearing of his coming toward him, was
somewhat dismayed, fearyng, least if his enemies should approach to the walls,
and be espied by the garrison within the town, that, at one time he should be
assailed before, by them that would issue out of the town, and behind, by
therle and his army. Wherefore, like a hardy capitain, he brake up his siege,
and met face to face, with therle and his company: between whom, was a cruel
and a mortal battaill. The horsemen endured long, but in conclusion, the
English Archers, so galled the horses and so wounded the men, that the Barroys
and their friends, were compelled to fly: in which chase was taken, thesaied
duke of Bar, the bishop of Myes, the lord of Rodemaque, sir Euerard of
Saseabery, the Uicou^t Darcy, and two hundred other, beside three thousand men,
which were slain. In this lucky time also, no less occasion of victory, was
offered to the Englishmen, being in another part, if, when the pigge had been
proffered, they had opened the poke: for Robert, Lord Willoughby, and Matthew
Gough a valiant Welsheman, with.xv. hundred Englishemen, laid siege to a
town in Aniow, being both by situacion, and policy, very strong, and
defensible, called saint Seueryne. The Englishmen assailed it not so
coragiously, but they within, with egall audacitie, boldly made defense: so
that fortune seemed, to way both the parties in egall balau^ce. Charles the
French king, being thereof advertised, sent with all speed, the lord Ambrose
de Lore, with many noble and valiau^t personages, to aid and releue his
friends, enclosed in the town by his enemies. This lord de Lore, being
capitain of the town, made much haste to comfort his deputy and capitain
within the same, and so marched forward with great spied: but fearyng to be
suddenly compassed about, he tarried still at Beaumont, lokyng for the army
and capitaines, that should follow, and then altogether to set on their enemies,
and so to reyse the siege. Whiles he there made his abode, and took his
leisure, the Englishemen, by their espialles, were assertened and advertised,
what progress their enemies made, and what they intended* Wherefore, they
pollitiquely provided, to fight with the one part, before the whole puyssaunce
were joined. And so a great part of them, departed secretly in the night,
toward their enemies, and found the watch so out of order, and ouersene, that a
thousand men were entered into the camp before they were espied. But the
slaiyng of men, and cuttyng down of tents, awaked the capitaines, whom this
sudden fear, and unlooked chance, so greatly abashed, that no man in manner,
either could h^are his fellow or himself, or could make sign to expulse and
drive out their enemies out of their camp. But when the day began to appear,
and the son had setfurth his bright beams, that all thing might be seen and
perceived, the Englishmen, given to couetuousnes of spoil, and desire of
Rauyne, neither chaced, nor followed their enemies, but being content with their
prey and gain, began to retraite toward the siege again. But se the chance:
the Frenchmen which were coming after, heard by the noyce of the people, that
some fraie was then in hand, put the spurs to the horse, and ^et on their
enemies, being laded with bags and wallettes, of preys and spoils. The other
part, which before fled, returned again, and assailed their enemies. The
Frenchmen egerly assailed, and the Englishemen manfully defended, which being
out of order, were compelled to fly, of whom, Matthew Gough and diverse other
were taken prisoners, and yet of the other part, many were slain, and a great
nombre taken, amongst whom, was the lord of Lore, which, for all the
battle, was kept and not delivered.

THE lord Willoughby, hearing of this chance, raised the siege and departed,
very sore displeased. Therefore, let every capitain take good head of
victory, the which as she is hard to obtain, so she is quick to fly away:
for it is daily seen, that he, which thinks suerly, that he has her in his
hands, before he can catch her, is deceived, and ronneth into a great loss
and danger: and on the otherside, when she is gotten, (except good watch be
hourly kept) she will steal away, with much hurt and detriment, to the
first gainer. Thus the Englishmen, for the gredy appetite of gain, lost the
triumphaunt victory, which they had in their hands. While the English and
French nations, thus strove and contended, for preeminence, principality,
yea, and for the superior power of life, by the unreasonable rage of war in
France, the rich men were spoiled of their goods, the spiritual persons,
were taxed and brought low, the common people were slain, murdered, and trod
under the foot, women were defiled, virgyns were ravished, tounes were destroyed
and wasted, town dwellers and citezens, were robbed and exiled, beautiful
buyldynges, were cruelly brent, nothing was spared, by the cruelty of Mars:
which by fire, blood, or famyne, might be catched or destroyed, beside a
hundred more calamities, that daily vexed and troubled the miserable French
nation. Although France, were at this time, thus miserably aflicted: yet
England, was not without doloure and trouble: for daily Englishmen, as well
noble as mean personages, were slain taken, wounded, or hurt, their substance
was continually exacted, and consumed for maintenance of the wars, so that
mischief and calamity was indifferent to both the nations, and quietness and
gain, were expulsed and banished from them both: in so much that the
lamentacion and dolor of both the countries, were heard through the whole west
part of the world, and of their continual discencion, al Europe and Affrike,
had their ears and mouths full, so that all men, not only marueiled, that
France could so much trouble so long time sustain, but more wo^dered, that
the realm of England, being but an Isle, was able so to scourge, plague and
trouble, the large French region, for which cause Euginye the fourth, being
bishopp of Rome, intendyng to bring this cruel war, to a friendly peace, sent
his Legate, called Nicolas, Cardinal of the holy cross, into France, to
thentent to make an amity, and a concord between the two Princes and their
realms. This wise Cardinal, came first to the French king, and after to the
duke of Bedford being at Paris: exhortyng concord, and persuadyng unity,
showing, declaryng, and arguyng, peace to be most honorable, and more
profitable to Christian princes, then mortal war, or uncharitable
discencion. Which governors of Christ's people, ought to have an iye, to the
profit of their people, to se Justice duly ministered, to rule themselves by
reason and not by will, and to abstain from malice, and abhor al wrong and
injury, to which things, war is ever enemy and clean contrary.

WHEN the Legate had thus persuaded the princes on every part, both, gently
answered, that they were content to come, to a reasonable end. But when the
first communicacion was moved, and by commisioners treated, their doings were
so far disagreable, from their words, that not only reasonable and honest
conditions of peace, could be neither heard nor accepted, but more frowardnes,
pertinacie, and malice, was kindeled and sprung in their stomachs, then before
that time had been seen. The Cardinal being in utter despair, of co^cludyng a
peace between the two realms, (least he should seem to depart empty of all
things, for the which he had taken so much trauaill) desired a truce for
six years to come, which request, as it was to him, by both parties hardly
granted, so was it of the Frenchmen, sone and lightly broken, after his
return: For the Bastard of Orleaunce, newly made Earl of Dumoys, took by
treason the town of Charters, from the Englishemen: affirmyng by the law of
arms, that stealyng or biyng a town, without inuasio^, or assaute, was no
breach of league, amity, nor truce. In the which town, he slew the bishop,
because he was a Burgonyo^, through which occasion, new malice increased, and
mortal war began again, to rise and spryng.

WHILE these things were doing in France, Henry Beaufforde Cardinal of
Winchester, was sailed again into England, to appea^e and repress certain
divisions and commocions, sprung up, by mischeuous and pernicious persons,
within the realm, which under the color of a new sect of religion, coniured
together, to disquiet and vex, the whole quietness of the realm. But after,
that William Maundeuile and Iho^ Sharp were taken, and executed by the governor
and the kings Justices, the remnaunt yielded, and confessed their offenses:
whereof two articles were these, as some men write: that priests should have no
possessions, and that all things, by the order of Charity, amongst Christen
people, should be incommon. After this sedicious coniuracion, by diligent
inquiry, was thus quenched out, the Cardinal began to commen with the duke of
Gloucester, concerning the affairs and business of France: and suspecting that
the truce would not long continue between both y^ realms, (as it did not in
deed) divised, how to send more aid, and men to the Duke of Bedforde, and
gathered up more money, and treasure, for the further maintenau^ce of the
wars, and resistance of their enemies. Whereupon the Duke of Gloucester,
called a Parliament, in the which, money was assigned, and men were appointed.
During which Parliament, James the king of Scotts, sent Ambassadors, to
conclude a peace, with the duke of Gloucester, which, (because the king was
abs^nte) referred the matter to the iij. estates. After long consultacion, (not
without great arguments) a peace was granted and concluded, which all men
judged, long to continue, because king James, was then vexed, with civil war
and intestine discencion, and also the Frenchemen had taken truce, (as you have
hard) for.vi. years.

WHEN the parliament was finished, the cardinal well garnished with men and
money, departed out of England, and came to Roan to the king, to whom also
resorted from Paris, John, Duke of Bedford, to debate and consult of things,
not unlikely to happen and chance. Wherefore, a great counsel was celebrate,
within the Castle of Roan, and many doubts were moved, and few weighty things
out of hand concluded. Some imagined, that their enemies, would not long keep
promise, nor yet observe the truce, by them solemply granted: considering,
that the French hearts burnt, and their iyes were very sore, to se the rich
Duchy of Normandy, the fair city of Paris, and the pleasant Isle of
France, to be brought and reduced, under the obeysau^ce and subieccion, of
thenglish nation. Wherefore, they would not omit, or ouerse one thing, that
sou^ded to defense, least the Frenchmen suddenly, (not keeping their promise, and
brekyng the truce,) might cause thenglishmen to be in great and perilous
ieoperdy, not knowing what cou^saill to take, nor suddenly to provide a remedy
for a mischief, both for lack of men and substance. Other were of opinion,
that nombres of men, could not long be maintained and kept together, without
breach of truce, and violatyng of peace: knowing that the hands of men, be
properly given to spoil, and ever ready to gain, and most especially, when
they be daily ready in harneis, prone and quick to set on their enemies. And
therefore, they would the walled tounes, to be well manned and defended, and the
rest of the army, to be sent into England again, there to remain and tarry, til
the time of the truce were expired and over passed.

AFTER this disputacion, with many arguments ended, the dukes of Bedford and
York, and Edmond late earl of Mortayn, and now by the death of Ihon duke of
Somerset, (which died without heir male, leaving behind him, a sole daughter
called Margaret, after, countess of Richemo^d) erected to the name and title,
of duke of Somerset, liked and approved, the first argument, and first moved
reason: affirmyng best, that war must be provided for, and that money out to
be disburssed, and to aduoyde all doubts, that a greater army, was necessary
to be gathered together and assembled. When al things were agreed, king Henry
departed to Calice, and from thence to Dover, and so by easy torneis he came
the.xxi. day of February, to the city of London, where he was received, not
only with great pomp and triumph, but also highly presented with gifts and
money, as in the Chronicle of Robert Fabian, you may read at large, which
thing I over pass.

AFTER that the king, was departed into England, the Duke of Bedford, Regent
of France, and capitain of Calice, tarried behind in the Marches of Picardy:
where he was informed, that certain soldiers of Calice, grudgyng at the
restraint of wolles, began to mutter and murmr against the king and his
counsel, so that the town of Calice, was like to stand in ieoperdy. Wherefore
the duke, forseyng the mischief that might ensue, and thinkyng it wisdom, to
withstand the first mocion, caused the chieftaynes of this faccion, to be
apprehended, and after due examinacion had, diverse were put to death, and many
banished and exiled the Marches for ever. After that he had purged the town of
that ungracious and sedicious company, and had furnished it, with new soldiers
and discrete men of war, he was determined, first to repair again to Paris,
but his heart would not serve him: for since his departure, Lady Anne his wife
and Duchies, was departed to God, and honorably enterred in the Celestyns at
Paris: by whose death, and for other causes, (as partly you have hard) the
sure love, and approved fidelity, between the duke of Burgoyn, his brother in
law and him, began to wax fainte and cold. For which cause, he, being
persuaded by the lord Jews of Luxenborough, bishop of Tyrwine and Ely, and
Chauncellor of France for king Henry, agreed to marye the Lady Iaquet,
daughter to Peter, Earl of saint Paul, and nicce to the said bishop, and to
lord Ihon of Luxenborough: to the intent, that by this new affinity, the
old acquaintance and familiarity, which he had with that noble family of
Luxe^borough, should be reneued and enforced, and with a more surer knot, knit
and confirmed. Whereupon, he departed from Calice to Tirwyne, where, he was
highly received of the Earl of saint Paul, and of his brethren, and there he
married, the fair and freashe lady Iaquet, of the age of.xvii. years, with all
triumph and nup^iall solempnitie. After which Ceremony ended, he returned
with his new spouse to Calice, and so into England, where, he with his wife
remained, until August next, and then returned again to Paris. The duke of
Burgoyne, (whose mind began to incline, a little and little, toward king
Charles) was sore grieved and angry, that the duke of Bedforde, was joined in
affinity, with the noble and famous house of Luxe^borough: by the which he
saw, that the power of the Englishmen, should be greatly advanced. But the
marriage was fully ended, and he could find no remedy.

The eleventh year. The.xi. year.

WHile these things were doing thus, in other places the French soldiers
lackyng wages, (and emo^gest them, a great nombre, which in hope of prey,
and desire of spoil, had cast up the plough, and left their labor,) began
privily, (as time served, and occasion gave place) to take both Englishmen and
Burgonyons, and raunsomed and spoiled them, at their pleasures. And although,
they were prohibited thus to do, (during the time of truce and peace) yet
inconclusion, they spared not, openly to rob, spoil, and burn: yea, and to
steal tounes, which they affirmed to be no breach of truce. The Englishemen,
pricked and vexed, with these open wrongs, and manifest injuries, prepared for
war, after the six month, that the truce was taken and concluded. And by
this means, the war was reneued and begone again. The untrue Frenchemen,
breakers of peace, and not kepers of truce, raised a crewe of men, and suddenly
took the town of saint Ualerie, standing in Normandy, on the River of Soame:
and another army, under the co^duict of sir Ambrose, lord of Lore, wasted and
destroyed all the country about Caen. The Duke of Bedford, not myndyng to lie
still in idleness, sent the Earl of Arundell, the Earl of Warwickes son the
Lord Lisle, Adane Marshall of France, for king Henry, and.xii.C. men, with
ordinance and municions, to besiege the town of Laigny, upon the River of
Marne. Wh^che Earl, with the shot of a Canon, brake the arche of the bridge,
and gat from the Frenchmen, their bulwark, and set it on fire. Diverse
assautes were attempted, but the town was well defended: for within, were shut
up, eight hundred men of arms, beside other mean soldiers.

THE duke of Bedford, being thereof advertised, gathered an army of six
thousand men of war, whereof were capitaines, Robert, Lord Willoughby, sir
Andrewe Ogard, Chamberlein to the duke, sir Ihon Saluaine, Baylife of Roan, sir
Ihon Montgomerie, Bailife of Caux, sir Phillip Halle, Baylife of Uernoyle, sir
Richard Ratclife, deputy of Calice, sir Raufe Neuell, sir Raufe Standishe, sir
Ihon Hanforde, sir Richard Euthin, sir Richard Harryngton, Bailife of Eurenx,
sir William Fulthorpe, sir Thomas Griffyne of Irelande; Dauy Halle, Thomas
Stranguish, Leonard Ornesto^, Esquiers, and Thomas Gerard, which sold the
town of Mounstrean Faultyon, to the Frenchemen: and with all things
necessary, came to the siege before Laigny. He, there, made a bridge of
boats, and brought his ordinance so nere the town, that to all people, it
seemed not long able to resist. But the Earl of Dumoys Bastard of Orleaunce,
with diuer^e hardy capitaines, as valiauntly repulsed, as the Englishemen
assauted. This siege contyneued, as fire against flame, and sometime flame
against fire. For although the Englishemen slew more nombre, yet they gat
neither prey, nor boty: and although the Frenchemen, kept valeauntly the
walls, and defended the loupes, yet they lost both men and capitaines, and
were long secluded from their aid and succors, til Charles the French king,
perceiuyng this town, to be the three corner key, between the territories of
the Englishemen, the Burgonyons, and his own, and that the loss thereof,
should turn him to innumerable damages, and incredible hurtes, sent the lord
of Rieux, Poyton, the Heir, the lord Gancort, and six thousand men, with
great plenty of vitailes, to thentent, either to reise the siege, or to
vitaile the town. The French capitaines, made a brag, as though they would
fight with thenglishemen, within their field and Camp. The Englishemen would
not issue out, but kept themselfes in good order, ever lokyng for, their entry
and inuasio^. The Regent perceiuyng, that they approached not, sent to them an
herault of Arms, declaryng his intent, and the courage of his company, which
nothing more desired, then battaill. And to show himself as a capitain,
meaning that, which he offered, and not dissimulyng that, which he spoke: he
incontinent, divided his men into three battles, no more wisely ordered, the
pollitiquely governed: as who would say, come on Frencheman, if thy heart will
serve. But his adversaries, more crafty then hardy, more pollitique then
coragious, framed themselfes in such order of battle, as they were able to do
all thing, and yet inconclusion, (concerning marciall feats) they did nothing.
For, while they made a proud brag, and a stout skirmishe with the
Englishemen, they appointed diverse rude and rusticall persons, to conueye
into the town, xxx. oxe^ and other small vitaill, but this sweet gain, was
sowerly paid for, if the loss with the gain, be pondered in one balaunce: for
having regard to.xxx. lean oxen, in the conflict were slain, the lord
Sentrayles, brother to Pothon, the valeaunt capitain Ihon, brother to the lord
Gawcort, and fifty other noble and valeaunt personages, besid other common
people, which bought that bargayne, about the price of the common Markette.
The Frenchemen, perceiuyng their unfortunate chance, and not only consyderyng,
the unspeakable heat, which then weried their people, being in the beginning,
of the hot month of August: but also, perceiuyng the Englishmen, to be
planted and settled, in a place unable to be won, and in a ground, both
dangerous to invade, and hard to assail, like men desperate of gain, and
without hope of victory, departed to Fort under Yerre, where, by a bridge of
tons, they passed into the Isle of France. The Duke of Bedforde, (like a
wise prince) not myndyng to lease the more for the less, nor the accident for
the substance, fearyng that Paris and other tounes, more necessary to
thenglishemen, and of more estimacion, would return to his adversaries,
thynkyng if the greater power were holden, the less should be sone obtained,
raised his siege, and returned to Paris, nothing less myndyng, then to try
his querell with dent of sweard, against his enemies: and so sent Bedford his
herault, to the lord Gamcort, and other chieftaines of his army, offering him
battle, and a pitched feld, within a convenient ground* where so ever he
would, within the Isle of France, assign or appoint. To the which officer of
Arms, the capitaines answered, that battaill they feared not, nor the
English puyssaunce, they not much regarded, but they said: that time was to
gain, and time was to lose, of the which two, they doubted not to epsy the
one, either to their great gain, or to their apparaunt loss. Whereupon they
sent the lord Ambrose de Lore, with.vii.C. horsemen, to rob and spoil the
poor people, coming to the faier, on the day of sai^ct Michaell the
Archangell, kept in the suburbs of the town of Cae^. But when Dauy Halle
Esquier, capitain of the town, for the duke of York, issued out to fight with
him, he departed by flight, without any either botie or gain of the faier. The
Frenchmen perceiuyng, that neither power, force, nor policy, could avail
against the English nation, determined to trippe and deceive them, by their
accustomed servant, called master Treason, and so by money, corrupted Piers
Audebeuffe, Constable of the castle of Roan, that the Marshall of France, and
the lord Fountaynes, with two hundred persons disguised, entered into the
Castle, but they were sone espied, and driven to the dongeon, where they were
taken and yielded: whereof some were hanged, some hedded, and some raunsomed at
the pleasure of the Regent: and such end had the traitors, which would by
treason, rather then by battaill, obtained their prey and desired purpose.

THIS pageaunt played, the Regent sent Peter of Luxenborough Earl of saint
Paul, and Robert, lord Willoughby, with a compete^t crew of men, to besige
the town of Saint Ualerie, which the French men alitle before had taken.
These valeaunt capitaines, not myndyng to sleep their business, environed the
town with a strong siege. Within the town, were sir Jews de Uancort, sir
Phillippe de la Toure, and sir Reignold de Uerseilles, capitaines, with three
hundred good fightyng men, which by the space of iii. wekes, manfully defended
the same. But at the.xxi. day, they perceiuyng the fiersenes of thenglishemen,
and the weakness of themself^s, (having no hope of relief, nor confidence in
any aid) rendered the town, their horse and harneis only saved. The Earl
put, in the garrison of the town, freashe and valeaunt soldiers, and
appointed capitain there, sir Ihon Awbemorid: in which town suddenly,
(whether it were by infeccio^ of the air, or by corrupt vitail by long liyng,
which the tounes men did eat,) a great pestilence sprang, in the unfortunate
country. Which, after so many calamities and evil chances, being two times
besieged by the Frenchemen, and thryse recovered by thenglishe nation, was now
infected and corrupted, with the pestilent plague: whereby two parts of the
people, within short space, were destroyed and consumed.

AFTER this town gotten, the Earl of saint Paul, and the Lord Willoughby,
returned to the Regent, where, they were well welcomed. And after, thesaid Earl
departed from Paris, to lay siege to the Castle of Monchas, but being
encamped, nere to the town of Blangy, he, by a sudden malady, finished his
days, and departed the world, leauyng his seigniories, to Jews his son and
heir. For which dedde Earl, were solemn obsequies kept, both in Paris and
in London, because he was father in law to the Regent. In the mean season,
the Frenchemen entered into the costs of high Burgoyne, and brent, took, and
destroyed tounes: for which cause, the Burgonyons being sore displeased,
assembled a great army, both to revenge their querels, and also to recover
again the tounes, from them iniustely taken: to whom, (as to his friends) the
duke of Bedforde, sent Robert Lord Willoughby, and sir Thomas Kiriel, with a
convenient company of soldiers, which enteryng into the laundes of La^noys,
were encou^tred with a great no^bre of their enemies: but by whose force, (after
long fight) the French men were slain and dispersed: whereof were left dedde in
the feld, an hundred and sixty horsemen, beside prisoners, which after in a
fury, were al killed and put to destruction.

The.xii. year. The.xii. year.

WHile these chances thus happened in France, Iho^ lord Talbot, gathered
together, a crew of chosen men of war in England, to the nombre of viii.C, and
sailed into Normandy, and passed by Roan toward Paris, and in his way, he took
the strong Castle of Ioing, between Beauoys and Gisors, and caused all the
Frenchmen within, to be hanged on the walls, and after, raised and defaced the
Castle, and came to the Duke of Bedford, to Paris. The presence of which
renoumed capitain, (a marvelous thing it is to se) so incoraged the hearts of
the English nation, that they thought, nothing able to resist their puyssaunce,
and so discoraged the hearts of the Frenchemen, that they were in doubt, whether
it were better to fight, or to fly. And this was not without a cause: for
surely, he was a chosen capitain, and in marcial feats, a man fully
instructed, and his courage and practice in war, was fearful to the French
nation, and to his own cou^tremen, an especial hope and a sure defense. When
this hardy Baron, had commoned with the Regent, and agreed what way he should
take, without long delay or prolongyng of time, he departed from Paris with his
army, and desieged the Castle of Beaumont upon Oise, whereof was capitain, sir
Amadour de Uignolles, brother to the Heir. Which castle was sone rendered,
upon condition. After that, he regained without long siege, the tounes of
Creile, the bridge of saint Maxens, the new town in Esinoy, Crespy in Ualoys,
and Cleremou^t in Beauoys: and so with great riches, and fat prisoners, he
returned again to Paris. Thus, prosperous success happened, not to the lord
Talbot alone: but also the same very season, therle of Arundell, took the Castle
of Bomelyne, and raised it to the ground, and after, took by force the Castle
of Dorle, and from thence came to saint Seleryne, where the lord Ambrose of
Lore, was capitain, which issued out, and fought with the Englishemen so
egerly at the first, that he drove them back an arowe shot by fine force.
But the Earl so incoraged his men, that they took new corages to them, and set
to fiersly on the Frenchemen, that they slew a great nombre, and drove the
remnaunt into the town.

AFTER this victory, he besieged Louiers, whereof was capitain, the Heir, and
his brother, which rendered the town, without stroke or assaute. For all this
good luck, therle forgot not to return, to the town of S. Seleryne, but
assembled a great army, and environed the town about with a strong siege. When
he had lien there almost.iij. months every day attemptyng or dooyng
somewhat, for the performaunce of his enterprise, in conclusion at the three
months end, he gave so fierce an assault, that by force he entered the town,
and slew Ihon Allemagne and Gulliam sent Aubyne, the chief capitaines,
and.viij.C. other men of war, and the Children of the lord Lore, were taken
captives: he replenished and fortified the town again with new men, and
municio^s, and made there capitain, sir Ihon Cornwale. Which act thus
accomplished, he departed, and came before the strong town of Sillye, and
there pitched his camp. The inhabitauntes of the same, somewhat dismayed with
the chance, that late happened to the town of. S. Seleryne, delivered to him
pledges, upon this condition: that if they were not rescued, within.xxx. days
next insuyng, then they, (their life's saved) should render the town, into his
possession: which offer was taken. The capitaines within the town, sent a
post to the French king, to advertise him of their hard chance, which
incontinent sent to them, Arthur, Earl of Richemond, (but after some writers,
Ihon, duke of Alaun son) with a great company of men. When therle saw the
French succors appear, he restored again y^ pledges to the governors of the
town, and issued out of his camp, taking a place most mete and convenient
for to abide battaill, for which he sore thirsted and longed. The Duke or the
Earl, (take which you list) liying by a brook side, which a man might stride
over, seeing the Englishemen, so warlike and strongly embattailed, thought it
not for his profit, to give battaill, or to set forward: but in the dedde
time of the night, cowardly fled, and with shame returned: although some
French writers affirm, that he looked that the earl of Arundell, should have
given him battaill, and because he proffered not forward, therefore the Frenchmen
departed. This appears to be an apparaunt lie, and a French brag: for if
they came to rescewe the town, why did not they give battaill, and so drive
away thenglishmen from the town? If they came to fight, why departed they
without any stroke stricken? But it seems that they came, to make a French
face, and for to do nothing. For they, without skirmishe or succoryng the
town, departed in the night secretly, (as you have heard.) When they within
the town knew, that their succors failed, they rendered themselfes, to the
mercy of therle of Arundel, which gently received the^, and leauyng a garrison
in the town, departed to Mauns, and in the mean way, took the Castles, of
Mellay and saint Laure^ce. About this time, the lord Willoughby, and sir
Thomas Kiriell, returnyng with great victories out of the parties of Burgoyne,
took in their way, the town of Louiers, and furnished it, both with men,
and municions.

AMONGST so many good chances, some evil are accustomed to fall and happen,
or else the gayners, will not know themselfes. So it happened, that a great
no^bre, of rude and rustical persons in Normandy, dwelling by y^ sea coast,
either provoked, or intised thereunto, by the French king, or desirous of
alteracion and change, (which thing the commen people much couete and
desire) made an insurreccion, and put on harneis, and by force expulsed certain
garriso^s, out of their houldes, and took certain tounes: publishyng and
proclaimyng openly, that their only purpose and intent was, to expel and
banish, the whole English nation, out of their countries and coasts.
Wherefore, it may evidently appear, that the black Ethyopian, or the black
colored raue^, will sooner turn their colors, that the universal people, bred
in France will heartily love, or inwardly favor, an English borne child. And
yet, the Normans of long time, louyngly and gentely, have obeyed to the
subieccion of England, and have of the English nation, been well accepted and
regarded, but now they, forgettyng their duty, and reme^bryng their hurtes,
did not doubt, to rebel against their prince and sovereign Lord.

THIS mischeuous company, thus frantiquely gathred together, with all speed
marched toward Caen, to the intent there, both to assemble a greater nombre of
people, and also to consult, what way they should follow in their new begone
atte^ptate. But the dukes of York and Somerset, which then were liyng in
Normandy, hearing of this ungracious faccion and troubelous co^mocion, and
having knowledge by their espials what journey they intended to take:
incontinent without delay, sent therle of Arundell, and the lord Willoughby,
with.vj.M. archers, and.xiij. hundred light horses, to stay and keep them,
either for setting furthe, or making farther progress. Therle of Arundell
going one way, appointed the Lord Willoughby, with two thousand Archers,
and a certain nombre of horsemen, to go before him, to lie in watch and stale,
secretly by the way, to stop the journey and passage of the rebels, when they
should approach. The lord Willoughby, covertly covered himself and his company,
sendyng word to the Earl, of the place where he lay, to thentent that he might
make a sign and a token, (when time should be most luckey and fortunate,) to
invade and set on their enemies. Which thing done, therle followed at the
back, the ragged route and mischeuous multitude, as a man, that drove the
dear before him into the buckestalle, or the sely coneis into the secret hay.
When the ignorant multitude, approached nere to the place of the stale, the
Earl made a token, and shot a gonne for a sign. Then the Lord Willoughby, set
on them before, and the Earl behind, shotyng so fiersly, that the dastarde
people, partly, amassed with the sudden chance, and partly, galled and wounded
with the shot of the arrows, threw away their harneis: desiryng nothing but
death. Therle of Arundel, (moved with compassion) caused his soldiers to leave
of and stay, from farther murder or blood sheding, and apprehendyng such, as
he thought, to be the ledars and chief stirrers of the people, let the other
return home frankly and freely: but yet there were a.M. and more slain, before
the soldiers, could be brought again under their standerdes.

AFTER this commocion appeaced, and the sudden rage in the beginning stayed and
brideled, dilligent inquiry was made of the malefactors, and such as were found
gilty, by diverse terrible execucions, (according to their deserts,) miserably
ended their traitorous life's. During which rebellion, Peter Rokefort and his
company, gat by treason the town of Deape, and diverse other houldes, thereunto
adioynyng. After the Earl of Arundell, had obtained so many conquestes, and
notable victories (as you have heard) he attempted another, which was the last
work and extreme labor, of his living days. For the duke of Bed ford, being
informed, that his adversaries, had suddenly surprised and taken the town of
Rue, and therein had put a garrison, which sore vexed the countries of Ponthiew,
Arthoys, and Bolenoys, sent word to therle, that he, without delay, should
besiege thesaid town. Therle obeyed to his commandment, and incontinent,
sent for all the people under his governance, and in his marchyng forward,
came to Gourney, where he heard tell, how y^ there was a certain Castle, nere
Beauoys, called Gerborye, which either by force of rasyng, or violence of
weather, was sore decayed and defaced. And because this place was opportune and
very necessary, to prohibit, let and stop thenglishmen, to make sudden
runnynges in, or rodes into the country of Beauoys: Charles the French king
commanded sir Stephen de Ueignolles, commonly called the Heir, to se the
castle reedefied and fortified. Thesaid sir Stephen with a great company, came
to the ground, and lackyng neither stuff necessary, nor artificers
sufficient, in small time erected the Castle, and began to defend the
fortress. The earl of Arundell, being credibly informed of their doings,
and perceiuyng that this new edificacion, was very prejudicial to the English
part, determined first to take the Castle, supposyng little or no resistance,
therein to be shut up, but he was deceived, for there was the Heir, with
many good and valeaunte capitaines. The Earl with five hundred horsemen,
encamped himself in a little close, nor far from the Castle: the Frenchemen,
which were three thousand men, perceiuyng that the Earl and his horses were
weary, and that his archars were not yet come, determined for their advantage to
set on him, before the coming of his footmen, which they knew to be little
more, then a mile behynd the Earl. Wherefore, for a policy, they set furthe
fifty horssemen, as though there were no mo in the Castle. The Earl perceiuyng
that, sent forth sir Randolfe Standishe, to encountre with them, having in his
company a hundred horses: the Frenchemen fought coragiously a while, and
suddenly came out all the remnaunte, and slew sir Randolfe Standishe, and all
his company, and boldly set on the Earl and his band, which manfully defended
them, so that the Frenchmen gat little advantage, for all their great nombre.
The Heir perceiuyng the hearts, courage and defense of the English people,
caused three Culuerynes to be shot amongst them, whereof, one struck the Earl
on the ancle, and so brake his leg, that for pain he fell from his horse,
then the French men entered amongst the English army, and took the earl,
being on the ground, prisoner, and sir Richard Wooduile, and six score more,
and there were slain almost two C. The remnaunt saved them selfs as well as
they might. The Earl was carried to Beauoys, where, of this hurt he shortly
died, and was buried in the friars Minors. He was a man of a singular virtue,
constancy and gravity, whose death in so troubelous a world, did sore appall
the hearts of his nation. By this infortune, Rue was not besieged, nor Gerborie
taken, such is the chance of war, thus Lady Fortune daily turns her
whiele, and mighty Mars, often varied his countenance, so that one time the
Englishemen gat by assaut and yeildyng, diverse strong tounes, Castles, and
piles. At another season, the French people, sometime by bargain, sometime by
assaut, obtained thesaid citees and fortificacions again, or other in their
sted. Which daily attemptes, Iomit and over pass, because in the^, no notable
act, nor great Warlike feate was done or committed. For small things,
require little writing, and t^we acts, require less speaking. For I assure
you, that he, which should write the negligent losses, and the pollitique
gains, of every city, fortress, and turrett, which were gotten and lost in
these days, should fatigate and weary the reader, more with volumes, then
queares and the hearer, more with triflyng words, then with notable matter.
Wherefore, sith in all mine authors, I find no matter, either greatly
necessary, or much convenient to be spoken of, concerning any high
enterprise: I therefore, leauyng both the nations, daily studiyng how to grieve,
and gain of the other, will turn again to other things accidental which
chanced in this.xii. year.

ABOUT the month of June, Ihon duke of Burbon and Auerne, taken prisoner at
the battaill of Agyncourte, xviii. years paste, (as you before have heard) now
paiyng his ransom, which was.xviii.M. l. sterlyng, and having ready prepared
all things necessary, for his triumphaunt return into his country, was taken
with a most sore and grievous ^euer, which sh^rtely unbodied his soul, in the
city of London, on the day appointed, for his departure into France: whos^
corpse was enterred, in the Gray Friars of thesaied city. So by this, every
creature may se: that man purposes and God disposes. I may not forget a
chance which happened this year, to thexample of princes, and a spectacle of
governors. For the devil himself, to set farther division between the English
and French nation did apparel certain catchepoules, and Parasites, commonly
called titiuils and tale tellers, to sow discord and dissencion, between the
dukes of Bedford and Burgoyne, not fainyng trifles nor pha^tasies, but things
of reproach, repugnau^t to both their honors, estates, and dignities, with the
which, each of them was as well pricked, as hastily spurred, so that all
love, between them ceased, all affinity was forgotten, and all old
familiarity was cast by disdain, into the cave of obliuio^. Such a pestilent
breath has Flattery, and such mischief ensues, of Princes light credence.
This grudge was perceived, by their mutual friends, which by charitable
exhortacion and Godly advertisement, exhorted them, to renew their old love
and familiarity, and to mete and enteruieu, in some place decent and
convenient. The Duke of Bedforde, gladly condiscended, to come to sent Oners,
being the duke of Burgoyns town, and thither, according to his appointment, he
in honorable estate, came and resorted, and likewise did the duke of Burgoyne.
The duke of Bedford, being Regent of France, and son, brother, and uncle to
kings, though that the duke of Burgoyne, should first have visited and saluted
him: duke Phillip on the other part, being Lord and sovereign of the town,
judged it not mete, nor to stand with his honor, to go to him, where he was
lodged, but was content, by entreatie of friends, to mete with him in a place
indifferent, between both their harberowes: which offer was not accepted, and
so, both parties departed discontent, and never after saw or commoned with
other. What should I speak of the courage of these two proud princes, the
Duke of Bedford myndyng to have no pere, and the duke of Burgoyne, willing to
have no superior, by whose proud disdain, and envious discord, shortly
England lost, and Burgoyne gained not long, as you shall perceive, in this
history ensuyng.

The.xiii. year. The.xiii. year.

THe Bastard of Orleaunce, called the earl of Duinoys, the lord Rocheford
Marshal of France, with other in the beginning of this.xiii. year, took the
town of saint Denise by treason, and skirmished with them of Paris, and
leauyng behynd him a great garrison, took the town of Howdone, and the
bridge of saint Maxence by composicion, and at that time was taken the town,
of Pount Meulane, by sudden scalyng of two fisshermen: which entered up at a
common privy, standing on the wall. Thus tounes unwalled, were preys to
ravenous men of war, so that the poor inhabitauntes within them, (not being
able to keep their fidelity or allegeaunce, when sheilde and defense lacked,)
were constrained and compelled, to yeilde and render theimselfes, to the more
power, and upper hand: least they being nedy and innocente people, should be
vexed and turmented, with the unreasonable men of war: So that in all
Christendom, no Region was more unquiet, more vexed, more poor, nor more to
be pitied, then the country of France. And although the rude and poor
people, suffered many plagues and adversities: yet the soldiers, prospered not
in all things. For although prey and spoil sometime refreshed their minds,
and did comfort their stomachs, yet sometime they were slain, taken, and licked
up, or they were ware. For every prince studied, and circumspectly compassed,
how to keep, defend and releue, the citees and tounes, of their several
faccion, and private fidelity. Wherefore, when sacietie of slaughters, and
abundance of murders, had replenished the stomachs, of both the nations,
and that both in general, perceived their hurtes, pondered their losses, and
considered their ruynes, and daily affliccions: although their stomachs were
haute, and their hearts stony, yet they waxed soft, privily inclinyng to
peace, and wisshyng concord, and not without an vrgente cause: For all things
necessary to man's living, penury showed her self forth, and aboundau^ce was
hidden in a cave. The corn feldes lay untilled, the meddowes were over
trodden, the woods were spoiled, so that all men went to harneis, and no man to
the plough. The churches were seldom used for devotion, but many tyemes
spoiled, for desire of gain. These, and such innumerable mischiefs, caused
both the people, being enemies, to desire peace, and yet the one part,
disdained openly to offer it, or the other privately to receive it.

THE cry and noyes of this perilous and insaciable war, was blasted through
Europe, detested through Christendom, and especially, at the Counsel of
Basil, where then themperor Alberte, and all the princes and potestates of
Christendom, or their deputies, were assembled, for the vnio^ of the
ungracious scisme, in the usurped sea of Rome untruly, and against all
scripture, called saint Peter's sea. Wherefore, the Emperor and the temporal
princeis, supposyng the exhortacion of Spiritual fathers, should more profit
amongst the two high stomacked, and proud encoraged nations, of England and
of France, desirered Eugeny then bishop of Rome, to be the author and
arbitrer, of that great strife and contencion: so that by his means, counsel
and exhortacion, the weapon might be taken out of the hands, of two so
invincible nations, which never would yield or bow, the one to the other,
neither yet, once hear of abstinence of fightyng, or refusyng from war: so
much were their hearts hardened, and so princely were their stomachs. And one
thing, much put them in hope, of some good conclusion, because the duke of
Burgoyn was willing, (so that it were not of his own suite,) to return and
reconcile himself, to Charles, his mortal enemy and ancient adversary.
Wherefore, by authority of this general Counsel, two discreite persons,
called the Cardinals of saint Cross, and Cypres, came to the town of Arras
in Arthoys, whither, were sent for the king of England, Henry Beaufford,
Cardinal of Wynchester, Henry, Archbishop of York, William de la Pole Earl
of Suffolk, and Ihon Hollande Earl of Huntyngdon, with diverse other knights
and Esquiers: and for the French king, were there present, Charles Duke of
Burbon, Jews Earl of Uandosme, Arthur of Brytayne Constable of France, the
Archbishop of Reyns, and sir Phillip Harcort. There, was the duke of Burgoyne,
in proper person, accompanied with the duke of Gelders, and the Earls of
Estampes, Lygnye, saint Paul, Uaudemont, Neuers, and Daniel, son to the
prince of Orange, with a great guard and a gallaunt company.

UPON the day of the first session, the Cardinal of saint Cross, declared to
the three parties, the innumerable mischiefs, the multitude of inco^ueniencies,
which had succeeded, through al Christendom, by their daily discord and
continual discencion: exhortyng and requiryng the^, for the honor of God, for
the love that they bare to the setting furthe of Christ's religion, and for the
aduau^cement, of the public wealth of all Christendo^, that they would lay
all rancor apart, repress all wrath and anger, and conform themselfes to
reason, and to Godly concord, by the which, they should receive, honor,
profit, and continual quietness, in the world, and of God, a reward
everlasting. After which admonicion, thus to them given, and after diverse
days of communicacion, every part brought in their demand, which were most
contrary, and hard to come to a good conclusion. The Englishemen required,
that king Charles should have nothing, but at the hand of the king of
England, and that not as duty, but as a benefit, by him of his mere
liberality given, and distributed, to which the Frenchmen answered, that
king Charles would have the kingdom, fra^kely and freely, without begging it, of
another man: requiryng the king of England, to leave the name, Arms, and title
of the King of France, and to be content with the dukedoms of Aquitain and
Normandy, and to forsake Paris, and all the tounes, which they possessed in
France, between the Rivers of Loyre and Soame, being no percell of the Du^hie
of Normandy. The Englishemen, loath to lease so good a boty as Paris, did not
esteem and allow, the demaundes of the French Ambassadors and they on the
otherside, couetyng and desiryng, to obtein again the renoume and glory of
their Region, which was Paris, would in no wise condescend, to any part of the
English requests. Thus, the pride of the one part, and the ambicion of the
other, let concord, peace, and quietness. The Cardinals, seeing the frostie
hearts, and hardened minds of both parties, determined not, to despute the
titles, but offered to them, honest and reasonable conditions, of truce and
peace, for a season: which articles both parties, either for frowardnes, or
for disdain openly refused: In so much as, the Englishmen in great
displeasure, departed to Calice, and so into England. One writer affirms,
that they being warned of a secret conspiracy moved against them, suddenly
removed from Arras, and so sailed into their country.

VVHILES this treaty of peace, was thus in co^municacion at Arras, the Lord
Talbot, the Lord Willoughby, the lord Scales, with the Lord Lisle Adame, and
five thousand men, besieged the town of S. Denise, with a strong band. The
Earl of Dumoys hearing thereof, accompanied with the Lord Lohac, and the lord
Bueill, and a great company of horsemen, haisted thitherward, to raise the
siege, and in the mean way, they encountered with sir Thomas Ki^iell, and
Matthew Gouthe, ridyng also toward. S. Denise, between whom, was a great
conflict, and many slain on both parties: but suddenly came to the aid of the
Frenchmen, the garrison of Pou^t Melance, which caused thenglishemen to
return, without any great arm or damage, saving that Matthew Gouth, by
founderyng of his horse, was taken and carried to Pount Melance. During which
fight, the town of saint Denise, was rendered to the lord Talbot, and the
other lords, which caused all the walls to be raised, and abated down to the
ground, saving the walls of the Abbay, and a Toure called Uenyn. After this
town gotten, the Lord Willoughby, left sir Ihon Ruppelley at Pounthoyse, and
departed to govern Paris, which then began to smoke, and sone after, brast
out in flame, (as you shall shortly, apparau^tly perceive). After whose
departure, thenhabitaines of Pounthoyse rebelled, and drove out thenglishmen by
very force, and rendered themselfes subjects to king Charles. This town was
small, but the loss was great, for it was the very convenient kaye, between
Paris and Normandy, so that now the gate between them both, was set open and
the passage at large.

LET us now again, return to the counsel at Arras. After the English
Ambassadors were departed, the Frenchemen and the Burgonyons, began familiarly
to common of a peace, and talk of an amity, to the which mocion, Phillip
duke of Burgoyne, was neither deiffe nor strange: for he in the beginning of
his rule, being much desirous to revenge and punish the shameful murder done
to his father, and to keep himself in his high estate, and preeminence, began
to be associate, and to reign with thenglishe power, and to serve the king of
England thinking, that by his amity and ioynyng, that he should neither harm
nor hurt, the common wealth of the country, whereof at that time he bare the
whole rule, nor yet lose one jot or point, of his authority, or governance.
But when it happened, contrary to his expectacion, that the king of England,
by the right course of inheritance, took upon him the whole rule and
governance, within the realm of France, and ordered by the advice of his
cou^saill, al causes, judgments, wars, and co^cordes, and that the duke
judged, that he was not had in great confidence, nor in perfect trust, as he
thought, because the Duke of Bedforde, would not suffer the town of Orleaunce,
to be rendered to him, (as you before have heard): He therefore imagined, and
determined with himself, to return into the pathe again, from the which he
had straied and erred, and to take part, and join with his own blood and
nation: so that some honest mean, might be sought by other, and not by
himself, least paraduenture by his own sekyng, he might bind him self in
conditions hurtful, and sore inconveniences, to the French king, and also be
noted of untruth, and traitorous behauor, toward the king of England and his
nation: to whom he had done homage, leage, and sworn fealty. Now this
Counsel, was to him a cloak for the rain, as who should say, that he sought
not amity, of the French king, (which thing in his heart, he most coueted
and desired) but was thereunto persuaded, by the general counsel, and by the
bishop of Rome, whom it was reason, in all honest requests, that he should
submit himself, and humbly obey. And so, shadowed with this counsel,
without long argument or prolongyng of time, he took a determinate peace, and
a final conclusion, upon these condicio^s: that he should have to him
delivered, the counteis of Arthoys, Ponthiew, and Bullonoys, and the tounes of
Amience, Corby, Mondidier, Peron, saint Quintyne, and Abbeuile, with many
other seigniories, and superiorities, which be not for my purpose to rehearse.
Provided alwaie, that the French king, paiyng in ready money, to y^ duke or his
heirs, iiij.C.M. crounes, should have thesaied tounes and countres, to be
redeliuered again: and many other things, the French king granted, to the
duke of Burgoyn, which after, he was not able to perform, nor accomplish,
for he had no power, to make denial to the duke, of any demand or request,
which the Duke either phantasied or moved: as who would say, that he thought
in himself, that such an adversary, which desired so honest, and so
reasonable conditions, (considering the state of the time, and the occasion of
concord, most apparauntly offered to him,) ought neither to be refused nor
cast away, the which chance, was to him luckey and fortunate: for surely, y^
thing foresene and looked for, succeeded and took place, as you shall perceive.
This concord, was so pleasant to the French king, that he, not only set for
him: but as a swane that swimmeth after her make, met him in proper person, at
the city of Reins, and (after long co^municacio^) standing up upon his fete,
said to him these words.

DVKE Phillipp cousin, and pere of France, The oracion of the French King to
the du^e of Burgoyne.
with all my heart welcome, and at your coming, my heart is fulfilled with
joy, and my spirits be refreshed with solace, for now, all doubt of the
recovery, of my land and seigniory, is clearly banished, and fully abandoned:
considering that I have now, joined and united to me, the principal year, the
most noble prince, (next to the Croune) and the most valeaunt capitain, that
has been, or is, in our days, seen, or known, whom the nobility honor, the
chivalry favor, and the poor commons love, and daily desire to behold: So
that all men love, and embrace you, above all creatures, and worship and
reverence you, above all Lords, because you, being a straiyng sheep, are now
returned, to your old flock, and like a man wanderyng out of the pathe, are
now brought again, to the right way, and true limite. For surely, this text
was ever beaten much in my hedde: that every realm, divided amongst
theimselfe, should turn to desolacio^, and that all discord, should bring
poverty, and that of al discencion, should succeade misery: which intolerable
calamities, I ever judged to ensue, by the discord and contrauersie, between
us two. But now the sore is cured, and the ship brought into the sure haven:
trustyng perfectly, and nothing mistrustyng, but by your healp and aid, we
shall expel, clean pull up by the roots, and put out, all the English
nation, out of our realms, territories, and dominions. And if you help us,
(as you may) and if you aid us, (as you be able) we here promise you, in the
word of a prince, to be yours, yea, so yours, that al ours, shall be yours, at
your commandment and desire, not as ours, but as yours, to do and spend at
your pleasure. To the which, the duke of Burgoyn answered, that he would let
escape nothing, that appertayned to his duty, nor forget any point, which
might turn to his dishonor.

WHEN this league was sworn, and this knot was knit, the duke of Burgoyne, to
let a veil, before the king of Englandes iyes, sent Thoison Dor, his king at
Arms, to king Henry with letters: that he, being not only waxed faint, and
wetled, with continual war, and daily conflictes, but also chafed daily, with
complaints and lamentacion, of his people, which, of the Frenchemen, suffered
loss and detriment, embraydyng and rebukyng him openly, affirmyng, that he
only was the supporter and mainteyner, of the English people, and that by his
means and power, the mortal war was continued and set forward, and that
he more diligently studied, and intentiuely took pain, both to keep, and
maintein thenglishmen in France, and also to aduau^ce and promote their
desires, and intentes, rather then to restore king Charles his cosyn, to his
rightful inheritance, and paternal possession: by reason of which things, and
many other, he was in manner compelled and const^ained, to take a peace, and
conclude an amity with King Charles, exhortyng king Henry, with many
flatteryng words, when honest and reasonable conditions were offered, to take
the^, and to make an end of the war, which so long had continued, to the
decay of both the realms, and to the effusion of Christen blood, beside the
great displeasure of almighty God, which is the author of peace and unity:
promisyng him his aid, and furtheraunce in that behalf, with many glosyng and
flatteryng words, which I pass over.

HERE is to be noted, that the Duke of Burgoyne, which thought himself by this
concord, in manner dishonored, and spotted with infamy sent his letters to the
King of England, rather to purge and excuse himself, of his untruth and
infidelity, (yea of perjury, if a poor man may use that term, of so great
a prince) to thentent that it should appear, that he, by co^pulsion, and not by
voluntary affeccion, was turned to the French part: not for any malice or
displeasure, which he bare to king Henry, or to the English nation. This
letter was not alitle looked on, nor ^^ally regarded of the king of England, and
his sage cou^saill: not only for the waightines of the matter, but also for
the sudden change of the man, and for the strange superscripcion of the
letter, which was: To the high and mighty Prince, Henry, by the grace of GOD
King of England, his well-beloved cosyn: Neither namyng him king of France,
nor his sovereign lord, according as, (ever before that time) he was
accustomed to do. Wherefore al they, which were present, being sore moved with
the crafty deed, and untrue demeanor of the duke, (whom they so much
trusted) could neither temper their passions, nor moderate their ire, nor yet
bridle their toungues; but openly called him traitor, deceiuer, and most
inconstant prince. But when the rumor of the Dukes returnyng, was published
amongst the common people, they left words and went to stripes: for they
being moved and pricked, with this unhappy tidings, ran fiersly upon all the
Flemynges, Hollanders, and Burgonyons, which then inhabited within the city
of London, and the suburbs of the same, and slew and hurt, agreate nombre of
them, before they, by the kings proclamacion, could be prohibited, to leave of
and abstain, from such violence, and injurious doing: for the king nothing
more minded, then to save innocent blood, and defend them, which had not
offended.

AFTER the letter twice read, and wisely brooked, he willed the officer at
Arms, to tell his master, that it was not convenient, nor honorable for him,
to be enemy to the English nation, without cause or occasion given, but his
duty, (all things considered) was to have kept his ancient truth and oulde
allegeau^ce, rather then to be the occasion, of new war and freashe
discencion: aduertisyng him farther, that it was not the point of a wisema^, to
leave and let pass, the certain for the uncertain, admonishyng him also, not
to myngle and mixte his safety and surenesse, with the unstableness and
vnsuretie of his new alye, and cosyn, king Charles. When the messenger was
departed, the king of England and his counsel, thought and determined, to
work some displeasure to the duke, and to set some conspiracy, against him in
his own country. Wherefore by rewards, they did su^or^e and corrupt certain
governors and rulers, of tounes and cities, within the dukes countries and
dominions, (which nations surely, be ever proc^^ue and ready, to commocion and
rebellion.) But the Gantoys, which of that feate ever bare the bell, and were
the common rysers, against their sovereign lords, some of them imagenyng,
that the power of the Englishmen, was not long like to continue, within the
realm of France, more for fear, then love of their Duke, sat still and moved
not, but let other tounes alone, which sore troubled the Dukes wits, and a
great while, did disquiet and vex his senses.

THIS year the.xiiij. day of September, died Ihon Duke of Bedford, Regent of
France, a man, as pollitique in peace, as hardy in war and yet no more hardy
in war, then merciful, when he had victory, whose body was, with great
funeral solempnitie, buried in the Cathedral church of our Lady, in Roan, on
the Northside of the high altar, under a sumptuous and costly monument: which
tomb and sepulture, when king Jews the.xj. son to this king Charles, which
recovered again Normandy, did well advise and behoulde, certain noble men in
his company, having more youth then discrecion, and more envy in their
hearts, then consideracions of their parents, counseled him to deface and
pluck down the tomb, and to cast the deed carcass into the feldes:
affirmyng, that it was a great dishonor, both to the king and to the realm,
to se the enemy of his father, and theirs, to have so solemn and rich
memorial. King Jews answered again, saying: what honor shall it be to us, or
to you, to break this monument, and to pull out of the ground and take up, the
deed bones of him, who^ in his life, neither my father, nor your progenitors,
with all their power, puyssau^ce, and fre^des, were once able, to make fly one
foot backward, but by his strength, wit, and policy, kept them all out
of the principal dominions, of the realm of France, and out of this noble
and famous duchy of Normandy: wherefore I say, first, God have his soul, and
let his body now lie in rest, which, when he was a live, would have
disquieted* the proudest of us all: and as for the tomb, I assure you, is not
so decent, nor convenient for him, as his honor and Acts deserved, although it
were much richer, and more beautiful.

The.xiiii. year. The xiiii. year.

AFter the death of this noble prince, and valeaunt capitain, the bright sun,
that commonly shone in France fair and beautifully upon the Englishmen, began
to be c^oudie, and daily to wax darker: for the Frenchmen seeing the chief
capitain taken away, began not only to refuse their obedience, and loyalty,
which they had sworn, and promised to the king of England, but taking
swearde in hand, rebelled, persecuted, and openly defied the Englishmen, yet
all these mischaunces, not one point abated, the valeau^t corages of the
English people: for they nothing mistrustyng God, nor good Fortune, set up a
new sail, and began the war new again, and appointed for regent in France,
Richard duke of York, son to Richard earl of Cambridge. Although the duke of
York, both for birthe and courage, was worthy of this honor and preferment,
yet he was so disdained of Edmond duke of Somerset, being cousin to the king,
that he was promoted to so high an office, (which he in very deed, gaped and
looked for) that by all ways and means possible, he both hindered and
detracted him, glad of his loss, and sorry of his well dooryng, causyng him to
linger in England, without dispatche, till Paris and the flower of France,
were gotten by the French King. The Duke of York, perceiuyng his evil will,
openly dissimuled that, which he inwardly thought privily, each workyng
things, to the others displesure. This cancard malice, and pestiferous
division, so long continued, in the hearts of these two princes, till mortal
war consumed them both, and almost all their lines and ofsprynges, as
within few years you shall perceive and se.

THE Normans of the country of Caux, being somewhat hartened, by the death of
the duke of Bedforde, began a new rebellion, and slew diverse Englishmen, and
robbed many praty tounes, which were of king He^ries faccion and part, and took
the town of Harflew by assaute, and diverse other tounes. The lord Talbot
being advertised, of this rebellion, sent for the Lord Scales, sir Thomas
Kiriell, and the lord Hoo, which afflicted and plagued the people of Caux,
that they slew above five thousand persons, and brent all the tounes, and
villages in the country, not being walled, so that in that part, was neither
habitacion nor tillage, for all the people fled into Britayne, and all the
beasts of the country, were brought to Cawdebe^, where a good sheep was sold
for an English penny, and a kowe for xii. pence. Daily was skirmishyng and
fightyng in every part, in so much that the Lord Scales with four hundred
Englishemen, discomfited at the Rye beside Roan, the Heir and fiftene hundred
valeaunt Frenchemen, and sir Richard Reignold de Fountaynes, sir Aleyne
Gerond, Alayne de Monsay, and Geffrey Grame capitain of the Scotts, and three
hundred, and mo were taken prisoners, beside seven fair and pleasant coursers.
But this victory stayed not the hearts of the French nation, for their minds
were so full of treason, and their malice so great against the Englishemen,
that many tounes turned, to the part of king Charles, without conquest or
desire, and diverse were sold for covetousness, and many were delivered by
treason, as Deep, Boys de Uyncennes, and other.

HERE is one especial point to be noted, that either the disdain amongst
the chief peers of the realm of England, (as you have heard,) or the
negligence of the kings counsel, (which did not with quick sight, forese
and prevent things for to come) was the loss of the whole dominion of
France, between the rivers of Soame and Marne, and in especial of the noble
city of Paris. For where before times there were sent over, for the aid and
tuicion of the tounes, and citees, brought under the obeysaunce, of the English
nation, thousands of men, apt and mete for the war, and defense: now were
sent into France, hundredes, yea scores, some rascal, and some not able to
draw a bow, or carry a bill. For the lord Willoughby, and the bishop of
Tyrwyne, which had the governance, of the great and large city of Paris,
had in their company, not two thousand Englishmen. Which weakness king
Charles well perceived. Wherefore he appointed Arthur of Britayne, the Earl of
Dumoys Bastard of Orleaunce, the Lords de la Roche, and Lisle Adame, and
other valeaunt capitaines, as well Burgonyons as French, to go before Paris,
trustyng by the favor of certain citezens, with whom he had great
intelligence, and knew thenglishemennes power and doings, shortly to be lord
of the city and town, without any great loss or battaill. So these
capitaynes came before the city of Paris, but perceiuyng, that all things
succeeded not, according to their expectacio^, returned to Mount Marter, and the
next day, suddenly set on the town of saint Denise, where, the Englishemen
manfully defended them selfs, but being oppressed with so great a multitude,
they were compelled to fly into the Abbaye, and into the Toure of Uenyn, for
succor and refuge: in which conflicte two hundred Englishemen were slain, and
the rest, upon a reasonable composicion, rendered the town, and departed to
Paris.

THOMAS Lord Beaumond, which of late was come to Paris with eight hundred
men, issued out of Paris, with six hundred soldiers, only intendyng to se,
and vieue the doings and nombre of the French army, but he was suddenly
espied, and compassed about: so, that within a small space, he was discomfited
and taken, and with him four score prisoners, beside two hundred which were
slain on the feld, and the remnaunt chased to the very gates of the city. The
Parisians and in especial the Master of the Halles, and some of the
University, and Michael Laillier, and many notable burgesses of the town,
(which, ever with an English countenance, covered a French heart)
perceiuyng the weakness of the Englishemen, and the force and strength of the
Frenchemen, signifiyng to the French capitaines, their minds and intentes,
willed them to come with all diligence, to receive so rich a prey to them,
without any difficulty, offered and given. The Constable delaiyng no time, came
with his power, and lodged by the Charterhous: and the lord Lisle Adame,
approchyng the walls, showed to the citezens, a charter, sealed with the
great seal of king Charles, by the which he had pardoned them their
offenses, and granted to them all the old liberties and ancient privileges,
so they would hereafter be to him, obedient, true, and serviceable. Which
thing to them declared, they ran about the town, criyng: saint Denise,
live king Charles. The Englishemen perceiuyng this, determined to keep the gate
of. S Denise, but they were deceived, for the cheynes were drawn in every
streate, and women and children cast down stones, and scaldyng water on the
Englishemennes heddes, and the citezens persecuted them, from streate to
streate, and from lane to lane, and slew and hurt, diverse and many of them.
The bishop of Tyrwyne, Chauncellor there for king Henry, and the lord
Willoughby, and sir Simon Moruier, took great pain, to appeace the people, and
repress their fury: but when they saw, that all auailed not, they withdrue
theimselfes, to the Bastell of saint Anthony, which fortress, they had well
vitailed and furnished, with men and municions.

VVHILES this rumor was in the town, therle of Dumoys and other scaled the
walls, and some passed the River by boats, and opened the gate of saint
James, at the which the Constable with his banner displaied entered, at whose
entry, the Parisians were very glad, and made great joy. The bishop and the
Lord Willoughby, with their small company, defended their fortress, ten
days, lokyng for aid, but when they saw that no comfort appeared, they
yielded their fortress, so that they and theirs, with certain baggage, might
peaceably return to Roan, which desire was to them granted. Then as they
departed, the Parisians rayled, mocked, and taunted the Englishmen, with the
most spiteful words, and shameful terms, that could be invented or devised:
so that all men may apparauntly perceive, that their hearts never thought, as
their toungues uttered. For notwithstanding their obeysaunce and fidelity,
sworn to King Henry, and nothing regardyng the final composicion, to the
which they had set their common seal, when they saw thenglishmen at the
weakest, they turned the leaf and sang another song: declaryng to all men
their inconstaunt hearts, their waueryng minds, and untrue demeanor. Thus was
the cite of Paris brought again into the possession of the French king, which,
there altered officers, and ordained laws, at his pleasure, for the surety and
safegarde of him, his realm, and people.

AFTER this glorious gain, the French king besieged the town of Crayle, upon
Oyse, whereof sir William Cha^berlayn, was capitain, which, with five hundred
Englishmen, issued out of the town, and after long fight, discomfited his
enemies, and slew two hundred, and took a great nombre prisoners: the
remnaunt not likyng their market, departed to Champeigne, and other tounes
adioynyng. During which season, xii. Burgesses of the town of Gysors, sold
it for money to Poyton of Xantrayles, but he had not the Castle delivered.
Wherefore with all his power, he besieged the same, whereof the Lord Talbot being
advertised, sent for the lord Scales, and they both with.xviii. hundred men,
rescued the Castle, took the town, and discomfited their enemies, and slew of
them above four hundred persons. Now was the old proverbs verefied, that he
that comes a day after the fair, comes to late, and when the s^ede is
stolen, it is no bote to shut the stable door. For when Paris, saint
Denise, saint Germayns in Lay, and many other tounes in France, were taken
and betrayed, for lack of succors and sufficient garrisons, then the duke of
York appointed at the parliament before, to be Regent of France, and by the
disdain and envy of the duke of Somerset, and other, not till now dispatched,
was sent into Normandy, with eight thousand men, and in his company, the
Earls of Salisbury, and Suffolk, and the Lord Fawconbridge, and diverse
valeaunt capitaines. When he was landed at Har^lewe, the Earl of Salisbury,
besieged the Castle of Chamboys, which shortly was to him rendered. Then the
Duke removed to Roan, where he set good orders, and did great Justice in the
country, wherefore the Normans in their Chronicle, highly extol and much
magnify him, for that point: howbeit, they say, that he gat by long siege,
the town and Abbay of Feca^pe, and did none other notable act, during the time
of his rule and governance.

PHILLIP Duke of Burgoyne which, (as you have heard) brake both his oath and
promise with the king of England, imagened with himself, that the Englishemen
were like shortly, to be expulsed out of all the tounes on that side the sea,
and that they had no certain refuge nor place to resort to, out of ieoperdy,
but only the town of Calice. Wherefore, he assembled his counsel, and the
heddes of the citees and tounes of Flaunders, Brabant, Hollande, and Zelande,
in the town of Gaunt, where was declared to them, the right, title, and
interest, that he had to the town of Calice, and the County of Guysnes, as a
very patrimony, belongyng to his inheritance: she wyng farther, that thesaid
town was the golffe, and swallower up, of all the gold and silver of his
countries and dominions, for as much as there, was the staple of woolles, tynne,
lead, and other marchaundise, for the which, the Englishemen would take no
common current money, but only gold and silver, to the great impouerishment
of his seigniories, and Regions: saying farther, that Calice only was the
common stop, between his countries and Britayne, and Spain, so that Southward,
nor Westwarde, his subjects could not pass, without the daungier of that
town. Wherefore these detrimentes considered, he determined, (if they would
assent) shortly to recover and conquer, that town and the county of Guisnes.
To this purpose all the counsel, and common people, not only agreed, but
also promised aid, both of men and money. Lord how the Flemines bragged, and
the Hollanders craked, that Calice should be won and all the Englishemen
slain, swearyng, and staryng, that they would have it, within three days at the
most: thynkyng verily, that the town of Calice, could no more resist their
puyssaunce, then a pot of double beer, when they fall to quaffyng.

TO tell you what ordenau^ce was new cast, what powder was bought what engynes
were devised, what harneis was provided, what vitale was purueyed for this
great enterprise: I will not comber you, in rehersyng every thing
perticularly, because the Flemynges write, that the provision was more then
tongue could speak, or heart could think yet you may believe as you list.
These doings were not so privy, but sir Ihon Radcliffe deputy of the town
of Calice, was thereof informed and shortly of the same, advertised king Henry,
and his counsel, which incontinent sent thither, the Earl of Mortayne son
to the Duke of Somersette, and the Lord Cammeys with.xv.C. men, and great
foyson of vitaille, which tissued out of Calice, and came before Grauelyne,
where they were encountered, with a great nombre of Flemynges, which were
shortly discomfited, and four hundred of them slain, and six score taken
prisoners, and carried to Calice. And within two days after, the Englishmen
drove by fine force, the lords of Waurayn and Bado, to the barriers of Arde,
and discomfited the company, to the number of.xv.C. and slew vij. valeaunt
capitaines, and took many gentlemen prisoners. Phillip duke of Burgoyne,
abidyng still in his high and warlike enterprise, assembled together of
Flemynges, Pycardes, Holla^ders, and Henowiers a great army, to the nombre
of.xl.M. so well armed, so well vitailed, so well furnished with ordenaunce, and
so well garnished in all things, that they thought in their hearts, and blasted
amongst them selfs, that the Calicians, would leave the town desolate, and
fly for their sauegard, hearing only the approchyng of the Gauntoys. But they
reckened before their host, and so paid more then their shot came to. When
this gallant army, was passed the water at Grauelyn, the duke intendyng to
begin his great conquest, besieged and assauted the little and poor Castle of
Oye, which having in it but.L. soldiers, of the which.xii. sold their lives
derely, the remnaunt compelled by necessity yielded themselfes symplie to the
duke, which to please the Gauntoys, being of the most puissaunt company in his
army, liberally gave to the^ both the Castle and the prisoners, as a sign and
token of good luck, and fortunate victory. Which rude and beastly persons,
nothing expert in war, or laws of Arms, not only rased and abated the
Castle, but also hanged.xxix. of the captives, and had so done with all the
remnaunt if the duke (disdainyng their cruelty) had not entreated for the rest.

AFTER this victory, little honorable and less profitable, the Pycardes
besieged the Castle of Mark, and three times assauted it, more to their loss,
then gain. The Englishemen within, whereof sir Ihon Geddyng was capitain, set
out the banner of saint George, and rang the belles, to the intent to have
succors from the town of Calice. But the capitaines there, myndyng not to lose
the more for the less, nor the substance for the accident, wisshed them good
luck, and good fortune without any aid se^dyng. For doubt of the dukes great
army and power, The soldiers within Mark, being but two hundred and six,
seeing no hope of succor, and desperate of comfort, rendered theimselfes to the
duke upon condition: that their life's and lymmes should be saved, and so they
were conveyed in suer custody, to the town of Gaunt, and the castle of Mark
was rased and defaced.

AFTER this act dooen, the duke of Burgoyne, accompanied with the Duke of
Cleues, the Earl of Estampes, the Lords of Dantoyng, Croy, Cresquy, Humyers,
and many other valeaunt Barons, and knights, with his great army, came before
the town of Calice, and placed his siege about the same, most to his
advantage, and to the most displeasure of his enemies. He gave three great
assautes to the town, but his people were not so fierce to assaut, but
thenglishemen were as quick to defend: so that he, gainyng so little at these
iii. enterprises, was content to abstain from farther approaching toward the
walls. At the first assaut the Heir, which was come to se the duke of
Burgoyn, was sore wounded and hurt. Beside this, the duke had daily one great
iye sore, which was by cause that at every tide, ships arrived in the haven,
out of England, openly before his face, laden with vitail, municio^s, and men
and also the Calicians would for the nonce, put out cattaill into the marish,
under the town walls, the thentent to provoke the Flemynges to come within
their catchyng, and daungier, which being covetous of prey, and gain, often
adventured, and seldom returned again: for many by this means were taken
prisoners, but many mo slain with ordenaunce. The duke one day rode about, to
vieue and behold the situacion, and the walls of the town, to thentent to
take his most aduau^tage, either by assaute or shot of ordenaunce. He was
quickly espied, and with the stroke of a Canon, a tro^peter which rode next
before him and three horses in his company, were slain out of hand. When he saw
that all things succeeded not to his purpose, he first set the Lord of Croy,
and a convenient nombre, to besiege the castle of Guysnes, where thesaied
capitain gat little profit, and did less harm: And after devised how to
stop the haven, so that no succors should enter there, and also, to prohibit
the^ within the town, to make any egresse or rode outward, and so by this
means, to famishe and compel them to yield, and render the town. This devise
was set forward, and nothing slepte: for iiii. great hulkes were laden, with
great square stones, semented and joined together with lead, to thentent that
they should lie still, like a mount and not to sever a sunder. These ships
with the re^naunt of the dukes navy, were conveyed into the mouth of Calice
haven, and in a full sea by craft and policy, were sounke down to the
ground; but whether God would not that the haven should be destroyed, either
the conueyers of the huikes, knew not the very channel, these four great
ships at the low water, lay openly upon the sands, without any hurt doing
to the rode or cha^nel, which when the soldiers had perceived, they issued out
of the town, and brake the ships, and carried both the stones and the tymbre
into the town, which served them well, to their fortificacions. The second
devise was also accomplished, which was a strong bastell, set on a little
mountain, furnished with.iiii.C. men and much artilarie, which fortress,
did let thenglishemen to issue out, when they would, to their great
displeasure and disturbaunce.

VVHILES these things were in doing, there arrived into the dukes army, an
herault of England called Pembroke, belongyng to the duke of Gloucester, which
declared to the duke of Burgoyne, that the Protector of England his master, (if
God would send him wind and wether) would give battle to him and his whole
puyssau^ce, either there, or in any other place, within his own country,
where he would appoint: but the day he could not assign, because of the
inconstancy of the wind, and mutabilitie of the air. The duke (like a noble
man) answered the herault: sir say to your master, that his request is both
honorable and reasonable, howbeit, he shall not need to take pain, to seek me
in mine own country, for (GOD willing) he shall find me here, till I have my
will of the town, ready to abide him, and all the power that he can make.
After this answer made, the Heraulte was highly feasted, and had a cup and a
hundred golden gyldens, to him delivered for a reward, and so returned to
Calice. After whose departure, the duke called a great counsel, in the chief
pauilion of the Gauntoys, and there declared both the heraultes message and
his answer, desiryng them to regard his honor, the estimacion of their
countries, and the honesties of themselfes, and like men to receive their
enemies, and valeauntly to defend their adversaries, promisyng to them
victory, gain, and perpetual glory. Lord how the Flemynges threatened, how the
Pycardes craked, and how the Hollanders swear, that thenglishme^ should be
killed and slain, promisyng to the duke, rather to dye then to fly, or to be
recreaunt. Whiles this great matter was in consultacion, the Calicians, not
well contented with the bastell, which the duke had newly builded, issued out
of the town, in a great nombre, part on foot, and part on horseback. The
footmen ran to assaut the bastile, and the horssemen, went between the army
and the assailau^tes, to stop the aid and succors which might come. The
alarmy was sounded, in so much that the Duke in proper person, was coming on
foot to releue his people, but by the means of the horsemen, he was stayed and
kept back a space, in the which delay of time, the Englishmen by fine force
gat the place, and slew.Clx. persons, the remnaunt were taken prisoners, and
defaced the fortress, and set it on fire: cariyng with them, all the ordinance
and artilerie, into the town of Calice, to the great displeasure, of the Duke
and his counsel. The next day after, there sprang a rumor in the army (no
man could tell how) that the Duke of Gloucester with a great puyssaunce, was
all ready embarked and shipped, and would arrive at the next tide, and come
down before Calice, and raise the siege. What was the very cause, I cannot
truly write: but surely, the same night the Duke fled away, and sent in all
have to the Lord of Croye, to reise his siege before Guysnes, which tidings
were to him very joyous, for he neither got nor saved: so these two capitaines
departed, leauyng behind, both ordinance, vitaill, and great riches. The
French writers, to save the honor of the Duke of Burgoyne, say, that there
was a certain discord and commocion, amongst the Fleminges and duche nation:
affirmyng, that the great lords and the Pycardes, (whom the Frenchemen greatly
extol) would betraye and sell the Fleminges, and their friends, and that, for
the same cause, in a great fury they cried, home, home, and would not tarry, for
no request the Duke could make, nor no exhortacio^ that could be given: and so
by their misgouernaunce, the Duke was enforced to raise his siege and to
depart. The Flemishe authors affirm the contrary, saying: that they were
ready to abide the coming of the duke of Gloucester, but the duke of Burgoyn
fearyng to be trapped, between the duke of Gloucesters army before, and the
garrison of Calice behind, so that he could escape by no way, fled away in
the night, geuyng to them no warnyng before. So that for lack of time, and
convenient space, to lade and carry their stuff, and being com^aunded to retire
with all speed and diligence, they were compelled to lose, and leave behind
them, their vitaill, and tents, to their great loss and detriment. Now it is
at your liberties, (gentle reders) whether you will give credit to the
Frenchmen, (which were absent, and no d^ers in the act) or to the Flemynges,
(which were partakers of the loss and dishonor.) But the infallible verity
is, that he fled the.xxvj. day of July in the night, and the next day in the
morning, the duke of Gloucester, landed in Calice haven, and straight went into
the Camp, where his enemies, the night before were lodged, and there he found
many goodly peaces of ordenau^ce, and inespecially one, called Dygeon, named
after the chief town of Burgony, beside pauilio^s, wine, beer, meal, and
innumerable vitaill.

THE Duke of Gl^^cester, seeing his enemies reculed, having in his
company.xxv.M. men, entered into Flaunders, burning houses, killyng such as
would resist, destroiyng the country on every part, setting (...) the tounes
of Poporniche and Baillens, and wasted the suburbs of many fair citees, and
in all this way, they lost no man, nor saw any creature appete, to defend the
country. After, they passed by New Castle* and destroyed Ryme^^ure, and
Uallo^ Chapel, and then entered into Arthoys, to Arques, and Blandesques,
setting fire in every (...) where they came. Thus they passed by saint Omers,
to Guysnes, and (...) at six weeks end, where they were well refreasshed:
for in all this journey, they had little plenty of good bread, which caused
much faintness, and diverse diseases in the army. When the Duke of
Gloucester, had sufficiently plagued and wasted the countries of the duke of
Burgoyn, and brought great preyes of beasts and spoil, to the town of
Calice, he setting there all things in good order, returned in to England,
where he was advertised, how James king of Scotts, contrary to his oath,
league, and promise, had besieged the Castle of Rokesborough, with thirty
thousand men, whereof sir Raufe Graye was capitain, which manfully defended
it.xx. days, but the Scottish king being advertised, that the Earl of
Northumberlande, was coming to fight with him, fled with no less loss,
then dishonor, to his town of Edenbrough.

The.xv. year. The.xv. year.

AFter this dangerous business finished, and for a time ended, by mean of
friends, and desire of Princies, a truce or abstinence of war for a certain
time, was moved between the King of England, and the duke of Burgoyne, for
which cause were sent to Grauelyne, for the king of England, the Cardinal of
Wynchester Henry Beaufford, Ihon Lord Moubrey Duke of Norffolke, Humffrey Earl
of Stafford, and diverse other well learned and honorable personages: and for
the duke, there appe^^ed the duches his wife, the bishop of Arras, the lord of
Croy, and diverse other. At which treaty, a (...) was taken for a small time,
and for a less space observed. Which abstinence of war, was concluded between
the King of England, and the Duchess of Burgoyne, (enterlessyng the duke and
his name.) Some think that the king of England, would never enter in league
with him, because he had broken his promise, writing, and fidelity, written,
sealed, and sworn to him, and to his father. Other imagened, this to be done
by a cautell, to cast a mist before the French kings iyes, to the intent he
should believe, that this feate was wrought by the duchess, without assent or
knowledge of the duke or his counsel, and so he was not bound to
accomplish, any act or thing done in his wifes treaty. Thus you may se,
that princies sometime, with such vain gloses, and scornful exposicions, will
hide their doings and cloak their purposes, to thentent that they would not,
either be espied, or pluck their hedde out of the collar, at their pleasure.
But, (as the common proverb says) he, which is a promise breaker, escapes
not alwaie free: for it is well seen* that daily it chances, both to princes
and mean persons, that for breakyng of faith, and not keeping of promise,
many displeasures arise, and innumerable inconveniences ensue.

ABOUT this season, Katheryne queen and mother to the king of England, departed
out of this transitory life, and was buried by her husband, in the mynster of
Westmynster. This woman, after the death of king Henry the fifth her husband,
being young and lusty, following more her own appetite, then frendely
counsel, and regardyng more her private affeccion, then her open honor, took
to husband privily, a goodly gentilman, and a beautyful person, garnished with
many Godly gifts, both of nature and of grace, called Owen Teuther, a man
brought forth and come of the noble lignage, and ancient line of Cadwaleder,
the last king of the Brytons, by whom she conceived and brought forth.iii.
goodly sons, Edmond, Jasper, and another, which was a monk in Westmynster,
and lived a small time, and a daughter, which in her youth departed out of this
transitory life: After whose death king Henry, because they were his
brethren of one womb descended, created Edmonde, earl of Rychemonde, and
Jasper, earl of Pembroke, which Edmond engendered of Margaret, daughter and
sole heir to Ihon, duke of Somerset, Henry, which after was king of this
realm, called king Henry the seventh, of whom you shall hear more hereafter.
This Owen, after the death of the Queen his wife, was apprehended and committed
to ward, because that contrary to the statute made in the vi. year of this
king, he presumptuously had married the Queen, without the kings especial
assent, and agreement, out of which prison he escaped, and let out other with
him, and was again apprehendyd, and after escaped again.

THE duchess of Bedford, sister to Jews, earl of saint Paul, myndyng also
to marye, rather for pleasure then for honor, without cou^sayl of her friends,
married a lusty knight, called sir Richard Wooduile, to the great displeasure
of her uncle the bishop of Tyrwyne, and the earl her brother: but they now
could not remedy it, for the chance was cast and passed. This sir Richard,
was made Baron of Rivers, and after earl, and had by this Lady, many noble
sons, and fair daughters: whereof, one was Lady Elizabeth, after Queen of
England, married to King Edward the fourth, (as here after you shall perceive.)

VVHILES this marriage was celebratyng, Jane late Queen of England, and before
Duchess of Britayne, daughter to the King of Nauer, and wife to king Henry the
iiij. died at the manor of Haueryng, and was buried by her husband at
Canterbury, in which time disceased the Countess of Warwick, and Henry
Archbishop of York.

I thought here to omit and ouerpasse, the regainyng and conquest of the strong
town of Harflew, once English and after, (by craft) turned to the French
part, except the French writers, more then the English auth^rs, had made
mention and remembrance, of the reduccion of the same. For they say and
affirm, that the Duke of Somerset, accompanied with the Lords of
Fauconbridge, Talbot, sir Franceis Surrien Arragonoys, Matthew Gough, Thomas
Paulet, Thomas Haringto^ Walter Limbrike, Ihon Geddyng, William Watton,
Esquieres, and Thomas Hylton Bailife of Roan, with a great puissaunce of the
English party, compassed about and besieged the town of Harflew, both by
water, and by land. The captain within the town, was called sir Ihon
Desto^teuile, and sir Robert his brother, with other, to the nombre of six
hundred good fightyng men. The assailauntes lost no time, but made trenches,
and cast diches, both to assaute the town, and also to let the French
succors, that they should neither approach, nor aid the citezens shut in and
besieged. Diverse assautes were given, which were manfully resisted: but more to
the loss of the defenders, then the assauters. Beside this, the Englishemen
laid great ordinance, before the gate of the town, which continually vexed
the inhabitau^tes, and over threw buyldynges, and destroyed mancions: so that
neither house, nor high way was sure, or refuge to the tounes men. This siege
endured long, to the great discomfiture of the people: whereof they advertised
the French king and his counsel, which sent thither the earl of ewe, therle
of Dumoys, called the Bastard of Orleaunre, the valeaunt Bastard of Burbon, the
lord Gaucort, sir Giles of sent Simon, and the chief capitaines of all his
realm, with four thousand men, both pollitique and proved. This valeaunt
army passed the River of Soame between Amyas and Corby, not mistrustyng to
get that, which they lost and left behynd them, and so they came before the
town, and divided themselves in several parts, to their most advantage:
daily skirmishyng with thenglishmen, but nothing preuailyng, and so for fear
of losyng honor, and desperacion of gain, the florishyng Frenchemen, returned
again with much labor, and little profit. The capitaines of the town seeing
their pillars borken, and their chief ayders discomfited* rendered the town
to the duke of Somerset, which made there capitaines, Thomas Paulet, William
Lymbrike, Cristopher Barker, and George sent George, which many years, (till
the division began in England) manfully and valeauntly defended the town,
and haven: but afterward, when the said duke was Regent, and governor of
Normandy, he not only lost the town, but also the city of Roan, the Empeire
and chief iuell of thesaied Duchy, with many other citees and fortresses,
which he, more by entreatyng, then threatenyng, might still have holden under
his subieccio^. But all men have not wit alike, nor all rulers be not of one
condition and policy. For this duke Edmond, gatte this town, with great
glory, when he was but a deputy, under the Regent, and after, being governor
himself, lost the same, and all the whole duchy, to his great slander and
infamy, (as hereafter you shall perceive). But, who can prevent fortunes
chance, or have spectacles to se all things to come, or chances that be
present: seeing God disp^seth that man purposes, and that all worldely devises,
and man's cogitacions, be uncertain and ever imperfect.

ALTHOUGH I have long talked of France, yet I may not forget the double
dealyng, and crafty demeanor, of James King of Scotts: which being, (as you
have heard) late prisoner in England, not only was garnished with learning
and Civility, (which things, were rare and strange before that time, within
the realm of Scotland) but also set at liberty, and honorably sent home. And
to the intent that his amity might be perpetual, and that love might
continually succeade between both the realms, by his mean and accord:
first, his great ransom was abbridged, and diminished, and after, he was
joined in marriage, with one of the blood royal, to thentent that he, and his
heirs, should be united and knit, to the progeny of England, with an
indissoluble knot, like the twisted tree, which cannot sever, and like the
hard flinte, which will not wax soft: yet this ungentle prince, and
forgetful friend, puttyng in oblivion, both the duty of his obeysau^ce,
toward his sovereign and liege lord, and the oath and promise, that he made to
king Henry, when he did to him homage, and liege at the Castle of Wyndesore,
(as before you have heard) turned his back to his friend and kynsman, and looked
to y^ French part, which never did him honor nor profit, not only sendyng
into France daily, aid and succors against the English nation, but also by
new alliance, sought and practiced ways and means, how to join himself
with foreign princes, to grieve and hurt his neighbors and adioynauntes, of the
realm of England. And although his own power were small, to do to them any
great damage, yet he thought that he, being linked in such noble houses,
should the less fear the malice of his enemies: upon which fe^le foundation,
he concluded.ii. marriages, the one with Jews the dolphin son to Charles the
French king, and the other with Fraunces duke of Britayn. Which marriages,
were not desired for love or riches, but only for aid, to resist and drive
out the Englishmen out of France. For the Lady Margeret married to the dolphyn,
was of such nasty complexion and evil sauored breathe, that he abhorred her
company, as a clean creature, does a carrion: whereupon she conceived such an
inward grief, that within few days after, she ended her days. Although this
lady had such impedimentes, (as you have heard) yet her sister Isabell, married
to Fraunces duke of Britayne, lacked, neither excedyng beauty, nor pleasant
breathe: but as for wit, womanhod, and Civil behauor, she never had, nor
excercised. Wherefore, when the duke before his marriage, was by his counsel
admonished, to refuse and forsake so innocent a creature, he, more moved with
her fair face, then her woma^ly wisdom, answered: that it was enough for a
woman, to judge the difference between the shurte and the dublet of her
husband, and to know him in the dark, from another man.

FOR these marriages, king James demanded of his commons, a great subsidye or
tallage, which was sore grudged at, and in manner denied: so that he married
them, with fair promises, and aid and succor against thenglishemen, rather
then with bags of money, or chestes of plate. This foreign alliance little
profited, or auayled the realm of Scotland, nor this new amity, defended not
king James: for Walter Steward earl of Athole, (which pretended a title to the
Croune, by reason that he was begotten of king Robert the second, by his
first wife, and by whose occasion, Robert duke of Albany, murdered David duke
of Rothesay, elder brother to this king James, as in the story of king Henry
the fourth, you have heard declared) after the coronacio^ of king James the
first in Scotland, earnestly solicited him to putt to death, duke Murdo, and
all the ofspryng of Robert first duke of Albany, trustyng, that after he had
destroyed that line, (which was a stop in his way) to invent some mean how to
destroy the king and his children, and so to obtain the croune and preeminence
of the realm. Wherefore, he persuaded Robert Steward his nephiew, and Robert
Grame his cosyn, and diverse other, to murder and sley the king their
sovereign Lord, which thereto by deuilishe instigacion incensed and procured,
came to the town of Pertho, (commonly called S. Iho^s town) and there entered
into the kings privy chamber, and slew first diverse of his servants,
which made resistance, and after, killed the King with many mortal strokes,
and hurt the Queen, which, in defense of her husband, felled one of the
traitors. When this ungracious deed was blown about the town, the people
rose in great plumpes, and found out the princequellers, and them brought to
straight prisone, which afterward, (according to their deserts) were with most
terrible torments, put to death and executed.

AFTER James the first, succeeded James the second, his eldest son, which
fearyng sedicion and civil discord, vexed more his own nation, then the
English people.

NOW leauyng Scotland, let us return to the business of France. Whiles the
Scotts were compassyng, how to destroy their king: The lord Talbot, with a
great company, laid siege to the Castle of Tankeruile, which after four
months, was to him simply rendered, and given up. This town was no great
gain to the Englishemen: for in the mean season, the French king in his own
person, besieged the strong town of Monstreaue Faultyou, whereof Thomas
Gerard was capitain: which, more for desire of reward, then for fear of
enemies, sold the town to the French King, and had of him great gifts, and
good chere, which afterward was well known, to his shame and reproach. This
town had been rescued, or the French King foughten with all, if one chance
had not happened: for the duke of York was discharged of the office of Regent,
and the earl of Warwick preferred to the same, so that the duke of York liyng
at Roan, would have gladly rescued the town, if his authority had not
surceased, and the Earl of Warwick could not, for the wind was so clean
co^tray to him, that he and his army, tarried for the wind above ten wekes.
And so between the discharge of the one, and the charge of the other, this
town of Mo^streau, was delivered and sold.

THIS present year, was a parliament kept at Westminster, in the which were
diverse notable conclusions ordained and taken, as well for the preseruacion of
peace and concord at home, as for the maintenau^ce of war, and hostility in
outward regions: in the which parliament, (who so will look on the acts)
shall perceive that one act made, for byyng and sellyng by strangers, was
profitable to the public wealth of this realm, if it were well kept, (as a few
good acts or none be either by the negligence of y^ governors, or by the
insolency and pride of the people.)

NOW must we speak somewhat of Charles the French King: which after he had
gained again the city of Paris, and diverse other tounes, was so puffed up
with pride, that he thought it but a trifle, to conquer Normandy, and expulse
all the English nation, out of his countries and seigniories. Wherefore, he
sent Arthur of Britayn, Constable of France, and Iho^ duke of Ala^son, into
Normandy with a great army, which besieged the town of Aurau^ches, standing
upon the knop of an hill, nere to the Britishe sea, both well walled and well
manned. While they lay there long, little gettyng and much spendyng, the lord
Talbot with a valeaunt company of men, approached nere the French men, and
encamped themselfes, in the face of their enemies, to provoke and entise them
to battle and fight. The Frenchmen refusyng this offer, kept theimselfes
within their trenches, daily fortifiyng and repairing their camp. The
Englishemen perceiuyng their doings, removed their army half a mile farther,
geuyng their enemies come to issue out and to fight, but all this little
auailed: for the Frenchemen lay still and stirred not. The lord Talbot, seeing
their faint hearts, raised his feld, and in the open sight of them all, entered
into the town, and the next day issued out, and found the Frenchemen ridyng
abroad, to destroy the plain country, whom he environed, bet, and
discomfited, slayng many, and taking diverse prisoners. Although the Fre^chemen
gat neither honor nor profit by this journey* yet they enterprised a greater
matter: for Ponthon of Sentrayles and the Heir, with diverse other capitaines,
and a great nombre of Frenchmen, having promise of certain Burgesses of Roan,
to be let secretly into the town, came forward to a village, called Rise, and
there lodged. The lord Talbot, the lord Scales, and sir Thomas Kiriell,
hearing of their approach, set out of Roan at midnight, and with great pain,
came to Rise in the morning so covertly, that the Frenchemen, being suddenly
surprised and set on, like men madd and amassed, ran away, and fled: in the
chase were taken the lord of Fontaynes, sir Alleyne Geron, sir Jews de Balle,
and.lx. knights and esquires, beside other, and there were flain, two hundred
and mo: the Heir being sore wounded, by the swiftnes of his horse, escaped
very narowly. The Englishmen returned to the town of Rise, and found there a
great nombre of horses, and other baggages, which they ioyously brought with
them to Roan.

The.xvi. year.
ON the sixth day of Nouembre, The xvi. year
this present year, the earl of Warwick, as regent of France, passed the sea,
after he had been seven times shipped and unshipped, and landed at Humflewe,
with a.M. freashe soldiers and came to Roan, and then the duke of York,
returned into England, neither wholly pleased, nor half content. For he
secretly smelled, that some men, privily disdained his advancement, and envied
his promocio^: yet, (like a wise man) he kept his tongue close, whatsoever his
heart thought. Between the change of these two capitaines, the duke of
Burgoyne, (which sore envied the glory of thenglishmen) besieged the Castle of
Croytoy, with ten thousand men and mo, having with him great plenty of
gonnes, and goodly ordenaunce. The Earl of Warwick hearing of this feate, sent
the lord Talbot, the lord Fawconbridge, sir Thomas Kiriell, sir Ihon
Mountgomery, Thomas Limbricke, Thomas Cha^dos, Dauy Halle, and diverse other
knights and esquiers, and many tall yeomen, to the nombre of five thousand
men, which passed the River of Soame, beside the town of S. Ualery: for the
passage of Bla^ch Taque, was very dangerous to go through, because the duke of
Burgoyne had laid there ordinance, and other engyns, to let, trouble and
stop the Englishemen to go over at that foorde. And yet, where the lord
Talbot passed, his men went in the water up to the chinne, so glad were the men
to rescew their fellows. When the duke of Burgoyn was informed of the
approchyng of the lord Talbot and other, he with all his power, saving four
hundred, which were left in a bastile, by him there newly builded fled to
Abbeuile, which bastile was sone gained, and the men within, either slain or
taken.

AFTER this town received, the lord Talbot sent word to the duke of
Burgoyn, that he would utterly wast and destroy the country of Pycardy, except
he, (like a valeaunt prince) would give him battle. And according to his
promise, he brent tounes, spoiled, and slew many people in Pycardy, but for
all his doings, the duke would not appear, but stale away from Abbeuile, and
fled to Amyas. So the Lord Talbot was.xx. days full, in the countries of
Pycardy, and Arthoyse, destroiyng and burning, all that they could se or come
to, and after departed. And in the mean season, sir Thomas Kiriell had gotten
all the dukes cariages, and ordenaunce, and left as much vitaile in the town
of Croytoy, as would serve six hundred men a whole year, and conveyed the
remnaunt in safety, to the earl of Warwick, which not only, received the
capitaines, with good semblaunce, and loving cheer, but also highly magnified
their acts, and much praised their hardiness.

AFTER this enterprise achiued, Henry Earl of Mortaine son to Edmond duke of
Somerset, arrived at Chierbuege, with four hundred archers, and three hundred
speres, and passed through Normandy, till he came into the County of Main,
where, he besieged a castle, called S. Anyan, in the which were three C.
Scotts, beside Frenchemen. This Castle he took by a strong assaut, and slew
all the Scotts, and hanged the Frenchmen, because they were once sworn
English, and after, brake their oath: and after he gatte also another Castle,
two miles from saint Iulians, called Alegerche, which was shortly after
recovered, and the Lord Cameuys, which came to the rescue of the same, in the
mean way was trapped and taken. Thus the victory flowed some time on the one
part, and sometime on the other, but the treason of the Frenchmen, far
surmounted in gettyng, both the policy and strength of the English
capitaines: for by the untruth and perfidy, of the very Burgesses and
inhabitau^tes of the tounes, of Meaux in Brie, and. S. Susanne, the same were,
sold and delivered to the French part, in the end of this sixtene year.

The.xvii. year. The.xvii. year.

WHat should I rehearse the great tempests, the sharp blastes, the sudden
piries, the unmeasurable wyndes, the continual raynes, which fell and chanced
this year in England: sith such torments be both natural, and of God, at
his pleasure diversely ordered and altered. Of these intemperate storms, rose
such a scacety, that wheat was sold at.iii.s.iiii. d. the busshell, wine
at.xii.d. the gallon, Bay salt at.xiiij. d. the busshel, and malt at
xiij.s.iiij. d. the quarter, and all other graynes, were sold of an excessive
price, above the old custom.

IN the month of June, the Earl of Huntyngdone, (as Steward of Guyen) with
two.M. archers, and four hundred speres, was sent into Gascoyne, as a
suppliment to the country, and the commons of the same. For the king of England
and his cou^saill, were informed that therle of Dumoys, lay on y^ fronters of
Tholose, secretly by rewards and fair promises, entisyng and provoking
diverse tounes in Guyen, to become French, and leave thenglishe nacio^.
Wherefore, this earl (like a pollitique warrior) altered not only the
capitaines, in every town and cite, but also removed the magistrates, and
changed the officers, from town to town, and from rowme to rowme, so that by
this means at that time, the earl of Dumoys, lost both travail and cost. In
the same month also, sir Richard Wooduile, six William Cha^berlain, sir William
Peyto, and sir William Story, with a.M. men, were lent to stuff the tounes in
Normandy, which surely at that time, had thereof great need: for thenglish
capitaines, had small confidence in the Norma^s, and not to much, in some of
their own nation. For that harlot bribery, and her fellow couetuousnes, ran so
fast abroad with French crounes, that uneath any creature, (without an especial
grace) could hold either hand, close, or pursse shut, such a strong percer is
money, and such a gredie glotton is avarice. You have heard before, how that
King Charles heart by gettyng of Paris, was set upon a merry pynne, and thought
daily that all things more and more, would both apply to his purpose, and
follow his appetite. Which invented imaginacion, suddenly both deceived him,
and also appalled his haut courage, and abate^ him somewhat of his proud
stomach. For ^odainly there rose a strange storm, and a quick pirie, so
mischeuous and so pernicious, that nothing more execrable, or more to be
abhorred, could happen in any Christian Region. Which sedicious tempest, if
wise counsel had not with all speed repressed, no doubt, but king Charles, and
the whole public wealth of France, had been turned up, and clean
overthrown. For Jews Dolphyn of Uyen, and heir apparaunt to king Charles, a
young prince, of a froward stomach and evil conditions, desiryng liberty, and
to be out of ward and rule, with such as were of his nature and conditions,
began to conspire against his father, and sovereign lord. The chief of this
ungracious faccion with him, were Iho^ Duke of Alaunson, and Ihon Duke of
Burbon. These confederates gathered together a great power, and the Dolphyn
took upon him, the rule and governance of the realm, orderyng causes, not in
his fathers name, nor by his authority, but after his own will, affeccion, and
fantasy. When king Charles his father, had knowledge of this unnatural
disobedience, and insolent and proud doings, he was (and no marvel) greatly
moved with this sudden commocio^: thinkyng himself borne, and predestinate to
trouble, reme^bryng, that it was no small thing, in his own country so many
years, both with strangers, and with his own nacio^, to fight and strive for
rule and dignity, but now to be constrained, to contend and make war, with his
own son and well-beloved child, for the Croune and regiment, of his realm and
dominion. Yet these things did not bring him, being a man of great wit, and
counsel, daily troubled and unquieted with calamities and displeasures, into
utter despair, or extreme wanhope: but like a pollitique prince, determinyng
to withstand and resist, the smoke at the beginning, before the fire and flame
^rast out abroad, called together all such, as he had either in great
confidence, or especial favor, communicatyng to them, al his inward thoughts,
and privy cogitacions. After long consultacion had, it was agreed by the most
part, that this sore was more mete to be cured, by pollitique and witty
handelyng, rather then by force, and ^ent of sweard. Wherefore, letters were
written, and posts were sent to every city and borough, straightly prohibityng
all and synguler persons, either to hear, or obey, any precept or
commandment, set furthe or published, by the dolphyn himself, or by other, or
in his name, and al offenses done in that confederacy, were by open
proclamacion, freely for given and remitted. And beside this, diverse grave and
sage persons, were sent to the dolphyn, and his alies, to common and conclude a
peace, and reconciliacion, between the French king and them, declaryng to
them, that their civil war, and inward discencion, was the very mean to cause
their enemies, utterly to plague and destroy their native country, which was
almost desolate, and brought into subieccion, by the continual war practiced
before. By which means and persuasions, the knot of this sedicious faccio^,
was losed and dissolved: and the king with his son, and other confederates,
openly agreed and apparau^tly pacified. And so the spryng of these mischiuous
sect, was stopped and repulsed, or the flodde had any thing increased, or
flowen farther.

THE Englishmen (which ever sought their advantage) hearing of this
domestical division in the realm of France, raised an army, and recovered
again diverse tounes, which were stolen from them before, by the French
nation: and made great provision, to recover again the city of Paris, but when
they heard, that the dolphyn was returned again to his father, and that all his
mates, were joined with the French king, they left of from that enterprise, and
revoked their purpose.

The.xviii. year. The.xviii. year.

IN the month of Nouembre this present year, there was such a great Frost,
and after that, so deep a Snow, that all the ground was covered with white,
and all the diches hardened and frosen, which weather put the Englishemen in
comfort, to recover again the town of Ponthoise, by the French king gotten
before, by corruptyng with money, diverse Burgesses of the town. Wherefore, the
Englishemen being clothed all in white, with Ihon lord Clifforde their
capitain, came in the night to the diches, and passed them without daungier,
by reason of the Froste, and suddenly scaled the walls, slew the watch, and
took the town, with many profitable prisoners. When this town was thus
gotten, lord Richard Beauchampe earl of Warwick and Regent of France, died
in the Castle of Roan, and was conveyed into England, and with solemn
Ceremonies, was buried in his College of Warwick, in ^ very solemn and
sumptuous sepulture.

THEN was the duke of York again, made regent of France, which accompanied
with therle of Oxford, the lord Bourchier, called earl of Ewe, Sir James of
Ormond, the Lord Clinton, and diverse other noble men, sailed into Normandy:
Before whose arrival, the French king being sore grieved with the taking of
the town of Pounthoyse, assembled a great army, and besieged thesaid town
himself, and made round about it, bastiles, trenches, and diches, and daily
shot ordenaunce, and gave thereunto diverse great and fierce assautes. But Ihon
lord Clifford, like a valeaunt capit^in, defended the town with such
valeauntnes, that the Frenchemen rather lost then gained. The Duke of York at
his landyng, having true knowledge of this siege, sent for the lord Talbot,
and a great nombre of soldiers, and so came nere to the town of Pounthoyse,
and there encamped himself, and sent word to the French King, that he was
there, ready to give him battaill, if he would come out of his camp and
Bastiles. King Charles was ruled by his counsel, which in no wise would
suffer him to adventure his person, with men of so low and base degree:
biddyng him remember, what losses he and his auncesters had sustained, by
geuyng to the Englishemen battaill: which thing they principally desire,
willing him to keep his ground still, and to bid th^im enter at their perell,
and in the mean season, to stop the passage of the River of Oy^e, so that no
vitaile could be brought to the English army by that way, by which means, he
should not only obtein his purpose, but also cause the Englishemen to recule
back again, for lack of vitaile and succors. The Duke of York perceiuyng,
that the French king was nothing minded to ^ight, determined to pass over the
River of Oyse, and so to fight with him in his lodgyng, whereupon he removed his
camp, and appointed the lord Talbot and other, to make a countenance, as they
would pass the River by force at the gate of Beaumont, and appointed another
company with boats, of tymbre and ledder, and bridges made of cords and
ropes, (whereof he had great plenty, carried with him in Chariottes) to pass
over the River by neth the Abbay. While the lord Talbot made a cry, as though
he would assail the gate, certain Englishmen passed the water over in boats,
and drew the bridge over, so that a great nombre were comen over, or the
Frenchemen them espied. When they saw the chance, they ran like mad men, to
stop the passage, but their labor was lost, and all their pain to no
purpose: for the most part of thenglishe people were suddenly transported, in
so much that they chased their enemies, by fine force into the town again,
and took sir Guylliam de Chastell, nephieue to the Lord Canehy, and diverse
other gentlemen prisoners. The Frenchmen seeing their damage irrecuperable,
returned to the French king, accomptyng to him their evil chance and vnluckey
fortune, which therewith was not a little displeasau^t: and well perceiuyng, that
if he tarried the coming of thenglishmen he was like to be either in great
ieoperdy, or sure to sustein much dishonor and great damage. Wherefore he
remouid his ordinance into the bastile of. S. Martyn, which he had newly
made, and leauyng behynd him the lord of Cotigny, ^dmirall of France, with
three.M. men to keep the bastiles, dislodged in the night from Maubuisson, and
came to Poissye: for if he had tarried still in that place, the lord Talbot
with certain of his trusty soldiers, which passed the river of Oyse in ii.
small lether boats, had either slain or taken him, in his lodgyng, the same
night. The Englishemen the next day in good order of battaill, came before the
town of Pounthoise, thinkyng there to have found the French king, but he was
gone, and in his lodgyng, they found great riches, and much stuff, which
he could not have space, to convey, for fear of the sudden invasion. Then the
Duke of York with his company, entered into the town, and sent for new
vitaill, and repaired the toures and bulwerkes about the town, and diverse
times assailed the Bastile of the Frenchemen, of the which he passed not
greatly, because they were not of power, either to assaut, or stop the
vitailes or succors from the town. The Duke liyng thus in the town of
Ponthoise, was advertised, that the French king and the dolphyn, with all the
nobility of France, were lodged in Poissye, wherefore he intendyng once again
to offer him battaill, left behynd him there, for capitain, sir Geruays
Clifton, with a thousand soldiers, and removed his army and came before
Poysye, and set himself and his men in good order of battaill, ready to fight.
There issued out diverse gentlemen, to skirmish with the Englishemen, but they
were sone discomfited, and four valeaunt horssemen were taken prisoners, and
diverse slain. The Englishemen perceiuyng the faynte hearts, and cold courage
of their enemies, which nothing less desired, then to encountre with the
Englishnacion in open field, dislodged from Poysye, and came to Mante, and sone
after to Roan.

WHEN the Regent and the lord Talbot, were returned again into Normandy, the
French king (for all this evil luck) forgot not the town of Ponthoise, and
first he considered, what charges he had sustained, both during the time of
the siege, and also in making bastyles, trenches, and other devises: and after
remembered, that his people, and especially the Parisians (to who^ this town
was an evil neighbor) would rail and say, that he was not able, or lacked
courage, to get so small a town, or to discomfite half a ha^dfull of amassed
people. Wherefore these things set in order, he assembled all his puyssaunce,
and returned suddenly again to Ponthoise: where, he first by assaute gat the
church, and after the whole town, and took the capitain prisoner, and diverse
other Englishemen, and slew to the nombre of four hundred, which derely sold
their life's: for one French writer affirms, that the French king lost
there, three.M. men and mo, and the whole garrison of the Englishemen, was only
a.M: so they gained the town, but they gat no gr^ate boty of men. When the
fame of this victory was blown abroad, the hearts of the tounes men, began to
appall, in somuche, that Melune, Corbuell, Eureux, and diverse other tounes,
yielded and turned at a proud crake, or a French brag, without stroke
stricken, or any blow given.

AFTER these hot rages, the wether began to wax more temperate for king Henry
and king Charles, were agreed, to send Ambassadors, to common and treat some
good peace and conclusion, between them, and their realms. So the king of
England, sent the Cardinal of Wynchester, with diuers^ other noble personages
of his counsel, to Calice, with whom was also sent, Charles Duke of
Orleaunce, yet prisoner in England, to thentent that he might be both the
author of y^ peace, and procurer of his deliverance. The French king, sent
the Archbishop of Reyns, and the Earl of Dumoys: and the Duke of Burgoyne,
sent the lord Cre^ecuer, and diverse other, because that the duke of Orleaunce
was passed the sea with the English Ambassadors, they would mete in none other
place to commen, but in Calice. The French Ambassadors perceiuyng their mind,
came to Calice, where the duke of Orleaunce, gently received therle of Dumoys
(his bastard brother) thankyng him heartily for his pain taken, in gouernyng his
country during the time of his captivity and absence. Diverse communicacions
were had, as well for the deliverance of the duke, as for a final peace: in
somuche, that after much consultyng, and little doing, another time was
appointed for a new assembly, and every part to declare to their sovereign,
the request and desire of the other. So these Ambassadors took their leave and
departed, and thenglishe commissioners conveyed again the duke of Orleaunce
into England, which had nothing then to pay his rau^some, and yet he could
not be delivered, without payment. The cause why these commisioners did not
agree, was, (as the French writers say) that the Englishemen demanded, not
only to have and possess peaceably the ii. Duchies of Aquitayn and Normandy,
to their kings and princes discharged of all resort, superiority, and
souereigntie, fra^kly and freely, against the realm of France, the kings and
governors of the same for ever: but also required to be restored to all the
tounes, citees, and possessions, which they, within.xxx. years next before
gone and past, had conquered in the realm of France. The Englishemen, thought
that they demanded but right and reason: and the Frenchemen, thought their
request to be most hurtful to their realm, and ancient glory. So both
parties, rather myndyng to gain or save, then to lose, departed for that time,
(as you have heard). After which diet proroged for a time, Phillip Duke of
Burgoyn, partly moved in conscience, to make some amends and recompense to
Charles duke of Oleaunce (then being prisoner in England) for the death of
duke Jews his father (whom duke Ihon, father to this duke Phillip, shamefully
slew, and cruelly murdered in the city of Paris, (as in the time of king
Henry the fourth, is plainly mentioned) And partly entendyng the advancement
of his niece, lady Marie daughter to Adolphe, Duke of Cleue, by the which
aliaunce, he trusted surely to knit, such a firm knot and friendly amity with
the Duke of Orleaunce, that all old rancor should cease, and all discord
should be forgotten: and in their places, concord should be stablished, and
perpetual love embraced) sent messengers into England, to the said duke,
declaryng to him his good will, devise, and intent. Think not but this
message, was joyous to a captive, being out of his native country, and
natural seigniorie, by the space of.xxv. years? Suppose you that he, which
nothing more coueted and desired, then liberty and discharge, would refuse so
honorable an offer? Imagine you that a prince of a blood royal, brought into
thraldom, restrained from liberty and living, far from kyn and father, and
farther from fre^des, would not give his diligent ear to that mocion, by the
which he might be restored, both to his ancient pre-eminence, possession and
seigniory? Yes, yes, you may be sure, he neither co^sulted on the matter, nor
deferred the answer, but thereunto gently agreed. What should I say more? As
some writers affirm, four hundred thousand Crounes were paid for his
deliverance, although other say, but three hundred thousand: and so he was
delivered out of England into France at that time, both speaking better
English then French, and also swearyng, never to bear Armure against the
King of England. After his arrival in France, he came to the Duke of
Burgoyne, his especial friend, gratifiyng and thankyng him of his liberty and
deliverance: and according to his promise and co^uencion, married the fair lady
in the town of saint Omers, on whom he begat a son, which after was
French king, and called Jews the.xii. After his deliverance from captivity
he forgot not his uncle Ihon Earl of Angolesme, which had been as a pledge in
England, for the debt of Duke Jews of Orleaunce, his father, sith the last
year of king Henry the fourth, (as in his story is declared): but made friends,
borrowed money, and morgaged land, and so set him at liberty, and brought him
into his country. This Ihon, engendered Charles, father to Fraunces, the
first of that name, which after the death of Jews the.xij, obtained the
Croune of France.

HERE is to be noted, that old rauncor newly appeaced, will commonly spryng
out again: for although the unhappy division, between the two noble families,
of Orleaunce and Burgoyn, were by this great benefit and marriage, for a time
given over and put in Oblivion, and so continued by the space of.xx. years and
more, yet their children and cosyns, within, not many years after, fell so far
at square, that the house of Burgoyne, was spoiled of the fairest flower of his
garland, (as you shall here afterward, at large declared) and in especial, in
the time of king Fraunces the first, the very heir of the house of Orleaunce,
which not only continually vexed with mortal war, Charles the fifth Emperor
of that name, lineall successor to Phillip Duke of Burgoyne: but also did
as much as in him lay, to deprive thesaid Charles of his honor, and
possessions, (as men writing their life's, will hereafter declare). The French
writers affirm, that this Duke of Orleaunce, was detained thus long in
captivity, by reason that the Englishemen, gained yearly by him, great somes
of money, by reason of his great and liberal expenses, which he made daily
in the realm of England. If this be true, I report me to all indifferent and
reasonable persons, for who will spend his goods freely, in the land of his
enemy, which may by pinchyng and bearyng a low sail, wax rich and be set
at liberty? Or who is so proud to wast and consume his substance, in living
prodigally, that may with the sparyng of the same, be delivered out of
captivity and bondage? But surely it is apparaunt, that the revenues of his
seigniories, were neither able to ransom him, nor to mainteyne him in po^peous
estate: partly, because thenglishmen possessed diverse tounes, belongyng to his
Duchy: and partly, by reason that the rentes were scace able to defend his
possessions, against the invasions of the English nation, and Burgonions. But
the very cause of his long deteinyng were two: one, the lack of money, the
second and the principal cause, was this, that you have heard before, how that
Ihon Duke of Burgoyne father to Phillippe, shamefully and cruelly, caused Jews
Duke of Orleaunce, father to this Duke Charles, (of whom we now speak) to be
murdered in the city of Paris: for the which murder, all the alies and
friends to the Duke of Orleaunce, had envy against the house and family of
Burgoyne, in somuche that thesaied Duke Ihon, b^yng measured with the same
measure, that he met with all, was likewise tyrannou^ly murdered on the bridge
of Mounstreau Faultyou, (as you have also heard declared before). For which
cause, and for to be revenged of so heinous an act, duke Phillip son to
thesaid Ihon, not only joined himself, in league and amity with the English
nation, but also did homage, and swear fealty to King Henry the fifth, as to
his King and sovereign Lord: for which cause, the Englishemen entendyng to
keep the duke of Burgoyn, as a trusty treasure, and sure Iuell, perceived, that
if they delivered the duke of Orleaunce, and set him at liberty, he would not
cease to vex and trouble the duke of Burgoyne, in reuengyng the detestable
murder, committed by his father against his parent: wherefore, both for the
surety and sauegard of the duke of Burgoyne, and also to do him pleasure, they
kept still the duke of Orleaunce in England, demaundyng such ransom, as he
was neither able, nor could find means or ways to pay. But after that the
duke of Burgoyn, (like an untrue prince and dishonest gentleman) had broken his
promise, not kept his faith, and was turned to the French part, the counsel
of the king of England, studied and devised, how to deliver the duke of
Orleaunce, to do displeasure to the duke of Burgoyn. Duke Phillip perceiuyng,
what mischief was like to rise if he were redeemed, and set at liberty without
his knowledge, to preue^te the matter, to his great cost and charge,
practiced his deliverance, paid his rau^some, and joined with him, amity and
alliance, by marriage of his niece, (as before is rehearsed) and by this means,
was Duke Charles of Orleaunce, restored to his liberty, which had been
prisoner in England, from the day of saints, Crispin^ and Crispinian, in the
year of our Lord.M.CCCC.xv. to the monethe of Nouembre, in the year, a
thousand four hundred and forty.

The.xix. year. The.xix. year.

IN the beginning of this.xix. year, Richard duke of York Regent of France,
and governor of Normandy, remembryng the great charge, and weighty office to
him delivered and committed, determined, (after long consultacion) to invade
the territories of his enemies, both by sondery armies, and in diverse places,
to thentent that the French people being vexed within their own country, and
peculiar dominion, should make no rodes nor enterynges, into the Duchy of
Normandy, the returnyng whereof, was somewhat suspicious. This devise for that
season, seemed both profitable and necessary, wherefore, without long delaiyng
of time, he sent Robert Lord Willoughby, with a great crew of soldiers, to
invade and destroy the country about Amias, and Ihon lord Talbot, was
appointed to besiege the town of Deape, and he himself, accompanied with
Edmond duke of Somerset, set forward into the Duchy of Aniow. The Lord
Willoughby, according to his commission, entered in the country to him
appointed, and to thentent that his commission should not be espied nor known,
he straightly forbad and inhibited, al manner fire, and of burning of tounes,
which is the most open and plain token of war and invasion. By reason whereof,
the pore paysau^tes and rustical people going abroad, without fear or
suspicion of evil, were over run or taken with the horssemen, or they could
attain to any town, or forcelet: so that innumerable people were slain, and
taken, or they heard any tidings of their enemies approchyng. The Frenchmen in
the garriso^s adioynyng, astonnied at the clamor and cry of the poor people,
issued out in good order, and manfully set on their enemies. The fight was
sore, and the victory long doubtful: But inconclusio^, the Frenchmen seeing
their people in the forefront of the battaill, to be killed without mercy,
like men desperate, turned their ba^kes and fearfully fled, the Englishmen
followed, and slew many in the chase, and such as escaped the sweard, were
robbed and spoiled, by Jews Earl of saint Paul, which was coming to aid
the English nation. In this conflicte were slain, above six.C. men of arms,
and a greater nombre taken: So the Lord Willoughby, like a victorious
capitain, with rich spoil and good prisoners, returned again to the city of
Roan. The dukes of York and Somerset, likewise entered into the Duchy of
Aniow, and County of Main, destroiyng tounes, spoylyng y^ people, and with
great prey and profit, repaired again into Normandy. The Duke of Somerset, not
filled with this gain, entered into the Marches of Britayne, and took by a
fierce assaute, the town of Gerche, apperteinyng to the Duke of Alaunson, and
spoiled and brent the same, and after that, departed to Ponzay, where he
soiourned two months, from whence he sent daily men of war, which destroyed
and wasted the countries of Aniow, Traonnoys and Chatragonnoys.

THE French king in all haste, sent the Marshall of Loyache, with iiii.M. men,
to resist the invasions of the duke of Somerset, which capitain determined to
set on the duke and his people, in the dedde time of the night. This enterprise
was not so secret, but it was reveled to the duke, which marched forward, and
met the Frenchemen half way, and after long fight, them by fine force
manfully discomfited, and slew a hundred persons and mo, and took
captives.lxii, whereof the chief were the lord Dausigny, sir Jews de Buell,
and all the other almost, were Knights and esquires. After this encountre,
the Duke took the town of Beaumot Le Uicount, and manned all the fortresses,
on the Frontiers of his enemies, and with rich boties and wealthy captives
came again to the Duke of York.

DVRYNG these fortunate chances and victories, the lord Talbot also, the
vnweried chieftain and ma^ly warrior, environed the town of Deape, with deep
trenches and terrible mountains, and did set up upon the mount de Poulet, a
strong and defensible Bastile, at which time, was capitain of the same town,
Charles de Maretz, a man of more force in battaill, then pollitique in defense
of a siege: for the Englishemen being a small no^bre, had to them delivered
with fair words, and fainte strokes, the castle of Charlemesnyll, and diverse
other fortresses, adioynyng to the town. During the siege, many encounters
were had, and many great assautes given, thenglishemen sometime saved, and
sometime gained, but the most loss lighted on the Frenchemen for awhile. But
of iii. captains sent forth at one time, (as you before have heard) all cannot
return with egall honor, and even botie. For the lord Talbot perceiuyng the
town of Deape, to be strongly defended, both with men, vitaile, and
ordenaunce, and that he lacked all thesaid furnitures for the accomplisshyng of
his stout enterprise, delivered the custody of the Bastile, with the
governance of the ^iege, to his Bastard son, a valeaunt young man, and
departed to Roan, for aid, money, and municions. The French king, was
quickly advertised of the lord Talbots absence, and of the estate of the
Englishemen: wherefore without delay, he meaning not to lose so great a prey,
sent his eldest son Jews dolphyn of Uyen, accompan^ed with the Bastard of
Orleaunce, called the earl of Dumoys, and diverse other nobles of France, to
the nombre of.xv. thousand persons, well armed, and no less garnished with
all things necessary for their purpose. Three days they assailed the Bastile,
and so many times they were put back, but poulder failed in the fortress, and
weapon wherewith to defend, was very scant, so that in conclusion, the
Englishmen were vanqueshed, and the Bastile taken, and in it, the Bastard
Talbot, sir William Peytow, and sir Ihon Repeley, which were shortly after
redeemed: The other English soldiers seeing the Bastile gained, stood all day
in good order of battaill, and in the night, pollitiquely returned to Roan,
without loss or damage. At this assaute, the Frenchemen say, that they slew
two hundred Englishemen, and deny not, but they lost five hundred persons, and
by this means, the one nation lost the Bastile, and the other saved the
town, to the great displeasure of the Lord Talbot: Whose presence would
as much auailed at this attempt, as his absence was loss and detrement to his
friends, and fellows in war and chivalry. But gain is not always perdurable,
nor loss always continual.

WHILE these things were a doing, Phillip Duke of Burgoyn, having an envious
heart, at the glory and fortunate success of the English people, intending to
bereue them of one of their assured friends, called Jews of Luxenborough earl
of saint Poule, made sharp war upon his countries, and took diverse tounes,
and fortresses from him, so that in conclusion more for fear, then for love,
he utterly refused his faith and promise, made to the duke of Bedford his
brother in law and turned to the French part, and became a luke warm enemy
to the realm of England. The loss of this friend and necessary neighbor, not
alitle grieved King Henry and his counsel: Howbeit, they made such
purueiaunce and provision, by descrete counsel, that if he of evil will, would
do them little good, yet he of malice should do to them no great hurt or
damage.

THE English capitaines being in Guyen, having knowledge of the valeau^t
doings of their countrymen in the realm of France, determined to do some
notable and noble enterprise, on the French costs adioynyng to Aquitayn: and
so, they besieged the strong town of Tartas belongyng to the lord Delabreth,
their old and ancient enemy. The capitaines and governors of the town,
considering their weakness, and the force of the Englishemen, took this
appointment with the English capitaines, that the town should remain neuter,
and for the assurance thereof, they delivered Cadet the son of the lord
Delabreth in pledge, upon this condition: that if the lord Delabrethe, would
not assent to their agreement, then he should signify his refusal, to the
English capitaines, within three months next ensuyng: and he to have his
pledge, and they to do their best. The French king, at the request of the
lords of Guyen, which were not able to defend themselfes, took this matter in
hand, and caused the lord Delabreth, to certify his disagrement to the Earl of
Huntyngdon, lieuetenaunt for the king of England, in the Duchy of Aquitayne.
And to please the great Lords of Guyen, he assembled.lx.M. men, and came to
Tholose, and so to Tartas: to whom the chieftaines of the town, seeing no
succors coming, rendered the town, and Cadet Delabrethe, which was left
there as a pledge, was delivered. The French king after the yeldyng of Tartas,
removed to saint Severe, a strong town in Gascoyn, but smally peopled with
men of war, which he took by force, and slew three hundred persons, and
took sir Thomas Rampstone prisoner. After this town gained, he with all his
power besieged the city of Arques, and took the Bulwark of the same, which
was smally defended, and sone gotten. The inhabitauntes of the town, began
sore to be afraied, and came to the lord Mountferrant, capitain for the king
of England, requiryng him to have mercy upon them, and to render the town to
the French king, upon some honest covenant or co^posicion. The capitain
perceiuyng the faint hearts of the Gascoyns, and knowing that without their
aid, he was not able to resist the puyssaunce of the French king, took an
agreement and departed with all the English crew to Bordeaux, where he found
the earl of Longuile, Capdaw of Bueffe, and sir Thomas Rampstone, which was
alitle before delivered.

AFTER this, the fortresses of Ryoll and Mermandie, yielded them to the French
king. Although these tounes thus submitted them to him, yet he had them not
long, nor made much tariyng in the Duchy of Guyen, for the Englishemen not
only prohibited the Gascoynes, to minister to his army, viandre and
sustenaunce, but also gat into their hands and took such vitailes, as were
conveyed to him, from Tholo^e and Poytiers: So that in manner constrained with
famyn and lack of provision, he retired his army again into France. After
whose departure, the English capitaines recovered again the city of Acques,
and the other tounes by the French king gained, and took prisoner his
lieuetenaunt, called Reignault Guillam the Burgonyo^, and many other gentlemen,
and all the mean soldiers, were either slain or hanged.

WHILE the French king was in Guyen, the lord Talbot took the town of
Couchete, and after marched toward Gayllardon, which was besieged by the
Bastard of Orleaunce Earl of Dumoys: which Earl hearing of the Englishmennes
approchyng, raised his siege and saved himself. Alitle before this enterprise,
the Frenchemen had taken the town of Eureux, by treason of a fisher. Sir
Fraunces Arragonoys hearing of that chance, apparreled six strong men, like
rustical people with sackes and baskettes, as carriers of corn and vitaile,
and sent them to the Castle of Cornyll, in the which diverse Englishemen were
kept as prisoners: and he with an imbusshement of Englishemen, lay in a valey
nigh to the fortress. These six companions entered into the Castle,
unsuspected and not mistrusted, and straight came to the chamber of the
capitain, and laid hands upon him, geuyng knowledge thereof to their
imbushement, which suddenly entered the Castle, and slew and took all the
Frenchemen prisoners, and set at liberty all the Englishemen, which thing
done, they set all the castle on fire, and departed with great spoil to the
cit^e of Roan. Thus the lady victory, sometime smiled on the English part, and
sometime on the French side. Thus one gained this day, and lost on the
next. Thus Fortune changed, and thus chance happened, according to the old
proverb, saying: in war is nothing certain, and victory is ever doubtful.

The.xx. year. The.xx. year.

NOw let us leave the marciall feactes, the mortal strokes, and daily
skirmishes, practiced between the English and French nation in the Region of
France, and speak alitle of a smoke that rose in England, which after grew
to a great fire, and a terrible flame, to the destruction of many a noble man.
You have heard before, how the Duke of Gloucester sore grudged at the proud
doings of the Cardinal of Wynchester, and how the Cardinal likewise, sore
envied and disdayned at the rule of the Duke of Gloucester, and how by the
means of the duke of Bedforde, their malice was appeaced, and each was
reconciled to other, in perfect love and amity, to all men's outward
judgments. After which concord made, the Cardinal and the Archbishop of
York, did many things without the consent of the king or the duke, being
(during the minority of the prince) governor and protector of the realm,
wherewith the duke, (like a true hearted prince) was neither content nor
pleased: And so declared in writing to the king, certain articles, wherein the
Cardinal and the Archbishop, had offended both the king and his laws, the
true tenor, here after ensues.

A complaint made to King Henry the.vj. by the Duke of Gloucester, upon the
Cardinal of Winchester.
THese be in part, the points and Articles, which I Humfrey

FIRST the Cardinal, then being bishop of Winchester, took upon

ITEM thesaied bishop, now being Cardinal, was assoyled of his Cardinal,
that the sea was not void, where in deed it stood void by a certain time, or
thesaied bulle were granted, and so he was exempte from his ordinary, by the
taking on him the state of Cardinal, and the church bishopric of Winchester,
so standing void, he took again of the Pope (you not learned thereof ne
knowing whereby he was fallen into the case of provision) so that al his good
was lawfully and clearly forfeited, to you my right doubted Lord, with more as
the statute declares plainly for your advantage.

ITEM it is not unknown to (you doubted lord) how through your lands it is
noysed, that thesaied Cardinal and tharchebishop of York had and have the
governance of you, and all your land, the which none of your true liege men,
ought to usurp nor take upon them. And have also estranged me your sole uncle,
my cosyn of York, my cosyn of Huntyngdon, and many other lords of your kin,
to have any knowledge of any great matter, that might touch your high estate,
or either of your realms. And of Lords spiritual, of right, the
Archebishoppe of Cantorbury, should be your chief counsailer, the which is
also estranged and set a side. And so be many other right sad Lords, and well
advised, as well spiritual as temporal, to the great hurt of you my right
doubted lord, and of your realms, like as the experience and works shown
clearly and evidently, more harm it is.

ITEM in the tender age of you, my right doubted Lord, for the necessity of
an army, thesaied Cardinal lent you.iiii.M. l. upon certain Iuels, preised
at.xxii.M. mark, with a letter of sale, that and they were not quited at a
certain day, you should lose them. The said Cardinal seeing your money ready
to have quited your Iuels, caused your treasorer of England, at that day
being, to pay the same money, in part of another army, in defraudyng you, my
right doubted lord, of your said Iuels, keeping them yet, alwaie to his own
use, to your right great loss, and his synguler profit and avail.

ITEM thesaid Cardinal, then being bishop of Winchester, and Chau^cellor of
England, delivered the king of Scotts, upon certain appoyntmentes (as may be
showed,) presumpteously, and of his own authority contrary to the act of
Parliament. I have heard notable men of law say, that they never heard the
like thing done among the^, which was to great a defamacio^ to your highness,
and also to wedde his niece to thesaid king, whom y^ my lord of notable memory,
your father, who^ God assoile would never have so delivered. And there as he
should have paid, for his costs.xl.M. l. thesaied Cardinal, Chauncellor of
England, caused you to pardon him thereof.x.M. mark, whereof the greater some
he paid you, right alitle, what, I report me to your highness.

ITEM, where thesaid Cardinal lent you, my redoubted lord, great and notable
somes, he has had and his assigns, the rule and profit of the port of
Ha^pton, where the Customers been his servants, where by likelihode and as it
is to be supposed, he standing the chief merchant of wolles of your land,
that you be greatly defrauded, and under that rule, what Wolles and other
marchaundise have been shipped, and may be from time to time, hard is to
esteem, to the great hurt, and prejudice of you my right doubted Lord, and of
all your people.

ITEM, howbeit that thesaid Cardinal, has diverse times, lent you

ITEM, where there was Ieuelles and plate, preised at a.xi.M. l. in

ITEM, the Cardinal being feoft of my said lord your father, (who^

ITEM, notwithstanding yt thesaid Cardinal, has no manner of authority

ITEM, thesaid Cardinal, nothing considering the necessity of you

ITEM, by the governance and labor of thesaied Cardinal, and archbishop
doubted lord, the greater party of your obeysaunce, as well in your realm of
France, as in your Duchy of Normandy, and much other thing gone greatly, as
through thesaid colorable treaty, and otherwise, sith the death of my
brother of Bedford, (whom God assoyle.)

ITEM, now of late was sent another Ambassador to Calice, by the labor and
counsel of thesaied Cardinal, and Archbishop of York, the cause why of the
beginning, is to me your sole uncle, and other lords of you kyn and counsel
unknown, to your great charge, and against the public good of your realm,
as it openly appears. The which good if it be employed, for the defense of
your lands, the marchaundises of the same, might have had other course, and
your said lands not to have stand in so great mischief as they do.

ITEM after that, to your great charge and hurt, of both your realms,
thesaid Cardinal and Archbishop of York, went to your said town of Calice,
and diverse Lords of your kyn, and of your counsel in their fellowship, and
there, as there was natural war, between the duke of Orleau^ce, and the duke
of Burgoyn, for murder of their fathers, a capital i^nemnitie like to have
endured for ever, thesaid Cardinal and Archbishop of York, licenced and
suffered, thesaid duke of Orleaunce, to entreat and common a part, with the
counsaiell of your said adversaries, as well as with the Duchies of Burgoyne, by
which mean, the peace and alliance was made, between the two dukes, to the
greatest fortifiyng of your said capital adversaries, that could be thought,
and consequently (my dear redoubted lord,) to your greatest charge, and hurt
to both your realms. Under color of which treaty, your said adversaries, in
mean time wan your city of Meulx, and the country therabout and many diverse
rodes made into your Duchy of Normandy, to the great noysaunce and
destruction of your people, as it shows openly.

ITEM thesaid Archbishop of York, sent with other into this your realm, from
thesaied Cardinal, after communicacion had with your adverse party, at your
said town of Calice, made at his coming into your notable presence at
Wyndsore, all the swasions and color, all mocions in the most apparau^t wise
that he could, to induce your highness to your agreement, to the desires of your
capital adversaries, as I saw there in your noble presence, of his writing, at
which time, as I understood, it was his singular opinion, that is to say: that
you should leave your right, your title, and your honor of your croune, and
nominacio^ of you king of France, during certain years, and y^ you should
utterly abstain you and be content, only in writing, with, rex Anglie, etc. to
the great note of infamy, y^ ever fell to you, or any of your noble
progenitors, since the taking of them first, thesaid title and right, of your
realm and croune of France, to which matter in your presence there, after y^
it had liked your said highness, to ask mine advise thereupon, with other of
your blood and cou^saill, I answered and said, that I would never agree me
thereto, to die therefore, and of the same disposicion I am yet, and be while I
live, in conseruacion of your honor, and of your oath made unto your said
croune, in time of your coronacion there.

ITEM thesaied Cardinal and Archbishop of York, have so labored

ITEM it is said, that the deliverance of thesaied Duke of Orleaunce,

ITEM where that every true counsailor, specially unto any king or

MORE thesaied Cardinal has you bound a part, to make him could be
devised by any learned counsel, or else that surety not made, thesaied
Cardinal, to have and reioye to him, and his heirs for evermore, the lands
of the Duchy of Lancaster, in Norffolke, to the value of.vii. or viii.C.
marks, by the year, which thing seems right strange and unseen, and unhard
ways of any liege man, to seek upon his sovereign lord, both in his
enheritaunce and in his Iuelles, and good. For it is thought, but if right and
extreme necessity caused it, there should, nor ought no such things to be
done: from which necessity (God for his mercy) ever preserve your noble
person, wherefore my redoubted lord, seeing that ye should be so cou^sailed, or
stired to leave your croune and enheritaunce in England, and also by fraud and
subtle means, as is before reher^ed, so to lose your Iuelles: In my truth
and in mine acquitall (as me seameth) I may not nor ought not, counsel so
great an hurt to you and to all your land.

ITEM, it is not unknown to you my right doubted lord, how often times I have
offered my service, to and for the defense of your realm of France, and
duchy of Normandy, where I have been put therfro, by the labor of thesaid
Cardinal, in preferryng other after his singular affeccion, which has caused
great part, of thesaied Duchy of Normandy, as well as of your realm of
France to be lost, as it is well known, and what good (my right doubted lord)
was lost on that army that was last sent thither, which therle of Mortayn,
your counsel of France, has well and clearly declared to your highness here
beforne

ITEM, my right doubted Lord, it is not unknown, that it had not been
possible to thesaied Cardinal, to have comen to the great riches, but by
such means, for of his Church it might not rise, and enheritaunce he had
none. Wherefore my right doubted Lord, sith there is great good behouefull at
this time, for the weal and safeguard of your realms, the poverty,
necessity, and indigence of your liege people, in highness understand, like it
unto your noble grace, to considre thesaid lucar of thesaid Cardinal, and the
great deceiptes, that you be deceived in, by the labor of him, and of the
Archbishop, as well in this your realm, as in your realm of France, and
duchy of Normandy, where neither office, liuelode, nor capitain may be had,
without to great a good given unto him, whereby great part of all the loss that
is lost, they have been the causers of, for who that would give most, his was
the price, not considering the merits, service, nor sufficiaunce of persons.
Furthermore it is greatly to be considered, how, when thesaied Cardinal had
forfeited al his good, because of provision, as the statute, thervpo^ more
plainly declares, by having the rule of you my right doubted Lord, purchased
himself in great defraudacion of your highness, a charter of pardon, the which
good and it had be well governed, might many years have sustained your wars,
without any talage of your poor people.

ITEM, my redoubted Lord, where as I write much thing, for the weal of you
and of your realms, peradventure some will say and understand, that I would,
or have written it, by way of accusement of al your counsel, which god
knows, I do not: for your highness may well se, that I name them, that be
causers of the said inordinate rule wherefore, considering that the said
Cardinal and Archebisshop of York been they, that pretend the governance of
you, and of your realms and lordshippes: Please it unto your highness, of your
rightwisenesse to estraunge them of your counsel, to that intent, that men
may be at their fredome, to say what they think of truth.

FOR truth, I dare speak of my truth, the poor dare not do so. And

WHEN the king had heard these accusacio^s, he committed the hearing thereof,
to his counsel, whereof the most part were spiritual persons, so what for
fear, and what for favor the matter was wynked at, and dalyed out, and nothing
said to it: and fair contenaunce was made to the duke, as though no
displeasure had been taken, nor no malice borne, either in heart or in
remembrance against him. But venyme will once break out, and inward grudge
will sone appear, which was this year to all men apparaunt: for diverse
secret attemptes were aduau^ced forward this season, against the noble duke
Hu^frey of Gloucester, a far of, which in conclusion came so nere, that they
bereft him both life and land, as you shall hereafter more manifestly
perceive. For first this year, dame Elyanour Cobha^, wife to the said duke, was
accused of treason, for that she, by sorcery and enchau^tme^t, intended to
destroy the king, to thentent to aduau^ce and promote her husband to the
croune: upon this she was examined in saint Stephens chapel, before the
Bishop of Canterbury, and there by examinacion convict and judged, to do open
penance, in.iij. open places, within the city of London, and after that
adjudged to perpetual prisone in the Isle of Man, under the keeping of sir Ihon
Sta^ley, knight. At the same season, were arrested as ayders and counsailers to
the said Duchess, Thomas Southwel, priest and chanon of saint Stephens in
Westmynster, Ihon Hum priest, Roger Bolyngbroke, a conyng nycromancier, and
Margerie Iourdayne, surnamed the witch of Eye, to whose charge it was laid,
y^ they, at the request of the duchess, had devised an image of wax,
representyng the king, which by their sorcery, a little and little consumed,
entendyng thereby in conclusion to waist, and destroy the kings person, and so
to bring him to death, for the which treison, they were adjudged to dye, and so
Margery Iordayne was brent in smithfelde, and Roger Bolyngbroke was drawn and
quartered at tiborne, taking upon his death, that there was never no such
thing by them ymagened, Ihon Hum had his pardon, and Southwel died in the
toure before execucion: the duke of Gloucester, took all these things
patiently, and said little.

The.(...).year. (...)

THE counsel of England, forgot not the late enterprise of the French king,
done in the duchy of Guyen, wherefore, to for^ifie the country, least he
peradventure, would attempt again alike ^orney, they sent thither sir William
Wooduile, with.viii. hundred men, to fortify the frontiers, till a greater
army might be assembled: And farther made public proclamacion, that all men
which would transporte, or carry any corn, chese, or other vitaile, into the
parties of Acquitayn, should pay no manner of custom or tallage, which license
caused that country, to be well furnished of all things necessary and
convenient. About this season, the king remembryng the valeaunt service, and
noble acts of Ihon Lord Talbot, created him Earl of Shrewesburie, and with a
company of three M. men, sent him again into Normandy, for the better tuicion
of the same, which neither forgot his duty, nor forslowed his business, but
daily labored and hourly studied, how to molest and damage his enemies.

IN this year, died in Guyen the Countess of Coming, to whom the French King,
and also the Earl of Arminacke, pretended to be heir, insomuche, that the Earl
entered into all the lands of thesaied lady, as very inheritor to her of right,
and took homage of the people of the country. But to have a Rowland to resist
an Oliver: he sent solemn Ambassadors to the king of England, offering him
his daughter in marriage, not only promisyng him silver hills, and golden
mountains with her, but also would be bound, to deliver into the king of
Englandes hands, all such Castles and tounes, as he or his ancestors
detained from him, within the whole duchy of Acquitayn or Guyen, either by
conquest of his progenitors, or by gift or delivery of any French king:
offryng farther, to aid the same king with money, for the recovery of other
citees, within thesaied duchy, from him and his ancestors, by the French
kings progenitors, the lord de Albrethe, and other lords of Gascoyn,
iniustely kept and wrongfully withhoulden. This offer seemed both profitable,
and honorable to king Henry and his realm, and so the Ambassadors, were both
well heard, and louyngly enterteined, and in conclusion, with a gentle answer
(not without great rewards) they departed into their country: after whom were
sent for the conclusion of thesaied marriage into Guyen, sir Edward Hulle, sir
Robert Roos, and doctor Ihon Grafton deane of saint Seuerines with an
honorable company, which (as all English Cronographiers affirm) both
concluded the marriage, and by proxy aff^ed the young Lady. The French king
was not ignorant, of all these conclusions, wherefore disdainyng, that the Earl
of Arminacke, should both usurp against him, the County of Coming, and also
join himself, with his mortal enemy, the king of England, to recover his
right, and to punish his rebel, he sent Jews his eldest son Dolphyn of
Uyen, into rouergne with a puissaunt army, which suddenly took the Earl of
Arminacke, at the Isle in Iordayne, and his youngest son, and both his
daughters, and by force obtained the countries of Arminacke, Lonuergne,
Rouergne and Moullesson, beside the citees of Seuerac and Cadenac, and chased
the Bastard of Arminacke out of his country, and co^stituted governor of all
those seigniories, sir Theobald de Walpergne, bailif of Lion. So by reason of
this unfortunate chance, the marriage concluded was differred, yea, and so long
differred, that it never took effect, as you shall hear more plainly declared.

The.xxii. year. The.xxii. year.

THus, while England was unquieted, and France sore vexed, by spoil,
slaughter, and burning, all christendom lamented the continual destruction of
so noble a realm, and the effusion of so much Christen blood, wherefore, to
appeace the mortal war, so long contineuyng between these two puyssaunt
kings, all the princes of Christendom, so much labored and travailed, by
their orators and Ambassadors, that the frostie hearts of both the parties,
were somewhat mollified, and their indurate stomachs, greatly assuaged. So
there was a great diete appointed, to be kept at the city of Tours in
Tourayne, where, for the king of England appeared, William de la Pole earl of
Suffolk, doctor Adame Molyns, keeper of the kings privy seal, and Robert
lord Roos, and diverse other: And for the French King were appointed, Charles
Duke of Orleau^ce, Jews de Burbon earl of Uandos^^e, and great Master of the
French kings household, sir Piers de Bresell Steward of Poytou, and Bartram
Beauriau, Lord of Precignye. There were also sent thither, Ambassadors from
the Empire, from Spain, from Denmark, and from Hungary, to be mediators
between these two princes. The assemble was great, but the cost was much
greater, in somuche that every part, for the honor of their Prince, and praise
of their country, set forth themselfes, as well in fare, as apparel, to the
vttermoste point and highest prike. Many metynges were had, and many things
moved to come to a final peace, and mutual concord. But inconclusion, for
many doubts and great ambiguities, which rose on both parties, a final
concord could not be agreed, but in hope to come to a peace, a certain truce
as well by sea as by land, was concluded by the commisioners, for.xviij.
months, which afterward, again was prolonged, to the year of our
Lord.M.iiii.C.xlix. if in the mean season it had not been violated and
broken, as here after shall be declared.

IN the treatyng of this truce, the Earl of Suffolk, extendyng his commission
to the vttermoste, without assent of his associates, imagened in his fantasy,
that the next way to come to a perfect peace, was to move some marriage,
between the French kings kynsewoman, and king Henry his sovereign: and
because the French king had no daughter of ripe age, to be coupled in
matrimony with the king his Master, he desired to have the Lady Margaret, cosyn
to the French king, and daughter to Reyner duke of Aniow, calling himself king
of Scicile, Naples, and Jerusalem, having only the name and style of the
same, without any penny profit, or foot of possession. This marriage was made
strange to therle a good space, in somuche that he repented him of the first
mocio^, but yet like a bold man, entendyng not to take afoile in so great a
matter, desisted not still, daily to solicit and advance forward his cause.
The wily Frenchemen, perceiuyng the ardent affeccion of the earl, toward the
conclusion of marriage, declared to him that this marriage, was not like to come
to conclusion, as he desired, because the king his Master, occupied a great
part of the Duchy of Aniow, and the city of Mauns, and the whole Countey of
Main, apperteynyng (as they said) to king Reyner, father to the damsel.

THE earl of Suffolk (I cannot say) either corrupted with bribes, or to much
affeccionate to this unprofitable marriage, condiscended and agreed to their
mocion, that the Duchy of Aniow, and the county of Main, should be released
and delivered, to the king her father, demaundyng for her marriage, neither penny
nor farthyng: (as who would say) that this new affinity, excelled riches,
and surmounted gold and precious stone. And to thentent that of this truce,
might ensue a final concord, a day of enteruie^e or metyng was appointed,
between the two kings, in a place convenient, between Charters and Roan. When
these things were concluded, the Earl of Suffolk with his company, thinkyng to
have brought joyful tidings, to the whole realm of England, departed from
Toures, and so by long iorneis, arrived at Dover, and came to the king to
Westminster, and there openly before the king and his counsel, declared how he
had taken an honorable truce, for the sauegard of Normandy, and the wealth of
y^ realm, out of which truce, he thought, yea, and doubted not, but a
perpetual peace, and a final concord, should shortly proceade and grow out.
And much the sooner, for that honorable marriage, that invincible alliance,
that Godly affinity, which he had concluded: omittyng nothing, which might
extol and setfurth, the personage of the Lady, nor forgettyng any thing, of
the nobility of her kin, nor of her fathers high style: as who would say,
that she was of such an excellent beauty, and of so high a parentage, that
almost no king or Emperor, was worthy to be her make. Although this marriage,
pleased well the King, and diverse of his counsel, and especially such as
were adherentes, and fautors to the earl of Suffolk, yet Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, Protector of the realm, repugned and resisted as much as in him
lay, this new alliance and contrived matrimony: alledgyng that it was
neither consonaunt to the law of GOD nor man, nor honorable to a prince, to
infrynge and break a promise or contracte, by him made and concluded, for the
utility and profit of his realm and people, declaryng, that the king, by his
Ambassadors, sufficiently instructed and authorized, had concluded and
co^tracted, a marriage between his highness, and the daughter of therle of
Arminacke, upon conditions, both to him and his realm, as much profitable as
honorable. Which offers and co^dicions, thesaid earl since his coming out of
his captivity and thraldom, is ready to yield and perform, saying: that it
was more conueniente for a Prince, to marie a wife with riches and friends,
then to take a make with nothing, and disherite himself and his realm of old
rightes and ancient seigniories. The duke was not heard, but the Earls
doings, were condiscended unto, and allowed. Which fact engendered such a
flame, that is never went out, till both the parties with many other were
consumed and slain, to the great unquietness of the king and his realm. And for
the performaunce of these conclusions, the French King sent the Earl of
Uandos^e, great Master of his house, and the Archbishop of Reyns, first pere
of France, and diverse other into England, which were ioyously received, and
friendly entertained. Which Ambassadors, after instruments on both parties,
sealed and delivered, (not vnteward^d) returned into their country. When these
things were thus done, the king, both for the honor of his realm, and to
assure to himself, more special friends, he created Lord Ihon Holand Earl of
Huntyngdon, Duke of Excester, as his father was, and Humfrey Earl of Stafford,
was made duke of Buckyngham, and Henry Earl of Warwick, was erected to the
title of Duke of Warwick, and the Earl of Suffolk, made Marquis of Suffolk,
which Marquis with his wife, and many honorable personages of men and women,
richely adorned, both with apparel and Iuels, having with them many costly
chariottes, and gorgious horselitters, sailed into France, for the conueyaunce
of the nominated Queen, into the realm of England. For king Reyner her father,
for all his long style, had to short a purse, to send^ his daughter honorably,
to the king her spouse.

The.xxiii. year The.xxiii. year.

THIS noble company, came to the city of Toures in Tourayne, where they were
honorably received, both of the French king, and of the king of Scicile. Where
the Marquis of Suffolk, as procurator to King Henry, espoused thesaid Lady,
in the church of saint Martyns. At which marriage were present, the father
and mother of the bride, the French king himself, which was uncle to the
husband, and the French queen also, which was awnte to the wife. There were
also, the dukes of Orleaunce, of Calaber, of Alaunson, and of Britayn, vii.
Earls, xii. Barons.xx. Bishops, beside kinghtes and gentlemen. There were
triumphaunt Iustes, costly feasts, and delicate banquettes, but all pleasure
has an end, and every joy is not continual. So that after these high
solempnities finished, and these honorable ceremonies ended, the Marquis had
the Lady Margaret to him delivered, which in great estate, he conveyed
through Normandy to Deape, and so transported her into England, where she
landed at Portesmouthe, in the mone^he of April. This woman excelled all
other, as well in beauty and favor, as in wit and policy, and was of stomach
and courage, more like to a man, then a woman. Sone after her arrival, she was
conveyed to the town of Southwike in Hamshire, where she, with all nupciall
Ceremonies, was coupled in matrimony, to king Henry the vi. of that name. After
which marriage, she was with great triumph, conveyed to London, and so to
Westminster, where, upon the.xxx. day of May, she, with all solempnitie
thereunto apperteinyng, was Crouned Queen of this noble realm of England. Who
so would know, the costly receipt, the pleasant company, the gorgeous
apparel, the diversity of Instruments, the strange pagiauntes, the behauior
of the Lords, the beauty of the Ladies, the sumptuous feast, the delicate
viander, the marcial iustes, the fierce turnais, the lusty daunces, and the
minio^ so^ges, which were showed, setfurth and practiced at her coronacion, let
him look in the Chronicles of London, and of Robert Fabian, and there he shall
find the^ set forth at the full.

THIS marriage seemed to many, both unfortunate, and unprofitable to the realm
of England, and that for many causes. First the king with her had not one penny,
and for the fetchyng of her, the Marquis of Suffolk, demanded a whole
fiftene, in open parliament: also for her marriage, the Duchy of Aniow, the
city of Mauns, and the whole cou^tie of Main, were delivered and released to
King Reyner her father, which countries were the very stays, and backestandes
to the Duchy of Normandy. Furthermore for this marriage, the Earl of Arminacke,
took such great displeasure, that he became utter enemy to the realm of
England, and was the chief cause, that the Englishmen, were expulsed out of the
whole duchy of Acquitayne, and lost both the countries of Gascoyn and Guyen.
But most of all it should seem, that God with this matrimony was not content.
For after this spousage, the Kings friends fell from him, both in England
and in France, the Lords of his realm, fell in division amongst themselfes,
the commons rebelled against their sovereign Lord, and natural Prince,
feldes were foughten, many thousands slain, and finally, the king deposed, and
his son slain, and this Queen sent home again, with as much misery and
sorrow, as she was received with pomp and triumph, such is worldly
unstableness, and so waueryng is false flatteryng fortune.

DVRYNG the time of this truce, Richard Duke of York, and diverse other
capitaines, repaired into England, both to visit their wifes, children, and
Friends, and also to consulte, what should be done, if the truce ended.

The.xxiiii. year.
FOR the which cause, The.xxiiii. year.
the King called his high court of Parliament, in the which above all things,
it was concluded, diligently to forsee, that Normandy should be well furnished
and strongly defended, before the term of the truce should be expired: for it
was openly known, that the French king, was ready in all things, to make open
war, if no peace or abstinence of war, were agreed or concluded. For which
consideracion, money was granted, men were appointed, and a great army
gathered together, and the duke of Somerset, was appointed Regent of Normandy,
and the Duke of York thereof discharged. In which Parliament, to please the
people with all, it was enacted, yt when whete was sold for.vi. s.viii. d. the
quartr and Rye for.iiii. s. and Barley for.iii. s. it should be lawful to every
man to carry thesaid kinds of corn* into the parties beyond the sea, without
license, so it were not to the kings enemies or rebels: which act, king
Edward the.iiii. for the utility of his people, approved and confirmed.

THE Marquis of Suffolk, being in high favor with the King, and in no less
grace with queen Margaret, for co^cludyng the marriage between them two,
somewhat infected with the sede of vainglory, and thinkyng that his procedynges
and doings in France, (during the time of his legacion) had as well pleased
all men, as they pleased himself, the second day of June, in the first session
of this parliament, before all the lords spiritual and temporal, in the
higher house assembled, openly, ^loquently and boldly, declared his pain,
travail and diligence, which he had taken and sustained of late time, in the
Realm of France, as well for the taking and concludyng a truce or abstinence of
war, between the Realms of England and of France, as in the making of the
marriage between the king his sovereign lord and theirs, and the noble Princes
lady Margarete, daughter to the King of Scicile and Jerusalem: Openyng also to
them, that thesaid truce should expire the first day of April next coming,
except a final peace or a farther truce were concluded in the mean season:
aduisyng them to provide and fors^e all things necessary, for the war (as
though no concord should succeed, nor agreement could take place) least the
Frenchemen perceiuyng them unprovided, would take their advantage, and agree
neither to reason nor amity: saying unto them, that sith he had admonished
the king, and them, according to his duty and allegeaunce, if any thing
quailed, or if danger ensued, he was thereof innocent and gilteles, and had
acquitted himself like a loving subject, and a faithful counsailor, praiyng
the lords to have it in their remembrance. Likewise the morrow after, he with
certain lords, descended into the common house, where he declared again all
thesaied matters, to the Knights, Citezens and Burgesses, omittyng nothing,
that might sound to his glory, nor openyng any thing, which might redound to
his dispraise: praiyng the commons for his discharge, that as well all his
doings and procedynges in the kings affairs beyond the sea, as also his
advertisement and counsel, opened to the lords and commons now together
assembled, might be, by the King and them, enacted and enrolled in the
Records of the Parliament: whereupon the morrow after, William Burley, speaker
for the commons and all the company of the nether house, repaired to the kings
presence, sittyng in his trone, amongst his lords in the parliament chamber,
where thesaied William Burley, by the counsel of the commons (whether they
did it more for fear then for love, or were thereunto entised by the Marquis
friends, as some men doubted) most hu^blie commended to the kings highness,
the foresaid Marquis of Suf^olke* and all his acts and notable works, which
he had done, to the pleasure of almighty God, the honor of the king, and the
utility of the Realm: as in taking the truce, concludyng the marriage, and the
good admonicion, given by him in open Parliament, for provision of war to be
made, during the time of truce, least to much trustyng of peace, might
encorage the Frenchemen, the sooner to begin war and inuasio^: besechyng the
kings highness, in the name of the commons, to imprint in his heart and
remembrance, thesaid Marquis, and all his labors and acts, to his honor and
renoume, which should be an example to al other, which the king should call
to like service, to employ themselfes in like endeavor, faithfully and honorably
to serve their king and sovereign lord: praiyng also the lords spiritual
and temporal, that they for the consideracions before rehearsed, would
vouchesaue to make like peticio^ to the kings ma^e^rie, and that all the acts
and demeanor of thesaied Marquis, might by authority of parliament, be, to
his honor, and perpetual fame, in the rolls of the same Parliament, recorded
and substancially regestered. At which humble intercession, the lords, as well
spiritual as temporal, rose from their seats, and on their knees, made to the
king like request and peticion, as they of the commons before were desired:
whereupon, the king by the mouth of the Archbishop of Canterbury his
Chancellor, made answer, that their requests were so reasonable and so
honorable, that he in no wise could, but louyngly accept and gently allow
the same, saying also: that their desires, were to him a singular pleasure, and
an especial comfort, and that he would from thencefurthe accept and take
thesaied Marquis to his benign grace, and especial favor, as a person,
which had dooen both true, faithefull, and notable service to him and to his
Realm, to the intent, that al men put in like trust, should enforce them
selfs, to do like or better service to their sovereign Lord or Master:
agreyng also (according to their requests and peticions) that the labors,
demeanors, diligences, and declaracions of thesaied Marquis of Suffolk, and
thesaied commendacions and desires, not only of the lords, but also of the
commons, as well for the honor of him and his posterity, as for his acquital and
discharge, should be enacted, and enrolled in the Records of the same
parliament, which was so done. This Marquis thus gotten up, into fortunes
trone, not content with his degree, by the means of the Queen, was shortly
erected to the estate and degree of a Duke, and ruled the King at his pleasure,
in so much, he obtained the wardshippes, both of body and lands of the
Countess of Warwick, and of the lady Margarete, sole heir to Ihon Duke of
Somerset (which lady was after, mother to King Henry the seventh) and beside
that, caused the King to create Ihon de Foys, son to Gaston de Foys, earl of
Longuile, and Capdaw of Bueffez, earl of Kendale: which Iho^ had married his
niece, and by his procurement, the king elected into the order of the Garter,
thesaid Gaston, and Ihon his son, geuyng to the son, toward the
maintenance of his degree and estate, lands and Castles, in the Duchy of
Guyen, amountyng to the some of one thousand pounds by the year, which
lands, name, and style, the issue and line of thesaied earl of ^endall at this
day have, and enjoy.

HERE a man may behold, what security is in worldly, glory, and what
constancy is in fortunes smilyng: for this Duke of Suffolk, in open
Parliament of the Lords praised, of the commons thanked, and into the kings
favor, entierly received, within four years after, was in the same place, by
the commons of the Realm, accused of many treasons, mispricions and offenses,
done and committed against the King, and the common wealth of his Realm, and
in conclusion, being exiled the realm, he was taken upon the sea, and made
shorter by the hedde, which chance had not happened to him, if he had
remembered the counsel of the popyngay, saying: when thou thynkest thy self in
court most surest, then is it high time to get thee home to rest.

THESE things being in doing, the French king seeing, that the town of Mauns,
and diverse fortresses in Main, were not to him delivered, according to the
appointment made, gathered together a great number of people, for to recover
the same: whereof the king of England being advertised, (least the breach of
truce should begin by him) caused the town to be delivered, without any
force.

THIS year, an Armerars suruaunt of London, appeled his master of treason,
which offered to be tried by battaill. At the day assigned, the friends of
the master, brought him Malmesey and Aqua vite, to comfort him with all, but
it was the cause of his and their discomforte: for he poured in so much, that
when he came into the place in Smithfelde, where he should fight, both his
wit and strength failed him: and so he being a tall and a hardye personage,
ouerladed with hot drynkes, was vanqueshed of his servant, being but a
cowarde and a wretch, whose body was drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged and
behedded. In which year was a great insurreccion in Norwiche, against the
Prior of the place, in so much that the citezens kept the gates, against the
Duke of Norffolke, which came thither to appea^e the matter: but in
conclusion, they opened the gates, and submitted theimselfes. The chief
offenders, were (according to their deserts) straightly punished, and executed,
and the Maire was discharged of his office, and sir Ihon Clifton was made
gouernoure there, till the king had restored the citezens to their ancient
liberties, and francheses. This commocion, was for certain new exaccions,
which the Prior claimed and took of the citezens, contrary to their ancient
fredomes and vsages: but this was not the dew mean to come to their right and
purpose, and therefore because they erred and went out of the pathe, they were
by punishemente brought again to a very straight trade and the right way.

The.xxv. year. The.xxv. year

During the time of this truce or abstinence of war, while there was nothing
to vex or trouble the minds of men, within the realm, a sudden mischief, and
a long discord, sprang out suddenly, by the means of a woman: for king Henry,
which reigned at this time was a man of a meke spirit, and of a simple wit,
preferryng peace before war, rest before business, honesty before profit,
and quietness before labor. And to the intent that all men might perceive,
that there could be none, more chaste, more meke, more holy, nor a better
creature: In him reigned shamefastness, modesty, integrity, and patience to
be marueiled at, taking and sufferyng all losses, chances* displeasures, and
such worldely torments, in good part* and with a ^acient manner, as though
they had chanced by his own fault, or negligent oversight: yet he was
governed of them whom he should have ruled, and brideled of such, whom he
sharply should have spurred: He gaped not for honor, nor thristed for riches,
but studied only for the health of his soul: the saving whereof, he esteemed to
be the greate^^ wisdom, and the loss thereof, the extremest folly that
could (...) But on the other part, the Queen his wife, was a woman of a great
wit, and yet of no greater wit, then of haute stomach, desirous of glory,
and covetous of honor, and of reason, pollicye counsel, and other gifts and
talentes of nature, belongyng to a man, full and flowyng: of wit and
wiliness she lacked nothing, nor of diligence, study, and business, she was
not vnexperte: but yet she had one point of a very woman: for often time, when
she was vehement and fully bente in a matter, she was suddenly like a
wethercocke, mutable, and turnyng. This woman perceiuyng that her husband did
not frankely rule as he would, but did all thing by thaduise and counsel of
Hu^frey duke of Gloucester, and that he passed not much on the aucthority and
governance of the realm, determined with her self, to take upon her the rule
and regiment, both of the king and his kingdom, and to deprive and euict out
of al rule and authority, thesaid duke, then called the lord protector of the
realm: least men shoud say and report, yt she had neither wit nor stomach,
which would permit and suffer her husband, being of perfect age and ma^s
estate, like a young scholar or innocent pupille, to be governed by the
disposicion of another man. This manly woman, this coragious queen, ceased not
to prosecute furthwith, her invented imaginacion and prepe^sed purpose, but
practiced daily the furtheraunce of the same. And although this inue^cio^ came
first of her own high mind* and ambicious courage, yet it was furthered and set
forward by such, as of long time had borne malice to the duke, for declaryng
their untruth as you before have heard. Which venomous serpents, and
malicious Tigers, persuaded, incensed and exhorted the queen, to look well upon
the expenses and revenues of the realm, and thereof to call an account:
affirmyng plainly that she should evidently perceive, that the Duke of
Gloucester, had not so much advanced and preferred the common wealth and
public utility, as his own private things and peculiar estate. Beside
this, Reyner king of Scicile, wrote to his daughter, that she and her husband,
should take upon them, the rule and governance of the realm, and not to be
kept under, like young wards and desolate orphans. The queen persuaded and
encoraged by these means, took upon her and her husband, ye high power and
authority over the people and subjects. And although she joined her husband
with her in name, for a countenance, yet she did all, she said all, and she
bare the whole swing, as the strong ox does, when he is yoked in the plough
with a pore silly ass: and first of all she excluded the duke of Gloucester,
from all rule and governance, not prohibityng such as she knew to be his
mortal enemies, to invent and imagyne, causes and griefs, against him and his:
so that by her permissio^, and favor, diverse noble men conspired against him,
of the which, diverse writers affirm, the Marquis of Suffolk, and the duke
of Buckyngham to be the chief, not vnprocured by the Cardinal of Winchester,
and the Archbishop of York. Diverse articles, both heinous and odious, were
laid to his charge in open counsel, and in especial one, that he had caused
men adjudged to dye, to be put to other execucion, then the law of the land had
ordered or assigned: for surely the duke being very well learned in the law
^iuill, detestyng malefactors, and punishyng their offenses, gat great malice
and hatred of such, as feared to have condign reward for their ungracious
acts and mischeuous doings. Although the duke (not without great laud and
praise) sufficiently answered to all things to him objected, yet because his
death was determined, his wisdom little helped, nor his truth smally auailed:
but of this unquietness of mind, he delivered himself, because he thought
neither of death, nor of condempnacion to dye: such affiaunce had he in his
strong truth, and such confidence had he in indifferent justice. But his
capital enemies and mortal foes, fearyng that some tumulte or commocion might
arise, if a prince so well beloved of the people, should be openly executed,
and put to death, determined to trappe and undo him, or he thereof should have
knowledge or warnyng. So for the furtherau^ce of their purpose, a parliament
was somoned to be kept at Bery, whether resorted all the peers of the realm,
and ^mongest them, the duke of Gloucester, which on the second day of the
session, was by the lord Beamond, then high Constable of England, accompanied
with the duke of Buckyngha^, and other, arrested, apprehended, and put in
ward, and all his servants sequestered from him, and.xxxii. o^ the chief of
his retinue, were sent to diverse prisons, to the great admiracion of the
common people. The duke the night after his emprisonement, was found dedde in
his bed, and his body showed to the lords and commons, as though he had died
of a palsy or empostome: but all indifferent persons well knew, that he died
of no natural death, but of some violent force: some judged him to be
strangled: some affirm, that a hot spitte was put in at his foundement: other
write, that he was stiffeled or smoldered between two fetherbeddes. After
whose death, none of his servants (although they were arraigned and
attainted) were put to death: for the Marquis of Suffolk, when they should have
been executed, showed openly their pardon, but this doing appeased not the
grudge of the people, which said that the pardone of the servants, was no
amends for murderyng of their master. The dedde corse of this duke, was carried
to saint Albons, and there honorably buried. Thus was this noble prince,
son, brother, and uncle to kings, which had valeauntly and pollitiquely by
the space of.xxv. years governed this Realm, and for his demerites, called the
good duke of Gloucester, by a bone cast by his enemies, choked and brought to
his fatal fine, and last end. So al men may openly se, that to men in
aucthorit^e, no place no not the court the chief refuge of all, nor the
dwelling house, nor yet a man's private Castle, or his bed ordained for his
quietness, is out of danger of deaths dart. It seems to many men* that the
name and title of Gloucester, has been unfortunate and unlucky to diverse,
which for their honor, have been erected by creacion of princes, to that si^le
and dignity, as Hugh Spenser, Thomas of Woodstocke, son to king Edward the
third, and this duke Humfrey, which three persons, by miserable death ^inished
their days, and after them king Richard the.iij. also* duke of Gloucester, in
civil war was slain and confounded: so y^ this name of Gloucester, is taken
for an unhappy and unfortunate style, as the proverb speaks of Seianes
horse, whose rider was ever unhorsed, and whose possessor was ever brought to
misery. When the rumor of the dukes death, was blown through the realm, many
me^ were suddenly appalled and amassed for fear: many abhorred and detested y^
faict, but all men reputed it an abominable cruelty, and a shameful tyranny.
But the public wealth of the realm of England, by the unworthy death of
this pollitique prince, sustained great loss, and ran into ruin, for surely
the whole weight and burden of the realm, rested and depe^ded upon him, as the
experience afterward did declare. For after his death* good and sage men
fearyng the^ selfs, fled out of y^ flatteryng court, into whose places entered
such, as desiryng their own promocion, set open the gates to new faccions,
which could never be extinct, til all the seignories beyond the sea (except
Caleice and the marches) were lost, and king Henry in conclusion spoiled of his
Realm and life. There is an old said saw, that a man ente^ding to avoid the
smoke, falls into the fire: So here, the Queen mynding to preserve her
husband in honor, and her self in authority, procured and consentid to the
death of this noble man, whose only death brought to pass that thing, which
she would most feign have eschewed, and took from her that jewel, which she
most desired: for if this Duke had lived, the Duke of York durst not have
made title to the crown: if this Duke had liuyd, the nobles had not conspired
against the King, nor yet the co^mo^s had not rebelled: if this Duke had lived,
the house of La^caster had not been defaced and destroyed, which things happened
all contrary by the destruccio^ of this good man. This is the worldly
judgment, but God knows, what he had predestinate, and what he had ordained
before, against whose ordinance preuayleth no counsel, and against whose
will avails no stryuinge.

The.xxvi. year. The.xxvi. year

IN this.xxvi. year of the reign^ of this King, But in the first year of the
rule of the Queen, I find no thing done, worthy to be rehearsed, within the
Realm of England, but that the marquis of Suffolk by great favor of the
King, and more desire of the Queen, was erected to the title, and name of the
duke of Suffolk, which dignity he short time enioied and which degree, he
but a brief season possessed. For after the deposicion or rather the
destruction of the good duke of Gloucester, and the exaltacion and advancement
of this glorious man: Rychard duke of York, being greatly alied by his wife,
to the chief peers and potentates of the Realm, over and beside his own
progenye and great consanguinitie, perceiving the King to be a ruler not
Ruling, and the whole burden of the Realm, to depend in the ordinances of the
Queen and the duke of Suffolk, began secretly to allure to his friends of the
nobility, and privately declared to the^, his title and right to the Crown,
and likewise did he to certain wise and saige Governors and Rulers of diverse
cities and towns: which privy attempt was so politiquely handeled and so
secretly kept, that his provision was ready, before his purpose was openly
published, and his friends opened them selfs or the contrary part could
them espy: but in conclusion time reveled truth and old hyd hatred openly
sprange out, as you shall hereafter both lament and hear.

DVRING these doings, Henry Beaufford, bishop of Winchester, and called the
rich Cardinal, departed out of this world, and was buried at Wynchester. This
man was son to Ihon of Gaunte duke of Lancaster, disce^ded of an honorable
lignage, but borne in Baste, more noble of blodd, then notable in learning,
haut in stomach, and high in countenance, rich above measure of all men, and
to few liberal, disdaynfull to his kynne and dreadful to his lovers*
preferrynge money before frendshippe, many things beginning, and nothing
perfourmyng. His covetous insaciable, and hope of long life, made him both to
forget God, his Prince and him self, in his latter days: for doctor Ihon
Baker his pryuie counsailler, and his chappelleyn, wrote, that he lyeng on his
death bed, said these words. Why should I dye, having so much riches, if the
whole Realm would save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by
riches to bye it. Fie, will not death be hyered, nor will money do nothing?
when my nephew of Bedford died, I thought my self half up the whele, but when
I saw mine other nephew of Gloucester disceased, then I thought my self able
to be equale with kings, and so thought to increase my treasure in hoope to
have worn a tryple Croune. But I se now the world fails me, and so I am
deceived: praiyng you all to pray for me. Of the gettyng of this man's goods,
both by power, legantye or spiritual bryberie I will not speak: but the kepinge
of them for his ambycious purpose, aspiryng to ascend to the papisticall sea,
was both great loss to his natural Prince, and natyue country: for his
hidden riches might have well helped the King, and his secret treasure migth
have releued the co^monaltie, when money was scante and importunate charges,
were daily imminent. After the death of this prelate, which was a great stay to
the King and the realm, the affairs in France, were neither well looked to,
nor the governors of the country were well advised. For an English capitayn,
called sir Franceys Surrien the Arragonoys, a man for his wit and actiuitie
admitted to the order of the Gartier, took by scalynge suddenly in the night, a
Town on the frontiers of Normandy, belonging to the duke of Britayn, called
Fongiers, spoiling the same, and kyllinge the inhabitau^tes to the great
distruccion of the people, and more displeasure to the duke of Britayn, their
sovereign lord. The Duke being thereof aduertysed, sent word to the
French king, declaringe to him that in the time of truce (in the which, he as
his allye and vassal was co^prehendyd) he was spoiled and bereuyd of his town
of Fongiers: besechyng the French king, in that cause to se a recompense and
amendment: whereupon he sent Ihon Hauart his caruar, and Ihon Cosynet one of
the masters of his requests to the king of England: and to the duke of
Somerset, he dispatched Peter de Fountaynes Esquyer, and one of the chief of
his stable, to whom by both the Princes, it was answered, that the fact and
enterprise was both done contrary to there mind, will and knowledge. And for
the truce to be kept, and not only restitucion, but also amends to be made to
the Duke of Britayn, a day of diet and assemble was appointed to be kept at
the town of Louiers. At the time appointed both the parties assembled: the
French part demanded amends, with no little recompense: The English orators
answered, that without offense, no thing by justice, ought to be satisfied:
affirming the doing of sir Francyes Surrien, to be his only act, without
the consent or counsel, either of the king of England, or the duke of
Somerset his lieuetena^t and regent. Duringe this daily communicacio^ and long
delay, certain Frenchemen, friends to the duke of Britayn, desyring to be
revenged of the injury done to him at Fongiers, and also imagening, how to do
some new displeasure to the Englismen, were advertised by a wagoner of
Louiers, yt the town of Pou^telarche, was but meanly manned and slenderly
furnished, and the watch was but negligently looked to: with which sayings
the Frenchemen being somewhat encouraged, devised a way, how by policy to
take the town: So the wagoner laded his wagon, and passed forward, having in
his company.i^. strong varlettes clad like carpenters, with great axes in
their necks. And for the furthera^ce of their purpose, the lord of Bressy,
with a chosen company of men of arms, lodged him self in a busshement nere to
the gate of saint Andrewe. And capitayn Floquet, accompanied with sir James of
Cleremou^t, and another great company, privily lurked under a wood toward
Louiers. When al things were appointed, early in the morning in the beginning
of the month of October, the wagoner came to the gate, and called the porter
by name, praiyng him to open the gate, that he might pass to Roen, and
return again the same night. The porter (which well knew the voice of his
customer) took little head to the other.ij. co^paignions, and so opened the on^
gate, and sent another fellow of his, to open the ^ormost gate. When ye
Chariotte was on the draw bridge, between both ye gates, the Chariottemaster
gave the porter money, and for the nones, let one piece fall to the ground, and
while the porter stoped to take it up, the wagoner with his dagger stroke him
in at his throat, so that he cried for no healpe, and the.ij. great lubbers
slew the other porters, and with their axes cut the aexletre of the wagone,
so that the draw bridge could not be shortly drawn up. Which things done,
they made a sign to captain Floquet, which, without delay or tract of time,
entered the town, and ^lew and took the Englishmen, which neither heard nor
thought of any such enterprise: amongst whom, the lord Fauconbridge,
captain of the said town, was apprehended as a prisoner. By this praty
cautele and ^lyghte imposture, was the town of Pou^telarche taken and
surprised, which town was the kay and passage over the river of Soame, from
France to Normandy, being distant from Roen, only.iiii. leages. Thus wrong
was added to wrong, and injury heped to injury, whereby y^ term of truce was
violated, and mortal war was revived. But because y^ taking of this
fortress, had a certain color of breki^g of truce. The duke of Somerset by
ambassadors, and not by force of arms, devised to recover again this pratye
town, and sent for ye restitucio^ of the same, diverse ambassadors to ye French
king and his cou^sail, which made answer again, yt if the Englishmen restored
to the duke of Brytayn, the town of Fo^giers with co^digne ame^des, for the
damages done and committed within the same* the town of Pou^tlarche should
again be rendered and delivered: for the French king and his counsel
began now to perceive and smell, that the affairs of England, by the death
of the duke of Gloucester, were sore minished and decayed, and that good
counsel began to wax faynte and decay, and sedicion freshely began to
spring and rise: By reason whereof, they thought that Normandye might sone ^e
conquered and recovered, and that the English nation out of that region might
easily be expulsed and driven out: wherefore they determined to take the good
occasion to them openly offered, and to lose no time in so good a bargayne.
Whereupon king Charles divided his army in to.iij. parts, not doubting of
victory, by reason that the fame of the conquest of Pountelarche, was blown
and spread abroad over al y^ country. So after diverse assautes (not without
loss of diverse of his men) he had rendered to him by co^posicion, the towns
of Louiers and Gerborie, whereof William Harper was capitayn. Thus prosperous
victory daily succedinge to the French kings army, he augmenting his
hooste, determined to get the town of Uernoyle in perch, and gyrd it round
about with a strong seage. The inhabitau^tes whereof, although with the sudden
chance they were somewhat abashed, yet having some succors, and hopinge of
more relefe, took to them good courage, and manfully defended the town. But
when their aid tarried longer, then they either thought or desired, they were
compelled to compound and pact with their enemies, upon this condition: that if
the seage were not raised within.xx. days, that then they should depart with
bag and baggage, which condition was accepted: and because no rescous came,
the town, Castle and the great Tower, were delivered. The French historians
affirm, the town to be taken by assaute, and the Castle by composicion, but
all writers agree, that the Frenchemen obtained it. Thus was war revived
before the full term of the truce expyred, which was the most detestable and
unprofitable chance, that either could, or might have happened or come, to the
realm of England. For by this sodayn damage and loss, without thought
arrising, the English capitaynes were so busyed and unquieted, what with
appeasing daily rumors within towns, and what with study how to recover
Castles lost and taken, that they scace wyste, what way to take: for while
they studied, how to keep and defend one city.iiij. or.v. other, following
fortunes chance, turned to the French part, and became their enemies. The
chief cause of which reuolting and turni^g was this: It was blown throughout
all France, that the realm of England, after the death of the duke of
Gloucester, by the several faccio^s of Princes, was divided in two parts, and
that William de la Pole, late created duke of Suffolk, and diverse other, were
the occasion of the death of the said duke of Gloucester, which was the very
father of the country, and the shield and defense of the poor co^monaltie,
and that the forenamed duke of Suffolk, only for lucre of money, vexed,
oppressed and molested the poor people, so that men's minds were not
intentive, nor given to outward affairs and foren conquestes, but all their
study was, how to drive back and defend domestical injuries, and daily
wrongs done at home: by reason whereof men of war were unpaid, and no army
for resiste^ce was either gathered or assembled together: which mischiefs
(while the King, as things of the world, and of no great moment, did neglect
and omit, as he which preferred and extolled godly things* above all worldly
affairs and mortal cures, and thought the^ most to be pha^tasied and labored:
And while queen Margarete his wife, in whom the whole rule of the realm
consisted, being a woman of to much crede^ce geuyng, to evil and flattering
co^sallors them little regarded) daily so much increased, that by no means
after they could be either overcome or resisted: so that by this means, the
French nation knew in what case the state of the realm of England stood in,
which elated and encouraged their hearts, and dau^ted and appalled the
courages of the Normains and Gascoyns, so much that for lack of aid and
relefe, they turned to the French part, and forsook their very sovereign
lord the king of England in short space, as you shall here after hear.

The.xxvii. year. The.xxvii. year.

IT was not e^ough, the realm of England this season thus to be vexed and
unquieted with the business of Normandy, but also a new rebellion began in
Irelande, to the great displeasure of the King and his counsel: for
repressinge whereof, Richard duke of York, with a convenient number of men was
sent thither, as lieuetenant to the King, which not only appeased the fury of
the wild, and savage people there, but also gat him such love and favor of
the country and the inhabitau^tes, that their sincere love and fre^dly
affeccion could never be separated from him and his lygnage, as in the sequel
of this story, you shall more plainly perceive. The Frenchemen having perfyte
understanding of the infirmity and unreadiness of the realm of England,
displaied their banners, and set furthe their armies, and in short space gat
by yeildynge, Constance, Gisors, Castle Gayllard, Pontean du mere, saint Lo,
Fescampe, Newchastel, Alanson, Toncque, Manleo^ arge^ton, Lisiaux argenton, and
diverse other towns in Normandy: Likewise in Guyen was the town of Maulissone
re^dered to y^ Earl of Foys. These towns were not yielded voluntarilye by the
English soldiers, but they were thereunto compelled by the cytizens and the
inhabitauntes of the towns, which apparently perceiving, that the great
fla^me of the English force was extinct and consumid, rose against the
Capitaines, and other opened the gates to their enemies, or constrained them to
render upon a composicion. By which enforcement was the rych city of Roan
delivered: for surely the duke of Somerset and the lord Talbot Earl of
Shrowesburye, had well kept and defended this city, if they had been no more
vexed with the citizens, then they were with their enemies. For after the
French king had once by his Herault somoned the city, the inhabitau^tes not
only sought ways and invented frauds, how to betray the same, but also put on
harnes and rebelled against their capitaynes, manacinge to the death and
destruction all the English people. The capitaines perceiving their vntrought,
and traiterous demeanor retrayted them selfs into the Castle or Palaice,
where they a certain space with arrows and handgonnes, sore molested and
vexed the untrue citizens. But when they co^^idered the great puyssau^ce of the
French king, and that they were in despair of all aid or relefe, and that
their victayle and artillarye began sore to minishe, they thought it better to
compounde and agree with their enemies, rather then wilfully to be destroyed or
dye for ^amy^: and so upon condition that all they should safely depart of
Caen with all their goods and armure, and that certain towns should be
delivered by a day, they were permitted to depart: leaving behynd them for
hostages, till the said towns (which were agreed to be rendered) should be
delivered, the Earl of Shreuesbury and the lord Butler, son to the Earl of
Ormonde, which were sent to the Castle of Eureux, because they sore feared the
malice of the citizens of Roen. The Frenchemen following still the steps of
victory, and elated with the brute and fame of gettinge of Roen, determined
either by force or offer, to get the town of Harfflew, and shortly assauted
the same, whereof was capitayn sir Thomas Coneson, a man of great wit and of no
less force: which having knowledge of the heavy tidinges, brougth from Roen,
was therewith nothing abashed, but coragiously set upon his enemies, and them
to their great hurt, manfully repulsed and drove from the walls. The
Frenchemen learning wit by this great peril, left their scalynge, and devised
daily, how to batter and break the walls and fortificacio^s. This seage long
continued to the great loss of both parties. When sir Thomas saw small
lykelihod of aid or gain, but much apparaunce of loss and ieopardy, he took
a conuencion with his enemies, and so departed with all his goods.

The.xxviii. year. The.xxviii. year.

AFTER which town rendered, the fortress of Hunflew, upon the same
composicion was yielded. Thus you may perceive, that fortune is ever without
measure, for either she to much favors or to much hates: for beside these
towns surrendered in Normandy, the duke of Britayne recovered again Fongiers,
sent Ihon de Buerne and diverse other towns. In the mean season, the king of
England sent into Normandy with a crew of.M. and.ccccc. men, a valiant
capitayn, called sir Thomas Kyriel: a man of great stomach, if he had had a
great army but his power was to small, either to recover that which was lost,
either to save that, which yet remained vngotten: but surely in him lacked
neither good will nor courage, for with his small number, he recovered again
the towns of Lyseaux and Ualongnes. After which feate, he joined himself with
sir Henry Norbery, sir Robert Ueere, Matthew Gough, and other capitaines, so
that they were above five thousand men* of valiant hearts and haute courages.
After long consultacion, they determined to fight with the Frenchemen, which
were gooyng to the siege of Caen, but in their journey, they were encountered at
a place called Formigny, between Carentyne and Bayeux, by the earl of
Cleremont, lieuetenaunt for the French king, the Steward of Poytou, and the
lord of Rays Admiral of France, with six hundred men of arms, and six
thousand other, which skirmished with the Englishemen a great season. During
which s^irmishe, there arrived Arthur earl of Richemond, high Constable of
France, James of Luxenborough, earl of Lauall, with a great number of
horsemen and fresh fotemen. After his coming, he and all the Frenchmen set on
thenglishmen, being faint and weary with the long skirmishe. This battaill was
sore fought, but in conclusion, the Englishemen were discomfited, and put to
flight, and of them slain above iiij.M, and.viii.C. taken prisoners, where of,
sir Thomas Kiriell, sir Henry Norbery, and sir Thomas Dreue were the chief, sir
Robert Uere and Matthewe Gough saved themselfes. This was the first foughten
feld, that the Frenchemen gatte on the Englishemen in many years, wherefore, I
blame them not, though they of a little, make much, and set furthe all, and
hide nothing, that may sound to their glory. They declare what nu^bre they
slew, but they write not how many of them were slain nor destroyed.

AFTER this victory obtained, the French king hearing that the Duke of
Somerset was in the town of Caen, thought that he had nothing done, if he
permitted the duke, still to tarry in Normandy, which by new aid and fresh
succors, might turn the whele of Fortune, into a contrary part, and
peradventure recover all that has been lost, or put the realm of France in
ieoperdy: wherefore, like a wise prince, entendyng to prevent things, imminent
and at hand, assembled an army royal, and in his own person, having in his
camp Reyner, called king of Scicile, father to the Queen of England, the
dukes of Calaber and Alaunson, the earls of Cleremont, Richemond, Main,
Dumoys, Sent Polle, and Dampemartyne, beside many noble Barons and valiaunte
knights, when all things were ready, as opportunity of time served: He
caused the Town to be environed on every side, assignyng to his capitaines
several places of the town to be assauted, and there to prove their manhod.
The earl of Dumoys, with more loss then gain entered into a bulwerke and was
beaten back. Thenglishemen within the town kept silence, as though they knew
not of their enemies approchyng, but every man kept his loupe, and every
capitain well ouerloked his ward. The Frenchemen with quarrelles, morispikes,
slings, and other engynes, began to assaut the walls: but of the Englishemen
within, some shot fiercely withlong bows, other cast darts, and rolled down
great stones and bars of Iron: other cast down Iauelyns, firebra^des, hot
lead, and blocks with pitche and brymstone, like burning ^ire flaming: some
cast down and ouerthrewe the scalyng ladders and slew such as clymed up the
walls: neither courage lacked in the assault, nor manhood, nor pollecie in the
def^nce: for on the embatelme^tes of the walls were set great rolls of
tymbre, so mouyng and unsteadfast, that neither scalyng ladder could catch any
hold, nor no person that should clyme up, could set any sure fotyng. The
French king* perceiuyng that this assaye little or naught prevailed him, sent
for all his great ordinance to Paris, determinyng never to depart, till he
had conquered the town, either with sword or famyn. When the ordinance was
brought, he daily shot at the walls, and did some hurt: but to the Castle,
which stood on a rock, and in it a dongeon unable to be beaten down, he did
no harm at all. In this town was the duke of Somerset, his wife and children,
but he was not capitain, for the Duke of York owner of the town, by the
kings gift, had appointed there his capitain general, sir Dauy Halle, and of
the castle, sir Rober Ueer, and of the dongeon, sir Henry Radford. Daily the
shot was great, but more terrible then hurtful. Saving one day, a stone shot
into the town, fell between the duches of Somerset, and her children, which,
being amassed with this chance, prayed on her knees her husband, to have mercy
and compassion of his small enfantes, and that they might be delivered out of
ye town in sauegard. The duke more piteous then hardy, moved with the dolor of
his wife, and love of his children, assembled the capitaines and magistrates of
the town, declaryng to them, the power and puyssaunce of the French king,
and their debilitie and weakness, perswadyng them rather to yield and render
upon honest conditions, then obstinatly to resist, and foolishly to perish.
Sir Dauy Halle, capitain of the town, answered to him, saying: my lord,
although you be the kings lieuetenaunt general, within this country and
dominion, and may by force of your authority, deliver, sell or give, any of
the kings tounes, to such persons, either friends or enemies, as shall
please you: yet I am sure that you cut your lether to large, to entreat or
speak of the renderyng of this town, apperteinyng to my lord and master,
Richard duke of York, which thereof has given me both the charge and
custody* with other of my trusty friends and fellows, and which with the help
of almighty God, I shall well defend, both against the French king and all
his puyssaunce, till the duke my master come to succor me: for of men, money
and municions, I trust I have sufficient. Why said the duke, am not I here the
kings deputy, representyng his person, and may command all things
according to my discrecion? Yea, said the capitain, so that you give away no
man's right, but his, whose authority you have for the same: as for this
town, I assure you, without my lords assent, you shall neither render nor
yield, by my consent or agreement. The duke was sore moved with this saying, and
so departed, and after sent for the rulers of the town, and the poorest people
of the same, declaryng to them, that their life's and goods, were in the French
kings hands, and if they looked not shortly to their sauegard, of death they
were sure, and of mercy far uncertain: exhortyng them to follow his loving
monicion, rather then the hardened heart, of their to hardy capitain. The
people of the town thus persuaded (whose hearts were rather French then
English) began to rise against sir Dauy, boldly affirmyng, that if he took
no composicion, within three days, they would open the gates, and let in the
French king: and of this opinion, were all the common soldiers. What should
the poor Hare say, when she is environed with a hundred hounds, or the silly
Lark cry, when she is in the middell of a hundred Hawks, but take patience,
and seek away to escape: so this capitain perceiuyng, that neither his words
served, nor his truth toward his master prevailed, bad the duke of Somerset do
what he list, for he would in no wise be named in y^ composicio^. Then the duke
partly to pleace the tounes men, but more desirous to pleace the duches his
wife, made an agreement with the French king, that he would render the town,
so that he and all his, might depart in sauegard with all their goods and
substance: which offer, the French King gladly accepted and allowed, knowing
that by force, he might longer have longed for the strong town, then to have
possessed the same so sone. After this conclusion taken, sir Dauie Halle, with
diverse other of his trusty fre^des, departed to Chierburge, and from thense
sailed into Irelande, to the duke of York, making relacion to him of all these
doings: which thing kyndeled so great a rancore in his heart and stomach
that he never left persecutyng of the Duke of Somersette, till he had brought
him to his fatal point, and extreme confusion.

AFTER the obteinyng of this strong town of ^aen, therle of Cleremont besieged
the city of Lyseux, whereof was capitain Matthewe Gough, with three hundren
Englishmen. The capitain perceiuyng that when Caen was not rescewed, that poor
Liseux, was in despair of all succor, agreed to abandon and deliver the city,
so that he and his people, might depart to Chierburge, having no iron weapon
nor armure, but only their goods, and white stafes in their hands. After the
deliverance of this town, the Frenchemen still like good begeles, following
their preye, besieged the town of Fallayse, apperteinyng to the lord Talbot,
earl of Shrewesbury: whereof were capitaines for thesaied earl, Andrewe Trollop,
and Thomas Cotton esquires, which being desperate of succors, and considering
the puissaunce of their enemies, agreed to deliver the town upon two
conditions. The one was, that the Earl their master, which remained in pledge
for certain conditions, agreed to be performed at the deliverance of Roen,
(as you have heard before) should be dismissed and set at liberty. The other,
that if they were not rescued within twelfe days, that then, they and theirs,
to depart with armure, and all their gods moveable, whether it pleaced them.
After this agreement at the day prefixed, no rescues came, and so the town was
re^dered, and incontinent after, the fortress of Dampforde was delivered upon
like agreement. For the Frenchemen bragged, that they regarded neither gold nor
silver, but desired rule, glory, and fame: With which lightne^e the other
tounes of Normandy being persuaded, voluntarily rendered themselfes, vassalles
and subjects to the French nation.

NOW rested English, only the town of Chierburge, whereof was capitain,
Thomas Gonuile, which surely, valiau^tly defended the town as long as vitail
and municion served: but when those two hands were spent and consumed, he
destitute of all comfort and aid, upon a reasonable composicio^, yielded the
town and went to Caleis, where the duke of Somerset, and many Englishemen then
soiorned: lamentyng their loss, and desperate of all recovery. Thus was the
rich duchy of Normandy lost, yt which had continued in thenglishmennes
possession.xxx. years by the conquest of King Henry the fifth. In the which
duchy were a hundred strong tounes and fortresses, hable to be kept and holden,
beside them which were destroyed by the wars, and in the same was one
Archebishopricke, and six bishoprics. Some say, that the Englishemen were
not of puyssaunce, either to man the tounes as they should beeor to inhabit
the country, which was the cause, that they could not, keep it: according to
the Frenchemennes Adage, which says: A man cannot long hold that, which he
cannot gripe. Other say, that the duke o^ Somerset, for his own peculier
profit, kept not half his nombre of ^ouldiors, and put their wages in his
purse. These be men's imaginacions and conjectures, but surely the loss of
it, was the domestical division within the realm every great man desiryng,
rather to be revenged on his foo at home, then on his outward enemy, as you
now shall manifestly se and perceive.

The.xxviii. year. The.xxviii. year.

FOR while these conquestes were obtained in the parts beyond the sea, with
sword spear, and target, by the adversaries of the Englishmen, three
mischeuous capitaines, set the people of the Realm (as well of the nobility,
as of the mean sort) in a civil war and intestine division: For among the
high Princes and peers, reigned inward grudge: among the Clergy, adulacion,
and among the commonaltie, disdain of lascivious souereigntie which the Queen
with her minions, and unprofitable counsailers daily took and usurped upon
them. Wherefore they (not myndyng to be more charged, then their backs would
bear, and perceiuyng that by the negligent provision, and improuident policy
of the wit wantyng governors within the realm, the affairs and business in
the parts beyond the sea, daily decayed and more were like to do, if other
pollitique rulers were put in authority, and the negligent officers,
sequestered and deposed,) began to make exclamacion against the Duke of
Suffolk, affirming him, to be the only cause of the delivery of Angeow and
Main, the chief procurer of the death, of the good duke of Gloucester, the
very occasion of the loss of Normandy, the most swallower up and consumer of
the Kings treasure, (by reason whereof, the wars in France were not
maintained,) the expeller from the king, of al good and verteous counsailors,
and the brynger in and auauncer of vicious persons, common enemies and
apparaunt adversaries to the public wealth: So that the duke was called in
every man's mouth, a traitor, a murderer, a robber of the kings treasure, and
worthy to be put to most cruel punishment. By reason of this exclamacio^,
the Queen somewhat fearyng the destruction of the Duke, but more the confusion
of her self, caused the Parliament, before begone at the black Friars in
London, to be adiorned to Leicester, thinkyng there, by force and rigor of ye
law, to subdue and repress all the malice and evil will, conceived against
the Duke and her: at which place few of the nobility would appear, wherefore
it was again adiorned to Westminster, where was a whole company and a full
apparaunce. In the which session, the commons of the neither house, put up to
the King, and the Lords, many articles of treason, misprision and
misdemeanoure, against the duke of Suffolk: theffect whereof with his
aunsweres, hereafter ensues.

FIRST they alleged, that he had traitorously excited, provoked,

ITEM, that thesaied duke, being of the kings privy and nere cou^saill,

ITEM, that before the departure of thesaied duke of Orleaunce, the

These three articles, hedenied either for fact or thought.

FARTHER it was alleged, that he being Ambassador ^or the King of England, to
Charles calling himself the French King, promise^ to Reyner king of Scicile,
and to Charles Dangiers his brother, enemies to the king, the relese of Angeow,
with the deliverance of the County of Main, and the city of Maunt or Mauns,
without the knowledge of the other Ambassadors, which him accompanied: which
promise, after his return, he caused to be performed, to the kings
disenheritance, and loss irrecuperable, and to the s^rength of his enemies and
feblishement of the Duchy of Normandy.

To this article he answered, that his commission was to conclude, and do all
things according to his discresion, for the obteinyng of a peace, and because
without delivery of those countries, he perceived that truce could not be
obtained, he agreed, to the relese and deliverance of them.

ALSO they surmised, that thesaied duke, being in France in the kings
service, and one of the priuiest of his counsel there, traitorously, declared
and opened to the capitaines and conduyters of war, apperteinyng to the
kings enemies, the kings counsel, purueiaunce of his armies, furniture of
his tounes, and all other ordinances, whereby the kings enemies, (informed by
his traiterous informacion) have gotten tounes and fortresses, and the King by
that mean, deprived of his inheritance.

ITEM, thesaid duke declared to the Earl of Dumoys, to the Lord Presigny, and
Willyam Cosynet, Ambassadors for the French king, liyng in London, the
priuities of the kings counsel, both for the provision of farther war,
and also for defense of the Duchy of Normandy: by the disclosyng whereof, the
Frenchmen knowing the kings secrets, prevented the time, and obtained their
purpose.

ITEM that the said Duke, at such time as the King sent Ambassadors to the
French King, for the entreatyng of peace, traitorously before there coming to
the French court, certified king Charles of their commission, authority,
and Instructions, by reason whereof, neither peace nor amity succeeded, and the
Kings enheritau^ce lost, and by his enemies possessed.

ITEM the same Duke said openly in the star chamber, before the lords of the
Counsel, that he had as high a place in the cou^sail house of the French
King, as he had there, and was as well trusted there as here, and could remove
from the French King, the priuiest man of his counsayl, if he would.

ITEM when armies have been prepared, and souldyers ready waged, to pass over
the sea, to resist the Kings enemies: Thesayd Duke corrupted by rewards of
the French King, has restreyned and stayed the said armies to pass any
farther.

ITEM the said Duke being Ambassador for the King, comprised not in the
leage, as the kings Alies, neither the king of Arragon, neither the duke of
Brytayne, but suffered them to be comprised on the contrary party, by reason
whereof, the old amity of the king of Arragon, is estraunged from this realm,
and the duke of Britayne become enemy to the same: and Giles his brother the
Kings suer friend, cast in strong prison, and their like to end and finishe
his days.

AL these objections he utterly denied, or fayntely avoided, but not fully
excused. Diverse other crimes were laid to his charge, as, enrychyng himself
with the Kings goods and lands, gatheryng together, and making a money polde
of offices, fees, wards, and fermes, by reason whereof, the Kings estate was
greatly mynished and decayed, and he and his kyn highly exalted, and enriched,
with many other points, which, by cause they be not notable, nor of no great
force or strength I omit and ouerpasse. The Queen, which entierly loved the
Duke, fearyng that some co^mocion and trouble might rise, if he were let goo
unpunished, caused him to be committed to the Tower, where he was kept with as
much pleasure, as he that was at large, and out of all captivity. But after
that a month was expired, she ymagenynge the people to be pacified with this
open emprysonement, caused him both to be delivered, and also to be restored
to the Kings favor and grace, as much as ever he was before that time. But
this doing incensed the furye of the mutable commons, much more then before:
openly demouncyng, and saying, that it was a shame to all the Realm, to se such
a person, infected with so many misdedes, either to rule about a prince or be
had in honor. Of these words sprang deeds, and of this talkyng, rose
displeasure, which had grown to great mischief, if pollitique provision had
not, with all celeritie resisted the first fury: for the commons in sundry
places of the realm assembled together, gathered great companyes, and elected
a Capitayn, whom they called, blew berd: but or they had attempted any
enterprise, their headdes were apprehended and so the members suddenly were
dispersed, without any hurt committed, or perpetrated.

AFTER this little rage was assuaged, the Parliament was adiornied to Leycester,
whither came the King and the Queen in great estate and with them the Duke of
Suffolk, as chief counsailor. The co^mo^s of the lower house, not forgettyng
their old grudge: beseched the king, that such persons, as assented to the
relese of Angeow, and deliverance of Main, might be extremely punished, and
tormented: and to be priuye to this fact, they accused, as principal, the duke
of Suffolk, with Ihon bishop of Salisbury, and sir James Fynies, lord Say, and
diverse other. When king Henry perceived, that the commons were thus stomacked
and bent, against the Queen's dearlynge William Duke of Suffolk, he plainly
saw, that neither glosyng would serve, nor dissimulacion could appeace, the
continual clamor of the importunate commons: Wherefore to begin a short
pacificacion in so long a broyle. First he sequestered the lord Say, being
threasorer of England, and other the Dukes adherentes, from there offices, and
authority, and after banished and put in exile the duke of Suffolk, as the
abhorred tode, and common noysaunce of the Realm of England, for the term
of.v. years: meaning by this exile, to appeace the furious rage of ye
outrageous people, and that pacified, to reuocate him into his old estate, as
the Queen's chief friend and counsailer. But fortune would not, that this
flagitious person, should so escape: for when he shipped in Suffolk,
entendynge to be transported into France, he was enco^tered with a ship of
war apperteynyng to the duke of Excester, William de la poole, duke o^
Suffolk behedded.
the Constable of the Tower of London, called the Nicholas of the Tower. The
captain of the same bark with small fight, entered into the dukes ship, and
perceyuyng his person present, brought him to Dover Rode, and there on the one
side of a cock bote* caused his head to be stryken of, and left his body with
the head upon the sands of Dover, which corse was there found by a
chapelayne of his, and conveyed to Wyngfelde college in Suffolk, and there
buried. This end had William de la pole, first duke of Suffolk, as men judge,
by Gods punyshme^t: for above all things he was noted to be the very organ,
engine, and diuiser of the destruction of Hu^frey the good duke of Gloucester,
and so the bloudde of the Innocente man was with his dolorous death,
recompensed and punished. But the death of this froward person, and ungracious
patron, brought not the Realm quyete, nor delivered it from all inward grudge,
and intestine division, which to all Realms is more pestiferous and noisome,
then outward war, daily famyne, or extreme pestilence. For allthough Rychard
duke of York, was in prison, (as the kings deputy) in ye realm of Irelande,
continually resyaunt there, yet his breath puffed, and his wind blew daily, in
many parts of the Realm. For many of the nobility, and more of the mean
estate, wisely ponderynge the estate and condition of the Realm, perceiving
more loss then increase, more ruin then auancement, daily to ensue:
Remembryng also that France was conquered, and Normandy was gained, by the
French people in short space, thought with them selfs and imagened, that the
fault of all these miserable chances, happened, either because the King was
not the true enheritor to the crown, or that he or his counsel were not able
of wit, policy, and circumspeccion, to rule and govern so noble a Realm, or
so famous a region. Upon this conjecture the friends, kinsmen and alyes of the
duke of York, which were of no small number, began to practice the governance
of his title: Infusyng and puttyng into men's heads secretly his right to ye
crown, his pollitique governance, his gentle behauior, to all the Iryshe
nation, affirming, that he which had brought that rude and savage nation, to
civil fashion, and English vrbanitie, would, (if he once ruled in the Realm
of England) depose evil counsaillers, correct evil judges, and reform al
matters amiss, and vname^ded. And to set open the fludde gates of these
devises, it was thought necessary, to cause some great com^ocio^ and rysyng of
people to be made against the King: so that if they prevailed, then had the
duke of York and his accomplices, there appetite and desire. And because the
Kentishmen be impacient in wrongs, disdayning of to much oppression, and ever
desirous of new chaung, and new fangelnes. The, ouerture of this matter was put
furthe first in Kent, and to thentent that it should not be known, that the
duke of York or his fre^des were the cause of the sudden rising: A certain
yongma^ of a goodely stature, and pregnaunt wit, was entised to take upon him
the name of Ihon Mortymer, all though his name were Ihon Cade, and not for a
small policy, thinking that by that surname, the line and lynage of the
assistente house of the earl of March, which were no small number, should be
to him both adherent, and favorable. This capitayn not only suborned by
techers, but also enforced by pryuye scholemasters, assembled together a great
company of talle personages: assuring them, that their attempt was both
honorable to God and the king, and also profitable to the common wealth,
promisyng them, that if either by force or policy, they might once take the
king, the Queen, and other their counsaillers, in to their hands and
governance, that they would honorabl^e entreat the king, and so sharply
handle his counsaillers, that neither fiftenes should hereafter be demanded,
nor once any imposicions, or tax, should be spoken of. These persuasions, with
many other fair promises of liberty, (which the common people more affect
and desire, rather then reasonable obedience, and due conformitte) so animated
the Kentishe people, that they with their captain above named, in good order
of battle (not in great number) came to the plain of Blackehethe, between
Eldham and Grenewyche. And to the intent that the cause of this glorious
capitaines coming thither, might be shadowed from the king and his counsel,
he sent to him an humble supplicacion, with loving words, but with malicious
intent: affirmyng his coming, not to be against him, but against diverse of his
co^nsail, lovers of them selfs, and oppressers of the pore commonaltie,
flatterers to the king and enemies to his honor, suckers of his purse, and
robbers of his subjects, perciall to their friends, and extreme to their
enemies, for rewards corrupted, and for indifferency, nothing doing. This
proud byll, was both of the king, and his counsel, disdainfully taken, and
thereupon great consultacion had, and after long debating, it was concluded,
that such proud rebels, should rather be suppressed and tamed, with
violence and force, then with fair words or amycable answer:

Whereupon the king assembled a great army, and marched toward the^, which had
lain on Blackeheath, by the space of.vij. days. The subtle capitayn named
Jack Cade, entendyng to bring the king farther, within the compass of his net,
brake up his Camp, and retired backwarde to the town of Seuenocke in Kent,
and there exspectynge his pray, encamped him self, and made his abode. The
Queen, which bare the rule, being of his retrayte well advertised, sent sir
Humfrey Stafford knight, and William his brother with many other gentelmen, to
follow the chase of the Kentishmen, thinking that they had fled, but verily,
they were desceyued: for at the first skyrmish, both the Staffordes were
slain, and all their company shamfully discomfited. The kings army, being
at this time come to Blackeheathe, hearing of this discomfiture, began to
grudge and murmr amongst them self: some wisshing the duke of York at
home, to aid the captain his cosyne: some desiryng the overthrow of the king
and his counsel: other openly cryeng out on the Queen, and her accomplices.
This rumor openly spoken, and co^moly published, caused the king, and certain
of his counsel, not led by favor, nor corrupted by rewards (to the intent
to appeace the furious rage of the inconstant multitude) to commit the lord
Say, Threasorer of England, to the Tower of London: and if other, against
whom, like displeasure was borne had been present, they had likewise ben
served. But it was necessary that one should suffer, rather then all the
nobility then should perish. When the Kentish capitayn, or ye covetous Cade,
had thus obtained victory, and slain the two valeaunt Staffordes, he
apparreled him self in their rych armure, and so with pomp and glory
returned again toward London: in which retrayte diverse idle and vacabonde
persons, resorted to him from Sussex and Surrey, and from other parts to a
great number. Thus this glorious Capitayn, compassed about, and environed with
a multitude of evil rude and rusticall persons, came again to the plain of
Blackeheath, and there strongly encamped him self: to whom were sent by the
king, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Humfrey duke of Buckyngham, to common
with him of his greues and requests. These lords found him sober in
communicacion, wise in disputyng, arrogant in heart, and styfe in his opinion,
and by no ways possible, to be persuaded to dissolve his army, except the
king in person would come to him, and assent to all things, which he should
require. These lords, perceyuyng the wilful pertinacy, and manifest contumacie
of this rebellious Iauelyn, departed to the king, declaring to him, his
temerarious and rasshe words, and presumptuous requests. The king somewhat
hearing, and more markyng the sayings of this outrageous losel, and having
daily report of the concurse and access of people, which continually resorted
to him, doubtyng as much his familiar servants, as his unknown subjects
(which spared not to speak, that the capitaynes cause, was profitable for the
common wealth) departed in all haste to the castle of Kylyngworthe in
Warwyckeshyre, leaving only behynd him ye lord Scales, to keep the Tower of
London. The capitayn being advertised of the kings absence, came first into
Southwarke, and there lodged at the white heart, prohibity^g to all men, Murder,
Rape, or Robbery: by which color he allured to him the hearts of the common
people. But after that he entered into London, and cut the ropes of the draw
bridge, strykyng his sword on London stone, saying: now is Mortymer lord of
this city, and rode in every street like a lordly Capitayn. And after a
flatteryng declaracion made to the Mayre of the city of his thither coming,
he departed again in to Southwarke. And upon the third day of Iulij, he
caused sir James Fynes lord Say, and Threasorer of England, to be brought to
the Gylde halle of London, and there to be arrayned: which being before the
kings justices put to answer, desired to be tried by his peers, for the
longer delay of his life. The lord Say, threasorer of England, behedded at
the sta^dard in ^h^ape.
The Captain perceiuyng his dilatorie ple, by force took him from the
officers, and brought him to the standard in Cheap, and there before his
confession ended, caused his head to be cut of, and pitched it on a high
poole, which was openly borne before him through the streets. And this cruel
tyrant not content with the murder of the lord Say, went to Mile end, and
there apprehended sir James Cromer, then shreue of Kent, and son in law to
the said lord Say, and him without confession or excuse heard, caused there
likewise to be hedded, and his head to be fixed on a poole, and with these two
heddes, this blody butcher entered into the city again, and in despyte caused
them in every street, kiss to gether, to the great detestacion of all the
beholders.

AFTER this shameful murder, succeeded open rapyn and manifest robbery in
diverse houses, within the city, and in especial in the house of Philip
Malpas, Alderman of London, and diverse other: over and beside raunsonyng, and
fynyng of diverse notable merchants, for the tuycio^ and security of their
lyfes and goods, as Robert Horn alderman, which paid.v.C. marks, and yet
neither he, nor no other person was either of life or substance in a suertie or
sauegard. He also put to execucion in Southwarke diverse persons, some for
infryngyng his rules and precepts, because he would be seen indifferent, other
he tormented of his old acquayntance, lest they should blase and declare his
base birth, and lowsy lynage, disparagyng him from his usurped surname of
Mortymer, for the which, he thought and doubted not, both to have friends and
fautors, both in London, Kent, and Essex. The wise Mayre, and sage magistrates
of the city of London, perceyuyng the^ selfs, neither to be sure of goods
nor of life well warranted, determined with fear to repel and expulse this
mischeuous head, and his ungracious company. And because the lord Scales was
ordained keeper of ye Tower of London, with Matthew Gough, the often named
captain in Normandy, (as you have hard before) they purposed to make them
pryuye both of their intent and enterprise. The lord Scales promised the^ his
aid, with shoting of ordinance, and Matthew Goughe was by him appointed, to
assist the Mayre and the Londoners: because he was both of manhood, and
experience greatly renoumed and noysed. So y^ Capitaynes of the city
appointed, took upon them in the night to keep the bridge of London,
prohibiting the Kentishme^, either to pass or approach. The rebels, which
never soundly slepte, for fear of sudden chances, hearing the bridge to be
kept and manned, ran with great haste to open that passage, where between
both parts was a ferce and cruel encounter. Matthew Gough, more expert in
marcial feats, then the other cheuetaynes of the city, perceiuyng the
Kentishmen, better to stand to their taclyng, then his imaginacion expected,
advised his company no further to proceed, toward Southwarke, till the day
appeared: to the intent, that the citezens hearing where the place of the
ieopardye rested, might occur their enemies, and releue their friends and
companions. But this counsel came to small effect: for the multitude of ye
rebels drove the citezens from the stoulpes at the bridge foot, to the draw
bridge, and began to set fire in diverse houses. Alas what sorrow it was to
behold that miserable chance: for some desyringe to eschew the fire, lept on
his enemies weapon, and so died: fearful women with children in their arms,
amassed and appalled, lept into the river: other doubtinge how to save them self
between fire, water, and swourd, were in their houses suffocat and smoldered.
Yet the Capitayns nothing regarding these chances, fought on the draw bridge
all the night valeauntly, but in conclusion, the rebels gate the draw
bridge, and drowned many, and ^^ew Ihon Sutton alderman, and Robert Heysande a
hardy citizen, with many other, beside Matthew Gough, a man of great wit, much
experience in feats of chivalry, the which in continual wars, had
valeauntly served the king, and his father, in the parts beyond the sea (as
before ye have heard). But it is often seen, that he, which many times has
vanqueshed his enemies in strau^g countries, and returned again as a conqueror,
has of his own nation afterward been shamfully murdered, and brought to
confusion. This hard and sore conflict endured on the bridge, til.ix. of the
clock in the morninge, in doutfull chance, and fortunes balaunce: for some
time the Lo^doners were bet back to the stulpes at saint Magnes corner, and
suddenly again the rebels were repulsed and driven back, to the stulpes in
Southwarke, so that both parts, being faynte, weary and fatigate, agreed to
desist from fight, and to leave battle til the next day, upon condition: y^
neither Londoners should pass into Southwarke, nor the Kentishme^ in to London.

AFTER this abstinence of war agreed, the lusty Kentishe Captain, hopyng on
more friends, brake up the gayles of the Kings benche and Marshalsea, and set
at liberty, a swarm of galla^tes, both mete for his service and apt for his
enterprise. The Archbishop of Canterbury, being then Chauncelor of England,
and for his suerty lyenge in the Tower of London, called to him the Bishop of
Winchester, which also for fear, lurked at Halywell. These two prelates seeing
the fury of the Kentish people, by reason of their betyng back, to be mitigate
and minished, passed the river of Thamyse from the Tower, into Souhtwarke,
bringing with them under the kings great seal, a general pardon unto all the
offenders: which they caused to be openly proclaimed and published. Lord how
glad the poor people were of this Pardone (ye more then of the great Iubile of
Rome) and how they accepted the same, in so much that the whole multitude,
without biddyng farewell to their capitain, retired the same night, every man to
his own home, as men amassed, and strike^ with fear. But Ihon Cade desperate
of succors, which by the friends of the duke of York were to him promised, and
seeing his company thus without his knowledge suddenly depart, mistrustyng the
sequel of ye matter, departed secretly in habit disguysed, into Sussex: but
all his metamorphosis or transfiguracion, little prevailed. For after a
Proclamacion made, that whosoever could apprehende thesaied Iac Cade, should
have for his pain, a.M. marks, many sought for him, but few espied him, til
one Alexander Iden, esquire of Kent, found him in a garden, and there in his
defense, manfully slew the cai^ife Cade, and The miserable end of Iac^e cade.
brought his ded body to London, whose head was set on London bridge. This is
the success of all rebels, and this fortune chances ever to traitors. For
where men strive against the stream, their bote never comes to his pretensed
port.

AFTER this commocion, the king himself came into Kent, and there sat in
judgment upon the offenders, and if he had not mitigated his justice, with
mercy and compassion, more then five.C. by the rigor of his law, had been
justly put to execucion: but he considered, both their fragilitie and
innocence, and how they with perverse people, were seduced and deceived: and
so punished the stubburne heddes, and delivered the ignorant and miserable
people, to the great reioysyng of all his subjects.

DVRYNG this commocion about London, Raufe bishop of Salisbury, was by his
own tenantes, and servants, murdered at Edyngton, and so from thensefurth
daily succeeded, murder, slaughter, and discencion.

The.xxix. year
THese variable chances in England, The.xxix. year
were not unknown to the French king, wherefore, he making foundation upon the
English discord, determined to get into his possession, the duchy of
Acquitayne, while the princes of England, were in controversy, for their
titles and superiority: and therefore like a spedy puruior, which slacketh not
time, he sent therles of Ponthieure, and Perigot, with many valiant capitaines,
to ley siege to the town of Bergerac set upon the river of Dordone, of which
town was capitain, Iho^ Geddyng, which hearing of the yeldyng of Roen, and
conquest of Normandy, considering the puyssaunce of the French army, upon
reasonable condicio^s, rendered the town: yet all this notwithstanding, the
lord Cameyse, sir George Seymour, sir Ihon Arundell, and other valiant
capitaines, which had the governance of the country, manned tounes gathered
people, and animated the cold stomachs of the fearful Gascons: requiryng
them to be constant in their fidelity, true to their natural prince and
undoubted sovereign lord, sendyng daily letters to the king of England and
his counsel, declaryng to him the weakness of his subjects, and the strength
of his enemies, assertenyng him for a suertie, that without spedy aid, and
ready succors, the whole country were like to be gotten from his possession.
Many letters were sent, and many fair aunswers were brought, but relief neither
appeared, nor one man of war was thither shipped. By reason whereof, the
Gascoyns perceiuyng their enemies at hand, intendyng as well to destroy the
country, as to subdue the people, began every man for himself, to regard
nothing, but the saving of their tounes, goods, and corn: neglectyng defense,
and fearful of assaults, least by small resistance, they might receive more
detriment, then after they could recover again, either with great force, or
much labor. But thenglishmen, (whose natures are not to be faint hearted, even
at the very ieoperdy of death) with all their wits studied, both how to
repulse and convince their enemies, and to turn away the evil chances which
they saw likely, (if policy did not help) suddenly to fall, and shortly to
ensue. But al their pollices little prevailed in conclusion, because succors
failed, and force wanted: For afther the Frenchemen, had the town of Bergerac
to them rendered, the fortresses of Io^sac, of Bonefoy, and diverse other
places, willyngly and freely, yielded themselfes to the French subieccion.
During which time, (...) lord Doruall, third son to the lord Delabreth,
with a great number of men, as well on horssebacke as on foot, departed from
Basas, to conquer and destroy the isle of Madoce: whereof hearing the Maire of
Bordeaux, with a convenient crewe of men, issued out of the city, and
encontered with his enemies, between whom, was a hard fight and a dedly
battaill: but the Frenchemen, more with multitude, then with force, vanquished
thenglishemen, and killed and took prisoners, above.vj.C. Englishmen and
Gascoynes, but of the Frenchemen, which were in double number, above their
adversaries (as writers affirm) there were slain.viii.C. persons. For which
cause, the capitaines followed no farther the chase, lest the English people
would again return. This slaughter of the English part, the French writers
set furthe with the most, but of their own loss, they speak not one word.
Such indifferency, is in their Chronographiers. This discomfiture so amassed
the wits, and appalled the hearts of the mean Gascons that they offered many
tounes to the French part, before the same were of them demanded.

AFTER this, the Bastard of Orleaunce, earl of Dumoys, and Lo^guile,
lieuetenant general for the French king, accompanied with his brother, Ihon
earl of Angulesme, which had been long prisoner in England, and many valiant
capitaines, and expert men of war, besieged the Castle of Montguyon, which
to them was rendered. After this, the said army besieged the fortress of
Blay, standing on the river of Gyrond, which town is the very keye of the
port of Bordeaux, and this town was besieged both by water and by land, and
fiersly assaulted and manfully defended, and in conclusion by very force, for
lack of resistance, conquered and gained. The bastard of Kendall capitain of
the Castle, seeing the town lost, upon certain conditions, delivered his
^ortresse, into the possession of the lord lieuetenant. After this town gained
the fortresses of Bourge and Liburne yielded, not without five Wekes besiegyng.
The witty capitaines perc^iuyng fortunes favor toward them, thought it
necessary to take the time, while their good planet reigned. Wherefore, to
prevent the aid of the Englishmen, whom they daily expected to come to the
succor of their people: they appointed four armies, to make war in four
several parts. The lord Charles Dellebreth, accompainied with Ihon lord of
Tartas and Aymon, lord of Doruall his sons, and therle of Foys, and the
Uiscount Lawtrec his brother, and many noble men of Guyen, laid siege to the
town of Acques, in the which be diverse ho^e bathes. Therle of Arminack
extreme enemy to the realm of England, for breakyng the marriage concluded
between king Henry and his daughter (as before you have heard) ^esiged with a
great puyssaunce, the strong town of Ryon. Therle o^ Po^thyeure, with many
noble barons, besieged the town of Chastis^on in Perigot, and the earl of
Dumoys, environed with a great puyssance the town of Fronsacke. Thenglishemen
within this town, perceiuyng the great ordinance on the French part, and
the small provision on their side, couenanted with thesaid earl, that if the
town were not succored, and the Frenchemen foughten with all, before the feast
of the nativity, of.s. Iho^ Baptist next ensuyng, that then the town of
Fronsacke should be yielded to them, which was the stro^gest fortress of all
the country, and the very key of Guyen, and chief chamber of Bordeaux: and for
per^ormans hereof, pledges were delivered, and writings autentique sealed. This
agreement once blown through the country, the city of Bordeaux, and al other
tounes, (except Bayon) made like agreement, and delivered pledges. So did all the
noble men and ge^tlemen, which were subjects and vassals to the croune of
England. Alack alack, every day was lokyng for relief, and every hour was
gapyng for comfort, but wisshyng served not, nor hopyng nothing helped: for the
pestiferous division, which reigned in England, so ^ueglid the brains of the
noble men there, that the honor of the realm was clearly forgotten, and
nothing yearthly, but their private fantasies looked on and remembered. Now to
conclude, the day appointed came, but succor looked for, came not: so that all
the tounes in Acquitayne (except Bayon) delivered their keys, and became
vassals to the French nation, yet the citezens of Bordeaux hopyng of rescous,
offered themselfes to fight with the Frenchmen, and desired a day of battaill
to be appointed, which request was to them granted. But at the day
assigned, they being in dispa^re of all refuge and succor, rendered themselfes
and the town, to their adversaries, their life's and goods reserved, with
license and saf^conduyte to all persons which would depart and sail into
England. When the cities and tounes of Gascoyne were set in good order, the
Earl of Dumoys and Foys, with great preparacion of vitaill, municion and men,
came before the cite of Bayon, where with mines and battery, they so dismayed
the fearful inhabitants, that neither the capitain nor the soldiers, could
keep them from yeldyng: so by force they delivered the town, and their
capitain as a prisoner, offered a great some of money for the safeguard of their
life's and goods. Beside these agrementes taken with tounes, diverse noble men
made several composicions, as Gaston de Foys, Capdaw of Buessz, whom king
Henry the fifth, made earl of Longuile and knight of the garter, whose
ancestors were ever true to England, which agreed that he, and Ihon de Foys
his son, whom king Henry the sixth, created earl of Kendale, and made also
knight of ye garter, should enjoy all their lands in Acquitayne, given to them
by the kings of England, or by the Dukes of Acquitayn. And because their
intent was still to serve the King of England, their sovereign Lord, they
agreed, to deliver into the custody of therle of Foys, their cosyn, the son
and heir of thesaied earl of Kendale, being of the age of three years, to the
intent, that if he at his full age, denied to become subject and vassaill to
the French king, or before that time disceased, that then, after the death of
his father and graundfather, all thesaid lands should wholly remain, to the
next heir of their blood, either male or female, being under the obeisance of
the French king, or his heirs. Many noble men, whose hearts were good
English, made like composicions, and some came into England, and other went
to Caleis, and were great officers there: as the Lord Duras which was Marshall
there, and Monsire Uanclere, which was there deputy, under therle of Warwick,
(as after shall be showed.) Now have I declared to you, the loss of France,
Normandy, and Acquitayn: wherefore, having no more cause yet to speak of them,
I will return to the great trouble, discencion and division, which long was
cloked, and now openly set abroad, and burst out in the realm of England.

The.xxx. year.
YOU have heard before, The.xxx. yer^.
how the duke of York, as heir to Lionell Duke of Clarence, pretended
privily, a title to the Croune, and how his friends commoned secretly, with
diverse persons of that matter, and excited them to set forward, and auaunce
that part to the vttermoste: and how thesaied duke was sent into Ireland,
where he was daily advertised by his assured friends, of all things done in
England, and by the^ knew in what estate he stood, both with the nobility,
and co^monaltie. Wherefore, he mindyng no le^ger to dream in his weighty
matter, nor to keep secret his right and title, returned out of Irelande, and
came to London in the parliament time, where he deliberately consulted, with
his especial friends: as Ihon Duke of Norffolke, Richard Earl of Salisbury, and
Lord Richard his son, which after was Earl of Warwick, Thomas Courtney,
earl of Devonshire, and Edward Broke, lord Cobham a man of a great wit and
much experience: requiryng them, both of advise and counsel, how he might
without spot of treason, or color of usurpation, set forth his title, and
obtein his right.

AFTER long consultacion, it was thought expedient, first to seek some occasion
and pick some querell, to the duke of Somerset, which ruled the king, ordered
the realm, and most might do with the queen: Whom, the commons, for the loss
of Normandy, worse then a Tode or Scorpion, hated, disdained and execrated, in
so much that diverse evil ruled persons, brake his house, and spoiled his
goods, within the black Friars of the city of London: which malefactors,
according to their deserts, were justly executed and punished. For well knew
the duke of York and his adherentes, that if the Duke of Somerset saw or
smelled, any point of their purposed enterprise, that he would with spear and
sheld, with might and main, withstand and repel the same, to thextreme point of
death, and to their utter confusion. Wherefore to abridge his power, and to
minishe his authority, they determined to bring him, into the hatred of the
people, and into the disdain of the nobility. And to be the stronger in the
setting forth of their feate, they, what with rewards and fair promises, and
what with declaracion of great enormities, committed by the kings counsailors,
against the common wealth, allected and allured to them, lu^ty bachelars, and
active persons, of a great number, protestyng and declaring, that they neither
meant evil, nor thought harm, either to the kings person, or to his dignity:
but that their intent was, for the revenging of great injuries done to the
public wealth, and to persecute and reform diverse rulers about the king,
which daily contrary to right and equity, vexed and pilled thenglish people,
without reason or measure: so ye no man was in surety, either of his own
goods, or suer of his proper lands or possessions. These great enormities,
they caused to be published, to the intent ye their chief purpose should not be
espied, or perceived.

WHEN the duke of York had thus framed thentery into his long intended
journey, he with help of his friends, assembled a great army in the Marches of
Wales, publishyng openly, that the cause of his mocio^ was for the public
wealth of the realm, and great profit of the commons: which fair told
tale, allured to him much people, as well of the chiualry as of the mean sort.
The king much astonnied with this sudden commocion, by the advice of his
counsel, raised a great host, and marched forward toward the duke: but he
being of his approach, credibly advertised, by his espials, diuerted from the
kings ways, and took his journey toward London: and having knowledge, that he
might not be suffered with his army, to pass through London, he crossed over
the Thamese at Kyngston bridge, and so set forth toward Kent, where he knew
that he had both friends and good willers, and there, on burnt Heath, a mile
from Dertford, and.x. miles from London, he embattailed himself, and encamped
his army very strongly, both with trenches and artilery. The king being thereof
advertised, with great diligence, brought his army to black Heath, and there
pight his te^tes. While both tharmies lay thus embattailed, the king by
thaduise of his counsel, sent the bishops of Winchester and E^ie to the
duke* both to know, what was the cause of so great a tumult and commocion,
and also to make a concord, if the requests of the duke and his company, seemed
to them consonant to reason, or profitable to the people. The duke hearing ye
message of the two bishops, either doubtyng the variable chance of mortal
battaill, or lokyng for a better occasion, or a more luckey day, answered the
prelates, that his coming was neither to dampnifie the king, neither in honor,
nor in person, nor yet any good man, but his intent was to remove from him,
certain evil disposed persons of his counsel, which were the bludsuckers of
the nobility, the pollers of the clergy, and oppressors of the poor people:
amongst who^ he chiefly named, Edmond duke of Somerset, whom if the king would
commit to ward, to answer to such articles, as against him should in open
parliament, be both proponed and proved, he promised not only to dissolve his
army and dispatche his people, but also offered himself, like an obedient
subject, to come to the kings presence, and to do him true and faithful
service, according to his truth and bounden duty. When the messengers were
returned with this reasonable answer: The king perceiuyng, that without great
bludshed, he could not bridle the duke of York, nor without war he could not
appeace, the furious rage of the common people, being once set on fire, except
he followed their minds, and granted their requests, caused the duke of
Somerset, to be committed to ward, as some say: or to keep himself priuye in
his own house, as other write, till the fury of the people were somewhat
assuaged and pacified. Which thing done, the duke of York the first day of
March, dissolved his army, and brake up his camp, and came to the kings
tent, where beside his expectacio^, and contrary to the promise made by the
king, he found the duke of Somerset, set at large and at liberty, whom the
duke of York boldly accused, of treason, of bribery, oppression, and many
other crimes. The duke of Somerset not only made answer to the dukes
obieccions, but also accused him of high treason, toward the king his
sovereign lord: affirming, that he with his fautors and accomplices, had
consulted together how to obtein the croune and scepter of the realm. By mean
of which words, the king removed straight to London, and the duke of York as
a prisoner, rode before him, and so was kept a while. The king assembled
together a great counsel at Westminster, to here the accusacio^s of the ij.
dukes, the one obiectyng to the other, facinorous acts, and detestable crimes.
But the duke of Somerset, which now conceived in his mind the thing that
shortly followed, incessantly exhorted the counsel, that the Duke of York,
by compulsion, or otherwise, might be compelled to confess his offense, and
so being attainted of treason, to be put to execucion, and his children to be
taken enemies and adversaries to their native country: to the intent that by
the loss of this only Prince and his sequel, all civil war, and inward
division might cease and be repressed: besechyng almighty God, that so great
an enemy to the king and his blood, might never escape punishment, nor
continewe long in life. The duke of Somerset set ^^rth this matter the more
vehemently, because he knew perfitely, that the duke of York daily studied,
how to get the crown, and obteyn the governance, and to depose and destroy
both the king and him. But the necessity of destineye, can not by any man's
devise, be either let or interrupted: for many things (to common
judgments) declared the duke of Yorkes trought and innoce^cye in this case.
First his free and voluntary coming to the king, when he with his power was
able to encounter with the kings puyssance, which was an open token* and
manifest argument, that he neither mea^te treason, nor yet fraud. Secondarily,
his humble submission, his reasonable requests, and profitable peticions, for
the pore commons, were judged no points of a man, that desired souereignetie,
or rule above other which things he did only for a cautele, (as afterward
openly appeared). While the cou^sail treated of saving or losing of this
dolorous duke of York, A rumor sprange throughout London, that Edward earl of
March, son and heir apparaunt to the said duke, a young prince of great with
and much stomach, accompanied with a strong army of Marchemen, was coming
toward London, which tidinges sore appalled the Queen and the whole counsel.
Beside this, the same very day came Ambassadors from the heads and
Magistrates of the city of Bordeaux, whereof the chief were, the earl of
Kendal, and the lord Lesparre, which signified to the counsel, that if they
would send an army into Gascoyne, the Gascoyns would reuerte and turn
again to the English part: aduertising them, that there was (...) those parts
no puissaunce or garrison of French men, to withstand them, and therefore
there was no doubt of the regay^ing or reco^quest: requyring the^ with all
dilligent celeritie, to take so fair a prey so openly to them offered, and to
mind nothing before the regayning of so fruictful a country. These.ij. things
sore troubled the heads of the kings counsel, which, lest this discencion
between two persons, might be the let of outward conquest, set the duke of
York at liberty, and permitted him to return to his fair Castle of Wignore,
in the Marches of Wales, where he studied, both how to displease his enemies,
and to obteyn his purpose: And so by means of ye abse^ce of ye duke of York,
which was in manner banished ye court and y^ kings presence, ye duke of
Somerset rose up in high favor with y^ king and ye queen, and his word only
ruled, and his voice was only heard.

The.xxxi. year.
THe counsel of England, not forgettinge the offer of the Gascons, The.xxxi.
year.
and that they might now have the city of Bordeaux with the country round
about, by offer and request, which with great charge and long war, they
could scant again recover or repossesse, appointed the veterane soldier, and
valiant Capitayn, Ihon lord Talbot, and earl of Shrewsburye, to be chefetayn
of the army, which should in all haste be transported and conucyed into
Acquitayn. The lords of Gascoyn, both well pleased and glad of their answer,
returned into their country, in as secret manner, as they from thense departed,
declaringe to their nation, the Capitaines, and the power, that was to the^
coming: exhorting every man to be firm and stable to the king of England and
his heyrs, under whose liberty and fredom, they had prospered and reioysed,
above.iii.C. years, rather then now to fall into the French captivity; whose
taxes were unreasonable, and whose daily exaccions were to them importable.
When the valiant Talbot, the hardy earl of Shrewsbury was appointed to assemble
an army of men, and them to co^uey into the duchy of Acquitayn, Lord, how busy
he was in mustering, how dilligent in setting forward, and how ientelly he
entertained his men of war, as though he went first to war, and never had
taken pain, either to serve his price or to gayn honor. What should I speak,
how that he thought every hour, as three, till his army were ready, or write,
what pain he took to se them shipped and vitayled. But verily men judge, that
as this labor was the end and extreme point of all his worldly busynes so he
should show him self: fearce, coragious, and fearful to his enemies in the
extreme point of his death and natural departing. This English Hector and
marcial flower, elected to him, the most hardy and coragious persons, which he
could espy, preparing also, horses, municions vitayles, and all things
necessary to such an army, and to so great an enterprise. When all things
were shipped, and wynd and wether served he took his chance, and sailed into
Gascoyn, where without resiste^ce, he peaceabl^ arrived in ye Isle of Madre,
where he reposed his army, being scant.iij.M. men, and destroyed all the
country, between Bordeaux and Blay, and took the strong town and castle of
Fronsac, and diverse other towns and fortresses. The inhabitau^tes of Bordeaux,
hearing of the earls Arriual, sent to him messengers in the dark night,
tha^king and congratulating him for his thither coming, and also requiryng him
to accelerate, and speed his journey toward their city, enformyng him, that
now the time was propice for his purpose: and time not taken, was labor
misspent. This ancient Fox, and pollitique Captain lost not one hour, nor
spared one mynet, till he came before the city of Bordeaux. The citezens glad
of his coming, made not the French capitayns, which had the governance of
the town, either parties or priuies of their intent: yet some of them would,
that the Frenchmen, in security both of life's and goods, should depart out
of y^ town but their will was no will: for the multitude, abhorryng the French
servitude and embracing the English liberty, which they and their au^cestors
of many years and tasted, opened one gate, and let in a great part of the
Englishmen army. The French Capitaynes entending to escape secretly, by a
posterne, were slain and taken by the lord Lespar, and other of the English
army. After the regaynyng of Bordeaux, arrived at Blay, the bastard of
Somerset, sir Ihon Talbot, lord Lisle, by his wife son to the said earl of
Shrewesbury, the lord Molyns, the lords Haryngton and Cameus, sir Ihon Haward,
sir Ihon Montgomerye, sir Ihon Uernon with.xxii.C. me^ with vitailes and
municio^s. When the earl of Shrewesbury was thus according to his intent of all
things furnished and adorned: first he fortified Bordeaux with Englishmen and
victayle: after that, he rode into the country abroad, where he obtained
cities, and gat towns without stroke or de^t of swourde* for the poor and
nedy people being fatigate, and weary with the oppressio of their new landlordes
rendered their towns before they were of them required, and beside this the
towns and cities far distauncte from Bordeaux sent messengers to the earl,
promisyng to him both service and obeysaunce. And emonge other the town and
castle of Chastillon in Perigotte, was to him delivered by the Frenchmen upon
co^posicion, that they might with their life's sauely depart: which town, the
earl strongly fortified both with men and ordinance. The French king lyeng at
Towers in Towrayne, being of the earls acts in Gascoyn credible informed, was
not a little exasperate and quickened: wherefore he mynding to resist the first
storm, and repulse the first surge, assembled a great army to the number
of.xxii.M. men, and enteringe into Acquitayne came to Lusigneum, and from
thence accompanied with the earl of Ponthyure, the lords of saint Severe and
Boucat, marched toward Caleys in Gascoyn, and with fair promises obtained the
town. And after that town gained, the French king divided his army into two
parties, whereof the one was governed by the earl of Cleremont, son in law to
king Charles, and heir to the duke of Burdon, in the which were.xv.M. men, in
whom consisted the wayght and peyse of the whole enterprise. This army he
appointed to take the next way toward Bordeaux: the other army whereof he was
Capitayn and leadar him self, accompaned with the peers and noble men of his
realm, he kept and retained still beside Caleys, and sent the two Marshals of
France with.xviii.C men of arms, beside archers, to besege the town of
Chastylon in Perigot, and in going thither, they gat a fortress, which they
manned, and so departed to Chastilone, which they enuyroned with a strong
seage, and cast high trenches, and made deep dytches on every side: and in a
place where their enemies must come, they laid ordinance both great and
small, whereof so great a number was never before seen in France. The earl of
Shrewesbury hearing of these news, and perceiving that he must of necessity
encounter, and fight with two armies, determined with him self, first to assay
the least power and weeker puyssaunce: wherefore without longer procrastinacion,
he assembled together.viii.C. horsemen, whereof the lord Lis^e his son, the
lord Molyns, the lord Cameus, sir Edward Hull, sir Ihon Haward, and sir Ihon
Uerno^ were chief, and so marched forward toward Chastylon, appoyntyng.v.M.
footmen under the conduyte of the earl of Kendalle, and the lord Lespar to
follow him with all speed. In his way he assauted y^ Tower, which the Frenchmen
had taken, and by force entered, and slew all that he found within and by the
way he met^.v.C. Frenchmen, going a forragyng, of whom he slew the greatest
part, and chaced the other to the camp. The French men knowing by these good
ru^ners away of ye earls approchyng, with all diligence left the seage, and
retired in good order, into the place which they had tre^ched, dytched, and
fortefied with ordenaunce. They within the town seeing the seage removed, sent
out word to the Englishmen that the Frenchmen fled. The coragious earl
hearing these news and feryng, lest through long taryeng the birds might be
flowen away, not tarieng till his fo^eme^ were come, set forward, toward his
enemies, which were in mind surely to have fled, as they confessed afterward,
if the fear of the French kings rebuke, which was not far of, had not
caused them to tarry, and yet in this army were present the Marshals and great
Master of France, the earl of Po^thyeure, the Senescal of Poythiew, the lord
Bessire, and many valiant Barons and Knights. When the Englishmen were come to
the place where the Frenchmen were encamped, in the which (as Eneas Siluius
testifies) were.iii.C. pieces of brass, beside diverse other small pieces, and
subtle Engynes to the Englishmen unknown, and nothing suspected, they lyghted
al on foot, the earl of Shrewesbury only except, which because of his age, rode
on a little hakeney, and fought fiercely with the Fre^chme^, and gat thentre of
their camp, and by fine force entered into the same. This co^flicte continued
in doutfull judgment of victory.ii. long hours: during which fight, the
lords of Montamban and Humadayre, with a great company of Frenchmen entered
the battle, and began a new field, and suddenly the Gonners perceiving the
Englishmen to approach nere, discharged their ordinance, and slew.iii.C.
persons, nere to the earl, who perceiving the imminent ieopardy, and subtle
labirynth, in the which he and his people were enclosed and illaqueate,
despicynge his own sauegarde, and desiryng the life of his entierly and
well-beloved son the lord Lisle, willed, advertised, and counsailled him to
depart out of the field, and to save him self. But when the son had
au^swered that it was neither honest nor natural for him, to leave his father in
the extreme ieopardye of his life, and that he would taste of that draught,
which his father and Parent should assay and begin: The noble earl and
comfortable capitayn said to him: Oh son son, I thy father, which only
has been the terror and scourge of the French people so many years, which has
subverted so many towns, and profligate and discomfited so many of them in
open battle, and marcial conflict, neither ca^ here dye, for the honor of my
country, without great laud and perpetual fame, nor fly or depart without
perpetual shame and co^tinualle infamy. But because this is thy first journey
and enterprise, neither thy flyeng shall redounde to thy shame, nor thy death
to thy glory: for as hardy a man wisely flies, as a temerarious person
folishely abidethe, therefore y^ fleyng of me shall be ye dishonor, not only of me
and my progeny, but also a discomfiture of all my company: thy departure shall
save thy life, and make the able another time, if I be slain to revenge my
death and to do honor to thy Prince, and profyt to his Realm. But nature so
wrought in the son, that neither desire of life, nor thought of security,
could withdraw or pluck him from his natural father: Who co^sideryng the
constancy of his child, and the great danger that they stood in, comforted his
soldiers, cheared his Capitayns, and valeau^tly set on his enemies, and slew
of them more in number then he had in his company. But his enemies having a
greater company of men, and more abu^daunce of ordinance then before had been
seen in a battle, first shot him through the thyghe with a ha^dgo^ne, and
slew his horse, and cowardly killed him, lyenge on the ground, whom they
never durst look in the face, while he stood on his fete, and with him, there
dyed manfully his son the lord Lis^e, his bastard son Henry Talbot, and sir
Edward Hull, elect to the noble order of the Gartier, and.xxx. valiant
personages of the English nation, and the lord Molyns was there taken prisoner
with.lx. other. The residew of the English people fled to Bordeaux and other
places, whereof in the flight, were slain above a.M. persons. At this battayl
of Chastillon, fought the.xiij. day of Iulij, in this year, ended his life Ihon
lord Talbot, and of his progeny ye first earl of Shrewesbury, after that he
with much fame, more glory, and most victory had for his prince and
country, by the space of.xxiiij. years and more, valeantly made war, and
served the king in the parts beyond the sea, whose corpse was left on the
ground, and after was found by his friends, and conveyed to Whitchurch in
Shropshyre, where it is intumulate. This man was to the French people, a very
scorge and a daily terror, in so much that as his person was fearful, and
terrible to his adversaries present: so his name and fame was spiteful and
dreadful to the common people absent, in so much that women in France to
fear their young children, would cry, the Talbot comes, the Talbot comes.
After this discomfiture, diverse lords fled to Bordeaux, but the earl of
Kendall, the lords of Montferrant, of Rosayne, and of Dangladas, entered into
the Castle of Chastillon, which they by the space of.x. days manfully
defended, but in conclusion being desperate of all succors, re^dered the
fortress, and came safe to Bordeaux. After this town was yielded the towns of
saint Million, Bybourne and all other, which the earl of Shrewesbury had
conquered, rendered the^ selfs to the French obeysaunce, Bordeaux only
except. The which city being the last refuge, and only consolacion of the
English people in Gascoyne, the French king in person with all his puissaunce,
strongly beseged and daily assauted, in the which he more lost then gained:
beside this, the English men issued out, and coragiously fought with their
enemies: likewise did the citizens, which lokyng for no favor at the French
kings hand, because of their late coniuracion against him, manfully defended
them selfs, and sore noyed and hurt their enemies. But in conclusion both
garrisons and the inhabita^tes, oppressed with much penurye and extreme tamyne
were coacted to render the city upon reasonable conditions, to them by the
French king sent and oblated: the effect whereof was that no offense, before
time committed or done by any of the citeze^s should hereafter be imputed, or
leyd to the charge of any of them. Also that all Englishmen and Gascons might
safely depart into England or to Caleys with all their substance, and that the
lords Lespar, Duras and xxx. other, should never upon pain of death be found
within any of the French kings dominions, which lord Lesparre after being
taken, disguysed in Gascoyn was made shorter by the hedde. When this
composicion was agreed and sealed, the Englishmen had their ships and al
things necessary for their journey, to them delivered, which, when wynd and
whether were to them propice and convenient, were shortly transported into
England, in the month of October this present year. Thus was the duchye of
Acquytayn, which had co^tynued in the English possession, from the year of our
Lord.M.lv. which is.iii.C. and od years, by ye marriage of Alienor, daughter and
heyr to William duke of Aequitayn wife to king Henry the second, finally
reduced, and brought again to the French obedience and servitude. The keeping
of which duchye was neither costly nor troblesome to the realm of England,
but both pleasant and profitable: for by the soueraingtie of that country,
young gentelmen learned the experience of war, and expert me^ were promoted
to many rich offices, and great, liuinges within the same. For within that
only Duchye, be.iiij. A declaration of the digni^ies in the D^chye of
Acquitay^^.
Archebishoppes.xxxiiij. Bishops.xv. erledo^s ii.C. and.ii. Baron^es, and
above a.M. Capitaynshippes and baylywyckes. All though this great loss
chanced, this year to the English nation, yet a greater detryment happened in
the same season to the whole flock of Christen people. For Machumet, called the
great Turk beseaged the city of Consta^tynople in Greece, with an innumerable
number of Turks, and fiftye days together gave to it a continual assaut, and
on the.iiii. day of June, The w^nnig of Constantinople by the great Turk.
took it perforce, sleyng man, woman and children, except the Emperor
Palialogus, and diverse other of the blood Royal, whom he took prisoners, and
after caused them to be behedded. If I should write the detestable murder of
men, the abominable and cruel slaughter of children, the shameful rauishme^t
of women and virgyns, which were perpetrate and done by the unmerciful pagans
and cruel Turks, I assure you that your ears would abhor y^ hearing and
our eyes would not abide the reading, and therefore I pass the^ over. The
birth of prince Edward, son to king Henry the.vi.
In this trobleous season on y^.xiii. day of October, was ye queen delivered
at Westmynster of a fair son, which was Christened and named Edward, and
after grew to a goodely and perfight man, as after you shall hear: whose
mother sustained not a little slander and obloquye of the common people, saying
that the king was not able to get a child, and that this was not his son,
with many slanderous words, to the queen's dishonor, which here need not to
be rehearsed. After the birthe of this child, The Kings two brethren created
earls.
the King highly auaunced his two brethren, on his mothers side. For Edmond he
created earl of Richemo^d, which was father to king Henry the.vij. and Jasper
he created earl of Penbroke, which died without issue.

The.xxxii. year.
WHen foren war and outward battles, The.xxxii. year.
were brought to an end and final conclusion: domestical discord and civil
discencion began again to renew and arise, within the realm of England: for
when the care of outward hostility (which kept the minds of the Princes in
the realm occupied, and in exercise) was taken away and vanished, desire of
souereigntie, and ambicion of preemine^ce, suddenly sprang out so far, that
the whole Realm was divided into two several faccions, and private parts.
For king Henry, descended of the house of Lancastre, claymyng the croune from
king Henry the.iiii. his graund father, first aucthor of this division: and
Richard duke of York, as heir to Lionell, the third son to king Edward the
third: wresteled for the game, and strove for the wager. By reason whereof, the
nobles as well as the common people, were into parts divided, to the
destruction of many a man, and to the great ruin and decay of this region. For
while the one part studied to vanquishe and suppress the other, all common
wealth was set a side, and justice and equity was clearly exiled. For the duke
of York, which sore gaped and more thirsted for the superiority and
preeminence, studied, divised, and practiced al ways and means, by the which
he might attein to his prete^sed purpose, and long hoped desire. And amongst
all imaginacio^s, one seemed most necessary for his purpose, which yet again
was to stir and provoke the malice of all the people, against the Duke of
Somerset, who only ruled the King, and ordered all things at his pleasure and
will: Imaginyng, that he being made out of the way, his purpose should shortly
come to a good conclusion. Wherefore, to the nobles of the realm he complained,
lamented, and detested, the miserable state and daily ruin, of this noble
country: notyng and affirmyng, the Duke of Somerset, to be the very root and
cause of the same, whom he named and called, an unjust man, a mischeuous
person, a tyrannical governor, and a coueteous cou^sailor: laiyng also great
offenses to king Henry, saying, that he was a man, neither of wit nor stomach,
neither mete to be a king, nor apt to govern a common wealth, and therefore it
was the duty of the noble men, and great Princes, not only to think on this
weighty matter, but spedely to provide a remedy, and to set the Realm in
another stay. By which complaints and persuasions, the duke of York, so
altered the minds of many persons of high estate, that they liked not the
world, as it then wauered, nor approved thactes of the king or his cou^sail.
And because, that ambicion and avarice, was newly entered into their hearts,
they studied, suddenly to change al things, and to turn the world
vpsetdoune. When the duke saw me^nes appetites, and felt well their minds, he
chiefly enterteined two Richardes, and both Neuelles, the one of Salisbury,
the other of Warwick being earl, the first the father, the second the son.
This earl of Salisbury, was second son to Raufe Neuell, earl of
Westmerlande, whose daughter the duke of York had married, and thesaid Richard
was espoused to Lady Alice, the only child and sole heir of Thomas Montacute
earl of Salisbury, slain at the siege of Orleaunce, (as before I have declared)
of which woman he enge^dered, Richard, Ihon, and George. Richard the eldest
son espoused Anne, the suster and heir of the entire blood, to lord Henry
Beauchamp Earl, and after duke of Warwick, in whose right and title, he was
created and named Earl of Warwick, and not by his own progeny or parentage.
This Richard was not only a man of marvelous qualities, and facundious
facions, but also from his youth, by a certain practice or natural
inclinacion, so set them forward, with witty and gentle demeanor, to all
persons of high and of low degree, that among all sorts of people, he
obtained great love, much favor, and more credence: which things daily more
increased, by his abundant liberality, and plentiful house keeping, then by
his riches, authority, or high parentage: by reason of which doings, he was
in such favor and estimacion, amongst the common people, that they judged him
able to do all things, and that without him, nothing to be well done. For
which causes his authority, shortly so fast increased, that which way he
bowed, that way ran the stream, and what part he auaunced, that side gat
the superiority.

The.xxxiii. year.
When the duke of York had fastened his chain, The.xxxiii. year.
between these two strong and robustious pillars, he with his friends, so
seriously wrought, and so pollitiquely handled his business, that the Duke of
Somerset, was arrested in the Queen's great chamber, and sent to the toure of
London, where he without great solempnitie, kept a dol^full Christmas: against
whom in open parliament, were laid diverse and heinous articles of high
treason, as well for the loss of Normandy, as for the late mischance, which
happened in Guyen. The king at this time was sick at Clarendon, and so
conveyed to London, by reason whereof, no final determinacion proceeded, in this
great and weighty cause, but it was put in suspense, til the next assemble of
the high court of parliament. During which time, the king either of his own
mind, or by the Queen's procurement, caused the duke of Somerset, to be set at
liberty: by which doing, grew great envy and displeasure, between the king
and diverse of his lords, and in especial between the duke of York, and the
kings lineage. And to aggrauate more the malice new begone, the Queen, which
then ruled the roast and bare the whole rule, caused the duke of Somerset, to
be preferred to the capitainship of Calice, where with, not only the commons
but also many of the nobility, were greatly grieved and offended, saying: that
he had lost Normandy, and so would he do Calice. The duke of York and his
adherentes perceiuyng, that neither exhortacion served, nor accuseme^t
prevailed against the duke of Somerset, determined to revenge their querell,
and obtein their purpose, by open war and marciall adventure, and no longer
to sleep, in so weighty a business. So he being in the Marches of Wales,
associate with his especial friends, the earls of Salisbury and Warwick, the
lord Cobha^, and other, assembled an army, and gathered a great power, and
like warlike persons, marched toward London. The Londoners, hearing of so
great a multitude, coming toward their city, were greatly astonnied and much
abashed: for every person considered his own part, that either with holdyng
with the one side, or being contrariant to the other, or medelyng with no part
he should incur indignacion or displeasure. The king being credebly informed,
of the great army coming toward him, assembled an host, intendyng to mete
with the duke in the North part, because he had to many friends about the
city of London, and for that cause, with great speed and small luck, he
being accompanied, with the Dukes of Somerset, and Buckyngham, therles of
Stafford, Northumberlande, and Wilshire, with the lord Clifford, and diverse
other barons, departed out of Westminster, the.xx. day of May, toward the
tonne of S. Albons: of whose doings, the duke of York being advertised, by
his espials, with all his power costed the countries, and came to the same
town, the third day next ensuyng. The king hearing of their approchyng, sent
to him messengers, straightly chargyng and commaundyng him, as an obedient
subject, to keep the peace, and not as an enemy to his natural country, to
murdre and slay his own countremen and propre nacio^. While king Henry, more
desirous of peace then of war, was sendyng furthe his orators, at the one
end of the town: the earl of Warwick with the Marchemen, The first ba^taill
at ^ain^^. Albons.
entered at the other end of the town, and fiersly set on the kings
foreward, and them shortly dicomfited. Then came the duke of Somerset, and all
the other lords with the kings power, which fought a sore and a cruel
battaill, in the which, many a tall man lost his life: but the duke of York
sent ever freshemen, to succor the weary, and put new men in the places of the
hurt persons, by which only policy, the kings army was profligate and
dispersed, and all the chieftaines of the feld almost slain and brought to
confusion. For there died under the sign of the Castle, Edmond duke of
Somerset, who long before was warned to eschew all Castles, and beside him, lay
Henry the second earl of Northumberlande, Hu^frey earl of Stafforde, son to
the duke of Buckyngham, Ihon lord Clifford, and.viij.M. men and more. Humfrey
duke of Buckyngham, being wounded, and James Butler earl of Wilshire and
Ormond, seeing fortunes loweryng chance, left the king post a lone and with a
great number fled away. This was thend of the first battaill at ^. Albons,
which was fought on the Thursdaie, before the feast of Pentecost, being
the.xxiij. day of May. In this.xxxiij. year of the Kings reign, the bodies
of the noble men, were buried in the Monastery, and the mean people in other
places. This Edmond duke of Somerset, left behind him three sons, Henry,
Edmonde, and Ihon, which to the extremity of death, took part with the line
of king Henry.

AFTER this victory obtained, by the Duke of York and his compaignions, he
remembered, that often times he had declared and diuulged abroad, the only
cause of his war to be, for thauauncement of the public wealth, and to set
the Realm in a more commodious estate, and a better condition. Wherefore, he
vsyng all lenity, mercy, and bounteousnes, would not once touch or apprehend
the body of king Henry, who^ he might both have slain, and utterly destroyed,
considering, that he had him in his ward and governance. But with great honor
and due reverence, conveyed him to London, and so to Westminster, to which
place was somoned and appointed, a great assemble of the three estates, commonly
called a Parliament, which began the.ix. day of July, in the which session,
the Duke of Gloucester, was openly declared a true Prince, both to the king
and the realm. Beside this, it was enacted, that no person, should either
judge or report, any point of untruth, of the duke of York, the earls of
Salisbury and Warwick, for coming in warlike manner, against the king at. S.
Albons, considering, that their attempt and enterprise, was only to se the
kings person, in safeguard and suer keeping, and to put and aliene from him,
the public oppressors of the common wealth: by whose misgouernaunce, his life
might be in hasard, and his authority hang in a very small thread. In which
Parliament also, the duke of York was made protector of the Realm, and therle
of Salisbury, was appointed to be Chauncellor, and had the great seal to him
delivered: and the earl of Warwick, was elected to the office of the capitain
of Calice, and the territories of the same. As this devise was pollitiquely
invented, so was the sequel thereof to the first aucthors, both honorable
and profitable, if fortunes ship had sailed al one way. For by this practice,
the whole rule and regiment of the whole Realm, consisted only in the heddes
and orders, of the duke and the Chauncellor, and all the Warlike affairs and
business, rested principally in the earl of Warwick, and so amongst them, it
was agreed, that king Henry should still reign, in name and dignity, but
neither in deed, nor in authority: not myndyng either to depose or destroy
thesaid king, least they might suddenly provoke and stir the fury and ire of
the common people against them: which for his holiness of life, and abundant
clemency, was of the simple sort, much favored, and highly esteemed. After
which authority given, these three persons ruled the realm, and did all
things after their own discrecions, (which without battaill or manslaughter,
might have easily deprived thesaied King, both of life and land). And first
they amoued from the privy counsel, all such persons as the king loved, or
the queen favored, puttyng in their places, men of their sect and
confederacy, and changyng officers throughout the realm, at their will and
disposicion: so that tholde spoken proverb, here took place: New Lords, new
laws: such lips, such lettice. And yet in all their rule, I find no
mention made, of differryng Justice, or of their pollyng, or their bribery, as
was openly proved by such as governed before their time: Saving that they took
out of the sainctuary of Westminster, Ihon Holland, duke of Excester, being
repugnant to the order taken and concluded, in the last parliament, and
conveyed him to Poumfret castle. Which taking out, was accounted an execrable
and a dampnable offense, of diverse of the spirituality, and especially of the
Abbot of Westminster and his Monks, and this is the most spot that was (as I
could read) ever most to be cast in the Dukes fame, during his Protectorship,
or of his counsel.

The.xxxiiii. year.
BUT that vene^ous worm, The.xxxiiii. year.
that dreadful dragon, called disdain of superiority, which has consumed
the blood of so many noble princes, and destroyed the lineage of so many
governors, in all Realms and kingdoms, as well pagan as Christian, could not
abstein from incensyng the hearts of lord Hanry Beauford, newly come to the
Duchy of Somerset, by the death of duke Edmond his father, which at the
battaill of saint Albons, (as you have heard before rehearsed) lost his life,
and of Humfrey duke of Buckyngham, (whose son and heir named Humfrey, earl
of Stafford, tasted the same cup, at the forenamed conflict) and of other
lords and me^ of authority, favoring and following the part of king Henry,
which not only bewailed and had compassion of the unsure condition, and
waueryng estate of his rule and lordeship, perceiuyng openly, whereunto the
cloked ge^tlenes, and subornate fashion of the duke of York, tended and crept
up: but also thought it necessary and convenient, to puruey for a remedy, or
the mischief happened. Wherefore with open mouths and fierce corages, they came
to Queen Margaret, informyng her, that it was not honorable, but a reproach and
infamy to the King, to have one to be a Protector and governor of him and his
Realm, as who would say: that he was either a child, which had need of
norice, to feed him with pappe, or an innocent creature, which must be ruled
by a tutor, asserteinyng her farther, that the Duke of Yorkes only intent was,
under the color of this protectorship, suddenly to destroy and depose the
king, when he least thought of it, and therefore willed her in so quick a
mischief, to provide a hasty remedy, if she loved the safeguard of her husband,
or the tuicion of her self. The Queen having a wit, more then the common sort
of women have, and considering the estate of her husband, the condition of her
self, and the peril of her only son, thought it necessary, to pluck the
sword of authority, out of their hands, which under color of rulyng under
others, desired to be governors, and superiors theimselfes. Wherefore, a great
counsel was called at Grenewiche, where the duke of York, was discharged of
his Protectorship, and the earl of Salisbury also, was dismissed of his office:
which malicious mutacion amongst the nobility, caused sudden alteracions and
sedicious commocions, to spryng and arise in the commonaltie, and in especial,
within the city of London.

FOR a young Merchant, which before time had been in diverse citees within
the country of Italy, and there prohibited by the Magistrates and rulers, to
use or wear any weapon, either inuasiue or de^en sieve, challenged an Italian in
Chepe side, for wearyng of a dagger, confutyng him with the laws of his own
country, which, like a Colericke knave and presumpteous person, so
disdainfully and with such tau^tes and checkes, answered the merchant, that
he not willing to suffer to open a reporche, in so public a street, and that
of so proud a villain, took by force from him his dagger, and with the same, a
little cut his croune, and cracked his pate. This Italian in great have,
complained to the Mayer, of this offense, which at the next Court, holden at
the Guyldhaule, by the consent of the whole senate, sent for thoffendor, and
declaryng to him his crime, commanded him to ward, whereof diverse other light
marchantes within the city, sore abhorryng the Italian nation, for lickyng the
fat from their beardes, and taking from them their accustomed living, by reason
that thesaid estrau^gers imported and transported, into and out of this realm,
all such marchandises, commodities, and necessaries, as thenglishemen only
were accustomed to do, assembled together in great plumpes, and by force
compelled the Maire to deliver the prisoner out of newgate: and yet this
multitude, with this doing nothing saciate nor appeased, like mad persons and
frantique fools, ran to the several houses, of diverse Uenecians, Lucases,
and Florentynes, and them spoiled, robbed and riffled, without reason or
measure. The Maire perceiuyng this great enormitie, assembled a great number
of substanciall and grave citezens, which, not without great bloodshed, and
maymyng of sundery persons, finally appeased their rage, and caused the people
to depart to their houses. The beginner of this temerarious commocion, and
sudden uproar, either persuaded by his friends, or fearyng his chance, which
for his first fact might suddenly ensue, departed to Westminster, and there
Registered himself as a sa^ctuary man. The Queen which ruled all things,
hearing of this great riote and unlawful misdemeanour, sent the Dukes of
Excester and Buckyngham, accompanied with many other noble men, to London, with
a commission of oyer and determiner, for the punishment of this outrageous
offense and sedicious crime. When the Maire of the city the two dukes, and the
two chief justices, were set in the Guyldhaule for the performance of their
commission, and began to call the empanelles, for thenquiry, as the use and
order is, diverse light witted, and less brained persons of ye city, privily
armed the^, and by ye ringing of bow bell thought to assemble together a great
multitude of their mi^d and opinion, and so by force and might to take from the
kepers, all such prisoners, as were before apprehended, for y^ late committed
robbery and riot, as they were going to their trial or arreigme^t. But this
great tumult and sudden fury, was by discrete and sage citizens, a little and
little appeased and finally quenched, but in the mean season, the dukes and
other commissioners, being untruely advertised, ye they were in ieopardy of
their life's, suddenly departed from the Guyldhaule, and left their inquyrie for
y^ day. The Mayre on y^ next day perceiuyng how the grudge rose, called a
common counsel, whereof ye number was.j.C.iiij. score and od persons, and by
authority of the same ordained, that all Wardeins of mysteries, should assemble
their fellowship in their particular hawles, where they should* exhort the^ to ye
obseruacion of the kings peace, and keeping of good order within the city: and
if they espied any man, either prone or ready to reyse a rumor or desirous of
ye delyueraunce of such as were accused, and in captive custody, that their
names should be secretly written, and covertly delivered to the lord Mayre:
which pollitique doing, finally ended the entragious doing of the insolent
people, after which appeasyng ye commisioners returned to y^ Guyldhaule, where
many of the robbers were attainted, and after co^dignely put to execucion,
beside diverse great fynes and rau^somes paid, which were set upon many
merchauntes, for winkyng at these doings or assentyng to the same.

The.xxxv. year.
THE French nation, hearing of this domestical division and civil dissencion,
the.xxxv. year.
within the Realm of England, much desyring to be revenged of old
displeasures and great damages, which they had so many years born and
sustained by the English people, appointed two Nauyes to invade and depopulate
the towns and ports, adioynyng to the ryuage of the sea. The capitayn of ye
one army, was William lord Pomiers, and of the other, sir Piers Bressy, a great
ruler in Normandy. These two Capitayns, when opportunity of wether served,
set up their sails at the mouth of Sayme, and there severed them selfs, the
one Westward, and the other Eastward, which was sir Peter de Bressy. This lusty
Capitai^ saylyng all the cost of Susseix and Kent, durst not once take land,
til he arrived in the downs, and there having by a certain espial, perfect
notice, that the town of Sandwyche was neither peopled nor fortefied, because
that a little before, the chief rulers of the town were from thence departed,
for to avoid the pestilenciall plage, which sore there infected and slew the
people, entered the haven, spoiled the town, and after such pore stuff as he
there found, ryfflyde and taken, he fearinge an assemble of the country,
shortly returned. The lord Pomiers likewise took his course Westward, and by
night bre^t certain houses in founay, and with a little pillage retired into
Britayn. These two adventures and fortunate chances, which to them in
comparison of their great expe^ses, in their journeys were scant worth one pore
myte, or single farthyng: The French writers dylate, setfurth and paynt with
pe^ne, as though they had gotten Cresus riches, and Alexanders kyngdoms:
forgettyng how many hundred thousand pounds, they had lost in few years
before precedynge, as to all men, being indifferent readers of this History,
plainly appears. But verily some bread is better to the hungry person, then no
bread, and a small gayn of him, which desires recovery, is a great pleasure,
and therefore the French aucthors make of a little much, and yet their much (all
things considered) is in effect nothing at all. The Scotts also not
degeneratyng from their old mutabilitie, nor alteryng their ancient
conditions from their accustomed perfidie and usual vntreught entered into
Northumberland, king James the second, then being there in person, and burned
small houses, and little cotages: but in the very mids of their great
enterprise, they hearing of the duke of York, marchyng toward the^, with a
great army, with much pain, and no gayn, in all haste reuerred to their
country. Let us pass over for a time all outward invasions, and return to
our awn domestical debate, and daily discord. First not forgettyng, that while
fore^ enemies invaded the outward parts, and extreme confynes of this
trobleous realm, a great conflict was attempted between the lord Egremond, and
the sons of the earls of Salisbury: in the which fray, many persons were
slain, and a greater number hurt. The lord Egremo^d, in this great tumult could
not escape, but by force was taken and brought before the kings cou^saill, and
there the king and the queen to show them selfs to al persons indifferent,
adjudged him to pay to y^ earl of Salysbury a great sum of money, and for his
heinous offense, done against the kings laws, he was committed to the gayle
of Newgate, within the city of London out of the which prison, by help of his
fautors, he secretly escaped, and suddenly departed, to the great vexacion of
the shryfes of London, at y^ tune being. In which season, the craft of Printyng
was first invented in the city of Men's in Germany, When and where the most
excellent science of Printinge was first invented.
to the great furtheraunce of all persons, desiryng knowledge or thyrstyng for
litterature. Queen Margarete, whose breath ruled, and whose word was obeyed
above the king and his counsel, within this Realm of England, entendyng the
destruction of the duke of York and his friends, which devise she thought not
mete to be practiced nere to the city of London, because she well perceived the
duke of York to be had in more estimacion emonge the citezens and co^munaltie,
then the king her husband or her awn person: caused the king to make a
progress into Warwyckeshyre, for his health and recreacion, and so with
Hawkyng and Hunting came to the city of Coue^trey, where were diverse ways
studied privily, to bring the queen to her hearts ease, and long expectate
desire: which was the death and destruccio^ of the duke of York, the earls of
Salesbury and Warwycke, And for the furniture of this matter, al these.iii.
noble me^ were sent for to Coue^tre, by the kings letters under his privy
seal, to which place the foresaid lords, suspectyng no treason, nor puttyng
diffide^ce in any creature, obediently resorted: but the serpent lurked under
the grass, and under sugered speech, was hide pestiferous poison, so that if
these noble men admonished by their friends, had not suddenly departed, their
lyfes threde had been broken, and their mortal fate had them ensued, but by
secret admonicion of their good willers (to whom no earthly treasure is
comparable) they avoided this net, and narowly escaped the snare, whereupon for
the security and tuycion of their life's, the duke of York departed to
Wygnore, in the Marches of Wales, the earl of Salisbury resorted to his fair
Castle of Middelham in the Northcouncrye, and the earl of Warwyke sailed to
the town of Caleys. Although the bodies of these noble personages, were by this
sedicious and fraudule^t means a sonder separated as ye have heard: yet their
hearts were knitte and coupled in one, never forgettyng, but daily studyeng,
both how to be revenged of the old dispites and malicious atte^ptes, against
them committed and imagened, and also how to compass their purposes, and to
get the superiority and ouerhand above their euilwillers, and apparent
enemies: for which causes, their letters never ceased, their messengers never
slept, nor their pursses were at no time shut, what for enentert ayning of old
friends, and obteyninge of new confederates, till king Henry and his alyes were
profligate, and expelled clearly out of the Realm, as after shall appear.

The.xxxvi.
BEcause you have been long troubled with readyng of diverse divisions,
The.xxxvi. year.
sedicions, operacions, and great disturbance within the Realm, among the
temporaltie, I will now a little digress from my continued purpose, to declare
to you an ouerthwarte judgment given among ye fathers of the spirituality,
against Reynold Pecocke, then bishop of Chichester. This man, somewhat learned,
but better stomacked, began to move questions, not privately, but openly in the
Uniuersities, concerning the annates, peterpens, and other iurisorccio^s and
aucthorities, apperteyning to the sea of Rome, Reynold Pecocke, bishop of
Chichester ab^ured at Paul^scrosse
and not only put forth the questions, but declared his mind and opinion in
the same: wherefore he was for this cause abiured at Paul's cross, and all his
books brent, and he him self kept in his own house, during his natural life.
Some say that his opinion was, that spiritual persons, by Gods law, ought to
have no temporal possessions. Other writ that he said, that personal tithes
were not dew by Gods law: but whatsoever the cause was, in such sort as before
I have declared, he was used. King Henry and his adherentes, perceiving that
the duke of York lay still, and made no open appearance, of assemble or
commocio^, returned to London, and there called a great cou^saill, openly
declaring, how the French king perceiving the realm of England implicate, and
troubled with civil dissencion, and mutual discord was not afeard to send his
admirals on the costs of Ke^t, and Deuonshyre, and there to spoil towns,
burn houses, and murder the English people: which cause also animated y^
Scotts to make Rodes and Incursions, into the confines and marches of the
Realm, to the great loss and detriment of the kings leage people: which two
na^ions were set continually to grieve and vex this his realm of England, till
they perceived a perfect concord, and an unfeigned amity to be concluded and
knitte together, between him and his co^sanguinitie, and the other sort of the
contrary part, and confederacy. And to the intent that he would be the chief
aucthor of peace, and principal styrrer of this virtuous concord, he promised
so gentelly to entertayne the duke of York, and his fautors, y^ all old
grudges being not only inwardly forgotten, but also outwardly forgyuen, should
be the cause of perpetual love, between them and their friends: of which
concord should ensue, familiarity among the lords, and concord among the
commons, which to all utter enemies should be an inward grudge, The de^ise*
for the (...) and unity of the Realm.
and to this realm a great glory and profit. This devise was of al men
present well taken and adjudged, both honorable to the king, and profitable to
his realm. Whereupon diverse grave and sad persons were sent to the duke of
York and all other the great estates of the realm, which sins the battle of
saint Albons never met, came, nor co^moned together, commaundynge them for
reasonable causes, and great consideracions, to resort to the kings palayce,
without procrastinacio^ or delay. At this commandment came to London, Richard
duke of York, and Richard, earl of Salisbury, acco^panyed with a great number
of meigniall servants and friends, lest peradventure they for lack of aid,
might have been betrapped, or they had knowledge, or were warnyd. After the^
came from Caleys to London, the earl of Warwycke, whose seruituers were
apparreled in read cotes, embroudered with white ragged stafes. These.iij.
lords were lodged within the city: the duke at Baynardes castle, the earl of
Salis^ury, at the Herber, and the earl of Warwyke at his place, beside the
Graye friars. About the same season, with no less company of me^ came to the
city, the young duke of Somerset, the earl of Northumberland, and the lord
Clyfford, whose fathers were slain at saint Albo^s: and after them resorted
the dukes of Excester, and Buckingham, the lord Egremond, and most all the
nobility of this realm. The duke of York and his mates, were lodged within
the city, and the duke of Somerset, The mortal hatered between y^.ii. lignages
of La^caster ^ York
and all his friends, soiourned without Templebarre, Holborne and other places
of the suburbs: as who said, that as the Jews disdayned the company of the
Samaritans, so the Lancastria^s abhorred the familiarity of Yorkysh lynage.
After the coming of these lords to the city, the King, the Queen with all
their family, shortly followed, and were lodged in the Bishops palayce of
London. These lords had such great companyes, attendyng on them (for one
had.v.C. other v.C. and diverse.iiii.C. persons in a band) that continual
watch was kept by the Mayre and senate of London, as well by day as by night,
for the preseruacio^ of the peace, and co^tinuau^ce of good order. The lords,
which lodged within the city, kept a daily counsel at the Black friars,
within the city. The other part soiornyng without ye walls, assembled
likewise in the chapter house of Westminster. Thus every part both studied his
awn profitte and aduau^cement, and also how to reue^g things done to them, by
their foes and adversaries. But the Archebisshop of Canterbury, and other
virtuous prelates, so exhorted, applied, and persuaded both the pa^ties
(although a great while they wre neither heard, nor regarded) that in
conclusion, they brought them to a communicacion, where after long altercacion,
as well of old Injuries, and of new displeasures, by the one faccion, against
the other committed, ye fear of outward hostility, and foren invasion, so
mollified their inducate hearts, that they outwardly promising, to forget all
old rancors, and ancient displeasures, sealed and signed writings, the one
ever after to^ be friend to the other, and all together to be obedient to the
King, and favorers to his fre^des and enemies to his enemies. This concord was
so joyful to the superiors, and so embraced of the common people (who ever
bear the burden, when princes be at controversy) that for the open
apparaunce, and demonstracion of this godly concord, public processions were
appointed, A general procession at Paul's, by y^ king, and the peers of the
Realm.
to be sole^pnely celebrate, within the Cathedral church of saint Paul in
the city of London, on the day of the Concepcion of our Lady, in the month of
March. At which solemn feast, the King in habit royal, and his dyademe on
his hedde, kept his estate in procession, before whom, went hand in hand, the
duke of Somerset, the earl of Salisbury, the duke of Excester, and ye earl of
Warwyke, and so on of the one faccion, and another of the other sect, and
behynd the king the duke of york led the Queen with great familiarity to
all men's sightes: but woe worth dissimulacion, and false flatteryng contenaunce:
fie on doble entendement, and cloked adulacion, which has been the common
seruituers in all palacies, both Imperial and Regal, and by their only
pestiferous venime, and secret malice, has been the destruction of many a
noble man, and the confusion of a great number of true meaning, and faithful
persons. But the Wiseman, which says: w^ be thou that have a doble heart,
meant, that diss^^ulacio^ once espied should be the arrow wherewith the
dissembler should be wounded. As by this cloked pageant, and diss^nuling
procession, hereafter shall plainly be declared. For their bodies were joined
by hand in hand* whose hearts were far a sonder: their mouths lovingly
smiled, whose corages were infla^med with malice: their toungues spoke like
sugar, and their thoughts were all inuenemed: but all these diss^^ulinge
persons, tasted the vessel of woo, as the Wyseman said: and few or none of
this company were vnblotted, or vndest^oied by this ^^lorous drink of
diss^^ulacio^. But this cancard worm, and pestife^^us (...)* not only at this
tym^ reigned in England, but also did much harm in the court of France:
for Ihon duke of Ala^son, which before had been prisoner, and well enterteyned
in the realm of England, and after Capitayn general of the wars in France
against the Englishmen, highly favored, and of great estimacion in the French
kings house, was by such as he most trusted and used most familiarity with al,
and whom he had greatly promoted, and highly exalted, accused of high treason,
as enemy to his king, and traitor to his country, alledgyng that he long
before y^ time had conspired with the Englishmen, to cause them once again to
recover the duchye of Normandy: whereupon by the order of the law, he there
suffered death very unjustly, Ihon duke of Alanson, executed i^ France.
as diverse aucthors affirm, whereof one says: that kings sekyng treason,
shall find land, and the denial of a princes desire, was the invented
destruction of the innocent Naboth. Well let us now leave the cloked collusion,
that remained in France, and return to the open dissimulacion, which now
appeared in England.

The.xxxvii. year.
AS fire being enclosed in a strayte place, The.xxxvii. year.
will by force utter his fla^me, and as the course of water astricted and let
will flow and brust out in continuance of time: so this ca^card crocodryle,
and subtle serpent, could not long lurk in malicious hearts, nor venomous
stomachs, but in conclusion she must (according to her nature) appear and
show her self. For after this apparent concord, and intrinsecall discord,
according to the very nature of dissimulacion, diverse noble men of birth, but
not stable of word, putting from them honor, trought and honesty forgot their
oath, and brake their promise, and advanced forth the banner of displeasure,
and the flagge of malice. So a man may set, hat such persons, regard neither
their own peculiar profit, nor the public wealth of their native country,
nor yet pass of an oath, or promise brekyng, to whom discord is pleasant, and
discension is delectable. For not long after this dissimuled amity, a certain
fray, either by chance, or of a thing prepensed, was made upon a yoman of the
earls of Warwyke, by a seruiteur of the kings, in the which the Assaylant was
sore hurt, but ye earls man ^led. The kings meigniall servants, seeing their
fellow hurt, and the offender escaped, assembled in great number, and watched
the earl, returnyng from the counsel toward his barge, and suddenly set on
him the yomen with swourdes, and the Black guard, with spittes and fire forkes.
After long fight, and many of the earls men maymemed and wounded, by help of
his friends, he took a wherry, and so escaped to London: whom the Queen
incontinent commanded to be apprehended, and as a captive and prisoner, to be
sent to the Tower of London, where (if he had been then taken) he had shortly
ended his days, and made his end. By this unhappy fraye, and sodayn chau^che
of malice, there arose such daily and ^errible war, that every man was in
trouble, and no person was in quiet. For after this displeasure done to the
earl, and the queen's good mind toward him, by his secret friends privily
reveled, he with all diligence, took his journey to Warwick, and after into
Yorkshire, where he ^ounde the duke of York, and the earl of Salisbury,
declaryng to them, the assaute of the kings servants, and the pretensed
purpose of the fraudulent Queen. After which complaint made, he fearyng lest
by long absence, he might be deposed or defrauded of his capitainship of
Calice, with great speed embarked himself, and sailed thither, daily expectyng
and lokyng, what way the duke of York would take, for acheuyng his long
intended purpose. After whose departure, the duke of York and therle of
Salisbury, somewhat exasperate and moved with this doble dealyng, began to
grudge and murmr: affirmyng that in the Queen rested nothing, but fraud and
femmyne malice* which rulyng the king at her pleasure and will, studied nothing
so much, as the destruction of the nobility, and peers of the realm. After
long consultacion had, it was agreed, that the earl with a warlike company,
should march toward the king, and complain to him, both of the manifest
injury done to his son, and also of the unkind breach, of the sworn amity
and late agreement, in which suite, if he did preuail, he then should not omit
the occasion to him given, in reuengyng the displeasures to him done, by the
queen and her sinister counsailors, which evil and ungodly, ordered the
subjects of the whole Realm. After this devise made and concluded, therle of
Salisbury removed from Middelham castle, acco^painied with.iiii. or.v.M. men,
and took his way through Lancashire, and Shropshire, toward London. In the
mean season the queen, which was assisted and ruled, by the dukes of Somerset
and Buckyngha^* having the vigilant iye and circumspect brain, of a pollitique
governor: imagined that therle of Warwick had kindeled this fire, and begone
this tumult, to thentent (according to his pretensed purpose) to set the duke
of York in the siege royal, and high throne of the realm: For which causes,
she being a woman of no small wit, nor little pollecie, conceiuyng in her
opinion, that it was no bote to make any farther concord or league with her
adversaries, and hearing of therle of Salisburies setyng forward, with aco^pany
of armed of men and archers: assembled together a great counsel, to puruey a
remedy, for that imminent mischief, and (as in a multitude often times it
happeth, so many heddes so many wits) so diverse were in opinion, that neither
people nor weapon should be stirred, till the earl approached: doubtyng, whether
he came to demand war or peace, or to ask Justice, and reform wrong.
Other, otherwise thought, and were of a contrary opinion, making the foundacio^
of their argument, that the raisyng of people, and assemble of soldiers by
him, could signify no peace, nor treaty of concord: except a man should say,
that intreatyng for favor with naked sword in hand, were in humble submission
and a meke request: which only consideracion, moved them to say, y^ as force
with force, ought to be repelled, so he with a great power, or he came into
the midst of the realm, should of necessity be encountered and (if fortune
would serve) utterly destroyed. This sentence took place, and without delaie,
sir James Twichet lord Awdeley, because his seignorie and power lay in those
parts, where the earl should pass, was appointed to mete with him, and to
give him battaill, if he saw cause or place convenient, and the queen followed
after. The lord Audeley, according to his commission, assembled above x.M. men,
and knowing by his espials which way therle kept, approached nere to him on a
fair plain called Blore Heath, within a mile of the town of Drayton, in the
country of Salope, commonly called Shropshire. The earl perceiving by the
livery of the soldiers, that he was circumuented and likely to be trapped with
the queen's power, determined rather there ^o abide the adventure, with fame and
honor, then farther to fly, with loss and reproach: and so encamped himself
all the night, on the side of a little broke not very broad, but somewhat deep.
In the morning early, being the day of.s. Tecle, he caused his soldiers to
shote their flightes, toward the Lord Awdeleyes company, which lay on the
otherside of thesaied water, and then he and all his company, made a sign of
retraite. The lord Awdeley, remembryng not only the trust that he was put in,
but also the Queen's terrible commandment, (which was to bring to her
presence, therle of Salisbury, quick or ded) blewe up his trumpet, and did set
forth his voward, and suddenly passed the water. Therle of Salisbury, which
knew the slaightes, stratagemes, and pollecies of warlike affairs, suddenly
returned, and shortly encountered with the Lord Awdeley and his chief
Capitaines, or the residewe of his army could pass the water. The fight was
sore and dreadful. Therle desiryng the ^auyng of his life, and his adversaries
couetyng his destruction, fought sore for the obteinyng of their purpose, but
in conclusion, the earls army as men desperate of aid and succor, so egerly
fought, that they slew the lord Awdeley, and all his capitaines, and
discomfited all the remnaunt of his people. In this battle were slain.xxiiii.C.
persons* but the greatest plague lighted on the Chesshire men, because one
half of the shire, was one the one part, and the other, on the other part, of
which number were sir Thomas Dutton, sir Ihon Dunne, and sir Hugh Uenables. But
therles two sons, the one called sir Ihon Neuell, and the other sir Thomas,
were sore wounded, which soberly iorniyng into the Northcountrey thinkyng there
to repose them selfs, were in their journey apprehended, by the queen's friends,
and conveyed to Chester: but their kepers delivered them shortly, or else the
March men had destroyed the Gayles. Such favor had the commons of Wales, to
the duke of Yorkes band and his affinity, that they could suffer no wrong to
be done, nor evil word to be spoken of him or his friends.

The.xxxviii. year
AFter this battle, the duke of York not only perceiving that the destruction
of him and his friends, The.xxxviii. year.
was intended (as by this last conflict, was apparently declared) but also
remembryng, that all his counsels and privy inte^tes, were now opened to the
king and y^ queen which studied to divert and turn from the^, all michief or
infortunitie, which might chance either to them or their friends, thought it
mete neither longer to dissimule, nor farther to keep his bill under wyng: and
therefore with a coragious heart, as well for the obteinyng of the croune, as for
the tuicio^ and safeguard of him and his friends, he determined no longer to
sleep in his den, but with all diligence, to set furthe his business and auaunce
his banner. And therefore sendyng for therle of Salisbury his fellow and compere
in all his doings, counsels, and fortunes (after long communicacion had, of
the Queen's misgouernaunce, and how she without their assent, did all things at
her will and pleasure) determined to raise a great army, and by fine force,
either to die or win their purpose. What should I say, men were assembled,
friends were sent for, and a puissaunt army was gathered, both of Northren men
and Welshemen, which in good order came into the Marches of Wales, adioynyng
to Shropshire, where they determined either to abide their enemies, or to mete
them if they marched forward. The king was not ignorant of this assemble, nor
yet vnaduertised of the dukes intent: wherefore to resist the mischief at the
beginning, he caused commissio^s to be made and sent into every part of the
realm, where he suspected either to have assured friends, or indifferent
favorers, for men and money. By reason of which commandment, a great number
was assembled. Many for the love they bare to the king, but more for the fear
y^ they had of the queen, whose countenance ws so fearful, and whose look
was so terrible, that to al men, against whom she took a small displeasure, her
frounyng was their undoing, and her indignacion, was their death. The king
accompanied with the dukes of Somerset and Excester, and other of the line of
Lancastre, determined clearly, to set ont he duke of York and his
confederates, and the^ by force either utterly to vanquish, or by pollecy to
attrap and bring to confusion: whereupon in hope of good luck, the king with
his army by long marchyng, came nere to the duke of York, which was strongly
encamped, alitle from the town of Ludlow, nere adioynyng to the confines of
Wales, to whom not long before, was come his trusty friend Richard Earl of
Warwick, with a great number of expert men in marciall feats, whom he had
brought with him from Calice, whereof two were men of approved pollecye, in
the wars of Normandy and Guyen, the one called Andrew Trowlop, and the other
Iho^ Blount. These armies thus liyng, the one in the conspect and vewe of the
other studied all means and pollecies, how to take advantage each of other
and how with less ieoperdye, the one might set on the other. The Duke
perceiuyng by reason of his expert Capitaines, a way how he might easily
dampnifie and discomfite his enemies, though no longer to sleep his purpose,
but manfully to give the onset, and so with his secret friends and capitaines,
determined the next morning early, with dreadful blastes of the terrible
trompet, to begin the battle, and set on the king and his army, or he were ready
or in array. But of this devise succeeded nothing nor of this imaginacion
proceeded any effect. For Andrewe Trolop and other the Calicians, which were men
of great knowledge and much experience, and had lived by the kings wages,
more then a few years, perceiuyng now, that they should fight against their
sovereign lord himself (whose friend they esteemed before that time, therle of
Warwick ever to have been taken and ruputed, and not his enemy or destroyer)
in the dedde of the night, before the day of battaill, secretly departed from
the dukes camp, and submitted themselfes to the king, admonishyng him of all
things prepared and devised, for his loss and destruction. I^ these ancient
capitaines were welcome to the king, or if he ioyously them received, I refer
that to all men, which have relief in their distress, or haua a sudden good
chance, when they think least upon it. When the duke of York was advertised
of their departing, no maruaill though his senses were moved, and his wits
disturbed, as a man that suddenly rises out of a traunse, woteth not what to
do or sai^: For he first considered the power and authority of the King, and
saw that Andrewe Troloppe, of his friend was suddenly transformed, into the
image of his extreme enemy, whose force and pollecie, as much now disco^forted
him, as by the trust which he put in him, he was before encouraged: wherefore
he evidently perceiuyng, that all his counsel and purpose, was by the
forenamed Andrew, reveled and disclosed, thought it better for him and his, to
depart in surety, them to abide the chance, of mutable Fortune, which
turns the whiele at her will and pleasure: whereupon he with his younger son
Edmond earl of Rutland, secretly departed into Wales, and so passed into
Ireland, where he was with all joy and honor gladly received. Therle of March,
son and heir apparent to the forsaid duke, accompanied with therles of
Salisbury, and Warwick, and sir Ihon Wenlocke, stale away the same night, and
came into Devonshire: where by the means of Ihon Dinham Esquire (which after
was high treasurer of England, in the time of king Henry the vij.) they bought
a ship, which cost C.x. marks, at Exmouth, and sailed to Gernsay, and after
came to Calice, and were let in at the posterne, and joyfully welcomed of their
friends.

THE next day in the morning, the king being advertised of the departing of
the Duke of York and his partakers, caused al his horssemen to follow them by
every passage, but they were neither seen nor espied, as they that followed, made
report. The king perceiuyng that the lords were escaped, pardoned all the
poor soldiers, saving certain Ryng leaders, whereof some he punished and
fined, and some he hanged and quartered. After this, he removed to Ludlowe, and
there dispatched his host, and spoiled the town and the Castle, and sent the
Duches of York, with her two younger sons, to be kept in ward, with the
duches of Buckyngham her suster, where she continued a certain space* After
this, he proclaimed these lords, traitors to him, enemies to their country,
and rebels to the Croune: confiscatyng al their lands, goods, and offices,
committyng the governance of the North parts, to the Earl of
Northumberlande, and the Lord Clifford, as to his trusty and most faithful
friends: and of his town of Calice, he made Capitain, Henry the new Duke of
Somerset: but the old husband man says, that as to hasty sowyng, often
time deceives, so to late, never well proves. For in this business,
protractyng of time only, hurted and harmed the King and his sequel. For if
he at the beginning, had dispossessed his adversaries of that refuge and hold,
no doubt but he had either tamed or vanquished them, with little labor and
small danger.

THE Duke of Somerset, reioysyng much in his new office, elected diverse
hardy and valiant soldiers, and with great pomp sailed toward Calice: and
when he thought surely to have entered into the Haven, the artillarie shot so
fiercely, both out of the town and Risebancke, that he sufferyng there a sore
repulse, was ^ain to land at whitsandbay, and sent word to the capitaines of
the town, to receive him, as the Kings lieuetenaunt, and showed to them his
letters Patentes, but neither he nor his writing, ^was once regarded or looked
on: so of necessity he resorted to the Castle of Guysnes, daily skirmishyng
with the garrison of Calice, more to his loss then gain. After his arrival,
as is aforesaied, diverse of the mariners, owyng more good will, to therle of
Warwick, then to this young duke, conveyed their ships into the Haven of
Calice, and in them diverse of the Earl of Warwickes enemies, as Ianyn
Fendill, Ihon Fellow, and diverse other, and presented them to thesaied Earl,
which incontinent, caused their heddes to be stricken of. This daily
conflicte, still continuyng between the Lords, which soiorned at Calice, and
the Duke of Somerset, liyng at Guysnes, no small number of the commonaltie,
daily resorted to the Earl of March and his confederates: by reason whereof,
all though they daily lost people, and had many slain, yet their number was
restored, and the gappe ever filled, which was the continual loss, and daily
detriment to the Duke of Somerset. Yet he like a valiant Prince, nothing less
myndyng, then for lack of aid to be expelled from the great office and
renoumed authority, which the king had to him given, in the parts beyond
the sea, sent letters to the king, and messengers to the Queen, desiryng of
them aid and succor, in defense of the querell, and lawful assistence. His
posts were not unheard, nor his requests unprovided. For without delay
Richard lord Rivers, and sir Anthony Wooduile, his valiant son, which
after was Lord Scales, accompanied with four hundred warlike persons, were
appointed to pass the seas, and to be coadiutors to the Duke of Somerset.
These marciall capitaynes endeuouryng them selfs to the point, for the which
they were assigned, came to the Port of Sandwyche, and there abode the Wind
and the wether, which obeys neither King, nor serves Emperor.

THE Earls of March and Warwick, and other being at Calice, had knowledge of
all these doings, and secret conuenticles: wherefore to anticipate and prevent
the Dukes purpose, they sent Ihon Dinham the valiant esquire, with a small
number of men, but with a multitude of courageous hearts, to the town of
Sandwyche, which suddenly entered the same, and took the Lord Rivers in his
bed, and his son also: robbyng houses, and spoylyng ships of great riches
and merchandise, and beside this, they took the principal ships, of the
kings navy, then liyng at the Port, well furnished with ordinance and
artillarie, but not without the favor of the mariners, which favored more
the one part then the other. But although Ihon Dinham, Capitain on the Lords
part, was sore hurt and maimed on his leg, by reason whereof, he ever after
halted and somewhat limped: yet his courage and pollecy was so much, that he
vanquished his enemies, and brought the ships royal laded with preye and
prisoners, to the town of Calice, and them presented to the Earl of March,
not knowing then, that the Lord Rivers daughter should be the Earls wife,
which then had an husband leuyng, nor thinkyng that her father for her sake,
should after be destroyed. But who can know the secrets of GOD, or without
him, declare the chance that after shall ensue.

AFTER this booty gotten, and good luck obtained, diverse of the best
ships, taken in the Haven of Sandwiche, were well vitailed and manned, and
with them the Earl of Warwick, transfreted and sailed into Irelande, to
common with the Duke of York, of his great affairs and business. The wether
was so fair, and the Wynd so favorable to the Earls purpose, that within less
then.xxx. days, he passed and repassed from Calice to Deuelyne, and
asserteined the Earls of March and of Salisbury, what was the Duke of Yorkes
devise and intent, both for his enter and theirs, into the Realm of England.
The earl of Warwick had come to short home, to tell these tidings, if the duke
of Excester, which, being Admiral of the sea, lay in the Weste country, to
stop the Earls passage, might have had his own will: but the capitaines of
his Navy murmured against him, and the mariners dispraised and disdayned him,
glad to hear of the Earl of Warwickes good success, by which occasion, he
neither would nor durst one meddle or coupe with the Earls navy.

DVRYNG this time, the King called a Parliament, in the City of Couentre, in
the which, the Duke of York and all his confederates were attaynted of high
treason, and their goods and lands confiscat and forfeted: and to prohibit
their landyng in all parts, haven tounes were watched, and the sea costs were
garnished with bekens. And sir Simon Mondford with a great crew, was appointed
to keep the dounes, and the five Ports, and all men passing into Flaunders,
were upon pain of death, prohibited to pass by Calice, lest the lords there,
should borow of them any money, as they did pressed of the marchantes of the
staple.xviii.M.^. late before, which was a great displeasure to ye king, and a
more carasey to the queen. The lords lye^g at Caleys, were not ignorant of all
these doings and provisions, but daily were asserteyned what was done in the
kings privy chamber: wherefore first they sent a company to Sandwyche, which
conquered the town, and apprehended sir Simon Mou^tford, and brought him with
all his mates to the haven of Caleys, where incontine^t, he with.xii. of his
chief fellows, lost their heddes on the sands, before Rysebanke. After the
kings nauye gained, and his capitayns on the arriual of the sea taken and
destroyed, the lords, lyenge at Caleys, hoping in their friends within the
realm determined to pass the sea, and to land in England. And after they had
put the castle and town of Caleys, in sure and safe custodye to their only
use, they passed the sea, and landed at Sandwych. And so passing through Kent,
there came to them the lord Cobham, Ihon Guldefford, William Peche, Robert
Horn, and many other gentelmen, which conveyed them to the city of London.
But the fame of their landyng once known, gentelmen repaired, and yome^
resorted out of all the Southpartes of the Realm: upon which rumor, Thomas
lord Scales, a man in great favor, with the king and Queen, accompanied with
the earl of Kendale, a Gascoyn, and the lord Louel, resorted to London, with a
great company of armed men: declaring to the Mayre of the city, that their
repair only was to defend, and keep the city from the spoil and robbery of
such traitors, as the king was credibly informed, would thither make access:
to whom the Mayre answered, that he well knew both his own oath, and bounden
duty toward his souereign lord and prince, and neded neither of prompter, nor
yet of Coadiutor, either to defend or govern the city, to him committed in
charge. With which answer, the lord Scales and his associates not a little
displeased, entered into the Tower of London, daily with new inventions, doing
displeasures and domages to the citezens of the city, whom they sore
suspected, rather to favor then to hate, the earls of March, and Warwycke,
and other of their band and affinity. Which earls with a great army came
shortly to London, and were of the Mayre and citezens ioyously received, to
whom resorted the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Ely and
Excester, with many prelates and religious persons. These lords nothing
slackyng the purpose, that they came for, daily consulted and assembled
together in the house of the friars Franciscane within the city. And after
long debatinge, and secret consultacion had, it was agreed, that they with
their whoole puy^sa^nce should march forward, toward the king: determining
eith^r by force or fair means, to bring their purpose to a conclusion. Whe^^
his counsel was dissolved, the earls of March and Warwycke, Thomas lord
Fauco^bridge, Henry lord Borchier, called earl of Eve, with a great number of
men, which came out of Kent, Essex, Surrey, and Sussex, to the number as some
writers afferme of.xxv.M. persons departed from London, toward the king, lyeng
at Couentre, then called the Queen's secret arbor, leuyng behynd them, to keep
the Londoners in their fidelity, from reuertyng from their part, the earl of
Salisbury, the lord Cobham, and sir Ihon Wenlocke: which lord Cobha^* with
certain Aldermen of the city, so kept the West side against the Tower, and sir
Ihon Wenlocke, with other so vigilantly watched the East part, toward saint
Katherynes, that no person either could issue out, or enter in, to y^ great
displeasure of the lord Scales and his company, which daily shote their
ordenaunce out, and had likewise great ordinance shot at them, to the hurt,
and no pleasure of both parts. The king not ignorant of all these doings,
assembled a great army, and accompanied with the duke of Somerset, which was
lately come from Guysnes, and the duke of Buckyngham, and diverse other great
lords of his part and faccio^ came to the town of Northampton, where the
Queen encouraged her friends, and promised great rewards to her helpers: for
the king studied nothing but of peace, quiet and solitary life. When ye kings
host was assembled, and that the Queen perceived that her power was able to
match with the force of her adversaries, she caused her army to issue out of
the town, and to pass the river of Nene, and there in the new field, between
Harsyngton and Sandifford, the Capitaynes strongely emparked them selfs with
high banks and deep trenches. The earl of March being lusty, and in the
flower of his coragious yought, lyenge between Towceter and Northampton,
determined to set on the kings army, without longer protractyng of time. And
in the night season removed his camp toward Northampton, and in marchyng
forward set his men in good order of battayl, whereof the vawegard was co^ducted
by the earl of Warwycke, which, either by strenght or stealth maugre y^ lord
Beamond, which kept a strayt, going toward the Kings camp, entered freshly,
and began the battle about.vij. of the clock, the.ix. day of Iulij. After
whom followed the earl of March, with the ba^ner of his father. This fight
continued in doutfull judgment, till the hour of nine, at which time the
kings army was profligat, and discomfited, and of the same slain, and drouned
in the river, few less then x.M. talle Englismen, and y^ king him self left
alone disconsolate, was taken and apprehended, as a man borne, and predestinate
to troble misery and calamity. At this battayl were slain, Humfrey duke of
Buckyngham, Ihon Talbot earl of Shrewesbury, a valiant person, and not de
generating from his noble parent: Thomas lord Egremond, Ihon viscont Beaumond,
and sir William Lucy, which made great have to come to part of the fight, and
at his first approach was strike^ in the head with an axe. Diverse other ge^tilme^
were slain in this civil battle, whose names were not remembered nor published
by any aucthor that I have read. Beside these dead persons, many were taken
prisoners, because they left their horses, and disce^ded to fight on foot. The
duke of Somerset and other, which narowly escaped, fled with the Queen and
prince Edward, into the Bishoprycke of Durhame, in which place they determined
to congregate, and gather a new army and power, and if no hoope were of
recovery, them they agreed to fly into Scotland: there to expect better luck,
and happier chance, by fortunes favor. The earls being victorious in this
blody battle, conveyed the King that night again to the town of Northampton,
and the next day with great solempnitie and small comfort, they set forward the
king, and by easy journeys brought him to London the.xvi. day of Iulij, where he
was fayntly receyue^, and febly welcomed, and was lodged in the Bishops palace.
After whose coming to the city, the Tower of London was delivered to the earl
of March, upon a certain composicion. But the lord Scales, suspectyng the
sequel of the delivery of the same, took a wherry privily, entendyng to have
fled to the Queen. But he was espied by diverse waterme^ belongyng to the earl
of Warwycke, which waited for his forthcommyng on the Thamse, and suddenly
taken, and shortly slain with many darts and daggers, and his body left all
blody and naked at the gate of the Clyncke, which after was buried in the
church adioynyng. Then were diverse persons apprehended, and endited of treason,
whero^ some were pardoned, and some executed: but Thomas Thorpe, second Baron
of thexchequer, great friend to the house of Lancaster, and extreme enemy to
the family of York, was taken disguysed in a monks apparel, with a shaven
croune, and so brought to the earl of Warwycke, which sent him to the Tower of
London, where he long remained. During this troble, was a Parliament somoned to
begin at Westmynster, in y^ month of October next following. Before which time,
Richard duke of York, being in Ireland, by swyft currers, and flieng posts,
was advertised ^f the great victory, gained by his part, at the feld of
Northhampton, and also knew that the king was now in case to be kept, and
ordered at his pleasure and will: wherefore losyng no time, nor s^uggyng one
hour, he sailed from Deuelyne to Chester with no small company, and by long
iourneys, came to the city of London, which he entered the Friday next before
the feast of saint Edwa^de the confessor, with a swourd borne naked before
him, and took his lodging in the kings own palayce, whereupon the common
people babbeled, that he should be King, and that king Henry should no longer
reign. During the time of this Parliamente, the duke of York, with a bold
contenaunce, entered into the chamber of the peers, and sat down in the trone
royal, under the clothe of estate (which is the kings peculiar seat) and in
the presence as well of the nobility, as of y^ spirituality (after a pause made)
said these words in effect.

My singular good lords, The duke of Yorkes oration made ^o all the lor^er of
the Parliament.
and very indifferent fre^des, in whose power and authority consists the
peyse and the stay of this noble Realm of England, the which as well before the
time, that Christ our savior and redemer, took upon him our frail flesh,
and humayn nature, as ever since, has been a Realm renoumed, a kingdom famous,
and a region (as well amongst Paganes as Christians) greatly bruted, beloved
and feared. I no less require, then friendly exhort you now, being together as
lovers of God, and friends to your country, neither yet to judge, or once
suspect, that I either enfla^med with ambycio^ or desirous of high rule, or
covetous of sovereignty, have presumed to enter under this trone, or attempted
to set in this princely chayer and seage Royalle, except you hear the cause,
and digest well the truth. For without these two points known, and
understood your judgments may be void, and your cogitacions frivolous.
Therefore I declare and publysh to you, that here I sit, as in the place to me
by very justice lawfully belongyng, and here I rest, as he to whom this chair
of right apperteineth, not as he, which requires of you favor, parcialitie,
or bearyng, but egall right, friendly indifferency, and true administracion of
justice: for I being the party grieved, and complaynau^t, can not minister to
my self the Medecin, that should help me (as expert leches and Chyrurgians
may) except you be to me both faithful ayders, and also true counsaylors. Nor
yet this noble realm and our natural country shall never be vnbuckeled from
her quotidia^ fever, except I (as the principal Physician and you, as true and
trusty Appotecaries) consult together, in making of the pocion, and try out
the clean and pure stuff, from the old, corrupt, and putrified dregs. For
undoubtedly, the rote and botome of this long festured ca^kar, is not yet
extirpat, nor the feeble fou^dacion of this fallible buildyng, is not yet
espied, which has been, and is the daily des^^uccion of the nobility, and the
quotidian confusion of ye pore communaltie of this realm and kingdom, For all
you know (or should know) that the high and mighty prince king Richard
the.ii. was the true and indubita^e heir, to the valiant Conqueror, and
renoumed prince king Edward the.iij. as son and heir to the hardy knight,
and courageous capitayn, Edward prince of Wales, duke of Acquitayn and
Cornwall, eldest son to the said king Edward the.iii which king was not
only in dead, but also of all men, reputed and taken, as ye very true and
infallible heir, to the wys^ and pollitique prince, king Henry the.iij. as
son and heir to king Edward the second, son and heir to king Edward the
first, the very heir and first begotten son of the said noble and virtuous
prince, king Henry the.iii. Which king Richard, of that name the second, was
lawfully and justly possessed of the croune, and diadem of this Realm and
region, till Henry of Derby, duke of Lancaster and Herdford, son to Ihon duke
of Lancaster, the fourth begotten son, to the said king Edward the.iij. and
younger brother, to my noble auncestor Lyonel duke of Clarence, the.iii.
begotten son of the said king Edward, by force and violence, contrary both to
the duty of his allegiau^ce, and also to his homage, to him both done and
sworn, raised war and battle, at the cast of Flynt, in Northwales,
against the said king Richard, and him apprehended and imprisoned within the
Tower of London. During whose life and captivity he wrongfully usurped and
entruded upon the royal power and high estate of this Realm and region,
taking on him ye name, style, and authority of king and governor of the same.
And not therewith satisfied and contented, compassed and accomplished, the
death and destruction of his natural prince, and most worthy sovereign lord,
not as a common homicyde, and bocherly murder, but as a regicide and destroyer
of his king. After whose piteous death, and execrable murder (alas my heart
pantethe to remember the abominable fact) the right and title of the croune,
and superiorite of this Realm, was lawfully reuerted and returned to Rogier
Mortimer, earl of March, son and heir to lady Philippe, the only child of
the above rehearsed Lyonel, duke of Clare^ce, to which Rogiers daughter called
Anne, my most derest and well-beloved mother, I am the very true and lyneall
heir, which descent, all you can not justly again say, nor yet truly deny.
Then remember this, if the title be mine, why am I put from it: if I be true
heir to the croune (as I am in deed) why is my right withholden: if my claim
be good, why have I not justice: for surely learned men of great science and
litterature, say and affirm, that lyneall descent, nor usurped possession,
can nothing prevail, if continual claim be lawfully made, or openly
published. For avoiding of which scruple and ambiguitie: Edmond earl of March,
my most well-beloved uncle, in the time of the first vsurpar, in deed, but not
by right, called king Henry the.iiij. by his cosyns, the earl of
Northhumberla^d, and the lord Percy, he being then in captivity, with Owen
glendore, the rebel in Wales, made his title, and righteous claim, to the
destruction of both the noble persons. Likewise my most derest lord and father,
so far setfurth that right and title, that he lost his life, and worldly
joy, at the town of Southampton, more by power, then indifferent justice.
Sithe whose death, I coming to my full age, have never desisted to pursew my
title, and require my right, which by means of synister counsel, and iniust
detencion, I can neither obtain or recover. So that of fine force, I am
compelled to use power instead of prayer, and force, instead of request (not
as I said before) for my private emolume^t, and peculiar profit, but to
restore peace, love, and quietness to this our natural regio^: which ever sithe
the first ungodly usurpation of the forenamed Henry, untruly called king
Henry the.iiij. has been clearly banished, and out of the same iniustly exiled.
What murders and manslaughtes has been perpetrated, and committed within this
country, sithe the beginning of that ungracious usurpation: what number of
noble men have been slain, destroyed and executed, since that unfortunate day:
what manifest iniquity has been openly borne, and maynteyned in every country
and city, since the doleful death of king Richard: or what person darre sue
for his right at this dai, contrary to y^ will of the counsailors, which now
bear the swyng and rule the roste. Well, well, although almighty God slackely
and slowely do y^ proceed, to y^ punishment of sinners: yet the differryng of
his scorge, is recompensed with ye greater pain, when his rod strikes, yea,
and oftentimes he leaves the very malefactors, apparently unpunished, and
scorgeth their blood, and punishes the^ in their heirs, by worldly
adversity. Such is his mercy when it pleases him to show it, and so sharp
is his whyp when he list to strike. For although, Henry of Lancaster, earl of
Derby took upon him the scepter, and the croune, and wrongfully bare the name
and style of a king, and was not much tyckeled with mine Uncle, the earl of
March, at yt time being within age: Yet was he never in suerty of him self,
nor had any, or enjoyed any perfyt quietness, either in mind or in body: for
surely a corrupt conscience feleth never rest, but looks when the swourd of
vengeance will descend and stryke. His son also called king Henry the.v.
obtained notable victories, and immortal praises, for his noble acts, done in
the realm of France: yet God for the offense of his untrue parente, suddenly
touched him, vnbodiynge his soul, in the flower of his yought, and in the
glory of his conquest. And although, he had a fair son, and a young apparent
heir: yet was this Orphan such a one, as Preachers say, that god threatened to
send for a punishment, to his unruly and ungracious people: saying by his
prophet Esaias: I shall give you children to be your princes, and enfantes without
wysedom, shall have the governance of you. The Prophet lied not, if you note
all things in an order: For after this Henry y^ v. (whose fame, no man can
justly reprove or deface) succeeded his son whom all we have called our
natural prince, and obeyed, as his heir: in whose time, and wrongful reign,
I require you diligently to consider, with what great torments and affliccions
God has whypped and scorged this miserable Isle, yea, with such and so many
scourges and plagues, as no nation (the Egyptians only except) were ever
tormented, or afflicted withal. I will not speak of rebellious murders and
oppressio^s, which of late had been done, and exercised here among us: but I
will declare and manifest to you, how the croune and glory of this realm, is
by the negligence of this silly man, and his unwise counsel, minished,
defaced, and dishonored. Is not Normandy, which his father gat, regayned, and
conquered again, by the insolency of him, and his coueteous counsel? Is not
the whole duchye of Acquitayn by.ii.C. and od years, peaceable possessed by the
kings of this realm, in one year and a little more, gotten out of ower hands
and seignorie? What should I speak of Angeow and main or the loss, of the
Isle of France, with the rich city of Paris. Alas, my heart sobbeth, mine
eyes water, and my toungue foltereth, either to speak or think of the losses
and misfortunes, that this our native country, has of late sustained. But as
Preachers say: evil gotten gooddes, do not long continue, nor usurped power,
has no prosperous success. I will not molest you, with the rehersyng of the
calamity, which fell emo^gest the Israelites, when Athalia slew all the blood
Royal, except little Ioas, and tyra^nously usurped the croune: nor troble you
with the continual war, which happened emo^ge the Romans, when Julius Caesar
took upon him, without law or authority, the name and style of Emperor: but
I put you in remembrance of our own nation, what mischief, strife and misery
succeeded in this realm, by the injurious vsurpacions, of Herrald son to
Godwyn earl of Kent, and Stephen of Bloys, earl of Bulleyn, the one being the
cause of the conquest of this realm, and the other the occasion of infinite
trobles, and domestical discencion within the same: yet all these vexacions and
scorges, be but a shadow or counterfeit light, in comparison of the great
calamities and miseries, which all we here present, have seen and
experimented. Yet in the mids of this affliccio^, and to make an end of
the same, God of his ineffable goodness, lookyng on this country, with his iyes
of pity, and aspect of mercy, has sent me in the truth, to restore again
this decayed kingdom, to his ancient fame and old renoume. Which here in open
parliament, according to my just and true title, I have and do take possession,
of this royal throne, not puttyng diffidence, but firm hope in Gods grace,
that by his divine aid, and the assistence of you, the peers of this Realm,
I shall decore and maintein the same, to the glory of him, honor of my blood,
and to the public wealth, as well of you all here present, as of all the poor
commons and subjects, of this kingdom and regiment.

When the duke had thus ended his oracion, the lords sat still like Images
graven in the wall or do^me Gods, neither whisperyng nor spekyng, as though
their mouths had been sowed up. The duke perceiuyng none answer, to be made
to his declared purpose, not well content with their sobre silence, and
taciturnitie, advised them well, to digest and pondre the effect of his oracion
and saying, and so neither fully displeased, nor all pleased, departed to his
lodgyng in the Kings palace.

WHILE he was thus declaryng his title, in the chamber of the peers, there
happened a strange chance, in the very same time, amongst the commons in the
nether house, then there assembled: for a Croune which did hang in the middell
of the same, to garnishe a branche, to set lights upon, without touch of any
creature, or rigor of wynd, suddenly fell down, and at the same time also, fell
down the Croune, which stood on the top of the Castle of Dover: as a sign
and prognosticacion, that the Croune of the Realm should be divided and
changed, from one line to another. This was the judgment of the common people,
which were neither of Gods priuitie, nor yet of his privy counsel, and yet
they will say their opinions, whosoever say nay.

THE lords of the realm, forgot not the dukes demand, nor long protracted
the time, to se some good end, in so weighty a cause: wherefore diverse
lords, as well spiritual as temporal, with many grave and sage persons of the
commonaltie, daily assembled at the Black Friars and other places, to treat
and common of this matter, being of no small importance. During which time,
the Duke of York, although he and the king, were both lodged in the palace of
Westminster, yet for no prayer or intercession, he would once visit or se the
king, till some perfect conclusion were taken, in this great and weighty
purpose: saying and affirmyng, that he was subject to no man, but only to God,
and he was his lord and superior, and none other. I will alitle space leave the
lords consultyng together, and speak of outward attemptes and foren doings

THIS civil discension within the realm of England, did much animate and
incorage James the second of that name, king of Scotts to make war on the
English nation, partly for the displeasure which he conceived, for the death
of Edmond duke of Somerset, his mothers brother, and partly to show himself
emo^gest his people, to be both valiant and coragious. This king James from
his ^irste rule, began to enter into suspicion with William Earl Douglas, a man
both of great kynne and more power, ever mistrustyng, that he nothing more
desired, then to deprive him from his authority, and to usurp the same. This
cancard suspicion was so rooted in the kings heart, that suddenly it branched
out, in so much that the King sendyng for the Earl, (which trustyng on his
own innocence, humbly came to his pres^nce) caused him shamefully to be slain
and murdered with which injury, his two brethren, Archibald Earl of Murrey,
and Hugh Earl of Ormount, not alitle pricked and incoraged, with the Earls of
Angus and Morthon^, being all of one line and surname, made open war on
thesaied king James: but inconclusio^ he prevailed, and suppressed the great
power of the Douglasses. And then thynkyng himself a king, without either peer
or fere, assembled a great army, and entered into the Marches of
Northumberlande, and besieged the Castle of Roxborough, and there caused his
new Bombarde, lately cast in Flaunders, called the lion and diverse other
pieces, to be shot against the Castle, whereof one being weak and slender, brake
in pieces, and with one of the fragmentes slew the king, King James of
Scotland ^layne with a piece of a go^ne
standing amongst a great company of his people, and wounded the earl of
Angus. The Scotts not dismayed with the death of their king, seeing the Castle
easy to be won, manfully assauted and with much pain gat it, and the same
long defended, till Richard Duke of Gloucester it conquered and destroyed. This
king James, of queen Mary his wife left three sons, James which succeeded
him, Alexander duke of Albany, and Ihon. This young king James, was put under
the tuicion of James Kenede, bishop of saint Andrews, which during his
noneage, ruled the realm to the Kings great honor, but more to his own
profit and peculier gain: For he made sumpteous houses, and builded Colleges,
which his young pupil king James, neither could nor was hable to do.

ABOVTE this very season, and during this unnatural co^trouersy within the
Realm of England, Charles the French king, which only by trouble and
calamity, gat to him a perpetual name, and amongst his nation above the
sterres exalted, ended the point of his fatal fine, which Prince in his
youth, never regarded wanton pastyme, nor la^^^ous dalliau^ce, for his wits
were set, and his industry only applied* to recover again his paternall
patrimony, and Princely inheritance: So that more plainly then in a mirror,
all men may perceive that pain often profits, and labor commonly avails,
but idleness sildome and dalliaunce, never. To this Charles, succeeded king
Jews, of that name the.xi. of whose doings you shall hear after: and shall
both study and marueill, for the straungenes of his demeanor, and the crafty
pollecie of his secret compasses. Now I will return to the great counsel of
the lords, celebrate about London, for the duke of Yorkes claim.

The.xxxix. year. The xxxix. year.

AFter long arguments made, and deliberate co^sultacio^ had among the peers,
prelates, and commons of the realm: upon the vigile of all saints, it was
condescended and agreed, by the three estates, for so much as king Henry had
been taken as king, by the space of.xxxviij. years and more, that he should
inioye the name and title of King, and have possession of the realm, during
his life natural: And if he either died or resigned, or for feted the same, for
infringyng any point of this concord, then the said Croune and authority
royal, should immediately be diuoluted to the Duke of York, if he then lived,
or else to the next heir of his line or lineage, and that the duke from
thensefurth, Articles of agreement between King Henry the vi. and Richard duke
of York
should be Protector and Regent of the land. Provided allwaie, that if the
king did closely or apertly, study or go about to break or alter this
agreement, or to compesse or imagine the death or destruction, of the saiede
Duke or his blood, then he to forfet the croun, and the duke of York to take
it. These articles with many other, were not only written, sealed, and sworn
by the two parties: but also were enacted, in the high court of Parliament. For
joy whereof, the King having in his company thesaied Duke, rode to the
Cathedral Church of saint Paul, within the city of London, and there on
the day of all Saints, went sole^pnely with the diadem on his head, in
procession, and was lodged a good space after, in the bishops Palace, nere to
thesaied Church. And upon the Saturdaie next insuyng, Richard Duke of York,
was by the sound of a trumpet, solempnely proclaimed heir apparent to the
Croune of England, and Protector of the realm.

AFTER this, the Parliament kept at Couentre the last year, was declared to be
a deuilishe counsel, and only celebrate for the destruccio^ of the
nobility, and no lawful Parliament, because they which were returned, were
never elected, according to the dew order of the law, but secretly named by
them, which desired more the destruction, then the auauncement of the
public wealth, and common profit. When these agrementes were done and
enacted, the king dissolved his Parliament, which was the last Parliamente
that ever he ended. Such was the pleasure of almighty God, that king Henry
being a good and verteous manne, which had tasted innumerable adversities and
calamities of the world should be deprived of his terrestrial Croune, to be
recompensed with an heavenly garland, and a joyful place: For surely a per^ite
good man, all though he be plagued with a thousand displeasures cannot be but
blessed, and have a good soul toward God.

THE Duke of York well knowing, that the Queen would spurn and impugn the
conclusions agreed and taken in this parliament, caused her and her son, to
be sent for by the king: but she being a manly woman, vsyng to rule and not to
be ruled, and thereto counseled by the dukes of Excester and Somerset, not
only denied to come, but also assembled together a great army, intendng to
take the king by fine force, out of the lords hands, and to set them to a
new skoole. The Protector liyng in London, having perfect knowledge of all
these doings: assigned the Duke of Norffolke and the Earl of Warwick, his
trusty friends, to be about the King, and he with therles of Salisbury, and
Rutlande: with a convenient company, departed out of London, the second day of
Decembre Northward, and sent to the Earl of March his eldest son to follow
him with all his power. The Duke by small iorneis, came to his Castle of
Sandall, beside Wakefelde, on Christmas eve, and there began to assemble his
tenauntes and friends. The queen being thereof asserteined, determined to
couple with him while his power was small and his aid not come: And so having
in her company, the Prince her son, the Dukes of Excester and Somerset, the
Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Clifford, the Lord Rosse, and in effect all the
Lords of the North part, with eightene thousand men, or as some write,
twenty and two thousand, marched from York to Wakefelde, and bad base to
the Duke, even before his Castle he having with him not fully five thousand
persons, determined intontinent to issue out, and to fight with his enemies,
and all though sir Dauy Halle, his old sernaunt and chief counsailer, auised
him to keep his Castle, and to defend the same with his small number, till his
son the Earl of March were come with his power of Marchemen and Welshe
soldiers, yet he would not be counseled, but in a great fury said, a Dauy,
Dauy, have thou loved me so long, and now would have me dishonored? Thou
never saw me keep fortres when I was Regent in Normandy, when the Dolphyn
himself, with his puissaunce came to besiege me, but like a man, and not like a
bird included in a cage, I issued and fought with mine enemies, to their loss
ever (I thank God) and to my honor: If I have not kept my self within walls,
for fear of a great and strong prince, nor hid my face from any man living,
would thou that I for dread of a scoldyng woman, whose weapon is only her
toungue, and her nails, should incarcerate my self, and shut my gates? then al
men might of me woundre and all creatures may of me report dishonor, that a
woman has made me a dastarst, who^ no man ever to this day could yet prove a
coward: And surely my mind is, rather to die with honor, then to live with
shame for of honor comes fame, and of dishonor rises infamy. Their great
number shall not appall my spirits, but incorage them, for surely I think
that I have there, as many friends as enemies, which at ioynyng, will either
fly or take my part: therefore auaunce my banner, in the name of God and saint
George, for surely I will fight with the^, though I should fight a lone. Therle
of Salisbury and other his friends, seeing his courage, resolved themselves to
his opinion, and ordered their men, and set them forth in Warlike fashion, for
their most advantage. The Duke of Somerset and other of the queen's part,
knowing perfitly, that if the Duke gat the victory, their days were minished,
and their livings left bare, like men quickened and exasperate, for the
safeguard of their life's, and defense of their goods, determined to abide the
chance, and to epsy their most advantage, and so appointed the lord
Clifford, to lie in the one stale, and the Earl of Wilshire in the other, and
they theimselfes kept the main battaill. The duke of York with his people,
descended down the hill in good order and array, and was suffered to pass
foreward, toward the main battaill: but when he was in the plain ground
between his Castle and the town of Wakefelde, The battaill at Wakefeld
he was environed on every side, like a fish in a net, or a dear in a
buckestall: so that he manfully fightyng, was within half an hour slain and
ded, The duke of York ^lain.
and his whole army discomfited, and with him died of his trusty fre^des, his
two bastard uncles, sir Ihon, and sir Hugh Mortimers, sir Dauy Halle his chief
cou^sailor, sir Hugh Hastynges, sir Thomas Neuel, William and Thomas Aparre,
both brethren, and two thousand and eight hundred other, whereof many were
young gentlemen, and heirs of great parentage in the Southe part, whose
linages revenged their deaths, within four Months, next and immediately
insuyng. In this conflicte was wounded and taken prisoner, Richard Earl of
Salisbury, sir Richard Lymbrike, Raufe Stanley, Iho^ Harow, Capitain Hauson,
and diverse other While this battaill was in fightyng, a priest called sir
Robert Aspall, chappelain and schole master to the young earl of Rutland ii.
son to the above named duke of York, scace of y^ age of.xii. years, a fair
ge^tlema^, and a maydenlike person, perceiuyng y^ flight was more sauegard,
then ^ariyng, both for him and his master, secretly conveyed therle out of y^
field, by the lord Cliffordes band, toward the town, but or he could enter
into a house, he was by the said lord Clifford espied, followed, and taken, and
by reason of his apparel, demanded what he was. The yo^g gentelman dismayed,
had not a word to speak, but kneled on his knees imploryng mercy, and desiryng
grace, both with holding up his hands and making dolorous countinance, for his
speech was gone for fear. Save him said his Chappelein, for he is a princes
son, and peradventure may do you good hereafter. With that word, the lord
Clifford marked him and said: by Gods blood, thy father slew mine, and so will
I do the and all thy kyn, and with that word, stacke the earl to ye heart with
his dagger, and bad his Chappeleyn bear the earls mother and brother word what
he had done, and said. In this act the lord Clyfford was accounted a tyrant,
and no gentelman, for the property of the Lion, which is a furious and an
unreasonable beast, is to be cruel to them that withstand him, and gentle to
such as prostrate or humiliate them selfs before him. Yet this cruel
Clifforde, and deadly bloudsupper not content with this homicyde, or
chyldkillyng, came to y^ place where the dead corpse of the duke of York lay,
and caused his head to be stryken of, and set on it a croune of paper, and so
fixed it on a pole, and presented it to the Queen, not lyeng far far from
the field, in great despite, and much derision, saying: Madame, your war is
done, here is your kings ransom, at which present, was much joy, and great
rejoicing, but many laughed then, that sore lamented after, as the Queen her
self, and her son: And many were glad then of other men's deaths, not knowing
that their own were nere at hand, as the lord Clifford, and other.

But surely, man's nature is so frail, that things passed be sone forgotten,
and mischiefs to come, be not forsene. After this victory by ye Queen and her
part obtained, she caused the earl of Salisbury, with all the other prisoners,
to be sent to Pomfret, and there to be behedded, and sent all their heddes,
and the dukes head of York, to be set upon poles, over the gate of the city
of York, in despite of them, and their lignage: whose children shortly
revenged their fathers querell, both to the Queen's extreme perdicion, and the
utter undoing of her husband and son. This end had the valiant lord,
Rychard Plantagenet, duke of York, and this fine ensued of his to much
hardines. The earl of March, so commonly called, but after the death of his
father, in deed and in right very duke of York, lyeng at Gloucester, heryng of
the death of his noble father, and loving brother, and trusty friends, was
wonderfully amassed, but after comfort given to him, by his faithful lovers and
assured alyes, he removed to Shrewsbury, and other towns upon the river of
Seuerne, declaryng to them the murder of his father, the ieopardye of him
self, and the unstable state and ruin of the Realm. The people on the
Marches of Wales, which above measure favored y^ lynage of the lord Mortimer,
more gladly offered him their aid and assistence, then he it either instantly
required, or heartily desired, so that he had a puyssant army, to the number
of.xxiij.M. ready to go against the queen, and the murderers of his father. But
when he was setting forward, news were brought to him, that Iaspar earl of
Penbroke, half brother to king Henry, and James butler, earl of Ormond and
Wylshyre had assembled together a great number, both of Welshe and Irysh
people, suddenly to surprise and take him and his friends, and as a captive to
convey him to the queen. The duke of York, called earl of March, somewhat
spurred and quickened with these noueltyes, retired back, and met with his
enemies in a fair plain, nere to Mortimers cross, not far from Herford
east, on Candelmas day in the morning, at which time the sun (as some write)
appeared to the earl of March, like.iii. suns, and suddenly joined al together
in one, and that upon the sight thereof, he took such courage, y^ he fiercely
set on his enemies, and the^ shortly disco^fited: for which cause, men
imagined, that he gave the sun in his full brightness for his cognisau^ce or
badge. Of his enemies were left dead on the ground.iii.M. and.viii.C: The
earls of Penbroke and Wilshyre fled, and sir Owen Tewther, father to the said
earl of Penbroke, which Owen had married king Henry's mother (as you have heard
before) with David floyde, Morgan ap reuther, and diverse other were taken and
behedded at the city of Herford. During this season, ye queen was greatly
encouraged with the victory, obtained late at Wakefeld, partly because the duke
of York, her utter enemy was ryd out of the world, and partly, because she
perceived, the lords of the North country to adhere and cleue to her part
and faction: wherefore with a great multitude of Northre^ people, she marched
toward London, of whose approach the Londoners were nothing glad: for some
affirmed, that she brought that rusty company, to spoil and rob the city:
other said, that she would be revenged, of such as favored the duke of York.
So the pore citeze^s hangyng between the water and the fire, were much amassed,
but ye magistrates and governors caused great watches to be kept, and good
order to be observed. The Queen, still came forward with her Northre^ people
entendyng to subuerte and defaict all conclusions and agreme^tes, enacted and
assented to, in the last Parliament. And so after her long journey, she came to
the town of saint Albons: whereof y^ duke of Northfolke, ye earl of Warwycke,
and other, whom y^ duke of York had left to govern the king in his absence,
being advertised, by the assent of ye king, gathered together a great host,
and set forward toward saint Albons, having the king in their company, as
the head and chefetayn of the war, and so not mynding to differ the time
any farther, upon shrouetuesday early in the morning, set upon their enemies.
Fortune y^ day so favored the Queen, that her part prevailed, and the duke and
the earl were discomfited, and fled: leaving the king accompanied with the lord
Bonuile, and sir Thomas Kyriell of Kent, which upon assurance of his promise,
tarried still and fled not, but their trust, them deceived. For after the
victory obtained, and the king brought to the Queen, they two were deteyned
as prisoners, and so continued till the kings departing from that town. In
this battayl were slain.xxiii.C men, and not above, of whom no noble man is
remembered, save sir Ihon Gray, which the same day was made knight, with.xii.
other, at ye village of Colney. Happy was the queen in her two battayls, but
vnfortunate^ was the king in all his enterprises, for where his person was
present, there victory fled ever from him to the other part, and he commonly
was subdued and vanqueshed. When queen Margaret had thus well sped, first she
caused the king, to dubbe prince Edward his son, knight, with.xxx other
persons, which in the morning fought on the queen's side, against his part.
After she sent to the Mayre of London, commaundinge him without delay, to send
certain Carts, laded with lenten victayle, for y^ refreashing of her and her
army. The Mayre, incontinent made prouisio, laded carts, and sent them toward
the queen. But the moveable co^mo^s, which favored not the queen's part,
stopped ye carts at Crepulgate and boldly said, that their enemies, which
came to spoil and rob y^ citizens, should neither be releued, nor victayled
by them. And notwithstanding gentell advertisement to them given, of the
mischefes, which might ensue of their doings: yet they remained still in one
obstinate mind and wilful will, not permittinge the cariages, to pass or go
forward. During which controversy, diverse of the Northen horsemen, came and
robbed in the suburbs of the city, and would have entered at Crepulgate, but
they by the commoners were repulsed, and beten back, and iii. of them slain:
whereupon the Mayre sent the recorder to the kings counsel to Barn, to
excuse the matter, and the duches of Bedford, and the lady Scales, with diverse
sad fathers of the spirituality, went to the queen to mollify her rancore, and
assuage her mela^colie, which she had conceived against the city. At this
humble request, the queen and her counsel appointed certain lords and
knights, with.iii.C. talle persons, to ride to the city, and there to vewe,
and se the demeanoure and disposicion of the people: and diverse Aldermen were
appointed to mete them at Barnet, and to convey them to London. But what soever
man purposes, God disposes: for all these devises were shortly tra^smuted
into another form, because true report was brought, not only to the city but
also to the queen, that the earl of March had vanqueshed the earls of Penbroke
and Wilshyre, and that the earl of Warwycke, in whom rested the chief trust of
that faction, after the last conflict, had at saint Albons, had mete with the
said earl of March at Chippyng Norton, by Cottesood, and that they with both
their powers were cominge toward London. These true tales turned the queen's
purpose, and altered all her long devised ententes, in so much that she little
trustinge Essex, and less Kent, but London least of all, with her husband and
son, departed from saint Albons, into the Northcountrey, where the root,
and foundation of her aid and refuge, only consisted. But at the day of her
departing, she caused the heddes of the lord Bonuile, and sir Thomas Kyriel, to
be cut of, in the presence of her son, contrary to y^ mind and promise of her
husband, but emo^gest men of war, faith or oath, syldome is performed.

THE duches of York, seeing her husband and son slain, and not knowing what
should succeed of her eldest sons chance, sent her.ii. younger sons, George
and Richard, over the sea, to the city of Wtrechte in Almayn: where they were
of Philippe, duke of Bourgoyne, well received and fested, and so there they
remained, till their brother Edward had obtained the Realm, and gotten the
regiment. Duringe which time diverse merchantes mistrusting the mutacion of the
world, fled out of y^ Realm, emo^gest whom, one Philippe Malpas, a man of
great riches, sailing into Flaunders, was taken by Ihon Columme, a French man
and paid.iiii.M. marks for his raunsone. The earls of March and Warwycke,
having perfect knowledge, that the king and queen with their adherentes, were
departed from saint Albons, determined first to ride to London, as the chief
key, and common spectacle to the whole Realm, thinking there to assure them
selfs of the East and West part of the Kingdom, as king Henry and his faction
nesteled and stre^gthe^d hun and his alyes, in the North regions and boreal
plage: meaning to have a buckelar against a swourd, and a southern byl, to
co^teruayle a Northren bas^ard. And so these two great lords, resoluinge them
selfs upon this purpose, accompanied with a great number of men of war,
entered the city of London, in the first weke of Le^t. What should I declare
how the Kentishmen resorted: how the people of Essex swarmed, and how the
counties adjoining to London, daily repaired to se, aid, and comfort, this
lustly prince and flower of chiualry, as he in whom the hope, of their joy,
and the trust of their quietness only then consisted. This wise and prudent
noble man, perceiving the most part of the Realm, to be to him friendly and
adherent, mynoing to take time when time served, called a great counsel, both
of lords spiritual and temporal, and to them repeted the title, and right
that he had to the Realm, and dignity royal: rehersing the articles of the
agreement, not only concluded between king Henry, and his noble father, Richard
duke of York, by their writings signed and sealed: but also corroborated, and
confirmed by authority of the high court of Parliament: the breaches whereof,
he neither forgot, nor omitted vndeclared. After the lords had considered, and
weighed his title and declaracion, they determined by authority of the said
counsel, for as much as king Henry, contrary to his oath, honor and agreement,
had violated and intringed, the order taken and enacted in the last Parliament,
and also, because he was insufficient to rule the Realm, and inutile to the
common wealth, and public profit of the pore people, he was therefore by the
aforesaid authority, deprived and detected of all kyngly honor, and regal
souereigntie. And incontinent, Edward earl of March, son and heir to
Richard duke of York, was by the lords in the said counsel as^embled,
named, elected, and admitted, for king and governor of the realm: on which
day, the people of the earls part, being in their muster in sain^t Ihons
field, and a great number of the substanciall citezens there assembled, to
behold their order: suddenly the lord Fawco^bridge, which took the musters,
wisely declared to the multitude, the offenses and breaches of the late
agremente done and perpetrated by king Henry the.vi. and demanded of the
people, whether they would have the said king Henry to rule and reign any
longer over them: To whom they, with a whole voice, answered nay, nay. Then
he asked the^, if they would ser^e, love, and obey the earl of March as their
earthly prince and souereign lord. To which question they answered, yea, yea,
crieng, king Edward, with many great showtes and clappyng of hands. The lords
were shortly advertised of the loving consent, which the commons franckely and
freely of their fre will had given, whereupon incontinent, they all with a
convenient number of the most substanciall commons, repaired to Baynardes
castle, making just and true report to the earl of their eleccion and
admission, and the loving assent of the faithful commons. The earl after long
pausynge, first thanked God of his great grace and benefit, then to him
declared and showed, and the lords and commons also, for their hearty favor,
and assured fidelity, and notwithstanding that, like a wise prince, he
alleged his insufficiency for so great a room and weyghty burden, as lack
of knowledge, want of experience and diverse other qualities, to a governor
apperteyninge: yet in conclusion he being persuaded by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the bishop of Excester and other lords, the^ being present,
granted to their peticion, and took upon him the charge and upon the next day,
being the.iiii. day of March, he as king, rode to the church of saint Paul,
and there offered. And after Te deum song, with great solempnitie, he was
conveyed to Westmynster, and there set in the hawle, with the scopter royal in
his hand, where, to all the people which there in great number were assembled,
his title and claim to the croune of England, was declared by.ii. manner of
ways: the first, as son and heir to duke Richard his father, right
enheritor to the same: the second, by authority of Parliament and forfeiture
committed by, king Henry. Whereupon it was again demanded of the commons, if
they would admit, and take the said earl, as their prince and sovereign
lord, which al with one voice cried, yea, yea. Which agreement concluded, He
entered into Westmynster church under a canapy, with sole^pne procession, King
Edward the.iiii. proclaimed king of England.
and there as king offered, and after the homages taken of all the nobles there
present, he returned by water to London, and was lodged in the bishops palace:
Daily making provision to go Northwarde against his adverse faccion and open
enemies, and on the morrow he was proclaimed king, by the name of king Edward
the.iiii. throughout y^ city. While these things were in doing in the
Southpart, king Henry being in the Northcountrey, thinking because he had slain
the duke of York, the chief Capitayn of the contrary lynage, that he had
brought all thing to purpose and conclusion as he would, assembled a great
army, trusting with little pain and small loss, to destroy the residew of his
enemies, whom he esteemed to be of no force, or of a small validity. But he was
sore deceived: for out of the dead stock, sprang a strong and mighty
branch, which by no means could either be broken, or made sere: which was
this king Edward the.iii. which was so beloved and favored of the people,
that no man was spoken of, no person was remembered, but only he: for he was so
much esteemed, both of the nobility and commonaltie, for his liberality,
clemency, integrity, and courage, that above all other, he was extolled and
praised to the very heaven. By reason whereof men of al ages and of al degrees
to him daily repaired, some offering them selfs and their men to ieopard
their life's with him, and other plenteously gave him money, to support his
charges and maintain his war. By reason whereof, he assembled together a
puissant army, to thentent to give to his enemies a fierce and sharp battle,
and so in one day to obteyn his purpose and make an end of all his troble.
When his army was ready, and al things prepared, he departed out of London
the.xii. day of March, and by easy iourneys came to the castle of Pomfret,
where he rested, appointyng the lord Fitzwater, to keep y^ passage at
Ferybridge, with a great number of talle personages. Let no man think or yet
imagine, that either the counsel of king Henry, or his vigilant queen,
either neglected or forgot to know or search what their enemies did, but that
they prepared to their power all y^ men, that they either could persuade or
allure to their purpose to take their part. And thus thinking them selfs
furnished, committed the governance of the army to the duke of Somerset, the
earl of Northumberland, and ye lord Clifford, as men desiring to revenge ye
death of their pare^tes slain at the first battle of saint Albons. These
noble ^apitaynes, leaving king Henry, his wife, and son, for their most
sauegard in the city of York, passed the river of Wharfe, with all their
power, entendinge to prohibit king Edward to pass over the river of Ayree,
and for the more expedicion and exployt of their purpose (after many
comparisons made between the earl of Northumberland, and the lord Clifford,
both being in lusty yought, and of frank courage) the lord Clifforde
determined with his light horsemen, to make an assaye to such as kept the
passage of Ferybridge, and so departed from the great army, on the Saturday
before Palmsondaye, and early or his enemies were ware, gat the bridge, and
slew the kepers of the same, and al such as would withstand him. The lord
Fitzwater hearing the noise, suddenly rose out of his bed, and unarmed, with a
pollax in his hand, thinking ye it had been a fray emo^gest his me^, came down
to appeace the same, but or he either began his tale, or knew what the matter
mea^t, he was slain, and with him the bastard of Salisbury, brother to the
earl of Warwycke, a valeaunt young gentelman, and of great audacitie. When the
earl of Warwycke was informed of this feate, he like a man desperate, mounted
on his Hackeney, and came blowyng to king Edward saying: sir I pray God have
mercy of their souls, which in the beginning of your enterprise, has lost
their life's, and because I se no succors of the world, I remit the vengeance
and punishment to God our creator and redemer, and with that lighted down, and
slew his horse with his swourde, saying: let him fly that will, for surely I
will ^ary with him that will ta^y with me, and kissed the cross of his swourde.

THE lusty king Edward, perceiving the courage of histrusty fre^d the earl of
Warwycke, made proclamacion that all men, which were afraid to fight,
should incontinent depart, and to all me^ that tarried the battle, he
promised great rewards with this addicion, that if any soldier, which
volu^tariely would abide, and in, or before the conflict fly, or turn his
back, that then he that could kill him, should have a great remuneracio^ and
doble wages. After this proclamacio^ ended the lord Fawconbridge, sir Water
Blout, Robert Horn with forward, passed the river at Castelford.iij. miles
from Ferebridge, entending to have environed and enclosed the lord Clyfford and
his company, but they being thereof advertised, departed in great haste toward
king Henry's army, The conflict at Ferebridge
but they mete with some that they looked not for, and were attrapped or they
were ware. For the lord Clifforde, either for heat or pain, putting of his
gorget, suddenly with an arrowe (as some say) without an hedde, was stricken into
the throat, and incontinent rendered his spirit, and the earl of Westmerlandes
brother, and all his company almost were there slain, at a place called
Dintingdale, not far from Towton. This end had he, which slew the young earl
of Rutland, kneling on his knees: whose young son Thomas Clifford was brought
up with a shepperd, in poor habit, and dissimuled behauior ever in fear, to
publish his lignage or degree, till king Henry the.vij. obtained the croune, and
gat the diadem: by whom he was restored to his name and possessions. When
this conflict was ended at Ferebridge, the lord Fawco^bridge, having the
foreward, because the duke of Northfolk was fallen sick, valeau^tly upon
Palmsunday in the twylight, set forth his army, and came to Saxton, where he
might apparently perceive the host of his adversaries, which were
accounted.lx.M. men, and thereof advertised king Edward, whose whole army, they
that knew it, and paid the wages, affirm to.xlviii.M.vi.C. and.lx. persons,
which inco^tine^t with y^ earl of Warwycke set forward, leuyng the rereward
under ye gouerna^ce of sir Ihon Wenlocke, and sir Ihon Dynham and other. And
first of all he made proclamacion, that no prisoner should be taken, nor one
enemy saved. So the same day about.ix. of the clock, which was the.xxix. day
of March, being Palmsundaye, The conflict at Sa^to^ upon Palmsundai
both^ the hosts approached in a plain field, between Towton and Saxto^. When
each part perceived other, they made a great shoute, and at the same instante
time, their fell a small snyt or snow, which by violence of the wynd was driven
into the faces of them, which were of king He^ries part, so that their sight
was somewhat blemeshed and minished. The lord Fawnconbridge, which led the
forward of king Edwardes battle (as before is rehearsed) being a man of great
polecie, and of much experience in marciall feats, caused every archer under
his standard, to shot one flight (which before he caused them to provide) and
then made them to stand still. The Northre^ me^, feling the shoot, but by
reason of y^ snow, not well vewyng y^ distau^ce between them and their enemies,
like hardy men shot their schiefe arrows as fast as they might, but al their
shot was lost, and their labor vayn for they came not nere the Southerme^, be,
xl. ta^lors yerdes. When their shot was almost spent, the lord Fawconbridge
^arched forward with his archers, which not only shot their own whol^
sheues, but also gathered the arrows of their enemies, and let a great part
of them ^^ye against their own masters, and another part they let stand on y^
ground which sore noyed the legs of the owners, when the battle joined. The
earl of Northumberla^d, and Andrew Trolope, which were chefetayns of king
He^ries vawgard, seeing their shot not to prevail, hasted forward to join
with their enemies: you may besure the other part nothing re^arded, but
valeauntly fought with their enemies. This battayl was sore foughte^, for hope
of life was set on side on every part and taking of prisoners was proclaimed
as a great offense, by reason whereof every man determined, either to conquer
or to dye in the field. This deadly battle and bloody conflic^e, continued.x.
hours in doubtful victory. The one part some time flowyng, and sometime
ebbyng, but in conclusion, king Edward so coragiously comforted his me^,
refreshyng the weary, and helping the wounded, that the other part was
discomfited and overcome, and like me^ amassed, fled toward Tad^aster bridge
to save the^ selfs: but in the mean way there is a little broke called Cock,
not very broad, but of a great deapnes, in the which, what for have of
escapyng, and what for fear of folowers, a great num^er were drent and
drowned, in so much that the common people there affirm, that men alive passed
the river upon dead car^asis, and that the great river of Wharfe, which is the
great sewer of yt broke, and of all the water coming from Towton, was colored
with blood. The chase continued all night, and the most part of the next day,
and ever y^ Northren men, when they saw or perceived any advantage, returned
again and fought with their enemies, to the great loss of both parts. For in
this.iij. days were slain (as they that knew it wrote) on both parts
xxxvi.M.vij.C.lx. and.xvi. persons, A great slaught^r of Englishmen.
all Englishmen and of one nacio^, whereof the chief were the earls of
Northumberland, and Westmerland and the lord Dakers, the lord Wells, sir Ihon
Neuel, Andrew trolop, Robert Horn, and many other Knights and Esquiers, and
the earl of Deuonshyre taken prisoner, but the dukes of Somerset and Excester
fled from the field and saved them selfs. This conflict was in manner
unnatural, for in it the son fought against the ^ather, the brother against
the brother, the nephew against the uncle, and the tenant against his lord,
which slaughter did not only sore debilitate and much weke^ the puyssance of
this realm, considering that these dedde men, when they were living had force
enough to resist the greatest princes power of al Europe: But also gave a
courage to outward enemies and foren pote^tates, to i^^ade and make war in
this realm, which thing was not unlikely to have en^ued, if either Jews the
French king had been at this time quiet in his realm, or James king of
Scotts had been of age and master of him self, yet thanked be God, for
although the gate of a con^uest were opened, yet it was shut again, or it was
espied.

After this great victory, king Edward rode to York, where he was with all
solempnitie received: and first he caused the heddes of his father, the earl of
Salisbury, and other his friends to be taken from the gates, and to be buried
with their bodies. And there he caused the earl of Deuonshyre and.iii. other to
be behedded, and set their heddes in the same place. after that, he sent out
men on light horses, to espy in what part king Henry lurked, which hearing
of the irrecuperable loss of his friends, departed incontinent with his wife
and son, to the town of Barwycke, and leaving the duke of Somerset there,
came to the kings court of Scotland, requiring of him and his counsel, aid
succor, relief and comfort. The young king having compassion on the miserable
fateand great mischaunce of this sorrowful man, not only comforted him with
fair words and friendly promises, but also assigned to him a compedent
pencion to live on, during the time of his abode^ within the realm of
Scotland. King Henry considering the great humaniti^, showed to him by the
Scottis^ king, in whom only now consisted the whole hope and especial trust
of his aid and succor, thought to bynd and oblige the said king, with some
great benefit to his part, and for that cause, delivered to him the town of
Barwycke ^inge Henry the.vi. delivered the town of Barwic^* into the han^des
of James king of Scotland.
upon twede: which town the Scotts many years had desired, but yet they
neither by force nor fair promises, could obtain their desire or purpose
before y^ time, Some writers affirm, that he not voluntarily, but coacted by
nece^^itie, rendered the same town, or else he could not be permitted once to
enter, or have any succor in the realm of Scotland. But whatsoever the cause
was: after king James had taken possession of the town, he friendly enterteyned
and faithfully supported the part and faccion of king Henry, and concluded a
marriage between his sister and the young prince of Wales, which marriage,
Philippe duke of Bourgoyne, enemy to queen Margaretes father, labored much to
infringe and interrupte: but by the consent of both the fre^des, the matrimony
was agreed, but it was never solempnised, as after you shall hear. When king
Henry was somewhat setteled in the realm of Scotland, he sent his wy^e and his
son into France, to king Rene her father trustyng by his aid and succor,
to assemble a great army, and once again to possess his Realm and dignity,
and he in the mean season determined to make his abode in Scotland, to se and
espy, what way his friends in England would study or invent, for his
restitucion and advancement. But whether it were his destinye or his folly, he
so imprude^tly demeaned him self, that within short space, he came into the
hands of his mortal enemies. Queen Margaret thus being in France, did obteyn
and impetrate of the young French king, that all fautors and lovers of her
hus^ande and the Lancastreall band, might safely and surely have resort into
any part of the realm of France, prohibiting all other of the contrary
faccion, any access or repair into that country.

THVS you have heard the variable chance and tragedicall hystory of king
Henry the sixthe, which had reigned over this realm eight and thirty years
and odd months, which the tenthe year after h^s deposicion, was again
erected to his throne and estate royal, as after shall be declared. Now leuynge
king Henry with the princes of his faccion consultynge together in Scotland,
and Queen Margarete his wife gatherynge men together in France, I will return
to the acts of king Edward.

: FINIS.:
The end of the trobelous season of king Henry the.vj.
The prosperous reign of King Edward the fourth.
PRosperous fortune and glorio^s victory, The first year
happily succedyng to this yo^g Prince and courageous Capitain, in the mortal
battaill fought at Towton, (as you have heard) he being incoraged and set up,
partly because he had obtained so great a conquest, and partly, because he
perceived, that as well the nobles as the commo^s of the Realm, began to draw
to him, and to take his part, after the fashion and manner of a triumphaunt
conqueror, and victorious champion, with great pomp returned to London. Where
(according to the old custom of the realm) he called a great assemble of
persons of all degrees: and the.xxix day of June, was at Westminster with all
solempnitie crounedand anointed King, and called King Edward the.iiij. after
Willyam the Conqueror, which was in the year of Christ's
incarnacion.M.iiii.C.lxj.

IN the which year, he called his high Court of Parliament, wherewith thestate
of the Realm was wholly set in good order, and specially such things as
apperteined to the common wealth, which were to much neglected and decayed.
During the time of the civil and intestine war, he caused all statutes and
ordinances made by king Henry the sixte, (which either touched his title or
his profit) to be adnihilate and frutrate. In the which Parliament, the Earl
of Oxford far stricken in age, and the Lord Ambrey Ueer, his son and heir,
whether it were for malice of their enemies, or they were suspected, or had
offended the King, they both and diverse of their counsailors, were attainted
and put to execucion, which caused Ihon earl of Oxford, ever after to rebel.
And afterward he created his two younger brethern Dukes, that is to say:
Lord George, Duke of Clarence, lord Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and lord
Ihon Neuell, brother to Richard Earl of Warwick, he first made Lord
Mountacute, and afterward created him Marquis Mountacute. Beside this, Henry
Burchier, brother to Thomas Archbishop of Cantorbury was created Earl of
Essex, and William Lord Fawconbrige, was made Earl of Kent. To this Lord
Henry Burchier being a noble man in marciall acts, highly approved and
renoumed, Richard Duke of York, long before this time, had given his suster
Elizabeth in marriage: Having a firm hope, and a sure confidence, that he and
his generation, should be a perpetual aid to the Duke and his sequel, as well
in prosperity as adversity, associate together in all chances of fortune,
which trust he did not defraude, as afterward appeared to King Edward the
fourth, son to thesaid duke Richard, which for his assured fidelity, made
him Earl of Essex: to the end that both he the father, and his son, should
ever be to him, both an aid and a bulwark. This Earl Henry, begat of lady
Elizabeth his wife, four sons, William, Thomas, Ihon, and Henry, and one
daughter named Isabel, which lived bat a small season. In the which sons,
in compassyng and bryngyng great things to pass, there lacked no industry,
nor providence: in grauous and weighty affairs, there wanted neither labor
nor diligence: in all ieoperdies, they were hardy, strong, and coragious: and
finally, in forseyng of things, they neither lakced pollecie, nor were
destitute of counsel. But in Lord William, the eldest son of Henry, all
the^e virtues were surely planted and engraven: which William espoused lady
Anne Woodwile, descended of an high pare^tage, whose mother Iaquet was daughter
to Peter of Luxenborough, earl of saint Paul by whom he had Lord Henry,
afterward Earl of Essex, and Cicile, and Isabel, which died unmarried: Cicile
was married, to Water lord Ferre^s of Chartley. But now to return to the
purpose.

The second year. The.ii. year.

WHen al these chau^ces, thus luckely happened to king Edward, and all things
in manner were framed, as he would have them: Henry duke of Somerset, sir Raufe
Percie, and diverse other, being in despair, and out of hope of all good
chance, that might happen to king Henry the sixte, came humbly and submitted
theimselfes, whom he gentely interteined, and louyngly received. Of which
deed, the duke shortly repented him and so did some of the other.

ALL this season was king Henry the.vj. in Scotland, which to have the more
aid and comfort of the Scottishe king, he delivered unto him the town of
Barwicke, (as you before have heard) which had been continually, in the
possession of Englishmen, from the time of king Edward the first, which, with
hardy courage, manfull assautes, slaughter of many thousands of Scotts,
valiauntly conquered the same. This same season also, queen Margaret being in
France, by the means of her father and friends, found such friendship at the
French kings hands, that she obtained a crewe of five hundred Frenchemen,
which was but a small number, for her purpose, and yet a greater number then
her husband or she, were able to intertein in wages, of their own ^offers.
She thus being accompanied, with these bostyng Frenchmen, of whom sir Piers
Bracy, a Bryton knight was Capitain, a man more fierce in the house* then in
the feld, and yet more fierce in fliyng from the ^eld to the house, then hardy
to set foreward from the house to the feld, set up her sails, and with a
prosperous wind, arrived in Scotland. If she and her company, were welcome to
her husband and son, I report me to such as languish, and would have
succor, and to such as lack aid, and would be comforted. The Queen and her
company, Queen Margarete wi^h her company arriueth at Tynmouth.
thought to do some great enrterprise, (as the nature of the Frenchemen is,
to be more busy then bold) sailed with her gallant band, toward New Castle,
and landed at Tynmouthe. But whether she were a fraied of her own shadow, or
that the Frenchemen cast to many doubts, the truth is, that the whole army
returned to their ships, and a tempest rose so suddenly, that if she had not
taken a small Caruell, and that with good speed, arrived safe at Barwicke: she
had neither vexed king Edward after, as she did with a new invasion, nor yet
she had not lived all her old age, in misery wretchedness, and callamitie, as
she did, leasyng both her husband, her son, her Realm, and her honor. And
although fortune was so favorable to her, yet her company were with stormy
blastes, driven on the shore before Ba^borough castle, where they set their
ships on fire, and cowardly fled to an Island, called holy Island, where they
were so assailed by the bastard Ogle, an Esquire called Ihon Manners, with other
of king Edwardes retinue, that many of them were slain, and almost.iiii.C.
taken prisoners, and put to ransom. But the capitain Bracy more coward then
coragious, happened by chance of a fishar man, and so came to Barwicke, to
Queen Margaret his mastres: whether she gave him thanks or no, I doubt, but
sure I am, he none deserved, yet she made him capitain of Alnewike Castle,
which he with his fresh men kept till they were rescowed. This chance little
amassed the Queen, nor in any thing abated her haute courage. For incontinently
she obtained a great company of Scotts, and other of her friends, and so
bringyng her husband with her, and leauyng her son called prince Edward, in
the town of Barwicke, entered Northumberlande, and took the castle of
Bamborough, and stuffed it with Scotts, and made thereof capitain sir Raufe
Gray, and came forward toward the Bishopric of Durham. When the Duke of
Somerset heard these news, he without delay refused king Edward, and rode in
post to his kynsman, king Henry the sixte: verefiyng the old proverb: kynne
will ^repe, where it may no go: Refusyng the surety of his estate, which king
Edward did promise him, for the uncertain gain which he hoped to get, by
supportyng king Henry. With him fled also sir Raufe Percy, and many other of
the kings fre^des, but many mo followed him, for coueteousnes of spoil and
rapyne: in so much that the puyssaunce of king Henry, was thought to be of as
much force, as the strength and army, of his enemy king Edward. The which army
was judged to be y^ greater, because he spoiled, and burned tounes, and
destroyed feldes, whersoeuer he came. King Edward (as you could not blame him)
was with these doings nothing content, wherefore like a wise prince,
intendyng to stop the gut of king Henry's power, or it made any farther issue:
Prepared al municions, convenient for the war, rigged and apparreled, a great
navy of ships, of which some were vitailed at Lyn, and some at Hull, and
they were furnished with soldiers. When his army by the sea, was thus
warlikely set forward: he sent the lord Montacute, (whom both for his
hardiness and sage conduyte in marciall affairs, he much trusted and
believed) into Northumberlande, there to raise the people, to withstand his
enemies. And after this, he in his royal person, accompanied with his
brethren, and a great part of the nobility of his realm, not without a great
and puyssaunt army, marched toward his enemies, and came to the city of
York, sendyng a great quantity of his faithful subjects, to the aid of
the lord Montacute, least paraduenture he geuyng to much confidence, to the
men of the Bisshopprike and Northumberlande, might by them be deceived and
surprised. The Lord Montacute, forgot not the office of a good capitain; nor
being well furnished with such as he knew would neither fly backward, nor
stand still lookyng, and not fightyng, thought no le^ger to tract the time,
but with a valiant courage, marched forward toward his enemies, and in his
journey, he was incountered, with the lord Hungerford, the Lord Roos, sir
Raufe Percy, and diverse other, at a place called Hegely More. Where suddenly
thesaied lords, in manner without stroke strikyng, fled, and only sir Raufe
Percy abode, and was there manfully slain, with diverse other, saying* when he
was diyng: I have saved the bird in my bosom: meaning that he had kept, both
his promise and oath, to king Henry the.vj: Forgettyng that he in king Henry's
most necessity, abandoned him, and submitted him to king Edward, (as you
before have heard.) The lord Mo^tacute seeing fortune thus prosperously leadyng
his sail, was auaunced with hardy courage toward his enemies, and then in
passing forward, he had by his espialles perfect intelligence, that king Henry
with all his power, was encamped in a fair plain called Lyuels, on the water
of Dowill in Exham shire. The battle at Li^els, on the Water of D^wil in
Exham shire.
It was no need to bid him have have, as he that thought not to lose the
occasion, to him so manifestly given, and to leave the good port of fortune,
to him opened and unclosed: and therefore, in good order of battle, he
manfully set on his enemies, in their own ca^pe, which like desperate
persons, with no small courage received him. There was a sore fought feld, and
no party by a long tract, could get any advantage of the other, till at the
last, the lord Montacute, criyng on his men to do valiauntly, entered by plain
force, the battaill of his enemies, and brake their array, which like men
amassed, fled hither and thither, desperate of all succor. In which flight and
chase, were taken, Henry duke of Somerset, which before was reconciled to King
Edward, the Lord Roos, the Lord Molyns, the Lord Hungerford, sir Thomas
Wentworth, sir Thomas Huse, sir Ihon Fynderne, and many other. King Henry was
this day, the best horseman of his company: for he fled so fast that no man
could overtake him, and yet he was so nere pursued, that certain of his henxmen
or folowers were taken, their horses being trapped in blew velvet: whereof one of
the^ had on his head, shesaid king Henry's healmet. Some say his high cap of
estate, called abococket, garnished with two rich Crounes, which was
presented to king Edward, at York the fourth day of May. The Duke of
Somerset, was incontinently, for his great mutabilitie and lightness, behedded
at Exam, the other lords and knights, were had to New Castle, and there after
alitle respite, were likewise put in execucion. Beside these persons, diverse
other to the number of.xxv. were executed at York, and in other places: whereby
other fautors of king Henry's party, should be out of all trust of al victory,
considering that their capitaines, had hopped hedles. From this battaill
escaped king Henry the.vj. sir Humfrey Neuell, William Taylboys, calling
himself earl of Keme, sir Raufe Gray, and Richard Tunstall, and diverse other,
which being in fear of taking, hid themselfes and lurked in de^nes and wholes
secretly. They were not so closly hid, but they were espied: for the earl of
Keme was taken in a close place in Riddesdale* and brought to New Castle, and
there with an axe lost his life, Sir Humfrey Neuel, after long lurkyng in a
Cave, was taken in Holdernes, and at York behedded. Thus every man almost
that escaped, was after taken and scorged: so that it should seem that God had
ordained, all such persons as rebelled against king Edward, to have in
conclusion, death for their reward and guardone.

AFTER this battaill called Exham feld, king Edward came to the city of
Duresme, to the intent to be more nerer to his enemies, if they would make any
farther attempt: and sent from thence into Northumberlande, the Earl of
Warwick, the lord Montacute, the lords, Fawconbrige and Scrope, and diverse
other, to recover such Castles and fortresses, as his enemies there held, and
with force defended. These lords first besieged the castle of Alnewike, which
sir Piers Bracy and the Frenchemen, by force and strong hand kept, and in no
wise would yield, sendyng for aid to the Scotts, whereupon sir George Douglas,
earl of Angus, with.xiii.M. men well chosen, in the day time rescowed the
Frenchemen out of the castle, the Englishemen lookyng on, which thought it
much better to have the castle, without loss of their me^, then to lose both
the castle and their men, considering the great power of the Scotts, and their
small number: and so they entered the castle and manned it, and after thesaied
lords, besieged the castle of Dunstanborogh, and by force took it, and Ihon
Goys servant to the duke of Somerset capitain of thesaid castle, was taken and
brought to York: where, with a hachet he received his reward. These Lords
also took by force, the strong castle of Bamborough, and in it sir Raufe Gray,
which was before sworn to king Edward, for the which perjury to both the
princes, he was disgraded of the high order of knighthode at Dancastre, The
disgradynge of a knight.
by cuttyng of his gylt sporres, re^tyng his cote of arms, and breakyng his
sword over his head: and finally, there his body was shorted, by the length of
his head, and had no more harm, thus was he rewarded for his doble deceit, and
manifest perjury.

AFTER this victory, king Edward returned to York, where, in despite of therle
of Northumberlande, which then lurked, in the realm of Scotland, he created
sir Ihon Neuel, lord Montacute, earl of Northumberlande, and in reprofe of
Iaspar earl of Penbroke, he created William lord Herbert, earl of the same
place: but after when by mediacion of friends, therle of Northumberlande, was
reconciled to his favor, he restored him fully to his possessions, name and
dignity: and not intendyng thereby, to diminishe the honor of his friend, he
preferred sir Ihon Neuel, to the style of Marquis Montacute, and so by that
means, he was in estate and degree higher, then therle of Warwick his elder
brother, but in power, pollecie, and possessions, far baser and lower.

The third year. The.iii year.

ALthough that King Edward might now think, all things to be in a good case,
and himself also to be of puyssance sufficient against al his enemies, (for yt
he had obtained so great a victory): yet did he provide with all diligence,
that neither king Henry, nor queen Margaret his wife, should by any means
remain in England: least the sight with the persuasions of them, and
especially with old friends and alies, might alter and change the minds, and
also win the hearts of the mutable co^monaltie. Wherefore he edified bulwarks,
and builded fortresses on every side and part of his realm, where might be
any place propice and mete, for an army to arrive or take land. Beside this,
he wrote to all them in the South parts of his realm, that in no wise they
should receive thesaied queen, nor in any thing should help or minister to her:
and if any did presume or attempt, privately or openly to infringe his will and
commandment, the offenders should be taken as his adversaries, and punished
as his utter enemies. And on that part that marches upon Scotland, he laid
watches and espialles, that no person should go out of the realm, to king
Henry and his company: which then lay soiornyng in Scotland. But what so ever
ieoperdy or peril might be construed or demed, to have insued by the means
of king Henry: all such doubts, were now shortly resolved and determined, and
all fear of his doings, were clearly put under and extinct. For he himself,
whether he were past all fear, or was not well stablished in his perfect mind,
or could not long keep himself secret, in a disguysed apparel, boldly
entered into England. He was no sooner entered, but he was known and taken of
one Cantlowe, and brought toward the king, whom the earl of Warwick met on
the way, by the kings commandment, King Henry the.vi. taken, and committed
to the Toure of London.
and brought him through London, to the toure, and there he was laid in sure
hold. Queen Margarete his wife, hearing of the captivity of her husband,
mistrustyng the chance of her son, all desolate and comfortles, departed out
of Scotland, and sailed into France, where she remained with Duke Reyner her
father, till she took her unfortunate journey into England again: where she
lost both husband and son, and also all her wealth, honor, and worldly
felicity. The new Duke of Somerset and his brother Ihon, sailed into
Flaunders, where they also lived in great misery, till duke Charles, because
he was of their kyn, and descended of the house of Lancastre by his mother,
succored them with a small pencion, which to them was a great comfort. Therle
of Penbroke went from country to country, not always at his hearts ease, nor
in security of life, or surety of living. Such an unstable and blind gods
is fortune: for when he that sits highest on the whele falls to the
ground, all that be underneath fall also, and can neither have aid nor help of
her, nor yet of theimselfes.

AFTER the taking of king Henry the.vj. and the departing of his wife, this
realm was in more quietness and tranquillity, because that men of the contrary
part and faccion, durst not once attempt nor yet move, any new tumulte or
conspiracy, considering that both the head was fallen, and the chief members
fled and vanquished. Wherefore king Edward, being clearly out of doubt, of all
hostility and danger, set all his mind the whole four years following, for
both amendyng things prejudicial to the common wealth, and also for
stablishyng of things, mete and necessary, for the people of his Realm and
dominion. And first of al, following the old ancient adage which says, that
the hus^andman ought first to taste of the new growe^ fruit: he distributed the
possessions, of such as took part with king Henry the.vi. to his soldiers
and capitai^es, which he thought had well deserved it. And beside, he left no
point of liberality vnshewed, by the which he might allure to him, the
benevolence and loving hearts of his people: and in especial to his nobility,
he gave both large and precious gifts and rewards. And because yt he would
gladly have the love of all men, as well noble as ignoble, as well of rich as of
poor, he showed himself more familiar, both with the nobility and the
commonaltie, then (as some me^ thought) was convenient, either for his estate,
or for his honor: which gentilnes and friendly familiarity, he ever after
used. The laws of the realm, King Edward the iiii. devised the names of the
Coins.
in part he reformed, and in part he newly augmented. The coin both of gold
and of silver, which yet at this day is curraunt, he newly devised and
divided: for the gold he named royals and nobles, and the silver he called
grotes and half grotes. After this, he caused open Proclamacion to be
diuulged, that all persons which were adherent to his adversaries part, and
would leave their armure, and submit themselves wholly to his grace and mercy,
should be clearly remitted, pardoned, and relessed: and they that obstinatly
would so refuse, should have such pains, as by the law, to such
transgressors, was assigned and appointed. What profit this gentle
interteinyng of his people brought him to: What good will and fixed hearts of
the people, he obtained by this kind and friendly handelyng, all me^ may with
their iyes manifestly perceive. For only by the favor and aid of the people,
ever after in all his wars, he was a victor and a conqueror: so that all
enterprises afterward against him attempted, had either evil success, or were
sone refelled, as afterward you shall perceive. When he had brought his Realm
into this estate, he surely thynkyng, and no less trustyng, but that he was
set in the sure stall, sta^ble throne, and immovable chair, of the croune of
his realm and kingdom, was not only desirous of himself, being a prince of
haut courage* young, lusty, and sanguyne of complexion, to have a wife, but was
also daily ^ollicited, required, and mocioned of the peers and nobility of the
Realm, to join with such a make, as should be both to his honor and
contentacion, and also for the security and establishment, of the royal
succession and continuance of his progeny, in his new possessed country, and
late recovered kingdom. Whereupon, like a wis^ and a circumspecte Prince, very
desirous of a Queen, but more thirstyng for such a make, by the aid of whose
parents, alies and confederates: he being joined with them in perfect
affinity, might little or nothing doubt the attemptes of his adversary king
Henry, nor yet the malice of his secret friends and privy fautors. This matter
(as it was of great weight and importance) hangyng long in consultacion:
Amongst other it was moved, to send to James the.iii, king of Scotts, for the
obteinyng of the fair lady Margaret his suster, to the intent, that* on that
side, king Henry his adversary, should be destitute of all aid, refuge,
succor, and comfort: but whether it were for a privy sickness, or an open
impediment, to him and his counsel declared, or by them spied, this mocion
vanished and took no farther effect. Then (as many men have said, and few or
none have written) it was farther consulted, that the lady Elizabeth, suster
and heir apparent, to Done Henry king of Castle, (which afterward was his
heir in deed, and married to Done Ferna^do, king of Arragon) was a marriage for
him most convenient, and not so convenient, as profitable both to him and his
realm, and them that should lineally succeed him, considering that if he
might obtein the kingdom of Castle, of the which his great graund mother,
was one of the indubitate heirs, as daughter to Done Peter, late king of
Castle, (by the valiant knight, Edward prince of Wales, restored to his
seigniory, realm and kingdom) then were he in case, not only hable to defend
himself, and his realm of England, against all foren enemies, and utter
invasions, but also he should be of puyssance sufficient to invade, and likely
to recover the duchy of Guyen, yea, and whole Acquitain, being his own true
and lawefull inheritance, with the aid only of the Castilians* puttyng the
Englishement to little trauaill, and less charge. This mocion thus setforward
seemed highly to redounde, both to the honor of the king, and the high
auauncement of thestate of the realm: Considering first, the high pare^tage of
the woman, and secondly, the indubitate expectacion o^ thinheritance, of the
realms of Castle and Lion. And this marriage agred upon, (which seems more
likely to be entreated of, then concluded as the tale tellers say). The earl
of Warwick was sent into Spain, well instructed, and no less accompanied, for
the conclusion of thesaid marriage. But who so will diligently consider, and in
egall balaunce ponder, the youth and appetite of king Edward, and the tender
age and minority of this noble damsel: may evidently perceive, that it was
neither decent nor convenient, for him nor his realm, to expect and tarry the
maturitie and full age of this noble princes, nor that he being a prince, well
cherished, of lusty courage, and apt to generation, would or could live sole
and unmarried without a wife, till she were of age, mete and convenient for his
bed. For it appears on her goodly sepulture, in the cite of Granado (where she
is buried) and also diverse famous and notable Historiographers, both of Spain
and other regions, write and affirm, that she changed this transitory life, in
the year of our Lord.M.D.vi. being L. years of age, one month only lackyng.
By which report she should be borne, in the year of our lord.M.iiii. C.lvi.
And when therle of Warwick was sent for the marriage of king Edward, in the
beginning of the third year of his reign, the year of our lord.M.cccc.lxiii,
so that then she was six and not fully.vii. years, at which time king Edward
had fully accomplished.xxiiii. years and more. The treaty of which marriage
although it be not impossible, yet for ye causes aforsaied, it seems not
alitle unlikely. But admit that this marriage was moved, as it peradventure
might be, and that the earl of Warwick sailed into Spain, (as he did not in
deed) of likelihod his legacion was frustrate, and came to none effect: but
sure it is that the same year, he came to king Jews the.xi. then being French
king, liyng at Tours, and with great honor was there received, and honorably
interteined: of who^, The treaty^ of a marriage for king Edward the.iiii.
for king Edward his master, he demanded to have in marriage the lady Bona,
daughter to Jews duke of Sauoy, and suster to the lady Carlot, then French
Queen, being then in the French court. This marriage seems pollitiquely
devised, and of an high imaginacion to be invented, if you will well consider,
the state and condition of king Edwardes affairs, which at this time, had king
Henry the vi. in safe custody, in the strong toure of London, and the most
part of his adherentes, he had as he thought, either profligated or extinct,
Queen Margaret only except, and Prince Edward her son, which were then
soiornyng at Angiers, with old Duke Reiner of Aniow her father, writing himself
king of Naples, Scicile, and Jerusalem, having as much profits of the letters
of his glorious style, as rentes and revenues out of thesaid large and rich
realms and dominions, (because the king of Arragon took the profits of
the same* and would make no account thereof to duke Reiner). King Edward therefore
thought it necessary, to have affinity in France, and especially by the
Queen's suster: which Queen, although she ruled not the king her husband, (as
many women do) yet he of a certain especial humility, was more content to
have her favor and follow her desire, (for wedded men often times doubt
storms) rather then to have a lowryng countenance, and a ringing peale, when
he should go to his rest and quietness: trusting that by this marriage, queen
Margarete (whom the same Queen Carlot little or nothing regarded, although her
father was called a king and she a queen, and none of both having subjects,
profits, nor dominions) should have no aid, succor, nor any comfort of y^
French king, nor of none of his fre^des nor alies, wherefore queen Carlot much
desirous to advance her blod and progeny, and especially to so great a prince
as king Edward was, obtained both the good will of the king her husband, and
also of her sister, so that the matrimony on that side was clearly assented to,
and the earl of Dampmartine appoi^ted with other, The marriage concluded for
king Edward the.iiii.
to sail into England, for the clearly finishyng of the same. After these
things thus concluded, the earl of Warwycke was dismissed and highly rewarded,
and for the great and noble courage that was in him, he obtained such favor of
the king, the queen and the nobles of France, that when he fled out of
England, he was there honorably received, friendly maynteined, and lovingly
succored, as you shall perceive hereafter.

BUT now consider the old proverb to be true y^ says: that marriage is
destiny. For during ye time that the earl of Warwycke was thus in France,
concludyng a marriage for king Edward: The king being on huntyng in the forest
of Wychwod beside Stonnystratforde, came for his recreacion to the manor of
Grafton, where the duches of Bedford soiorned, then wife to sir Richard
Woduile, lord Ryuers, on who^ then was attendyng a daughter of hers, called
dame Elizabeth Greye, wydow of sir Ihon Gray knight, slain at the last battle
of saint Albons, by the power of king Edward. This wydow having a suyt to y^
king, either to be restored by him to some thing taken from her, or requyring
him of pity, to have some augmentacion to her living, found such grace in the
kings eyes, that he not only favored her suyte, but much more phantasied her
person, King Edward falls in love with the buches of Bedfo^des daughter, ^
after marieth her.
for she was a woman more of formal countenance, then of excellent beauty,
but yet of such beauty and favor, that with her sober demeanure, lovely
lokyng, and femynyne smylyng, (neither to wanton nor to humble) beside her
toungue so eloquent, and her wit so pregnant, she was able to rauishe the mind
of a mean person, when she allured, and made subject to her, y^ heart of so
great a king. After that king Edward had well considered all the linyame^tes of
her body, and the wise and womanly demeanure that he saw in her, he determined
first to attempt, if he might provoke her to be his sovereign lady, promisyng
her many gifts and fair rewards, affirmynge farther, y^ if she would
thereunto condisce^d, she might so fortune of his peramour and concubyne, to be
changed to his wife and lawful bedfelow: which demand she so wisely, and
with so covert speech answered and repugned, affirmynge that as she was for
his honor far unable to be his spouse and bedfelow: So for her own poor
honesty, she was to good to be either his concubyne, or sovereign lady: that
where he was a littell before heated with the darte of Cupido, he was now set
all on a hot burning fire, what for the confidence that he had in her perfyte
constancy, and the trust that he had in her constant chastity, and without any
farther deliberacion, he determined with him felfe clearly to marye with her,
after that askyng counsel of them, which he kenwe neither would nor once
durst impugn his concluded purpose.

BUT the duches of York his mother let it as much as in her lay alledgyng a
precontract made by him with the lady Lucye, and diverse other lettes: al which
doubts were resolved, and all things made clear and all cauillacions avoided.
And so, privily in a morning he married her at Grafton, where he first
phantasied her visage.

The.iiii. year. The iiii. yer^

ANd in the next year after, she was with great solempnitie crouned queen at
Westmynster. Her father also was created earl Ryuers, and made high Constable
of England: her brother lord Anthony, was married to y^ sole heir of Thomas
lord Scales, and by ^er he was lord Scales. Sir Thomas Gray, son to sir Ihon
Gray, the queen's first husband, was created Marquis Dorset, and married to
Cicilie, heir to the lord Bonuile. Albeit this marriage, at the first
apparaunce was very pleasant to the king, but more joyous to the queen and
profitable to her blood, which were so highly exalted* yea, and so suddenly
promoted, that all the nobility more maruayled then allowed this sudden
risyng and swift eleuacion: Yet who so will mark the sequel of this story,
shall manifestly perceive, what murder, what misery, and what troble ensued by
reason of this marriage: for it can not be denied, but for this marriage king
Edward was expulsed the Realm, and durst not abide, And for this marriage was
therle of Warwycke and his brother miserable slain. I^commodi^^^ y^ (...) of
^yng Edwardes marriage.
By this marriage were king Edwardes.ii. sons declared bas^ardes, and it
conclusion priued of their life's. And finally by this marriage, the queen's blood
was confounded, and utterly in manner destroyed. So y^ men did afterward divine,
that either God was not contented, nor yet pleased with this matrimony, or else
that he punished king Edward in his posterity, for the diepe dissimulynge and
covert clokynge, with his faithful friend the earl of Warwycke. But such
co^iectures for y^ most part, be rather more of men's pha^tasies, then of divine
reuelacion. When this marriage was once blown abroad, foreign kings and princes
maruayled and musyd at it: noble men detested and dis^ained it: the common
people grudged and murmured at it, and al with one voice said, that his
unadvised wowyng, hasty loving, and to spedy marriage, were neither meet for
him being a king, nor consonant to the honor of so high an estate. The French
king and his queen were not a littell discontent (as I can not blame them) to
have their sister, first demanded and then granted, and in conclusion
rejected, and apparently mocked, without any cause reasonable. Wherefore shortly
to appeseher dolor, they married her to Ihon Gale^ce, duke of Millayn, where she
lived in great felicity. But when the earl of Warwycke had perfect knowledge by
the letters of his trusty friends, that king Edward had gotten him a new wife,
and that all that he had done with king Jews in his ambassade for the
co^ioynyng of this new affinity, was both frustrate and vayn, he was earnestly
moved and sore chafed with the chance, and thought it necessary that king
Edward should be deposed from his croune and royal dignity, as an inconstant
prince, not worthy of such a kyngly office. All men for the most part agree,
that this marriage was the only cause, why the earl of Warwycke bare grudge, and
made war on king Edward. Other affirm that th^re were other causes, which
added to this, made y^ fire to fla^me, which before was but a litell smoke. For
after that king Edward had obtained his kingdom (as it was then thought) by
the only help and mean of the earl of Warwycke, he began to suspect* yea,
and to doubt him, fearyng, lest he being in such authority and estimacion of
the people, as he well might work him pleasure or displeasure, when he
thereunto were minded, wherefore he thought it convenient a little and a little to
pluck away and minyshe the power and authority, which he and his
predecessors had given to the earl, to thentent that he then might do at his
pleasure, both at home and in outward parties, without fear or dread, without
check or taunt, whatsoever to his awn mind seemed most convenient. By this a
man may se that often it chau^ceth, that friends for one good turn will not
render another, nor yet remember a great gratuite and benefit in time of
necessity, to the^ showed and exhibited: But for kyndnes they show unkindness,
and for great benefits received, with great displeasure they do recompense. Of
this the earl of Warwycke was nothing ignorant, which although he looked for
better thanks and more ample benefits at king Edwardes hands: yet he thought
it best to dissimule the matter, till such a time were come, as he might find
the king without strength, and then to imbrayd him with the pleasure that he
had done for him. The displeasure between king Edward the.iiii. and the earl of
Warwycke.
And farther it erreth not from y^ treuth that king Edward did attempt a thing
once in the earls house which was much against the earls ho^estie (whether he
would have deflowred his daughter or his nece, y^ certayntie was not for both
their honors openly known) for surely such a thing was attempted by king
Edward, which loved well both to look and to feel fair dammosels. But whether
the injury that the earl thought he had taken at king Edwardes hands, or the
disdain of authority that the earl had under the king, was the cause of
dissolucion of their amity and league, truth it is that the privy intencions
in their hearts brake into so many small pieces, that England, France, and
Flaunders, could never join them again, during their natural lyfes.

THE earl of Warwycke being thus moved, infla^med, and set against the king*
lest in his fury, his purpose might be espied and brought to naught,
determined him self, covertly dissimulyng, so long to suffer all such wrongs
and injuries, as were to him done, til he might spy a time convenient, and a
world after his awn appetite, for the setting forth of his enterprise, and
accompilshyng of his purpose: whereupon he sailed into England, and with
reverence saluted the king as he was wont to do, and declared his Ambassade and
thexployt of the same, without any spot of grudge to be perceived, as though he
were ignorant of the new matrimony. And when he had tarried in the c^urte a
certain space, more for to show that he was the same person, and of the same
good mind toward the king, as he was before the time of his legacion, then
for any great affeccion that he bare, either to the king or the queen, he
obtained license of the king, to depart to his Castle of Warwycke, both for his
health and recreacion, whither with great honor he was accompanied with diverse
of the kings familier seruitors, as though none inward grudge or covert
dissimulacion had been hydden between them, where he remained till all his
privy imaginacions were made open, and all his enterprises were ready to be
set forward. During which time, the queen was delivered of a young and fair
lady, named Elyzabeth, which afterward was wife to the noble prince king
Henry the vij. and mother to king Henry the.viij,

The v year. The *v. year.

WHen king Edward had reigned this, full the term of.v. years, not all in
pleasure, nor yet so in displeasure, but either by policy or fre^dshippe, he
ever was superior, and had the upper hand of his enemies: He daily studied and
intentyuely applied his whole mind with all labor and diligence to obtain the
love, favor and amity of outward princes and foren potentates. First to have a
Rowlad for an Olyuer, for the French king whom he knew not to be his friends,
by reason of the refusal of his queen's sister, he procured an amity with
Henry, king of Castle, and Ihon king of Arragon. At the concludyng of which
amity he granted license and liberte for certain cottesolde sheep to be
transported into the county of Spain King Edward lyce^ced a ^^^tayne number
of sheep to be transported into Spain.
(as people report) which have so there multiplied and increased, that it has
turned y^ comoditie of England, much to the Spanysh profit, and to no small
hynderance of the lucre and gain which was beforetymes in England, raised of
wolle and fell. Beside this to have an amity with his next neyghbor, the
king of Scotts he wynkynge at the town of Barwyke, was content to take a
truce for xv. years.

BUT Lord what happy chance and good luck had king Edward for beside these
new friends and conferates (of the which, some were more farther of, then he
could call to for help with a whistel, when he stood in most danger and
distress) Fortune beside all his expectation provided him even at his elbowe,
A brother in law, a perpetual allye and friendly neighbor: which offered
allyaunce and new amity, if he had either refused or myssed, surely of al his
other putatyue (I dare not say feigned) friends, for all their leage, in his
extr^me necessity, he had been clearly abandonyd, and of all comfort left
disconsolate. This happy chance came by this occasion, In this same season was
lord and prince in Flaunders, Brabant and Zela^dt, and other the low contreis,
thereaboute, Philippe duke of Burgoyne, a man as he was of great age and
years, so was he had in much honor, great estimacion and high reverence
amongst all kings and princes in his days: which duke as you hard before,
was enemy mortal to king Henrye the sixte This duke had only one son
legitimate, called Charles earl of Charol^ys, a man of such haute courage, of
so high enterprice and vntimerous audacite (even like the son of Mars) as
few or none was seen in his time: For how he discomfited king Loys the.xi.
then the French king at the battle of Montleherrye, the Frenchemen has not
yet forgotten. The land of Luke also has in recent memory his sore scorge
and cruel plage. This earl Charles was at this time a wydower, having only a
sole daughter, and no son, wherefore both by his father and him self and the
companions of the order of the golden flece, being of their cou^sail, it was
thought not only expedient but much more necessary, that he should take a
wife, ye and in such a place as they might by that matrimony have both aliance
and aid against all their outward enemies, and especially against the
French king, whom they knew daily to wait and watch like a serpente, how he
by fraud might swalow or catch them or their possessions: upon which
co^municacio^ it was declared by certain, there being present, that king
Edward of England had a fair virgyn to his sister, called lady Margarete, a
lady of excellent beauty, and yet more of womanhod then beauty, and more of
virtue then womanhode, whose innumerable good qualities, beside the gifts of
nature, grace and fortune, were so seriously setfurth to duke Philip, and the
earl of Charoloys his son, that both the father and the child judged that
marriage to be the most metest matrimony in Christendom, not only for the
excellent qualities and manifold virtues emprinted in the person of the noble
virgyn, but also for the great profit, alliance and continual friendship that
should grow and rise between the realm of England, and the dukes lands.

The vi. year.
AFter that this point was clearly resolved on, The vi. year.
the Duke appointed his bastard son lord Anthony, commonly called the
bastard of Bourgoyne, chief Ambassadoure for this purpose: a man of great
wit, courage, valiantnes and liberality, which being richely furnished of
plate and apparel, necessary for his estate, having in his company ge^telmen
and other expert in all feats of chiualry, and merciall prowes, to y^ number
of.cccc. horses (as the Brabanders write) took his ship, and with prosperous
wind arrived in England, where he was of the nobility received and and with all honorable entertainment, conveyed to the kings presence which like a
prince, that knew what apperteined to his degree, lovingly welcomed, and
familiarly embrased the bastard and other nobles y^ came with him. And after
his commission seen, and his message declared, the King gave to him a gentell
answer for that time, and so the ambassadors departed to their lodging,
where they kept a great household, and made triumpha^t chere. You may think
that king Edward was not so unwise, nor yet so unpurveyed of counsel, to
forsake this beneficial alliau^ce, amicable consanguinitie and loving
frendshyp, thus frankely to him proffered and granted, but that he and all his
counsel with foot and hand endeavored them selfs to bring too pass, and
finally to conclude the same, the Earl of Warwycke only except, which berynge
his hearty favor too the French king by ill reports, did as much as in him
lay to hinder this marriage and affinity, of whose good will duke Charles was
well informed.

But for all his opinion at a ce^tayne day, the king sent for the
Ambassadors, and there declared to^ them how he gladlye did both accept and
grant their loving request, and demand, promisyng them in the word of a
Prince, that he should be during his life friend to the fre^des of the Duke and
the Earl, and ennemies to their adversaries and ennemies, which words not a
littel pl^ased the Burgo^nyons. After this he caused the lady Margaret his
syste^ to be sent for which being richely appareled, accompanied with a great
multitude of ladies and gentelwomen, entered into the kings great chamber, with
so sober demeanure, so fair a visage, so loving a countenance and so princely
a port, that she was esteemed for her personage and qualities, both of the
Burgonnyons and other, not to be vnw^rthy to match in matrimony, with the
greatest prince of the world. And after the king, she and the ambassadors
had co^moned a good tract of time, the lord Anthony^ bastard of Burgonnye,
contracted openly the said lady Margaret, for and in the name of his brother
the earl Charles, and there in the name of the duke his father, and the Earl
his brother, he presented to y^ lady Margaret a rich and a costly Iuell,
which she ioyouslye received with great thanks and many gratulations given,
b^th to her father in law and her new contracted husband.

After this marriage, was thus concluded and contracted to speak what bankettes,
festes, disguisynges, pastymes and pleasures were made and showed to the
ambassadors, it were to long to write the matter, b^yng no more serious, and
much more tedious to here: But one thing was v^ry honorable, and not mete to be
put in obliuio^. The bastard of Burgoyne, a man of a haute courage, challenged A
chaleng^.
Anthony lord Scales, broth^r to the Queen, a man both egall in heart, and
valyantnes with the bastard to fight with him both on foot and on horsbacke,
the lord Scales gladly received his demand and promised him on the oath of a
gentelman, to answer him in the field, at the day appointed: like chalenges
were made by other Borgonyons, to the gentelmen of England, which you may
surely believe were not refused. The king ente^dyng to see this marciall sport
and valiant challenge performed, caused lystes royal for the champio^s, and
costely galleries for Ladies to look on, to be newly erected and edefied in
West Smythfelde in London. And at the day by the king assigned, the.ii. Lords
entered within the listes, well mounted, richely trapped, and curiouslye armed.
On which day they ran together, certain courses with sharp speres, and so
departed with egall honor. The next day, they entered the field, the bastard
sitting on a bay courser, being somewhat dymme of sight, and the lord Scales
had a gray courser, on whose s^haffro^ was a long and a sharp pyke of stele.
When these.ij. valea^t persons coped together at the tornay, the lord Scales
horse by chance or by custom, thrust his pyke into the nostrelles of the
horse of the bastard, so that for very pain he mounted so high, that he fell
on the one side with his master, and the lord Scales road round about him with
his sword shaking in his hand, ^yll the king commanded the Marshall to help
up the bastard, which openly said, I can not hold by the clouds, for
though my horse failed me, surely I will not fail my cou^terco^paignions. And
when he was remounted, he made a countenance to assail his (...), but the king
either* favoring his brothers honor then gotte^^^ mistrustyng the shame, which
might come to the bastard, if he were again foiled, caused the Heraldes to
cry, a lostell, and every man to depart. The morrow after, the two noble men
came in to the field on (...), with two Poleaxes, and there fought valiantly
like two coragious ^hamp^ons, but at the last, the point of the axe of the
lord Scales happened to e^ter into the ^ight of the healme of the bastard, and
by fine ^orce might have plucked him on his knees, the king sodaynlye cast
doun^ his ^arder, and then the Marshalls them severed. The bastard not content
with this chance, very desirous to be revenged, trustinge on his cunning at
the Poleaxe (the which feate he had greatly excercysed, and there in had a
great exper^^ent) required the king of justice, that he might perform his
enterprise: the lord Scales, not refused it. The king said he would ask
counsel, and so calling to him the Constable and Marshall with the officers of
arms, after long consultacion had, and laws of arms rehearsed, it was
declared to the bastard for a sentence diffinitiue by the duke of Clarence,
then Constable of England, and the duke of Northfolke Earl Marshall, that if
he would prosecute farther his attempted challenge, he must by the law of
arms, be delivered to his aduersarye in the same case and like condition, as he
was when he was taken from him, that is to say, the point of the lord Scales
axe to be fixed in the sight of his healme, as deep as it was when they were
severed. The bastard heryng this iudgemt, doughted much the sequel, if he so
should proceed again, wherefore he was content to relinquyshe his challenge,
rather then to abide the hasarde of his dishonor: Other chalenges were done,
and valiau^tly achened by the Englishmen, which I pass over. When all these
corragious acts were thus with joy accomplished, sorrowful tidinges were
brought to the bastard, that duke Philip his father was passed this transitory
life, of which tidinges he was not a littell sorrowful, and thereupon taking
his leave of king Edward and his sister, the new Duches of Burgoyne,
liberally rewarded with plate and Iuels, with all celeritie he returned to the
new duke Charles his nephew, acco^pting to him what exployt he had made in his
Ambassade and message, which answer was to the great contentacion and
accomplishement of the desire of the said Duke, and thereof most heartily
thanked the lady for her consent, as for the thing that he most desired, not
forgetting to gratefie king Edwardes for his preferment and furtherance in
his louinge request.

This contract was made, and duke Philip dyed in the year of our
salvation.M.CCCC.LXUII. and in the.vj. year of king Edward the.iiij. in
which year king Edward more for the Marquis Montagewes love, then for any
favor he bare to the earl of Warwycke, promoted George Neuel their brother, to
the Archebishoperyke of York.

The,vii, year, The.vii: ye^^

NOw to return to Charles duke of Burgoyne, which was with great victory,
and victorious triumph returned from the conquest of the land of Luke of
Bruseles, he not forgetting the contract, which his bastard brother the lord
Anthony had made in his name, with the noble princess lady Margaret, sister to
Edward king of England, deu^sed always how he might with all honor and
royalty, have her received into his country. And first he wrote to the king
of England, to send her over the sea with all diligence, according to the
pact and leage between them concluded, which being nothing slack, and
especially in such a cause, as so highly magnified his blood, prepared
ships and all things necessary, for the honorable conduyte of her and her
company and so accompanied with the ^ukes of Exceter and Southfolke and their
wyfes, being both her systers, and a great company of lords and ladies and
other, to the number of.CCCCC. horses, in the beginning of June departed out
of London to Dover, and so sailed to S^uys, how she and her company were there
received, and from thence conveyed to Bruges, where the marriage was celebrate
and solempniezd, what abundau^t fare and Delicate vian^ was served at the
feast, with how rich hanginges the house was garnished and trimmed, with how
many Cupperdes of gold and silver the palace was adourned, with how many
garnyshe of silver vessel the companyes were served, what Iustes, what
Tourneys, what bankettes, and what disportes were at this Nup^iall feast* I
neither dare nor will write, according to the Braba^der Cronicle, lest
perauenture some men might think that I flattered a little, as perchance I
think they say not true in a great dele.

But now to let go ye matters of joy and solace, and to return to the
pestilent serpent, which so long had sucked up his poison, and now began to
vomit and cast it so abroad, that all the.iij. years following the whole Realm
was continually infected with the same, which infeccion, never ceased till the
air was purified with the bloudde and death of him self at Barnet field: for
if you call to your remembrance the deep dissimulinge of the Earl of Warwycke
at his return from beyond the sea, and the continual grudge that lurked in
his sto^mack, toward king Edward sith y^ time, ye must think that of very
necessity it would at length either burste the vessel, and by some means
issue out, as it did now even at this time: he being at his town of Warwycke,
accompanied with his two brethren the Marquis Mountacute, and the Archbishop
of York, framed communicacion too make them merye and to pass forth the time
two or three days, and at the last having an occasion to speak of the king
and his doings and procedinges, he then first moved and excited them by all
ways possible to help and aid, and to restore king Henry the sixte, to the
Croune and royal dignity again, The persuasion of y^ earl of Warwyke unto his
two brethren against king Edward the fourth.
saying to the^ after this wise. My dear and well-beloved brethren, the
incredible faythefulnes, the secret sobernes, and the polytique prudence that
I have ever by long co^tinua^ce of time experimented in you both, does not
only encourage my heart, yea and sets me in great hope of obteynynge my
purpose, but also puts me out of all dread and mistrust, fermely beleuyng,
and surely judging, yt you both will with tothe and nail endeuer your self, to
the uttermost of your power to bring to effect and purpose y^ thing that I now
shall declare unto you. Surely, I would in no wise that you should think
that, that which I shall speak to you, of king Edward and king Henry, should
rise of any lightness or fantasy of my mind, or any triffelyng toye, lately
fallen into my imaginacion, but the true experience and just judgment, that I
have of them both, their qualities and conditions, in manner compel and
constrain me to say as I say, and to do as I do. For surely King Henry is,
a Godly, good, and a verteous person, neither forgettyng his friends, nor
puttyng in oblivion any benefit by him, of a mean person received, nor yet
any pain for his causes sustained, he has left unrewarded: To whom God has
sent a son, called Prince Edward, borne to be of great worthynes and praise,
of much bountefulnes and liberality, of whom men may, many laudable things
conjecture, considering the pein, labor, and trauaill, that he takes to help
his father out of captivity and thraldom. King Edward on the contrary side,
is a man, co^tumelious, opprobrious, and an injurious person, to them that
deserve kyndnes, he shows unkindness, and to them that love him, he dedly
hates, now detestyng to take any pein, for the preferment or maintenance, of
the public wealth of this realm, but al given to pastime, pleasure, and
daliance. Sooner preferryng to high estate, men descended of low blood, and
basse degree, then men of old and undefiled houses, which has both supported
him, and the common wealth of his realm: So that now I perceive, that it is
eue^ come to this point that he will destroy all the nobility, or else the
nobility must shortly, of very necessity destroy and confound him. But
reason would, that we that were first hurt, should first revenge our cause: for
it is not unknown to you both, how that he, immediately after he had obtained
the croune, began first secretly, and then openly, to envy, disdain, and
impugn the fame, glory, and renoune, of our house and family, as who said,
that all the honor, preferment, and authority that we have, we had only
received at his hands, and that we had neither obteigned, dignity nor rule by
our great labor, aid and trauaill. Which to a^l men may seem untrue, which
consider that our name, chief title, and principal authority, was to us
given by king Henry the sixte, and not by him. But if every man will remember,
who first took part with his father, when he claimed the Croune: who at that
time, for that cause was in great ieoperdie, and almost slain by the kings
meniall servants, and who never left this man in prosperity nor adversity,
till he had the garlande, and the realm in quietness, shall manifestly
perceive, that we and our bloudde, has showed our selfs more like fathers
to him, then he like a friend to us. If we have received any benefits of him,
surely they be not so much, as we have deserved, nor so much as we looked
for, and yet they be much more, then he would we should inioye, as ye both
well perceive and know. Let these things ouerpasse, and speak of the
ungentle, untrue, and unprincely handelyng of me, in the last ambassade, being
sent to the French king, for to treat a marriage for him, having full
authority to bynd and to lose, to contracte and conclude. Which thing when I
had finished and accomplished: how lightly his mind changed, How privily he
vowed, and how secretly he married, Both you know better then I. So that by
this means, I was almost out of all credence, in the Court of France, both
with the king and queen as though I had come thither like an espiall, to move a
thing never minded, or to treat of a marriage determined before, never to take
effect. Whereby the fame of all our estimacion, which all kings and Princes
have conceived in us, partly obtained by the virtue and prowess of our noble
ancestors, and partly acheued by our own peines and forward acts: shall now
be obfuscate, utterly extinguished, and nothing set by. What worm is touched,
and will not once turn again? What beast is stricken, that will not rore or
sound? What innocent child is hurt that will not cry? If the poor and
unreasonable beasts: If the sely babes that lacks discresion, groan against
harm to them proffered, How ought an honest man to be angery, when things
that touch his honesty, be daily against him attempted? But if a mean person
in that case be angery: how much more ought a noble man, to fume and stir
coals, when the high tipe of his honor is touched, his fame in manner brought
to infamy, and his honor almost blemished and appalled, with out his offense or
desert? All this brethren you know to be true, the dishonor of one, is the
dishonor of us all, and the hurt of one, is the hurt of all: Wherefore,
rather then I will live unrevenged, or suffer him to reign, which has sought
my decay and dishonor, I will surely spend my life, land, and goods, in
setting up that just and good man king Henry the sixte: and in deposyng this
untrue, unfaithful, and unkind Prince (by our only means) called king
Edward the fourth.

These fair words allured the Archbishop shortly, to his intent and purpose,
but the Lord Marquis could by no means be reduced, to take any part against
king Edward, till the erl^ had both promised him great rewards and high
promocions, and also assured him of the aid and power, of the greatest princes
of the realm. Eue^ as the Marquis unwillingly, and in manner coacted gave his
consent, to this unhappy coniuracion, at the intisement and procurement of
therle, so with a fainte heart and less courage, he always showed himself
enemy to King Edward* except in his last day: which lukewarm heart, and
double dissimulacion, were both the destruction of him and his brethren. The
earl of Warwick being a man of a great wit, far castyng, and many things
vigilantly foreseyng, either perceived by other, or had perfect knowledge of
himself, that the duke of Clarence, bare not the best will to king Edward his
brother (as he did not in deed) thought first to prove him a far of, as it
were in a problem, and after to open to him (if he saw him flexible to his
purpose) the secret imaginacions of his stomach: thynkyng that if he might by
policy or promise, allure the duke to his party, that king Edward should be
destitute, of one of his best Hawks, when he had most need to make a flight.
So at time and place convenient, the earl began to complain to the duke, of the
ingratitude and doublenes of king Edward, saying: that he had neither handled
him like a friend, nor kept promise with him, according as the estate of a
Prince required. The earl had not half told his tale, but the duke in a
great fury answered, why my lord, think you to have him kind to you, that is
unkind, yea, and unnatural to me being his own brother, think you that
friendship will make him keep promise, where neither nature nor kynred, in any
wise can provoke or move him, to favor his own blood? Think you that he will
exalte and promote his cousin or alie, which little cares for the fall or
confusion, of his own line and lignage: This you know well enough, that the
heir of the Lord Scales he has married to his wifes brother, the heir also
of the lord Bonuile and Haryngton, he has given to his wifes son, and
their of the lord Hungerford, he has granted to the lord Hastynges: three
marriages more meter for his two brethren and kynne, then for such new
foundlynges, as he has bestowed them on: But by sweet saint George I
swear, if my brother of Gloucester would join with me, we would make him
know, that we were all three one man's sons, of one mother and one lignage
descended, which should be more preferred and promoted, then strangers of his
wifes blood.

When therle of Warwick had hard the dukes words, he had that which he both
sore thrusted and lusted for, and then began boldly to disclose to the Duke,
his intent and purpose even at the full, requiryng him to take part with him,
and to be one of the attempted confederacy. And least the duke might think,
that the matter was lightly, and uncircumspectly begone, he declared to him, how
warely, how secretly, how spedily all things concerning this purpose, had
been compassed, studied, and forsene, requiryng him in so great and vrgente a
cause, both to take pein and trauaill, and also to study with all
circumspeccion and forseyng, how these things thus begone might be brought to a
certainty and a final conclusion. And the rather to win the dukes heart the
earl beside diverse and many fair promises made to the duke, offered him his
eldest daughter (being o^ ripe age and elegant stature) in marriage, with the
whole halfedele of his wifes inheritance. The duke at the persuasion and
request of therle, promised to do all things which he would or could, in any
manner require or desire. After that the Duke and the earl had long consulted,
concerning their strange and dangerous affairs: they first determined to
sail to Caleis, of the which town the earl was chief capitain, where his wife
and two daughters then soiorned, whom to visit, the duke of Clarence being in
amors, had no small affeccion. But the earl continually remembryng the purpose
that he was set on, thought to begin and kindle the fire, of his ungracious
coniuracion (which so many years vexed and unquieted the realm of England)
before his departure, wherefore he appointed his brethren, the Archbishop and
the Marquis, that they should by some mean in his absence, stir up new
commocion or rebellion, in the County of York and other places adiacente: so
that this civil war should seem to all men, to have been begone without his
assent or knowledge (he being in the parts of beyond the sea).

The eight year: The.viii: year

WHen all these things were thus determined, and in grave counsel allowed,
the earl and the duke sailed directly to Caleis: where they were solempnely
received, and ioyously interteined of the Countess and of her two daughters.
And after that the duke had sworn on the Sacrament to keep his promise and
pacte inuiolate made and concluded with the earl of Warwick, he married the
Lady Isabell, eldest daughter to thesaied earl, in our Lady Church at Cal^is,
with great pomp and solempnitie. After which marriage so solemnized, the
duke and therle consulted sadly together, by what means they should continue
the war (which as it was by them appointed) was recently and within few
days begone in York shire, not without great rumore and disturbaunce, of all
quietness in that country.

The mother of this pernicious commocion, was vncharitie, or very impiety, for
there was in the city of York, an old and rich Hospital, dedicated to
Saint Leonarde, in the which Almosehouse the poor and indigente people were
harbored and refreshed, and the sick and impotente persons were comforted and
healed. For this good purpose and char^table intent, all the whole Province of
York, gave yearly to this Hospital certain measures of corn: in manner as an
oblacion of the first fruits of their new grain, thynkyng their gift given
to so holy a place, for so holy an expense, should be to them meritorious,
and before God acceptable. Certain evil disposed persons of the earl of
Warwickes faccion, intendyng to set a bruill in the country, persuaded a
great nombre of husband men, to refuse and deny to give any thing to thesaied
Hospital, affirmyng and saying: that the corn that was given to that good
intent, was not expended on the pore people, but the Master of the Hospital
wexed rich with such almose and his priests wexed fat, and the poor people
lay lean without succor of comfort. And not content with these sayings,
they fell to doings, for when the Proctors of the Hospital, acc^rdyng to
their usage, went about the country, to gather the accustomed corn, they
were sore beaten, wounded, and very evil entreated. Good men lamented this
ungodly demeanure, and the perverse people much at it reioysed, and took such
a courage, that they kept secret conuenticles, and privy communicacio^s, in
so much, that within few days, they had made such a confederacy together,
that they were assembled to the nombre of.xv. thousand men, even ready pressed to
set on the city of York. When the fame of this commocion and great assemble,
came to the ears of the citizens of York they were first greatly astonished:
but leauyng fear aside, they were in a great doubt and uncertainty, whether
it were best for them to issue out of their walls, and to give battaill to the
rebels, or to keep their city, and repulse the violence of their enemies, by
the manfull defendyng of their walls and ports. But the Lord Marquis
Montacute, governor and presedent of that country for the king, did shortly
put the citizens out of all fear and suspicion of invasion, for he taking
spedy cou^saill, and considering the opportunity of the time, with a small
nombre of men but well chosen, encountered the rebels, before the gates of
York: where after long conflicte, he took Robert Huldurne their capitain, and
before them commanded his head there to be stricken of, and then he caused all
his soldiers (because it was dark, to enter into the city of York) and
after their long labor to refreshe them.

Here is to be marueiled, why the Marquis thus put to death the capitain and
ruler of the people, stirred and reised up by him, and the fellows of his
coniuracion and conspiracy: Some say he did it to the intent, that he would
seem faults and innocent, of all his brothers doings, and privy
imaginacions: But other affirm and say, that he for all his promise made to
his brother, was then deliberatly determined to take part with king Edward,
with whom (as it shall after appear) he in small space entered into great
grace and high favor. The people being nothing abashed at the death of their
capitain, but rather the more eger and fierce, by fair means and crafty
persuasions: found the means to get to them, Henry son and heir to the
lord Filz Hughe, and sir Henry Neuell, son and heir of the Lord Latimer,
the one being nephew, and the other cousin germain to therle of Warwick.
Although that these young gentlemen, bare the names of capitaines, yet they had
a tutor and governor called sir Ihon Conyers, a man of such courage and
valiauntnes, as few was in his days, in the North parts. And first
considering that they could not get York, for want of ordinance and artilery,
which they did lack in deed, they determined with all ^pede to march toward
London, intendyng by the way to reise such a phantesie in the peoples hearts,
yt they should think that king Edward was neither a just prince to God, nor
profitable to the common wealth of y^ realm.

When king Edward (to whom all the doings of the Earl of Warwick, and the
Duke his brother, were manifest and ouerte, and were come to that point, that
he expected and looked for) was by diverse letters sent to him, certified that
the great army of the Northren men, were with all spe^e coming toward London.
Therefore in great have he sent to Wyllyam lord Herbert, whom, within two
years before, he had created earl of Penbroke, that he should without delay
encountre with the Northren men, with the extremity of al his power. The earl
of Penbroke, commonly called the lord Herbert, was not a little joyous of the
kings letters, partly to deserve the kings liberality, which of a mean
gentleman, had promoted him to the estate of an earl, partly for the malice
that he bare to the earl of Warwick, being the sole obstacle (as he thought)
why he obtained not the wardship of the Lord Bonuiles daughter and heir, for
his eldest son. Whereupon he accompaignie^ with his brother sir Richard
Harbert, a valiant knight, and above.vi. or.vii. thousand Welshemenne well
furnished, marched forward to encountre with the Northren men. And to assiste
and furnishe him with archers, was appointed Humffray lord Stafford of
Southwike (named, but not created) Earl of Devonshire, by the King, in hope
that he valiauntly would serve him in that journey, and with him he had eight
hundred archers. When these two Lords were met at Cottishold, they made
diligent inquiry, to here where the Northren men were, and so by their
explorators they were asserteined, that they were passing toward Northampton,
whereupon the lord Stafford, and sir Richard Harbert with two thousand well
horsed Welshmen, said: they would go vewe and se the demeanor and nombre of
the Northern men, and so under a w^oddes side, they covertly espied the^ pass
forward, and suddenly set on the rerewarde: but the Northren men with such
agilitie so quickly turned about, that in a moment of an hour, the Welshemen
were clean discomfited and scatered, and many taken, and the remnaunt returned
to the army with small gain.

King Edward being nothing abashed of this small chance, sent good words
to the Earl of Pembroke, animatyng and byddyng him to be of a good courage,
promisyng him not alonely aid in short time, but also he himself in person
royal, would follow him with all his puyssance and power. The York shire
men, being glad of this small victory, were well cooled and went no farther
Southward, but took their way toward Warwick, lokyng for aid of therle,
which was lately come from Caleis, with the Duke of Clare^ce his son in
law, and was gatheryng and reisyng of men, to succor his friends and
kyns^olke. The king likewise assembled people on every side, to aid and assist
therle of Penbroke and his compaignie. But before or any part received comfort
or succor, from his friend or partaker, both the armies met by chance, in a
fair plain, nere to a town called Hedgecot, three mile from Banbery, Banbery
feld
wherein be three hills, not in equal distaunce, nor yet in equal quantity,
but liyng in manner although not fully triangle: the Welshemen gat first the
West hill, hopyng to have recovered the East hill: which if they had obtained,
the victory had been theirs, as their unwise Prophesiers promised the^ before.
The Northren men encamped themself on the Southe hill. The earl of Penbroke and
the lord Stafford of Southwike, were lodged at Banbery the day before the
feld, which was saint James day, and there the earl of Pembroke, put the
Lord Stafforde out of an Inn, wherein he delighted much to be, for the love
of a damsel that dwelled in the house: contrary to their mutual agreement by
them taken, which was, that whosoever obtained first a lodgyng, should not be
deceived nor removed. After many great words and crakes, had between these
two capitaines, the lord Stafford of Southwyke, in great dispite departed
with his whole compaignie and band of Archers, leauyng the earl of Pembroke
almost desolate in the town, which, with all diligence returned to his host,
liyng in the feld vnpurueied of Archers, abidyng such fortune as God would
send and provide. Sir Henry Neuell son to the Lord Latimer, took with him
certain light horssemen, and skirmished with the Welshemen in the euenyng, even
before their Camp, where he did diverse valiant feats of arms, but a little
to hardy, he went so far forward that he was taken and yielded, and yet
cruelly slain: which unmerciful act, the Welshemen sore ruied the next day
or night. For the Northren men being inflamed, and not a little discontented,
with the death of this noble man, in the morning valiauntly set on the
Welshemenne, and by force of archers, caused them quickly to descend the
hill into the valey, where both the hosts fought. Therle of Penbroke behaved
himself like a hardy knight, and expert capitain, but his brother sir Richard
Herbert so valiauntly acquitted himself, that with his Polleaxe in his hand (as
his enemies did afterward report) he twice by fine force passed through the
battaill of his adversaries, and without any mortal wound returned. If every
one of his fellows and compaignions in arms, had done but half thactes,
which he that day by his noble prowes ach^ued, the Northre^men had obtained
neither sauetie nor victory.

Beside this, behold the mu^abilitie of fortune, when the Welsheme^ were at
the very point, to have obtained the victory (the Northernme^ ^^eyng in manner
disco^fited) Ihon Clappam Esquier, servant to the Earl of Warwycke, mounted
up the side of ye east hyl, accompanied only with.CCCCC. men gathered of all
the Rascal of the town of Northampton and other villages about, having borne
before them the standard of the Earl, with the white Bear, Cryenge a Warwycke a
Warwycke. The Welshmen thinkyng that y^ Earl of Warwycke had come on them with
all his puyssance, sodaynlye as men amassed fled: the Northernme^, them
pursued and slew without mercy, for ye cruelty that they had showed to the lord
Latymers son. So that of the Welshme^ there were slain above.v.M, A great
slaughter of Welshemen.
beside them that were fled and taken.

The earl of Penbroke, sir Rychard Herbert his brother, and diverse gentelmen
were taken, and brought to Banberie to be behedded, much lamentacion and no
less entreatie was made to save the life of sir Rychard Herbert, both for his
goodely personage, which excelled all men there, and also for the noble
Chiualry, that he had showed in the feldes the day of the battayll, in so much
that his brother the Earl, when he should lay down his head on the block to
suffer, said to sir Ihon Conyers and Clappam, Masters let me dye for I am old,
but save my brother, which is young, lusty and hardye, mete and apt to serve
the greatest prince of Christendom. But sir Ihon Conyers and Clappain,
remembryng the death of the young knight sir Henry Neuel, Cosyn to the earl of
Warwycke, could not here on that side, but caused the earl and his brother with
diverse other gentelme^, to the number of.x. to be there behedded. The
Northamptonshire men, with diverse of y^ Northernme^ by them procured, in this
fury made them a captain, and called him Robyn of Riddisdale, Robin of
Riddesdale.
and suddenly came to the manner of Grafton, where the earl Ryuers father to
the Queen then lay, whom they loved not, and there by force took the said
earl and sir Ihon his son, and brought them to Northampton, and there without
judgment stroke of their heddes, whose bodies were solemply enterred in the
Blackefreers at Northampton. When king Edward was advertised of this
unfortunate chau^ces, he wrote in all have to the Shiriefes of Somerset shyre
and Deuenshyre, that if they could by any mean take the lord Stafford of
Southwyke, that they upon pain of their lives, should without delay put him in
execucion, which accordingly to the kings commandment, after long
exploracion made, found him hyd in a village in Brentmarche, called where he
was taken and brought to Bridgwater, and there cut shorter by the hedde. This
was the order, Hegecote feld commonly called Banbery^ field.
manner and end of Hegecot field, come^ly called Banberie field, foughten the
morrow after saint James day, in the.viij. year of king Edward the.iiii, the
which battle ever since has been, and yet is a continual grudge between
the Northernmen and the Welshemen. After this battle the Northernme^ resorted
toward Warwycke, where the earl had gathered a great multitude of people,
which earl gave high comme^dacions to sir Ihon Conyers and other capitaynes of
y^ North, much rejoicing, that they had obtained so glorious victory, requiring
them to continue as they had begone. The king likewise sore thrusting to recover
his loss late sustained, and desirous to be revenged of the deaths and
murders of his lords and fre^des, marched toward Warwycke with a great army,
and ever as he went forward, his company increased, because he commanded it
to be noysed and published to the common people, that his only intent was to
destroy, and utterly to confound the unhappy stock and ill graffed
generation, of such pernicious persons, as would disturb and bring in
thraldom, ye quiet commons and peaseable people. The earl of Warwycke had by
his espialles perfyt, knowledge how the king with his army was bent toward him,
and sent in all have possible to the duke of Clare^ce (which was not far from
him with a great power) requyringe him that both their hosts might join in
one for as far as he could imagyne, the time of battle was very nere. The
duke hearing these news, in good order of battle, came and encamped him
self with the earls host. When all things were ready prepared to fight: by the
means of fre^des, a mean was found how to common of peace, for the which,
letters were written from each part to other, declaring their griefs and the
very bottoms of their stommackes: Herauldes spared no horseflesh in riding
between the king and the earl, nor in retornynge from the Earl to the king:
the king conceyuinge a certain hope of peace in his own imaginacion, took
both less head to him self, and also less fered the outward atte^ptes of
his enemies, thinkyng and trusting truly that all things were at a good
point, and should be well pacified. All the kings doings were by espials
declared to the earl of Warwycke, which like a wise and politic Captain
entendyng not to lose so great an auantage to him given, but trustyng to bring
all his purposes to a fynall end and determinacion, by only obteyning this
enterprise: in the dead of the night, with an elect company of men of war, as
secretly as was possible set on the kings field, kylling them that kept the
watch, and or the king were ware (for he thought of nothing less then of
that chance that happened) at a place called Wolney.iiii. mile from Warwycke,
King Edward the.iiii. taken prisoner, by y^ earl of Warwike
he was taken prisoner, and brought to the Castle of Warwick. And to the
intent that the kings friends might not know where he was, nor what was
chanced of him, he caused him by secret journeys in the night to be conveyed to
Myddelham Castle in Yorkeshyre, and there to be kept under the custody of the
Archbishop of York his brother, and other his trusty friends, which
entertained the king, like his estate, and served him like a prince. But there
was no place so far of but that the taking of the king was shortly known
there with y^ wind which news made many men to fear, and greatly to dread,
and many to wonder and lament the chance. King Edward being thus in
captivity, spoke ever fair to the Archbishop and to the other kepers, (but
whether he corrupted them with money or fair promises) he had liberty diverse
days to go on hunting, King Edward escaped out of prison.
and one day on a plain there met with him sir William Stanley, sir Thomas of
Borogh, and diverse other of his fre^des, with such a great bend of men, that
neither his kepers would, nor once durst move him to return to prison again.

Thus as you have hard was king Edward delivered: Some say that he was set at
large by the earls consent and commandment, as who said, I had him in my
keeping, and might have destroyed him, I had him in captivity, and so might
have deteyned him, but yet of mine own frewill and gentelnes, without pacte or
raunsom I am contented to set him at liberty and to deliver him. This doing
might seem to be some countenance of treuth, if the earl after this had
desisted from persecutyng the war by him newly begone: But for a treuth this
good chance happed to king Edward, by the ill luck of king Henry, for
surely by this ill fortune a man may plainly conjecture, that the extreme point
of decay of his house and estate was apparently at hand, considering that
neither by man's policy, nor by worldly riches his unhappy predestinate
chance could not by any policy be put by, nor by any instrument scraped away
(well such was Gods pleasure) for if you consider how that the earl of
Warwycke and his friends, only to thentent to aid, conserve and defend king
Henry the.vi. have dispended their substances, adventured their lives, and
taken pains intolerable, having a sure determinacion, fixed in their minds,
that as long as king Edward lived, that king Henryes faction should never
prosper and yet when he was by the Earl taken prisoner, and in captivity, he
by fortune escaped, or was wilfully delivered. By this you may plainly perceive
that the luck of king Henry was unfortunate, and that all that was done for
him, and in is quarrel, ever redouned to his misfortune and detriment, ever
notyng this, that when things contrived and Imagened come to an unlucky
success, all the senses of our bodies be there by anger, fear or madness,
rauyshed, and in manner distracte from them selfs. But to return to the
purpose, when king Edward had escaped the hands of his enemies, he went
streyghte to York, where he was with great honor received of the Citiezens,
and there tarried two days to prepare some small army, to accompany him in his
journey, but when he perceived that he could have no host mete and convenient
to pass to London, thorough the mids of his enemies (as he was appointed to
do) he turned from York to Lancaster, where he found the lord Hastynges his
Chamberlayne, well accompanied. He then with y^ aid of the lord Hastynges, and
such other as drew to him, being well furnished with spedy journeys, came safe
to his city of London.

When the earl of Warwyke and ye duke of Clare^ce, had knowledge how the king by
treason of them yt they put in trust, was escaped their hands, and that in one
moment of time, all their long studyes and forcastes were brought to none
effect or conclusion, they wexed angrye, and chafed without measure, and by and
by calling together all their chief friends began to consult again, of new,
and to enquire the estate of their enemies, to the intent that they might make
a beginning of a new war, which they coniectured to have taken an end when
the king was brought in to captivity. The minds of these Princes were much
satisfied, and their courage greatly kindeled, by reason that a great number of
men having more pleasure in discord then in concord, loving better strife then
unity, offered them selfs to begin new war of their own desire and
request. King Edward took even like study for the wars as his enemies did,
myndinge either to bring them to conformity or reason, by dent of sword, or
else by power of battle utterly to destroy and exstirpate them and their
affinity, to the intent ye* all men might led a more quiet life, and live in
more security and rest: for by the sedicious rebellinge of these persons, the
state of the Realm was brought to great misery, for Churches and Temples
were every where robbed and spoiled, houses burnt, and men slain in every
place, all the Realm was replenished with blood, slaughter, sorrow and
lamentacion, Cornefeldes were destroyed Cities and Cownes were made desolate
and languished with famyn and dearthe, beside many other things, which happen
by the cruelty and furye of war and rebellion. This tumult and trouble in
the common wealth of this Realm sore vexed and troubled many, but in especial
y^ nobility much lamented and pitied the state of the comminaltie which with
all diligence rode between the king, the Earl and the Duke to reconsile the^
each to other, and to conclude a perfect peace and amity, requiring them
rather more to remember the benefits, that every of the^ have received of
other, then to set forth the ingratitude or injury, which one has done to
the other, which is rather the occasion of discord, then the mean to come to
amity. Further, they exhorted them rather to deserve the love of all men, by
keeping of peace and v^^e, then by fightinge and intestine war to destroy the
Realm, and win the hatred and malice of all the nation: for as he is unkind
and unnatural, that will not cherishe his natural parents and procreators,
much more unnatural and wicked are they, which will suffer their natyue
country, being their common father and mother, by their contencion and strife
to be brought to decay and utter perdicion. The authority first of the
nobility of the Realm, and secondarely their charitable mocion, so mytigated
the minds, both of the king, the Duke and the earl, that each gave faith to
other to go and come, sauely without ieopardy. In which promise the Duke and
Earl, having perfight trust and co^fide^ce, came both to London, accompanied
with to small a number of men, in comparison to the great dangier that they
were in. And at Westmynster, the king, the Duke and the Earl had a long
communicacion together, ^or some end to be taken or made between them: But they
fell at such great words with such exprobracions, and opening: either of old
benefits showed or of old ingratitudes received, that in a great furye,
without any conclusion they departed, the king to Canterbury, and the Duke and
the Earl to Warwycke, where the Earl of Warwycke prepared a new host to rise in
Lyncolnshire, and made there of captain sir Robert Wells, son to Rychard
lord Wells, an expert man in arms, and very pollitique in war.

These news suddenly brought to the king, did not a littell vex and tykil
him, because he ever ferue^tly hoped, that his adversaries would rather come to
some honest condicio^s of co^corde, then so temerariously and so suddenly
renouate the war. And the more rumor yt was sprede (contrary to his
expectacion) of this new begone battayll, the sooner he gathered together an
host for the resistance of the same, and out of hand he sent to Rychard lord
Wells, willing him upon the sight of his letters with all have to repair unto
him, which oftentimes he had excused by syckenes and debilitie of his body. But
when that excuse served not, he thynkyng to purge him self sufficiently before
the kings presence, took with him sir Thomas Dymocke, which had married his
sister, and so together came to London. When he was come up, his fre^des
certefied him that the king was with him not a littell displeased, but highly
discontented. Wherefore for very fear, he with his brother in law took the
sentuarie at Westmynster, entendynge there to abide till the princes Ire were
somewhat assuaged and mitygate. King Edward which thought to pacify all this
besy tumulte, without any farther bloodshed, promisyng both those persons
their pardons, caused them upon his promise to come out of Sentuary to his
presence, and calling to him the lord Wells, willed him to write to sir
Robert his son to leave of the war, and not to take the Earls part. And in
the mean season, he with his army went forward toward his enemies, having
with him the lord Wells, and sir Thomas Dymocke, and being not past two
days journey from Sta^ford, where his enemies had pytched their field, had
perfyt knowledge that sir Robert Wells nothing moved with his fathers letters,
still kept his camp, abiding the king and his power. The king having high
indignacion at his presumpcion and minded to be revenged in part, contrary to
his faith and promise caused the lord Wells, father to the said sir Robert,
and sir Thomas Dymocke to be behedded there, to the terrible example of of
other, which shall put their confidence in the promise of a prince. When sir
Robert Wells hard that the king drew nere, and that his father and sir Thomas
Dymocke ware behedded, he stood first in a great perplexity, studyeng
whither he should give battle or no, because it was both perilous and
doughtfull to fight with so great an army, before the earl of Warwycke with
his power were assembled, but yet having a young and a lusty courage, and with
manly boldness stimulate, and pricked forward, he set on his enemies.

The battle was sore fought on both parts, and many a man slain And in
conclusion, while sir Robert was exhortyng and provoking his men to tarry,
which were in manner disconfit, and ready to fly, he was enuyroned and beset
about with his enemies, and so was taken, and with him sir Thomas Delaund
knight, and many mo. After his taking, the Lyncolnshyre men amassed, threw away
their coats, the lighter to run away, and fled, and therefore this battayl is
yet there called Losecote field. (...)
The king, glad of this victory, commanded out of hand sir Robert Wells and
diverse other, to be put to execucio^ in the same place. The fame was, that at
this battayll were slain.x.M. men at the least.

The earl of Warwycke lay at this time at his Castle of Warwycke, and was
cominge with a houge host the next day toward his army in Lyncolneshyre, but
when he hard say that they had fought sooner then he thought either they could
or would, and that his party was overthrown and vanquyshed: Although he
might now be discoraged, yet he thought it necessary to dissimule the case,
because oftentimes in battayles, vayn things be regarded before true, and to
thente^t to comfort certain of his company (being in despair, and ready to
flee) both in word and deed, he conscribed and prepared a new host, and with
all the study and industrye, that he could practice or use, he imagened how
to compass Thomas lord Stanley, which had married his sister, that he might be
one of the confederacy and coniuracion: which thing when he could not bring
to pass, for the lord Stanley had answered him plainly, that he would
never make war against king Edward, he thought to spend no longer time in
waste, and mistrustyng that he was not able to mete with his enemies, he with
the Duke of Clarence his son in law, departed to Exceter, and there taryenge
a few days, and perceiving that all things lacked, which were apt and
necessary for the war, determined to sail to king Loys the French king, to
renew the familier acquayntaunce, which he had with him when he was there of
Ambassade, for the marriage of king Edward as you have hard, having a sure
confidence and hope, either to have a great aid of the French king, or else to
incense him earnestly to make battayll against king Edward. And restyng upon
this opinion, they hired ships at Dartmouth in Deuonshyre, well armed, and at
all points trymmed and decked. And when wind and wether served them, the
Duke and the Earl with their wives, and a great number of servants, plucked
up the sails, and took their way first toward Caleys, where the earl of
Warwycke was chief capitayn, and thought there to have left his wife and
daughters, till he had returned out of France.

The.ix. year.
WHen the earl of Warwick thus fled out of England, The.ix. year*
the year of our Lord was just.1470. and the year of King Edwardes reign was
then.ix. This sudden departing of king Edwardes adversaries, did not only vex
and bite him at the very stomach, but also did stimulat and quicken him to
look the more diligently to his affairs, and business, and especially, because
that the absence of the earl of Warwick, made the common people daily more and
more, to long and be desirous to have the sight of him, and presently to
behold his personage. For they judged that the Sun was clearly taken from the
world, when he was absent: In such high estimacio^ amongst the people, was
his name, that neither no one manne, they had in so much honor, neither no one
person, they so much praised, or to the Clouds so highly extolled. What
shall I say? His only name sounded, in every song, in the mouth of the
common people, and his person was represented with great reverence, when
public plays, or open triumphs should be ^hewed, or set furthe abroad in
the streets: which hearty favor, was the apparent occasion why his faccion and
compaignie, within a few days, merueilously increased and augmented. For the
which cause, the king was vexed with a double mischief, for he doubted much,
whom he should most fear of two, either the familier enemies abidyng at
home, or the extrauagant fooes, lyngeryng beyond the sea: But chiefly he
provided, but very ^lackly, to withstand the earl of Warwickes landyng. And
first he wrote to Charles duke of Burgoyn, which had married the lady Margaret
his suster, to help that therle nor his compaignie, should have neither aid
nor refuge, in any part of his, nor his fre^des territories or dominions. These
tidings were joyful to the duke of Burgoyne, as to him which (according to
the old proverb) hated the earl of Warwick, worse then the curre dog, or
serpent: partly, because he was the ouerthrower and confounder, of the house of
Lancastre, of the which, the earl was linially descended, by the duches his
mother partly because therle had such high offices, and was so renoumed in
England, that king Edward the dukes brother in law, might not do liberally
all things in his realm, as he himself would (which the duke esteemed to be a
great bondage.) And partly, because the earl with stood with all his power
and might, the conclusion of the marriage, between the kings suster and thesaid
duke. But the chief rancor was, because the earl of Warwick, favored the
French king, whom the duke loved not, for at his last being in France, he
promised the French king to be friend to his friends, and utter enemy to his
fooes and adversaries. This roted hatered, and cankarde malice, which the Duke
bare to the Earl, caused him to attempt mo displeasures, and to invent mo
mischiefs against therle, then either king Edward could imagyn, or was of the
Duke required (as you shall plainly perceive, by the sequel of this history.

Now let us speak of the earl of Warwickes doings, which must needs play a
pagtaunt in this interlude, or else the play were at apoynt. The earl as you
have hard before, sailed from Dartmouth toward Caleis* where he was capitain
general, and with a prosperous wynd came before the town, in which fortress
was deputy for the earl, the Lord Uaw^lere a Gascoyne, beside diverse of
therle of Warwickes servants, which bare great offices and aucthorities in
the town. This Uaw clear, whether he did it by dissimulacion, or bearyng his
good mind to king Edward (as by the sequel hereof, I doubt whether he did or
no) Instead of receiuyng of his master with triumph, he bent and discharged
against him, diverse pieces of ordinance, sendyng him word, that he should
there take no land. This navy liyng thus before Caleis at ancre, The Duches
of Clare^ce delivered of a soonne upon the sea, before the town of Caleis.
the duches of Clarence, was there delivered of a fair son, which child,
therles deputy uneath would suffer to be christened within ye town, nor
without great entreaty, would permit two flagons of wine to be conueighed
aborde, to the ladies liyng in the haven. This was a great rigor and
extremity, for the servant to use against the Master, or the inferior to use
against the superior, wherefore the earl hoped, and nothing less mistrusted,
then to be assured and purueyed in that place, which is the greatest treasure,
that belongs to England, and the fairest capitainship of the world, at the
least in Christendom. But he was fain to keep the seas, without comfort of
aid, of any of his servants. The King of England was quickly advertised,
of the refusal that Mo^sire de Uaw^lere, made to his capitain therle of
Warwick, which manful doing, so much pleased the king, that incontinent he
made him ^hier capitain of the town of Caleis, by his letters patentes, which
he sent to him out of hand, and thereof discharged clearly therle, as a traitor
and a rebel. Duke Charles of Burgoyn, liyng at sent Homers (which would needs
have an ower, in the earl of Warwickes boat) being advertised also, of Monsire
de Uawcleres refusal made of his Master, sent to him his trusty servant,
Philip de Commines (which wrote al these doings in a Chronicle) and gave to
him yearly a thousand crounes in pencion, (a small reward God wotte, for so
high a service, as untruly to keep his Master from his office) praiyng and
requiryng him, to continue in truth and fidelity, toward king Edward, as he
had showed and begone. The messenger found him so toward and of such
conformity, that he was content to swear in his presence, truly to take king
Edwardes part against all men, and only to his use to keep and defend the
strong town of Caleis. But thesaied Phillip de Commines sore mistrusted
Monsire de Uawclere, because he sent word to the earl of Warwick privily,
liyng at whitsandbay, that if he landed he should be taken and lost: for all
England (as he said) took part against him, the duke of Burgoin and all
thinhabitantes of the town, were his enemies, the Lord Duras the kings
Marshall, and all the retinue of the garrison were his adversaries: so that for
a final conclusion, his only sauegarde and comfort, were to withdraw him
and his compaignie into France, where he knew he should be highly received
and better welcomed, and as for the town of Calice, he should take no thought,
for thesaid Monsire de Uawclere, promised thereof to make him a good reconyng,
when time and opportunity should serve. This counsel was profitable to the
earl of Warwick, but not to the king of England, and less pleasant to the
duke of Burgoyn: which princes might very well thynk both the office of the
Capitainship of Caleis, and the pe^cion of the.M crounes (if it were paid) on
such a deep dissimuler, to be evil employed.

The earl of Warwick, as he was both before his departure out of England
determined, and also now by Monsire de Uawclere, newly counseled and advised,
with his navy sailed toward Normandy, and in the mean way, robbed, spoiled,
and took many rich ships, of the Duke of Burgoyns countries (which sore
netteled the duke, and caused him to prepare a strong and a great army on the
sea, to take therle prisoner, as he returned homeward) and at the last with all
his navy and spoil, he took land at Deep in Normandy, where the governor of
the country for the French king, frendely welcomed him, and louyngly him
entertained, certifiyng king Jews of his landyng and arrival.

King Jews a great ceason before, had so much merueiled at the public fame
and common renoume, of the noble acts and high prowes, of the Earl of Warwike,
that he thought nothing might more pleasauntly hap, or chance toward him,
then to have a cause or occasion to him ministered, whereby he might do the Earl
some profit or pleasure. Which long lust according to his desire, was now
likely to take effect, to his contentacion, and the earls great commodity:
wherefore being joyous of his landyng in France, he sent unto him certain
Princes, which declared to him on the Kings behalf, that as the king had long
time sought ways and means, how to do him pleasure, aid and comfort: So seeing
that now the time was come, that the Earl had necessity of all those things,
he assured him that he would neither forget him, nor yet desist to do for him
any thing, which might be consonaunt to his loving request, or friendly desire:
requiryng him with the duke his son in law, to take pein to come to his
castle of Amboys, set on the River of Leyre: affirmyng y^thei should neither
lose their labor, nor think their journey to have evil success in the
conclusion.

When Duke Charles knew that therle was landed in Normandy, he sent in all
have a Post to King Jews, with whom he was then joined in a league, requiryng
him neither to help with men nor money, the earl of Warwick, nor the Duke of
Clare^ce, open enemies to king Edward, his fellow, friend, and brother in
law, and his perpetual alye and trusty confederate, addyng thereto sharp
words and minatorie sayings, if he would in any case, be to them a refuge or
succor.

The French king did not only contempne his proud words, and laughed at his
manacyng and blood braggyng, but soberly answered, that without enfringyng of
any league or treaty, he lawfully might and would help his friends, and in
especial such, which by their deserts, be above other renoumed and
extolled: Of which nombre, he affirmed therle of Warwick to be one, which
thing if he did, he said: it should be neither cost, charge, nor burden to
the Duke of one blancke, nor put him to the pein of a moment of an hour. When
the duke had certified the king of England of this answer, he was suddenly in
a dompe, and began seriously to immagyne, who were his friends, and who were
his foes, and apprehended some, whom he thought gyltie, began with them to
question, who were friends to his enemis: and of their coniuracion (which was
the occasion that many fearyng themselfes, fled unto Sanctuary) and many
trustyng the kings pardon, submitted and yielded theimself to the Kings
clemency. Amongst whom, Ihon Marquis Montacute, humbly yielded himself, and
vowed to be ever true to the king (as he had done before time) whom he with
much humanity and fair words, did receive and intertain, to the intent to
flecte and allure the hearts of other men, to join and knit with him, against
all hostility and utter enemies.

While these things were thus treated in England, therle of Warwick and the
Duke of Clarence, rode with great pomp toward Amboyse, where the French king
lay, and by the way the people gathered and in great nombre flocked, to se
and behold with their iyes, the person and visage of him, of whose valiant
acts and wonderful doings, their ears have many times been fulfilled and
replenished. When he came to the kings presence, he was with all kinds of
courtesy and humanity received and welcomed: To whom by long tracte of time,
he declared the causes and consideracions, of his coming into France. King
Jews as well having now delectacion, with the presence of his friend as he was
accustomed to rejoice and be joyous, when he hard either laud or praise of
him in his absence: promised him his power, his riches, and all things that he
might or could do, to help him in his trouble, and to refreshe him in his
adversity.

When Queen Margarete, which soiorned with Duke Reyner her father, called king
of Scicile. etc. Hard tell that the earl of Warwick and the Duke of Clarence,
had abandoned England, and were come to the French Court: hopyng of new
comfort, with all diligence came to Amboyse, with her only son Prince
Edward. And with her came Jasper earl of Penbroke, and Ihon earl of Oxenford,
which after diverse long imprisonmentes lately escaped, fled out of England
into France and came by fortune to this assemble. After that they hadlong
co^moned, and debated diverse matters, concerning their surety and wealth,
they determined by mean of the French king, to conclude a league and a
treaty between them: And first to begin with all, for the more sure foundation
of the new amity, Edward Prince of Wales, wedded Anne second daughter to
therle of Warwick, which Lady came with her mother into France. This marriage
seemed very staunge to wise men, considering that that the earl of Warwick, had
first disherited the father, and then to cause his son, to mary with one of
his daughters, whose suster the duke of Clarence before had married, which was
ever extreme enemy to the house of Lancastre: whereupon they d^^^ned that the
marriage of the Prince, should ever be a blot in the Dukes iye, or the marriage
of the Duke, a mote in the iye of the Prince, each of them lokyng to be
exalted, when therle on him smiled: and each of them again thinkyng to be over
thrown, when the earl of him lowred. After this marriage, the duke and therles
took a solemn oath, that they should never leave the war, until such time
as king Henry the sixth, or the prince his son, were restored to the full
possession and Diadem of the realm: and that the Queen and the Prince, should
depute and appoint the Duke and the earl, to be governors and conseruators, of
the public wealth, till such time as the Prince were come to man's estate,
and of ability meet and convenient, to take upon him so high a charge, and
so great a burden. There were many other conditions concluded, which both
reason, and the weightines of so great a business, required to be setforward

While these Lords were thus in the French Court, there landed at Caleis a
damsel, belongyng to the Duches of Clarence (as she said) which made
Monsire de Uawclere believe, that she was sent from king Edward to the earl of
Warwick, with a plain ouerture and declaracio^ of peace. Of the which
tidings, Uawclere was very glad for the earls sake, whom he thought (by this
peace) to be restored to all his old possessions, romes and dignities. But he
was sore by this damosel deceived for her message (as it after proved) was the
beginning of the earls confusion. For she persuaded the Duke of Clarence, that
it was neither natural, nor honorable to him, either to condiscende or take
part, against the house of York (of which he was lineally descended) and to
set up again the house of Lancastre, which lignage of the house of York, was
not only by the whole Parliament of the realm, declared to be the very and
indubitate heirs of the Kingdom: but also king Henry the sixte and his blood
affirmed the same, and thereupon made a composicion, which of record appears.
Farthermore she declared, that the marriage with therles daughter with Prince
Edward, was for none other cause, but to make the Prince king, and clearly to
extingishe all the house of York, of whom the duke himself was one, and next
heir to the croune, after his eldest brother and his children. These reasons,
and the marriage of the Prince to the Earls daughter, so sancke in the Dukes
stomach, that he promised at his return, not to be so an extreme enemy to
his brother, as he was taken for, which promise afterward, he did not forget.
With this answer the dampsell departed into England, therle of Warwick
thereof being clearly ignorant.

When the league was concluded (as you before have hard) the French king lent
them ships, money, and men, and that they might the surer sail into
England, he appointed the Bastard of Burgoyn, Admiral of France with a
great navy, to defend the^^^ against the army of the Duke of Burgoyne,
which was stronger then bathe the French kings navy, or the English flete.
King Reyner also did help his daughter, to his small power, with men, and
muni^ions of war. When this army (which was not small) was conscribed and
come together to Harflete, at the mouth of the river of Seyne, expectyng wind
and wether. The Earl of Warwick received letters out of England, that men so
much daily and hourly, desired and wished so sore his arrival and return,
that almost all men were in harness, lokyng for his landyng: wherefore he was
required to make have, yea, have more then have, although he brought no succor
with him. For he was farther assured, that as soon as he had once taken land,
there should mete him many thousands (as after it proved in deed) to do him
what service or pleasure, they could or might: all this was the offer of the
common people. Beside this, diverse noble men wrote, to help him with me^,
harness, money, and all things necessary for the war: beside their own
persons, whom they promised to adventure in his querell. When therle had
received these letters, he not a little regardyng such an offer, and so many
great benefits to him, even at hand apparauntly proffered, fully determined
with the Duke, and the e^les of Oxenford and Penbroke (because Queen Margaret
and her son, were not fully yet furnished for such a journey) to go before
with part of the navy, and part of tharmie, and to attempt the first brunte of
fortune and chance, which if it well succeeded, then should Queen Margerete
and her soonne, with the residue of the navy and people follow into England.
The Earl of Warwick thynkyng this weighty matter, not worthy to be ly^gered,
but to be accelerate with all diligence possible, taking his leave of the French
king Jews, geuyng him no small thanks, both on the behal^e of king Henry,
and also for his own part, and so being dismissed, came where his navy lay
at Anchor, commaundyng his men to go on ship board myndyng to take his course
toward England.

The Duke of Burgoyn which was not content, that therle of Warwick and his
compaignie, was succored and aided of the French king against his brother in
law king Edward of England, to withstand that army, and to take therle o^
Warwick prisoner, if it were possible. He prepared such a great navy, as
lightly has not been seen before, gathered in manner of all nations, which
army lay at the mouth of Seyne, ready to fight with therle of Warwick, when
he should set out of his harborowe.

Se the work of God, the same night before therle departed, there rose such a
sudden wind and a terrible tempest, that the dukes ships were scatered one
from another, some drouned, some wether driven into Scotland, so that two of
them were not in compaignie together, in one place, In the morning next
following, the wether wexed fair, and the wind prosperous, whereupon in hope of
a bone voyage, the Earl and his company halsed up their sails, and with good
speed la^ded at Dartmouth in Deuonshyre, from which place he passed into
France, almost the.vj. monethe, last passed.

Before this time the duke of Burgoyne Charles, which more hated the Earl of
Warwycke, and envied his prosperity, then he loved king Edward, saving for his
aid y^ he trusted of in time of necessity, wrote to king Edward, both of
the doings of the earl of Warwycke in France, and of his army and power, and
also certefied him by his trusty servants of the place, where the Earl
purposed with all his people to take land, king Edward passed little on the
matter, trusting to much to the mouable commons of his Realm, and without
any army laid, either to keep the Earl from landyng, either to encou^tre with
him at the first arryuall, to the e^tent that his fre^des should not draw in
hepes to him for his strength left all purueiance for defense alone, and rode
on huntyng, Hawkyng, and using all manner of pastimes, with Ladies and Damsels,
for his disport and solace that could be imagened or invented. When the earl
of Warwycke had taken land, he made a Proclamation in the name of king Henry
the.vi. upon high pains, commanding and charging all men apt, or able to bear
armor, to prepare them selfs to fight against Edward duke of York, which
contrary to al right, Justice and law, had untruely usurped the Croune and
Imperial dignite of this realm. It is almost incredible to think how sone the
fame of the earls landyng was blown over, and through all the whole Realm, and
how many thousand men of war, at the very first tidinges of his landing, were
suddenly assembled and set forward to welcome him. When he was thus, according
to his desire, fully furnished on every side with his kynred and friends, he
took his way toward London, where he judged and faithfully believed, to find
more open friends then privy enemies, or cancard hearts.

When king Edward knew of the Earls landynge, and of the great repair of
people, that to him incessantly without intermission did resort, he then began
to think on his business, and studied how to find a remedy for a mischief. (but
this was to late) And first he wrote to the Duke of Burgoyne, requyring him to
have a vigylant eye to the sea, and so to se the stremes kept and scoured with
his navy, that the Earl neither should nor might return again into France,
if he should be again propulsed out of the Realm. And as for the doings in
England he bad let him alone, for he was both of puissance and ability,
sufficient to overcome and defend al his enemies and rebels, within his own
Realm and country. This saying littel or nothing pleased the duke of
Burgoynes messengers, for they thought that it had been much more profitable
to king Edward, to have circumspectly forsene before, and provided to stop his
landyng, then now suddenly to abide the fortune of battle, which is ever
dubious and uncertain. King Edward accompanied with the duke of Gloucester his
brother the lord Hastynges his Chamberleyn, which had married the Earls sister,
and yet was ever true to the king his Master, and the lord Scales brother to
the Queen, sent out curriers to al his trustye friends, for the fornyture of
able persons, mete for the war, and conueniente for the defense of his own
royal person, entending if he might by any policy or subtle engyn to
circu^uent or trappe the earl of Warwycke, knowing perfitly that if he had once
mastred the chief belwether, the flock would sone be dispercled.

Of them that were sent for, few in effect came, and yet more came then were
willing, and more came willingly then were betrusted, some came for fear, and
some much doughted to come, but the greatest heddes wynked and said they could
not, but they meant they would not come. king Edward being in this perplexity,
and in diffidence of reysyng any army, with such trusty friends as he had
departed into Lyncolnshyre, consulting what was best to be done, but suddenly
or he was fully determined on any certain purpose, news were brought to him,
that all the Towns and all the country adjacent was in a great rore, and made
fires and sang songs, Cryeng king Henry, king Henry, a Warwycke a Warwycke,
king Edward was much abashed with these new tidings, and more and more his
especials and explorators declared and accounted to him, that all the Realm
was up, and by open Proclamacion commanded to make war against him, as enemy
to king Henry and the Realm, wherefore his nere friends advised and admonished
him to fly over the sea to the duke of Burgoyne, his brother in law, there to
tarry till God and fortune should send him better luck and chance, he being
somewhat ruled by this consayll, but much more quickened by having knowledge,
that some of the earls of Warwyckes power was within a half days journey, and
less of his tail, with all have possible passed the wasshes (in greater
ieopardye then it besemed a Prince to be in) and came to the town of Lynne,
where he found an English ship and.ij. Hulkes of Holla^d ready (as fortune
would) to make sail and take their journey, whereupon he being in a marvelous
agonye and doughtyng the mutabilite of the Towns men, taking no farther
leisure for his sure succor and sauegard, with his brother the duke of
Gloucester, the lord Scales, and diverse other his trusty friends entered into
the ship, without bag or bagage, without clothe sack, or male, and
perchance with a great purse, and littel treasure, for he nor his had no
leyser to provide, according to their degrees and estates. The lord
Chamberlayne tarried a while after exhortyng all his acquayntance, that of
necessity should tarry behind, to show them self openly as fre^des, to the
part adverse for their own sauegard, but heartily requiryng them priuelie to
co^tinew in their hearts true to king Edward, and friendly to him and his: this
persuasion declared he entered, the ship with the other, which were ready to
depart. This was in the year of our lords blessed incarnacion.M.v.C.lxx. and
in the.ix. year of king Edward: When he with one small ship of his awn, and.ii.
Hulkes, and.vij. or.viij.C. persons, with him having no raiment, but apparel
for war, and small store of money, sailed toward Holland. At which time the
Easterlynges were mortal enemies, as well to the Englishmen as to the French
nation, and had done ye last years past much prejudice and damage to the
English marchantes, both in taking and spoylyng of ships.

And as the king with sail and ower was making his course as fast as could
be possible the Easterlyuges, which had many ships of war on the sea, him
espied (according to the old proverb) one ill comes never alone, and
with.vii. or.viii. gallant ships, began to chase the king and his company.
The kings ship was good with sail, and so much gat of the Easterlinges, that
she came on the coast of Holland, and so descended lower, before a town in
Holland, called Alquemare, and there cast Ancker as nere the town as was
possible, because they could not enter the Haven at an ebbyng water. The
Easterlynges also approached the English ship as nere as their great ships
could come at the low water, entendynge at the fludde to have obtained their
pray, and so they were likely to do, if Monsieur de Gronture, governor for
duke Charles in Holland had not at that season been personally present in those
parties.

O what a miserable chance and strange luck was this to happen so suddenly
to a king, and in especial to such a king, as by his own valyantnesse and
prowes had overcome his foes, and destroyed his enemies in more then.v. or.vi.
great and mortal battayles. First to be persecuted, exiled, and expulsed his
own Realm and kingdom, by his own servants, subjects and kynsmen.
Secondarely, being destitute of all help and consolacion, flyeng to his only
friend and brother in law duke Charles, for refuge and comfort, to be chased on
the sea by his mortal enemies and deadly foes, and like to be taken prisoner,
and brought into captivity, which thing, if it had happened (as God would
that it should not) he had lain long vnraunsoned (king Henry being restored to
his pristinate estate and dignity royal) or else he had dyed prisoner in
great wretchedness and misery. These sour sauces he tasted as a penance for
his wanton living, and negligent ouersey^g of things that he might well have
forsene and prevented, but his mind was so given to pastyme, dalyaunce, and
sensual pleasure, that he forgot the old adage, saying, in time of peace
provide for war, and in y^ time of war provide for peace which thing if he
either had well remembered, or politiquely provided for he had not been chaced
and expulsed his Realm within.xi. days as he was in deed. The only excuse of
his folly is to say, that he so much trusted fortunes flatteryng, that he
thought never to see her change, nor yet to have at dyce any ill chance, or
at chestes any check mate.

King Edward thus lyeng at Ancker in great fear of the Easterlinges, was by
good chance comforted, and of his great perplexite releued, or he wist how,
for the same time lay in the town of Alquemare the lord Gronture, chief
governor of Hollande, for duke Charles of Borgoyne, which being incontinent
advertised of the kings arryuall, and also of the great ieopardy that he was
in, prohibited first the Easterlinges in no wise on pain of death, to
intermit or meddle with any Englismen which were both the dukes friends and
alies: which commandment so vexed and troubled the Easterlinges, making sure
reconynge to have had for their pray and pryse, a King, a Duke, diverse Barons
and rich ge^telmen, that they cried out of God, rayled and cursed the duke and
his officer, and in a rage halsed up their sails, and without any more
expectation of good luck, departed home to their countray. The lord Gronture
came a board y^ ship, where king Edward was, and him honorably saluted and
required him to come to la^d, offering hi^ his service with all pleasures that
he could do or imagine to be done. The king him heartily thanked, and was well
revived and comforted with his words, and so he with all his company were set
on land, and well refreshed. The lord Gront^re, like a noble man, co^sideryng
in what poor, estate and necessity the king and his people were in, ministered
to them habundantly all things convenient and necessary, according to every
man's estate and degree, at the dukes charge and cost. And after they had been
well refreshed and newly apparreyled, he conduyted them to the Hage, a rich
town in Holland, where they arrived on the church holy day, not long after
Mychelmas. The lord Gronture, of all this adventure wrote to the duke his
master, which there at, was at the first so abashed and amassed to se y^ earl
of Warwyke, whom he hated more then a Cocodrylle, to have the vpperhande of
his brother, that he had rather have hard of king Edwardes death, then of his
discomfiture, and especially by the earl of Warwycke, whom he more feared and
disdayned, then any one man living, yet he willed the lord Gronture to se him
and his company, well enterteyned at the Hage, till he sent for them.

Now let all Englishmen consider (as before is rehearsed) what profyt, what
commodity, and what help in distress, the marriage of the lady Margarete,
king Edwardes sister to the duke Charles, did to him in his extreme necessity:
and but by that mean incurable extremity, for his alyes and co^ferates in
Castle and Arragon, were to far from him, either spedely to fly to, or
shortly to come fro with any aid or army. The French king was his extreme
enemy, and friend to king Henry, for whose cause in the king of Scotts (for
all the leage between them) he did put littell confidence and less trust. The
stedes and all Eastland were with him at open war, and yet by this marriage,
God provided him a place to fly to, both for refuge and for releue.

When the fame was spread of king Edwardes flyenge, innumerable people resorted
to the earl of Warwycke to take his part, but all king Edwardes trusty friends
went to diverse sentuaries, daily lokyng, and howerly harkening, to hear of his
health, and prosperous ret^r^e who afterward served him manfully and truly.
Amongst other, Queen Elizabeth his wife, all most desperate of all comfort,
took sentuarye at Westmynster, and their in great penury forsaken of all her
friends, King Edward the.v. borne in sanctuary.
was delivered of a fair son called Edward, which was with small po^pe like
a pore man's child Christened and Baptized, the Godfathers being the Abbot and
Pryor of Westmynster, and the godmother the lady Scrope.

The Kentyshmen this season, whose wits be ever mouable at the change of
Princes came to the subberbes of London, and spoiled houses, robbed berehouses,
and by the counsayll of sir Geffray Gates, and other sentuary men, they brake
up the kings Benche, and delivered prisoners, which fell at Radclefe,
Lymehouse, and saint Katherynes to burning of houses, flaughter of people,
and rauishyng of women: which small sparcle had grown to a greater flame, if
the earl of Warwycke with a great power had not suddenly quenched it, and
punyshed the offenders: which benefit by him done, caused him much more to be
praised and accepted emonges the commons then he was before. When he had
setteled and put an order in all things, according as he thought most
convenient, Upon the.xij. day of October he rode to the tower of London,
which was to him without resistance delivered, and there took king Henry the
vi. out of the ward, where he before was kept, and was brought to the kings
lodgyng and there served, according to his degree. And the.xxv. day of the said
month, the duke of Clarence accompanied with the earls of Warwycke,
Shrewsbury, and the lord Stanley, and other lords and Gentelmen, some for
fear, and some for love, and some only to gase at the waueryng world,
resorted with a great company to the tower of London, and from thence with
great pomp brought king Henry the.vi. appareled in a long gown of blew
velvet, through the high streates of London, too the cathedral church of
saint Paul, the people on the right hand and on the left hand, rejoicing and
cryeng God save the King, as though all thing had succeeded as they would have
it, and when he had offered as k^nges use to do, he was conveyed to the palleys
of the bishop of London, and there kept his household like a king.

King Henry the.vi. thus readepted (by the means, King Henry the.vi. again
restored to his kyngly es^ate.
only of y^ earl of Warwycke) his croune and dignity Royal, in the year of
our Lord 1471. newly, after so many overthrows beginnynge to reygne, lykely
within short space to fall again, and to taste more of his accustomed
captivity and usual misery. This ill chance and misfortune, by many men's
opinions happened to him, because he was a man of no great wit, such as men
commonly call an Innocent man, neither a fool, neither very wise, whose study
always was more to excel, other in Godly living and virtuous example, then in
worldly regiment, or temporal dominion, in so much, that in comparison to the
study and delectacion that he had to virtue and godliness, he littel regarded,
but in manner despised al worldly power and temporal authority, which syldome
follow or seek after such persons, as from them fly or disdain to take them.
But his enemies ascribed all this to his coward stommack, afferming that he was
a man apt to no purpose, nor mete for any enterprise, were it never so small:
But who so ever dispiseth or dispraiseth, that which the common people allow
and marueyll at, is often taken of them for a mad and indiscreet person, but
notwithstanding the vulgar opinion, he that follows, loves and embraseth the
contrary, does prove both sad and wise (verifieng Salomons proverb) the
wisdom of this world, is folishenes before God. Other there be that ascribe
his infortunitie, only to the stroke and punishment of God, afferming that the
kingdom, which Henry the.iiij. his grandfather wrongfully gat, and unjustly
possessed against king Rychard the.ii. and his heirs could not by very divine
justice, long contynew in that injurious stock: And that therefore God by his
divine providence, punished the offense of the grandfather, in the sons son.

When king Henry had thus obtained again, the possession and dominion of the
Realm, he called his high court of Parliament to begin y^ xxvi. day of
November at Westmynster, in the which king Edward was declared a traitor to
his country, and vsurpor of y^ Realm, because he had unjustly taken on him,
the Croune and Scepter, and all his gooddes were co^fiscate and adjudged,
forfayted: and like sentence was given against all his partakers and fre^des.
And beside this, it was there enacted that extreme punishment should be done
without delay over such persons, as for his cause were taken or apprehended,
and were either in captivity, or went at large upon trust of their suerties,
amongst whom lord Ihon Typtoft, earl of Worcester lieuetenant, for king Edward
in Ireland excercisinge there more extreme cruelty (as the fame went) then
princely pity, or charitable compassion and in especial on.ii. enfantes, being
sons to the earl of Desmo^d, was either for treason to him laid or malice
against him conceived, atteynted and behedded. Beside this, all estatutes made
by king Edward, were clearly revoked, abrogated, and made frustrate. The
Crounes of the realms of England and France, was by y^ authority of the same
Parliament entayled to king Henry the.vi. and the heirs males of his body
lawfully begotten, and for default of such heir male of his body begotten,
then y^ said Crounes and dignities were entayled to George duke of Clarence,
and to theyres males of his body lawfully engendered, and farther the said Duke
was by authority aforesaid enabled to be next heir to his father, Richard
duke of York, and to take by descent from him all his lands, dignities and
preheminences as though he had been his eldest son and heir, at the time of
his death. Jasper earl of Penbroke, and Ihon earl of Oxenford, and diverse other
by king Edward attaynted, were restored to their old names, possessions, and
ancient dignities (keep them even as long as they might) Beside this, the
earl of Warwycke as one to whom the common welthe was much beholden, was made
Ruler, Governor of the Realm, with whom as fellow and compaignion was
associated, George duke of Clarence his son in law. So that by these means
the whole estate, both of the realm, and the public wealth of the same, were
newly altered and changed, yea, and in manner clearly trans^igured and
transmuted. To this Parliament came the lord Marquis Montacute, excusing
himself that only for fear of death, he declined to king Edwardes patte,
which excuse was so accepted, that he obtained his pardon, which, after was
the destruction, of him and his brother: For if he had manfully and appartly
taken king Edwardes part, surely he being an open enemy, had much less
hurted, then being a fained, false and a colored friend: for such things as
we se before our iyes, we be well ware of, and seldom things before known,
do us any hurt or prejudice.

Queen Margaret, after that the earl of Warwick was sailed into England, ever
forcastyng and doubtyng, the chance that might happen, did never cease to
pray to God, to send victory to her friends and confederates: which, when
she knew by her husbands letters to be obteigned, she with Prince Edward
her son, and her train, entered their ships, to take their voyage into
England: but the Winter was so sore, the wether so stormy, and the wind so
contrariant, that she was fain to take land again, and defer her journey till
another season. Her enemies said, that it was Gods just provision, that she
which had been the occasion of so many battles, and of so much manslaughter
in England, should never return thither again, to do more mischief. Her
friends on the otherside, said, that she was kept away, and her journey
empeched by Sorcerers and Necromanciers: thus as men's immaginacions ran,
their toungues clacked.

In this season Jasper earl of Penbroke, went into Wales, to visit his County
of Penbroke, where he found lord Henry, son to his brother Edmond Earl of
Richmond, having not fully ten years of his age complete, which was kept in
manner like a captive: but well and honorably educated, and in all kind of
Civility brought up, by the Lady Harbert, late wife to Willyam Earl of
Penbroke, beheded at Banbery, as you before have hard. This lord Henry was he,
that after king Richard, brother to king Edward, was vanquished and
overthrown, obtained the Croune and regalitie of this Realm, whom we ought
to believe, to be sent from God, and of him only to be provided a king, for
to extinguishe both the faccions and parts, of king Henry the.vi. and of king
Edward the.iiii. (which had almost brought the nobility of this realm, to
a final destruction and an utter decay) considering, that he once exalted to
that dignity, nothing more minded, nor to any one thing more his study
applied: This Henry was borne of Margaret, the only daughter and heir, to
Ihon the first Duke of Somerset, then not being fully of.xiiii. years of age.
The which Lady Margaret, although she were after conjoined in marriage, with
Lord Henry son to Humfrey Duke of Buckyngham, and after to Thomas Sta^ley
earl of Darby, both being lusty, and of age mete for generacio^: yet
afterward she brought furthe no more fruit, as though she had dooen her part
sufficiently, for to have borne one man child, and the same to be a king. Jasper
earl of Penbroke took this child being his nephew, out of the custody of the
Lady Harbert, and at his return, he brought the child to London, to king
Henry the sixte, whom, when the king had a good space by himself, secretly
beholden and marked, both his wit and his likely towardnes, he said to such
princes, as were then with him: Lo, This was King Henry the seuent^.
surely this is he, to whom both we and our aduersaris leuyng the possession
of all things, shall hereafter give rome and place. So this holy man showed
before, the chance that should happen, that this earl Henry so ordained by
God, should in time to come (as he did in deed) have and enjoy the kingdom
and the whole rule of the realm.

As I have showed to you before, what things were done in England after that
king Henry had obtained the new possession, of his old kingdom, thynkyng
surely to have possessed, and enjoyed the same longer season then either he did,
or could by his adversaries, be permitted or suffered to do: so must I of
congruent necessity declare unto you, what great perplexity, what sudden
trouble, what multiplicitie of immaginacions, the landyng of king Edward in
Friseland, brought to and encombered with all, Charles Duke of Burgoyn: and how
fraudulently for his own advantage he dissimuled, first with king Edward, and
after with his party adverse, and how that he openly denied aid to king
Edward, when he privily ministered, ample and large succors to him and his. I
think you would not, that these things should be forgotten: wherefore you must
call to remembrance, how that Duke Charles had before this (as you have hard)
great intelligence with Monsire de Uawclere, as he list himself to be called,
either chief Capitain of Caleis or else deputy Capitain, to the earl of
Warwick, which had promised to him by the Duke, a pencion yearly of a
thousand Crounes, to the intent to stand still true to king Edward, and to
relinquishe king Henry, but in especial to abandon therle of Warwick. The duke
although that he had small confidence, but rather great diffidence in the oath
and promise of Mo^sire de Uawclere: thought it necessary to know, in what case
Caleis stood, and what mutacio^s were there, because it was his next neighbor,
(for that time Bulleyn, and Bullenoys, and all Artoys, were in the hands of
Duke Charles) as a pledge delivered to his father, as is before rehearsed.
Wherefore in all have (before he sent for king Edward or spoke with him) he sent
his trusty counsailer Phillip de Commines, accompaignied with two gentle men
to Caleis, which two gentlemen fauoredmore the party of Lancastre then of
York. The lord of Arge^ton met with the people of the country of Bullenois,
fliyng from every part like wild dear. For the earl of Warwick, had now
lately sent to Caleis, four hundred archers on horseback, which forraied and
spoiled all the country of Bullenoys. The Dukes messengers, which had not
seen so soda^^ mutacion of worldly things, durst not keep on their journey, but
the same night tarried at Turnoham, and sent to Monsire de Uawclere for a
saueconduite, and also wrote to the Duke, of the fear that they were in. The
Duke sent word to Phillip de Commes, that he and his with all speed, should
pass toward Caleis, and if they there were taken, he would shortly for a
raunsom, bye or redeem them again. For he passed little, either of the pein of
his servant, or of his charge and expense, so that his purpose might be
served. When this word was brought to the messengers at Turnehan, at the same
time they received a letter, from Monsire de Uawclere, with loving words and
gracious terms, declaryng that they might safely come, and freely depart, as
before they were liberally accustomed: so that sir Phillip and his compaignions
came to Caleis, without any meting or solemn entertainment contrary to tholde
fashion that he had seen. When they entered the town they might perceive every
man, did were therle of Warwickes badge, and on every door were set white
Crosses, and ragged staves, with times and poyses, which purported the French
king, and the earl of Warwick were al one. These things seemed very strange,
and nothing pleasant to the Burgonions. The lord Uawclere sent for them to
diner the next day, being well accompaignied, and did were on his cappe, a white
ragged staff of gold enameled, and so did many other, and he that could have
it neither of gold nor of silver, had it of silk or cloth. This badge was
taken up within one quarter of an hour, after the news came out of England:
such is the mutacion of the common people, like a read with every wind is
agitable and flexible. While these Burgonio^s lay thus in Caleis they had
knowledge that therle of Warwick had prepared.iiii.M. valiant men to make
frontier war on the Dukes countries, whereof by post they certified the
Duke, which so fumed, and smoked at the matter, that he wist neither well what
to do, nor of whom to ask confortable or wholesome counsel. For war he was
compelled to have with the French king, which had taken from him certain
tounes: and if he succored king Edward, he was sure that with the Earl of
Warwick, he should have no p^^^e: and if he left king Edward his confederate
and alie, in the time of his tribulacion, discon^olate, and destitute of aid
and succo^r, all the world of him might speak shame, unfaithfulness and
dishonor. When the duke had well advised this matter, he wrote to his
messengers, that they should require to have the league made, between the two
realms, kept and observed, with diverse other privy instruccions Phillip de
Comines, being wise and well learned, declared to the counsel of Cal^^s, that
the Duke his Master not alitle marueiled why the Englishemen should over run,
and destroy his Countries, having aleague in sure, so strong, and with so many
words of efficacy enfor^ed, lately made between the two countries, their
territories and dominions, affermyng that the mutacion of the Prince, is no
dissolucio^ of the league: For although the Princes be named, as chief
contractors in every treaty and amity concluded, yet the Countries are
bounden, and the subjects shall make recompense, if any thing be altered
wrongfully out of his course. And the rather to obtein their desire, they
caused all the merchauntes gooddes of England, being in the Dukes Countries,
to be attached for the redress of the spoil, that the English men had dooen
in the Dukes Country. Which sore grieved the Merchauntes, and much hindered
their voyages: beside this, the Mercha^tes of the Staple of Caleis, wrote to
the king, and to the earl of Warwick: how, if their Wolle and fell at Caleis,
were not sold and uttered, as it was wont to be (the greatest part whereof, was
bought by the Dukes subjects and vassals for ready money) the soldiers of the
garrison, should lack their wages, the king should not be paid his custom,
and the Merchaunt in conclusion should stand in adventure, both of loss of
stock and credence. These persuasions mollified therle of Warwickes mind, and
especially, because the king had no great store of money* to furnishe Caleis
with all, which store if he had had, surely the duke of Burgoyne for all the
league, had been a little disturbed, and geuously molested. But considering that
all things were not, correspondent at this time to therles appetite: he was
content that it should be thus condescended and agreed, that the alyaunce made
between the Realm of England and the Dukes dominions, should still remain
muiolated, saving in the stead of Edward, should be put for the king, this
name Henry. This conclusion thus brought to an end, came (even as a man would
wish) to pass, for the Duke of Burgoyns purpose, for at this same time, the
French king had won from him, the fair town of Amias, and saint
Quintines, so that if the Duke should have had war both with France and
England, he had been likely to have been shortly a poor Duke, and else utterly
undone and brought to destruction. And to pacify and please the Earl of
Warwick, whom he never loved and less favored: he wrote louyngly to him,
declaryng that as he was lineally descended, and naturally procreated, of the
noble stock and family of Lancaster, by his graund mother, being daughter to
the high and mighty Prince Ihon of Gaunt, Duke of Lancastre: so was he by
nature obliged, and by aliance enforsed to support, honor, maintein, and
defend, thesaid noble house and lignage, during his life, as ever he has done,
both in word and deed, against all manner of persons and estates: further
more, promisyng to bear his good heart, loving mind, and friendly favor, to
king Henry the sixte and his sequel, before all other Princes and Potentates,
with many other flatteryng terms, and glosyng words: which fair promises, I
think neither the Duke himself inwardly minded, nor yet the earl outwardly
believed.

Now to return to king Edward, being in the Duke of Burgoyns land, which,
although he were out of his country, yet did he never despair, but had a ferme
hope, to have a mature and ready occasion to him given, how to obtein his
kingdom and dominion, and that in short space. For partly, he hoped of a
great help, of his brother in law the Duke of Burgoyn, and partly, he was
daily solicited by the letters and messages of men of his faccion in England,
to return with all speed, promisyng him compaignie and comfort. Many other
there were, which either for fear of the rigor of the law, which they had
offended, or else disdainyng that the world was so altered: or else being
brought in to king Edwardes favor, had hope to exercise their pollyng romes,
as they did before his fliyng out of England, daily came to him from England,
and provoked him more and more, to take his journey homward King Edward in manner
ravished with their golden promises, came to the Duke of Burgoyn, to the town
of Sent Poll, and there declared to him what great intelligence he had in the
realm of Englad, and what assured fre^des he had in the same, requiryng him to
aid him with speed as his only trust, and sole hope of relife was in him,
being not only his brother in law, but each being compaignion of others order:
for the king ware the golden Flees, and the duke ware the Gartier. The duke of
Somerset, which was cousin germain, removed to the Duke of Burgoyn, and brought
up and had a pencion in the Dukes house. (For surely the Duke of Burgoin loved
better the house of Lancastre, then the house of York) sore labored to the
contrary, affirmyng that it was both ungodly, unprincely, and unnatural, to
exalte and set up a stranger, having no right, and to depose and deprive his
natural kynsman, having a just title descended to him, from the king his
father, and the king his grandfather, from his scepter and regalitie. Duke
Charles was in a great perplexity, not knowing well what to say, whether
consanguinitie should prevail more, or affinity, or nature before favor, not
willing if he might, to displease any of both the parties. But because the
war was ouert at his very nose, with the French king: he concluded openly
(but intendyng another thing secretly) to aid the Duke of Somerset, and other
that were with him, taking of them certain promises, for things to be done
against the earl of Warwick: when they should epsy their time, most propice
and convenient: The Duke of Somerset joyous of these news, sailed into
England, and made report to King Henry. King Edward was present, and heard
all this determinacion, which brought him into a great heaviness, and a deep
perplexity: how beit, he was privily advertised by a friend, that these cloked
dissimulacions, were only for this cause, that Duke Charles would in nowise,
have war with both the realms at once, and further, if thesaid duke were
put to the worse, or vanquished by the French king, then he were not able,
neither to aid, nor to succor king Edward. Wherefore to blind with all the
French king, which sore desired, that the duke might have war with
England: for then he knew that his enterprise, were more then half gotten.
The Duke declared openly, that he would in nowyse minister any succors to king
Edward, straightly chargyng and commau^dyng, upon pein of the heart, that no
man should once pass the sea with him, or in his army. But all this
proclamacion notwithstanding when the duke saw that king Edward, upon hope of
his friends, would needs repair into England again (he having compassion of
his unfortunate chance, caused privily to be delivered to him fifty M.
Florence, of the cross of saint Andrewe, and further caused four great
ships to be appointed for him, in the haven of Uere in Zelande, which is
fre for all men to come to, and the Duke hired farther for him.xiiii. ships of
the Esterlynges, well appointed, and for the more surety, took bond of the^
to serve them truly, till he were landed in England, and.xv. days after. Of
which returnyng, the Esterlynges were glad* trustyng that by that mean, if he
obtained again the pos^ession of the realm, they shoud the sooner come to a
concord and a peace, and to the rest^^^cion of their liberties and franchises,
which they claimed to have within England. The Duke of Burgoyn as men
reported, cared not much on whose side the victory fell, saving for paim^t of
his money. For he would often say, that he was friend to both parts, and each
part was trendly to him.

The.x. year. The.x. year.

King Edward being thus furnished, thought nothing more peinfull and
wretched, then the tariyng of one day longer, nor nothing more to be desired,
then with all celerite to sail toward his country: whereupon having with him
only.ii.M. men of war, beside mariners, in the spryng of the year. In the
year of our Lord.1461. at the same very season, that the Duke of Burgoyn, went
to fight with the French king at Amias. He sailed into England, King Edwardes
landyng.
and came on the cost of York shire, to a place called Rauenspurt, and there
setting all his men on land, he consulted with his Capitaines, to know to
what place, they should first for succor resort unto: for he imagined that no
way could be for him sure, having so small a compaignie of soldiers.

After long debatyng, it was concluded, that diverse persons having light
horses, should skoure the country on every side, to se if by any persuasions,
they might allure the hearts of the rusticall and vplandishe people to take
king Edwardes part, and to were harnes in his querel: which, with all
diligence, followed their commission. It seems somewhat to lean to the truth,
that king Edward being a wise and a circu^specte Prince* would not have been so
foolish hardy, as to enter England with half a handful of men of war,
except he had been sure of spedy succor, and faithful friendship: In which
argument is no doubt, but that the Duke of Clarence and he, were secretly
agreed before, and that the Marquis Montacute, had secretly procured his favor,
of which privy signs and cloked workings, open tokens, and manifest
doings, afterward appeared. The light horsemen which were sent about, after
they had felt the minds and ententes, of the rude people (as much as they
might) they returned to king Edward the next day, making relacion that all
the tounes round about, were permanent and stiff on the part of king Henry,
and could not be removed: and that it was but a folly farther to solicit or
attempt them, considering that when they were moved and exhorted too be true
too king Edward, not one man durst speak for fear of the Earl of Warwycke.

Which answer, when king Edward had perfitly digested, of very necessity
he changed his purpose: for where before his claim was to be restored to the
croune and kingdom of England, now he caused it to be published that he only
claymed the Duchy of York, to ye intent that in requyryng nothing, but that
which was both true and honest, he might obtain the more favor of the common
people. It was almost incredible to se what effect this new imaginacion (all
though it were but feigned) sorted and took immediately upon the first opening
(Such a power has Justice ever emo^gest all men) when it was blown abroad
that king Edwardes desire was farther from nothing, then from the couetyng or
desire of the kingdom and royal dominion, and that he no erthelye promocion
desired before his just patrimony, and lyn^all enheritance: All men moved with
mercy and compassion, began out of hand either to favor him or else not to
resist him, so that he might obtain his duchye of York, when he had found
these means to pacify men's minds, and to reconcile their hearts, he
determined to take his journey toward York, and so went to Beuerley. The earl
of Warwycke which then lay in Warwykeshyre, being informed that king Edward was
landed, and going toward York, with all have wrote to the Marquis Montacute
his brother, which had lain at the Castle of Pomfret all the last winter,
with a great company of Souldears, geuynge him warnyng, and aduertesyng him in
what peril their whole affairs flode in, if their enemy should obtain the
possession, or enter into the city of York, willing and commanding him to
set on king Edward with all expedicion, and bid him battle, or else to keep
the passage, that he should pass no farther, till he him self had gathered a
greater host, which with all diligence, he was assemblynge to come and join
with his brother the Marquis. And because that the earl knew not by what way
his enemies would take their journey, he wrote to all the towns of Yorkeshyre,
and to the city also, commaundyng all men on the kings behalf, to be ready in
harnes, and to shut their gates against the kings enemies. King Edward
without any words spoken to him, came peaceably nere to York, of whose
coming, when the citiezens were certefied, without delay they armed them
self, and came to defend the gates, sendyng to him two of the chiefest
Aldermen of the city, which ernestly admonished him on their behalf to come
not one foot nerar, nor temerariouslye to enter in to so great a ^eopardy,
considering that they were fully determined, and bent to compel him to retract
with de^t of swourd, king Edward markyng well their message, was not a littell
trobled and unquieted in his mind, and driven to seek the furthest point of
his wit, for he had both two mischeuous and perilous chances, even before his
eyes, which were hard to be euaded or refelled, one was if he should go back
again, he feared lest the rural and commen people for coueteousnes of pray,
and spoil, would fall on him, as one that fled away for fear and ^reade. The
other was, if he should proceed any farther in his journey, then might the
citiezens of ^orke issue out with all their power, and suddenly circu^uent him
and take him, wherefore he determined to set forward, neither with army nor with
weapon: but with lowly words, and gentel entreatynges, requyryng most heartily
the messengers that were sent, to declare to y^ citiezens, that he came neither
to demand the realm of England, nor the superiority of the same, but only
the duchy of York his old enheritance, the which duchy, if he might by
their means readept and recover, he would never let pass out of his memory
so great a benifite, and so friendly a gratuitie to him exhibited. And so with
fair words and flattering speech he dismissed the messengers, and with good
speed he and his followed so quickly after, that they were almost at ye gates as soon as the Ambassadors. The citiezens heryng his good answer, that he meant,
nor entendyng nothing prejudicial to king Henry, nor his royal authority,
were much mitigated and cooled, and began to commen with him from their walls,
willing him to convey him self in to some other place without delay, which if
he did they assured him, y^ he should have neither hurt nor damage, but he
gently speaking to all men, and especialy to such as were Aldermen, whom he
called worshipful, and by their proper names them saluted, after many fair
promises to them made, exhorted and desired them that by their favorable
frendshyp, and friendly permissio^ he might enter in to his own town, of the
which he had both his name and title. All the whole day was consumed in
doutfull communicacion and erne^t interlocution. The citiezens partly wo^ne by
his fair words, and partly by hope of his large promises, fell to this pact
and conue^cion, that if king Edward would swear to entertayne his citiezens of
York after a gentell sort and fa^^, yon, and here after to be obedient, and
faithful to all king Henryes commandments and precepts, that then they
would receive him in to their city, and aid and comfort him with money. King
Edward (whom the citiezens called only duke of York) being glad of this
fortunate chance, King Edwardes oath of obedience to king Henry (...).vi.
in the next morning, at y^ gate where he should enter, a Priest being ready to
say mass, in y^ mass time receyuyng the body of our blessed Savior, solemply
swearyng to keep and observe the two Articles above mentioned, and agreed upon,
when it was far unlike, that he either intended or purposed to observe any of
them, which plainly afterward was to all men manifest, evidently perceyuyng,
that he took no more study or diligence for any one earthly thing* then he did
to persecute king Henry, and to spoil him of his kingdom. So it is daily seen
that as well princes, as men of lesser reputation led by blind avarice and
deuelish ambicion, forgetting the scruple of conscience, and the end of all
honesty, use, to take an oath by y^ immortal God, which they know perfitly,
shall be broken and violate hereafter, before the oath be first made or sworn:
yet these persons (as examples thereof be not very strange to find) at one
time or other be worthily scorged for their perjury, in so much often times
that the blot of such offense of the parents is punished in the sequel and
posterity: of this thing I may fortune to speak more in the life of Richard
the.iij. as the cause shall arise where it may evidently appear, that the
progeny of king Edward escaped not untouched for this open perjury.

When king Edward had appesed the citiezens, and that their fury was past, he
entered in to the city, and clearly forgettinge his oath, he first set a
garrison of soldiers in the town, to the intent y^ nothing should be moved
against him by the citezens, and after he gathered a great host, by reason of
his money. When all thing was ready, according as he desired, because he was
informed that his enemies did make no great preparacion to resist him, he
thought it necessary therefore with the more speed and diligence to make have
toward London: and as it were for y^ nones, he left the right way toward
Pomfret, where the Marquis Mo^tagew with his army lay, and took the way on the
right hand, not fully iiii. mile from the ca^pe of his enemies. And when he saw
that they made no stirryng, nor once showed the^ self in sight, he returned in
to y^ common high way again, a littel beyond their camp, and came sauely to
the town of Notingham, where came to him sir William Parre, sir Thomas a
Borogh, sir Thomas Montgomerie, and diverse other of his assured friends with
their aids, which caused him at the first coming to make Proclamacion in his
own name, king Edward the.iiii. boldly sayng to him, that they would serve no
man but a king. This Proclamacion cast a great shame and dolor in to the
hearts of the citezens of York, for that they might apparently perceive, that
they were fraudulently seduced, and for their good will unhonestly (if it might
be said) deluded and mocked. But when the fame was blown abroad, y^ king
Edward, without any detriment, was in sauetyme come to Notyngham, Princes and
noble men on all sides began to fall to him, fermely beleuyng, that either the
Marquis Montacute, beryng favor too king Edward, would not once with him
encounter, or that he was a frayde to set over or to give battayl, knowing not
to what part his soldiers would enclyne. But what soever the occasion was,
the most part thought it more for their security and auantage of them
selfs, to take part and join with king Edward, being at all points
furnisshed with men of war, rather then to cleue to king Henry, and to be
always in ieopardy, both of life and land. King Edward (as you can not blame
him) being with these good fortunes animated, and with his army furnished at
all points, came to his town of Lecester, and there heryng that the earl of
Warwycke, accompanied with Ihon earl of Oxford were together at Warwycke with a
great power, and were both determined to set on him, he politiquely imagening
to prevent their inue^cion, determined in great haste to remove his whole army,
hopyng surely, either to give them battle, either to allure and bring to his
side his brother George duke of Clarence, and to comen with him in some privy
place, before he came to his confederates: lest peradventure he should be by
them, illaquiated and co^pased, knowinge that the duke was in nothing constant,
nor in one mind long permanent.

In this very season to tell you how the earl of Warwycke was displeased, and
grudged against his brother the Marquis, for lettynge king Edward pass, it
ware to long to write: for where he him self had viguantlye provided and
politiquely forsene, for all things, ye Marquis nevertheless where the power
of their enemies first began to gather, never moved foot, nor made resistance
as he was commanded, but besides this suffered them with a so small number of
soldiers, before his eyes and in his open sight, without any battle to pass
by: wherefore the earl considering that king Edward did daily increase his power
(as a runnyng river by going more and more augmenteth) thought it most
necessary for him, to give him battle with speed, and thereupon accersed and
called together his army, and in all have sent for the duke of Clarence, to
join with him which had conscribed, and assembled together a great host about
London. But when he perceived that the duke lyngered, and did all things
neglige^tly, as though he were in doubt of war or peace, he then began
somewhat to suspect, that the duke was of his brethren corrupted and lately
changed, and therefore without delay marched forward toward Couentry, to
thentent to set on his enemies. In the mean season, king Edward came to
Warwycke, where he found all the people departed, and from thence with all
diligence auau^ced his power toward Couentre, and in a plain by the city he
pytched his field. And the next day after that he came thither, his men were set
forward, and marshalled in array, and he valia^tly bad the earl battle:
which mistrustyng that he should be deceived by the duke of Clare^ce (as he was
in deed) kept him self close within the Walls. And yet he had perfect word
y^ the duke of Clarence came forward toward him with a great army, king Edward
being also thereof informed, raised his camp, and made toward the duke. And
lest that there might be thought some fraud to be cloked between them, the
king set his battayles in an order as though he would fight without any le^ger
delay, the duke did likewise. When each host was in sight of other, Rychard
duke of Gloucester, brother to them both, as though he had been made arbitrer
between them, first rode to the duke, and with him commoned very secretly: from
him he came to king Edward, and with like secretnes so used him, that in
conclusion no unnatural war, but a fraternall amity was concluded and
proclaimed, and then leuyng all army and weapon a side, both the brethren
louyngly embraced, and familierly commoned together. It was no meruayll that
the duke of Clare^ce, with so small persuasion and less exhorting, turned
from the earl of Warwyckes part, for as you have hard before, this marchandyse
was labored, conduyted and concluded by a damsel, when the duke was in the
French court, to the earls utter confusion.

After this, king Edward caused to be proclaimed, that the duke and all that
came with him, should be taken as his true friends, without fraud or ill
suspicion. But this not withstandyng, it seems that God did neither forgive
nor forget to punish the duke with condign punishment, for violatyng and
brekyng his oath solempnely, and aduysedly taken and made to the earl of
Warwycke, for God not many years after, suffered him like a perjured person to
dye a cruel and a strange death.

Then was it concluded amongst the.iij. brethern to attempt therle of
Warwycke, if by any fair means he might be reco^siled or any promise allured
to their part: To whom the duke of Clarence sent diverse of his secret friends,
first to excuse him of the act that he had done, secondarely to require him to
take some good end now, while he might with king Edward.

When the earl had hard patiently the dukes message, lord, how he detested and
accursed him, cryenge out on him, that he contrary to his oath promise and
fidelity, had shamfully turned his face from his confederates and alies: But
to the dukes messengers he gave none other answer but this, that he had lever
be always like him self, then like a false and a perjured duk^, and that he
was fully determined never to leave war till either he had lost his own
natural life, or utterly extinguished and put under his foes and enemies.

From thence king Edward thus being furnished of a strong host, went without
any manner of diffide^ce or mistrust toward London (where after that it was
known that the duke of Clarence was come to his brethern, and that all they
came together in one knot to the city, such a fear rose suddenly amongst
the citiezens, that they were dryue^ to their wits end, not knowing either
what to do or to say, but at y^ last very fear compelled them to take king
Edwardes part. The self same season, the earl of Warwycke sent letters to
king Henry, to the duke of Somerset, tharchebishop of York, and other of his
counsayll, that they should keep the city from their enemies hands, by the
space of.ii. or.iii days after the coming of their enemies, and that he
shortly would be at hand, with a puyssant army. They as they were
commanded defended the city strongly, but it was to small purpose, for the
citiezens in the same time began maturely to consult, what part they should
follow for their most indempnite: and in conclusion when they considered that
king Henry was such an innocent person, as of him self was not most apt to
moderate and govern the public wealth of the realm. And that on the other
side, king Edward by no other men's document, but only by his own policy and
wit was wont to order the Realm and govern the kingdom. And farther that
king Edward was such a person as was able both to defend him self and also
all his, from injury and hostility, whereupon all men were glad to lean to
him, and to take his part. They concluded to take his part and to recryue him
in to the city: which determinacion being blowe^ abroad (as the nature of the
people is ever to delight in novelties) the communaltie could not be compelled
by no commandment to tarry at home, but ran in hepes out of the city, to
mete him, and saluted him as their king and souereygne lord. When the duke of
Somerset and other of king Henryes fre^des, saw the world thus suddenly
changed, every man fled, and in have shyfted for him self, leuyng king
Henry alone, as an host that should be sacrificed, in the Bishops palace of
London, adjoining to Poules church, Kyng^ Henry the.vi. again taken and
committed to prison.
not knowing of whom, nor what counsayll to ask, as he which with troble and
adversity was clearly dulled and appalled, in which place he was by king
Edward taken, and again committed to prison and captivity.

This was a sudden change, for the same day, the Archbishop of York to the
intent that the people might more fermely stycke on his side, caused him to
ride about London, appareled in a gown of blewe velvet, with a great company
cryeng king Henry, king Henry (which sight as much pleased the citiezens as a
fire painted on the wall, warmed the old woman) not knowing that or night,
his tryumphynge should be iorned to trymblynge, and his solempnitie converted
in to mournyng, such chance was to him provided. King Edward returned to
London again the.xi. day of April, six months after that he had sailed in
to Flaunders: and first calling before him a great assemble of people,
hyghly commended the fidelity of the citiezens, which they constantly bare
unto him, rendryng to the Aldermen, most hearty thanks for that, that they had
kept, and cuased the people to continue, and be permanent in their good minds
and loyalty toward him, blaming farther and rebukynge as well Merchant
strangers, as Englishemen, whom he knew to have prested, and lent money to
king Henry for the arrayenge and setting forth of a new army against him.
But when he had grievously with terrible words declared to them their sedicious
crime and traiterous offense, he had them be of good comfort, and to expel
all fear, for he released to them both the punishment of their bodies, and
loss of gooddes, and granted to them Pardon for their faults and offenses,
by which gentell mean and easy indulgencie, he reconciled to him the hearts
of the whole multitude, obteyning that, by fair and loving words, which he
could not have acheued with sharp strokes, and blody wounds.

Therle of Warwick ponderyng, that the gain of the whole battaill stood in
making haste, with all diligence, followed hisenemies, hopyng (that if they were
let never so little, with any stop or tariyng by the way) to fight with the^
before they should come to London: the which he thought, should be much to his
advantage, co^sideryng that he perfightly knew the city to be destitute of
men of war for defense, and to have no manner of municions, to set on the
walls or towers, so that they were no able to abide a siege, and for that
cause, ever they inclined to the victorious and stronger part. But when he
followyng his enemies, had passed a great part of his journey, he was informed
that king Edward, peaceably was entered into London, and had taken, and sent
king Henry to prison again: Which things depely considered, he saw that al
cauillacions of necessity, were now brought to this end, that they must be
committed to thasard and chance of one battaill, wherefore, he rested with his
army, at the town of saint Albons, partly, to refreshe his soldiers and
partly, to take counsel what was best to do. In the earls army were Ihon
Duke of Excester, Edmond Earl of Somerset, Ihon Earl of Oxenford, and Ihon
Marquis Montacute, whom the earl his brother well knew, not to be well minded
(but sore against his stomach) to take part with these Lords, and therefore
stood in a doubt, whether he at this time, might trust him or no, but the
fraternall love between the^, washed away and diminished all suspicion: But
what so ever opinion therle conceived of him or any other, the earl as a man
past all fear, determined coragiously to set on his enemies. And from saint
Albones, he removed to a village in the mean way, between London and saint
Albones called Barnet, Barnet field
being ten mile distaunt from both the tounes. This town stands on an
hill, on whose top is a fair plain, for two armies to join together, on
the one part of this plain, the Earl of Warwick pitched his feld, tariyng for
his enemies. The rumor of the earls coming, was spread in an instant over all
London, which quickened king Edward not a little, wherefore with all speed he
adjoined to that host, that he brought with him first to London, a compaignie
of elect, picked, and chosen persons, strong, young, and mete for all assaies,
beside other new aides, that were then come to him: Harness, weapons, horse,
and all other engines, instruments mete for the war, he neither forgatte,
nor slackly furnished. What shall I say more, he determined clearly to spend
all his riches, yea, and all that he could imagyn upon the chance of this
battaill: Firmly beleuyng, that this conflict, should knit up the knot of all
his labor, and bring him to quietness. So with a puyssaunt army, he marched
forward, and to put his people in ure, that they might be the more ready to
fight, when so ever they should encounter with their enemies, he divided them
in four parts. He brought with him also king Henry the sixte, of all
likelyhod for this intent, that either his adversaries, seeing their king stand
as a prisoner in captivity, should be abashed and discomfited by him, or else
if the fortune of the battaill should turn against him, that then king Henry
should be to him, both a sauegard and a proteccio^. On Easter eve at after
noone he came to Barnet, and there not far from his enemies, he encamped his
army, and least his enemies should compel him to fight that night, he environed
his camp, with new fortificacions and trenches: For tariyng that night, was
to him a synguler profit, and to his enemies a great detriment: Considering
the longer he tarried, the more people came to his aid, the more stronger was
his power, and the stronger that his power was, so much weaker was the part of
the adversaries, which was far from all succor, and hoped of no new relief
nor comfort. Thus both the armies lodged that night on the plain, but not out
of their harness, for their tents were so nere together, in the which, what
for neighyng of horses, and talkyng of men, none of both the hosts could
that night, take any rest or quietness. At the breakyng of the day, the earl of
Warwick set his men in a raie, in this manner: In the right wyng, he set the
Marquis Montacute, and the Earl of Oxenford, with certain horsemen, and he with
the Duke of Exceter, took the left wyng, and in the mids between both, he
set archers, and to them he appointed the duke of Somerset to be capitain. And
when he had set his men in an order, he encoraged his men to fight, with many
comfortable words, willing them to strike with a good and a fierce courage,
and to remember that they fight, not only for the liberty of the country,
against a tiraunte, which wrongfully and against all right, had invaded and
subdued this realm, but they fight in the querell of a true, and vndubitate
king, against a cruel man, and a torcious usurper, in the cause of a Godly,
and a pitiful Prince, against an abominable ma^queller, and blou^y butcher:
In the title of a gentle, liberal, and bountiful king, against an extreme
nigard, and a coueteous extorcioner. In which cause being so good, so godly
and so just, God of very justice must bedes be their shield and defense. King
Edward likewise ordered his battles. In the forward he set the duke of
Gloucester, the middle ward, he himself with the Duke of Clarence* having with
them king Henry, did rule and govern, the lord Hastynges led the rereward,
and besides these three battales, he kept a compaignie of fresh men in store,
which did him great pleasure, and this dooen, he encoraged his men, saying:
that their adversaries were only traitors to the realm, spoylers of the pore
commonaltie, and people destitute of al grace, good fortune, and good living.
Which mischeuous persons, if they should prevail through the faintness of
your hearts, all you gentlemen and richmen, were in ieoperdy of your life's, all
mean men in dounbt of robbyng and spoylyng: and all inferior persons, in
hasard of perpetual bondage andseruitude.

When the day began to spryng, the trompettes blewe up coragiously, and the
battaill fiersly began, Archers first shot, and bill men them followed* King
Edward having the greater number of men, valiauntly set on his enemies. The
earl on the otherside, remembryng his ancient fame and renoume, manfully
withstode him. This battaill on both sides was sore fought and many slain, in
whose romes succeeded ever fresh and freshemen. In the mean season while all
men were together by the cares, ever lokyng to which way fortune would
incline. The Earl of Warwick after long fight, wisely did perceive his men to
be over pressed, with the multitude of his adversaries: wherefore he caused new
men to relief them, that fought in the forward, by reason of which succors,
king Edwardes part gave a little back (which was the cause that some lokers
on, and no fighters, galoped to London, saying: that therle had won the feld)
which thing when king Edward did perceive, he with all diligence, sent fresh
men to their succors.

If the battaill were fierce and dedly before, now it was crueller, more bloody,
more fervent and fiery, and yet they had fought from morning almost to noone,
without any part gettyng advantage of other. King Edward being weary of so long
a conflict, and willing to se an end, caused a great crewe of fresh men
(which he had for this only policy, kept all day in store) to set on
their enemies, in manner being weary and fatigate: but although the earl saw
these new succors, of fresh and new men to netre the battaill, being nothing
afraied, but hopyng of the victory (knowing perfitly that there was all king
Edwardes power) comforted his men being weary, sharply quicknyng, and earnestly
desiryng them with hardy stomachs, to bear out this last and final brunt of
the battaill, and that the field was even at an end. But when his soldiers
being sore wounded, weried with so long a conflict, did give little regard to
his words, he being a man of a mind invincible, rushed into the midst of
his enemies, where as he (auentured so far from his own compaignie, to kill
and sley his adversaries, that he could not be rescued) was in the mids of
his enemies, strike^ down and slain. The marquis Montacute, thynkyng to succor
his brother, which he saw was in great ieoperdy, and yet in hope to obtein
the victory, was likewise over thrown and slain. After the earl was ded, his
part fled and many were taken, but not one man of name, nor of nobility.

Some aucthors write, that this battaill was fought so nere hand, that king
Edward was constrained to fight his own person, and fought as sore as any man
of his party, and that the earl of Warwick, which was wont ever to ride on
horseback, from place to place, from rank to rank comfortyng his men, was
now advised by the Marquis his brother, to relynquishe his horse, and try the
extremity by hand strokes, which if he had been on his horseback, might
fortune to have escaped.

This end had Richard Neuell earl of Warwick, The death of therle of warwick.
whose stoutestomacke, and invincible courage, after so many strange fortunes,
and perilous chances by him escaped, caused death before he came to any old
age privily to stele on him, and with his darte to take from him, all worldly
and mundain affeccions: but death did one thing, that life could not do, for by
death he had rest, peace, quietness, and tranquillity, which his life ever
abhorred, and could not suffer nor abide. On both parts were slain at this
battaill, more then ten.M. men. Of prisoners the number could not be
certainly known: on the kings part were slain sir Humfrey Burchier, soonne to
the Lord Barnes, else no man of estimacion. The occasion of this great
slaughter was, because that where king Edward was wont, after the battaill
obtained, to cry: save the commons, and kill the capitaines, now he spared
them not, because they not only so highly favored therle of Warwick, but
also because they came with the earl* against him in battaill. After this feld
ended, the Duke of Somerset, with Ihon earl of Oxenford, were in all post have,
fliyng toward Scotland, but feryng the ieoperdies, that might chance in so
long a journey, altered their purpose, and turned into Wales, to Jasper earl of
Penbroke: every man fled whether his mind served him. The duke of Excester
with much difficulty, escaped into Westminster disguised, and there took
Sanctuary. King Edward after this victory, al though he wanne it not without
great effusion of blood, as well on his own part, as the part of his
enemies, was greatly reioysed and comforted after the manner of a victorious
conqueroure, leadyng with him king Henry like a captive, in most triumphant
manner, on Easter day at after noone, made his entery solempnly, into the city
of London, and at the Church of saint Paul, he offered his standerd, and
rendered to almighty God for his great victory, most humble and hearty
thanks. The ded bodies of the earl and the Marquis, were brought to London in
a coffin, and before they should be buried, by the space of three days, they
lay open visaged, in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, to thinte^t that all
men might evidently perceive, that they unfeignedly were dedde least peraue^ture
the common people hereafter, here of some dissimulyng person, to take on him
the name of therle of Warwick, thynkyng him to be living, might stir a new
sedicion, and excite an unware rebellion.

The common people said, that the king was not so iocound nor so joyous, for
the destruction of therle, but he was more sorow^ull and dolorus, for the death
of the Marquis, whom both he knew and it appeared to other, to be inwardly his
faithful friend: For whose only sake he caused both their bodies, to be with
their auncesters, solempnly enterred at the Priory of Bissain. In the mean
season, queen Margaret having knowledge, that all things in England, were now
altered and brought into trouble and broyle, by reason of king Edwardes late
return into the realm: gathered together no small compaignie, of hardy and
valiant soldiers, determined with all have and diligence, with Prince
Edward her soonne, to sail into England, but yet once again (such was her
destiny) being let for lack of prosperous wynd, and encombered with to
much rigorous tempeste, a day after the fair, as the common proverb says,
landed at the Port of Weymouth, in Dorset shire. When she had passed the sea
and taken land, it was to her declared* how that king Edward had gotten again
the garland, and that king Henry her husband, was desolately left post a lone,
and taken prisoner, how the Earl of Warwick and his brother were both slain
and ded, and all their army destroyed, scatered or taken, and in conclusion
that her part had sustained, the most bitter plague and scorge, considering
both the chance and the time, that in many years before, had been red or
seen. When she hard all these miserable chances and misfortunes, so suddenly
one in another neck, to have taken their effect, she like a woman all
dismayed for fear, fell to the ground, her heart was perced with sorrow, her
speech was in manner passed, all her spirits were tormented with Malencoly.
The calamity and misery of her time, she detested and abhorred, her unstable
and contrariant fortune, she steadfastly blamed and accused, her peinfull labor,
her care of mind, turned into infelicitie she much lamented, and bewailed the
evil fate and destenie of her husband, which eminently before her iyes, she
saw to approach she accused, reproved, and reviled, and in conclusion, her
senses were so vexed, and she so afflicted, and cast into such an agony, that
she preferred death before life, rather desiryng sooner to die, then longer to
live, and perauenture for this cause, that her interior iye saw privily, and
gave to her a secret monicion of the great calamities and adversities, which
then did hang over her head, and were likely incontinent to fall and succeed
(which other persons, neither looked for nor regarded.

This Queen Margarete might well consider and think, that these evil
adventures, chanced to her for the most part, for the unworthy death of
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, uncle to her husband: Of the which mischaunce,
although she were not the very occasion and prouoker, yet she greatly offended
in that she concented thereto, and did not save his life, when she rulyng all
other, might conveniently have stayed and let it. For surely he being a
live, and having the moderacio^ and governance of the common wealth, king
Henry had never wauered in so many hasardes, and ieoperdies of his life as he
did. I would desire of God, that all men would in egall balance, ponder and
indifferently consider the causes, of these misfortunes and evil chances, the
which being eleuate in authority, do mete and measure, Justice and injury,
right and wrong, by high power, blind authority, and unbridled will.

But now to the purpose, when Queen Margarete saw, that to bid battle was to
no purpose, and in manner in despair, of the wealth of her self and her son:
she with the Prince and her compaignie, departed to a Sainctuary there by,
called Beauliew in Hamshire (where was a monastary of Monks, of the order of
Cisterciens) and registered her self and hers, as persons there priuileged.
When it was known that she was landed, Edmond Duke of Somerset, with lord
Ihon his brother Thomas Courtney earl of Devonshire, the which before ever
took the contrary part, whose sudden chaungyng, shortly turned to his own
confusion, Jasper Earl of Penbroke, Ihon Lord Wenlocke (a man made only by
king Edward) and Ihon Longstrother, Prior of saint Ihones in England, came in
great have to Beaulew, and presented theimselfes to the Queen: Although that
she were almost drouned in sorrow, and plunged in pein, yet when she saw and
beheld, these noble and princely personages, to resort unto her presence, she
was somewhat comforted, and greatly revived again.

And first, lest it should be laid to her charge, that she had dooen any
thing misauisedly: she declared and showed the cause, why she could not come to
them in time, as she gladly would have done, and for what purpose and intent,
she had then taken the i^^unitie of Sanctuary: Besechyng them all to study,
and provide with all diligence, for the wealth and conseruacion, of her only
iuell the Prince her son, and where for this time, she dispaired to do any
thing by force of arms, that might be to her profit, she thought it most
convenient for her (if the time of year and her enemies, did not let or stop
her) to sail again into France and there to tarry till God would send her
better luck, and more pleasant fortune, and to bring her long purposed
business, to a good conclusion and end.

After that the Duke and other with comfortable words, somewhat had eased the
dolorus heart of this unfortunate queen: Thesaid Duke began with a long
process, to enter communicacion of war to be renewed, and with all have
possible, and extreme diligence, least their compaignie by tariyng might be
diminished, and king Edwardes power increased and augmented, considering that
all this time, he had no army gathered together, for so much, that at the
last battaill, the very strength of his chief soldiers, was weaked and
appalled: And that notwithstanding, that fortune shone on him, in obteinyng the
victory against therle of Warwick, yet now she might turn her sail on the
otherside, causyng him to taste eger vinegar, as she before had given him to
drink dilicate Ypocrace, when all men se daily, that of warlike affairs at
the point, there happens not seldom time, sudden commutacions and unlooked
variaunce: affirmyng farther, that the more number of the nobility, bare
toward king Henry her husband, their good minds and fixed hearts, and would
help him both with men and money. And of his own free will, if she would take
upon her, the name of capitain against her enemies, as she before that often
times had enterprised: he offered a great power of able men, at his own
expense and charge, promisyng that the two earls, should assure her of a far
greater number, of valiant and expert warriers, then she would esteem. And when
he had showed that, the victory was now (if they list) in their hands, he
merrily required them all, to be of hardy heart and good chere, and because
the matter, required great expedicion, he thought it not necessary, farther to
reason the cause of battaill, but determine out of hand how the battaill should
be given and ordered.

The Queen whose mind gave her, that this mocion, should come to no good
conclusion; answered: that she could well allow this sentence, if she thought
that there might happen, no greater loss to some other, then the loss of her
own life. But she suspected that while they would help things, that they
most phantesied and affected, the life of prince Edward her soonne, in whom,
all the whole hope of that family stood and remained, should be in perell and
ieoperdie: and therefore, she either thought it necessary, to defer the
battaill till another time, or ele to conueigh her son into France again,
there to lie sure and secret, till the chance of the first battle were
tried and assayed. And no marueyll, although the natural mother, much minded
and studied for the sauegarde and tuycion of the life of her son, ponderyng
that next her husband, whom she reputed for clean undone and utterly cost
away, she had nothing more to be belo^ed, nothing more derer, nor nothing to
be made more of.

Thus this prudent and politic Queen required the cheuetaynes expert in
marciall feats, that they should before hand premeditate with them selfs,
maturely and deliberatly these things by her moved and after that done, if
they thought it convenient to give battle, she would to their agreement with
all her heart be conformable. But there was no longer disputacion of the matter,
for the duke said that there was no need to waste any more words for all
they were determined (while their lives lasted) still to keep war against
their enemies, and therefore that thing which with great counsayll and
deliberacion is concluded, ought to be auaunced and set forward with a whole
consent and agreement.

Thus every man together clearly bent and encouraged to ye battle gathered
his power by him self. The duke thorough all his dominions, raised a chosen
company of men of war: likewise did the earl of Deuo^shyre. The earl of
Pe^broke went into Wales to his erledo^ to prepare his people with all
diligence. The queen, at the last was brought in to this hope of good fortune
that she said, well be it, and so as the duke had advised her, she with her
company departed to Bathe, entendynge there to make her abode, till more of her
affinity were together assembled. But whether so ever she went, few or none
had thereof knowledge, mistrustyng left her consayl should by some titiuille,
be published and opened to her adversaries, before she came to the place
prefixed.

When king Edward knew that Queen Margarete was landed in England, and that
the duke of Somerset with her accomplices had prepared a new army, out of hand
he dispatched certain cu^rers on ^ight horses, in to every part to se what
number his enemies were, and what way they intended to take. The explorators,
according to their instruccions, serched and sought the parts by West, and
made ^elacion diligently at their return, what they had known and sent. The
king being in a great agony, because he knew not what way his enemies took,
determined, surely to encounter the^ at some, one place before they came to
London. And upon this conclusion, with such an army as he had gotten about
London, he set forward into Oxford shyre, and there seeking a place apt and
mete to pytche his tents, was conducted to Abyndon, where he encamped him
self, commanding all men appointed for the war, with all celeritie to follow
him to that place. All the hynges host there being assembled and reduct in to
one company, news were brought to him, that his enemies were come to Bathe,
and there did soiorne and tarry purposely to augme^t and encreace their number
of such, as daily to them did resort, wherefore the king without delay removed
straight to Marleborough, being dista^t from Bathe.xv. miles, making haste and
great diligence, if by any possibility he might to give them battle before
they diuerted in to Wales, whether he thought (as they intended in deed) that
they would take their journey to join them self with the earl of Penbroke,
which had gathered a great host in those parties.

When the Queen knew that king Edward was come so nere to her, she tarried not
long at Bathe, but removed in great haste to Brystow: and sent out certain
horsemen to espy, whether she might sauely pass over the River Seuerne by
Gloucester into Wales, whether she determined first to go to augment her army,
and then without any delay with spear and shield, coragiously to set on her
enemies, where soever they would abide. They that were sent, returned to, her
again, declaryng that the town of Gloucester was under the obeisaunce of
Rychard, duke of Gloucester the kings brother, and that although they had
solicited the lord Beauchampe of Powike, which lay there in the Castle, and
had the rule of the Town, and the townsmen first by rewardesafter by
menacing, either to take their part, or peasably to suffer her to pass over
their bridge, they were there with all, neither once moved, nor once would
speak co^fortably to the messengers. When she hard these news, she shortly
departed from Bristow with her army, to a proper town on seuerne side, called
Tewkesburye, leuing Gloucester vnassauted, lest peradventure she might their
spend her time with much loss and littel gain, but in her passage toward
Tewkesbury, the lord Beaucha^pe took from her rereward, more ordinance then she
might have well spared, which did to her no small prejudice. When the Queen was
come to Tewkesbury, and knew that king Edward followed her with his horsemen
at the very back, she was sore abashed, and wonderfully amassed and determined
in her self, to fly in to Wales to Jasper earl of Pe^broke: But the duke of
Somerset, willing in nowyse to fly backward for doughtes that he casted might
chance by the way, determined there to tarry, to take such fortune as God
should send, being in his own munde, and so fixed in a fair park,
adioy^ynge to the town, he pytched his field against the will and consent of
many other Capitaynes which would that he should have drawn a side, for a
while till therle of Penbroke with his army were with him associate, but his
will served for his reason, and so the chance followed. The duke of Somerset
entending to abide the battle like a pollitique warrior, trenched his camp
round about of such an altitude, and so strongly, that his enemies by no
means facilye, could make any entry, and farther perceyuyng that his part
could never escape without battle, determined there to se ye final end of
his good or ill chance, wherefore he marshalled his host in this manner: he and
the lord Ihon of Somerset his brother led the forward: The middelward was
governed by the Prince under the co^duyte of the lord of saint Ihons, and lord
Wenlocke (whom king Edward had highly before preferred and promoted to the
degree of a baron) The rereward was put in the rule of the earl of Deuonshyre.

When all these battayles were thus ord^red and placyd, The battayll of
Tewkesbury^.
the Queen and her son prince Edward rode about the field, encouragyng their
soldiers, promising to them (if they did show the^ selfs valya^t against their
enemies) great rewards and high promocions, innumerable gayn of the spoil
and bootye of their adversaries, and above all other fame and renoune thorough
the whole realm. King Edward likewise which the day before was come within a
mile of Tewkesbury, put his brother the duke of Gloucester in the forward, and
him self in the middelward, the lord Marquis and the lord hastynges led the
reregarde. The duke of Gloucester, which lacked no policye, valyantly with his
battle assauted the tre^che of the Queen's camp, whom the duke of Somerset
with no less courage defended, the duke of Gloucester for a very politic
purpose, with all his men reculed back. The duke of Somerset, perceiving that:
like a knight, more courageous then circu^spect came out of his trenche, with
his whole battle, and followed the chase, not doubting but the prince and the
lord Wenlocke, with the middelward had followed just at his back. But whether
the lord We^locke dissimuled the matter for king Edwardes sake, or whether his
heart served him not, still he stood lokyng on. The duke of Gloucester taking
the auantage that he auentured for, turned again face to face to the duke of
Somersets battayl, which (nothing less thinkyng on, then of the return) were
within a small season, shamefully discomfited. The duke of Somerset, seeing his
unfortunate chance returned to ye middelward, where he seeing the lord Wenloke
standing still, after he had reuyled him, and called him traitor, with his axe
he struck ye brains out of his hedde. The duke of Gloucester entered the
trenche, A terrible stroke.
and after him the king, where after no long conflict, the Queen's part went
almost all to wrecke, for the most part were slain. Some sledde for succor in
the thyck of the park, some in to ye monastery, some in to other places. The
Queen was found in her Chariot al most dead for sorrow, ye prince was
apprehended and kept close by sir Rychard Croftes: the duke of Somerset and
the lord Prior of saint Ihons, were by force taken prisoners, and many other
also. In the field and chase were slain lord Ihon of Somerset, the earl of
Deuonshyre, sir Ihon Delues, sir Edward Hampden, sir Robert Wytyngham, and sir
Ihon Lewkenor, and.iii. thousand other.

After the field ended, king Edward made a Proclamation, that who so ever could
bring prince Edward to him alive or dead, should have an annuitie of an.C. l.
during his life, and the Princes life to be saved, Sir Richard Croftes, a wise
and a valyaut knight, nothing mistrusting the kings former promise, brought
forth his prisoner prince Edward, being a goodly femenine and a well feautered
young gentelman, when king Edward had well advised, he demanded of him, how
he durst so presumptuously enter in to his Realm with banner displayed. The
prince, being bold of stomach and of a good courage, answered saying, to
recover my fathers kingdom and enheritage, from his father and grandfather to
^ym, and from him, after him, to me lyneally diuoluted. At which words king
Edward said nothing, but with his hand thrust him from him (or as some say,
stroke him with his gauntlet) whom incontinent, they that stood about, which
were George duke of Clarence Rychard duke of Gloucester, Thomas Marquis Dorset,
and William lord Hastynges, suddenly murdered, and pitiously manquelled. The
bit ternesse of which murder, some of the actors, after in their latter days
t^sted and assayed by the very rod of Justice and punishment of God. His body
was homely enterred with y^ other simple corses, in y^ church of the monastery
of black Monks in Tewkesburye. This was the last civil battayl that was
fought in king Edwardes days, which was gotten the.iii. day of May, in
the.x. year of his reign, and in the year of our lord.M.cccc.lxxi. then being
Saturday. And on the Monday next ensuyng was Edmond duke of Somerset, Ihon
Longstrother, Prior of saint Ihons, sir Garuays Clyfton, sir Thomas Tressham,
and, xii. other knights and gentelmen behedded in the market place at
Tewkes^ury.

Queen Margaret like a prisoner was brought to London, Queen Margaret brought
prisoner too London.
where she remained till king Remer her father rau^somed her with money, which
sum (as the French writers afferme) he borrowed of king Jews y^ xi. and
because he was not of power nor ability to repaye so great a duty* he sold
to the French king and his heirs, the kingdoms of Naples, and both the
Sciciles, with the countye of Prouynce, which is y^ very title that king
Charles the vii. made when he conquered y^ realm of Napels. After the raunsom
paid, she was conveyed in to France with small honor, which with so great
triumph and honorable enterteynme^t was with po^pe above al pride, received into
this Realm.xxviii years before. And where in the beginnynge of her time, she
lived like a Queen, in the middel she ruled like an empress, toward the end she
was vexed with troble, never quiet nor in peace, and in her very extreme age
she passed her days in France, more like a death then a life, languisshyng
and morning in continual sorrow, not so much for her self and her husband,
whose ages were almost consumed and worn, but for the loss of prince Edward
her son (whom she and her husband thought to leave, both ouerlyuer of their
progenye, and also of their kingdom) to whom in this life nothing could be
either more displeasant or grievous.

After this battayl, king Edward rendered to God his most humble thanks, and
caused public processions to be with all devout reverence solemply, kept three
days together in every Town and Parish. And when he had visited the towns
and places, where his enemies assembled first together (to the pain and
punishmente of no small number) he with good diligence returned toward London,
for he was informed how one Thomas Neuel, bastard son to Thomas lord
Fauco^bridg the valyant captain, a man of no less courage then audacitie (who
for his evil condicio^s was such an apt person, y^ a more meter could not be
chosen to set all the world in a broyle, and to put the estate of y^ realm on
an ill hasard) had of new begone a great co^mocion. This bastard was before
this time appointed by the earl of Warwycke, to be Uiceadmyrall of the sea, and
had in charge so to keep the passage between Dover and Caleys, that none which
either favored king Edward or his friends should escape, untaken or vndrouned.
And when by the death of the earl of Warwycke, he was brought into poverty,
he robbed both on the sea and the land, as well his enemies as also his friends:
By reason whereof he gat together a great navy of ships, and spoiled on every
ship, and at last took land in Kent, and gathered together a great company of
Kentishmen, such as were most mete for his purpose, and so marched toward
London, where the Essex men having wild whaye worms in their heddes, joined
them with him, saying that their coming and quarrel was to deliver out of
captivity King Henry y^ vi. and to bring him to his wife, but what so ever
their outward words were, their inward cogitacions were only hope of spoil,
and desire to rob and pyll. For the bastard him self assaulted the draw
bridge of London, and a capitain of his called Spisyng scaled Algate with the
Essex me^, harnesed in their wyfes Chesecloutes, which assaults were deadly
given and manfully resisted, in so much that on both parts many were slain
and hurt, but at the last the citiezens then put back the rebels, and ^lew
and wounded a great number of them, and drove the bastard from al his pray to
his ships, lyeng at Radcleffe, which having a good and prosperous wind, made
sail with all haste, and Roued on the sea, as before he was accustomed.

This styrryng, although it were but littell to think on at the first yet if
it had begone not long before, it had brought all king Edwardes business in to
a doubtful difference: for king Edward in these his last battayles was twice
more then fortunate for that, that he at sundry and several times (and not all
a^ one time) was persecuted and invaded of his enemies: for surely, at the time
when the earl of Warwycke with his pytched army was coming toward London, if
queen Margarete with her company had taken land (which enterprice she thryse
in great ieopardy coragiously attempted) Then if she had set on behynd, while
the earl of Warwycke gave the onset before both at one moment, or if Edmond
duke of Somerset had not given battle at Tewkesburye, before Jasper earl of
Penbroke was come with his train, or if bastard Fawconbridge had vexed the
Londeners even at y^ time: One or the other of these.ij. things should
consequently have followed, that king Edward must of necessity once again
fly out of the Realm, or else with shame and rebuke yield him self, either to
slaughter or captivity: But as in all mean chances and small gaynes, good
luck is desired and praised, so much more in battle, is good fortune and
fortunate chance to be most made of, and chiefly to be auaunced.

Now to return to bastard Fauco^bridge, waueryng hither and thither in the
doubfull surges of the sea, as sure of his life on the water as on the land,
which either thynking that no man would se him, or that al men were blind, and
could not epsy him (and especially in so secret a place) came into the open
haven of Southampton, and there took land where he was not long untaken, but
shortlier behedded.

When Jasper earl of Pe^broke was credibly asserteyned that queen Margarete had
lost the battle at Tewkesburye, and that there was no more trust of any
comfort or releue to be had for the part of poor king Henry, he with such men
of war as he was, bringyng to his co^federates, returned back out of y^ way
to the town of Chepstow, where he taryeng deploryng and lamentyng, that have to
much hasted, and that vnpurueied and blind will had at the final conclusion,
not only destroyed and brought to naught al king Heryes estate, riches and
prehemine^ce, but further had left all his friends ready to toss the waves of
fortune, and to seek their living where thy might sauely get them, began to
think and provide what way was best to take.

King Edward at this season, not being out of fear of the earl of Penbroke*
sent privily in too Wales, Roger Uaughan, a man there both strong of people
and of friends, to the intent by some gyle or engyne suddenly to trap and
surprise the earl: but he having intelligence of certain friends, how that
watch was privily leyd for him, suddenly in the same town, took Roger
Uaughan, and without delay stroke of his head, so Thomas Uaughan, by Gods
providence, received the death himself, which he by deceit prepared for the
other.

The earl in good have departed thence to Penbroke, whom incontinent Morgan
Thomas, by king Edwardes commandment so strongly beseged him, and so
enuyroned his Castle with a diche and a trenche, that he could not lightly
fly or escape thence: but he was after eyghte days delivered, and the seage
raised by his faithful and trusty friends David Thomas, brother to the
foresaid Morgan, and from thence conveyed to Tynbye, a haven town in wales,
where he getting convenient ships, for to transport him and his over the sea
into France with his nephew lord Henry earl of Rychemonde, and a few of his
familiers took ship, and by fortunes leadyng, landed in Brytayne.

After his arryuall, he first went to duke Frau^ces of Brytayne, and him
reverently saluted, expoundyng to him the cause, the case, and the necessity
of their thither coming, committyng the lyfes, the goods and all the chances
both of him and his nephew, whole to the dukes discrecion and ordinance. The
duke received both the earls, with all benignity, and showed to the^ no less
honor, favor and humanity, with such entertainment, then if they had been his
natural brethren, and geuyng to them his faith, seriously made promise that
being with him, they should sustein no manner of wrong, nor no injury should be
to them by any creature offered: assuryng them, that they might within his
dominions, at all times, and in all places, go in safe and good surety.

When King Edward had appeased, by the means before rehearsed, his kingdom and
people, to the intent that there should insurge hereafter, no new commocion
within the realm again: he made a journey into Kente, and there sat in
judgment on such, as in the last tumulteous business, took part with bastard
Fauconbrige, where many were (not unworthy) straightly punished and raunsomed,
which business once perfo^^med, to the intent that all men might se apparently,
that indubitate peace was come into the realm, and that all fear of exterior
hostility, was banished and exiled for ever: Poor king Henry the sixte, a
little before deprived of his realm, and Imperial Croune, was now in the Tower
of London, King Henry the (...) in the ^ower
spoiled of his life, and all worldly felicity, by Richard duke of Gloucester
(as the constant fame ran) which, to the intent that king Edward his brother,
should be clear out of all secret suspicion of sudden invasion, murdered
thesaid king with a dagger. But whosoever was the manqueller of this holy man,
it shall appear, that both the murderer and the consenter, had condign and
not undeserved punishment, for their bloody stroke, and butcherly act: and
because they had now no enemies risen, on whom they might revenge themself, as
you shall hereafter perceive, they exercised their cruelty, against their own
selfs: and with their proper blood, embrued and polluted their own hands and
members.

The ded corpse of king Henry, with bills and gleues pompeously (if you call
that a funeral pomp) was conueighed from the tower, to the Church of saint
Paul, and there laid o^ a beree, where it lay the space of one whole day:
and the next day, without Priest or Clarke, Torche or Taper, syngyng or
saying, it was conueighed to the Monastery of Chertesey, being distant from
London.xv. mile, and there was buried, but after he was removed to Winsore, and
there in a new vawte newly intumilate. This king Henry reigned full.xxxviii.
years, and xvii. days, and after that he had repossessed his kingdom.vi.
months he lived.lii. years, having by his wife one only son, called
Edward Prince of Wales.

King Henry was of stature goodly, The discripci^n of King Henr^ (...)
of body sle^der, to which proporcion, al other members were correspondent: his
face beautiful, in the which continually was resident, the ^ountie of mind,
with which, he was inwardly endued. He did abhor of his own nature, all the
vices, as well of the body as of the soul, and from his very infancy, he was
of honest conversation and pure integrity, no knower of evil, and a keeper of
all goodness: a dispiser of all things, which be wont to cause, the minds
of mortal men to slide, fall, or appaire. Beside this, patience was so
^adicate in his heart, that of all the injuries to him committed, (which were
no small nombre) he never asked vengeance nor punishment, but for that,
rendered to almighty God, his creator, hearty thanks, thynkyng that by this
trouble, and adversity, his sins were to him forgotten and forgeuen. What
shall I say, that this good, this gentle, this meke, this sober, and wisman,
did declare and affirm, that those mischiefs and miseries, partly, came to
him for his own offense, and partly, for the hepyng of sin upon sin,
wretchedly by his aunceters and forfathers: wherefore he little or nothing
esteemed, or in anywise did turment or macerate himself, what so ever dignity,
what honor, what state of life, what child, what friend he had lost, or missed,
but if it did but sound an offense toward God, he looked on that, and not
without repentance, both mourned and sorowed for it: these and other like
offices of holiness, caused God to work miracles for him, in his life time, (as
old men said). By reason whereof, king Henry the seventh, not without cause,
s^ed to July Bushop of Rome, to have him canonized, as other saints be: but
the fees of canonizyng of a King, (...)
were of so great a quantity at Rome (more then the canonisyng of a Bushoppe or
a prelate, although he satte in sain^te Peter's Cheire) that thesaied king
thought it more necessary, to keep his money at home, for the profit of his
realm and country, rather then to empouetishe his kingdom, for the gainyng of
a new holy day of saint Henry: remittyng to God, the judgment of his will
and intent. This king Henry, was of a liberal mind, and especially, to such
as loved good learning, and them whom he saw profit, in any verteous science,
he heartily favored and embraced, wherefore (...) help his own young scholars,
to attein to discipline, and for them he founded a solemn school at Eton, a
town next unto Wyndsore, in the which he has stablished, an honest Colege of
sad Priests, with a great nombre of children which be there, of his cost
^rankely and freely taught, the eruditame^tes and rules of Grammar. Beside this,
be edefied a Princely Colege, in the University of Cambrige, called the kings
Colege, for the further erudicion, of such as were brought up in Eton, which,
at this day to florisheth, in all kinds, as well of litterature, as of
toungues, that above all other, it is worthy to be called, the Prince of
Coleges.

The.xi. year. The.xi. year.

NOw to return to King Edward, which was releued of ^he most part, of his
prickyng fear, and inward suspicio^, to the intent that no print or shadow,
should remain of the adverse faccion, in his realm. He diligently required and
serched out, all the fragmentes and leuynges, of his enemies part, intendyng
to repress, and utterly to extinguishe them. And first to begin with all, he
sent George Neuell, brother to the earl of Warwick, and Archbushoppe of York,
under strong conduite, to the Castle of Guysnes, there to be kept in extreme
captivity, where he long continued, and at the last, by friendship delivered:
which of very pensiuenes and grudge of mind, shortly after deceassed, whom,
Laurence Bathe, and after him Thomas Rotheram, in the sea of York, did
ordinarily succeed. Beside this, Ihon Earl of Oxenford, which after Barnet
feld, both manfully gat, and valiantly kept, saint Mighels Mount in Cornewal:
either for lack of aid, or persuaded by his friends, gave up the Mount, and
yielded himself to king Edward, (his life only saved) which to him was
granted: but to be out of all doubtful imaginacions, king Edward sent him
over the sea, to the Castle of Hammes, where by the space of.xii. years, he was
in strong prison, miserably kept, and diligently looked to. Many other beside
these, in diverse parts of the realm, being very little or nothing suspected:
were either committed to prison, or greuosly fined and taxed. Beside this, least
his neighbors country, might be an harborough, or receptacle of his foes and
adversaries, he concluded a new league, with James the.iii. king of Scotts,
for the term of.xx. years. And yet, whatsoever he thought in his Imaginacion,
for all his besy diuises, and pollitique forcastynges: his mind and phantesie,
were not clear exonerate and dispatched, of all fear and inward trouble: For
tidings were brought to him, that the earls of Penbroke and Richemond, were
arrived in Britayne: and there of the Duke, highly cherished, well fostered and
entertained.

The.xii. year. The.xii. year.

THis thing nipped king Edward hardly at the very stomach, as though his
mind, castyng some evil to come after: did signify before, that the Earl of
Richemond, should once attein to the Croune and diadem of the realm: which
mischief, when he had well disgested, he secretly sent wise and close
messengers, to the Duke of Brytayne, the which should not stick, to promise
the duke, great and sumpteous rewards, (knowing that mede, many things
corrupts) so that he would deliver, both therles into their hands and
possession. The duke gladly hard them that were sent* but when he knew, the
two Earls to be a pray, of such a great value, he determined not to
deliver them, but rather to entertain them with him more diligently, then
they were accustomed. The duke answered the orators, that it stood not with
his honor, nor he would not deliver the two Earls, to whom, he was bound and
obliged, by his faith and promise: but this he promised to do for the kings
pleasure, that they should be kept, and with such vigilant persons,
continually watched, that the king should have no manner of cause, once to
think, that they could or should attempt any thing, that might sound, either
to his displeasure or prejudice. When the messengers saw, that they could not
obtein, that which they desired, like wisemen held themselfes contented with
that, which by the duke was offered, and so returned into England. The king
wrote to the Duke of Britayne, louyngly requiryng him, to accomplish with all
speed, that, which he of his own mocion offered, promisyng him not only,
men and great rewards, but yearly to reward him, with a full hand, and a
well stuffed purse. The Duke perceiuyng the sweet gain, which rose to him, by
the abode of the two English Earls* in his Country: least they for any cause,
should abandon his dominions, and seek succors in some other foreign Region,
caused the one, to be segregated from the other: and removed from them such
Englishemen, as were daily on them attendant and came with them into Britayn,
and in their places appointed Britons, to be their seruitors to minister, and
continually to attend and wait on them.

When king Edward had thus pollitiquely, as he thought, compassed the Duke of
Britayne: he thynkyng nothing less, then to take a damage at the Duke of
Burgoynes hand, yea, and such a damage, as by all ^imil^tude, was both like,
continually to grieve and vex the realm of England: and farther to be an
occasion, of a common s^op, and puttyng back of the commodities, grown within
this realm, to be transported into outward parts North Estward, was yet eft
sons, brought into a new doubt and perplexity. For the declaracion whereof,
you must vnderitande, that Jews the French king, had a brother called
Charles, which was not the wisest, nor yet a man of the greatest experience:
and of a certain courtesy, loved better to have other men to rule him, then
he to take upon him to rule other. And although that the king at this time, had
no soonne, nor other brother, but him, his open heir apparent: he little
favored, and ^esse loved him, nothing geuyng him of his good will, for his part
and porcio^, of his fathers lands, but that, to the which he was compelled by
his counsel, and that he gave him this month, in the next month, he would
by flatery or by thretnyng, by war or corrupcion of his brothers servants,
obtain and bring to his hands and possession again. For first he gave him the
Duchy of Berry, and after that whole Normandy, whereof in no long time, he
bereft him the possession, regiment and title, without any cause given, on y^
party of young Charles. And when thesaid Charles, had afterward departed, with
the countries of Brye and Champaigne, by a fraudulent feate: king Jews caused
him to ^elinquishe the same, and to take for his pare^tage, the duchy of Guyen,
and so was called and named the duke of Guyen. This evil entreating of the duke
of Guyen, by the French king his brother, caused diverse other Princes, of no
small puyssaunce, to favor, aid, and succor thesaid Duke (of the which the
chief were, Charles Duke of Burgoyn, Fraunces duke of Britayn, and Jews Earl of
sent Poll, Con^^able of France. This Duke of Guyen, by the sollicityng of his
adherentes, sore labored to have in marriage, the sole daughter and only heir,
of Charles duke of Burgoyne, by whom he hoped to be lord and sovereign, of
all duke Charles inheritauuce. To the furtheraunce of this marriage, help with
all his power, the Duke of Britayn, as who said, that it should be only his
act. The Constable of France on the other part, thought that he a lone, was
able to compass this marriage, and to have soly the thanks, of the Duke of
Guyen. The French king did all that he could, to let and stop this marriage:
for if his brother had obtained, the young Lady with all her possessions, then
he saw well enough, that the Duke of Guyen, being joined with the Duke of
Britayne, should be strong enough, or at the least of puyssaunce enough, to
encomber the French king and his children. But king Edward of England, sore
smoked, when he hard tell first of this marriage, and not without a cause: For
he considered, that the French king had no heir maile, but one weak boy and
that the Duke of Guyen, was likely to were the Croune of France, after his
brother or nephewe. And if this ma^age should proceed, all Burgoyn, Brabant,
Holand, Zeland, Flaunders, and all the low countries, where the English men,
for the most part, made their martes, and uttered their their merchaundise,
should be united and annexed, to the Croune of France, and in the hands of
the old, and ancient enemies of the realm: For so had poor England, and
little Caleis, been continually in the danger of their enemes, almost with
them enui^oned round about. These things considered, king Edward and his
counsel, took the matter in great earnest, and seriously wrote to Duke
Charles, that if he would conculde, any marriage in France, to the hurt and
prejudice, of the realm of England* that he should know that he had, not
only broken his league and amity, but also find, that he had been better to
have dissimuled, with the best friend that he had, then privily, without
reason, to have iuggeled with the realm of England. The Duke of Burgoyn made
reasonable answers, and honest excuses, but the Counsel of England, in
nowise would give credit thereto: ever surmising that the marriage should take
^ffect. And certainly at this season, the Englishemen had rather have taken
part, with the French king then with the Duke of Burgoyne: if it had not been
only, to empeche and stop this marriage, so much the Englishemen disdained,
to have the house of Burgoyne, conjoined and unite, to the Croune of France.
But the Duke of Burgoyne dalied, and dissimuled with all parties, in this
matter, geuyng them fair words, and making large promises, by the which he
first deceived other, and inco^clusion himself. He promised his daughter, to
Nicholas Duke of Calaber, with who^, he had rather have had her buried, then
^edded. Duke Philbert of Sauoy, had an outward answer assuredly, when nothing
was so minded inwardly. Maximilian Duke of Austrice, and after king of
Romans, soonne to the Emperor Frederick, could never obtein, during the life
of duke Charles, but only glosyng and painted promises: but all words,
writings and promises, what so ever they were, clearly set a side, he was
surely fixed and determined (as Arge^ton his counsailer does write) that no
marriage as long as he lived, should sort to any effect, at the least by his
consent.

Now let us leave the Duke of Burgoyne, about his affairs for a while, and
return to king Edward: which, in the.xiii. year of his reign called his high
Court of Parliament, at his Palace of (...) in the which, alt laws and
ordinances, made by him (...) that day were corroberated and confirmed: and
such Laws made (...) him, as king Henry the (...), had caused to be abrogated
and an (...) he again revived and renouated. He made farther laws, (...) the
confiscacion of the goods of the rebels, to his person, as (...) for
restoryng of such* as fled out of the realm, for his quere (...) occasion:
which, by his adversaries, as traitors to their King and Countr^y, a little
before, were of high ^reason attainted, and to death co^demp^^^ Toward his
charges of late suste^^ed, a competent some of money was demanded, and
frankely granted: and inconclusion, all inward g^^dges and open discordes, the
which had of long continued, in the hearts of the nobility, which, now were
very few (the more part being consumed in the wars) he clearly extirped,
and brought to unity and co^corde. King Edward help to this agreement, as
much as in him lay: And to the intent that other men, should forget iniu^ies
to them dooen, and put away all rancor and malice: followyng his good and
Godly example, he clearly pardoned almost all offenses, and all men then
being within the Realm, he frankely discharged, although they had taken part
with his adversaries against him, of all high treasons and crimes.

The.x^ii. year. The.xiii. year.

WHile king Edward was thus setting an order, and pacifiyng all things,
which were out of square: Charles duke of Burgoyn, whose spirit was never in
quiet, whose ambicious mind, was never satisfied, whose haute and high
stomach, could never be tamed, (till death it swaged and abated) desiryng
as well to amplify, and enlarge his territories and dominions, liyng on the side
of the river of Ryne, toward high Burgoyn as also to recover again Amias and
other tounes, which the French king, more by fraud then by feats of war,
had from him wrongfully usurped: and further above all things, couetyng to
have the French king, to have some great shame, loss, or hinderaunce, could
not invent no one way, so apt and mete for his imagined purpose, as to entice
and persuade the king of England, by his ambassadors, to make war upon
thesaied king and his country: for the recoueryng of his old right and
ancient title in the same, by the French king and his father, against all
right and equity, with holden and deteig^ed. King Edward began a little to
harken on that side, not so much for to help the Duke of Burgoyne (to whom he
was much bound, for his aid in the time of his exile, as you before have
hard) as for to be revenged of king Jews, whom, he reputed for his mortal
enemy. First, for aydyng the Earl of Warwick and his accomplices, against him:
secondarely, for the long mainteinyng, and fosteryng of Queen Margarete, and
her soonne prince Edward (whom for a farther affinity, he had made Godfather
to his son Charles the Doulphyn) within his countries and dominions.
Whereupon, when he had consulted with the nobility and the chief and sage
persons of the Realm (which in manner have a certain natural inclination to
make war in France, either for hope of great spoil and gain, or of a
certain privy canker engendered in the hearts of their forefathers, in time
long past, and after by lyneall succession descended in to the stomachs of
their nephews) he answered the Dukes messenger, that in the beginning of the
year, he would land at Caleys with such a puissant army, that the French king
should well perceive that he lacked neither men, nor that his men lacked
stomachs, both for to revenge their soueraygnes quarrel, and also to recover
his right. And for a treugth, at this season there was mortal war between
king Jews and the duke of Borgoyne. And more likely to fall between him and
other, for king Jews, of nature was hard of speech, and chorlish in answer,
froward and vngentell as well to his friends as to his foes. By reason whereof
many great men within the realm of France, not content with his gross
rudeness, and rude diss^^ulacio^ began to have intelligens, and to cleue to
the duke of Borgoyn, amongst whom was Jews of Luxenborough, earl of saint
Pol, and Constable of France which being confedered with the duke and other
noble men, determined so to vex and scorge king Jews with some plague, by the
which other he should be transformed in to a man, clear altered from his old
qualities, or else should be in ieopardye, both of loss of live and realm,
for it was determined that France should be set on assaulted, both with
outward enemies, and inward diss^^ulers. All these things the duke of Borgoyne
with king Edward, did communicate to the intent the sooner to allure and provoke
him, to enterprise the war, according to his desire. These things, as tokens
of victory, before animated king Edward, and enforced him in manner to make
war on France and so with all expedicion prepared all things necessary,
both for water and land. And because no small sum of money was sufficient
for so great a charge, and that the money the year before to him auaunced by
the realm, was consumed in his household, and other necessary affairs, he
conceived a new device in his imaginacion, by the which engine he might
covertly persuade and entice his rich friends, to give and grant him some
convenient sum of money, toward his ine^^able charges, and incredible costs,
which thing, if they did not willingly assent to, he then would impute to the^
greater ingratitude, and more unkindness, whereupon he caused his officers to
bring to him the most rich persons one after another. And to them he explaned
the cause, and the purpose, and the necessity of the war begone, and the
faintness and leuenesse of his treasure, and the great and importion lack of
money, heartily requyring them for their love and affeccion, that always they
had born to him, being their natural Prince, of their own gratuitie and
frewill to give to him some aid or money, for mayntenance of his war and
army: what should I say more: This inuencion came to this effect, that some
calling to their remembrance, the benefits of him received, some with shame,
some with fear moved and encouraged, gave to him liberally both of their
substance and treasure, which without grudge he could not have otherwise
obtained. But here I will not let pass a pretty conceyt, that happened in this
gathering, in the which you shall not only note the humility of a king, but
more the fantasy of woman. King Edward had called before him a wydow, much
aboundynge in substance, and no less grown in years, of whom he merely
demanded what she gladly would give him toward his great charges? By my
treuth quod she, for thy lovely countenance thou shall have even.xx. l. the
king lokyng scace for the half of that sum, thanked her, and lovingly kyst
her, whether the flauor of his brethe did so comfort her stommacke, or she
esteemed the kiss of a king, so precious a iuell, she swore incontinently,
that he should have.xx. l. more, which she with the same will paid that she
offered it. The king willing to show that this benefit was to him much
acceptable, and not worthy to be put in oblivion called this grant of money a
benevolence, not withstanding that many with grudge and maleuole^ce gave great
sums toward that new found benevolence: But the using of such ge^till
fashions toward them, with friendly prayer of their assistance in his
necessity, so tempted them that they could none otherwise do, but frankely
and freely yield and give him a reasonable reward.

The x^iii year. The (...) year

WHen all things convenient for such an enterprise were in a redynesse. King
Edward with his army removed to Dover, where he found.v.C. ships and Hoyes,
ready to transport him and his army over the sea: And so he him self with his
nobility warlikely acco^paignied, passed over between Dover and Caleys,
the.iiij. day of July, and landed at Caleys with great triumph, his army,
horses and munycons of war, scace passed over in.xx. days (whom the
Frenchmen bragged, should have been taken, if they had well considered the
chance before, as they knew it after) When king Edward with all his army
royal, was without any trouble landed, and in suertie, he caused every man,
according to his degree, to be ordered and lodged. This army, by the wrytinge
of Argenton, was the fairest and the strongest army that passed out of
England in too France many years before, for the men were so well armed, and
so surely in all things appointed and provided, that the French nacio^ were
not only amassed to behold them, but much more praised them and there oder. In
this army were.xv.C. men of arms well horsed, of the which the most part were
barded and rychely trapped, after the most galiard fashion, having many horses
decked in one suyte. There were farther xv.M. archers, beryng bows and
arrows, of the which a great part were on horseback. There were also a
great number of fighting men and other, as well to set up Tents and Pauilions
(where of the Englismen had great plenty) as to serve their Artilarie, and to
enclose their camp, or otherwise to labor. And in all this army there was not
one page.

The king of England was at his arryuall highly displeased with the duke of
Borgoyn, which in the word of a Prince, promised him to mete him at his
landing with.ij.M. men of arms and light horsemen, beside a great number of
Lanceknightes and Halberders, and that he would have begone the war.iii.
months before the kings transportyng, the more to vex and greaue the French
king, and to cause him seek his wits. The duke of Borgoyn at this season, lay
at seage before the strong town of Nuyce, with a puissant army, against whom
ware assembled the Emperor Frederike, and almost the whole Empire for to rescow
of the town, to whom the king of England sent the lord Scales in post,
requyring him to leave his void seage before the impregnable town of Nuyce,
and to return in all have with his people and army to make war in France,
according to his promise and oath, declaring farther that the time passed, and
the Somer would be lost, with this charge the lord Scales departed in all have
toward the duke, whom we will leave, rydinge toward Nuyce for a while.

O France France, how much art thou bound to laud and praise the Savior for
the deliverance, in the time of thy affliccio^. For i^ God had not permitted
the cancard heart of the duke, to be indurate, nor his weke brain to be vexed,
nor yet his ambicious affeccion to be enflamed, so that he with all his power
had joined with the army of England on y^ one side, having on their side the
duke of Brytayn with his power.

These three princes had been like to have make France, either to bow or to
break, either to yield or to suffer the chances of fortune, which she like a
wavering Gods, had provided for her punishment. Before king Edward departed
from Dover, he sent to the French king an officer of arms (whom Argenton
untruely calls Garter borne in Normandy, for the rome of Gartier was never
given to no estraunger) which Herault delivered to the French king with all
dew reverence a letter of diffiance, both for the style and the pennyng
excellently endited, which the Frenchmen would scant believe to be framed by an
Englishman. The letter required the French king to render to the king of
England, the realm of France to him of right, and by lyneall enheritaunce
aperteyning and belonging, to thente^t that he might put again y^ church, the
nobility, and the commons into their ancient estates, and liberties, and to
disburde^ and exonerate them of the great charges, trauayles and labors, that
they now were in. And in case y^ he did refuse so to do, then he did protest
the harm that should ensue, in the form and manner, that in such a case is
requise and accustumed to be done. King Jews red the letter secretly to him
self, and after all alone in a great study withdrew him self into his
warderobe, and sending for the English Herault, said to him, sir I know, and
well wot, y^ the king of England your master, is neither descended in these
parts of his own fre mocion, nor yet of us required, but only entised and
provoked by the duke of Burgoyn, and somewhat enforced by the commons of his
Realm. But now you may se that y^ season of the year passes, and the duke of
Burgoyn is in poor estate, returning from Nuyce all most disco^forted. The
Constable also, with whom the king your souereygne lord, I am sure has some
intelligence, for favor that your master has married his nece, is not so sure a
^rende as he is taken for, and if all the world knew how I have promoted him,
and what I have done for him, they would littel thynk, that he would so
untruely handle me as he does, for I assure you, he is a deep dissimuler, and
in continual dissimulacion, entendeth to lead his life, entertayning all me^
for his awn profit. And although y^ king your master, be unsure of all his
other promises, yet of one thing he shall be sure, that is, he shall be ever
dissimuled with all, and therefore I say to you, and not to your master, y^ he
were better have a peace with an old enemy, then the promises and
familiarity of a new dissimuling frede, which peace most pleases God, and is
the thing that I most do desire. When he had said, he gave to the
Herault.iii.C. crounes, promisinge him a.M. crounes, if any good apoyntement
came to pass. The Herault being more coueteous of the crounes, then secret,
according to the duty of his office, promised to do all things that in him
lay, not doubting, but that the king his master would be conformable to any
reasonable offer, aduisinge the French king (after king Edward were once
landed) to send to him an Herault, to fetch a save conduyte and pasport, for
such as should labor and travail in that treaty. And that the said Herault
should first resort to the lord Stanley, or to the lord Haward, for the
co^ducting of him to the kings presence, when the Herault should depart, the
king gave him a piece of of Crymosen Ueluet of.xxx. yardes long, commaundinge
and strayghtly chargyng, that no man should be so hardy once to common with
him, but to let him pass in all gentel fashion. When the Herault was gone,
king Jews calling to him.vii. or.viii. of his familiers, caused the letter too
be red, of the which he was but a littel afraid and less abashed, considering
the English Herault had showed him plainly, how to enter into y^ port of the
treaty, and in manner how to gain and conquer the fortress, of which
enformacion he was not a littel joyous, and wisely and secretly according to
the same, when he saw his time, he prosecuted his purpose. In this very season,
the lord Scales came to the duke of Burgoyn before Nuyce, accompting to him his
message, as he was commanded. The duke of Burgoyn, being so sore set to
co^quere the town of Nuyce, answered the lord Scales, that his honor was lost,
and shame should be spoken of him thorough all Christendom, if he should raise
his feld and break his seage, but he hoped shortly to gain the town, and then
with triumpha^t victory, to come to aid king Edward with his whole army: with
this answer y^ lord S^ales departed, which only answer was comen without any
other augmentacion, to all such as king Edward sent, to have the duke to keep
his promise. What a folly was this in duke Charles, to besege a town
impregnable, even at the same time when the Englishmen at his request had passed
the sea, which thing all the time of his regiment, he had both traueled in,
and sore required, and never could compass till this season, and also all
things being well disposed for his purpose, both in Brytayn and in other
places, except he more regarded to conquer a new town, then to defend all
his old possessions and seigniories. But shortly after by the Bishop of
Romes authority, he left Nuyce unconquered, but lesyng a great number of his
people, and the remnau^t he sent into Lorayne and Barroys, there to lie and
trouble duke Reyner of Lorayn, which a littel before had defied him, lyeng
before Nuyce. And he him self with a small company, came to king Edward before
Caleys, with whom king Edward at the first coming, began somewhat to be grieved,
laiyng to his charg that at his mocion, request and desire, he with all his
army had passed the seas only to the intent with mortal war, to plague and
scourge the proud realm of France. And that he leuyng all things (which
should molest or trouble the French king) a part, applied him self to
matters of Lorayne, and externe nations, more then to revenge the open injuries
to him done by his neyghbor the French king. The duke excused him self with
ieoparding the loss of his honor, if he had returned from Nuyce, and also that
of necessity, he was compelled too leave his army in Lorayne, to be revenged
over duke Reyner, which had him before Nuyce with spytefull words and raylyng
terms defied and detested: affirmyng farther, that now in the beginnynge with
a small company, a great enterprice might be gained. In proof whereof he
delivered to the king, letters of credence, sent from the Constable of
France, which willed the king to give credit and perfait faith to the duke.
In making relacion of such secrets as were to him given in charge to declare
to the kings own person, first he showed that all though the Constable had
promised to the king and the duke, to render up to them the town of saint
Quintynes, yet it had not come to so good effect, if it had been yielded, the
duke being in Germany, as it now shall, the king and the duke being both
personally present, at the deliverance. Wherefore he exhorted the king to set
forward, and to display his banner, and set forth his standard. And so by his
mocion, the king accompanied with the duke, his army departed out of Caleys,
and passed by Boleyne to Perone, where the Englishmen thought them selfs of
the duke, more like enemies then friends to be enterteyned, for at the gates
entered but a few that were appointed, the remnant lodged in the feldes, better
purueyed of their own, then of the dukes provision.

The king of England, thinkyng surely, and fyrmely beleuyng that the Constable
meant all treuthe, and the sooner enduced to that credence because the Constable
was great Uncle to the Queen his wife, where in very deed, he nothing less
minded then truth, removed his camp from Peron, the Duke of Borgoyn, being
in his army, and marched toward saynct Quintynes: certain Englishmen ran
before the town, against whose coming they thought that the belles should
have benrong, and the gates set open. But when they aproched the town, the
artillarie began to shote, and they of the town came out both on foot and
horsbacke, and skyrmished with the Englishmen, of which two or three were
slain. This welcome seemed very strange to king Edward ponderynge together
yestardayes promise, and two days doing. The duke would not that the king
should desist from his purpose, because the town was not yielded at the sight
of a handful of people, which thing he said, although the Constable would
gladly have done, at the first, but yet he would have a color to do it, as
though it should papere that he did it by very conpulsion and force: and
therefore, if the king would make but semblance to besege the town, he wou^d
warrant, that incontinent it should be rendered. The king of England,
perceyuyng that he was deluded in his first enterprice, thought it more surer
to hear the fair words of the Constable, and the duke, then to give credit
to their untrue and disceatfull doings. The Englishemen returned to their
camp, very ill content, as I can not blame them murmeryng against the
Constable, calling him Traitor, perjured and untrue gentelman. Beside this
anger, there came the next day another corsey, that smarted a littell sorer,
for duke Charles of Borgoyne, by whose means king Edward had taken upon him
this war, either perceived that all the Constables promises were but fair
sun shynyng, swetely spoken, and sowerly performed, or else he saw that he him
self lacked men or money, to proceed farther with king Edward in his journey:
took his leave suddenly of the king of England, saiynge that he must needs
visit, and se his army in Berroys, promisinge shortly with all puissance to
return again to the great auantage and commodity of them both, and so in
have departed.

This departing was both displeasaunt and strange to the king of England,
considering that in hope to have the duke his continual fellow in arms, and
too have his counsayll in the order of his people (which of late had not
frequented the war of France, nor yet perfitly knew the force, the agilitie
and the manner of the French nation) had passed the seas, raised his standard,
and by dukes procurement entered into the land of his enemies, and now to be
left alone without guide or leder, without aid or succor in the middell of
his foes, he could no less think, but that the duke neither used him like a
prince nor yet kept his promise like a true man, which unstable and
dissimulyng workynge, caused, ye, and rather enforced king Edward, both to
think that he never thought, and to do that he never ente^ded to do. The
English men sore murmured against the Constable, and no less against the
duke, saving they determined, never to give confidence to the Constables
words, and greatly doubted, whether they might give any credit to the dukes
promise. Thus lay thenglishmen in the feldes when the cold nights began to
wax long, without any gain of conquest, which caused the common people, which
be not always content with hardness rather to desire to return homewarde, then
to proceed any days journey forward. The French king which was both wily and
witty (and especially for his own purpose) knew by his espials, y^ untrue
refusal made by the Constable, the unfriendly departing of the Duke of
Burgoyne, and the daily murmuryng of thenglishemen, against them both,
wherefore he thought now, that it was very expedient, to follow the counsel
of the English Herault, in sendyng for a saueconduite, for metyng of
Ambassadors, to common of a treaty, if it might be well compassed. But yet to
avoid all doubts, he reised an army, and the more he perceived, the power of
his enemies to increase, the more he studied, how by power to resist them, and
over that army he made capitain, Monsire Robert de Estoteuile a valiant man,
whom, he sent into Artoys, to defend the Frountiers there, against the king of
Englandes entree and inuacions: and he himself tarried still at Senlis. The
French king being thus privily desirous of peace, although he outwardly
showed the countenance of Mars: meaning quietness, and setting furthe war,
caused a varlet to be subornated, in a cote armure of France (which for have,
was made of a trumpet banner) because king Jews was not much desirous, nor
greatly passed on honor, and seldom had in his Court, either officer of Arms
or Trompet: which varlet was well animated, and no less instructed, how to do
his message (which was delivered to him in writing) both with a bold
countenance, and a sober demeanure. This cou^terfeight Herault, although he
was but a verlet in deed, was both witty and well spoken, and so rode in sad
manner, nere to the English army, and there put on his cote of Arms. The
English outskourers perceiuyng by his cote; that he was an officer of arms,
gently saluted him, and enquired of him* whether his journey lay: he sadly
answered, that his message was from the French king, to the king of England.
Then was he conueighed to the tent, where the Lord Haward, and the Lord
Stanley, with other were at dinner, where he was highly entertaigned, and no
less welcomed. And after dinner, he was brought before the king, in whose
presence, with a bold audacitie, and no fearful speech, he declared first his
credence, because he was an officer of arms (to whom, credit by the law of
all nations, ought to be given) and secondarely, he published the things, to
him given in charge and commandment, saying: Right high and mighty prince,
right puyssaunt and noble king, if your excellent wisedo^ did pe^fectly know,
or your high knowledge did apparently perceive: what inward affeccion, and
fervent desire, the king my Master has always had, to have a perfect peace,
a sure unity, and a fraternall concord, between your noble person, and your
Realm, and his honorable personage, and his Dominions, you would (and for
truths sake) should confess and say, that never Christian Prince, more
thrusted for an amity, nor yet no lover has more sought, to attain to the
favor of his paramor, then he has sought, to have with you, a perpet^all
friendship, amity, and alliance: to the intent that the subjects of both the
realms, quietly living under two princes, confederate and combined together,
in an indissoluble confederaci^ and league, may mutually embrace each other in
their hearts, may personally have resor^, and frequent each others princes
territories and dominions, with their Merchaundises and wares: And finally, the
one to live with the other, as friend with friend, brother with brother,
compaignion with compaignion, in continall love, rest, and tranquillity. And
for his part he does affirm and say, that sith he received first the
Croune of his kingdom, and was anointed with the holy Ampulle, he never
attempted, nor yet once imagined, any war or thing prejudicial toward your
royal person, your realm, or your people. If you peradventure will say,
that he supported, and maintained the Earl of Warwick, against your majesty,
he surely that does and will deny: For he aided him against the Duke of
Burgoyne, whom, he knew not only to be his extreme enemy* but also to lay
in wait, both by sea and land either to take him, or utterly to destroy him.
Which Duke of Burgoyne, only for his own cause, has excited and solicited
your highness, to come over the troubelous and tempestious seas, to the intent
to cause (yea, in manner to compel) the king my Master, to condescende to such
treaty and appointment, as should be to his only profit, and neither to
your honor, nor yet to your gain. For if he and such other, as daily flatered
him for their peculier profits (as he had many in deed, that daily sucked at
his elbowe) had once obtained the thing, that they breathed for, all your
affairs were put in oblivion, and left at large for them, or their assistence,
even as they* be at this day. Has not the Duke of Burgoyn caused you, first
to come into France: after to set forward your armi^, and inco^clusion, for
lake of his promise, to lose the fair season of the year, and to lie in the
feldes in Winter? Which war, if it continue, shall neither be profitable to
you, nor yet your nobility, nor yet pleasant, but painful to your
commonaltie: And finally to both the realms, and especially to Merchaunt
men, shall bring both misery, po^uertie, and calamity. Came the Duke of
Burgoyne from Nu^e to Caleis, only to visit you? Rode he all that post
haste, only to blind you? Returned he back into Lorayne again for any cause,
but only to leave you desolate and to abandon you? Did he or the Constabl^kepe
any one promise with you? Why do you then believe, and yet still trust them in
whom, you never found faith nor fidelity? But if God will it so ordain that
you and my master, may join in a league and amity, I dare both say and
swear, that the fine stele never cleued faster to the Adamant stone, then he
will stick and claspe with you, both in wealth and and woo, in prosperity
and adversity: And if it shall please you, to harken to any reasonable
treaty, I being a poor man, shall on ieoperdie of my life (which is my chief
treasure) undertake, that this communicacion shall sort, and come to such an
effect, that both you and your nob^litie, shall be glad and rejoice, and your
commons, shall be contented and pleased, and they that have deceived you, shall be
both abashed and ashamed: Most humbly besechyng your highness, if your
pleasure shall incline this way, that I may have a sure saufe conduite, for
one hundred horses, for such personages, as the king my Master, shall send to
you, with farther intimacion of his mind and purpose. And if your pleasure
shall be, to have the communicacio^ in any place, indifferent between both
tharmies, then I shall warraunt you, a like saueconduite for your men, as you do
send for ours. When he had accomplished his message and instruccions, the
king of England and his counsel, highly commended his audacitie, his
toungue, and his sobernes, geuyng to him in reward, a fair gylte cup, with a
hundred angels: deliueryng him a saueconduite, according to his request and
demand, with the which, he with speed departed, having with him an English
herault, to bring a like saueco^duite, from the French king. After both the
Princes had maturely consulted on this matter, and that the saueconduites, were
delivered on both parts: The ambassadors met, at a village beside Amias,
where were sent by the king of England, the Lord Haward, sir Thomas
Sentliger, Doctor Morton, after Chaunceler of England. For the French king
were sent, the Bastard of Burbon, Admiral of France, the Lord of saint
Pierre, the Bushop of Enreux called Heverge. It may of some be not a little
marueiled at, why the French king thus labored, and sought for peace, and did
make so humble, and large offers as he did: But if they considred in what case,
the realm of France stood in, at that time having the king of England, the
Duke of Burgoyne, the Duke of Britayne, their enemies, and all furnished to set
upon them at one instaunt: They may say, that the French king was both wise
and circumspecte, to humble himself for auantage, or else if God had not helped,
the realm of France had been troubled, and tossed in great ieoperdie, and
dangerous extremity. The Ambassadors met at the place appointed, the English
men demanded, the whole realm of France, or at the least Normandy, and
whole Aquitaine, the allegacions were well proved by the Englishmen, and
pollitiquely defended by the French men, so that with arguments, without
conclusion the day passed, and the Commissioners departed, and made relacion
to their Masters. The French king and his counsel, would in no wise consent,
that the king of England, should have any part, or parcel of land, within
the realm of France: but rather fully determined, to put himself and his
whole realm, in hazard and adventure: so loathe, ye more aferde, then loathe, he
was to have the Englishemen, to be his next neighbors. The commissioners at the
next metyng, concluded and agreed ce^tain articles, which were by both the
Princes, accepted and allowed. It was first couenau^ted and a greed, that the
French king should pay to the king of England without delaie, lxxv.M. Crounes
of the sun, and yearly.l.M. crounes, to be paid at London, during king
Edwardes life. And farther it was agreed, y^ Charles the Dolphin should mary
the lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to king Edward, and they two to have, for
the mainteinaunce of their estates, thewhole Duchy of Guyen or else.l.M.
crounes, yearly to be persolued and paid within the toure of London, by the
space of.ix. years: and at the end of thesaied term. The dolphin and his
dolphines, peaceably to enjoy the whole duchy of Guyen and of that charge the
French king, against the king of England, then to be clearly exonerate. And
further it was a greed and appointed, that the ii. princes, both for
thencreace of love, and for the continuance of amity should enteruew each
other, in some place most expedient, and mete for so great a purpose: and
after their metyng, each of the^ to take a corporal oath (...) presence of
the other. This peace to endure.ix. years between both the realms, inuiolate to
observe and keep al things, concluded, agreed, and appointed and on the king
of Englandes part, were comprised as allies in the league, the dukes of Burgoyn
and Britain, if they would assent. And y^ after y^ whole some aforsaid, was to
king Edward paid: he should league in hostage the lord Haward, and sir Iho^
Cheyny Master of his horses, til he with all his army, was passed over the sea.
This peace much reioysed the French king* to who^, nothing could be either more
plesaunt, or more exceptable, then to have thenglishme^ in short space (how
shortly he cared not) clearly avoided, and transported out of his realm:
immaginyng ever that by their tariyng, they would so like the wholesome and
sweteaire of his fruitful country, that a great number would be continually
sick and vexed till they returned, and sought for their health in the same
delicious climate again, wherefore, to rid the^ with all hasty speed, he borrowed
y^said some of lxxv. M. crounes, of every man that might lend a portion. King
Edward likewise, although he was of puissance strong enough, to acheue a great
enterprise on his enemies, and farther encoraged, because he was renomed for y^
famous acts* by him before time perpetrated, and brought to pass, in so many
battai^es. Desiryng also, rather to have war, with the French nation being the
old and ancient enemy, to thenglishe name and blood, yet when he called to
his remembrance, that the civil war, had so exhansted and consumed his
substance and treasure, that if urgent necessity should expostulate, he were
of scant ability, to conscribe and set furthe a new army: knowing his
treasorie at home, to be so void and faint, that it was not able, long to
wage his soldiers, thought it both reasonable and profitable, to obey to
necessity, and to abstein from battle seeing both honorable offers, to him
obleted and agrementes of auantage to him ^ocioned. Considering chiefly beside
all this, that neither the Duke of Burgoyne, nor the Constable of France, did,
nor would observe or perform the promises by them made and sworn. Whereupon he
and the most of his counsel, (and specially such, as loved better peace
then war, and their wifes soft beds, better then hard harness, or a stony
lodgyng) agreed to this conclusion and concord. But the Duke of Gloucester and
other, to whom the French nation, was more odious then a tode, whose swords
thrusted for French blood detested, abhorred, and cried out on this peace,
saying: that all their trauaill, pain, and expenses, were to their shame lost
and employed, and nothing gamed but a continual mock, and daily derision of
the French king, and al his minions, this immaginacion took effect without
delaie. For a gentle manne of the French kings chamber, after the peace was
concluded, did demand of an Englisheman, how many battailles king Edward had
vanquished, and he answered, nine: wherein he himself, personally had been. A
great honor said the French man, but I pray you quod he, smilyng: How many
has he lost, the Englishman perceiuyng what he meant, said: one which you by
policy, and by no strength, have caused him to lose. Well said the French
manne, you may ponder in a pair of bala^ce, the gain of the nine gotten
battles, and the rebuke of this one in this manner lost: for I tell you, that
we have this saying, the force of England has and does, surmount the force
of France: but the engenious wit of the French men, excel the dull brains
of Englishmen. For in all battles you have been the gayners, but in leagues
and treaties, our wits have made you losers: so that you may content your
selses, with the loss in treaties, for the spoil that you gatte, in wars
and battles. This co^municacion was reported to the French king, which
privily sent for the Englisheman to supper, and not only made him good chere,
but also gave him a thousand Crounes, to praise the peace and to help to
maintain the same: yet nevertheless, he being not a little moved with these
bragges, declared all the communicacion, to the duke of Gloucester, which
swear, that he would never have set foot out of England, if he had not
thought, to have made the Frenchemen once to assaied the strength and
puyssaunce, of the Englishemen: but whatsoever he thought, all things were
transmuted, into another kind, then he could immagin. The Duke of Burgoyne
being informed, that there was a peace entreatyng, between the two kings: came
in no small have from Luxenborough, only accompaignied with sixtene horses,
into the king of Engla^des lodgyng, whereof, the king being not a little abashed
seeing both his sudden coming, and his fierce countenance, like one that
would rather bite then whyne, demanded of him the cause, of his so sudden
coming. The Duke sharply answered, to know whether he had, either entered
into any communicacio^, or only had absolutely concluded a peace, between the
French king and him. King Edward declared, how that for sondery, and diverse
great and urgent causes, touching as well the universal public wealth, of
the whole Christianity as their own private commodity, and the quietness of
their realms, he and the French king, had concluded a peace and amity, for
term of.ix. years, in the which were comprised, as fellows and friends, both
he and the Duke of Britayne, requiryng him to condiscende, and agree to
the same. Oh Lord, Oh saint George, quod the Duke of Burgoyne, have you thus
done (...) deed: Have you passed the seas, entered into France and without
killyng of a poor ^ie, or burning of a sely sheep cote, and have taken a
shame^ull truce: Did your noble auncester, king Edward the third, ever make
army into France (as he made many) in the which, he did not either gain
victory in battaill, or profit in conqueryng, cities, tounes, and countries.
That victorious Prince, as nere kin to me, as you to king Henry the fifth, I
mean whose blood you have* either rightefully or wrongfully, God knows,
^xstirpate and destroyed, with a small puyssaunce entered into France,
conquered whole Normandy, and not alonely conquered it, but peaceably kept it,
and never would either commen, or agree to any league, till he had the whole
Realm of France offered him, and was thereof made, Regent and heir apparent
and you without any thing dooyng, or any honor or profit gainyng, have
condiscended to a pace, both as honorable, and as profitable to you, as a
Pesec^de, and not so wholesome as a Pomegranate: think you that I either moved
you, or once entised you, to take this journey for my peculier advantage, or
commodity (which of my power am able, to revenge mine own causes, without
help of other) but only to have you recover, your old rightes and possessions,
which wer^ro^ you both torciously and wrongfully with holden. And to the intent
that you shall know, that I have no need of your aid, I will neither enter
into your league, nor take truce with the French king, till you be passed the
sea, and have been there three months. When Duke Charles had said, he
furiously threw down his chayer, and would have departed. But the king him
stayed and said: Brother Charles, since you have spoken at leaser, what you
would, you must and shall, hear again, what you would not: And first, as
concerning our entery into France, no man living knows that occasion,
neither so well, nor has cause half so well, to remember it as you: For if
you have not fully, put your greatest things, to be had in memory, in your
box of oblivion, you be not yet out of mind, how the French king* for all
your power, took from you the fair ^oune of Amias, and the strong Pile of. S.
Quintynes, with diverse other ^ounes, which you neither durst, nor yet were
able, either to rescowe or defend. Since which time, how he has plagued you,
how he has taken from you your friends, yea, of your privy chamber, and
secret counsel (by whom all your secrets, be to him reveled and made open)
you know or have better cause to remember, and not to forget them. And when
you determined, to besege the town of Nuce, you thought your self, in a
great doubt, whether you should lease more at home, by your absence, (the
French king dremyng, and waityng like a Fox for his pray) or else gain more
in Germany, by your power and presence, and to keep the wolf from the fold,
that is the French king, from your Castles and dominions, was the chief and
principal cause, why you so fair prayed me, so sore labored and entyced me
to pass over the sea, promising mountains of gold, w^hiche turned into
snow, and wasted to water, boastynge and crakynge to send horsemen and
fotemen, and yet showing neither lackey nor page. If we had made our
enterprice for our self soly, and in our own quarrel think you that we
would have expected your coming? If the adventure had been for to have
recovered our right, imagyn you y^ we would have passed the sea so slenderly,
as we did lokynge for your aid? Nay nay, you should have well known, if we
had intended a conquest, that we would have so strongly invaded, and set on
the Realm of France, y^ what with savor of burning of towns, and infeccion
of the air, corcupted by the multitude of dead carcases of our slain enemies,
your countries of Flaunders and Brabant should have had causes enough to
wonder at, trustyng that, that which we had gotten, we would have kept as well
as any of our auncetours have done: but because the very occasion of the war
was yours, and that you wilfully (I will not say cowardly) did not prosecute
the same, the French king, which never offended me nor my subjects (except
in maynteininge the earl of Warwycke, for the displeasure that you bare him
against me) offered me, being destitute of all your succor and aid, both
honorable and honest ouertures of peace, which offers I was in manner enforced,
by very reason to enclyne to and to accept, and so have concluded a truce,
which God willing I will both keep and observe. God send you joy quod the
duke, and suddenly took his horse and rode again to Luxenborough. After this
day the king and the duke, never loved, nor never saw each other, such is the
end of vntrustynes and promisbrekyng. If the duke of Burgoyn were angry, when
he hard how this peace was in communicacio^ much more angry was the Constable
of France, fearing lest, that by that conclusion he might be reputed of the
French king v^trew, as ^e had well deserved it. Wherefore he sent his confessor
to king Edward, with letters of crede^ce, requyryng him heartily littell to
regard y^ French kings words, and less to trust to his promise, affermynge
that the French king would no longer keep promise, then king Edward were
on that side of the sea: and rather then he should agree with the French king,
for a small sum of money, he offered to lend him.l. thousand crounes, with
many other fair profers. The king of England made answer that the truce was
concluded, and that he would nothing change, concerning the matter, and that
if he had kept promise with him, he would not have made that apoyntement nor
agreement.

Then was the Constable in manner on all sides in despair, but yet he wrote to
the French king by his messengers, besechyng him to give no credit or belefe,
to any ^ale told or feigned against him, without hearing his answer,
affirmynge that the king had always known his treuth and fidelity, toward
the croune of France, and so should he still find him till his dyeng day,
promising and warranting him, if that it should stand with his pleasure, that
he would so compass the duke of Burgoyn, that they two should utterly destroy
the king of England and his army or they returned.

The counsaylers of the French king made answer, that their Master and the
king of England were joined and confedered in a sure amity, wherefore they
would in no wise know nor condisce^d to any thing that might be either
prejudicial, or once sound to the detriment of the Englishmen: But they said,
that the king their master much trusted y^ Constable, and that for his sake he
would talk with them in his privy chaumber. The French king, before their
entry into his chamber, caused the lord of Countay servant to the duke of
Burgoyn, accompanied with the lord of Argenton, one of his privy counsayll, to
stand secretly behynd a selyng or a hangyng in his chamber, and he him self
sat in a chair, directly before that place, so that what soever were purposed
to him, they standing behynd the clothe, might ^asely se, and facile hear the
same. Jews de creuell and his fellow entered into the kings chamber of
nothing thinkinge less then of the sprytes enclosed: they declared what pain
their master had taken for the French kings sake, to send move and entyce the
duke of Burgoyn to leave, and clearly to forsake y^ king of England, which duke
they found in such a rage and fury against the Englishmen, that at their
request, he was not only utterly determined, to forsake and refuse their
amity, but also would send out adventurers and Lanceknightes, to rob and
spoil them in their retornyng. And in spekyng these words (thinking surely
much to please the king) the said Jews conterfeyted the fashion and gesture of
the duke of Burgoyn* and began to sta^pe with his foot on the ground, and beat
with his fyste on the table, sweryng by saint George that the king of England
was not extracted of no noble house, but was a yomans son, and that when he
was not worth one halfpeny, he was restored to his kingdom, and made king
only by his aid, reprouyng and reuilyng him with such ill words, and so
shamful terms, that all the herers abhorred it. The French king fayning that he
was thycke of hearing, caused him to reiterate his saying again, which so
co^terfeited the very gesture of the dukes angry contenaunce and roryng voice,
that no man has seen a better cou^terfaytor or player in any Comedy or
Tragedy. The lord or Co^tay was sore displeased to se his master made a
iestingstocke but he kept all these things secret, till his return to his
master.

When the pagiaunt was played, the king bad the messengers of y^ Constable, to
have him commended to his brother their master, and to declare to him that as
news rose and grew, he would thereof advertise him, and so gave them license to
depart to their master, who thought him self now to be in great suertye of
his estate, when in deed he was never so nere his fall and perdicion: Estemyng
the duke of Burgoyn to be his assured friend, which hated him more then a
Panym, or a Turk, accomptyng also the French king to have no ill suspicion in
him, which neither trusted nor yet believed any word, writing or message that
was either written or sent from him: Such end has all dissimulacion, such
fruit springs of double dealyng and crafty co^ueyeng: for if either y^
Constable had been faithful to the king his master, as of bounden duetye and
allegeaunce he ought to be, or else had kept his promise, made to y^ king of
England and duke of Burgoyn, and not dalied and dissimuled with the^, he had
surely in his extremity been aided, succored and comforted of one of these
three at the lest, where now he was of al three forsaken, and yet not forsaken,
but sought for, looked for, and watched for, not for his profit or promocion,
but for his undoing and destruccio^: Now let us leave of the Constable, and
return to the conclusion of the peace. When all things were appointed, written
and established, the peace was proclaimed in both the camps, and the king of
England, the sooner to consumate the amit^e by oath as it was agreed, came
within half a leage of Amyas, where the French king was, which to thentent to
obtain the more favor of The^glishmen, sent into their army a.C. Carts, laden
with wine, y^ best that might be gotten. And farther, because the Englishmen
resorted to the town of Amyas, both for their pastime and business, he ordained
at y^ very entri^ of the gate of the town two great and long tables, to be set
on every side of the streat, where the Englishmen should pass, and every table
was abundantly furnished with all sorts of delicate viand, and especially of
such as would provoke an appetide to drink, there lacked no wine of no sort,
seruitours were ready to serve and minister al things necessary. And farther to
accompany and familierly to entertayne the English nacio^ at every table were
appointed.v. or.vj. gentelmen, of the best compaignions of the whole cou^tray,
not only to se them served without lacking but also to drink and make good
chere, and keep company with them, and ever as they entered into the town,
they were taken by the brydels and in manner ^nforced to drink, wheresoever
they came they paid no money, but were set scot free, which chere lasted.iii.
or.iiii. days, to the French kings cost, and in conclusion to his no small
vnquietinge. For one day there entered into the town of Amyas.ix.M.
Englishmen, well armed, so that no Fre^chman durst once forbid them to enter,
their occasion of enteryng into the town was only to refreshe them, and to
bye things necessary for their businesses and affairs. When the French king
was thereof informed, he was somewhat vexed and more amassed, fearyng either the
loss of his town, or hurt of his people: He sent to Thenglish capitaynes,
requiring them to withdraw their soldiers to their Camp, the capitaynes
performed the kings desire, as much as in the^ lay, but if they sent out.xx,
ten came back again, and brought more company with them. The French king sent
Monsier de Guye, Marshall of France, and other into the town to se the
Englishme^s behaueour, they found some drinkyng, some singing, and some
slepyng, so that they might perceive, that they meant neither disceat nor
vntreuth: yet the French king, which of his nature was very suspicious, and
especially toward the Englishmen, came to the gate of Amyas, strongly
acco^paignied, and caused.iij.C.men of arms to be kept secretly in their
capitaynes houses, and other co^paigny he set on the portall, where y^
Englismen entered, a small number God wot, to have resisted the great company
of Englishmen if they had either ente^ded any thing toward y^ French king or
his town. The king of England was privily informed of y^ French kings,
doubtful imaginacion, and untrue suspicio^, wherefore he sent word to him that
he should make a Proclamacion, that no Englishma^ should enter into the town
upon a pain. The French king made answer, that it neither stood with his
honor, nor yet with any princely humanity, y^ he should forbid his friends
(as he called them) to take their pleasure in his town but if it might please
the king of England, to apoint certain of the yome^ of his Croune, to stand at
the gate, and to apoynt, not only who should enter, but also the number of
them, he thought that this moderacion should be both suerty and pleasure to
both the parties. Which request the king of England with quick speed, caused
to be performed to y^ great quietness of the French king and his cou^saill,
casting farther periles then reason then required. You, have still in your
remembrance, how an article of the treaty was, that the two Princes should
enteruiew, and mete in a place by both parties to be appointed. The king of
England appointed the lord Haward, and sir Thomas Sentliger, and a Herault: for
y^ French king were assigned the lord Bonchace, and the lord of Argento^. When
they had vewed the River, they agreed the most convenient and surest place to
be at Pycquegnye, on the water of Some.iii. leagues fro Amyas. The town
stands low, and the River passes thorough. On that side y^ the French king
should come, the country fair and open, and so likewise the other part was
very pleasant: but toward the River, there was a Cawsey of.ii. arow shout in
length, which was enuyroned with marshes surely it was a dangerous passage to
conueye a Prince in a strange Realm, by such a strayte, if the French men
had meant any fraud, but verily the king of England had so great trust and
confidence in the honor and promise of the French king and his nobility, that
he would upon their assurance adventured farther then this, if his will might
have been performed. Then it was concluded by these.iiii. commissioners, that a
large bridge should be made over the River of Some, in y^ middel of which
bridge was made a great strong grate of timber* like to the grate where the
Lions be kept* the holes of which grate did extend into no longer quantity,
then that a man might easily put thorough his arm, which bridge was made and
covered with bordes, only to keep of the wether, so that under the couerture,
there might stand.xii. persons on every sude of the grate which extended from
the one side of the bridge, even directly to the other so y^ there was no way
for one Prince to come to the other (as was in the grate, where Ihon duke of
Burgoyn was slain) and over the River was only one fery bote. When the bridge
and all other things necessary were ended and performed for so great a
purpose, and well and diligently vewed on both the sides, there were
appointed.xii. noble personages, to be attendant on every Prince to the bars,
and.iiii. Englishmen were assigned to stand with the French men on the bridge,
to se their doing and behauoure, and likewise.iiii. Frenchmen were limited to
y^ Englishmen for that same cause and policy. At the day appoyn^ted, which was
the.xxxi. day of August, in the year of Christ's blessed incarnacion
M.cccc.lxxv. each king approached the River side with his army, so y^ each army
might se other. The Frenchmen say and write, that the army of the Englishmen,
was greater and much fayrer then their battayll, but they excuse it (in this
case as they do in all other) saying that the fourth part of their army was
lacking, you may allow their excuse if it please you. When the token of meting
by the shot of the Artelerie was known, the French king with.xii. noble men
entered the bridge, and came to the closure, with whom was Ihon duke of
Burbon, and the Cardinal his brother, a prelate, more mete for a ladies
carpet, then for an Ecclesiastical pulpet and.x. other, amongst whom the
lord of Argenton was in like disguised apparel, as the French king ware, for
so was his pleasure that day to have him adourned. The king of England came
all alonge the causey that I have spoken of well acco^paignied, that he seemed
well to be a king, and with him was his brother the duke of Clare^ce the earl
of Northumberland, the bishop of Elye his Chanceler, the lord Hastynges his
Chamberlayn, and.viij. other lords. King Edward, and.iiii other were appareled
in clothe of gold frised, having on his bonet of of black weluet a flower
delyce of gold, set with very rich and orient stones, he was a goodly fair
and a beautefull Prince, beginning a littel to grow in flesh, and when he
approached nere the grate, he took of his cappe, and made a low and solemn
obeisance: the French king made to him an humble reverence, but after his
fashion somewhat homely.

King Jews embrased king Edward thorough the barriers saiynge: Cosyn you be
right heartily welcome into these parties, assuringe you y^ there is no man in
the world y^ I have more desired to se and speak with, the^ with you, and now
lauded be almighty God, we be here met together for a good and Godly purpose,
whereof I doubt not, but y^ we shall have cause to rejoice. The king of England
him thanked and answered to his words so soberly, so grauelye, and so
princely, that the Frenchmen their at not a littell mused.

The Chanceler of England made there a solemn oracion, in laud and praise of
peace, concluding on a prophe^ie, y^ said that at Pycquegny should be concluded
a peace, both honorable and profitable to the Realms of England and France.
Then the Cha^celer opened the letters of both their agreme^tes to the treaty,
dema^dyng of the^ if they there with were contented, they answered ye, then
each Prince laid his right hand on y^ Missal, and his left hand on the holy
Cross, and took there a sole^pne oath, to observe and keep the treaty of the
truce for.ix. years concluded between them, with all their confederates and
alies comprised, mentioned and specefied in the same, and farther to acco^plishe
the marriage of their chylderne, with all things thereon depending, according as
it was agreed and concluded between their Ambassadors, when the oath was taken
and sworn, the French king said merrily to king Edward, brother, if you will
take peyn to come to Paris, you shall be feasted and entertained with Ladies,
and I shall apoynt you the Cardinal of Burbon for your confessor, which shall
gladly assoyle you of such sins, if any be committed.

The king of England took these words pleasauntly and thankefully, for he was
informed that the Cardinal was a good compaignion, and a Chaplayne mete for
such a dalyeng pastyme. When this communicacion was merrily ended, the French
king, entendynge to show him self like a Master emonngest his servants, made
all his compaigny to draw back from him, meaning to common with the king of
England secretly, the Englishmen with drew them without any commandment, then
the two kings commoned alone secretly, I think not to the profit of the
Constable of France. The French king demanded of of king Edward, whether the
duke of Burgoyn would accept the tre^ce, King Edward answered that he would
once again make an offer, and then upon the refusal, he would refer and
report the treuth to them both. Then king Jews began to speak of the duke of
Britayn, whom he would feign have excepted out of the leage. To whom the king
of England answered: Brother I require you to move no war to the duke of
Britayne, for on my fidelity, in the time of my need and adversity, I never
found a more frendlye sure and steadfast lover then he.

Then king Jews called his co^paignye again, and with most lowly and amiable
commendacions, took his leave of the king of England, speking certain friendly
words to every Englishma^. King Edward doing likewise to the Fre^chme^, then
both at one time departed from the barriers and mounted on horseback, and
departed the French king to Amyas, and king Edward to his army, to whom was
sent out of the French kings house all things necessary for a Prince, in so
much y^ neither Torches nor Torchettes lacked unsent. When the French king was
departed from Picquegny, he called to him the lord of Argento^ saying, by y^
peace of God, the kyyg of England is an amorous and a fair prince, he at the
first beck would gladly se Paris, where he might fortune to find such
pleasant or talkatyue Dames, which with fair words, and pleasant pastymes
might so allure him to their fantasies, that it might bread an occasion in him
to come over the sea again, which I would not gladly se, for his progenitors
have been to long and too often both in Paris and Normandye (on this side the
sea) love neither his sight nor his co^paginye, but when he is at home, I love
him as my brother, and take him as my friend.

The French king after this departing, sore desirous to make war on the Duke
of Britayne, which he could not do, except he were lift out of the treaty,
wherefore he sent the lord of Bouchage, and the lord of. S. Pierre, to the king
of England, entreatyng him by all ways and mocions possible, to leave the
duke of Britayn for his alie, and not to have him comprehended in the league:
the king of England hearing the^ so seriously and so fervently, speak against
the Duke of Britayn, with an earnest countenance answered, saying: My Lords I
assure you, if I were peaceably at home in my realm, yet for the defense of the
Duke of Britayn and his country, I would pass the seas again, against all
the^ that either would do him injury, or make war upon him, the French
Lords nothing farther saying, much marueiled why the king of England, so
surely claue to the Duke of Britaynes party. But they knew not (or else at the
least remembered not) that Henry Earl of Richemonde, was within the power and
dominion, of the Duke of Britayne, whom king Edwardes phanteasie ever gave him,
would make once a title to the Croune of England, as next heir to the house
of Lancastre: For he knew well, that if the Duke of Britayne, would transporte
him into England, where he had both kyns^olke and friends, with never so small
an aid (yea, although it were but a shadow of an army) then were he enforced,
newly to begin again a conquest, as though he had never won the Croune, nor
obteigned the possession of the Realm, which was the very cause, why he
stacke so sore, on the Duke of Britaynes part. The Same night the lords
returned to Amias, and reported to their Master king Edwardes answer, which
therewith, was not the best pleased, but pleasure or displeasure, there was no
remedy, but to dissimule the matter. This same night also, there came the lord
Haward, and two other of the king of Engla^des counsel, which had been
coadiutors toward the peace, to the French king to supper. The lord Haward
said to the French king, secretly in his ear, that if it stood with his
pleasure* he could persuade the king of England, to come to Amias, yea,
p^tauenture as far as Paris, familierly and friendly, to solate himself with
him, as his trusty friend and faithful brother. The French king, to whom
this mocion was nothing pleasant, calling for water, washed and rose without
any answer making: but he said to one of his counsel, that he imagined in
his own conceit, that this request would be made: the English men began
again, to common of that matter, the French men pollitiquely brake their
communicacion, saying: that the king with all celeritie, must march forward,
against the duke of Burgoyn. Although this mocion seemed, only for to increase
love, and continual amity between the Princes, yet the Frenchmen having, in
their perfect remembrance, the innumerable damages and huttes, which they of
late days, had sustained by the English nation: whereby, continual hatred
increased, against them in France, thought by policy and wisdom, with fair
words, and friendly countinaunce, to put by this request, and to mocion them
rather, to depart homeward, then to prick them forward to Paris, where
peradventure, they might so be entertained at this time, that they would at
another come thither, both undesired and vnwelcomed. This peace was said to be
made, only by the holy ghost, because that on the day of metyng, a white
Dove satte on the very top, of the king of Englandes tent: whether she sat
there to dry her, or came ^hether as a token, given by God, I refer it to
your judgment. At this treaty and metyng, was not the Duke of Gloucester,
nor other lords, which were not content with this truce, but the Duke came
afterward to Amias, with diverse other Lords of England, to the French
king, which, both highly feasted them, and also presented them with plate and
horses, well garnished. King Jews considering, what gai^ the Englishemen had
gotten, by making war in France, an^ what misery, what calamity, and what
poverty, the French nacio^ had suffered, and many years sustained, by reason
of thesaid wars, determined clearly, rather to pacify and entertain the
English nation* by (...) words, and great rewards (although it were to his
great charge) then by to much hardines, to put himself, his nobility and
realm, in a hasard by geuyng them battaill, as his predecessors, had unwisely
done at Po^^ers, and at Agyncort, wherefore, to bye peace, he granted to king
Edward, for a yearly tribute.L.M. Crounes, to be paid at London, which*
accoumptyng a croune at.iiii. s. amounts to.x.M. l. And to have the favor and
good will, of his chief counsailers, he gave great pencions, amountyng to the
some of.xvi.M. Crounes a year, that is to say: to his Chauncello^, to the
Lord Hastynges, his chief Chamberlein, a man of no less wit then virtue,
and of great authority with his Master, and that not without a cause: for he
had as well in time of adu^rsitie, as in the fair flateryng world, well and
truly served him, and to the Lord Hawarde, to sir Thomas Mountgomerie, to sir
Thomas Se^tliger, to sir Ihon Cheiney, Master of the kings horses, to the
Marquis Dorset, son to the Queen, and diverse other, he gave great and
liberal rewards, to the intent to keep himself, in amity with England while he
wanne and obtained his purpose and desire in other places.

These persons had given to them great gifts, beside yearly pencions: For
Argenton his counsailer, affirms of his own knowledge, that the lord Haward,
had in less then the term of two years, for reward in money and
plate.xxiiii.M. Crounes, and at the time of this metyng, he gave to the Lord
Hastynges, the kings chief Chamberlain, as the Frenchmen write, a hundred
marks of silver, made in plate, whereof every mark is.viii. ounces sterlyng,
but thenglish writers affirm, that he gave thesaid Lord Hastynges.xxiiii.
doosen boulles, that is to say, ^ii. dosen gilte, and.xii. dosen vngilte,
every cup waiyng.xvii. nobles, which g^ite, either betokened in him, a
great liberal nature, or else a great and especial confidence, that he had
in thesaid Lord Chamberlain. Beside this, he gave him yearly, two thousand
Crounes pencio^, the which some he sent to him, by Piers Cle^et, one of the
Masters of his house, geuyng him in charge, to receive of him an acquitaunce,
for the receipt of the same pencion, to the intent that it should appear, in time
to come, that the Chauncellor, Chamberlain, Admiral, Masters of the horses, to
the king of England* and many other of his Counsel, had been in fee and
pencionaries, of the French king, whose yearly acquitaunces (the lord
Hastynges only except) remain of record to be showed, in the Chamber of
accomptes, in the palaice of Paris. When Piers Cleret had paid the pencion, to
the lord Hastynges, he gently demanded of him an acquitaunce, for his
discharge, which request when he denied, he then only required of him, a
letter of three lines, to be directed to the king, ^estifiyng the receipte of
the pencion, to the intent that the king your Master, should not think, the
pe^cio^ to be imbesiled. The lord Hastynges although he knew, that Piers
demanded nothing but reason, answered him: sir this gift comes only, of the
liberal pleasure of the king his Master, and not of my request: if it be his
determinate will, that I shall have it, then put you it into my sleue, and if
not, I pray you render to him his gift again: For neither he nor you, shall
have either letter, acqui^aunce, or scrowe, signed with my hand, of the
receipte of any pencion, to the intent to brag another day, that the kings
Chamberlain of England, has been pencionary, with the French king, and show
his acquitaunce, in the Chamber of accomptes, to his dishonor. Piers left his
money behynd, and made relacion of all things to his Master, which, although
that he had not his will, yet he much more praised the wisdom, and policy
of the Lord Hastynges, then of the other pencionaries, commaundyng him yearly
to be paid, without any discharge demaundyng.

When the king of England, had rec^iued his tribute, and his nobility their
rewards, of the French king: he trussed up his tents, and laded all his
bagage, and departed toward Caleis, but or he came there, he rememberyng the
crafty dissimulacion, and the untrue dealyng, of Jews Earl of. S. Pole, high
Constable of France, entendyng to declare him, to the French king, in his
very true likeness and portarture: sent unto him two letters of c^edence,
written by thesaied Constable, with the true report, of all such words and
messages, as had been to him sent, and declared by thesaied Constable and his
Ambassadors, which letters, the French king gladly received, and thankfully
accepted* as the chief instrument, to bring the Constable to his death: which
he escaped no long season after, such is the end of dissimulers.

When king Edward was come to Caleis, and had set al things in an order, he
took ship, and sailed with a prosperous wind, into England, and was
received by the Mayor of London, and the Magistrates clad in scarlet, and.v.C.
co^moners, appareled in Murrey, the.xxviii day of Septembre, in the.xiiii.
year of his reign, upon Black Heathe, and so conueighed with great triumph,
through the city of Westminster, where after his long labor, he reposed
himself a while: every day almost, talkyng with the Queen his wife, of the
marriage of his daughter, whom, he caused to be called Dolphenesse: thynkyng
nothing surer, then that marriage to take effect, according to the treaty. The
hope of which marriage, caused him to dissimule, and do things, which
afterward chaunsed, greatly to the French kings profit, and smally to his.

When king Edward was arrived in England, the French King thynkyng by no
mean possible, to have his will on the Constable, but only by the Duke of
Burgoyne, determined to conclude a truce, for.ix. years, upon covenant, every
man to have his own: but the Ambassadors, would not have the truce
proclaimed, thynkyng thereby, to save the Duke from perjury, which had
sworn, never to conclude a peace, till the king of England had been three
months in his realm, after his return from Caleis. The king of England,
was of all these doings* asserteined by his friends: wherefore, in all have
he sent, sir Thomas Moungomerie, a wise and a sage knight, to the French king,
being then at Uernyns, concludyng with the duke of Burgoyns Ambassadors,
requiryng him, to take none other truce, with Duke Charles, then that, which
was by them concluded, desiryng him farther, in no wise to depart with saint
Quintines to the duke: Offering that if he would, any longer continue the
war, against thesaied Duke, that he would for his pleasure, and the dukes
displeasure, pass the seas again, the next Summer: so that the French king,
should pay to him fifty thousand crounes, for the loss which he should
sustein, in his Custom by reason that the wolles at Caleis, because of the
war, could have no vent, nor be vttred, and also pay half the charges, and
half the wages of his soldiers, and men of war.

The French king, most heartily thanked, the king of England, of his kind
offer, and faithful frendshippe, excusing him, that the peace was al ready
assented to: how be it, it was the very same peace, that was between them
concluded, saving only, that the duke would be, a contractor in the league,
and not comprehended in the same, as another princes alie. This matter was thus
answered, and faintly excused, and with the same, sir Thomas Mountgomerie
dispatched, which was with plate conveniently rewarded: and with him returned,
the lord Haward, and sir Ihon Cheiney, which were hostages with the French
king, til king Edward were returned into England. The French king marueiled
not a little, at king Edwardes offres, and thought it perilous to cause the
Englishemenne to pass the sea again, and to join with the French men, whom
they never loved: coniecturyng farther, that the English men and the
Burgonyons, would sone agree, by reason of their old acquaintance and
familiarity, and by chance, both become enemies to the French men:
wherefore, in auoydyng of all ambiguites, he determined to conclude the truce.

The.xv. year.
WHen King Edward had after this manner established, The.xv. yer.
as well his affairs of outward wars, as his private and particular business
at home, notwithstanding, that he being the most valiant, and fortunate
victor, of such, and so many terrible and bloody battles, might think to
lead his life, in perfect quietness, and sure sauetie: Yet considering, that
Henry the young earl of Richemond, one of the ofsprynges, of the blood of king
Henry the sixte, was yet living and in good health, he judged himself, to be
far from his purpose, and that that only thing* did so vex and trouble his
joy and felicity, that he thought himself, never to be in a sure estate,
void of trouble or fear. Wherefore, he determined yet once again, to solicit
and move, Frau^ces Duke of Britayne, either for gifts, promises or prayers, to
deliver the Earl into his hands, who^ he supposed (after the faccion and
band, of king Henry's part, by him extincted, and clearly defeated) to bring
to his lure, and to rule at his own mind and pleasure. Wherefore, he sent
Doctor Stillyngton, and two other, his Ambassadors, well laden with no small
some of gold, with all have to the Duke of Britayn: And to the intent that
their desire should appear more honest, in the open face of the world, he
willed them to declare to the Duke, that their request, to have the Earl
delivered to them, was only for this purpose, to join with him aliance by
marriage and so to extirpate and pluck up, all the dregees and leuynges of the
adverse part, and contrary faccion. Which enterprise (whatsoever they said)
was not only by affinity, but by the only death, of the innocent earl Henry,
to be acheued and brought to pass. The Duke gently hard the Orators, and
first he began to deny, and after to excuse, why he might nor ought not agree
to their request but inconclusion, what with prayers requiryng, and monnyes,
sollicityng* the Duke being weried and overcome, delivered the earl to the
Ambassadors, whom, in his letters he highly commended, to king Edward, not
thynkyng that he delivered, the sheep to the wolf, but the son to the
father, beleuyng surely without scruple or doubt, that king Edward would give
in marriage to him lady Elizabeth his eldest daughter, whom in deed he married*
after her fathers death, as you herafter shall hear. When thambassadors had
the pray, that they so much desired, they departed to the town of. S. Malo,
standing on the sea side, where, they rekened to have taken shippyng, and so to
have sailed into England. The earl of Richemond knowing, that he was going
toward his death, for very pensiuenes, and inward thought, fell into a fervent
and a sore agewe. In this very season, one Iho^ Cheulet, so esteemed among the
Princes of Britayne, as few were in all the country, and in much credit,
and well accepted with the duke, was when these things were thus concluded, for
his solace in the country, but being thereof certified, being chafed with the
abhominacion of the fact: resorted to the Court, and familierly came to the
Dukes presence, and there stood so sadly, and so paly, without any word
speaking, that the Duke was much abashed, and suddenly marueiled, at his sad
and frownyng countenance, and demanded of him what should ^ignifie, that
dumpishenes of mind, and inward sighyng, the which by his countenance,
manifestly appeared and was evident: he modestly answered, most noble and
redoubted lord, this palenes of visage, and dedly look does prognosticate y^
time of my death, to approach and be at hand, which i^ it had chanced to me,
before this day, I assure you, it had much less hurted me. For the^ had I not
been preserved, to feel the dolorous pa^g^s and sorow^ul sighynges: which a
fact by you done (that I thought impossible to be obtained) has imprinted in
my stomach, and in my heart depely graven: so that I well perceive, that either
I shall lose my life, or else live in perpetual distress and continual
misery. For you my synguler good lord, by your verteous acts, and noble
feats have gotten to you, in manner an immortal fame: which in eue^y man's
mouth, is extolled and elevated, above the high Clouds, but alas me seems (I
pray you pardon me my reudenes) that now that you have obtained, so high a
laud and glory, you nothing less regard then to keep and pre^erue the same
inuiolate, considering, that you forgettyng your faith and faithful promise,
made to Henry Earl of Richemo^d, has delivered the most innocent young
gentleman, to the cruel tu^menters, to be afflicted, rent in pieces, and
slain: wherefore, all such as love you, of the which number I am one, cannot
chose but lament and be sorry, when they se openly, the fame and glory, of your
most renoumed name, by such a dis^o^altie, and untruth against promise to be
both blotted and s^a^ed with a perpetual note, of ^aunder and in^amie. Peace
mine own good Ihon, quod the Duke, I pray thee, believe me there is no such
thing like to happen to therle o^ Richemond: for king Edward has sent for him,
to make of him being his suspect enemy, his good and fair sone in law. Well,
we^l, quod Ihon, my redoubted lord, give credence to me: therle Henry is at
the very brynke to perish, whom, if you permit once to set but one foot,
out of your power and dominion, there is no mortal creature able hereafter, to
deliver him from death. The duke being moved, with the persuasions of Ihon
Cheynet* which either little believed, or smally suspected king Edward, to
desire the earl for any ^raude or deceipte, or else seduced by blind avarice
and love of money* more then honesty, fidelity, or wisdom would require, did
not consider, what he unadvisedly did, or what he advisedly, should have done.
Wh^rfore, with all diligence* he sent furthe Peter Landoyse, his chief
Threasorer, commaundyng him to intercept and stay, the Earl of Richemond, in
all have possible. Peter not sluggyng, nor dreamyng his business: came to the
English Ambassadors to. S. Malos, there abidyng the wind. And first he
invented a cause of his coming, and kept with them a long communicacion, to
pertracte the time, till his men in the mean season, had conu^ighed th^rle
(almost half ded) into a sure Sanctuary, within the town, which in nowise
might be violated: where he being delivered, from the continual fear of
dredful death, recovered his health, and in good plight was brought to the duke.

Here a man may evidently perceive the old Greek proverb to be very true,
which is that a man, to a man shall sometime be as a God, for the young earl
Henry without desert delivered to his death, suddenly by the labor of Ihon
Cheulet, and the favor of the good Prince, was preserved, saved and delivered.
God grant that such examplesmay be a doctrine and ^yrror to such as be rulers
above other, lackyng counsaylers to monish and warn them of their duty and
office. That they remembryng this good act, may learn to take into the
counsayl and ^amilie, such as will well and truly admonish and warn them, and
they likewise with good mind and glad intent to be folowers of the same.

The English orators complained and murmured that they were both spoiled of
their money and merchandise, requyring Peter Landoyse that they in no wise
should return, so deluded without pray or penney. The Treasorer effectuously
promised them, that the Earl either should be surely kept in the Sentuary, into
the which he escaped (by their negligence as he laid to their charge) or else
should be again in the dukes house put in prison, so that they should not need
no more to fear him then his shadow. And so the king of England for his money,
purchased the keeping of his enemy by the space of.iii. days, and no more.

King Edward in the mean season, sore belongyng to know what effect his
Ambassade took with the duke of Britayne, and therefore was every hour trobled
and unquieted with harkenyng and lokynge, was at the last certefied from
thence, how the earl of Rychemond was delivered, and at a point to be brought
home to him as a prisoner in captivity: but that he escaped first, he lamented
his purpose, not to have more prosperously succeeded, but after being somewhat
molified and apeased, when he hard that he should be sauelykept in prison,
determined clearly hereafter to banishe that care out of his mind and fantasye,
and to employe all his whole study and diligence for the keeping of his house,
after a more beutyfull fashion and liberal proporcion, then before was
accustomed. And when he had sufficiently stored his cheste with treasure,
remembryng his honor, lest, he peradventure should be noted with the spot of
Nygardshyp, he showed him self like a liberal and beneficial Prince to his
commons, and like a good and a profitable king to the common wealth, and the
poor people of his Realm and dominion.

The.xvi year. The.xvi. y^r^.

Even as king Edward sought, invented and studied daily and howerly to bring
him self to quietness and rest, and his Realm to a continual amity, and a
perpetual peace, likewise at the same time Charles duke of Burgoyn, whose wit
never loved peace, nor yet was weary or abhorred troble, whose intolerable
pains in wars were to him pleasure, and especially where he thought any new
seignorie to obtain, or else to be revenged of ancient enemies, for old
greues and displeasures to him done. So y^ desire of rule mixed with hatred, and
malice co^bined with avarice, kyndeled* provoked and excited so his courage
this year (whose bragging audacitie had more need of a brydell to be refrayned,
then of a spur to be pricked forward) that he partly to be revenged of y^
duke of Lorayne and y^ Swytchers, and partly for y^ covetous desire that he had
to certain lands, lyeng between his low countries of Brabant and Flanders
and his Duchy of haut Burgoyn, assembled a great army and a mighty puyssance,
and beseged a town called Granson in Lorayn, which when he had received,
without mercy, like a tyrant he caused all the Inhabita^tes cruelly to be put
to death, whereof heryng the Switchers ma^fully encou^tered with him, and
disconfited his whole army, where the duke lost both honor, praise, and such
abundaunce of riches, that few Princes in his time were able to show such
Iuels, and so many, and of such high price and value. And after not content
with these chau^ces, but ever in hope of reue^ging he fought with the Switchers
again at Morrat, whereof.xviii.M. good me^ of war, he lost.x.M. beside them
that were wounded and hurt: yet this fierce and courageous Captain, more
coragious then circu^spect, gathered again a new army, and contrary to the
minds of his whole counsel, in the deep of Winter, beseged y^ town of
Nancy, belongyng to the duke of Lorayn, where he was encou^tered with the said
duke and the Switchers, and there by the^ again overcome, disconfited, and
slain.

Thus in one year he lost.iii. great battayles, the first at Grantson, where
he lost honor, and all his riches: The second at Morrat, where he lost honor,
and almost all his men: The third at Nancy, where he lost life, honor, riches,
men, and all worldely felicity, on the Uigile of the Epiphany, in the year of
our lord, after some writers.M.cccc.lxxvi. and after other.M.cccc.lxxvij.

This end had the valiant heart, and stout courage of duke Charles of Burgoyn,
who in his time could never agree with peace and concord, till death more
puyssant then life may resist, brought his body to quietness and perpetual
tranquilite, which body is entered in y^ Church of saint George in Nancy,
leuyng behynd him one sole daughter, lawfully begotten to be his heir, which
afterward was married to Maximiliaen Arch^duke of Austrice.

At this battayl were taken Anthony and Bauldwyn, bastard brethren to duke
Charles, whom the French king bought of the duke of Lorayne, to the intent
that they should not withstand his pretensed purpose in Flaunders. If any man
were sorry of the duke of Burgoyns death you may be sure that he was not so
inwardly sorry, as the French king was in heart joyous and glad: For now having
peace with England, he knew no creature that was able to match with him in
earnest or in game, and because he would lose no time, he under color that
women be not able to enjoy any thing, that is or has been, aperteynynge to the
Croune of France, took of the young Damosel of Burgoyn the tounes of
Moundedier, Perone, Abbeuyle, Monstreul Roy, and all the tounes on the river of
Some: Beside this, he with no great pain obtained Hesdyng, Arras, and the
town of Bulleyn, with the countye of Bullonoys, which king Charles his
father had before engaged, and empledged to duke Philip of Burgoyn, as before
is mentioned. But this wyly and wytty king Jews, coming to the town of
Bulleyn, perceived that if it were fortefied with a garrison, it should not
only be an ill neyghbor to the tounes of Caleys and Guysnes, but also a port
necessa^ie and convenient for all his subjects, when they should be, either by
enemies assailed, or by stormy tempestious wether driven on the narrow seas,
wherefore to cast a sure Ancker, knowing the lord Bartrame de la Toure, earl of
Auluerie, to be the very true and vndubytate heir of y^ said town and
county: He first obtained of him his right and title in the same, rewarding
him with a greater sum, and a more yearly value of revenues, in the countye
of Forest, and other places. And after to the intent to have a port ever open
upon England, he annexed the same town of Bulleyne, and the county of
Bullonoys, with the parts adjacent, to the croune and regalitie of France.
And because, the fornamed town and countye were holden of the ^rledom of
Artoys, he changed the ^enure, and solemply auowed to hold the same town and
cou^tie of our Lady of Bulleyn, and thereof did homage to the Image in y^ great
Church called our Lady church in Bulleyn, offering there a heart of gold, weiyng
ii.M. Crounes, ordenyng farther that all his heirs and successors, at their
entry into the estate and dignity royal, by them self, or their deputy
should offer a heart of like weight and value, as a releue and homage done, or
made for the same town and county. You may be sure that the king of England
would not have suffered the French king to have edefied such a covert nest, so
nere his town of Caleis, and the territories of the same, except his leage had
bound him, or that he had to much affyance in the French king, whose heart was
doble, and whose wit ever inco^sta^t, but surely the hope of the preferme^t of
his daughter, both brought him to blyndnes and dotage. Let these doings over
pass and se how politikely the French king wrought for his advantage. During
these gaynes in the low parts, he caused the duke of Lorayn to enter into
high Burgoyn with a great army, which by policy and promises brought the
whole Duchy under obedience of the French king, which then claymed to have the
order and marriage of the young lady, as a pupille, ward and orphane,
aperteyning to the croune of France, for the which title after rose no small
mischief, and troble in Flaunders, and the countries thereaboute. Let us leave
a while to speak of outward business, and return to our own.

The xvii. yer^. The (...) year

IN y^.xvii. year of king Edward, there fell a sparcle of privy malice, between
the king and his brother the duke of Clare^ce whether it rose of old grudges
before time passed, or were it newly kyndled and set a fire by the Queen or her
blood which were ever mistrustyng and privily barkynge at the kings lignage,
or were he desirous to reign after his brother: to men that have thereof made
large inquisicion, of such as were of no small authority in those days, the
certayntie thereof was hyd, and could not truly be disclosed, but by
conjectures, which as often d^c^yue the imaginacions of fantastical folk, as
declare treuth to them in their conclusion. The fame was that the king or the
Queen, or both, sore troubled with a folysh Prophesye, and by reason thereof
began to stomach and grievously to grudge against the duke. The effect of which
was, after king Edward should reign, one whose first letter of his name
should be a G. and because the deuel is wo^t with such wytchcraftes, to wrappe
and illaqueat the minds of men, which delight in such deuelyshe fantasyes, they
said afterward that that Prophecy lost not his effect, when after king Edward,
Gloucester usurped his kingdom.

Other allege this to be the cause o^ his death: That of late, y^ old ra^cor
between them being newly revived (The which between no creatures can be more
vehement then between brethren, especially when it is f^rmely radicate) the
duke being destitute of a wife, by the means of lady Margaret duches of
Burgoyn, his sister, procured to have the lady Marye, daughter and heir to
duke Charles her husband, to be given to him in matrimony: which marriage
king Edward (enuyenge the felicity of his brother) both again said and
disturbed. This privy displeasure was openly appeased, but not inwardly
forgotten nor outwardly forgeuen, for that, not withstandyng a servant of the
Dukes was suddenly accused (I can not say of treuth, or untruly suspected by
the Dukes enemies) of poysonyng, sorcery, or inchauntment, and thereof
condemned, and put to taste the pains of death. The duke, which might not
suffer the wrongful condemnacion of his man (as he in his conscience adjudged)
nor yet forbere, nor patiently suffer the unjust ha^delyng of his trusty
servant, daily did oppugn, and with ill words murmur at the doing thereof.
The king much grieved and troubled with his brothers daily querimonye, and
contynuall exclamacion, caused him to be aprehended, and cast into the Tower,
where he being taken, adjudged for a Traitor, was privily drouned in a But of
Maluesey. G^orge duke of Cl^rence, d^oun^d in a But of (...) in the Tow^^.


But sure it is, that although king Edward were consentyng to his death and
destruction, yet he much did both lamente his unfortunate chance, and repent
his sudden execucion. In as much, that when any person sued to him for Pardon
or remission, of any malefactor condemned to the punishment of death, he
would accustomably say, and openly speak, O infortu^ate brother, for whose
life not one creatoure would make (...) openly spekyng* and apparently
meaning, that by the means of (...) of the nobility, he was (...), and
brought to his confusion.

This duke left behynd (...) young infantes, ^ngendered of the body of the
daughter to Rychard* late earl of Warwy^ke, which chylderne by (...), or by
their own merits, ^olowynge the steps of their a^^cetours* succeeded (...)
misfortune, and ^emblable ill chance. For Edward his heir* whom king Edward
had created earl of Warwycke was three and twenty years after in the time of
king Henry the.vii. attaynted of ^reason, and on Tower hyl behedded. Margarete
his sole daughter was married to sir Richard Pole knight, being much bound to
king Henry the.vii. for her auauncemente in marriage* beside manifold (...) by
her of him received: But most of all obliged to that excellent prince king
(...) the eight, for restoryng her as well to the ^ame and title of countess of
Salisbury, as too the possessions of the same: she forgetting y^ miserable
chance of her father, and less remembryng the kynd^es and kyndred o^ her said
souereygne lord comm^^^ed against his Majesty* and his Realm, abominable and
de^estable treason, for the which she was in open Par^iament, adjudged and
attaynted, and two and sixty years after her father was put to death in the
Tower, she on the grene within the same place, with an Axe suffered execucion.
In whose person died the very surname of Plantagene^, which from Geofrey
pla^tagenet so long in the blood Royal of this realm, had flourished and
continued. After the death of this duke, by reason of great (...) and
intemperate air, happened so fierce and so quycke a Pestilence, that.xv.
years war paste, consumed not the third part of the people, that only four
months miserably and (...) dispatched, and brought to th^^ sepulture.

The.xviii. year. the.xviii. year.

YOu have hard not long before, how the French king not only claymed the
^ule, governance, and marriage of the young Princes and Damsel of Burgoyn^,
but also how he, what with policy, and what with ^orce had plucked from her
the ^ayrest feathers of her tail, that is too mean whole haut Burgoyne, and
the strong tounes of Pycardye which in time to come might (as they were very
like) happen to prove ill neighbors to the English nation. All these things
were pollitikely pondered, and maturely digest^d by the wi^e cou^saylers of
England, which first considered the old amity, between the house of England
and Flaunders, and the quotidiane intercourse, traffic and commutacion, which
no small season had been practiced, frequented and excercised m^tually and
friendly between the subjects, and all nations having resort to either of the
said countries, saw it open before their eyes, that if the French king,
either by force or by (...) of marriage to Charles earl of Angulesme (to whom
he promised his good will, for the obteynyng of the young Princes) should get
the upper hand of the Damosel or of her seignories and dominions, that then
(...) ensue to the whole Realm of England, both for vtterynge of their
commodities in those parts, and also for the impedyment or st^ppe of their
course and recourse, beside new imposicions and gabels, to be set within the
said countries, upon the Merchants, their goods and wares. Wherefore the
whole nobility and sage fathers made humble request, tokynge Edward to help,
and aid the young lady and Pry^ces of Burgoyne, allegynge that as fa^re as
they could ^er^eyue, the marriage of his daughter with the Dolphyne, was but
dissimuled and feigned for in y^ treaty concluded at Pycquegnye, between him and
king Jews, it was appointed, agreed, and openly (...), that the French king,
within a year following, should send for the Lady Elizabeth, entiteled
Dolphynesse of Uyen, to be conveyed into France, which year with four more
were passed and gone, without any word speking of her sendynge for, or going
into France.

The Queen of England also had written in this season too the lady Ma^garet,
Duchess of Burgoyne, for the prefermente of her brother Anthony earl Ryuers,
to the marriage of the young Damsel, but the counsayll of Flaunders,
consyderinge that he was but a earl of a mean estate, and she the greatest
enheritrice of all Christendom at that time, gave but deaf hearing to so
unmeet a request: the which desire, if the Fleminges had but given good ear
to, or with gentell words delayed the suyte, she had both been succored and
defended with a good number, and not sustained so great loss as she did.
Whether king Edward were not content with this refusal, or that he trusted
more the French kings promise, then all his counsayll could se cause, or
that he was loathe to lose his yearly tribute of fifty thousand Crounes, he
would in no wise consent to send any army into Flaunders, against the French
king: But he sent Ambassadors to king Jews with loving and gentle letters,
requyrynge him to conclude some reasonable peace, or else at the least to take a
certain truce with her at his request.

The Ambassadors of England, were highly received, bountefully fested, and
liberally rewarded: But answer to their desire, had they none, but y^ shortly
the French king would send Ambassadors, hostages, and pledges, to the king of
England, their Master, for the concludyng and per^ormaunce of all things,
dependyng between them two: So that their sovereign lord and they, should
have good cause, to be contented and pleased. All these fair words, were only
delays to protracte time, and in the mean season, to win tounes and
countries, from the damsel, or any aid or succor, could be to to her
administered.

And beside this, to stay king Edward, from taking part with her. He wrote
to him, that if he would join with him in aid, or personally make war, in
any part of the Ladies territories, or dominions: that then king Edward,
should have and enjoy, to him and his heirs* the whole County and Country
of Flaunders, A great offer made by the French king to King Edward the.iiii.
discharged of all homage, superiority, and resort to be claimed by the
French king, and his h^ires and successors: and farther, he should have the
whole duchy of Brabant, whereof the French king offered, at his own charge
and co^^e, to conquer four, the chief and strongest tounes, within thesaied
Duchy, and them in quiet possession, to deliver to the King of England,
grauntyng farther to pay to him, ten thousand Angels* toward his charges:
besides municions of war and artilerie, which he promised to lend him, with
men and carriage, for the conueighaunce of the same.

The king of England answered, that the tounes of Flanders, were of no small
strength, nor of no little quantie, very uneasy to be kept, when they were
conquered: and of no less force was the Duchy of Brabant, with whom, his
subjects were both loathe, and not very willing to have war there,
considering* that theth^r was one of their common trafficques and ventes, of
all their Merchaundice: But if the French king would make him partener, of his
conquest in Picardy, renderyng to him part of the tounes, all ready gotten and
gained, as Boleigne Mounstrell, and Abbeuile, then he would surely take his
part, and aid him with men, at his own costs and charges. While this matter
was in answeryng, and repliyng again, the French king spoiled the young
Princes, oftounes and Regions, and of the best Capitaines that her father
left* as the Lord Cords and other: wherefore for pure necessity of aid and
strength, she married with Maximilian, son to Frederike the Emperor, which
to his power, sore resisted the French King, for making any invasions into
Flaunders, or other his wifes lands and seigniories. This Princes conceived of
her husband, in the first year of her marriage, a fair lady called Margaret,
whom king Jews so phantesied, either to have a public peace, with Maximilia^
her father, by the which, he might stay all war, and hostility between
the^ and so by that mean, peaceably to enjoy the countries and tounes, by him
stolen and faintly conquered, or else imagenyng by that only damsel, in
conclusion to conioyne, the whole country of Flanders, and the other
dominions, thereunto apperteinyng, to the croune of France, (as he had no few
times, before attempted and assaied). That he clearly forgettyng, his promise
made, written, and sworn to the king of England, for the marriage of his
daughter, solicited privily the Lords of Flanders, to have thesaied lady
Margarete, to be conjoined in matrimony, with the Dolphin his son, writynge
and sendyng to the King of England, fair promises and flatteryng letters,
when his purpose was clearly vanished out of England, and fixed in Flanders,
as you shall hereafter well understand.

The.xix. year. The.xix. year.

King Edward in the.xix. year of his reign, forgettyng as well all exterior
invasions, as civil war, and intestine trouble: which before that time, he
had abundantly tasted and more then he was willing, had both felt, and had
in continual experience, began first more then he was before accustomed, to
search out the penal offenses, as well of the chief of his nobility, as of
other gentlemen, being propritaries of great possessions, or abundantly
furnished in goods, beside merchauntes, and other inferior persons. By the
reason whereof, it was of all men adjudged, more then doubted, considering his
new fame of riches, and his gready appetite of money and treasure, that he
would prove hereafter, a sore and an exstreme Prince, amongst his subjects,
and this immaginacion in especial, wandered through the heddes of all men, that
after his brother the Duke of Clarence, was put to death, he should say, that
all men should stand, and live in fear of him, and he to be unbridled, and
in doubt of no man. But his new invented practice, and auaricious inuencion,
what for other foreign and outward affairs, and what for the abbreuiatyng of
his days, in this transitory world (which were within two years after
consumed) took some but no great effect. How be it experience teaches, that
prosperity often times is as great a trouble, as a great mischief, and as
unquiet a profit, to the possessioners of riches, and such as have the
fruicion or the same: as poverty and adversity, are profitable and laudable,
in other persons which can, with pacient stomach, and meke heart, bear and
suffer the storms and surges, of evil fortune, and perverse mischaunce.

The.xx. year The.xx. year.

AFter this, king Edward having all things brought to that effect, which he
had long desired, except the ma^^age of his daughter, with Charles the dolphyn
much studied and no less desired to have this affinit^^, according to the
appoyntme^t made and concluded, to be accomplished and solemnized, and
therefore, not only wrote, but sent diverse messengers to the French king, for
the performaunce of the same. The French king which never intended, to have
that marriage take effect, considering that the Dolphin, was much younger,
then the lady Elizabeth, and for other causes, sent Ambassadors to the king of
England with fair words, and frivolous delays, making his excuse, that he
had not sent for the kings daughter to be married to his son the dolphin,
according to the league and treaty concluded, by the occasion of his great
troubles, and busy wars, enterprised in high Burgoin, and the low countries,
so that he was disgarnished, as well of his nobility, as of other men of
honor, to receive her into his realm, according to her estate and degree:
promisyng faithfully, shortly to send for her, and to conueigh her with such
a pomp and royal train, that it should be to both their honors and lauds,
and to the high contentacion, of the King of England and his Queen, which, no
less then her husband desired, and sore longed to se the conclusion, of
thesaid marriage take effect.

These Ambassadors were well feasted, and likewise rewarded, and so took their
leave: And within a convenient season after, he sent other Orators, which,
were never in England before, to the intent that if their predecessors being
Ambassadors, had said or concluded any thing, (although they were authorized so
to do) yet if it might turn, to the French kings prejudice or damage, they
might without blame, excuse themselfes by ignorance, of that matter: affirmyng
that they had no commission to common, or else once to enterprise, to meddle with
that matter. Or if he perceived that any thing was like to be concluded, which
sounded not to his pleasure or profit, he would send for his Ambassador, in
great haste, and after send another with new instruccions, nothing dependyng
on the old.

This fashion king Jews, used with all Princes, to whom he sent any
Ambassadors, by the which he compassed many things, to his purpose, and to
their loss: But most of all, he thus dalied with the king of England,
concerning this marriage, only to the intent, to keep him still in amity,
above all other Princes. And for a truth the King of England, being of no
suspicious nature, so much trusted, and gave to him so much confidence, that
he thought the Sun, would sooner have fallen from his circle, then that king
Jews, either would have dissimuled, or broken his promise with him.

But who sooner breaks promise, then he that is most trusted, or who sooner
deceives, then he to whom most credence is attributed. And on the other part,
who is so sone begiled, as he that least mistrusteth, and who sooner falls,
then he that casts no peril, but as in nothing mistrustyng, is no small
lightness, so into much trustyng, is to much folly: wherefore, if king Edward
had either not to much trusted, or mistrusted the French Kings fair
promises (as I would he had dooen in deed) the croune of France, had not so
increased in possessions and dominions, to the great glory, and strength of
the realm: nor the Princes of Burgoyne, had not so been plucked, hared, and
spoiled, of her fair tounes and Castles as she was, which chance, she being
destitute of friends, and without comfort of defenders, by patience perforce,
was compelled to suffer and sustein.

This is the profit that all nations get, by the fair promises, of the
Frenchmen. Thus is the league made with Jews the French king, fraudulently
glosed and dissimuled. Thus is the oath made, and sworn upon the holy
Evangelists violated, and contrary to the word, and honor of a Prince,
broken and falcefied: by which untrue dealyng, and covert dissimulyng, with
his especial and trusty friend, all men may facilie se, and more apparauntly
then in a myrror perceive, that the very natural condition of the French
nation, is pleasuntly to flatter, plentifully to reward, and gloriously to
gloss, til they have once obtained, their pretensed purpose, and have their
ambicious desire accomplished and satisfied and that gain once gotten on their
side, neither oath holds, nor friendship continues, nor yet humanity and
kyndnes before showed, is once regarded, or of them remembered: wherefore, mine
advise is, let all men trust them, as they find them.

The.xxi. year. The.xxi. year.

IN this very season, James the.iii. of that name, king of Scotts, sent into
England a solemn Embassage, for to have the Lady Cicile, king Edwardes.ii.
daughter, to be married to his eldest son, James Prince of Scotland, Duke of
Rothesay, and earl of Caricke. King Edward and his counsel, thinkyng that
this affinity, should be as well honorable, as profitable to the realm, did
not only grant, to his desire and demand but also before hand disbursed,
certain sommes of money, to the only intent, that the marriage should herafter,
neither be interrupted nor broken, upon this condition, that thesaied
Matrimony, by any accedentall mean, should in time to come, take no success
nor perfeccion: or that king Edward would notify, to the king of Scotts, or
his counsel, that his pleasure was determined, to have thesaid marriage, to be
infringe^ and dissolved: Then the Provost and merchauntes, of the town of
Edenborough, should be bound for the repaiment, of thesaied some again. Al
which things were, with great deliberacion concluded and sealed, in hope of
continual peace, and infringible amity. But this king James being a man of a
sharp wit, more wedded to his own opinion then reason would scace bear, would
neither here nor give credit to them, that spoke contrary to his own
phantesie, or this imagined opinion: And to thinte^t that no man should find
fault, with his doings, or reprehe^d his acts, he promoted and made
counsailers, men of basse lignage, and low blood and in especial, Cochrane
and his compaignie, by whose evil advise, and mischeuous instigacion, he so
punished and grieved his nobility, both with emprisonment, exaccions, and
death, that some of their voluntary will, went into Exile, and other fainyng
cause to depart* fled into other lands, and strange countries. For the Duke
of Albanie, called Alexander, brother to king James, was exiled into France
but passing through England, he tarried with king Edward as you shall hear.
Ther^e of Mar, a wise pollitique counsailer, was in Edenborough be hedded: And
beside this, he forgettyng his oath, promise, and affinity, concluded with
king Edward, caused armies to be made, into England, spoylyng, burning, and
killyng, the kings faith full subjects: at the which unprincely dooyng, the
king of England being, not a little moved and chafed, determined to be revenged
on him by battaill, and dent of sword. Yet notwithstanding, because king James
craftily excusing himself, alleging the mischief late committed, to be
attempted, done, and perpetrated, without his concent, knowledge* or counsel,
this matter had been lightly pacified, and blown over, (...) the Duke of
Albanie, being with king Edward, had not ince^sed, entised, and provoked him,
to make war on the Scottishe king, his brother, both to revenge the injuries
of late, to thesaid king done, contrary to all laws of arms, and Princely
demeanure, and also, to help to restore thesaied duke, to his possessions, and
dominions again: out of the which, he was by the king his brother,
dispossessed, and rejected 'promisyng to king Edward, great aid and
assistence, when his army was once entered, into the confines of Scotland.

King Edward being thus persuaded by the Duke, and trustyng on his aid, was
somewhat agreeable to this, but the inward remembrance how that king James, had
supported against him, with men and money, his old enemy king Henry the sixth:
and also trustyng, that if Alexander duke of Albanie, by his adie should
vanquishe his brother, and obtain the croune of Scotland, he would be always
to him sure* faithful, and trusty: which did so inflame his courage, and set
his heart so on fire, that he determined with all diligence, with an army
royal, to invade the country of Scotland, and make the king to know, that
he had neither honorably, nor truly kept his league and promise: Wherefore, all the winter season, he mustred his soldiers, prepared his ordinance, rigged his
ships, and left nothing apperteignyng to the war, unpurveyed or unlooked
for: so that in the beginning of the year, al things were prepared, and nothing
was missed.

The.xxii. year. The.xxii. year.

WHen all things apperteignyng, to the furniture of such an enterprise, were
put in a readiness, and ready to be set forward: king Edward appointed, to be
cheuetain of his hooste, and Lieuetenaunt general, his brother Richard Duke
of Gloucester, and to him associated, Henry, the.iiij Earl of Northumberlande,
Thomas Lord Stanley, Lord Steward of his household, the lord Louell, and the
lord Greystocke, and diverse other noble men and knights. These valiau^t
capitaines, set forward in May, and made such diligence, with pollitique
co^ueighaunce of their soldiers: beside the troubelous carriage, of their
ordinance, that they came to the town of Alnewike, in Northumberlande, about
the beginning of July, where they first encamped theimselfes, and Marshalled
their host. The forward was led, by therle of Northumberlande, under whose
standerd were, the lord Scrope of Bolton, sir Ihon Middelton, sir Ihon
Dichfeld, and diverse other Knights, Esquiers and soldiers to the nombre of
six thousand, and seven.C. men. In the middell ward was the Duke of
Gloucester, and with him the Duke of Albany, the lord Louell the lord
Greystocke, sir Edward Woduile and other, to the nombre of five thousand, and
eight.C. men. The Lord Neuell was appointed to follow, accompaignied
with.iii.M. men. The lord Stanley, led the wyng on the right hand, of the
Dukes battaill, with iiii.M. men, of Lancashire and Chesshire: The left wyng
was guyded by the lord Fitz Hew, sir Willyam a Part, sir James Harryngton,
with the nombre of.ii.M. men, and beside all these, there was a thousand men
appointed, to give attendance on the ordinance. This royal army, not
intendyng to sleep, but to give the Scotts knowledge, of their arrival in
those parties, came suddenly by the water side, to the town of Berwicke, and
there, what with force, and what with fear of so great an army, took and
entered the town: but therle Bothwell, being Capitain of the Castle, would in
nowise deliver it, neither for flatteryng words, nor for manacyng bragges,
wherefore, the capitaines deliberately consultyng together, planted a strong
siege, and environed it round about. When this siege was thus laid the two
Dukes, and all the other soldiers, except the lord Stanley, sir Ihon
Elryngton, threasorer of the kings house, sir Willyam a Parre, and.iiii.M.
men, that were left behind, to keep the siege before the Castle* departed
from Berwicke, toward Edenborough: And in marchyng thetherward, he brent and
destroyed these tounes following.

Edryngton. Paxton. Fishewike. Brandike. Hooton. Heton Hall. Mordyngton and the
Bastile. Plome Horn and the town. Bhroweshed and the Steple. Brom hill and
the Bastile. Edram. Estrusbet. Blakater and the Branke won. Kallow, and
Kamorgan. Whitsonelawes. Brynlenyn and Ryselaw. Elbanke. Hockas. Betroside.
Erneslaw and the Bastill won. Hilton and Whitsome. Mykyll Swynton and the
Bastile. Little Swynton and the bastill. Somprone and Harden. Croffirge and
Whitside. Edyngham. Whitmere. Newtowne. During which time, the earl of
Northumberland, brent these tounes Yatham, and Yatham. Brymsed and the Bastell.
Low houses and the bastell. Cheritrees and Hoyepe. Cliffton, Coto, and Hawmon.
Hawmon Grawnge and Hawdon. Marbotell and the bastile. Lynton with the Bastile.
Part of Cawarden brent. Chedworthe and Craylam and the Bastill. Neskot,
Neskett, and old Rokesborough. Ednam, and the bastill won. Ednam isle,
Benlaw. Ousnam, Long Puolo delivered. Croke, Ashewes, Mydpropes and the
Bastell. Cossemaynes and the bastell won. Weddon and the bastell.
While these things were in doing, king James of Scotland, having small
confidence in his commonaltie, and less trust in his nobility, did
voluntarely incarcerate and enclose him self in the strong Castle of Maidens
in Edenborough, perfitly trustyng there to be out of all doubts and danger,
except famyn or treason, caused him violently to open the ports or gates,
whereof the duke of Gloucester entered into the town and at the especial
request and desire of the duke of Albany, saved y^ town and thenhabitantes of
the same, from fire, blood and spoil, taking only such presents as the
mercha^tes gentelly offered him and his capitaynes: Causing Gartier, principal
king at arms, to make a public Proclamacion at the high Cross in the market
place of Edenboroughe, in the which he warned and admonished, James king of
Scotts, to keep, observe and perform all such promises, co^pactes, couenantes
and agrementes as he had concluded and sealed to, with the high and mighty
Prince Edward, by the grace of God king of England. etc. And also to make
co^digne and sufficient recompense to his subjects, for the great tyranny
spoil and crueltye, that he and his people had perpetrate and committed
contrary to his league, within the marches and territories of his realm of
England, before the first day of August next ensuynge.

And farther without delay to restore the high and mighty prince Alexander,
duke of Albanie, his natural brother to his estate, and all his offices
possessions and authorities, in as ample and liberal manner, as he before
occupied and enjoyed the same: or the high and valiaunte prince Rychard duke of
Gloucester, leuetenaunt general, and chiefetayne for y^ king of England, was
ready at hand to destroy him, his people and country with slaughter, flame and
famyn.

King James would make no answer, neither by word nor by writing, knowing
that his power now failed, either to perform the request demanded, or to
defend his country with such a puissant army invaded. The lords of Scotland,
lyeng at Hadyngton with a great puyssaunce, hearing the king of Englandes
reasonable desire, determined first to practice with the Duke of Gloucester for
a peace, and so to have the Castle of Berwycke to their part, and after by
some means to allure the duke of Albanye, from the English amity, and upon
this mocion, the.ii. day of August they wrote to the duke of Gloucester, that
the marriage between the prince of England should be accomplisshed in all
points, according to the couenantes agreed, and the instruments thereof
engrosed, rquyryng farther that a peace from thens^urth might be louyngly
concluded between both the Realms. The duke of Gloucester wisely and
circumspectly certefied the^ again, that as touching the article of marriage, to
take effect between their prince and the lady Cicilie of England, he knew not
the determinat pleasure of y^ king his master and brother, either for the
affirmaunce or denia^ce of the same but he desired full restitucion of all such
sums of money, as for the said marriage before time had been disbursed, or
prested out in love. And where the said lords desired to have a peace,
concluded from thensfurth, between both the said realms. He first required to
have the Castle of Barwyke to him delivered, or at the lest, if he did agree to
y^ said peace, that then his siege, lyeng about the said Castle, should be
hereafter in any wise, neither troubled, vexed, nor molested, nor ye king of
Scotts, nor none of his subjects, nor any other by his procurement or
provoking, should aid, comfort or assist with victayle, ordinance, or other
wise the Captain, Constable, or soldiers of the said Castle, during the
siege.

The Lords, Prelates, Barons, and estates of the realm of Scotland,
perceiving and well pondering, both the answer and the demaundes of the duke of
Gloucester, sent to him sufficiently enstructed with these conclusions, the
reverend father Andrew, elect of Murray, and the lord Ihon De^nele, which thus
answered, that where the said duke desired repayment of ye sums of money,
delivered in part of payment, for the contract of marriage, to be made between
the prince of Scotland and y^ kings daughter of England: the time of lawful
contract of marriage is not yet come, because of the minority of the said
prince and princess. And the fault hereof is, that no day was appointed for the
money, to be paid before the contract began. And if the king your brother
would demand farther assurance, either for the contract to be made, or for
y^ payment of the money, they promised thereunto, according to reason to agree.
Secondarely, as touching the Castle of Berwike, they said al we know well
enough, that it is the old enheritance of the croune of Scotland, of many
hundred years past, and that our sovereign lord has right thereunto. And if
it be alleged, that it belonged to the realm of England by conquest, it is
well known that it stands in Scotland, and over the Scottish ground. The
duke, not withstandinge their sayings, would co^discend to no peace, without
the Castle of Barwyke were rendered to the king of England, and so y^
messengers departed, and on the same day the Archbishop of saint Andrews, the
bishop of Du^kelle Colyn, earl of Argyle, lord Cambell and lord Andrew, lord
Auandale, Chaunceler of Scotland, wrote unto the duke of Albanye a solemn
and autenticall instrument, signed and sealed with their seals, binding their
bodies, lands and goods to the said duke, that if he would hereafter be
obedient to the king of Scotts, and keep and observe his faith and promise to
be made to the said lords, that he should not only be restored to all his
lands, hereditamentes, offices and possessions, which he enjoyed at the day
of his departure out of Scotland, but also should have and enjoy to him, and
his servants and familiers a fre and a general Pardon, which restitucion and
pardon, they likewise promised to be ra^^fied and approved by the king and
the.iii. estates assembled at the next Parliament. The duke being glad to be
restored again to his old estate and possessions, and especially in his own
native country, received their offer, which was truly performed, and so took
his leave of the duke of Gloucester, thankyng him (as he was no less bound) for
the great labor, traueyll and pain, that he had taken in his own person for
his restitucion. And promised both by word and by writing of his own hand to
do and perform all such things, as he before that time had sworn and
promised to king Edward, notwithstanding any agreement, now made or to be made
with the lords of Scotland: and for the performance of theffect of the said
Scedule, he again took a corporal oath before ye duke of Gloucester, and
sealed the writing the third day of August in ye English Ca^pe at Leuyngton,
besides Hadyngton, anno.M.cccc.lxxxii and departed to his own possessions.
After he was thus restored and reconciled, the lords of Scotland proclaimed
him great lieuetenau^t of Scotland, and in the kings name made Proclamacion,
y^ all me^ should be ready, upon pain of death within.viii. days at
Craushaues, both to raise the siege before the Castle, and for the recoueringe
again of the town of Barwyke. The duke of Albanye wrote all this preparacio^
to the duke of Gloucester, humbly requiring him to have no mistrust in him
promising to keep his oath and promise, made to king Edward and to him. The
duke of Gloucester wrote to him again, that it should neither be honorable nor
commendable in him, too help, to reise the siege, at the layeng whereof he was
counsayler and partener, nor yet to reward ye king of England, with such a
displeasure for his kyndnes costs and expe^ses to him in his extreme
necessity, lovingly showed and liberally exhibited. But he assured him in the
word of a Prince, that if he and all the power of Scotland attempted to come
to raise the siege, planted before ye Castle of Barwyke, that he him self
with his army would defend the besegiers, or else dye in the quarrel.

The counsayl of Scotland sagely and poletiquely saw before, that if they
should come to reyse the siege, that the duke of Gloucester would with them
shortly encounter, and then if they lost the field, both y^ strength of the
Realm was brought to an imbecilitie, the nobles sore minished, and the castle
lost and taken. And on the other side, if they obtained victory, nothing was
gotten but the pore town of Barwyke, and they were likely sone to be invaded
with a greater power shortly again, wherefore they sent Lion king at Arms to
the duke of Gloucester, offering to him as they thought, two offers very
reasonable, the one was, that if he would promise on his honor to subuerte and
cast down the town walls of Barwyke, they would likewise race, and clearly
deface the walls Towers and ports of the Castle, or else the duke of
Gloucester to put in a capitayn and a garrison of men of war into the town,
and the duke of Albanye, likewise to do with the Castle, for the Tuycion of
the same. And farther the foresaid Lion desired an abstine^ce of war to be
taken, till the two dukes might have co^municacion of grauous matters,
concerning the welthes of both the Realms. The duke of Gloucester refused
both the offers saying, that he had long maintained the siege before the
Castle of Barwyke, to no small waste and exhaustyng of his brothers treasure
and riches, and to the great travail and pain of the Lords, Gentilmen, and
men of war, that continuallye made there abode and daily residens at the said
seige: wherefore he said, that he in this point was fermely resolved, not to
depart till the Castle were yielded by apoyntement, or taken by force, or else
his siege were by the power of Scotland raised, or he and his army vanquished:
wherefore he would by no mean harken to the peticion of the Scottishe lords,
concerning the abstinence of war, till he were either vanquished or possessed
of the Castle of Barwyke. With which answer the Herault departed, and
thereof made relacion to the lords and counseyll of Scotland. When the dukes
answer was of them well digested, they evidently perceiving that the castle
of Barwyke was the only maker of ye peace and that the not delivery of
the same, should be the norice and continuer of war and hostility:
consideringe farther, that the nobility nor commons of Scotland, did not draw
together by one line, nor were sorted in one level, electyng and chosyng the
better part, and reiectinge and avoiding the worse, agreed and determined to
deliver the Castle of Barwyke to the English party, so that there should be
truce or abstinence of war taken and concluded for a determinate season. And
thervpo^ they sent to the duke of Gloucester a league inde^ted, which was dated
the.xxiiii. day of August, in the year of our lord a.M.cccc.lxxxii. in the
which it was contracted and agreed between the duke of Gloucester, lieutenau^t
general for the king of England, and Alexander duke of Albanye, lieuetenau^t
for James king of Scotts, that an especial abstinence of war should be kept
and observed betwixt the Realms of England and Scotland, and the people of
the same, as well by sea as by land, to begin the.viii. day of September next
ensuyng, and to endure till the.iiii. day of November next following. And in the
mean season, the town and castle of Barwyke, to be occupied, and be in ye
real possession of such as by the king of Englandes deputy, should be
appointed and assigned with all and singular such bounds, limits and
territories as the English uacion, last used and possessed, when the castle
and town were in the subieccion of the Englishmen. And all other marches and
bounds, being in difference between the said Realms, to stand and to be
holden in like case and condition, as they were before the last truce
concluded. The duke of Gloucester, which well perceived that the Scotts more
granted to his demau^des, for relieve of their own necessity, then to
gratefie him or the king his brother in any point: like a wise counseyler, took
his advantage when it was offered, and especially because these things made
for his long desired purpose.

First the delivery of the Castle of Barwyke, he voluntarely without counsayl
(as a pray privily gotten) both accepted and allowed, and for that only cause
he did not refuse the abstinence of war, but too that gentely agreed. As
touching the possession, to be kept in the lands dependyng in variance between
the Realms (comenly called the batable ground) he would not, nor durst not
conclude with the duke of Albanye, without having farther intelligence of the
king his sovereign lords pleasure and counsel, meaning thereby ever to
keep them as sueters to him, and he no farther to seek on them, and in the
mean season to let that matter be in suspense. When he had sealed to the first
two Articles, and that they were sent again to the lords of Scotland, they
them gladly received, and with good will embrased, and likewise truly performed
the same: for the castle of Barwyke was incontinent delivered to the lord
Stanley, and other thereto appointed, which therein put both English men and
artilerie, sufficient for the defense of all Scotland for.vi. months. By
this means as you have hard, the Englishmen repossessed again the town and
castle of Barwyke, which xxi. years before by king Henry the.vi. was to the
Scotts as you have hard given up and delivered. And lest peradventure the duke
of Gloucester might think that the duke of Albanye did not in all things set
forward, prefer, and auance his first requests and demaundes, made and
required of the lords of Scotland, and in especial one which was for the
assurance to be made for the repayment to the king of England, of all such
sums of money, as he had beforehand prested and disbursed to the king of
Scotts for the marriage to be solempnised and consummate between their
chyldern, as before is rehearsed: Therefore y^ said duke of Albanye, caused the
Provost and Burgesses of Edenborough to make a sufficient instrument
obligatorie, to king Edward, for the true satisfaccion and contentacio^ of
the same money, which he also sent by thesaied Provost to the Duke of Gloucester
to Alnewyke: The very Copy hereafter follows.

Be it known to all men by thele present letters, us Walter Bartraham, Provost
of the town of Ede^boroug in Scotland, and the whole fellowship, merchants,
burgesses, and communaltye of the same town, to be bound and oblished by their
presents, unto the most excellent and most mighty prince Edward, by the grace
of God king of England. That where it was commoned and agreed, between his
excellency on the ta part, and the right high and mighty prince our
sovereign lord, James king of Scotts on the other part, that marriage and
matrimony should have been solempnised, and had betwixt a mighty and excellent
prince, James the first begotten son and heir apparent to our sovereign
lord foresaid, and the right noble princes Cicilie daughter, to the said Edward
king of England, and for the said marriage to have been performed certain and
diverse great sums of money ben paid and contented by the most excellent
prince, unto our sovereign lord foresaid, as by certain wrytynges betwixt the
said princes, thereupon made more at large plainly appears: That if it be the
pleasure of the said Edward king of England, to have the said marriage to be
performed and completed according to the said communicacion in writing, that
then it shall be well and truly, without fraud, disceyte or collusion,
observed, keped, and accomplished on the party of our sovereign lord
foresaid, and the nobles spiritual and temporal of the Realm of Scotland.
And if it be not the pleasure of the said excellent prince Edward king of
England, to have the said marriage performed and completed: That then we Walter
Provost, burgesses, marchantes, and commons of the abouenamed town of
Edenboroughe, or any of us, shall pay and content to the king of England
foresaid, all the sums of money that was paid for the said marriage, at syke
like terms and days, immediately ensuen, after the refusal of the said
marriage, and in syke like manner and form, as the said sums were before
delivered, contented and paid, that than this obligacion and bond to be void,
and of no strength. Provided always, that the said Edward king of England,
shall give knowledge of his pleasure and eleccion in the premises in taking or
refusing of ye said marriage, or of repayme^t of the said sums of money, to
our said souereygne lord, or lords of his counsayll, or to us the said
Provost, merchau^tes, or any of us, within the realm of Scotland, being for
the time, betwixt this and the feast of Alhalowes next to come. To the whihc
payment well and truly to be made, we bind and oblishe us, and every of us,
our heirs, succession, executors and all our goods, merchaundises, and
things whatsoever they be, where so ever, or in what place, by water or by
land, on this side y^ sea, or beyond, we shall happen to be founden, any
leage, truse or sauegard made or to be made, notwithstanding. In wytnes whereof
to this our present writing, and letters of bond. We, the said Provost,
Burgesses, Merchauntes and commontye have set our common seal of the said
town of Edenborough* the fourth day of August, the year of God.M cccc.xxii.
Given in the presence of the right mighty Prince Richard duke of Gloucester,
Alexander duke of Albanye, a reverend father in God, James bishop of Dunkeld*
and the right noble lord Henry earl of Northumberlande, Colyn earl of Argile,
Thomas lord Stanley, Master Alexander English and other. etc.

When the duke of Gloucester had thus obtained his purpose, and received
writings signed and sealed for the performance of the same, he sent the
instruments to king Edward his brother, which much commended both his
valiant manhood, and also his prudent policy, in conueyng his business, both
to his own purpose, and also to the profit of the Realm. King Edward, not a
littel mused, and much more debated with his counsayl, whether it were more
profitable and honorable to him and his Realm, to suffer the said mentioned
marriage, to take effect, and proceed to a conclusion, or else to require a
repayme^t, and redelyuery of the sums of money, apprompted and laid out for
the same purpose. After long consultacion had, and it was considered in what
case the realm and ye king of Scotts stood in, for it was well known that he
and his nobility were at great discord as you before have heard: it was
considered farther, that if the nobility prevailed, and gat the souerayntie,
the line and succession of James the third, were likely to be totally
extirpate, and disinherited for ever: it was also alleged that the prince of
Scotland, never condiscended nor as he himself said, would agree to this
mocioned marriage. These things thus debated, the king by great advice, refused
and revoked all things to be done, for the more forwardnes of the said
matrimony, and elected and chose the repayment of all such sums of money, as
for the occasion of the said betrusted marriage was paid, and before hand
contented and delivered. And according to the words of obligacion, made by
the town of Edenborough, he sent Gartier, his principal king of Arms and
Northumberland Herault, to declare and intimate to the Provost and burgesses of
Edenborough, the determinate refusal of the future matrimony, and the eleccion
and choice of the repayment of the money and duty. And for the farther
ouerture of the whole conclusion. Gartier was instructed by writing, what he
should say and declare: and so by convenient journeys came to the town of
Edenborough.viii. days before the feast of all saints, where he openly said
as follows:

I gartier king of arms servant, proctour and messenger unto the most high
and mighty prince, my most dread soueraygne lord Edward by the grace of God,
king of England and of France, and lord of Ireland, by virtue of certain
letters of procuracie here ready to be showed to me, by my said souereygne lord
made and given, make notyce and give knowledge unto you Provost, Burgesses,
merchants and communaltie of the town of Edenborough in Scotland, that
where as it was sometime commoned and agreed, between my said soueraygne lord
on the one party, and the right high and mighty prince James king of Scotts,
on the other party, ye marriage and matrimony should have been solempnised, and
had between James the first begotten son of the said king of Scotts, and
lady Cicilie, daughter to my said souereygne lord the king of England. And for
the said marriage to have been performed* certain and diverse great sums of
money, ben paid and contented by my said souereygne lord, which sums of
money, in case of refusal of the said marriage, by my said souereygne lord
to be made and declared, ye the said Provost, Burgesses, merchants and
communaltie, and every one of you are bound and obliged by your letters under
your common seal of your town of Ede^borough, to repaye unto his hyghnes
under like form, and at such terms as they were first paid. So that the
king my souereygne lord would make notice and knowledge of his pleasure, and
eleccion in talkyng or refusing of the said marriage, of the repayment of the
said sums of money, before the feast of Alhalowes next to come, like as in
your said letters, bearing date at Edenboroughe the fourth day of August
last past, it was contained all at large. The pleasure and eleccion of my said
souereygne lord, for diverse causes and consideracions him mouynge, is to refuse
the accomplishement of the said marriage, and to have the repayment of all
such sums of money, as by occasion of the said betrusted marriage, his
hyghnes had paid. The said repaymente to be had of you Prouoste, Burgesses,
merchauntes and communaltie, and every of you, your heirs and successors,
according to your bond and obligacion before rehearsed. And therefore I give
you notice and knowledge by this writynge, which I deliver too you, within the
term in your said letters lymitted and expressed to all ententes and
effects, which thereof may ensue.

When Gartier had thus declared al things, given to him in charge, the Provost
or other Burgesses made answer, that they now knowing the kings determinate
pleasure, would according to their bond, prepare for the repayment of the
said sums, and gentelly enterteynyng Gartier co^ueyghed him to Barwyke, from
whence he departed to new Castle, to the ouke of Gloucester, making relacion to
him of all his doings, which duke with all speed returned too Shrythuton, and
there abode. Shortly after Gartiers departing, the duke of Albanye, thynkyng
to obtain again the high favor of the king his brother, delivered him out
of captivity and prison, wherein he had a certain space continued (not without
the dukes assente, which besieged him in the Castle of Edenborough a littell
before) and set him at large, of whom vtwardly he received great thanks, when
inwardly nothing but reuengyng and confusion was in the kings stomach
incorporate, so that shortly after in the kings presence, he was in icopardye
of his life, and all improuided for dread of death, coacted to take a small
balynger, and to sail into France, where shortly after tydynge by the men of
arms, which encontered at the tylt, by Jews then duke of Orliaunce, after
French king he was with mischarging of a spear by fortunes peruerce
countenance pytyfullye slain and brought to death, leauyng after him one
only son, named Ihon, which being banished Scotland, enhabited and married
in France, and there died. How dolorous, how sorrowful is it to write, and
much more pencifull to remember the chances, and infortunites that happened
within two year in England and Scotland, between natural brethren. For
king Edward set on by such as envied the estate of the duke of Clarence,
forgettyng nature, and fraternall amity, consented to the death of his said
brother. James king of Scotts, putting in oblivion that Alexander his
brother was the only Organe and instrument, by whom he obtained liberty and
fredome, seduced and led by Uyle and malicious persons, which maligned at the
glory and indifferent justice of the duke of Albanye, imagened and compassed
his death, and exiled him for ever? what a pernicious serpent, what a venomous
tode, and what a pestiferous Scorpion is that deuelishe whelpe, called priuye
envy? Against it no fortres can defend, no cave can hyde, no wood can shadow,
no foul can escape, nor no beast can avoid, her poison is so strong, that
never man in authority could escape from the bytyng of her tethe, scrachyng
of her paws, blastyng of her breath, defoulynge of her tail.

Wherefore, let every indifferent person, search Histories, read Chronicles,
look on aucthores, as well holy as profane, and they shall apparauntly
perceive, that neither open war, daily famyne, or accustomed mortality, is
not so much an enemy, nor so great a malle to destroy, and suppeditate high
power and nobility, as is roted malice, inward grudge, and dissimuled hatred.
Although that king Edward were glad and joyous, of all the prosperous success,
of all enterprises in the realm of Scotland, yet even now his Fever tercian,
of the which he had languished sore, sith his voyage royal into France, was
suddenly turned into a incurable quartain: For where he was before tossed,
between hope and despair, sometime hot, sometime cold, that the Matrimony
of his daughter, and Charles the dolphin, should come to the solempnizacion,
according to the leage, between him and the French king, concluded at
Picquegnie: Now was he cast into an indissoluble Melancoly, and a continual
cold: For the lord Hawarde, which was returned out of France, with many
fair words, and painted promises but without tribute, or conclusion of the
marige, certified the king of his own knowledge: how that he being present,
saw the lady Margarete of Austrice, daughter to Duke Maximilian, son to the
Emperor Frederick, received into France, with pomp more then Imperial, by
the Duke of Burbon, the lord Dalbret, and many other lords and magistrates of
the realm, and so with great triumph, conueighed to Amboyse, where the
Dolphin lay, and there was to him contracted and espoused. King Edward now
being certain, how the French king had with pleasant language, and colorable
answers, foded him furthe, and allured him to give credence, to his
dissimulyng words, neither meaning as he said, nor showing what he meante:
Determined with himself, no longer to suffer so apparaunt wrong, nor so
intolerable an injury. Wherefore, he called his nobility together, and
declared to them the manifold wrong, which he had received of late, at the
hands of the French king, and how he untruly, and unprincely, had broken the
league and amity, both in deniyng the payment of the tribute, as also, in
refusyng the accomplishme^t of the marriage of his daughter, according as in the
treaty was concluded. Requiryng them therefore to study, how to revenge and
punish, so great a shame, and so opprobrious a taunt, offered to their native
Country. The nobility not a little glad of this mocion, answered: that their
whole desire was, to fight with the French men, whom they so often times had
vanquished, and profligated in battle, and that for the dignity, and fame of
their Conntrey, they would let nothing be vnatempted, offering him in an
instant, to be ready in harnes to fulfill his mind and desire. When he knew
the toward minds of his subjects, of the Temporaltie, he moved the
Spirituality (because by the Ecclesiastical laws, they be prohibited to wear
armure) to aid him with money, for mainteinaunce of his wars, and
suppressyng of his enemies.

The.xxiii. year. The.xxiii. year.

Behold, while he was intentive, and amployed his whole labor, diligence, and
industry, to furnishe and setforward this war, which he newly had attempted
and begone: whether it was with the melencoly, and anger that he took with the
French king, for his untruth and unkindness, or were it by any superfluous
surfeit (to the which he was much given) he suddenly fell sick, and was with
a gr^uous maledy taken, yea, so grievously taken, that his vitaill spirits,
began to fail and wax feeble, which debilitie when he perceived, he called
together all his nobles, which, that time were about London, upon one day (as
he did diverse times commen with them) and thus in effect, to them said. My
well-beloved, and no less betrusted friends, counsailers, and alies, if we
mortal men would daily and hourly, with our self reuolue, and inte^tiuely in
our hearts engraue, or in our minds grauously po^der, the frail and fadyng
imbecilitie, of our humain nature* and the caduke fragilitie of the same: we
should apparauntly perceive, that we being called reasonable creatures, and in
that predicament, compared and joined with Angels, be more worthy to be
numcupate, and de^ed persons unreasonable, and rather to be associate in that
name with brute beasts, called unreasonable (of wohse life and death, no
creature speaks) rather then in that point, to be tesembled to the
Angelical society, and reasonable compaignie. For while health in us
florisheth, or prosperity abundeth, or the glosyng world laugheth, which is
he, so reasonable of us all* that can say (if he will not err from the
truth) that he, once in a weke remembered his fatal end, or the prescribed
term of his enduryng: or once provided by labor, study, or otherwise, to set a
steadfast and a sure order, for the security, and profit, continuanuce either
of his possessions and dominions, or of his sequel and posterity, which
after him shall naturally succeed: such is the blyndnes, of our frail and
fragile nature, ever given to carnal concupiscence, and mundain delectacion,
daily ob^uscate and seduced, with that lothargious, and deceiable serpent,
called hope of long life, that all we put in oblivion, our duty present, and
less remember the pollitique purueighaunce, for things to come: For blyndly
we walk in this frail life, till we fall grouelyng with our iyes, suddenly
upon death. The vanities of this world, be to us so agreeable, that when we
begin to live, we esteem our life, a whole world, which once ouerpassed, it
shows no better but dust, driven a way with a puff of wind: I speak this
to you of my self, and for your selfs to you, sore samentyng* and inwardly
bewailyng, that I did not perform and finally co^sumate, such pollitique
diuises, and good and Godly ordinances, in my long life and paciffique
prosperity, which, then I fully determined to have begone, set forward, and
completly to have finished. Which, now for the extreme pains, and tortures of
my angry malady, and for the small term of my natural life, I can neither
perform, neither yet live to see, either to take effect, or to short to take
any conclusion. For God I call to record, my heart was fully set, and my
mind deliberatly determined: so to have decorated this realm, with wholesome
Laws, statutes, and ordinances, so to have educated and brought up mine
enfantes and children, in virtue, learning, actiuitie, and policy. That, what
with their royal puyssaunce, and your friendly assistence, the proudest Prince
of Europe, durst not once attempt, to move any hostility, against them, you,
or this realm: But oh Lord, all things that I of long time, have in my mind
reuolued, and immagined, that stelyng thief death, goes about to subuerte, and
in the moment of an hour, clearly to suppeditate, wherefore (as men say) I
now being driven to the very hard wall: having perfect confidence, and sure
hope in the approbate fidelity, and constaunt integrity, which I have ever
experimented, and known to be radicate and planted, in the hearts of your
loving bodies, toward me and mine. So that I may say and aduowe, that never
Prince bearyng scepter and Croune, over realms and regions, has found or
proved, more faithfuller counsailers, nor trewer subjects, then I have done of
you, nor never Potentate nor governor, put more affiaunce and trust, in his
vassals and servants, then I, since the adepcion of the Croune, fermely have
fixed, in your circumspect wisdoms, and sober discresions. Am now of very
force compelled, liyng in a dubious hope, between living and diyng, between
remembrance and oblivion, do require you and instauntly move you, that as I
have found you, faithful, obedient, and to all my requests and desires,
(while I was here in health, conversant with you) diligent and intentive: So
after my death, my hope is with a sure anchor grounded, and mine inward
conceipte vndubitatly resolved, that the especial confidence, and inward
fidelity, which, so long has continued between us, being to gether living,
shall not totally by my death, be extincte and vanished like smoke. For what
avails frendshippe in life, when trust deceives after death? What profits
amity in apparaunt presence, when confidence is fraudulently beguiled in
absence? What love grows, by coniunccion of Matrimony, if the ofspryng after
do not agree and concord? Or what profits Princes, to auaunce and promote
their subjects, if after their death, the bountifulnes by them showed, be of
the receivers of the same and their sequel, neither regarded nor yet
remembered? The pare^tes make the marriage, for an indissoluble amity, Princes
promote sometime for favor, sometime for deserte, and sometime for pleasure:
yet (if you will consider) the very prick, to the which all gifts of
promocions, do finally tend it, is to have love, favor, faithful cou^saill, and
diligent service, of such as be by them, promoted and exalted, not only in
their own life's, being but brief and transitory: But also, that they and
their progeny, calling to remembrance, the favor, estimacion, and auauncement,
which, they of so liberal and munificent a prince had received and obtained:
should with spear and shield, toungue and wit, hand and pen, continually
study to defend, counsel and prefer not only him during his life, but also
to serve, assist, and maintein his sequ^le, and lineall succession, as the
very Images, and carnal portratures, of his stirpe, line, and stemne,
naturally disce^ded. In this case am I, whom you know, not without ineffable
trouble, and most dangerous wart, to have obtained the scepter, and diadem
of this realm and Empire, during which reign, I have had either little peace,
or small tranquillity: And now when I thought my self, sure of a quiet life,
and worldly rest, death has blown his terrible trompet, calling and somonyng
me (as I trust) to perpetual tranquillity, and eternal quietness: therefore
now for the perfect, and immovable confidence, that I have ever had in you,
and for the unfeigned love, that you have ever showed unto me, I commend and
deliver into your governance, both this noble realm, and my natural
children, and your kynsmen. My children by your diligent oversight, and
pollitique provision to be taught, informed, and instructed not only in the
sciences liberal, verteous moral and good literature: but also to be
practiced in tricks of marciall actiuitie, and diligent exercise of prudent
policy: For I have hard clerks say, although I am unlettered, that
fortunate is that Realm, where Philosophiers reign, or where kings be
Philosophiers, and lovers of wisdom. In this tender age, you may writhe and
turn them, into every form and fashion: If you bring them up in virtue, you
shall have verteous Princes: if you set them to learning, your governors
shall be men of knowledge, if you teach them actiuitie, you shall have valiaunte
capitaines, if they practice policy, you shall have both pollitique, and
prudent rulers. On the other side, if by your negligence, they fall to vice (as
youth is to all evil, prone and teady) not only their honor, but also your
honesty, shall be spotted and appalled: If they be slogardes and given to
slothe, the public wealth of this realm, must shortly decay. If they be
unlearned, they may by flattery sone be blinded, and by adulacion often
deceived. If they lack actiuitie, every creature be he never so base of
birthe, shall foil and overthrow them, like domme beasts and beastly
dastardes. Therefore I desire you, and in Gods name adjure you, rather to
study to make them rich, in Godly knowledge, and verteous qualities, then to
take pain to glorify them, with abundance of worldely treasure, and mundain
superfluity. And certainly, when they come to maturitie of age, and shall
peradventure considre, that by your omission and negligent educacio^, they have
not such graces, nor are endued with such notable qualities, as they might
have been, if you had performed the trust to you, by me committed: They shall
not only deplore, and lament their ungarnished estate, and naked condition,
but also it may fortune, that they shall conceive inwardly against you, such
a negligent untruth, that the sequel thereof, may rather turn to
displeasure then thank, and sooner to an ingratitude, then to a reward.

My kingdom also, I leave in your governance, during the minority of my
children, chargyng you on your honors, oaths, and fidelity, made and sworn to
me, so indifferently to order and govern, the subjects of the same, both with
justice and mercy, that the wills of malefactors, have not to large a scope,
nor the hearts of the good people, by to much extremity, be neither
sorofully daunted, nor unkindly kept under: Oh I am so slepie, that I must
make an end, and now before you al I commend my soul to almighty God, my
savior and redemer: my body to the worms of the earth, my kingdom to the
Prince my son, and to you my loving friends my heart, my trust, and my whole
confidence. And even with that, he fell on sleep: After diverse such
charitable monicions and exhortacions (as the pangues and fittes of his
sickness would permit him) sometime to his nobility, sometime to his familier
friends, made and declared: His malady suddenly increased, and grew to so
painful an extremity, that short death was sooner of him required, then longer
life desired, wishyng rather departing out of this world, then to abide the
painful smarte, of his dolorous pangues. Wherefore Attrapos having compassion,
of his continual languishyng, and daily agony, dirupted and brake the threde,
of his natural life, the.ix. day of April, in the year of our Lord,
M.CCCC.lxxxiii. and in the fifty year of his bodily age, when he had reigned
over this Realm, more in trouble then perfect quietness.xxii. years, one
monethe and eight days: whose corpse was with funeral pomp, according to the
royal estate of a king, conueighed to the Colege of Winsore, to the which, he
had been a great benefactor, and there on the right hand, of the high altar,
princely enterred and intumilate, whose death was asmuchelamented of his
subjects, as his life desired. He begat of the Queen Elizabeth his wife, ten
children, whereof he left living two soonnes, Edward Prince of Wales, and
Richard duke of York, and a bastard son called Arthur, which, after was
Uicount Lisle, and came to good proof: beside these he left five daughters,
Elizabeth, Cicilie, Anne, Katherine, and Briget: all these were married, except
lady Briget, which was a Nonne professed.

This king Edward was a man, of a goodly personage, of stature high, and
excedyng all other in countenance, welfauored and comely, of iye quick and
pleasant, broad brested, and well set, all other members down to his fete,
kept just proporcion with the bulk of his body: of wit he was quick and
pregnant, of stomach st^^^e and bold, and of courage haute and high, of
memory most perfect, and especially of such things, as he had travailed
in, in great affairs and weighty causes quick and diligent, in perelles and
adventures bold and hardy, against his enemies, fierce and terrible, to his
friends and to strangers bountiful and liberal, having in wars most
prosperous luck, and happy success: From the pleasure of the body, to the
which he was prone, and much given, he did much abstein and forbere, for
which cause, and also for the great humanity and lowlines, that in him was
by nature most abundauntly engendered, he used himself among mean persons,
more familier, then his degree, dignity, or majesty required, which was the
cause, that some suspected him, to have died of poison. And it was said, he
that all the days of his life, had much used liberality, was toward his
latter end, given to avarice and love of money. And although he found his
kingdom, greatly impouerished, and almost empty, both of men of war and
money, yet after that he had pacified, and finished the civil discencion, he
left his realm, of all things rich and abundaunt. The spiritual promocions,
he gave ever to the most famous and excellent Clerks, and men of the best
living: Other of mean qualities, whom he much favored, he did not prefer to
great dignity and high promocio^s but with money rewarded them, which thing
many Princes (regardyng not their honors) do not consider nor observe: with all
which notable virtues, he joined to him so surely the hearts of his people,
that after his death, his life again was daily wisshed, and effecteously among
his Subjects desired, but wisshyng served not, nor yet their desire took none
effect.

The end of the prosperous reign of King Edward the fourth.
The pitiful life of king Edward the.v.
THE eternal God calling to his merci the noble prince King Edward ye.iiij.
of that name, This kings time with some part of king Richard ye.iii. as shall
a^^re b^ anote made at that place, was written by sir Thomas More.
Edward his eldeste son (prince of wales) began his reygne the ninthe day
of April, in the year of our lord a thousand four hundred fourscore and
three, and in the.xxiij. year of Jews the leuenthe then French king: Which
young prince reigned a small space and little season over this realm, either in
pleasure or liberty. For his uncle Richard duke of Gloucester, within three
months deprived him not only of his croune and regalitee, but also
unnaturally bereft him of his natural life: and for the declaracion by what
crafty engine he first attempted his ungracious purpose, and by what false
coulourable and untrue allegacions he set forth openly his pretensed
enterprise, and finally by what shameful, cruel and detestable act he
performed the same: Ye must first considre of whom he and his brother
dessended, their natures, conditions and inclinacions, and then you shall
easily perceive, that there could not be a more crueller tiraunt apoincted to
acheue a more abominable entreprise.

Their father was Richard Plantagenet duke of York, Richard plantagene^t duke
of York.
which began not by war, but by law to calenge the crown of England,
puttyng his claim in the parliament, holden the thirty year of king Henry the
sixth, where either for right or for favor, his cause was so set furthe and
auaunced that the blood of the said king Henry, although he had a goodly
son, was clearly abiected, and the crown of ye realm (by auctoritee of
parliamente) entayled to the duke of York and his heirs after the decease of
the said king Henry the syxte. But the duke not entendynge so long too tarry,
but mindyng under the pretexte of discencion grown and arisen within the
realm, and of couenauntes made in the parliamente, not kept, but broken, to
prevent the time and to take upon him the governance in king Henry's life,
was by to much hardiness slain at the battaill of Wakefelde, leuynge behind
him three sons, Edward, George, and Richard. All these three as they were
great estates of birthe, so were they great and stately of stomach, gredy of
promocions, The iii. sons of Richard duke of York, described.
and impaciente parteuers of rule and autoritee.

This Edward revenged his fathers death and deposed king Henry the sixth, and
attained the crown and scepter of the realm.

George duke of Clarence was a goodly and well feautered prince, in all things
fortunate, if either his own ambicion had not set him against his brother, or
thenuy of his enemies had not set his brother against him: for were it by the
queen or the nobles of her blud, which highly maligned the kings kyn^ed (as
women comme^ly, not of malice but of nature, hate such as their husbands
love) or were it a proud appetitie of the duke him self, entendynge to be
king, at the least wi^e, heinous treason was laid to his charge, and finally
were he in fault or were he fautelesse, attainted was he by parliamente and
judged to death, and there upon hastily drowned in a butte of malmesey within
the tower of London. George duke of Clarence drowned in a but of Malmesay.
Whose death king Edward (although he commanded it) when he wiste it was
dooen, piteously he bewailed and sorowfully repented it.

Richard duke of Gloucester the third son (of which I must most entreat)
was in wit and courage egall with the other, but in beautee and liniame^tes
of nature far underneath both, The discrip^ion of Richard the.iii.
for he was little of stature eiuill featured of limnes, croke backed, the left
shulder much higher then the right, hard favored of visage, such as in
estates is called a warlike visage, and emonge commen persons a crabbed face.
He was malicious, wrothfull and envious, and as it is reported, his mother the
duches had much a do in her trauaill, that she could not be delivered of
him uncut, and that he came into the world the fete forward, as men be
borne outward, and as the fame ran, not vntothed: whether that men of
hatred reported above the truth, or that nature changed his course in his
beginnynge, which in his life many things unnaturally committed, this I leave
to God his judgment. He was none evil capitain in war, as to ye which,
his disposicion was more inclined too, then too peace. Sundry victories he had
and some overthrows, but never for defaute of his own person, either for
lack of hardiness or politic order. Free he was of his dispences and
somewhat above his power liberal, with large gifts he gatte him unsteadfast
friendship: for which cause he was fain to borowe, pill and extort in other
places, which gat him steadfast hatred. He was close and secret, a deep
dissimuler, lowlye of countenance, arrogante of heart, outwardely familier
where he inwardely hated, not lettynge to kiss whom he thought to kill,
dispiteous and cruel, not alwaie for eiuill will, but ofter for ambicion and
too serve his purpose, friend and fooe were all indifferent, where his
advantage grew, he spared no man's death whose life withstode his purpose.
He slew in the tower king Henry the sixte, King Henry y^ (...) in the tow^r
by Richard y^ iii.
saiynge: now is there no heir male of king Edward the third, but we of
the house of York: which murder was done without king Edward his assente,
which would have appointed that bocherly office too some other, rather then
to his own brother.

Some wise men also wene, that his drif^e lacked not in helping forth his
own brother of Clarence to his death, which thing in all apparaunce he
resisted, although he inwardly minded it. And the cause thereof was, as men
notyng his doings and proce^ynges did mark (because that he long in king
Edward his time thought too obtain the crown in case that the king his
brother, whose life he looked that eiuil diet would sone shorten) should
happen to diseace, as he did in deed, his children being young. And then if
the duke of Clarence had lived, his pretensed purpose had been far hyndered:
For if the duke of Clarence had kept him self true to his nephewe the young
king, or would have taken upon him too be king, every one of these castes
had been a troumpe in the duke of Gloucesters way: but when he was sure that
his brother of Clarence was ded, then he knew that he might work without that
ieoperdy. But of these poinctes there is no certentie* and whosoever diuineth
or coniectureth, may as well shote to fer as to short, but this conjecture
afterward took place (as few do) as you shall perceive hereafter.

But before I declare too you how this Richard duke of Gloucester began his
mischeuous imagined and pretenced enterprice as appara^tly shall be opened, I
must a little put you in remembrance of a loving and charitable act, no less
profitable then amicable to the whole comminaltie, if it had been so inwardely
thought as it was ontwardly dissimuled which king Edward did, liyng on his
death bed not long before he died. For in his life, although that the
division amongst his friends somewhat grieved and irked him, yet in his health
he less regarded and took head to it, by reason that he thought that he was
hable in all things to rule both parties, were they never so obstinate: But in
his last sickness (which continued longer then false and fantastical tales
have untruly and falsely surmised, as I my self that wrote this pamphlet
truly knew) when he perceived his natural strength was gone, and hoped little
of recovery by the arts of all his phicisians which he perceived only to
prolonge his life. Then he began to consider the youth of his children, how
be it, he nothing less mistrusted then that that happened, yet he wisely
forseyng and considering that many harms might ensue by the debate of his
nobles while the youth of his children should lack discrecion and good
counsel of their friends, for he knew well that every part would work
for their own commodite, and rather by plesaunte advise to win them selves
favor, then by profitable adnertismente too do the children good: wherefore
liynge on his death bed at Westminster, he called to him such lords as then
were about him, whom he knew to be at variaunce, in especial the lord
Marquis Dorset son to the queen, and the lord Hastynges, against whom the
queen especially grudged for the favor that the king bare him, and also she
thought him familier with the king in wanton compaignie: her kynne bare him
sore, as well for that the king made him capitain of Caleis, which office the
lord Rivers brother to the queen claimed of the king his former promise, as of
diverse other gifts which he received that they looked for. And when these
lords with diverse other of both parties were come unto the king his
presence, he caused him self to be raised up with pillowes, and as I can
guess, said thus or much like in sentence to them.

My lords, An exhortacio^ of king Edward the.iiii. in his death hedde.
my dear kynsmen and alies, in what plight I now lie you se, and I perfightly
feel, by the which I look the less while to live with you, therefore the more
depely I am moved to care in what case I leave you, for such as I leave you,
such are my children like to find you, which if they should find at
variaunce (as God forbid) they them selfs might hap to fall at war or
their discrecion would serve to set you at peace: you se their youth, of
which I reken the only surety to to rest in your concord. For it suffiseth
not all you too love them, if each of you hate other: if they were men your
faithfulness might hap to suffice, but childhod must be maintained by men's
authority, and slipper youth under prompted with elder counsel, which they
can never have except you give it, nor you give it, except you agree, for
where each labors too break that the other makes, and for hatered each
impugneth others counsel: there must needs be a long tracte or any good
conclusion can forewarde. And farther, while each party labors too be
chief flatterer, adulacion shall then have more place* then plain and
faithefull advise, of wiche must needs ensue the eiuill bringing up of the
prince whose mind in tender youth infecte shall re^ely fall to mischief and
riote and draw down this noble realm to ruin: But if grace turn him to
wisdom (which God send him) then they which by eiuill means pleased him
best, shall after fall fardest out of favor, so that at the length eiuill
driftes drive to naught, and good plain ways prospere and florishe. Great
variaunce has been between you, not always for great causes: Some time a
thing right well intended and misconstured has been turned to the worse, or
a small displeasure done to you, either by your own affection, either by
instigacion of evil tongues has been sore aggrauate. But this I wot well* you
had never so great cause of hatred as you have of love, because we be all
men and that we be all Christen men.

This I will leave to preachers to tell you, and yet I wot not whether any
prechers words ought more too move you, then I that is going by and by to the
place that they all preche of. But this shall I desire you to remember, that the
one part of you being of my blood, the other of my alies* and each of you
with other either of kynred or affinitee which is the very spiritual
affinitee and kindred in Christ, as all partakers of the sacraments of Christ
his church. The weighte of which consanguinite if we did bear as would to
god we did, then should we more be moved to spiritual charity then to
fleshely consanguinitee. Our Lord forbid that you love the worse together for
the self same cause that you ought to love the better, and yet that often
happens, for no where find we so^ dedly debate as amongst them which by
nature and law most ought to agree together. Such a serpente is ambicion and
desire of vainglory and souereingtie, which amongst estates when he is once
entered he crepith forth so far, till with division and variau^ce he turns all
to mischief. First longing to be next to the best, afterward egall with
the best, and at the last chief and above the best. Of which immoderate
appetite of worship and the debate and discencion that grew there by, what
loss, what sorrow, what trouble has within these few years grown within
this realm, I pray God as well to forget as we well remember, which thing if
I could as well have forsene as I have with my more pain then pleasure proved,
by God his blessed lady (that was his common oath) I would never have won the
courtesies of men's knees with the loss of so many heddes. But since things
passed cannot be called again, much more ought we to be ware, by what
occasion we have taken so great hurt before, that we eftsoon fall not into
that occasion again. Now be these greues passed and al is quiet, thanked be
God, and likely well too prospere in welthfull peace, under your cosins my
children, if God send them life, and you love and concord. Of which two
things, the less loss were they by whom although God did his pleasure, yet
should this realm always find kings, and paraduenture as good kings as
they. But if you amongst your selfs in a chyldes reign fall at debate, many
a good manne shall innocently perish, and happily he and you also, or this
land find peace and quiet again: wherefore in these last words that ever I
look to speak to you, I exhort and require you all, for the love that you
have borne too me, and for the love that I have borne to you, and for the love
that our Lord bears to us all: From this time forward all greues forgotten,
each of you love other, which I verily trust you will, if you any thing
regard God or your kings affinitee or kynrede, this realm, your own
conntree, or your own surete and wealth. And there with all, the king for
faintness no longer enduryng too sit up, laid him down on his right
side, his face toward them. And there was none present that could forbear
weepynge, but the Lords confortynge him with as good words as they could,
and answering for the time, as they thought should stand with his pleasure.
And there in his presence (as by their words apeared) each forgave other, and
joined their hands together, when as it after appeared by their deeds their
hearts were far a sunder. And so whithin a few days, this noble prince
disceased at Westminster the nynth day of April, in the year of our
lord.M.cccc.lxxxiii. after that he had reigned.xxii. years one month and
eight days, and was with great funeral pomp conueighed to Windsore, leuynge
behind him two sons, Edward the prince (of whom this story entreats) a
child of.xiii. years of age, Richard duke of York two years younger then the
prince, and five daughters, Elizabeth, which by God his grace was married to
king Henry the seuenthe and mother to King Henry the eighte, Cicile not so
fortunate as fair, first wedded to the vicounte Wells, after to one Kyne and
lived not in great wealth, Bridget professed her self a close Nonne at Sion,
Anne was married to lord Thomas Hauwarde after earl of Surrey and duke of
Northfolke, Katherine the youngest daughter was married to lord William
Courtney, son to therle of Devonshire, which long time tossed in either
fortune, sometime in wealth, after in aduersite, till the benignitee of her
nephewe king Henry the eighte brought her into a sure estate according to her
degree and progeny.

This king Edward was such a prince of governance and behaueoure in ye time
of peace (for in ye time of war each must be others enemy) ye there was
never any king in this realm attainyng the croune by war and battaill, The
discrip^ion of king Edward the (...).
so hertely beloved with the more sub^^aunce of his people, nor he him self so
specially favored in any part of his life, as at the time of his death:
which favor and affcction yet after his death, by the crueltee, mischief
and trouble of the tempe^^ious world that followed, highly toward him more
increased. At such time as he died, the displeasure of those that bare him
grudge for king Henry the sixte sake (whom he deposed) was well assuaged and in
effect quenched within the space of.xxii. years, which is a great part of a
man's life, and some were reconsiled and grown into his favor, of the
which he was never strange, when it was with true heart demanded. He was
goodly of personage and princely to behold, of heart courageous, politic in
counsel, and in aduersitee nothing abashed, in prosperity rather joyful
then proud, in p^ace just and merciful, in war sharp and fearce, in the
field bold and hardy, and yet nevertheless no s^rther, then reason and
policye would adventure, whose wars whosoever circumspectely and advisedly
considers he shall no less commend his wisdom and policy where he aduoided
them, then his manhod where he vanquished them. He was of visage full faced and
lovely, of body mighty, strong and clean made: whith over liberal and wanton
diet, he waxed somewhat corpulent and bourly, but nevertheless not uncomely.

He was in youth greatly given to fleshely wantonness, from the which health
o^ body in great prosperitee and fortune without an especial gracehardely
refraineth. This fault little grieved his people, for neither could any one
man's pleasure stretche or extend to the displeasure of very many nor a
multitude be grieved by a private man's fantesy or volupteousnesse, when it
was dooen without violence. And in his latter days he left all wild
daliaunce, and fell to grauitce, so that he brought his realm into a wealthy
and prosperous estate, all fear of outward enemies were clerly extinguished,
and no war was in hand nor none toward, but such as no man looked for.
The people were toward their prince not in a constrained fear, but in a true
loving and wil^ull obedience emongeste them self, and the commons were in
good peace. The lords whom he knew at variaunce, he in his death bed (as
he thought) brought too good concord, love and amitee. And a little before his
death, he had left gatheryng of money of his subjects, which is the only
thing that draws the hearts of English men from their kings and princes:
nor nothing he either enterprised nor took in hand, by the which he should
be driven there unto. For his tribute out of France he had a little before
recovered and obtained. And the year before he died, he recovered again the
town of Berwike against the king of Scotts. And albeit that all the time of
his reign, he was so benign courteous and familier, that no part of his
virtues was esteemed more then those high humilitees: Yet that condition in
the end of his last days decayed not, in the which many princes by a long
continued soueraingtee, decline to a proud port and behaueour from their
conditions accustomed at their beginning. Yet lowliness and gentleness so
far forth in him increased that the summer before he died, he being at the
hauerynge at the bower, sent for the maire and aldermen of London thither
only to hunte and make pastyme, where he made them not so hertye but so
familiare and friendly chere, and sent also to their wives such plenty of
venison, that no one thing in many days before gatte him either mo hearts or
more hertie favor amongst the common people, which often times more esteem
and take for great kyndenesse a little courtesy then a great profit or
benefit.

And so this noble prince deceassed, as you have heard in that time when his
life was most desired, and when his people most desired to keep him: Which
love of his people and their entiere affection toward him, had been to his
noble children (having in them selves also as many gifts of nature, as many
princely virtues, as much good towardness as their age could receive) a
merucilous fortress and a sure armoure, if the division and dissencion of
their friends had not unarmed them and left them destitute, and the execrable
desire of soueraingtie provoked him to their destruction, which if either
kind or kyndnesse had holden place must needs have been their chief defense.
For Richard duke of Gloucester, by nature their uncle, by office their
protectoure, to their father greatly beholden and too them by oath and
allegeaunce bounden, all the bands broken and violated which bind man and
man together, without any respect of God or the world, unnaturally contrived
too bereue them, not only of their dignitee and pre-eminence, but also of
their natural lives and worldely felicitee.

And first to show you that by conjecture he pretended this thing in his
brothers life, ye shall understand for a truth that the same night that king
Edward died, one called Mistelbrooke, long ere the day spro^g, came to ye
house of one Pottier dwelling in Redcrosse street without Creple gate of
London, and when he was with hasty rappyng quickly let in, the said
Mistlebroke showed unto Pottier that king Edward was that night deceased: by my
truth quod Pottier, then will my master the duke of Gloucester be king and
that I warrant thee. What cause he had so too think, hard it is to say,
whether he being his servant knew any such thing pretensed or otherwise
had any ynkelyng thereof but of all likelihod he spoke it not of naught.

But now too return to the true history, were it that the duke of Gloucester
had of old sore practiced this conclusion, or was before time moved there unto
and put in hope by the tender age of the young princes his nephews, as
oportunitee and likely of speed puts a man in courage of that that he
never intended. Certain it is, that he being in the North parties for the
good governance of the country, being advertised of his brothers death
contrived the destruction of his nephews with the usurpation of the royal
dignitee and croune. And for as much as he well wiste, and had help to
maintain, a long continued grudge and heart burning between the queen's kynred
and the kings blood, either part enuiyng others autoritee, he now thought,
as it was in deed, a furtherly beginnynge to the pursuit of his entente, and a
sure ground and situacion of his unnatural building, if he might under the
pretense of reuengynge of old displeasures, abuse the ignorance and anger of
the one party too the destruction of the other, and then to win to his purpose
as many as he could: and such as could not be won, might be lost or
they looked therefore. But of one thing he was certain, that if his intent were
once perceived, he hold have made peace between both parties with his own
blood: but all his intent he kept secret till he knew his friends, of the
which Henry the duke of Buckyngham was the first that sent to him after his
brothers death a trusty servant of his called Persiuall to the city of
York, where the duke of Gloucester kept the king his brothers funeralles.
This Persiuall came to Ihon Ward a secret chamberer to the duke of
Gloucester, desirynge that he in close and couerte manner might speak with the
duke his master: where upon in the ded of the night, the duke sent for
Persiuall (all other being avoided) which showed to the duke of Gloucester
that the duke of Buckyngham his master in this new world would take such
part as he would, and would farther wait upon him with a thousand good
fellows if need were.

The duke sent back the messanger with great thanks and diverse priuey
instructions by mouth, which Persiuall did somuche by his trauaill that he
came to the duke of Buckyngham his master into the marches of Wales, and
eftsoon with new instructions met with the duke of Gloucester at Notyngham,
which was come out of the Northecountree with many knights and gentlemen to
the number of six hundred horse and more, in his journey toward London. And
after secret metynge and communicacion had between him and the duke of
Gloucester, he returned with such speed that he brought the duke of Buckyngham
his master too mete with the duke of Gloucester not far from Northampton with
three hundred horses, and so they two came together too Northampton where they
first began their unhappy enterprice, and so the duke of Buckyngham continued
still with the duke of Gloucester til he was crouned king, as ye shall plai^ly
perceive herafter.

The young king at the death of his father kept houshoulde at Ludlowe, for
his father had sent him thither for Justice too be dooen in the Marches of
Wales, too the end that by the autoritee of his presence, the wild
Welshemenne and eiuell disposed persons should refrain from their accustomed
murders and outrages. The governance of this young Prince was committed too
lord Antony Wooduile earl Ryuers and lord Scales, brother to the queen, a
wise, hardy and honorable personage, as valiaunte of hands as politic of
counsel, and with him were associate other of the same party, and in effect
every one as he was nerer of kynne unto the queen, so was he planted next
about the prince. That drift by the queen seemed too be divised, whereby her
bloudde might of right in tender youth be so planted in the princes
favor, that afterward it should hardely be eradicated out of the same.

The duke of Gloucester turned all this to their destruction, and upon that
ground set the foundation of his unhappy buyldyng: For whom soever he
perceived too be at variaunce with them, or to bear toward him self any
favor, he brake unto them, some by mouth, some by writynge and secret
messengers, that it was neither reason nor yet to be suffered that the young
king their master and kynsman should be in the hands and custody of his
mothers kyntede, sequestered in manner from their compaignie and attendaunce, of
which every one ought him as faithefull service as they, and many of them of
far more honorable part of kynne then his mothers side, whose blood quod the
duke of Gloucester saving the king his pleasure was far unmeet to be matched
with his, which now to be removed from the king and the least noble to be
left about him, is quod he neither honorable to his majesty nor too us, and
also too him less surety, to have the nobles and mightiest of his friends
from him, and to us all no little ieopardie to suffer, and specially our well
proved evil willers too grow into great autoritee with the king in youth,
namely which is light of belefe and soon persuaded.

Ye remember that king Edward him self, albeit he was both of age and
discrecion, yet was he ruled in many things by that bend, more then stood
either with his honor or our profit, or with the commoditee of any manne
else, except only the immoderate auauncemente of them selves, which whether
they thirsted sore after their own weal or no, it were hard I think to
guess. And if some folks frendeshipe had not holden better place with the
king then any respect of kynrede, they might, paraduenture, easily have
trapped and brought to confusion some of us or this: and why not as easily as
they have dooen other or this as nere of the blud royal, but our lord has
wroughte his will, and thanked be his grace that perell is paste: howebeit as
great is growyng if we suffer this young king in his enemies hands, which
without his wittyng might abuse the name of his commandment to any of our
undoing, which things god and good provision forbid, of which good provision
none of us has any thing the less need for the late attoneme^te made, in
which ye king his pleasure had more place then the parties hertes or wills,
nor none of us is so unwise or so much ouersene as to trust a newefre^d made of
an old foo, or to think that any only kindness so suddenly contracted in an
hour, continued scantly yet a fourtnight, should be deper set in our
stomachs, then a long accustomed malice many years rooted.

With these persuasions and writings, the duke of Gloucester set a fire
them which were easy to kyndle, and in especial twain, Henry duke of
Buckyngham, and Willyam lord Hastynges, and lord Chamberlain, both men of
honor and of great power, the one by long succession from his aunceters,
the other by his offices and the king his favor. These two not bearyng each
to other so much love, as hatred both to ye queen's blood, acc^roed together
with the duke of Gloucester that they would remove from the king all his
mothers friends, under the name of their enemies.

Where upon the duke of Gloucester being advertised that the lords about the
king intended to bring him too London too his co^onacion, accompaigned with
such a number of their friends that it should be hard ^or him too bring
his purpose to pass without the assemblyng and gatheryng of people and in
manner of open war, whereof the end he wist was doubtful, and in the which
the king being on the other side his part should have the name and face of
rebellion.

He secretly therefore by diverse means caused the queen to be persuaded that
it was neither need and should also be ieoperdeous for ye king to come up so
strong, for as now* every lord loved other and none other thing studied for,
but the triumph of his coronation and honor of the king. And the lords
about the king, should assemble in the kings names much people, they should
give ye lords betwixt whom and them there had been some time bebate an occasion
to fear and suspecte least they should gather this people, not for the kings
save guard, whom no man impugned, but for their destruction, having more regard
to their old variaunce then to their new atonement, for the which cause they
on the other part might assemble men also for their defense, whose powers she
wist well far ^^retched, and thus should all the realm fall in a roar, and of
the mischief that thereof should ensue (which was likely to be not a little ye
most harm was like to fall where she least would, and then all the world would
put her and her kynred in the blame, saying that they had unwisely and untruly
broken the amytie and peace which the king her husband had so prudently made
between her kynred and his, which amyte his kynne had always observed.

The queen being thus persuaded, sent word to the king and to her brother,
that there was no cause nor need to assemble any people, and also the duke of
Gloucester and other lords of his bend, wrote unto ye king so reverently and
to the queen's friends there so louyngly, that they nothing yearthly
mistrustyng, brought the young king toward London with a sober compaignie in
great have (but not in good speed) til he came to Northampton, and from thence
he removed to Stony stratford. On which day, the two dukes and their bend
came to Northampton, fainyng that Stony stratford could not lodge them al,
where they found the earl Rivers, entendynge the next morning to have followed
the king, and to be with him early in the morning. So that night, the dukes
made to the earl Ryuers friendly chere, but as soon as they were departed very
familier with great courtesy in open sight and therle Ryuers lodged: the two
dukes with a few of their privy friends fell to council, wherein they spent a
great part of the night, and in the dawning of the day they sent about
privily to their servants in their lodgings to have to horseback for their
lords were in manner ready to ride, whereupon all their servants were ready or
the lord Ryuers servants were awake. Now had the dukes taken the keys of
the ynne into their possession, so that none should issue out without their
consent. And over this in the high way toward Stony stratford, they set
certain of their folks that should cause and compel to return again all
persons that were passing from Northampton to Stony stratforde, saying that the
dukes them selfs would be the first that should come to the king from
Northampton: thus they bare folks in hand. But when the earl Ryuers
understood the gates closed and the ways on every side beset, neither his
servants, neither him self suffered to go out, perceyuinge so great a thing
without his knowledge, not begone for naught, comparynge this present doing
with the last nights chere, in so few hours so great a change,
marueilously myslyked it. Howebeit, sith he could not get away* he determined
not to keep him self close, least he should seem to hyde him self for some
secret fear of his own fault, whereof he saw no such cause in him self,
wherefore on the surety of his own conscience he determined to goo to them and
to inquire what this matter might mean: Whom as soon as they saw, they began
to quarrel with him, affirmyng that he pretended to set distaunce between the
king and them to bring them to confusion, which should not lie in his power,
and when he began as he was an eloquente and well spoken manne in goodlywyse
to excuse him self, they would not hear his answer but took him by force
and put him in ward. And then they mounted on horsbacke and came in haste to
Stony stratforde, where the king was going to horseback, because he would
leave the lodgyng for them, for it was to straight for both the co^paignies.
And when they came to his presence they alighted and their compaignie about
them, and on their knees saluted him, and he them gentely received, nothing
yerthly knowing ner mistrustyng as yet. The duke of Buckyngham said aloude, on
before gentlemenne, and yomen keep your roumes, and therewith in ye kings
presence they picked a quarrel to the lord Richard Gray the queen's son, and
brother to the lord Marquis and half brother to the king saying, that he and
the Marquis his brother and the lord Ryuers his uncle had compassed to rule the
king and the realm and set variaunce between thestates, and to subdue and
destroy the noble blood of the realm. And toward thacomplishemente of the
same, they said, the lord Marquis had entered into the tower of London, and
thence had taken out treasure and sent men to the sea, which things these
dukes knew well were done for a good purpose and as very necessary, appointed
by the whole counsel at London, but somewhat they must say: unto the which
words the king answered, what my brother Marquis has done I cannot say, but
in good faith I dare well answer for mine uncle Rivers and my brother here,
that they be innocente of such mat^ers. Ye my liege quod the duke of
Buckyngham, they have kept the dealyng of these matters far from the knowledge
of your good grace. And furthwith they arrested the lord Rychard and sir
Thomas Uaugham and sir Richard Hawte knights, in the kings presence, and
brought the king and all back to Northampton, where they took further
counsel in their affairs. And there they sent from the king whom it pleased
them, and set about him such servants as better pleased them then him. At
which dealyng he wept and was not content, but it booted not. And at dynner,
the duke of Gloucester sent a dyshe from his own table to the lord Ryuers,
praiyng him to be of good chere and all should be well, he thanked him and
prayed the messenger to bear it to his nephiewe the lord Richard with like
words, whom he knew to have need of comfort, as one to whom such aduersite
was strange, but he him self had been all his days ennured therewith, and
therefore could bear it the better. But for all this message, the duke of
Gloucester sent ye lord Ryuers, the lord Richard and sir Thomas Uaugham and
sir Richard Hawte into the Northparties into diverse prisones, but at last, al
came to Pou^fret where they all four were beheaded without judgment.

In this manner as you have hard, the duke of Gloucester took on him the
governance of the young king, whom with much reverence he conu^ied toward
London. These tidings came hastily to the queen before mydnighte, by a very
sore report that the king her son was taken and that her brother and her
other son and other her friends were arested and sent, no man wyste whether.
With this heavy tidings the queen bewailed her chyldes ruin, her friends
mischaunce, and her own infortune, curffyng the time that ever she was
persuaded to leave the gatherynge of people to bring up the king with a
great power, but that was passed, and therefore now she took her younger son
the duke of York and her daughters and went out of the palace of Westminster
into the sanctuary, and there lodged in the abbotes place, and she and all her
children and compaignie were regestred for sanctuarye persons. The same night
there came to doctor Rotheram Archebyshop of York and lord Chauncelour, a
messenger from the lord Chambrelayne to York place beside Westminster: the
messenger was brought to the bishops bedsyde and declared to him that the
dukes were gone back with the young king to Northampton, and declared further*
that the lord Hastynges his master sent him word that he should fear
nothing for all should be well. (Well quod the Archbishop) be it as well as it
will, it will never be so well as we have seen it, and then the messenger
departed. Whereupon the bishop called up all his servants and took with him
the great seal and came before day to the queen, about whom he round much
heaviness, rumble, haste, business, conueighaunce and carriage of her stuff
into sanctuarye, every man was busy to carye, bear and conueigh stuff,
chestes and fardelles, no man was unoccupied, and some carried more then they
were commanded to another place.

The queen sat alone below on the rushes all desolate and dismayde, who^ the
Archebishoppe conforted in the best manner that he could, showing her that the
matter was nothing so sore as she took it for, and that he was put in good
hope and out of fear by the message sent to him from the lord Hastynges. A woe
worth him quod the queen, for it is he that goes about to destroy me and my
blodde. Madame quod he be of good comfort and I assure you, if they crown any
other king then your son whom they now have, we shall on the morrow croune
his brother whom you have here with you. And here is the great seal* which in
likewise as your noble husband delivered it to me, so I deliver it to you to
the use of your son and therewith delivered her the great seal, and departed
home in the dawning of the day. And when he opened his wyndowes and looked on
the Temys, he might see the river full of boats, of the duke of Gloucester his
servants watchyng, that no person should go to sanctuary, ner none should
pass vnserched.

Then was there great rumoure and commotion in the city and in other places,
the people diuersely diuined upon this dealing. And diverse lords, knights
and gentilmen, either for fauoute of the queen or for fear of them selfs,
assembled compaignies and went flockyng together in harneies. And many also,
for that they recompted this demeanor attempted, not so specially against
other lords as against the king him self in the dysturbaunce of his
coronacion, therefore they assembled by and by together to common of this
matter at London.

The Archebishoppe of York fearinge that it would be ascribed (as it was in
deed) to overmuch lightness, that he so sodeinly had yielded up the great seal
to the queen, to who^ the custody thereof nothing apperteigned without especial
commandment of the king, secretly sent for the seal again and brought
it with him after the accustomed manner to mete with the lords.

At this metynge, the lord Hastynges, whose truth toward the king no man
doubted nor neded not to doubt, persuaded the lords to believe, that the duke
of Gloucester was faithefull and sure toward his prince, and that the lord
Ryuers, the lord Richard and other knights apprehended, were for matters
attempted by them against the dukes of Gloucester and Buckyngham put under
arest, for their surety, and not for the kings ieopardie, and that they were
also in sauegarde there to remain till the matter were (not by the dukes
only) but also by all the other lords of the kings council indifferently
examined, and by their discrecions ordered and either judged or appesed. And one
thing he auised them to beware of, that they judged not the matter to
farfurthe or they knew the truth, nor turnynge their private grudges into the
common hurt, irritynge and provoking men unto anger, and disturbyng the
kings coronacion, toward which the dukes were coming, for that, then might
paraduenture bring the matter so far out of ioynte, that it should never
be brought in frame again, which if it should hap as it were likely to
come to a field, though al parties were in all other things egual, yet should
the authorytee be on that side, where the king is him self, with these
persuasions of the lord Hastynges, whereof part he him self believed, and of
part he wist well the contrary, these commocions were some what appeased. But
in especial, because the dukes of Buckyngham and Gloucester were so nere and
came on so shortly with the king, in none other manner, nor none other voice
or sembleaunce then to his coronacio^* causyng the fame to be blown about
that such persons as were apprehended had contrived the destruction of the
dukes of Gloucester and of Buckyngham and other of the noble blood of this
realm, to the entente that they alone would rule and govern the king. And
for the color thereof, such of the dukes servants as rode with the carts
of their stuff which were taken, among the which stuff no marueyle though
some were harneyes which at the breaking up of such an household must be
brought away or cast away, they showed to the people, and as they went,
said: lo, here be the barrelles of harneyes that these traitors had priuelye
conueighed in their cariages to destroy the noble lords withal. This diverse,
(although it made the matter to wise men more unlikely) well perceiuyng that
thentendours of such a purpose would rather have had their harneyes on their
backs, then to have bound them up in barrelles, yet much part of the common
people were therewith right well satisfied.

When the king approached nere the cytee, (...) of London.
Edmonde Shawe Goldesmythe then Mayre of the city with the Aldermenne and
shreues in skarlet, and five hundredth commoners in murraye received his grace
reverently at Harnesay Park, and so conueighed him to the cytee, where he
entered the fourth day of May, in the first and last year of his reign, and was
lodged in the bishop of Londons Palayce: but ye duke of Gloucester bare him
in open sight so reverently, saying to al me^ as he rode, behold your prince
and sovereign lord, and made such sembleaunce of lowlynes to his prince, that
from the great obloquy that he was in so late before he was suddenly fallen in
so great trust that at the council next assembled, he was made the only
chief ruler, and thought most mete to be protectoure of the king and his
realm: so that, were it desteny or were it folly, the lamb was betaken to the
wolf to keep. At which council the Archbishop of York was sore blamed for
deliueryng the great seal to the queen, and the seal taken from him and
delivered to doctor John Russel bishop of Lyncolne, a wise man and a good and
of much experience, and diverse lords and knights were appointed to diverse
roumes, the lord Chamberlayne and some other kept the ^oumes that they were in
before, but not many.

Now were it so that the protector (which always you must take for the duke
of Gloucester) sore thristed for the acheuynge of his pretensed entrepryse and
thought every day a year till it were performed, yet durst he no further
attempt as long as he had but half his pray in his hand, well wittyng that if
he deposed the one brother, all the realm would fall to the other, if he
remained either in sanctuarye or should happily be shortly conueighed to his
fathers liberty. Wherefore incontinent at the next metynge of the lords in
council, he purposed to them that it was an heinous thing of the queen, and
procedyng of great malice toward the kings councelers that she should keep the
kings brother in sanctuarye from him whose special pleasure and comfort were
to have his brother with him, and that to be done by her to none other intent,
but to bring all the lords in an obloquy and murmoure of the people, as
though they were not to be trusted with the kings brother, which lords were
by the whole assente of the nobles of the realm appointed as the kings nere
friends to the tuycion of his royal person, the prosperitee whereof (quod he)
stands not alonely in keeping from enemies and evil dyate, but partly also
in recreacion and moderate pleasure, which he cannot take in his tender youth
in the compaignye of old and ancient persons, but in the familiare
conversation of those that be not far under nor far above his age, and
nevertheless, of estate conueniente to accompany his majesty, wherefore with
whom rather then with his own brother? and if any man think this
consideracion light (I think no man so thinks that loves the king) let
him consider that sometime without small things, greater cannot stand, and
verily it redouneth greatly to the dishonor of the kings highness and of all
us that be about his grace to have it come in any man's mouth, not in this
realm only, but also in other lands (as evil words walk far) that ye
kings brother should be feign to keep sanctuary. For every man will judge that
no man will so do for naught, and such opinions fastened in men's hearts be
hard to be wrested out, and may grow to more griete then any man here can
divine. Wherefore me thinks it were not ye worst to send to the queen some
honorable and trusty personage, such as ten dreth the kings weal and the
honor of his counsel, and is also in credit and favor with her: for which
consideracions none femeth more metely to me then the reverend father my lord
Cardinal archbishop of Cauntorbury, who may in this matter do most good of
all men if it please him to take the pain, which I doubt not of his goodness
he will not refuse for the kings sake and ours and wealth of the young duke
him self the kings most honorable brother, and for the conforte of my
sovereign lord him self my most dearest nephiewe, considering that thereby
shall be ceased the ^launderous rumore and obloquy now going abroad, and the
hurtes avoided that thereof might ensue, and then must rest and quietness grow
to all the realm. And if she percase be so obstinate and so precisely set in
her own will and opinion, that neither his wise and faithful aduertisemente
can move her, nor any man's reason satisfye her, then shall we by mine advice by
the kings authorytee fetch him out of that prison and bring him to his
noble presence, in whose continual compaignye he shall be so well cheryshed and
so honorably entreated that all the world shall to our honor and her reproach
perceive that it was only malice, frowardness and folly, that caused her to
keep him there. This is my mind for this time, except that any of you my lords
any thing perceive to the contrari, for never shall I by Gods grace so wed my
self unto mine own will, but I shall be ready to change it upon your better
aduices.

When the Protector had said, all the council affirmed that the mocion was
good and reasonable, and to the king and the duke his brother honorable, and a
thing that should cease great murmoure in the realm, if the mother might by
good means be induced to deliver him: which thing the Archbishop of
Cauntorburye, whom they all agreed also to be most convenient thereunto, took
upon him to move her, and thereto to do his vttermooste endeavor. Howebeit if
she could in no wise be entreated with her good will to deliver him, then
thought he and such of the spirituality as were present, that it were not in
any wise too be attempted to take him out against her will, for it would be
a thing that should turn to the grudge of all men and high displeasure of
God, if the pryuilege of that place should be broken which had so many years
been kept, which both Kings and Popes had granted and confirmed, which
ground was sanctified by Saint Peter himself more then five hundredth years
agone. And sith that time, was never so undevout a king that ever enterprised
that sacred privilege to violate, nor so holy a bishop that durst presume the
church of the same to consecrate: and therefore quod the Archbishop, God
forbid that any manne should for any yearthely enterprise break the immunyte
and liberty of that sacred sanctuary that has been the safeguard of so many a
good man's life, but I trust quod he, we shall not need it, but for any manner of
need I would we should not do it, I trust that she with reason shall be contented
and all thing in good manner obtained. And if it hap that I bring it not to
pass, yet shall I further it to my best power, so that you all shall perceive
my good will, diligence, and endeavor: But the mothers dread and womannishe
fear shall be the let if any be.

Nay womannishe frowardness quod the duke of Buckyngham, for I dare take it
on my solle that she well knows that she needs no such thing to fear,
either for her son or for her self. For as for her, here is no man that will
be at war with women, would God some men of her kynne were women to, and then
should all be sone in rest. Howbeit, there is none of her kynne the less loved
for that they be of her kynne, but for their own evil deseruynge. And put the
case that we neither loved her nor her kynne, yet there were no cause why we
should hate the kings noble brother to whose grace we our selfs be kynne,
whose honor if she desired as our dishonor, and as much regard took to
his wealth as to her own will, she could be as loath to suffer him to be
absent from the king as any of us, if she had any wit, as would God she had
as good will as she has froward wit. For she thinks her self no wyser
then some that are here, of whose faithful minds she nothing doubts, but
verily believes and knowlegeth that they would be as sorye of his harm as her
own self, and yet they would have him from her if she abide there.

And we all I think be content that both her children be with her if she came
from thence and abide in such place where they may be with their honor. Now
if she refuse in the deliverance of him to follow the wisdom of them, whose
wisdom she knows, whose approbate fidelitee she well trusts: it is easy
to percewe that frowardenesse lets her, and not fear. But goo to, suppose
that she fears (as who may let her to fear her own shadow) the more we
ought to fear to leave him in her hands, for if she cast such fond doubts
that she fear his hurt, then will she fear that he shall be fet thence, for
she will soon think that if men were set (which God forbid on so great a
mischief) the sanctuary will little let them, which sanctuary good men as me
thinks might without sin, somewhat less regard then they do. Now then, if
she doubt least he might be fetched from her, is it not likely that she will
send him somewhere out of the realm? verily I look for none other. And I
doubt not but she now as sore myndeth it, as we mind the set thereof: And if
she might hap to bring that purpose to pass, as it were no great mastery to
do, we lettyng her alone, all the world would say that we were a sort of wise
cou^saillers about a king to let his brother to be ^ast away under our noses.
And therefore I ensure you faithfully, for my mind, I will rather maugre her
stomach fetch him away, then leave him there till her fear or fond
froward fear convey him away, Of sanctuaries
and yet will I break no sanctuary, for verily sith the priuelege of that
place and other of that sort have so long continued I would not goo about to
break it, but if they were now to begin I would not be he that should make
them: yet will not I say nay, but it is a deed of pity that such men as the
chance of the sea, or their evil debtors have brought into pouertee, should
have some place of refuge to keep in their bodies out of the danger of their
cruel creditours. And if it fortune the croune to come in question as it has
done before this time while each part takes other for traitors, I think it
necessary to have a place or refuge for both: But as for thieves and
murderers, whereof these places be full, and which never fall from their
craft after they once fall thereunto, it is pytee that ever Sanctuary should
serve them, and in especial wylfull murderers, whom God commands to be
taken from the altar and to be put to death. And where it is otherwise then in
these cases, there is no need of sainctuaries, appointed by God in the old
law. For if necessite of his own defense or misfortune driued him to that
deed, then a pardon serves him, which either is granted of course, or ye
king of pytee and compassion gives. Now look how few sainctuary men there
be whom necessitee or misfortune compelled to go thither? And then see on the
other syd, what a sort there be commonely therein of such, whom wylfull
vnthrittynes has brought to naught? what a rabble of thieves, murderers and
malicious heinous traitors be* and that in two places specially, the one at
the elbowe of the cytee, and the other in the very bowels. I dare well a vow
it, if you way the good that they do* with the hurt that comes of them, ye
shall find it much better to lose both then to have both. And this I say,
although they were not abused (as they now be and so long have been) that I
fear me ever they will be while men be afearde to set to their hands to the
amendment, as though God and saint Peter were the patrons of ungracious
living. Now unthrifts riote and run in debte upon boldness of these places,
yea, and ritche men run thither with poor men's goods, there they build,
there they spend and bid their creditours goo whystle. Men's wives run
thither with their husbands plate, and say they dare not abide with their
husbands for betynge, thieves bring thither stolen goods and live thereon.
There deuyse they new robberies nightely and steal out and rob, riue, and
kill men and come again into those places, as though those places gave them
not only a sauegard for the harm that they have dooen, but a license also to
do more mischief: howebeit, much of this great abusion, (if wise men
would set their hands there unto) might be amended, with great thanks
of God and no breche of the privilege. The conclusion is, sith it is so long a
goo I wot not what pope and what prince, more piteous then politic, has
granted it, and other men sense of a religious fear have not broken it,
let us take a pain with it, and let it stand a Gods name in his force,
as far furthe as reason will, which is not so farfurthe as may serve too
let us of the fetching furthe of this noble manne to his honor and wealth
out of that place in the which he nether is nor can be a sanctuarye or
priuileged man. A sanctnarye ever sernethe too defend the body of that manne
that stands in danger abroad, not of great hurt only, but of lawful
hurt: for against unlawful hurtes and harms no pope ner king intended too
privilege any one place wherein it is lawefull for one manne to do another
manne wrong. That no man vnlawefully take hurt that liberty the king, the
law and very nature fordiddeth in every place and makes too that regard
for every manne every place a sanctuarye but where a man is by lawefull
means in perell, there needs he the tuicion of some special privilege,
which is the only ground of all sanctuaries, from which necessitee this
noble prince is far, whose love to his king nature and kynred proves, whose
innocence too all the world, his tender youth affirms, and so sanctuarye
as for him is not necessary, ner none he can have. Men come not too
sanctuarye as they come too babtisme to require it by his godfathers he must
ask it him self that must have it, and reason, sith no man has cause too
have it, but whose consience of his own fault makes him have need to require
it. What will then has younder babe* which if he had discreccion too require
it if need were, I dare say would be now right angry with them that keep
him there? And I would think without any scruple of consience, without any
breche of privilege too be somewhat more homely with them that be there
sanctuarye men in deed, that if one goo too sanctuary with another man's
goods, why should not the king leuyng his body at liberty satisfy the party
of his goods even within the sanctuary, for nether king nor pope can give any
place such a privilege that it shall discharge a man of his debtes being hable
to pay.

And with that ^iuerse of the clergy that were there present, whether they
said it for his pleasure or as they thought, agreed plainly by the law of
God and of the church that the goods of a sanctuarye man should be delivered
in payment of his debtes, and stolen goods to the owner, and only liberty
reserved to him too get his living with the labor of his hands. Uerely quod
the duke I think ye say very truth: And what if a man's wife take sanctuary
because she list to run from her husband? I would think if she can allege
none other cause he may laufully without any displeasure dooen too saint
Peter, take her out of saint Peter's church by the arm. And if no body may
be taken out of sanctuary because he says he will abide there, then if a
child will take sanctuary because he fears to go to school, his master must
let him alone. And as simple as that example is, yet is there less reason in
our case then in it, for there, though it be a childeshe fear, yet is there
at the least some fear, and herein is no fear at all. And verily I have
hard of sanctuarye men, but I never hard before of sanctuary children, and
therefore as for the conclusion of my mind, whosoever may deserve to have
need of it, if they think it for their suretee let them keep it, but he can
be no sanctuary manne that has another discresion to desire it, ner malice to
deserve it, whose life ner liberty can by no lawful process stand in
ieoperdye: and he that takes one out of sanctuarye to do him good I say
plainly he breaks no sanctuary.

When the duke had done, the temporal men wholly, and the most part of the
spiritual men also thinking no hurt earthely meant toward the young baby,
condiscended in effect, that if he were not delivered he should be fetched
out. Howebeit, they thought it best in aduoydyng of all manner of rumor,
that the cardinal should first assaie to get him with her good will. And
thereupon all the counsel came to ye sterre chamber at Westminster, and the
cardinal leaving the protector and other lords in the sterre chamber departed
into the sanctuarye to ye queen, accompaignied with certain lords, were it for
the respect of his honor or that she should by the persons of so many,
perceive that his arrande was not only one man's mind, or were it for that
the protector intended not in this matter too trust one manne alone, or else
if she finally were determined to keep him, some of the co^paignie had
paraduenture some secret instruction incontinente maugree her will too take
him and too leave her no respite to conueigh him.

When the queen and these lords were come together in presence, the Cardinal
showed unto her that it was thought to the lord protector and the whole
counsel that her keeping of the king his brother in that place highly sounded,
not only to the grudge of the people and their obloquy, but also to the
importable grief and displeasure of the king his royal majesty, to whose
grace it were a synguler comfort to have his natural brother in compaignie,
and it was their bothes dishonoures and theirs and hers also to suffer him in
sanctuary, as though the one brother stood in danger and perell of the other.
And he showed her farther that the whole counsel had sent him to require of
her the deliuerye of him that he might be brought to the king his presence at
his liberty out of that place which men reconed as a prisone, and there
should he be demeaned according to his estate and degree, and she in this doing
should both do great good to the realm, pleasure to the counsel, profit
to her self, succor to her friends that were in distress, and over that, which
he wiste well she specially tendered, not only great comfort and honor to
the king but also to the young duke him self, whose both great wealth it
were to be together, as well for many greater causes as also for their both
disporte and recreacion, which things the lords esteemed not light, though
it seemed light, well ponderynge that their youth without recreacion and play
cannot endure, ner any estraunger for the conuenience of both their ages and
estates so metely in that poinct for any of them as the either of them for
the other.

My lord (quod the queen,) I say not naie, but that it were very conueniente
that this gentleman whom you require were in the compaignie of the king his
brother, and in good faith me thinks it were as great commoditee to them
both, as for yet a while too be in the custody of their mother the tender age
considered of the elder of them both, but in especial the younger, which
besides his infancy that also needs good lookynge to, has a while been so
sore deseased with sickness and is so newlye rather a little amended then well
recovered, that I dare put no person earthely in trust with his keeping, but
my self only, considering there is as phisicians say, and as we also find,
double the perell in the resiluacion that was in the first sickness, with
which desease nature being sore labored, foreweried and weakened, waxes the
less hable to bear our a new surfeit. And albeit there might be founde^
other that would happily do their best unto him, yet is there none that
either knows better how to order him then I, that so long have kept him,
or is more tendrely like too cherishe him then his own mother that bare him.
No man denies good madame, quod the Cardinal, but that your grace of all
folk were most necessary about your children, and so would all the
counsel not only be content but also glad that it were if it might stand
with your pleasure too be in such place as might stand with their honor.
But if you apoincte your self too tarry here, then think they it more
convenient the duke of york were with the king honorably at his liberty to
the comfort of them both, then here as a sanctuary man to their both
dishonor and obloquy, since there is not always so great necessite to have the
child with the mother, but that occasion sometime may be such that it
should be more expedient to keep him else where, which in this well apereth,
that at such time that your most derest son then prince and now king
should for his honor and good order of the country keep houshoulde in Wales
far out of your keeping, your grace was well content therewith your self. Not
very well content (quod the queen) and yet the case is not like, for the one was
then in health and theother is now sick, in which case I maruaill greatly why
my lord protector is to desirous to have him in keeping, where if the child in
his sickness miscarried by nature, yet might he run into slauuder and
suspicion of fraud. And they call it a thing so sore against my childs honor
and theirs also ye he abides in this place, it is all their honors there to
suffer him abide where no man doubts he shall be best kept, and that is here
while I am here, which as yet entende not to come furthe and ieoperde my self
after other of my friends, which would God were rather here in suretee with
me, then I were there in ieoperdie with them.

Why madame (quod the lord Haward) know you any thing why they should be in
ieopardie? Nay verily (quod she,) nor why they should be in prisone neither as
they now be, but I trow it is no great marueill though I fear least those
that have not let to put them in duraunce without color, will let as
little to procure their destruction without cause. The cardinal made a
countenance to the lord Haward that he should harp no more upon that stryng:
and then said he too the queen, that he nothing doubted but those lords of
her kynne the which remained under a rest should upon the matter examined do
well enough, and as toward her noble person, neither was, nor could be any
manner of ieoperdie. Whereby should I trust that (quod the queen) in that I am
gyltesse, as though they were gyltie, in that I am with their enemies better
beloved then they, when they hate them for my sake, in that I am so nere to
the king, and how far be they of that would help, as God send grace
they hurt not. And therefore as yet I purpose not too depart hence: as for
this gentleman my son, I mind he shall be where I am till I see further, for
I see some men so gredy without any substanciall cause too have him, which
makes me much more further and scrupulous too deliver him. Truly madame (quod
the Cardinal) the further that ye be too deliver him, the further be other
men too suffer you too keep him, least your causeless fear, might cause
you farther too conueighe him, and many think he can here have no privilege
which can have neither will too ask it, nor yet malice or offense to need it.
And therefore, they recon no privilege broken, although they fetch him out of
sanctuary, which if you finally refuse too deliver him. I think verily the
counsel will enfraunchefe him, so much dread has my lord his uncle, for
the tender love that he bears him, least your grace should send him away.
Ah, quod the queen, has he so tender a zeal too him that he fears nothing,
but least he should escape him? Thinks he that I would send him hence, which
is neither in the plight to send out? and in what place could I recon him
sure, if he be not sure in this sanctuary? whereof was there never tiraunte yet
so deuelishe, that durst attempt too break the privilege, and I trust God is
now as strong to withstand his adversaries as ever he was. But my son can
deserve no sanctuary, you say, and therefore he can not have it, forsothe the
lord protector has sent a goodly gloss, by the which that place that may
defend a thief, may not save an innocent: but he is in no ieoperdie nor has
no need thereof, I would God he had not. Troweth the protector, (I pray God he
may prove a protector, rather then a destroyer, where unto his painted
process draws) y^ is it not honorable that the duke bide here? it were more
confortable to them both that he were with his brother, because the king
lacks a play feloe, yea be you sure, I pray God send him better plai
fellows then him that makes so high a matter upon such a trifleyng pretexte,
as though there could none be found to play with the king, but if his brother
which has no lust to play ^or sickness, must come out of sanctuary, out of
his sauegard to play with him, as though that princes so young as they be,
could not play without their peers, or children could not play without
their kynred, with whom for the more part they agree much worse then with
straungiers. But the child you say cannot require the privilege, who told
the protector so? Ask him and you shall here him ask it, and so shall he if
ye will. Howebeit, this is a strange matter, suppose he could not ask it and
think he would not ask it, and imagene he would ask to goo out, if I say he
shall not: Note if I ask the privilege, but for my self, I say that he that
against my will takes out him, breaks sanctuary. Serves this liberty for
my person only or for my goods to? you may not from hence take my horse
from me, if I stale him not nor owe you nothing: then follows it, that you
may not take my child from me* he is also my ward, for as far as my learned
counsel shows me, he has nothing by dissente holden by knights service,
but by socage: then the law makes me his guarden, then may no man lawfully
(I suppose) take my ward from me out of this place* without the breche of
sanctuary, and if my privilege could not serve him, nor he ask it for him
self, yet since the law commits to me the custodye of him, I may require it
for him, except the law give the infaunte a guarden only for his goods,
dischargynge him of the cure and sauekepyng of his body, for which only, both
goods and lands serve: Wherefore here entende I to keep him, sith man's
law serves the guarden too keep the infant, and the law of nature wills
the mother to keep the child, and Gods law priuilegeth the sanctuary, and the
sanctuarye priuilegeth my son, since I fear to put him to the protectoures
hands, that has his brother already, which is (if both failed) inheritoure
to the crown as heir male, as he says. The cause of my fear no man has
too do to examine, and yet fear I no ferther then the law fears, which as
learned men tell me, forbids every manne the custodye of them, by whose
death he may enherite less land then a kingdom. I can say no more, but
whosoever he be that breaks this holy ^anctuary, I prai God send him
shortly need of sanctuary, when he may not come too it, for I would not that
my mortal enemy should be taken out of sanctuary.

The Cardinal perceived that the queen ever the longer the farther of, and
also that she began too kyndle and chafe and spoke sore bytynge words
against the protectoure, and such as he neither believed and also was loath to
here, he said to her, for a final conclusion, that he would no more dispute
the matter, and if she were content to deliver the duke to him and to the
other lords there present, he durst lay his own body and solle both in
pledge, not only for his suretye, but also for his estate, and surely he knew
nor suspected no cause but he might so do (but he knew not all.) And
further he said, if she would give him a resolute answer too the contrary
he would therewith depart incontinente, and shifte who so would with this
business afterward, for he never intended further to move her in the matter,
in the which she thought that he and all other also, save her self, lacked
either wit or truth. Wit if they were so dull if they nothing could
perceive what the protector intended, and if they should procure her son to
be delivered into his hands, in whom they should perceive toward the child
any evil will intended, then she might think all the counsel both evil
advised and of little fidelitee to their prince.

The queen with these words stood in a great study, and forasmuch as she
saw the lord Cardinal more redier to depart then the remanaunte, and the
protectoure him self ready at hand, so that she verily thought that she could
not keep him there but he should be incontinente taken thence and to conueigh
him else where, neither had she time too serve her, nor place determined, nor
persons appointed to conueigh him, and so all thing was unready, when this
messsage came so suddenly on her* nothing less lookynge for, then too have him
out of sanctuarye which she knew now men too be set in all places about,
that he could not be conueighed out untaken, and partly as she thought it
might fortune her fear to be false: so well she wiste it was either
nedelesse or bootelesse. Wherefore, if she should needs goo from him, she
demed best to deliver him, and specially of the cardinals faith she nothing
doubtyng nor of some other lords whom she saw there, which as she feared
le^e, they might be deceived, so well was she assured that they would not
be corrupted: then thought she that it would make them y^ more warely too
look to him, and the more circumspectely to see his surety, if she with her
own hands betook him them by trust, and at the last she took the young
duke by the hand and said unto the lords, my lord quod she and all my
lords, neither am I so unwise to mystruste your wits, nor so suspicious to
mistruste your truths: of the which thing I purpose to make such a proof,
that if either of both lacked in you, might turn both me to great sorrow,
the realm to much harm and you to great reproach. For lo, here is quod she
this gentleman, whom I doubt not but I could keep safe if I would, whatsoever
any manne say, and I doubt not also but there be some abroad so dedly
enemies unto my blood, that if they wiste where any of it lay in their own
body they would let it out: we have also experience that the desire of a
kingdom knows no kynrede, the brother has been the brothers bane, and may
the nephews be sure of the uncle? each of these children are others defense
while they be a sunder, and each of their lives lies in others body keep one
safe and both be sure, and nothing to both more perilous then both too be
in one place: for a wise marchaunte never auentureth al his gooddes in one
ship. All this notwithstanding* here I deliver him and his brother in him, to
keep to your hands, of whom I shall ask them both before God and the
world. Faithefull you be and that I wot well, and I know you be wise and
of power and strength if you list to keep him, for you lack no help of your
selves, nor need to lack no help in this case, and if you cannot else where,
then may yon leave him here: But only one thing I beseech you, for the trust
that his father put you in ever, and for the trust that I put you in now,
that as far as you think that I fear to much* ye be well ware that you
fear not to little. And therewith all she said to the child, fare well mine
own sweet son, God send you good keeping, let me once kiss you or you go,
for God knows when we shall kiss together again, and therewith she kyssed
him, and blessed him, and turned her back and wept, going her way, leauyng
the poor innocent child weeping as fast as the mother.

When the Cardinal and the other lords had received the young duke, they
brought him into the star chaumbre, where the protectoure took him into his
arms and kissed him with these words: now welcome my lord with all my very
heart, and he said in that of likelihod even as he inwardely thought, and
there upon, furthwith brought him to the king his brother into the bishops
palace at Paul's, and from thence through the cytee honorably into the tower,
out of which after that day they never came abroad. When the protector had
both the children in his possession, yea and that they were in a sure place, he
then began to thrist to se the end of his enterprise. And to avoid al
suspicion, he caused all the lords which he knew to be faithful to the
king, to assemble at Baynardes castle to common of the order of the coronacion,
while he and other of his accomplices and of his affinitee at Crosbies place
contrived the contrary and to make the protector king: to which counsel there
were adhibite very few, and they very secret. Then began here and there some
manner of mutterynge amongst the people, as though all thing should not long be
well, though they they wy^^ not what they feared nor wherefore: were it, that
before such great things, men's hertes (of a secret instinct of nature)
misgeueth them, as the southwynde sometime swells of him self before a
tempeste: or were it that some one manne happily somewhat perceiuyng, filled
many men with suspicio^, though he showed few men what he knew: howbeit,
the dealyng it self made men to muse on the matter, though the counsel were
close, for little and little all folk drew from the tower where the king was,
and drew to Crosbies place, so that the protectoure had all the resort, and
the king in manner desolate. While some made suyte unto them that had the
doing, some of them were by their friends secretly warned, that it might
happily turn them to no good to be to much attendaunt on the king without the
protectoures apointemente, which removed diverse of the king his old
servants from him, and set new in their toumes about him.

Thus many things coming together, partly by chance and partly by purpose,
caused at length, not common people only, which waver with the wind, but
wise me^ne also and some lords, to mark the matter and muse there upon: in so
much as the lord Stanley which afterward was earl of Derby wisely mistrusted
it and said to the lord Hastynges, that he much misliked these two several
counsels, for while we quod he talk of one matter at the one place, little
wot we whereof they talk in the other: peace my lord quod the lord
Hastynges, on my life never doubt you, for while one manne is there, which is
never thence, neither can there be any thing once minded that should sound
amiss toward me, but it should be in mine ears or it were well out their
mouths. This meant he by Catesby which was nere of his secret counsel, and
whom he familierly used in his most weighty matters, puttyng no man in so
special trust as him reco^nyng him self to no man so liefe since he wiste
well there was no man to him so much beholding as was this Catesby, which was
a ma^ne well learned in the laws of this land, and by the special favor of
the lord Hastynges in good authority and much rule bare in the countries of
Lecestre and Northampton where the lord Hastynges power lay. But surely great
pity was it that he had not had either more truth or less wit, for his
dissimulacion only, kept all that mischief up, in whom if the lord Hastynges
had not put so special trust* the lord Stanley and he with diverse other
lords had daparted into their countrees and broken all the dance. for many
evil signs that he saw, which he now construed all for the best, so
surely thought he that there could be no harm toward him in that counsel
intended where Catesbye was. And of truth the protectoure and the duke of
Bukyngham made very good sembleaunce unto the lord Hastynges and kept him
much in their compaignye. And undoubtedly, the protector loved him well, and
loathe was to have lost him saving for fear lest his life should have quayled
their purpose, for the which cause he moved Catesby to prove with some words
cast out a far of, whether he could think it possible to win the lord
Hastynges to their part. But Catesby, whether he assayed him or assayed him
not, reported unto him that he found him so fast, and herd him speak so
terrible words that he durst no farther break: and of a truth the lord
Hastynges of very trust showed unto Catesby the mistruste that other began to
have in the matter. And therefore, he fearyng lest their mocio^s might with
the lord Hastynges minishe his credence, where unto only all the matter
leaned, procured the protector hastily to ryd him, and much the rather, for
he trusted by his death to obtain much of the rule which the lord Hastynges
bare in his country, the only desire whereof, was the thing that enduced him
to be procurer and one of the speciallest contriuers of all this horrible
treason. Where upon the lord protector caused a counsel to be set at the
tower on the fridaye the thirtene day of June, where was much commonyng for
the honorable solemnitee of the coronacion, of the which the time appoincted
aproched so nere, that the pageauntes were a making day and night at
Westminster, and vitaile killed which afterward was cast away.

These lords thus sittyng* co^monyng of this matter, the protector came in
among them about nine of the clock salutyng them courteously, excusing him
self that he had been from them so long saying merely that he had been a
sleper that day. And after a little talkyng with them he said to the bishopp
of Ely, my lord you have very good strawberies in your garden at Holborne, I
require you let us have a mess of them. Gladly (my lord quod he) I would I
had some better thing as ready to your pleasure as that, and with that in all
have he sent his servant for a dishe of strawberies. The protector set the
lords fast in co^monyng and there upon prayed them to spare him alitle, and
so he departed and came again between.x. and eleven of the clock into the
chamber all changed with a sour angry countenance knittyng the brows,
frownyng and fretyng and gnawyng on his lips and so set him down in his place.
All the lords were dismayed and sore marueyled of this manner and sodeyne
change and what thing should him ayle. When he had sitten a while, thus he
began: What were they worthy to have that compass and ymagine the destruction
of me being so near of blood to the king and protectoure of this his royal
realm? At which question, all the lords sat fore astonyed, musyng much by
whom the question should be meant, of which every man knew him self clear.

Then the lord Hastynges as he that for the familiarity that was between
them, thought he might be boldest with him, answered and said that they were
worthy to be punished as heinous traitors what soever they were, and all the
other affirmed the same, that is (quod he) yonder sorceres my brothers wife and
other with her, menyng the queen, at these words many of the lords were sore
abashed which favored her, but the lord Hastynges was better content in his
mind that it was moved by her then by any other that he lued better, albeit
his heart grudged that he was not before made of counsel of this matter as well
as he was of the taking of her kynred and of their puttyng to death, which
were by his assent before devised to be beheaded at Pomfrete, this self same
day, in the which he was not ware that it was by other devised that he him
self should the same day be beheaded at London: then said the protector in
what wise that sorceresse and other of her counsel, as Shores wife with her
affinity have by their sorcery and witchecrafte this wasted my body, and
therewith plucked up his doublet* sleue to his elbowe on his let arm, where
he showed a weryshe wythered arm and small as it was never other. And
thereupon, every man's mind mysgaue them, well perceyuyng that this matter
was but a quarrel, for well they wist that the queen was both to wise to go
about any such folly, and also if she would, yet would she of al folk make
Shores wife least of her counsel whom of all women she most hated as that
co^cubine whom the king her husband most loved.

Also, there was no man there but knew that his arm was ever such since the
day of his birth, Nevertheless the lord Hastynges, which from the death of
king Edward kept Shores wife, whom he somewhat doted in the kings life, saving
it is said that he forbear her for reverence toward his king, or else of a
certain kind of fidelity toward his friend. Yet now his heart somewhat
grudged to have her whom he loved so highly accused, and that as he knew well
untruly, therefore he answered and said, certainly my lord, if they have so
done, they be worthy of heinous punishment, what quod the protector, thou
seruest me I wene with if and with and, I tell the they have done it, and that
will I make good on thy body traitor. And therewith (as in a great anger) he
clapped his fyste on the board a great rappe, at which token given, one cried
treason without the chamber, and therewith a door clapped, and in came rushyng
men in harneyes as many as the chamber could hold. And anon the protectoure
said to the lord Hastynges, I arrest the traytoure, what me my lord quod he?
yea the traytoure quod the protector. And one let fly at the lord Stanley,
which shroncke at the stroacke and fell under the table, or else his head had
been cleft to the teth, for as shortly as he shrancke, yet ran the blood
about his ears. Then was the Archbishop of York and doctor Morton bishopp
of Ely and the lord Stanley taken and diverse other which were bestowed in
diverse chambers, save the lord Hastynges (whom the protector commanded to
speed and shryue him apace) for by saint Poule (quod he) I will not dyne till
I se thy head of, it boted hum not to ask why, but heuily he took a priest at
adventure and made a short shrift, for a longer would not be suffered, the
protector made so much have to his dinner, which might not go to it till this
murder were done, for saving of his ungracious oath. So was he brought furthe
into the grene beside the chapel within the tower, and his head laid down on
a logge of timber that lay there for buildyng of the chapel, and there
tyrannously stricken of, and after his body and head were enterred at Wyndesore
by his master king Edward the forth, whose souls Jesus pardon. Amen.

A merueilous case it is to hear, either the warnynges that he should have
voyded, or the tokens of that he could not void. For the next night before
his death, the lord Stanley sent to him a trusty messenger at midnight in all
the have, requiryng him to rise and ride away with him, for he was disposed
utterly no longer for to abide, for he had a fearful dream in the which he
thought that a bore with his tuskes so rased them both by the heads that the
blood ran about both their shoulders, and for as much as the protector gave
the bore for his cognisaunce, he ymagined that it should be he. This dream
made such a fearful impression in his heart, that he was thoroughly determined
no longer to tarry but had his horse ready, if the lord Hastynges would go with
him. So that they would ride so far that night, that they should be out of
danger by the next day. A good lord (quod the lord Hastynges) to the
messenger* leans my lord thy master so much to such try^es, and has
such says in dreams, which either his own fear phantasieth, or do rise
in the nights rest by reason of the days thought. Tell him it is plain
wichcraft to believe in such dreams, which if they were tokens of things to
come, why thinks he not that we might as likely make them true by our going
if we were caught and brought back, (as friends fail fliers) for then had the
bore a cause lykely to race us with his tuskes, as folks that fled for some
falshead, wherefore either is there peril, nor none there is deed, or if any
be, it is rather ingoyng then abidyng. And if we should needs fall in peril one
way or other, yet had I leauer that me^ should se it were by other men's
falshed, then think it were either our own fault or faynte feeble heart, and
therefore go to thy master and commend me to him and I pray him to be merry
and have no fear, for I assure him, I am assured of the man he wotteth of* as
I am sure of mine own hand. God send grace (quod the messenger) and so
departed. Certain it is also that in redyng toward the tower the same morning
in which he was beheaded, his horse that he accustomed to ride on ^^ombled
with him twyse or thryse almost to the falling* which thing although it happeth
to them daily to whom no mischau^ce is toward, yet has it been as an old
evil token observed as a going toward mischief. Now this that follows was no
warnyng but an envious scorn, the same morning ere he were up from his bed
where Shores wife lay with him all night, there came to him sir Thomas Haward
son to the lord Haward (which lord was one of the priueyest of the lord
protectours counsel and doing) as it were of curtesye to accompaignye him to
the counsel, but of truth sent by the lord protector to have him
th^herward.

This sir Thomas, while the lord Hastynges slayed awhile commonyng with a
priest who^ he met in the Towr^^rete, brake the lords t^le, saying to him
merely, what my lord I pray you come on, wherefore talk you so long with that
priest, you have no need of a priest yet, and laughed upon him, as though he
would say, you shall have need of one sone: But little wist the other what he
meant (but or night these words were well remembered by them that hard them) so
the true lord Hastynges little mistrusted, and was never merier, ner thought his
life in more surety in all his days, which thing is often a sign of change:
but I shall rather let any thing pass me then the vain surety of man's mind
so near his death, for upon the very tower wharffe, so near the place where
his head was of, so sone after, as a man might well ca^t a balle, a pursyuau^t
of his own called Hastynges met with him, and of their metyng in that place
he was put in remembrance of another time, in which it happened them to mete
before together in the place, at which time the lord Hastynges had been
accused to king Edward by the lord Ryuers the queen's brother, insomuche that he
was for a while which lasted not long highly in the kings indignacion as he
now met the same pursiuau^t in the same place, the ieoperdy so well passed,
it gave him great pleasure to talk with him thereof, with whom he had talked in
the same place of that matter, and therefore he said, Ah Hastynges, art thou
remembered when I met the here once with an heavy heart? Ye my lord (quod he)
that I remember well, and thanked be to God they gat no good ner you no harm
thereby, thou would say so (quod he) if thou knew so much as I do,
which few know yet, and mo shall shortly, that meant he that therle Ryuers
and the lord Richard and sir Thomas Uaughan should that day be beheaded at
Pomfrete, as they were in deed, which act he wist well should be done, but
nothing ware that the axe hong so nere his own head. In faith man (quod he) I
was never so sorry ner never stood in so great danger of my ly^e as I did when
thou and I met here, and lo the world is turned now, now stand mine
enemies in the danger as thou may hap to hear more hereafter, and I never
in my life merier nor never in so great surerye, I pray God it prove so (quod
Hastynges, prove quod he? doubtest thou that) nay nay I warraunt the, and so in
manner displeased he entered into the Tower, where he was not long on live as
you have heard. O lord God the blyndnesse of our mortal nature, when he most
feared, he was in most suretye, and when he reconed him self most surest, he
lost his life, and that within two hours after. Thus ended this honorable
manne a good knight and gentle, of great authority with his prince, of living
somewhat dissolute,, plain and open to his enemy, and sure and secret to his
friend, easy to begyle, as he that of good heart and courage foresawe no
perilles, a loving man and passing well-beloved, very faithful and trusty
enough, but trustyng to much was his destruction as you may perceive.

Now flewe the fame of this lords death through the city and farther about,
like a wind in every man's ear, but the Protectoure immediately after dinner
(entendyng to set some color upon the matter) sent in all the haste for many
substancial men out of the city into the Tower, and at their coming him self
with the duke of Buckyngham stood, harnessed in old evil favored briganders,
such as no man would wene that they would have vouchesafed to have put on their
backs, except some sodeyne necessity had constraigned them. Then the lord
protector showed them, that the lord Hastynges and other of his conspiracy had
contrived to have suddenly destroyed him and the duke of Buckyngham there the
same day in counsel, and what they intended farther, was yet not well known,
of which their treason he had never knowledge before x. of the clock the same
forenone, which sodeyn fear drove them to put on such harness as came next
to their hands for their defense, and so God help them, that the mischief
turned upon them that would have done it, and thus he required them to
report. Every man answered fair, as though no man mistrusted the matter, which
of truth no man believed. Yet for the further appeasyng of the peoples minds,
he sent immediately after dynner an Heralde of arms with a proclamacion through
the city of London which was proclaimed in the Kings name, that the lord
Hastynges with diverse other of his traiterous purpose had before conspired, the
same day to have slain the protector and the duke of Buckyngham sittyng in
counsel, and after to have taken upon them the rule of the king and the
realm at their pleasure, and thereby to pill and spoil whom they list
vncomptrolled, and much matter was devised in the same proclamacion to the
slander of the lord Hastynges, as that he was an evil counsailoure to the
kings father, entisyng him to many things highly redoundyng to the
diminishyng of his honor and to the universal hurt of his realm by his
evil compaignie and sinister procuryng and ungracious example, as well in many
other things as in vicious living and inordinate abusyon of his body, both
with many other and especial with Shores wife which was one of his secret
counsel of this heinous treason, with whom he lay nightly, and namely the
night passed next before his death, so that it was the less marueill if
ungracious living brought him to an unhappy end, which he was now put to by
the commandment of the king his highness and of his honorable and faithful
counsel, both for his demerites being so openly taken in his false
co^triued treason, and also least the delaiyng of his execucion might have
encouraged other mischeuous persons parteners of his conspiracy, to gather and
assemble them selves together in making so great commocion for his
deliverance, whose hope now being by his well deserved death pollytickely
repressed, all the realm shall by Gods grace rest in good quiet and peace.
Now was this proclamacion made within two hours after he was beheaded, and
it was so curiously endyted and so fair written in Parchement in a fair set
hand, and therewith of it self so long a process, that every child might
perceive that it was prepared and studied before (and as some men thought, by
Catesby) for all the time between his death and the proclamacion proclaimyng,
could skant have suffyced unto the bare writing alone, albeit that it had been
in paper and scribeled furthe in haste at adventure. So that upon the
proclaimyng thereof, one that was scolemayster at Paul's standing by and
comparyng the shortenesse of the time with the length of the matter said to
them that stood about him, here is a gaye goodly cast, foul cast away for
have. And a marchaunte that stood by him said that it was written by
inspiracyon and prophesye. Now then by and by, as it were for anger and not
for coueteous, the Protectoure sent sir Thomas Hawarde to the house of Shores
wife (for her husband dwelte not with her) which spoiled her of all that ever
she had, above the valor of two or three thousand marks, and sent her body
to prison. And the Protectoure had laid to her for the manner sake that she was
a counsel with the lord Hastynges to destroy him. In conclusion, when no
color could fasten upon these matters, then he laid heynously to her charge
that thing that she could not deny, for all the world knew that it was true,
and that notwithstanding every man laughed to hear it then so suddenly, so
highly taken, that she was naught of her body. And for this cause as a godly
continent prince clean and fautlesse of him self, sent out of heaven into
this vicious world, for the amendment of men's manners, he caused the bishop of
London to put her to open penance, going before a cross one Sunday at
precession with a taper in her hand. In the which she went in countenance and
peace so womanly, and albeit she was out of all array saving her kyrtel only,
yet went she so fair and lovely, and namely when the wondryng of the people
cast a comely red in her checkes, of the which she before had most mysse, that
her great shame wanne her much praise amongst them that were more amorous of
her body then curious of her soul, and many good folk that hated her living
and were glad to se sin correected, yet pitied they more her penance then
reioysed it, when they considered that the protector did it more of corrupt
mind then any virtuous affection.

This woman was borne in London, The descripcion of Sho^es wife,
well frended, honestly brought up, and very well married, saving somewhat to
sone, her husband an honest and a young citezen, godly and of good substance,
but forasmuch as they were coupled or she were well ripe, she not very
ferue^tly loved for whom she never longed, which was the thing (by chance)
that the more easily made her to incline to the kings appetite, when he
required her. Howbeit the respect of his royalty, the hope of gaye apparel,
ease, pleasure, and other wanton wealth was hable sone to perce a soft tender
heart: but when the king had abused her, anon her husband being an honest manne
and one that could his good, not presumyng to touch a kings concubyne left
her up to him altogether. When the king dyed, the lord Hastynges took her,
which in the kings days albeit that he was sore enamoured with her yet he
forbear, either for a pryncely reverence or for a certain frendely
faithfulness. Proper she was and fair, nothing in her body that you could
have changed, but if you would have wished her somewhat higher. This say they
that knew her in her youth, soem said and judged that she had been well
favored, and some judged the contrary, whole judgment seameth like as me^ne
guess the beautye of one long before departed, by a scaple taken out of a
channel house, and this judgment was in the time of king Henry the eight, in
the.xviii. year of whose reign she dyed, when she had nothing but a reveled
skin and bone. Her beautye pleased not me^ne so much as her pleasant
behauoure, for she had a proper wit and could both read and write, merry in
compaigny, ready and quick of answer, neither mute nor full of babble, sometime
tantyng without displeasure, but not without disporte. The descripcion of king
Edward three Concubin^s.
King Edward would say ye he had three concubines, which in diverse proparties
diversely excelled, one, the meriest, the other the wyliest, the third the
holiest harlot in the realm as one, whom no man could get out of the church
to any place lightly, but if it were to his bed, the other two were somewhat
greater personages then mastres Shore, and nevertheless of their humility
were content to be nameles and to forbear the praise of these properties. But
the meriest was Shores wife in whom the king therefore took great pleasure, for
many he had, but her he loved, whose favor to say the truth (for it were
sin to lie on the devil) she never abused to any ma^s hurt, but to many men's
comfort and ^elie^e. For where the king took displeasure, she would mitigate
and apeace his mind, where men were out of favor, she would bring the^ into
his grace* for many that had highly offended, she obtained pardon, and of great
forfeatures she gat remission, and finally, in many weighty suites she stood
many me^ne in great stead, either for none or for very small reward: and
those rather gaye then rich, either for that she was content with the deed well
done, or for that she delighted to be sued unto, and to show what she was able
to do with the king, or for that that wanton women and welthy be not always
covetous, I doubt not some man will think this woman to be to slight to be
written of among grave and weyghtie matters, which they shall specially think
that happily saw her in her age and aduersite, but me seems the chance so
much more worthy to be remembered, in how much after wealth she fell to
poverty, and from riches to beggary vn^rended, out of acquaintance, after
great substance after so great favor with her prince, after as great suite
and sekyng to with all those which in those days had busynes to speed as many
other men were in their times, which be now famous only by the infamy of
their evil deeds, her doings were not much less, albeit they be much
less remembered, because they were not evil, for men use to write an evil
turn in marble stone, but a good turn they write in the dust, which is not
worst proved by her, for after her wealth she went beggyng of many that had
begged them selfs of she had not helped them, such was her chance.

Now was it devised by the protectoure and his counsel, that the same day ye
the lord Camberlayne was headed in the tower of London and about the same hour
should be beheaded at Poumfrete the earl Ryuers and the lord Richard the
queen's son, sir Thomas Uaughan and sir Richard Haute, which as you heard
were taken at Northampton and Stony stratfort by the consent of the lord
Hastynges, which execution was done by the order and in the presence of sir
Richard Ratclif knight, whose service the protectoure specially used in the
counsel, and in the execution of such lawless enterprises, as a man that had
been long secret with him, having experience of the world and shrewed wit,
short and rude in speech, rough and boisterous of behauour, bold in michiefe,
as far from pytie as from all fear of God.

This knight brought these four persons to the scaffolde at the day
apoincted, and showed to all the people that they were traitors, not sufferyng
the lords to speak, and to declare their innocency, least their words might
have inclined men to pytie them and to hate the protector and his part and so
without judgment and precesse of the law caused them to be beheaded without
other yearthly gylt, but only ye they were good me^ and true to the king and
to nigh to the queen, insomuch as sir Thomas Uaughan going to his death said, A
woe worth them y^ took the prophecy that G. should destroy king Edwardes
children, meaning ye by the duke of Clare^ce lord George which for ye suspicion
is now dead, but now remains Richard G. duke of Cloucester, which now I se is
he ye shall and will acco^plishe the prophecy and destroy king Edwardes
children and all their alyes and fre^des, as it appears by us this day, who^ I
appele to the high tribunal of God for his wrongful murder and our true
innocencye* And then Ratclyffe said, you have well apeled, lay down your
head, ye quod sir Thomas, I dye in right, beware you dye not in wrong, and so
that good knight was beheaded and the other three, and buried naked int he
monastery at Poumfret.

When the lord Hastynges and these other lords and knights were thus beheaded
and ryd out of the way, then the protector caused it to be proclaimed that
the coronacion for diverse great and urgent causes should be deferred till the
second day of November, for then thought he, that while men mused what the
matter meant, and while the lords of the realm were about him, out of their
own strengthes, and while no man wyste what to think nor whom to trust, or
ever they should have time and space to digest the matter, and make parts, it
were best hastily to pursue his purpose and put him self in possession f the
croune, or men could have time to deuyse any wise to resyste. But now was
all the study, this matter being of it self so heinous might be first broken
to the people in such wise as it might well be taken. To this counsel they
took diverse such as they thought mete to be trusted and likely to be enduced
to that part and hable to stand them in stead, either by power or by
polycye. Among whom, they made a counsel Edmond Shaa then Mayre of London,
which upon trust of his own auauncement, where he was of a proud heart
highly desirous, took on him to frame the city to their appetite. Of
spiritual men they took such as had wit, and were in authority amongst
the people for opinion of their learning, and had no scrupulous conscience.
Amongst these had, they took Raffe Shaa clearke brother to the Mayre, and
Freer, Pynkie provincial of the Augustine Freers, both doctors in divinity,
both great preachers, both of more learning then virtue, of more fame then
learning, and yet of more learning then truth. For they were before greatly
esteemed among the people, but after that, never none of these two were
regarded. Shaa made a sermonde in praise of the Protector before the
coronacion, and Pynkye made one after the coronacion, both ^o full of tedious
flattery, that no good man's ears could abide them, Pynkye in his sermonde so
lost his voice that he was feign to leave of and come down in the myddest,
Doctoure Shaa by his sermonde lost his honesty, and sone after his life, for
very shame of the world, into the which he durst never after much come
abroad, but the Freer forced for no shame, and so it harmed him the less.
Howbeit, some doubt and many think that Pynkey was not of counsel before the
coronacion, but after the common manner fell to flattery after, namely, because
his sermond was not incontinent upon it, but at saint Mary Spittle the Easter
after. But certain it is that doctor Shaa was of cou^saill in the beginning,
in so much that they determined that he should first break the matter in a
sermond at Poules cross, in which he should by the ancthoritie of his
preaching induce the people to incline to y^ protectours ghostly purpose. But
now was all the labor and study in the devise of some convenient pret^^te,
for which the people should be content to depose the prince and accept the
protector for king* In which diverse things they devised, but the chief
thing, and ^he weight of all that inuencion rested in this, that they should
allege bastardy in king Edward him self, or in his children, or both, so
that he should seem disabled to enherite the croune by the duke of York and
the prince by him. To lay bastardy in king Edward sounded openly to the rebuke
o^ the protectours own mother, which was mother to them both. For in that
poinct could be none other color, but to pretend that his own mother was an
auoutresse, but nevertheless he would that poinct should be less and more
fynely and closely handled, not even fully plain and directely, but touched a
^^ope craftily, as though men spared in that poinct to speak all the truth
for fear of his displeasure. But that other poincte concerning the basterdy
they devised to surmysse in king Edward his children, that would he should be
openly declared and enforced to the uttermost. The color and pretexte whereof
cannot be well perceived except we repete some things long before dooen
about king Edward his marriages.

After king Edward the fourth had deposed king henry the sixte and was in
peaceable possession f the realm, determinyng ^, ^m self to mary (as was
requisite) both for him self and for the realm, he sent therle of Warwike
and diverse other noble men in ambassade to the French king to entreat a
marriage between the king and Bona sister to the French queen, then being in
France. In which thing therle of Warwike found the parties so toward and
willing, that he spedely without any difficulty according to his instruccions
brought the matter to a good conclusion. Now happens it in the mean season,
there came to make a suit to the king by peticion dame Elizabeth Gray (which
after was his queen) then a widdowe, borne of noble blood, specially by her
mother, which was Duchess of Bedforde, and she was married to sir Richard
Wooduile lord Rivers, her father.

Howbeit, this Elizabeth being in service with queen Margaret wife to king
Henry the sixte, was married to one Ihon Gray Esquire whom king Henry made
knight at the la^te battaill of saint Albones, but little while he enjoyed his
knighthod, for at the same feld he was slain.

After, when that king Edward was king and the Earl of Warwike being on his
ambassad, this poor lady made suit to the king to be restored to such small
ladnes as her husband had given her in ioyntoure, whom when the king beheld
and hard her speak* as she was both fair and of good favor, moderate of
stature, well made and very wise, he not alonely pitied her, but also wexed
enamored on her, and taking her secretly a side began to enter into talkyng
more familierly, whose appetite when she perceived* she verteously denied him,
but that she did so wisely and that with so good manner and words so well set,
that she rather kyndeled his desire then quenched it. And finally after many a
metyng and much wowyng and many great promises she well espied the king his
affeccion toward her so greatly increased that she durst somewhat the more
bodily say her mind, as to him whose heart she perceived more fervently set
then to fall of for a word. And in conclu^ion she showed him plain that as she
wist her self to simple to be his wife, so thought she her self to good to be
his co^cubine. The king much marueilyng of her constancy, as she that had not
been wont else where so stiefly said nay, so much esteemed her continency and
chastitee, that he set her virtue in stead of possession and richesse: And
this taking coun^aill of his own desire determined in haste to mary her. And
after that he was thus apoincted and had between them twayn ensured her, then
asked he counsel of his secret friends, and that in such manner that they
might easly perceive that it boted not to say nay. Notwithstanding the duches
of York his mother, was so sore moved therewith that she dissuaded that
marriage as much as she possible might: allegyng that it was his honor* profit
and surety, to mary in some noble progeny out of his realm, where upon
depended great strength to his estate by that affinite, and great possibilite
of increase of his dominions. And that he could not well otherwise do,
considering the earl of Warwike had so farfurthe entered into the matter all
ready, which was not like to take it well if all his voyage were in such wise
frus^rate and his appoinctemente deluded. And she said ferther, tha it was not
princely to mary his own subject, no greater occa^io^ ledyng there unto, no
possessions ner other commodite dependyng thereupon, but only as a rich manne
would mary his maiden only for a little wanton dotage upon her person. In
which marriage many men commend more the maidens fortune then the man's
wisdom, and yet she said that there was more honesty then honor in this
marriage, fora^much as there is not between a merchant and his maid so great a
difference as between a king and his subject, a great prince and a poor
widow. In whose person, allthough there were nothing to be mi^^yked yet was
there said she, nothing so excellent but that it might be found in diverse
other that were more metely (quod she) for your estate: yea and maidens also,
the only widowhed of dame Elizabeth Gray (although she were in all other
poinctes and things convenient for you) should suffice as me thinks to
refrain you from her marriage, since it is an vnsittyng thing and a great
blemishe to the sacred majesty of a prince, that ought as nere to approach
priesthode in clennesse, as he does in dignity, to be defiled with bygamy in
his first marriage. The king made his mother an answer part in earnest and part
in play merely, as he that wyste him self out of her rule: and albeit he
would gladly that she should take it well* yet was he at ap^inct in his own
mind, took she it well or otherwise* Howbeit, somewhat to satisfy her he said,
that albeit marriage being a spiritual thing ou^ht rather to be made for the
respect of God, where his grace enclineth, the parties ought to incline to
love together (as he trusted it was in his case) rather then for the regard of
any temporal advantage: yet nevertheless him seemed this marriage well considered
not to be unprofitable, for he reconed the amitee of no earthely nation to be
so necessary for him as the frendeship of his own, which he thought likely
to bear him so much the more hartye favor, in that he disdaigned not to mari
with one of his own land: and yet if outward aliaunce were thought so
requisite, he would find the means to enter thereunto much better by other
of his kin where all the parties could be contented, then to mary him self
wherein he should never happily love, and for the possibilitee of possessions
lose the fruit and pleasure of this that he had already. For small plasure
takes a man of all that ever he has beside, if he be wiued against his
appetite, and I doubt not (quod he,) but there be as you say other that be
in every poinct comparable with her, and therefore I let not them that like
them to mary them, no more is it reason that it mislike any manne that I mary
where it likes me. And I am sure that my cousyn of Warwike, neither loves me
so little, to grudge at that that I love, ner is so unreasonable to look that I
should in choice of a wife rather be ruled by his yie then by mine own, as
though I were a ward that were bounden to mary by the apoynctement a guarden. I
would not be a king with that condition to forbear mine own liberty in
choice of mine own marriage. As for possibilite of more in^eritaunce by new
affinitee in strange lands, is often the occasion of more trouble then
proffite. And we have already title by that means, as ^^ffiseth to so much as
suffiseth to get and keep well in one man's days. That she is a widdowe and
has already children: By god his blessed lady, I am a bacheler and have some
to, and so each of us has a proof, that neither of us is like to be barren.
And therefore madame I pray you be content. I trust to God she shall bring
furthe a young prince that shall please you. And as for the bigamy, let the
bishop hardely lay it to my charge when I come to take ordres, for I
understand it is forbidden a priest put I never wiste that it was forbidden a
prince. The duchess with these words nothing apeased and seeing the king
so set on that she could not pluck him back, so highly she disdaigned it,
that under pretexte of her duty to God ward, she devised to disturb this
marriage, and rather to help that he should mary one dame Elizabet Lucy, whom
the king not long before had gotten with child, wherefore the king his
mother objected openly against this marriage (as i^ were in discarge of her
consience) that the king was sure to dame Elizabeth Lucy and her husband and
before God, by reason of which words such obstacle was made in that matter,
that either the bishop durst not, or the king would not proceade to the
solemnisacion of the marriage, til his fame were clearly purged, and the truth
well and openly testified. Where upon dame Elizabeth Lucye was sent for, and
albeit she was by the king his mother and many other put in good comfort to
affirm that was assured to the king, yet when she was solemply sworn to say
the truth, she confessed she was never ensured. Howebeeit she said, his grace
spoke such loving words to her, that she verily hoped that he would have
married her, and that if such kind words had not been, she would never have
showed such kyndenesse to him, to let him so kindly get her with child.
This examinacion solemply taken, it was clearly proved that there was no
impedimente to let the king to mary, wherefore, he shortly after at Grafton
beside Stonystratforde married the lady Elizabeth Gray very privily, which was
his enemies wife and had prayed heartily for his loss, in the which God loved
her better then to grant her her bone, for then had she not been his wife:
And after that she was crouned queen, and her father was created earl Rivers
and her son created Marquis Dorset. But when the earl of Warwike understood
of this marriage, he took it so highly, that thereof ensued much trouble and
great bloodshed as is declared before in the story of Edward the.iiii.

I have rehearsed this marriage somewhat the more at length, because it might
thereby the better apere upon how slipper a ground the protector builded his
color, by which he pretended king Edward his children to be bastardes, but
the inuencion, as simple as it was liked them to whom it suffiseth to have
somewhat to say, while they were sure to be compelled to no larger proof then
them selves list to make.

Now to return where I left, as I began to show you, it was by the
protector and his counsel concluded that this doctor Shaa should in a sermon
at Paul's cross signify to the people that neither king Edward him self nor
the duke of Clarence were lawefully begotten, nor were the very children of the
duke of York, but begotten unlawfully by other persons by aduoutry of the
duches their mother. And that dame Elizabeth Lucy was the very wife of king
Edward, and so prince Edward and all the children begotten on the queen were
bastardes. And according to this devise, doctor Sha the sondaie after at Paul's
cross in in a great audience (as alwaie a great number assembled to his
preaching, came into the pulpit taking for his Theme. Spuria vitulamina no^
dabunt ^ad^esaltos. Sapien.iiii. that is to say, bastard s^^ppes shall never
take deep roots: whereupon when he had showed the great grace that God gives
and secretly infoundeth in right generation after y^ laws of matrimony, then
declared he that those children commonly lacked y^ grace (and for the
punishment of their parents) were for ye most part unhappy which were gotten
in baste, and specially in aduoutry, of which (though some by the ignorauncie
of the world and the truth hid from knowledge) have enherited for a season
other men's lands, yet God alwaie of provides that it continues not in
their blood long, but the truethe coming to light the rightefull
enheritoures be restored, and the bastard s^ppes plucked up or it can be
rooted deep. And when he had laid for the proof and confirmacion of this
sentence, examples taken out of the old testamente and other aunciente
histories, then began he to discende to the praise of the lord Richard duke of
York, calling him father to the protector and declared his title to the
croune biinheritaunce and also by entaile authorized by parliament after y^
death of king Henry the sixte. Then showed he that the lord protector, was
only the right heir, of his body lawfully begotten. Then declared he that
king Edward was never lawfully married to ye queen, but his wife before God was
dame Elizabeth Lucy, and so his children were bastardes. And besides that, that
neither king Edward him self nor the duke of Clarence amongst them that were
secret in the duke of Yorkes houshoulde) were never reconed surely to be the
children of the noble duke as those that by their favors more resembled other
known men then him, from whose verteous conditions he said, also that king
Edward was far of. But the lord protector (quod he) that veraye noble
prince, the special patron of knightly prowes, as well in all princely
behaueour as in the liniamentes and favor of his visage represents the very
^ace of ye noble duke his father. This is (quod he) the fathers own figure,
this is his own countenance the very printe of his visage, the sure
undoubted image, the plain express likeness of that noble duke. Now was it
before devised that in the speaking of these words, the protector shoul^e
have come in amongst the people to y^ sermond ward, to the end that these
words so metynge with his presence, might have been taken amongst the
herers, as though the holy ghost had put them in the preachers mouth, and
should have moved the people even there to have cried, king Richard that it
might have been after said that he was specially chosen by God* and in manner
by miracle: but this devise quayled, either by the protectoures negligence or
the preachers over hasty diligence. For while the protectoure, found by the
way ta^iynge, least he should have prevented these words, the doctor
fearing that he should come or his sermon could come to those words
hastynge his matter thereto, he was come to them and paste them, and entered
into other matters or the protector came, whom when he beheld coming, he
suddenly left the matter which he had in hand, and without any deduccyon
thereunto out of all order, and out of all frame began to repete those words
again. This is the very noble prince the especial patron of knightely
prowes, which as well in all princely behaueoure as in the liniamentes and
favor of his visage represents the veray^ face of the noble duke of York
his father. This is the fathers own figure, this is his own^ countenance* the
very print of his visage the sure undoubted image, the plain express likeness
of that noble duke, whose remembrance can never die while he lives. While
these words were in speaking, the protector accompaignied with the duke of
Buckyngham, went through the people up into the place where the doctors stand
where they hard out the sermond: but the people were so far from ^^ynge king
Richard that they stood as they had been turned into stoones for wonder of
this shameful sermonde: after which once ended y^ precher gat him home and
never after durst look out for shame but kept him out of sight as an owl and
when he asked any of his old friends, what the people talked of him, although
that his own conscience well showed him that they talked no good, yet when the
other answered him, that there was in every man's mouth of him much shame
spoken it so struck him too the heart that in few days after he withered
away.

Then on the tuesday after next foloyng this sermond, being the xvii. day of
June, there came to the Guyld hall of London the duke of Buckyngham and diverse
lords and knights m^ then happily knew the message that they brought. And at
the east end of the hal where the hoystynges be kept* the duke and the maire
and the other lords sat down, and the aldermen also, all the commons of the
city being, assembled and standing before them. After scilence commanded
upon agreate pain in the protectoures name: The duke stood up and as he was
well learned and of nature merueilously well spoken, The ora^ion of the duke of
Buchingham made to y^ ci^^ns of London.
he said to the people with a clear and a loud voice: Friends, for the zeal
and hertie favor that we bear you, we be come to break of a matter right
great and weighty, and no less weighty then pleasyng to God and profitable
to all the realm* nor to no part of the realm, more profitable, them to you
the citezens of this noble city. For why, the thing that you have long lacked
and as we well know sore longed for, that you would have given great good
for, tha you would have gone far to fetch: that thing be we come hither to
bring you, without your labor pain, cost, adventure or ^eoperdye. What thing
is that? Certes the surety of your own bodies, the quiet of your wives and
daughters and the sauegarde of your goods: Of all which things in time
passed you stood in doubt. For who was he of you all that could recon him
self lord of his own good amongst so many gynnes and trappes were set
therefore among so much pyllyng and polling, emonge so many taxes and
talliages, of the which there was never end, and oftymes no need, or if any
were, it grew rather of riote or of unreasonable waste, then any necessary
honorable charge* so that there was daily plucked and pilled from good and
honest men great substance of goods, to be lashed out among unthrifts,
so far furthe that fiftenes suffised not, nor any usual terms of known
taxes, but under an easy name of benevolence and good will, the commissioners
so much of every manne took, ^eneuolence.
as no man would with his good will have given. As though the name of
benevolence had signified, that every manne should pay, not what he of him
self of his good will lust to grant, but what the king of his good will lust
to take, who never asked little, but every thing was haunsed above the measure,
amerciamentes turned into ^ines, fines into raunsomes small trespaces into
mesprision, mesprision into treason, where of I think that no man looks
that we shall remember you of examples by name, as though Burdet were forgotten
which was for a word spoken, in have cruelly behedded. (this Burdet was a
merchant dwelling in Chepesyd at ye sign of y^ ^roune, which now is y^ sign
of y^ flower de luse over against soper lane: This man merely in y^ ^ufflyng
time of king Edward y^.iiij. his rage, said to his own some that he would
make him in heritor of y^ croune, meaning his own house: but these words king
Edward made to be mysconstrued, and interpreted that Burdet meante the croune
of the realm: wherefore within less space then iiii. hours, he was
apprehended, judged, drawn and quartered in Chepesyde) by the misconstruynge
of the laws of the realm for the prince pleasure, with no less honor to
Merkam chief Justice then, which lost his office rather then he would assent
to that judgment: then to the dishonestie of those that either for fear or
flattery gave that judgment. What need I too speak of sir Thomas Cook
Alderma^ and mayre of this noble citce, Of this sir Thomas Cook ye ma^reade.
who is of you either for negligence that wotteth not, or so forgetful that he
remembers not, or so hard hearted that he pitieth not that worshipful man's
loss? What speak I of loss, this wonderful spoil and undeserved
destruction, only because it happened him to favor them whom the prince
favored not. We need not rehearse of these any mo by name, sith I doubt not
that here be many present that either in them selves or their nighe friends,
as well their goods as their persons were greatly endaungered either by
fained querels or small matters aggrauated with heinous names, and also there
was no crime so great, of which there could lack a pretexte. For sith y^
king preuentyng the time of his inheritance attained the croune by battle, it
suffised in a rich manne for a pretext of treason, to have been of kindred or
aliaunce, nere of familiarite, or longer of acquaintance with any of those,
that were at any time, the kings enemies which was at one time or another more
then half the realm. Thus were nether your goods, neither lands in surety,
and yet they brought your bodies in ieoperdye, beside the comen adventure of
open war, which albeit, that it is ever the well and occasion of much
mischief, yet is it never so mischeuous as where any people fall in division,
and at distaunce among them selves: and in no realm earthly so dedly and so
pes^^le^t as when it happens amongst us. And among us never continued so
long discencion nor so many battles in any season, nor so cruel nor so dedly
foughte^, as were in the king his days that dedde is, God forgive it his solle.
In whose time and by whose occasion* what about the gettyng of the garlande,
keeping it, lesyng and winnynge again, it has cost more English (...) then
has the twice winnynge of France. In which inward war amongst ourselves
has been so great effusion of the aunciente noble blood of this realm, that
scarcely the half remains, to the great enfeblyng of this noble land, beside
many a good town ransaked and spoiled by them that have been going too the
field or returnyng from thence, and peace after, not much ^urer then war. So
that no time was there in the which (...) men for their money, and great
men for their lands, or some other for some fear or for some displeasure
were out of perel. For whom mistrusted he that mistrusted his own brother?
Whom spared he that killed his own brother? Could not such manner of folk
that he most favored do somewhat (we shall for his honor spare to speak)
howbeit, this ye wo^e well all, that whose was best bare ever the lest rule,
and more suite in his days was to Shores, wife a vile and abominable strompet
then to all the lords in England, except unto those that made her their
proctour, which simple woman was yet well named and honest till the king for
his wanton lust and sinful affection berefte her from her husband, a right
honest manne and substanciall amongst you. And in thai poinct which in good
faith I am sorry too speak of, saving that it is vain to keep in counsel
that thing that all men kuoweth, ye king his gredy appetite was insaciable,
and every where over all the realm intolerable. For no women was there any
where young or old, poor or rich, whom he set his yie upon, whom he any
thing liked either for person or beauty, speech, pace or countenance, but
without any fear of God, or respect of his honor, mermure, or grudgyng of
the world, he would importunately pursue his apetite and have her, to the
great destruction of many a good woman, and great doloure to their husbands
and friends, which being honest people of them selves, so much regarded the
cle^nesse of their houses, the chas^itee of their wives and children, that
them were lever to lose all that they have beside, then to have such a
vilanie dooen to them. And albeit that with this and other importable dealing,
the realm was in every place anoyed, yet specially you the citezens of this
nobility, as for that amongst you is most plenty of such things as
minister matter to such miuries, as for that you were nerest hand, sith that
nere here about was his most common abidyng. And yet be ye people whom he had
as singular a cause well and truly to entreat, as any part of his realm: not
only for that the prince by this noble city, as of his special chamber and
renoumed cite of this realm, much honorable fame receives amongst all
other nations, but also for that, you not without your great cost and fondrye
favors and ieoperdyes in all his wars bare ever your especial favor to
his part: which your kind minds borne to the house of York, sith he has
nothing worthily requited you, there is of the house now which by God his
grace shall make you full recompense, which thing to show you, is the whole
some and effect of our errande. It shall not, I wore well need, that I rehearse
unto you again that you al ready have heard of him that that can better tell
it, and of whom I am sure ye will better believe it (and reason it is that it so
be) I am not so proud too look therefore y^ you should receive my words of
so great aucthorite as the preathers of the word of God* namely a man so
coming and so wise, that no man wotteth better what he should do and say,
and thereto so good and virtues that he would not say the thing, which he wist
he should not say in the pulpit, namely, into the which no honest manne comes
to lie: which honorable preacher ye well remember, substancially declared to
you at Paul's cross on Sondaie last paste, the right and title of the most
excellent prince Richard duke of Gloucester now protector of this his realm
which he has unto the croune of the kingdom of the same. For that worship
^u^man made it perfectely and groundely open unto you. The children of king
Edward the fourth were never laufully begotten, for as much as the king
living his very wife dame Elizabeth Lucy) was never laufully married to the
queen their mother whose blood saving he set his volupteous pleasure before his
honor, was full vnmetely to be matched with his (the mynglyng of which two
bloudes together has been the ^ff^sion of a great part of the noble blood of
this realm) whereby it may well be seen, that marriage was not well made of
which there is so much ^^th^efe grown. For lack of which lawefull
copulacion and also of other things which the said worshipful doctor,
rather signified then fully explaned, and which thing shall not be spoken for
me* as the thing that every manue forbeareth to say that he knows, in
aduoidyng the vispleasure that my noble lord protectoure bearyng as nature
requires a fil^all reverence to the duches his mother. For these causes before
remembered I say, that for lake of issue lawfully coming of the late noble
prince Richard duke of York, to whose royal blood the crounes of England and
of France, are by the high au^^horite of a parliament enta^^ed, the right and
title of the same is by (...) course of enheritaunce according too the common
law of this land, deuoluted and come unto the most excellent prince the lord
protectoure, as to the very lawful begotten son of the fore remembered noble
duke of York. Which thing well considred and the knightely prowess with many
virtues which in his noble person singulerely do habounde: The nobles and
commons of this realm, and specially of the North parts, not willing and
bastard blood to have the rule of the land, nor the abusions in the same before
used and exercised any longer too continue, have fully condiscend^d and utterly
determined too make humble peticion unto the puisaunte prince the lord
protecto^r that it may like his grace at our humble request, to take upon him
the guydyng and governance of this realm, too the wealth and increase of the
same, according to his very right and ^uste title, which thing I worcester well he
will be loath to take upon him as he whose wisdom well perueiueth* the
labor and study both of mind and body that shall come therewith to him,
whosoever shall occupye that rome. I dare say he will if he take it (for I
warrant you that that rome is no childs office) and that the great wise man
well perceived when he said Vae regno, cuius Rex puer est, woo to that realm
whose king is a child wherefore, so much more cause have we to thank God, that
this noble personage, which is so righteously entitled thereto is of so sad age,
and there to of so great wisdom, joined with so great experience which
albeit, he will be loathe as I have said to take upon him, yet shall he too
our peticion in that behalf the more graciously incline, if ye the worshipful
citezens of this city being the chief city of the realm join with us the
nobles in our said request, which for your own weal we doubt not but that
ye will. And yet nevertheless, we pray you so to do, whereby ye shall do
great profit to all this his realm: Beside that, in chosyng them so good a
king, it shall be to your self a special commodite, to whom his majesty
shall ever after, bear so much y^ more tender favor in how much he shall
perceive you the more prone and beneuolentely minded toward his election:
wherein dear friends, what mind you have we require you plainly to show us?
When the duke had said and looked that the people whom he hoped that the Maire
had framed before, should after this flattering preposicion made, have cried
king Richard, king Richard, all was still and mute and not one word
answered to: wherewith the duke was maruelous^y abashed, and taking y^ Maire
nere to him, with other that were about him privy to the matter, said unto
them softely. What means this, that the people be so still? Sir quod the
Maire, percase they perceive you not well, that shall we amend quod he, if
that will help, and therewith somewhat louder rehearsed the same matter again, in
other order and other words so well and ornately, and nevertheless so
evidently and plain, with voice, gesture, and countenance so comely and so
convenient, that every man much marueiled that hard him and thought that they
never hard in their lives so evil a tale so well told. But were it for wonder
or fear, or that each looked that other should speak first, not one word
was there answered of all the people that stood before, but all were as still
as the midnight, not so much as rounyng among them, by which they might
seem once to common what was before too do. When the Maire saw this, he with
other parteners of the counsel, drew about the duke and said that y^
people had not been a^customed there to be spoken too, but by the Recorder,
which is the mouth of the city, and happily too him they will answer. With
that the Recorder called Thomas Filz Wyllya^, a sad manne and an honest,
which was but newlye come to the office, and never had spoken to the people
before, and loathe was with that matter to begin notwithstanding, there unto
commanded by the Maire, made rehersall to the commons of that which the duke
had twice purposed him self, but the recorder so te^pered his tale, that he
showed every thing as the duke his words were, and no part of his own, but
all this no change made in the people, wiche alwaie after one stood as they
had been amassed. Where upon, the duke rouned with the Maire and said, this is
a marueileous obstinate scilence, and there with turned too the people again
with these words. Dear friends, we come to move you too that thing which
parauenture we so greatly neded not, but that the lords of this realm and
commons of other parts might have suffised, saving such love we bear you,
and so much set by you* that we would not gladly do without you, that thing
in which to be parteners is your weal and honor, which as to us seems
you se not or way not: Where fore we require you to give us an answer, one
or other, whether ye be minded as all the nobles of the realm be, to have
this noble prince now protector to be your king? And at these words the
people began to whisper among them selfs secretly, that the voice was neither
loud nor base, but like a swarm of bees* till at the last, at the nether
end of the hal a bushement of the dukes servants and one Nashfeelde and
other belonging to the protectoure with some prentices and laddes that
thrusted into the hall amongst the preace, began suddenly at men's backs to
cry out as loud as they could, king Richard, king Richard, and there threw
up their cappes in token of joy, and they that stood before cast back their
heddes marueilynge thereat, but nothing they said. And when the duke and the
Maire saw this manner, they wisely turned it to their purpose, and said it was
a goodly cry and a joyful to here every manne with one voice and no man
saying nay. Wherefore friends (quod the duke,) sith we perceive that it is al
your whole minds to have this noble manne for your king, whereof we shall make
his grace so effectual report that we doubt not but that it shall redounde to
your great wealth and commodite. We therefore require you that to morrow ye go
with us and we with you to his noble grace to make our humble peticio^ and
request to him in manner before remembered. And therewith the lords came down
and the compaignie dissolved and departed the more part all sad, some with
glad sembleaunce that were not very merry, and some of them that came with the
duke, not hable to dissemble their sorrow, were fain even at his back to turn
their face to the wall, while the doloure of their hearts braste out of their
yies.

Then on the morrow the Maire and aldremen and chief commoners of the city in
their best manner appareled, assemblyng them together at Paul's, resorted to
Baynardes castle where the protectoure lay, to which place also according too
the appoin^tment repaired the duke of Buckyngham, and diverse nobles with him,
besides many knights and gentlemen. And there upon the duke sent word to
the lord protectoure of the being there of a great honorable compaignie to
move a great matter to his grace. Where upon the protectoure made great
difficulte to come down to them, except he knew some part of their
errande, as though he doubted and partly mistrusted the coming of such a
number to him so suddenly, without any warnyng or knowledge, whether they came
for good or harm. Then when the duke had showed this too the Mayre and other,
that they might there by se how little the protector looked for this matter,
they sent again by the messenger such loving message, and there with so
humbly besoughte him to vouchsafe that they might resort to his presence to
purpose their intent of which they would to none other person any part
disclose. At the last he came out of his chamber, and yet not down to them,
but in a galary over them with a bishop on every hand of him, were they
beneth might se him and speak to him, as though he would not yet come nere
them til he wist what they meante. And there upon, the duke of Buckyngham
first made humble peticion to him on the behalf of them all, that his grace
would pardon them and license them to purpose unto his grace the intent of
their coming without his displeasure, without which pardon obtained, they
durst not be so bold to move him of that matter. In which, albeit they
meante as much honor to his grace as wealth to all y^ realm beside, yet
were they not sure how his grace would take it, whom they would in no wise
offend. Then the protector, as he was very gentle of him self and also
longed sore apparently to know what they meante, gave him leave to purpose
what him liked, verily trusting for the good mind that he bare them all, none
of them any thing would entende to him ward, wherewith he thought to be
grieved When the duke had this leave and pardon to speak, then wexed he bold
to show him their entente and purpose, with all the causes mouyng them
thereto as ye before have hard. And finally* to beseech his grace taht it
would like him of his accustomed goodness and zeal unto the realm now with
his yie of pity to behold the long continued distress and decaie of the
same, and to set his gracious hand to the redress and amendment thereof by
taking upon him the croune and governance of the realm according to his
right and title laufully disce^ded unto him* and to the laud of god profit
and surety of the land and unto his grace so much the more honor and less
pain, in that y^ never prince reigned upon any people that were so glad to live
under his obe^sau^ce as the people of this realm under his.

When the protector had hard the proposicion, he looked very strangely thereat
and made answer, that albeit he knew partly the things by them alleged to
be true, yet such entiere love he bare to king Edward and his children* and
so much more regarded his honor in other realms about, then the croune of
any one* of which he was never desirous, so that he could not find in his
heart in this poinct to incline to th^^^ desire, for in all other nations where
the truth were not well known. It should parauenture be thought that it were
his own ambicious mind and devise to depose the prince and to take him self
the croune, with which infamy he would in no wi^e have his honor freined for
any ^^oune, in which he had ever perchance perceived much more labor and
pein* then pleasure to him that so would use it as he that would not and were
not worthy to have it. Notwithstanding, he not only pardoned them o^ the
mocion that they made him, but also thanked them for the love and hearty favor
they bare him, praiyng them for his sake to bear the same to the prince under
whom he was and would be content to live and with his labor and counsel as
far as it should like the king too use it, he would do his vttermoste deuo^er
too set the realm in good estate which was all redye in the little time of
his protectourship (lauded be God,) well begone, in that the malice of such as
were before y^ occasion of the contrary and of new intended to be, were now
partly by good policy, partly more by God his special providence, then
man's provision, repressed and put under.

Upon this answer given, the duke of Buckyngham by the protector his license a
little rounded, as well with other noble men about him as with the maire and
recorder of London. And after that (upon like perdo^ desired and obtained) he
showed aloude unto the protector, for a final conclusion that the realm was
appointed that king Edward his line should no longer reign upon them, both
that they had so far gone that it was now no suretee to retreat (as for that
they thought it for y^ weal universal to take ye way, although they had not
yet begone it.) Wherefore if it would like his grace to take the croune upon him,
they would humbly beseech him thereunto, and if he would give them a resolute
answer to the contrary (which they would be loathe to here) then must they
seek and should not faill to find some other noble manne that would. These
words much moved the protector, which as every man of small intelligence
may wit would never have inclined thereto: but when he saw there was none
other way but that he must take it, or else he and his both to go from it, he
said to the lords and commons, sith it is we perceive well that all the
realm is so set (whereof we be very sorry) that they will not suffer in any
wise king Edward his line to govern them, whom no man earthely can govern
against their wills: And we also perceive that no man is there to whom the
crown c^n by so just title appertain as to our self as very right heir
laufully begotten of the body of our most dread and dear father Richard late
duke of York to which title is now joined your election, the nobles and
commons of the realm, which we of all titles possible take for most
effectual, we be content and agree favorably to incline to your peticion
and request, and according to the same, here we take upon us the royal estate
of pre-eminence and kingdom of the two noble realms, England and France,
the one from this day forward by us and our heirs to rule, govern and
defend, the other by God his grace and your good help to get again, subdue
and establishe for ever in dew obedience unto this realm of England, the
auauncemente whereof we never ask of God longer to live then we entende to
procure and set furthe. With this there was a great cry and shoute, criyng
king Richard, and so the lords went up to the king, and so he was after that
day called. But the people departed talking dyuersely of the matter, every
man as his fantasye gave him, but much they marueiled of this manner of
dealyng, that the matter was on both parts made so strange as though never
the one part had commaun^d with the other part thereof before, when they
wiste that there was no man so dull that heard them, but he perceived well
enough that all the matter was made between them. Howbeit, some excused that
again, saiynge: all thing must be done in good order, and men must
sometime for the manner sake not be aknowen what they know. For at the
consecracion of a bishop, every manne perceives by payment of his bulls
that he entendeth to be one, yet when he is twice asked whether he will be a
bishop, he must twice say naie, and at the third time take it upon him as
compelled thereto by his own will. And in a stage play, the people know
right well that he that plaieth the sowdaine, is percase a souter* yet if one
of acquaintance perchance of little nurture should call him by his name while
he stands in his majesty one of his tourme^tours might fortune break his head
for marryng the play. And so they said, these matters be kings games, as it
were staige plays, and for the most part played upon scaffoldes, in which
poor men be but lookers on, and they that wise be, will med^^ no ferther,
for they that step up with them when they cannot play their parts, they
disorder the play and do them selves no good.

The tragical doings of King Richard the third.
Loathe I am to remember, but more I abhore to write, the miserable tragedy of
this unfortunate prince, which by fraud entered, by tyranny proceeded, and by
sodayn death ended his unfortunate life: But if I should not declare the
flagicious factes of the evil princes, as well as I have done the notable
acts of verteous kings, I should neither animate, nor encourage rulers of
royalmes* Countries and Seigniories to follow the steps of their profitable
progenitors, for to atteyne to the type of honor and wordly fame: neither yet
advertise princes being proane to vice and wickedness, to aduoyde and expel all
sin and mischief, for dread of obloquy and worldly shame: for contrary set
to contrary is more apparaunt, as white joined with black, makes the fayrer
show: Wherefore, I will proceed in his acts after my accustomed usage.

RICHARD the third of that name, usurped y^ croune of England and openly took
upon him to be king, the nyntene day of June, in the year of our lord, a
thousand four hundred lxxxiii. and in the.xxv. year of Jews the leuenth then
being French king: and the morrow after, he was proclaimed king and with great
solempnite rode to Westminster, and there sat in the seat roial, and called
before him the judges of y^ realm straightely commaundynge them to execute
the law with out favor or delaie, with many good exhortacio^s (of the which
he followed not one) and then he departed toward the Abbaye* and at the church
door he was met with procession, and by the abbot to him was delivered the
scepter of faincte Edward, and so went and offered to saint Edward his
shrine, while the Monks sang Te deum with a faint courage, and from the
church he returned to the palice, where he lodged till the coronacion. And to
be sure of all enemies (as he thought) he sent for five thousand men of the
North against his coronacio^, which came up eiuil appareled and worse
harneissed, in rusty harneys, neither defensable nor skoured to the sale,
which mustered in Finesbury field, to the great disdain of all the lookers on.

The fourth day of July he came to the tower by water with his wife, and the
fifth day he created Edward his only begotten son, a child of.x. year
old, prince of wales, and Ihon haward, a man of great knowledge and virtue
(as well in counsel as in battaill) he created duke of Norffolke, and sir
Thomas Hawarde his son he created earl of Surrey, and Willyam lord Barkeley
was then created earl of Notingham, and Fraunces lord Louell was then made
Uicount Louel, and the king his chamberlain, and the lord Stanley was
delivered out of ward for fear of his son the lord Strange, which was
then in Lancasshire gatherynge men (as men said) and the said lord was
made Stauarde of the king his household, likewise the Archbishop of York was
delivered: but Morton bishop of Ely, was delivered to the duke of Buckyngham to
keep inward, which sent him to his manoure of Brecknoke in Wales, from
whence he escaped to king Richard his confusion, The same night the king
made seuentene knights of the Bath. The next day he road through London
with great pomp, and in especial the duke of Buckyngham was richely
appareled and his horse trapped in blew beluet enbroudered with the naues of
carts burning of gold: which trapper was borne by fotemen from the ground,
with such solemn fassion that all men much regarded it.

On the morrow being the sixth dare of July, the king came toward his
coronacion into Westminster hall, where his chapel and all the prelates mitred
received him. And so they in order of procession passed forward: After the
procession followed therle of Northumberlande with a poinctelesse sword naked,
and the lord Stanley bare the Mace of y^ co^stableshippe. Therle of Kente bare
the second sword on the right hand of the king naked. The lord Louell bare
an other sword on the left hand. Then followed the duke of Suffolk with the
scepter, and the earl of Lyncolne with the ball and cross. After them followed
the new earl of Surrey with the sword of estate in a rich skabard. On the
right side of him went the duke of Norfolk bearing the crown: then followed
king Richard in a Circot and robe of purple velvet under a canabie borne by
the barons of the five ports, gooynge between the bishops of Bathe and
Duresme. The duke of Buckingham with the rod of the high stuarde of England
bare the king his train. After him followed therle of Huntyngdon, berynge the
queen's scepter, and the Uicount lisle, bearyng the rod with the dove, And the
earl of Wilshire bare the queen's croune. Then followed queen Anne daughter to
Richard earl of Warwike in robes like to the king, between two bishops, and a
canabie over her head, borne by the Barons of the ports. On her head a rich
coronall set with stone and pearl. After her followed the countess of
Richemond heir to the duke of Somerset, which bare up the queen's train.
After followed the duchess of Suffolk and Norfolk with countesses,
baronesses, ladies, and many fair gentlewomen: in this order they passed
through the palayce, and entered the Abbaye at the Weste end, and so came to
their seats of estate. And after diverse songs solemply song, they both
descended to the high altar and were shifted from their robes, and had
diverse places open from the middle upward, in which places they were
anointed. Then both the king and the queen changed them into clothe of gold
and ascended to their seats, where the cardinal of Cauntorbury and other
bishops them crowned according to the old custom of the realm, geuynge
him the scepter in the left hand and the balle with the cross in the right
hand, and the queen had the scepter in her right hand, and the rod with the
dove in the left hand: On every side of the king stood a duke, and before
him stood the earl of Surrey with the sweard in his hands. And on every side
of the queen standing a bishop and a lady knelynge. The Cardinal song the
mass, and after paxe, the king and the queen descended, and before the high
altar they were both houseled with one host divided between them. After
mass finished, they both offered at saint Edward his shrine and there the
king left the crown of saint Edward, and put on his own crown. And so
in order as they came, they departed to Westminster hal, and so to their
chambres for a ceason, during which time the duke of Norffolke came into the
hall his horse trapped to the ground in clothe of gold as high marshall, and
voyded the hall.

About four of the clock the king and queen entered the hal, and the king
satte in the middle, and the queen on the left hand of the table, and on every
side of her floode a countess holding a clothe of pleasaunce, when she list
to drink. And of the right hand of the king satte the bishop of Countorbury,
the ladies satte all on one side in the middle of the hall, and at the table
against them satte the Chauncelloure and all the lords. At the table next the
cupborde satte the Maire of London. And at the table behind the lords, satte
the Barons of the ports. And at the other bordes satte noble and worshipful
personages. When all persons were set, the duke of Norfolk earl Marshall,
the earl of Surrey constable for that day, the lord Stanly lord Steward,
sir William Hopton treasourer, and sir Thomas Percy comptroller came in and
served the king solemply with one dishe of gold and another of silver. And the
queen all in gylte vessel, and the bishop all in silver. At the second course
came into the hall, sir Robert Democke the king his champion, making a
proclamacion, that whosoever would say that king Richard was not lawefully
king, he would fight with him at the vtteraunce and threw down his
gauntlet: and then all the hal cried king Richard. And so he did in three
parts of the hall, and then one brought him a cup with wine covered, and when
he had drunk he cast out the drink, and departed with the cup. After that,
the herauldes cried a largess thrice in the hall, and so went up to their
staige. At the end of diner, the Maire of London served the king and queen
with sweet wine, and had of each of them a cup of gold with a cover of
gold. And by that time that all was dooen, it was darkenight: And so the king
returned to his chamber, and every manne to his lodgyng. When this feast was
thus fineshed, the king sent home all the lords into their countrees that
would depart, except the lord Stanley, whom he retained till he hard what
his son the lord strange went about. And to such as went home, he gave
straighte charge and commandment to see their countrees well ordered, and
that no wrong nor extorcion should be done to his subjects. And thus he
taught other to execute justice and equitee, the contrary whereof he daily
exercised: he also with great rewards given to the Northrenmen which he sent
for to his coronacion, sent them home to their country with great thanks.
Whereof diverse of them, (as they all be of nature very gredy of autoritee,
and specially when they think to have any comfort or favor.) took on them
so highly and wroughte such mastries, that the king was feign to ride thither
in his first year, and to put some in execucion, and stay the country, or
else no small mischief had ensued

Incontinente after this, he sent a solemn Ambassade to Jews the French
king, to conclude a league and amity with him, trusting also to obtain the
tribute which king Edward his brother had before out of France, but the
French king so abhorred him and his cruelty, that he would neither se nor
hear his Ambassadors, an so in vain they returned.

Now after this triumphante coronacion, there fell mischifes thick and
thick, and as the thing eiuill gotten is never well kept, so through all
the time of his usurped reign, never ceased there cruel murder, death and
slaughter, til his own destruction ended it. But as he finished with the best
death and most rightewyse, that is to say his own, so began he with the
most piteous and wicked, I mean the lamentable murder of his innocente
nephews, the young king and his tender brother, whose death and final
fortune has nevertheless so far come in question that some remained long in
doubt whether they were in his days destroyed or no. Not for that that Parkin
warbek by many folks malice, and mo folks folly so long space abusing the
world, was as well with princes as with poor people reputed and taken for the
younger of these two: But for that also that all things were so couertely
demeaned, one thing pretented and another mente, that there was nothing so
plain and openly proved, but that yet for the common custom o^ close and
couerte dealing, men had it ever inwardly suspecte, as many well counterfeit
iewelles make the true mistrusted. Hobeit, concerning that opinion, men may
se the conueighaunce thereof in the life of the noble prince king Henrye
the.vii. in the process of Parkyn. But in the mean ceason, for this present
matter I shall rehearse to you the dolorous end of these two babes, not after
every way that I have hard, but after that way that I have so hard by such
men and such means as me thinks it to be hard but it should be true.

King Richard after his coronacion, taking his way to Gloucester, The
destruction of king Edward^ children.
to visit in his new honor the town, of which he bare the name of old,
devised as he road to fulfill that thing which he before had intended. And
forasmuch as his mind gave him that his nephews living, men would not recon
that he could have right to the realm. he thought therefore without delaie
to rid them, as thoug the killynge of his kynsmen might end his cause, and
make him kyndely king. Where upon he sent Ihon Grene, whom he specially
trusted, unto sir Robert Brake^bury constable of the tower, with a letter and
crede^ce also, that the same sir Roberte in any wise should put the two
children to death. This John Grene did his errand to Brakenbury, knelynge
before our lady in the Tower, who plainly answered that he would never put
them to death to dye therefore. With the which answer Grene returned,
recomptyng the same to king Richard at Warwyke yet on his journey, wherewith
he took such displeasure and thought that the same night he said to a
secret page of his: Ah, whom shall a man trust? they that I have brought up
my self, they that I went would have most surely served me, even those fail
me, and at my commandment will do nothing for me. Sir quod the page, there
lies one in the palet chamber with out that I dare well say, to do your grace
pleasure the thing were right hard that he would refuse, meaning this by James
Tirel, which was a man a goodly personage, and for the gifts of nature worthy
to have served a much better prince, if he had well served God* and by grace
obtained to have as much truth and good will, as he had strength and wytt.

The man had an high heart and sore longed upward, not risyng yet so fast as
he had hoped, being hindered and kept under by sir Richard Ratcliffe and sir
Willyam Catesbye, which longyng for no more parteners of the Princes favor,
namely not for him, whose pride they knew would bear no pere, kept him by
secret driftes out of al secret trust: which thing this page had well
marked and known: wherefore, this occasion offered of very special friendship
spied his time to set him forward, and such wise to do him good, that all the
enemies that he had (except the devil) could never have done him so much hurt
and shame, for upon the pages words, king Richard arose (for this
communicacion had he sittyng on a drafte, a convenient carpet for such a
counsel) and came out into the palet chamber, where he did find in bed the
said James Tyrell and sir Thomas Tyrell of person like and brethren of blood,
but nothing of kynne in conditions. Then said the king merely to them, what
syrs, be you in bed so sone? and called up James Tyrell, and brake to him
secretly his mind in this mischeuous ma^^er, in the which he found him nothing
strange. Wherefore on the morrow he sent him to Brakynbury with a letter by the
which he was commanded to deliver to the said James all the keys of the Tower
for a night, to the end that he might there accomplish the kings pleasure in
such things as he there had given him in commandment. After which lettre
d^liuered and the keys received, James appoincted y^ next night ensuyng to
destroy them, deuisyng before and preparyng the means.

The prince as soon as the Protector took upon him to be king, and left the
name of protectoure, was thereof advertised and showed, that he should not
reign, but his uncle should have the croune. At which word the prince sore
abashed began to sighe and said: Alas I would mine v^cle would let me have my
life although I lose my kyngedome. Then he that told him the tale used him
with good words and put him in the best conforte that he could, but
furthewith he and his brother were both shut up, and all other removed from
them, one called black Will, or Willyam Slaughter only except, which were set
to serve them, and iiii. other to see them sure. After which time, the prince
never tied his points, nor any thing roughte of him self, but with that young
babe his brother lyngered in thought and heuines, till this traiterous deed
delivered them of that wretchedness.

For James Tirrell devised that they should be murdered in their beds, and
no blood shed: to the execution whereof, he appoincted Miles Forest one of the
four that before kept them, a fellow flesh bred in murder before time: and
to him he joined one John Dighton his own horsekeper, a bygge broad square
and strong knave. Then all the other being removed from them, this Miles Forest
and John Dighton about mydnight, King Edwardes children ^urthered.
the sely children liyng in their beds, came into y^ chau^bre and sodenli
lapped them up amongst the clothes and so bewrapped them and entangled them,
keeping down by force the fetherbed and pillowes hard unto their mouths, that
within a while they smored and ^^yfled them, and their breathes failyng, they
gave up to God their innocent solles into the joys of heaven, leauyng to the
tourme^tours their bodies dead in the bed, which after the wretches perceived,
first by the strugglyng, with the panges of death, and after long liyng still
to be thoroughly dead, they laid the bodies out upon the bed, and fetched James
Tirr^ll to see them, which when he saw them perfightly dead, he caused the
murderers to burye them at the stayre foot, metely deep in the ground under
a great heap of stones.

Then rode James Tirrel in great have to king Richard, and showed him all the
manner of the murder, who gave him great thanks, and as men say, there made
him knighte, but he allowed not their burial in so vile a corner, sa^yng that
he would have them buried in a better place because they were a kings sons:
Lo y^ honorable courage of a king, for he would recompense a detestable murder
with a solemn obsequy. Whereupon a priest of sir Robert Break^nburies took
them up and buried them in such a place secretly as by the occasion of his
death (which was very shortly after) which only knew it the very truth
could never yet be very well and perfightly known. For some say that king
Richard caused the priest to take them up and close them in lead and to put
them in a coffyne full of holes hoked at the ends with.ii. hokes of yro^, and
so to cast them into a place called the Black depes at the Themes mouth, so
that they should never rise up nor be seen again. This was y^ very truth
unknown by reason that ye said priest died so shortly and disclosed it never
to any person that would utter it. And for a truth, when sir James Tirrell was
in the Tower for treason committed to king Henrye the seuenthe: both he and
Dighton were examined together of this poincte, and both they confessed the
murder to be done in the same manner as you have hard, but whether the bodies
were removed, they both affirmed they never knew. And thus as I have learned
of them that much knew and little cause had to lie, where these two noble
princes, these innocente tender children, borne of the most royal blood and
brought up in great wealth, likely long to live, to reign and rule in the
realm, by traiterous tirannye taken and deprived of their estate, shortly
shut up in prison and privily ^^aine and murdered by the cruel ambicion of
their unnatural uncle and his dispiteous tourmentours: which things on every
part well pondered, God gave this world never a more notable example, either
in what vnsurety stands this worlds weal, or what mischief workethe the
proud enterprise of an high heart, or finally, what wretched end ensues
such dispiteous cruelty. For first to begin with the ministers, Miles
Forest* The end of y^ murderers of king Edwards children.
at saint Mar^yns le graunde by piece meal miserably rotted away, John
Dighton lived at Caleys long after, no less disdayned and hated then poincted
at, and there dyed in great misery: But sir James Tyrrel was beheaded at the
Tower hill for treason: And king Richard him self was slain in field hacked
and hewn of his enemies hands, haried on a horsbacke naked being dead, his
here in dispite torn and tugged like a curre dog. And the mischief that he
took with in less then three years, of the mischief that he did in three
months be not comparable, and yet all the mean time spente in much trouble
and pain outward, and much fear, dread and anguishe within. For I have hard
by credible report of such as were secret with his chamberers that after
this abominable deed done, he never was quiet in his mind, he never thought
him self sure where he went abroad, his body privily feinted, his eyes
wherled about, his hand ever on his dagger, his countenance and manner like
always to stricke again, he took evil rest on rightes, lay long wakyng and
musyng, forweried with care and watch, rather from bred then slept, troubled
with fearful dreams, From the beginnynge of King Edward the fifte:
hitherto, is of sir Thomas Mores (...).
sodeinly sometime stert up, leap^^ out of his bed and looked about the chamber,
so was his restless heart continually tossed and tombled with the tedious
impression and stormy remembrance of his abominable murder and execrable
tyranny.

KING Richard by this abommable mischyef and scelerous act* thinkyng him self
well releuyd both of fear and thought, would not have it kept counsel, but
with in a few days caused it to run in a common rumor that y^.ii. children
were sodanlie dead, and to this intent as it is to be demyd that now, none
heir male being a live of king Edwardes body lawfully begotten, y^ people
would be content with the more pacie^t heart, and quiet mind, to obey him and
suffer his rule and governance: but when y^ fame of this detestable fact was
reveled, and devulged through y^ hole realm, there fell generally, such a dolor
and inwardsorow in to the hearts of all the people, that all fear of his
cruelty set a side, they in every town, streate, and place openly wept, and
pitiou^^ye sobbyd. And when their sorrow was sumwhat mitigate, there inward
grudge could not refrain but cry out in plates public, and also private
furiously saying, what creature of all creatures is so malicious and so
obstinate an enemy either to God, or to christian religion, or to humayne
nature, which would not have abhorred, or at the lest absteyned from so
miserable a murder of so execrable a tira^nye. To murder a man is much
odious, to kill a woman, is in manner unnatural, but to slaie and destroy
innocent babes, and young enfantes, the whole world abhors, and the blood
from the earth cries, for vengaunce to all mighty God. If the common people
cried out, I assure you the friends of the queen, and her children made no
less exclamacion and complainte with loud voice lamentable comme crieng and
saying a las what will he do to other that thus shamefully murdereth his own
blood with out cause or desert: whom, will he save when he slaith the poor
lambs committed to him in trust? now we se and behold y^ the most cruel
tyranny has inuadyd the common wealth, now we se that in him is neither hope
of justice nor trust of mercy but abundance of cruelty and thrust of
innocente blood. But when these news were first brought to the unfortunate
mother of the dead children yet being in sanctuary, no doubt but it struck to
her heart, like the sharp darte of death: for when she was first informed of
the murder of her.ii. sons, she was so suddenly amasyd with the greatness of
y^ cruelty that for fear she sounded and fell down to the ground. And there
lay in a great agonye like to a dead corpse. And after that she came to her
memory and was reuyued again, she wept and sobbyd and with pitefull scriches
she repleneshyd the hole mancion, her breast she puncted, her fair here she
^are and pulled in pieces and being overcome with sorrow and penciuenes rather
desired death then life calling by name diverse times her sweet babes,
accomptyng her self more then mad that she deluded by wyle and fraudulente
promyses delivered her younger son out of the sanctuary to his enemy to the
put to death thinking that next the oath made to God broken, and the dewtie
of allegiaunce toward her children violated, she of all creatures in that
poyncte was most seduced and disceaued. After long lamentacion, when she saw
no hope of reuengynge otherwise, she knelyd down and cried on God to take
vengeance for the disceaytfull perjury, as who said tha she nothing
mystrusted but once he would remember it. What is he living that if he remember
and behold these.ii. noble enfantes with out deserving, so shamefully
murdered, that will not abhor the fact, ye and be moved and tormented with
pity and mercy. And yet the world is so frail and our nature so blind that
few be sturred with such examples, obliuiouslie forgetting, and littell
consyderyng, that oftentimes for the offenses by the parents perpetrate and
committed, that sin is punished in there line and posterite. This chance
might so happen to this innocent children, because king Edward there father and
parent offended in staynyng his conscience: he made his solemn oath before y^
gate of the city of York (as you have hard before) and promised and swear
one thing by his word thinkyng clean contrary in his heart as after did
appear. And afterward by the death of the duke of Clarence his brother, he
incurred (of likelyehod) the great displeasure toward God. After this murder
this perpetrated and that he had visited his town of Gloucester which he for
his old dignity both loved and with ample liberties and privileges endewed
and decorated, he took his journey toward the county of York, where the
people abusyng his lawful favor (as he both favored and trusted them in
his heart) had of late presumed to attempt diverse routes and riottes contrary
to his laws and enfryngyng of his peace, and upon hope of his mayntenaunce,
were so elated that no lord were he never of so great power could either
pacify or rule them till the king him self came personally thither to set a
concord and an unity in that country and to bridell and rule the rude
rusticall and blusterynge bold people of that region, and so he by long
iourneyinge came to the city of York where the citezens received him with
great pomp and triumph, according to y^ qualities of their educacion and
quantity of there substance and ability, and made diverse days plays and
pagea^tes in token of joy and solace. Wherefore king Richard magnified and
applauded of the northe^ nation, and also to show him self apparantlie before
them in habyte roy^l with scepter in hand and diadem on his head, made
proclamacion that all persons should resort to York on the day of the
assencion of our lord where all men should both behold and se him his
queen and prince in there high estates and degrees and also for their good
wylles, should receive many thanks, large benefits and muni^icente rewards.
At the day appoincted the hole clergy assembled in copes richely reuested and
so with a reuerente ceremony went about the city in procession, after whom
followed the king with his croune and scepter appareilled in his circot robe
royal accompaignied with no small number of ye nobility of his realm: after
whom marched in order queen Anne his wife likewise crouned ledinge on her
left hand Prince Edward her son having on his head a demi crown appoyncted
for the degree of a prince. The king was had in that triumph in such honor
and y^ common people of the north so reioysed that they extolled and praised
him far above the stars. After this solemn feast and glorious pomp he
kept great counsailles there, as well for the ordering of the country in
time to come, as for the brydellynge and punyshinge of such as there had
mysgouerned them selfs: and farther of the gentilmen of that contrie, he
augmented the number of his domestical ministers and servants, in the which
persons he put his whole trust and affiaunce. When all things were thus
discretely ordered, he returned by Nothyngha^, and after came to London: whom
more for dread then for love, the Cytezens received in great compaygnies. Thus
king Richard by a new invented cruelty and late practiced tyranny obtained
and grew to high praise and honor, and then by the admiracion and judgment
of the common multitude, he was most esteemed to be exalted in to heaven, when
he covertly had intelligence, that he was like to lose his estate and could by
no means have long contynuaunce in his v^urped power: for assuredly after the
death of king Edwards children when any blusteringe wind per^lous thunder or
terrible tempest, chansed or were apparently like to happen: Suddenly the
people having in there fresh memory the facinorous act of there king and
prince, would openly cry and make vocyferacion that God did take vengaunce
and punish the pore Englishemen, for the crime and offense of there ungracious
king, whom they blamed, accursed and wysshed to have extreme tortures.
Although king Richard hard often of this slanderous words and malicious
sa^ynges and knew well by what persons they were spoken, yet he dirst not with
strong hand be on the first inuentours revenged, knowinge that some time it
is no wisdom to refuse or disdaigne them that tell a ruler his deutie or
declare to him his mysbehauour toward the common wealth, or counsel him to
amend and change his ill life. After this great felicity, he fell again in
to a great fear and penciuenes of mind, and because he could by no means
either correct or amend things that were passed, he determined by doing his
deutie in all things to his commons, to obliterate and put out of memory that
note of infamy with the which his fame was justly spotted and slayned, and
to cause the people to co^ceyue so good an opinion in him, that from thence
forth no calamyte nor trouble should be adjudged to happen to the common
wealth, either by his negligence or by his mysgouernaunce (although it is
difficile and strange shortelie to turn and pluck out such qualities and
vsages as have of long time ben encorporate in a man's mind and rooted in his
manners and conditions.) Therefore whether it was for the performaunce of his
former intent of amendment or (as the common fame slew a broad) that he took
repentance of his myscheuous acts and scelerate doings, he turned over the
leffe, and began an order of a new life, and pretended to have the name of a
good and virtuous man, by the reason that he showed him self more just, more
meker, more familiar, more liberal (especially a mongest the poor people)
then before he had accustomed to do, and so by this means he firmelye trusted
first to obtain of god forgeuenes of his offenses and crimes, and after to
levy and take a way the enemy and inward grudge that the common people bare
in their minds toward him, and in conclusion, to obteigne their frendelye
love and assured favor. He farthermore began and enterprised diverse things
as well public as private, the which he being prevented by sudden death did
neither accomplish nor bring to conclusion, for he begone to found a college
of a hundredth prestes, which foundation with the founder shortelye took an
end. To please the common people also, he in his high court of parliamente
enacted diverse and sondrie good laws and profitable estatutes and in especial
one against strangers and foren wrought wares, not to be transported in to
this realm, which commodius act for the common wealth if he had lived he
fullye purposed to have auaunsed and fet forward and put in execucion. But
afterward evidently to all persons it appeared, that only fear (which is
not a master long in office and in continual authority) and not justice,
caused king Richard at that very time to wax better and amend his
synnefull life, for shortelie the goodness of the man which was but payncted
and fraudulent, suddenly wexed could and vanished away. And from thence
forth not only all his counsailles, doings and procedynges, sodainlye decayed
and sorted to none effect: But also fortune began to froune and turn her
whele douneward from him, in so much that he lost his only begotten son
called Edward in the.iii. month, after he had created him prince of Wales.

The.ii. year.
ANd shortly after, The.ii. year he was unquieted by a conspiracye, or rather
a confederacye between the duke of Buckyngham and many other gentlemen against,
him as ye shall hear: But ye occasion why the duke and the king fell out, is
of diverse folk diuersely pretended. This duke as you have hard before,
as soon as y^ duke of Gloucester after y^ death of king Edward was come to
York* and there had solemn funeral service done for king Edward, sent to
him a secret servant of his called Persall, with such messages as you have
hard before. And after the duke of Buckyngham came with.CCC. horse to
Northampton and still continued with him, as partener and chief organe of his
devices till after his coronacion, they departed to all semyng very friends at
Gloucester. From whence as soon as the duke came home, he so highly turned from
him and so highly conspired against him, that a man would marueill whereof the
change grew in so short space. Some say this occasyon was, that a little
before the coronacion, the duke required the king amongst other things to be
restored to the earl of Herfordes lands: And forasmuch as the title which he
claymed by inheritance, was somewhat interlaced, with the title of Lancaster,
which house made a title to the croune, and enjoyed the same three discentes,
as al men knew, till the house of York deprived the third king, which was
Henry the sixte* King Richard somewhat mistrusted and conceived such an
indignacion, that he rejected the dukes request, with many spiteful, and
minotary words, which so wounded the dukes heart with hatred and mistrust,
that he could never after endure to look right on king Richard but ever feared
his own life, so far forth, that when the Protectoure should ride to his
coronacio^, he feigned him self sick, because he would do him no honor. And
the other taking it in evil part, sent him word to rise and ride or he would
make him to be carried. Whereupon, gorgeously apparelled, and sumpteously
trapped with burning carte naues of gold embrodered, he road before the king
through London with an evil will and worse heart. And that notwithstanding,
he roase the day of the coronacion from the feast, feignyng him self sick,
which king Richard said was done in hate and spighte of him. And therefore men
said that each of them ever after lived continually in such hatred and
dystrust of other, that the duke looked verily to have been murdered at
Gloucester, from which he in fair manner departed: but surely such as were
right secret with both, affirm all this to be untrue and other wise men
think it unlikely, the deep dissymulyng nature of both these men well
considered. And what need in that grene world the protectoure had of the duke,
and in what perel the duke stood if he fell once in suspicion of that
tyraunte, that either the protector would give the duke occasyon of
displeasure, or the duke the protector occasion of mystruste. And surely men
think, that if king Richard had any such opinion conceived in him, he would
never have suffered him to avoid his hands or escape his power: but very true
it is, that the duke of Buckyngham was an high minded man, and evil could
bear the glory of another, so that I have heard of some that saw it, that he
at such time as the corune was set upon the protectours head, his eye could
never abide the sight thereof, but wryed his head another way: but men said he
was not well at ease, and that was both to king. Richard well known and well
taken, nor any demand of the dukes request discourteously rejected, but gently
deferred, but both he with great gifts and high be hestes in most loving
and trustye manner departed from the king to Gloucester. Thus every man judged
as he thought, but soon after his coming home to Breckenocke, having there by
king Richardes commandment doctor Morto^ bishop of Ely, who before as you
have have hard was taken at the counsel at the tower, waxed with him very
familier, whose only wisdom abused his pride, to his own deliuerau^ce and
the dukes destruction. The bishop was a man of great natural wit, very well
learned and of honorable behaueour, lackyng no wise ways to win favor. He
was first upon the part of king Henrye, while that part was in wealth, and
neither left it nor forsook it in no woo, but fled the realm with the queen
and the prince. And while king Edward had king Henry in prison, he never
returned but to the field at Barnet: After which field lost and utterly
subdued and all part takynges extynguished, king Edward for his fast faith
and wisdom* as not only content to receive him, but also wooed him to come
and had him from thensforthe both in secret trust and special favor, whom
he nothing deceived. For the being after king Edwardes death first taken
by the tyraunte for his truethe to the king, found the mean to set the duke
in his top, and joined gentlemen together in aid of the earl of Richemonde,
which after was named king Henry the seventh: First deuisyng the marriage
between the lady Elizabeth daughter to king Edward the fourth, by the which
his faithful and true service declared to both his masters at once, was an
infinity benefit to the realm, by the conjunction of the bloudes of
Lancaster and York, whose funeral titles had long iniquieted the realm.
This man afterward escaped from the duke and fled the realm, and never
returned, and went to Rome, never minding to meddle with the world, till
king Henry the seventh sent for him, and after made him Archbishop of
Cauntorbury and Chaunceloure of England, and after was made Cardinal, and
lived well to all men's judgments and died well. But to return to the former
purpose, he by the long and often alternate proof, as well of prosperitee as
adverse fortune, had gotten by great experience the very mother and mastres of
wisdom, and deep insighte in pollitike and worldly driftes, whereby perceiuyng
now the duke to common with him, ^ed him with fair words and many pleasant
praises, and perceiving by the grefe of their communicacions the dukes pride
now and then to balke out a little brayde of envy toward the glory of the
king, and thereby feeling him easy to fall out if the matter were well
handeled, he craftily sought the ways to prycke him forward taking always
the occasyon of his coming, and also keeping him self close within his bands
that he rather seemed to follow him then to lead him. For when the duke began
first to praise and boast the king and show how much profit the realm
should take by his reign: Bishop Morton answered, surely my lord, folly it
were for me to lie, for I am sure if I would swear the contrary ye would not
once believe me but if the world would have begone as I would have wyshed,
that king Henry's son had had the crown and not king Edward, then would I
have been his true and faithful ^ubiecte, but after that God had ordained him
to lose it, and king Edward to reign, I was never so mad with a dead man
to strive against the quick, so was I ever to king Edward a faithful and true
chapeleyn and glad would have been that his children should have succeeded him
howbeit if the secret judgment of God have otherwise provided, I purpose not
to spurn against the prick, nor labor to set up that God pulls down. And
as for the late protector and now king: and with that word he left, saving
that he said that he had already meddled to much with the world and would from
that day meddle with his book and beads, and no further. Then longed the duke
sore to hear, what he would have said, because he ended with the king, and
there so suddenly stopped, and exhorted him familierly, between them both to
be bold and to say whatsoever he thought, whereof he faithefully promised
there should never come hurt, and paraduenture more good then he would wene.
And that he him self intended to use his faithefull secret advice and
counsel, which he said was the only cause for the which he procured of the
king to have him in his custodye, where he might recon him felf at home, or
else he had been put in the hands of them with whom he should not have found
like favor. The bishop right humbly thanked him and said, in good faith my
lord, I love not much to talk of princes as of a thing not all out of
perell, although the word be without fault, but yet it must be as it pleases
y^ prince to construe it. And ever I think on Isopes tale, y^ when the Lion
had proclaimed that on pain of death there should no horned beasts come into
the wood, one beast that had a bonche of flesh growyng out of his head, fled
a great pace: the Fox that saw him fly with all the have, asked him whether
he fled? In faith quod he, I neither wot ne recke, so I were once hence,
because of the proclamacion made against horned beasts. What fool quod the
fox, the Lion never meant it by the, for that which thou haste is no horn in
thy head. No mary quod he, I wot that well enough, but if he say it is a
horn, where am I then? The duke laughed merely at the tale and said, my lord
I warraunte you, neither the Lion nor the bore shall pycke any matter at any
thing here spoken, for it shall never come nere their ears. In good faith,
sir said the bishop, if it did, the thing that I was about to say taken as well
as before God I mente, it could deserve but thank, and yet taken as I wene it
would, might happen to turn me to little good and you to less.

Then longed the duke much more to wete what it was, whereupon the bishop
said. In good faith my lord, as for the late protectoure, since he is now king
in possession I purpose not to dispute his title, but for y^ wealth of this
realm, whereof his grace has now the governance, and whereof I my self am a
poor membre, I was about to wish that to those good abilities whereof he has
already right many, little neadyng my praise, yet might it have pleased God for
the better store to have given him some of such other excellent virtues mete
for the rule of the realm, as our lord has planted in the person of your
grace, and there left of again. The duke somewhat maruelynge at his sudden
pauses as though they were but parentheses, with a high countenance said: my
lord I euidentelye perceive and no less note your often breathyng and sudden
stoppynge in your co^municacion, so that to my intelligence your words neither
come to any dyrect or perfect sentence in conclusion, whereby either I might
perceive and have knowledge what your inward intent is now toward the king, or
what affection you bear toward me. For the comparyson of good qualities
ascribed to us both (for the which I my self knowledge and recognize to have
none, nor look for no praise of any creature for the same) makes me not a
little to muse thinking that you have some other preuie Imaginacion, by love
or by grudge engraued and emprinted in your heart, which for fear you dare
not or for childeshe shamefastnes you be abashed to disclose and reuele, and
especially to me being your friend, which on my honor do assure you to be
as secret in this case as the deffe and dumme person is to the singer, or the
tree to the hunter. The bishop being somewhat boulder, considering the
dukes promise, but most of all ammated and encouraged because he knew the
duke desyerous to be exalted and magnified, and also he perceived the inward
hatred and pryuie rancor which he bare toward king Richard, was now
bol^ened to open his stomach eue^ to the very bottom, entendyng thereby to
compass how to destroy and utterly confound king Richard, and to depryue
him of his dignitee royal, or else to set the Duke so a fire with the desyer
of ambicion, that he him self might be safe and escape out of all danger and
perell, which thing he brought shortly to conclusion both to the kings
destruction and the dukes confusion and to his own sauegarde, and finally, to
his high promocion. And so (as I said before) upon trust and confidence of
the dukes promise, the bishop saiede: my synguler good lord sith the time
of my captiuitee, which being in your graces custody I may rather call it a
liberal liberty more them a straight emprysonmente, in a voydynge ydelnes
mother and norissher of all vices, in redynge books and aunciente pamphlettes
I have found this sentence written, that no man is borne fre and in liberty of
him self only, for one part of duty he owes or should owe to his
parents for his procreacion by a very natural instincte and filial courtesy:
another part, to his friends and kynsfolke, for proximitie of blood and
natural amity does of very dewtie challenge and demand: But the native
country in the which he tasted first the sweet ayers of this pleasant and
flattering world after his nativity, demau^deth as a debt by a natural bond
neither to be forgotten nor yet to be put in oblivion, which saiynge causes
me to consider in what case this realm my native country now stands, and in
what estate and assueraunce before this time it has continued: what governor
we now have, and what ruler we might have, for I plainly perceive the realm
being in this case must needs decay and be brought to utter confusion and
fynall exterminion: But one hope I have encorporate in my breaste, that is,
when I consider and in my mind do diligentely remember, and daily behold
your noble personage, your justice* and indifference, your ^eruente zele and
ardente love toward your natural country, and in like manner y^ love of your
contrie toward you, the great learning, pregnaunte wit and goodly
eloquence, which so much does abound in the person of your grace, I must
needs think this realm fortunate, ye twyse more then fortunate, which has
such a prince in store, mete and apt, to be a gouernoure in whose person
being endued with so many princelye qualities consists and rests the very
undoubted similitude and image of true honor. But on the other side when I
call to memory the good qualites of the late protector and now called king,
so violated and subverted by tyranny, so thaunged, and altered by usurped
aucthoritee, so clouded and shadowed by blind and infaciable ambicion, ye and
so sodainlye (in manner by a metamorphosis) transformed from politic civility,
to detestable tyranny: I must needs say and justly affirm, that he is
neither mete to be a king of so noble a realm, nor so famous a realm mete to
be governed by such a tyraunte: Was not his first interprise to obtain the
crown begone and incepted by the murder of diverse noble valiant true and
virtuous personages: O a holy beginning to come to a myscheuous endyng, did he
not secondarelie proceed contrary to al laws of honesty, shamefully against
his own natural mother, being a woman of much honor, and more vertew,
declaryng her openly to be a woman given to carnal affection, and dissolute
living (which thing if it had been true as it was not in deed, ^uery good
and natural child would have rather mummed at, then to have blasted a broad
and especially she being a live.) Declarynge farthermore his ii. brethren and
his.ii. nephews to be bastardes and to be borne in auoutrey, yet not whith all
this content. After that he had obtained the garlande for the which he so
long thristed, he caused the two poor innoce^s his nephews committed to him,
for especial trust, to be murdered and shamefully to be killed. The blood of
which sely and lyttel babes daily cry to God, from the earth for vengaunce.
Alas my heart sobbith, to remember this bloody boutcher and cruel monster, what
surety shall be in this realm to any person, other for life or goods under
such a cruel prince, which regards not the destruction of his own blood,
and then less the loss of other. And most especially as oftentimes it
chances, where a covetous or a cruel prince takes suspicion, the smaleste,
swaruynge that is possible (if the thing be mysconstered) may be the cause of
the destruction of many gyltles persons: and in especial of noble and wealthy
personages having great possessions and riches: Such a lord is Lucifer when
he is entered into the heart of a proud prince, given to covetousness and
cruelty. But now my Lord to conclude what I mean toward your noble
person, I say and affirm, if you love God, your lynage, or your natyue
contrye, your must yower self take upon you the Crown and Diadem of this
noble empire, both for the mayntenauns of the honor of the same (which so
long has floreshed in fame and renown) as also for the delyueraunce of your
natural country men, from the bondage and thraldom (worse then the
captivity of Egypt) of so cruel a tiraunt and arrogante oppressor. For thus
I dare say, if any foren prince or potentate, ye the Turcke him self would
take upon him the regiment here and the crown, the commons would rather
admit and obey him, then to live under such a blood supper and child kyller:
but how much more joyful and glad would they be to live under your grace,
whom they all know to be a ruler mete and convenient for them, and they to be
loving and obedient subjects mete to live under such a governor: despise
not, nor forsake not so manifest occasion so lovingly offered. And if you your
self knowing the pain and trauaill that apperteyneth to the office of a king,
or for any other consideracion, will refuse to take upon you the crown and
scepter of this realm: Then I adjure you by ye faith that you owe to God, by
your honor and by your oath made to Saint George patron of the noble order
of the gartier (whereof you be a compaignion) and by the love and affection
that you bear to your native country and the people of the same, to devise
some way how this realm now being in misery may by your high discrecion and
pryncely policy, be brought and reduced to some suertie and conueniente
regiment under some good governor by you to be excogitate: for you are ye
very patron, the only help, refuge, and conforte for the poor amassed and
desolate commons of this realm. For if you could either devise to set up
again the lineage of Lancaster or auaunce the eldest daughter of king Edward to
some high and puyssaunte prince, not only the new crowned king shall small
time enjoy the glory of his dignity, but also al civil war should cease,
all domestical discord should sleep, and peace, profit and quietnies should
be set forth and embrased. When the bishop had thus ended his saying, ye duke
sighed and spoke not of a great while, which sore abashed the bishop and made
him change color: which thing when the duke apperceiued, he said, be not
afraid my lord, all promyses shall be kept, to morrow we will common more: let
us go to supper, so that night they commoned no more, not a little to the
iniquietacion of the bishop, which now was enen as desirous to know the
dukes mind and intent, as the duke longed the day before to know his opinion
and meaning. So the next day, the duke sent for the bishop and rehearsed to
him in manner (for he was both wyttie and eloquente) all the communicacion had
between them before, and so paused a while, and after a little ceason puttyng of
his bonett he said: O lord God creator of all things how much is this
realm of England and the people of the same bounden to thy goodness, for where
we now be in vexacion and trouble with great storms oppressed sailing and
tossyng in a desperate ship without good master or governor: but by thy
healp good lord I trust or long time pass that we shall provide for such a
ruler as shall be both to thy pleasure, and also to the securite and sauegarde of
this noble realm. And then he put on his bonett saying to the bishop, my
lord of Ely whose true heart and sincere affeccion toward me at all times, I
have evidently perceived and known, and now most of all in our last preuie
co^municacion and secret deuisynge, I must needs in heart think and with
mouth confess and say; that you be a sure friend, a trustye counsailour, a
vigilante foresear, a very lover of your country, a natural countreyman: for
which kyndnes for my part, I most louinglye render to you my hartye thanks
now with words: hereafter trustyng to recompense and remunerate you with
deeds, if life and power shall serve. And sith at our last communicacion, you
have disclosed, and opened, the very secrets and priuities of your stomach,
touching the duke of Gloucester now usurper of the crown, and also have a
littel touched the auaunceme^t of the.ii. noble famelyes of York and
La^caster: I shall likewise not only declare and manifest unto you, all my
open acts, attemptes and doings, but also my preuie ententes, and secret
cogitacions. To the intent that as you have vnbuckeled your bogett of your
preuie meanynges, and secret purposes to me: so shall all my clowdy workynge,
close devises, and secret imaginacions, be (as clear as the some) reveled,
opened, and made lightesome to you. And to begin, I declare: that when king
Edward was disseaced, to whom I thought my self littell or nothing
beholden, (all though we.ii. had married two systers) because, he neither
promoted nor preferred me, as I thought I was worthy and had deserved, nether
favored nor regarded me, according to my degree and birth: For surely I had
by him little aucthoritee, and les^e rule, and in effect nothing at all: which
caused me the less to favor his children, because I found small humanity, or
none in there par^nte. I then began to study, and with mature, deliberacion,
to ponder and consider, how and in what manner this re^lme should be ruled and
governed. And first I remembered an old proverb worthy of memory, that often
ruithe the realm, where children rule, and women govern. This old adage so
sanke, and settelled in my head, that I thought it a great error, and extreme
myschyefe to the hole realm, either to suffer the young king to rule, or the
qu^ne his mother to be a governor over him, considering that her brethrene,
and her first children (all though they were not extracte of high and noble
lynage) took more upon them, and more exalted them selves by reason of the
queen, then did the kings brethrene, or any duke in his realm: Which in
conclusion turned to there confusion. The^ I being persuaded whith my self in
this poyncte, thought it necessary both for the public and profitable
welthe of this realm, and also for mine own commodity and emolumente, to
take part with thee duke of Eloucester: Whom I assure you I thought to be as
cl^ane without dissimulacion, as tractable without injury, as merciful
without cruelty, as now I know him perfectely to be a dissembler without
verity, a tyraunte without petie, yea, and worse then the tyraunte phaleres,
destitute of all trutghe and clemency: And so by my means, at the first
counsel holden at London, when he was most suspected of that thing that
after happened, (as you my lord know well enough) he was made Protectoure and
defender, both of the king and of the realm, which aucthorite once gotten,
and the two children partly by policy brought under his governance, he
being moved with that gnawynge and covetous serpent, desyered to reign and
never ceased priuelie to exhort and require (yea and some times with minatorie
terms) to persuade me and other lords as well spiritual as temporal, that he
might take upon him the crown, till the prince came to the age of four and
twenty years, and were able to govern the realm, as a mature and sufficient
king: Which thing when he saw me somewhat stycke at, both for the
straungenes of the example (because no such presidente had been seen) and also
because we remembered that men once ascended to the highest type of honor and
aucthoritee will not gladly discende again, he then brought in instruments,
autentike doctors, proctoures, and notaries of the law, with deposicions of
diverse witnesses, testifieng king Edwards children to be bastardes, which
deposicio^s then I thought to be as true, as now I know them to be feigned,
and testified by persons with rewards vntruelye subornate. When the said
deposicions were before us read and diligently hard, he stood up bare hedded
saying: Well my lords, even as I and you sage and discrete counsailers would
that my nephewe should have no wrong: So I pray you do me nothing but
right. For these witnesses and sayings of famous doctors being true* I am
only the vndubitate heir to lord Richard plantagenet duke of York, adjudged
to be the very heir to the crown of this realm by aucthoritee of
parliamente, which things* so by learned men to us for a verite declared,
caused me and other to take him for our lawful and undoubted prince and
sovereign lord. For well we knew y^ the duke of Clarence son, by reason of
the attaynder of his father was disabled to inherit, and also y^ duke him self
was named to be a bastard, as I my self have hard spoken, and that upon
great presumpcions more times then one: so again by my aid and favor, he of
a protector was made a king, and of a subject made a governor, at which time
he promised me on his fidelite, laiyng his hand in mine at Baynarde Castle,
that the.ii. young princes should live, and that he would so provide for them
and so mayntaine them in honorable estate* ye I and all the realm ought and
should be content. But when he was once crouned king, and in full possession of
the hole realm he cast a way his old co^dicions as y^ adder does her skin,
verefieng y^ old proverb, honors change manners, as the parish pressed
remembers that he was never parish clerck. For when I my self sued to him for
my part of the Earl of Ha^^fordes lands which his brother king Edward
wrongefully de^eyned and with held from me, and also required to have the
office of the high constable ship of England, as diverse of my noble
anunceters before this time have had, and in long discente continued. In this
my first suyte showing his good mind toward me, he did not only first
delay me, and afterward denay me, but gave me such unkind words, with
such tauntes and retauntes ye in manner check and check mate to the
vttermooste proof of my patience. As though I had never furthered him but
hyndered him as though I had put him down and not set him up: yet all these
vngratitudes and undeserved unkindness I bare closlye and suffered pacientelie
and covertly remembered, owtwardely dissimulynge that I inwardelie thought, and
so with a payncted countenance I passed the last summer in his last
compaignie, not without many faier promyses, but without any good deeds. But
when I was credibly informed of the death of the.ii. young innocents, his
own natural nephews contrary to his faith and promise, to the which God be
my judge I never agreed nor condiscended. O lord, how my veins panted, how my
body trembled, and my heart inwardely grudged, in so much that I so abhorred
the sight and much more the compaignie of him, that I could no longer abide
in his court, except I should be openly revenged. The end whereof was
doutfull, and so I feigned a cause to depart, and with a merry countenance and
a dispiteful heart I took my leave humbly of him (he thinkyng nothing less
then that I was displeased) and so returned to Brecknock to you. But in y^
journey as I returned whyther it were by the inspiracion of the holy ghost, or
by Melancolous disposicio^, I had diverse and sundry imaginacions how to
deprive this unnatural uncle, and bloody butcher, from his royal seat, and
princely dignity. First I fantesyed that if I list to take upon me the croune,
and imperial scepter of the realm, now was the time propice and convenient.
For now was the way made plain, and the gate opened, and occasion given*
which now neglected, should paraduenture never take such effect and
conclusion. For I saw he was disdaigned of the lords temporal execrate and
accursed of the lords spiritual, detested of all gentilmen, and despised of
all the communaltie: So that I saw my chance as perfectely as I saw my own
Image in a glass, that there was no person (y^ ^ had been gredy to attempt the
enterprise) could nor should have wone the ryng, or got the gole before me.
And on this poyncte I rested in imaginacion secretly with my self.ii. days at
Tewkesberie. And from thence so iornyeng I mused and thought y^ it was not best
nor convenient to take upon me as a co^querour, for then I knew that all me^
and especially the nobilitee, would with all their power with stand me, both
for rescuyng of possessions and tenours, as also for subuertyng of ye hole
estat laws and customs of the realm: Such a power has a conqueror as you
know well enough my lord. But at the last, in all is doutfull case there
sprange a new branch out of my head, which suerly I thought should have
brought forth ^ayer flowers, but the son was so hot that they turned to
dry wedes, for I suddenly remembered that lord Edmond duke of Somersett my
grandfather was with king Henrye the sixte in the.ii. and.iii. degrees from
Ihon duke of Lancaster lawefully begotten: So that I thought sure my mother
being eldest daughter to duke Edmonde, that I was next heir to king Henry
the syxte of the house of Lancaster. This title pleased well such as I made
priuye of my counsel, but much more it encorraged my foulishe desyer, and
elevated my ambicious entente, in so much that clearly judged, and in mine
own mind was determynath resolved, ye I was indubitate heir, of the house of
Lancaster, and there upon concluded, to make my first foundation, and crecte my
new buyldinge. But whyther God so ordained, or by fortune it so chanced,
while I was in a ma^e, other to conclude sodaynlie on this title, and so set
it open a mongeste the common people, or to keep it secret a while, se the
chance: as I ro^e between worceter and brigenorthe, I encountered with the
lady Maxgariete, countess of Richemonde, now wife to the lord Stanley,
which is the very daughter and sole heir, to lord Ihon duke o^ Somersett my
grandfathers elder brother: Which was as clean out of my mind as though I
had never seen her, so that she and her son the Earl of Richemonde be both
bulwarcke and portecolice between, and the gate, to enter into the maies^ie
royal and getting of the crown. And when we had commoned a little concerning
her son, as I shall show you after, and were departed, she to our lady of
worceter, and I toward Shrewsberie: I then new changed and in manner amassed,
began to dispute with my self, title considering that thus my earnest was
turned even to a tittyl not so good as, estamen. Estsones I imagened whyther I
were best to take upon me, by the elec^ion of the nobility and commonaltie,
which me thought easy to be done, the vsurpor king thus being in hatred and
abhorred of this hole realm* or to take it by power, which stands in
fortunes chance and difficle to be acheued and brought to pass. Thus
romblynge and tossynge, in the waves ambiguitie, between the stone and
sacrafice, I considered fyr^^e the office, deutie and pain of a king, which
suely think that no mortal man can justly, and truly observe, except he be
called elected and ^pecially appoyncted by God as king David and diverse other
have been.

But farther I remembered that if I once took on me the ^cepter, and the
governance of the realm: That of two extreme enemies I was daily sure, but of
one trusty ^rend (which now a days begone a pilgrymage) I was nether assuered
nor credible asserteyned (such is the worlds mutacion) for I manifestely
perceived that the daughters of king Edward and there alies, and friends,
which be no small number, being both, for his sake much beloved, and also
for the great injury and manifest tyranny done to them, by the new
usurper, much lamented, and pitied, would never cease to barcke if they
cannot byte at the one side of me. Semblable, my cousyne therle of Rychemonde,
his aids and kynsfolke, which be not of little power, will surely attempt
like a fierce grandhounde, other to byte or to perce me on the other side. So
that my life and ru^e, should ever hang by a hear, never in quiet, but ever
in doubt of death^ or deposicion. And if the said.ii. linages of York and
Lancaster, which so long have stryued for the imperial Diadem should join
in one against me, then were I suerly mated and the game gotten. Wherefore I
have clearly determined, and with my self concluded, utterly to relinquishe
all such fantastical imaginacions concerning the obteynynge of the croune.
But al such plagues, calamities and troubles (which I feared and suspected)
might have chanced on me if I had taken the rule and regimente of this realm,
I shall with a reredemayne so make them rebounde to our common enemy that
calls him self king, that the best stopper that he has at tenyce shall
not well stop without a fault: for as I told your before, the countess of
Richemonde in my return from the new named king metyng me in the high way,
prayed me fyr^^e for kindred sake, secondarily for the love that I bare to my
gra^dfather duke Humfrey, which was sworn brother to her father, to move the
king to be good to her son Henry earl of Richemo^d, and to license him with
his favor to return again into England: and if it were his pleasure so to do,
she promised that the earl her son should mary one of king Edwardes daughters
at the appoinctement of the king, without any thing to be taken or demanded
for the said espousals, but only the kings favor, which request I so^e
over passed and gave her fair words and so departed. But after in my lodgyng,
when I called to memory with a deliberate study and did circumspectely ponder
them. I fully adjudged ye the holy ghost caused her to move a thing (the end
whereof she could not consider) both for the security of the realm as also
for the prefermente of her child and the destruction and final confusion of
the common enemy king Richard. Which thing, she neither then thought I am
sure as I by her words could make conjecture, nor I my self cast not her
desyer to be so profitable to the realm as I now do perceive, but such a lord
is God, that with a little sparcle he kyndelith a great fire, and so finally to
declare to you the very conclusion, to the which I am both bent and set, my
mind is and my power and purse shall help, that y^ earl of Richemond very
heir of the house of Lancaster (in the querell of the which lineage, both my
father and grand father lost there lives in battle) shall take to wi^e lady
Elizabeth eldest daughter to king Edward by the which marriage both the houses
of the York and Lancaster may be obtained and unite in one, to the clear
stablyshement of the title to the crown of this noble realm. To which
conclusion if the mothers of both parties, and especially the earl him self,
and the lady will agree, I doubt not but the bragging bore, which with his
tuskes raises every man's skyn, shall not only be brought to confusion as he
has deserved but that this empire shall ever be certain of an vndubitate
heir, and then shall all civil and intestyne war cease, which so long has
continued to the paring of many men's crowns, and this realm shall be reduced
again to quietness renoune and glory. This inuencion of the duke many men
thought after, that it was more imagened for the inward hatred that he bare to
king Richard, then for any favor that he bare to the earl of Rychemond. But
of such doubtful matter, it is not best to judge for erryng to far from the
mind and intent of the auctor: But whatsoever he intended, this device once
opened to king Rychard was the very occasion, ye he was rounded shorter by the
whole head, without attaynder or judgment. When the duke had said, the bishop,
which favored ever the house of Lancaster, was wondrous joyful, and much
reioysed to here this device, for now came the wind about even as he would
have it, for all his imaginacio^ te^ded to this effect to have king Richard
subdued, and to have y^ lines of king Edward, and king Henry ye.vi. again
raised and auaunsed. But lord how he reioysed to think how ye by this marriage
the linages of York and Lancaster should be conjoined in one, to the very
stedfa^^nes of the public wealth of this realm. And lest the dukes courage
should swage, or his mind should again alter, as it did often before, as you
may easily perceive by his own tale. He thought to set up all the sails that
he had, to the intent that ye ship of his pre^ensed purpose might come shortly
to some suer port: And said to the duke, my lord, sigh by Gods high provision
and your incomparable wisdom and policy, this noble conjunction is fyrs^e
moved, now is it conueniente, ye and nece^^arie to consider, what personages
and what friends we shall first make preuie of this high device and polliticke
conclusion. By my truth quod the duke we will begyne with my lady of
Rychemonde therles mother which knowethe where he is, either in captivity or
at large in Brytaine. For I hard ^aie that y^ duke of Brytaine restored him to
liberty immediately after the death of king Edward, by whose means he was
restrained. Sith you will begin that way (said y^ bishop) I have an old friend
with ye countess, a man sobre, secret, and well wytted, called Reignold Bray
whose prudent policy I have known to have compassed things of great
importau^ce, for whom I shall secretly send if it be your pleasure, and I doubt
not he will gladly come, and y^ with a good will. So with a lyttel diligence,
the bishop wrote a letter to Reignold Bray requyrynge him to come to Brecknocke
wit^ speed for great and vrgente causes touching his maistresse: and no other
thing was declared in the letter. So the messenger rode into Lancashire where
Bray was with the countess and lord Thomas Stanley her husband, and delivered
the letter, which when he had red, ^e took it as a sign or presage of some
good fortune to come, and so with y^ messenger he came to the Castle ^f
Brecknock, where y^ duke and the bishop declared what thing was devised both
for to set y^ realm in a quiet stedefastnes, as also for y^ high preferment of
y^ earl of Richemond son to his lady and maistresse: Wyllyng her first to
compass how to obtain y^ good will of queen Elizabeth, and also of her eldest
daughter bearing y^ same name: and after secretl^ to send to her son into
Britain to declare what high honor was prepared for him if he would swear to
mary y^ lady Elizabeth as soon as he was king and in royal possession of the
realm. Reignold Bray with a glad have for gettyng nothing given to him in charge
in great have and with good sped returned to the countess his lady and
mastresse. When Bray was departed and this great doutfull vessel once set a
broche, the bishop thrustyng for nothing more then for liberty: when he saw
the duke pleasant and well minded, toward him told the duke that if he were
in his isle of Elye he could make many friends to ferther there enterprise, and
if he were there and had but.iiii. days warnyng he little regarded the malice
of king Richard, his country was so strong. The duke knew well all this to be
true, but yet loathe he was that the bishop should depart, for he knew well
that as long as the bishop, was with him, he was sure of politic advise,
sage counsayl, and circumspect proceeding. And so he gave the bishop fair
words, saying that he should shortly depart and that well accompaigned for
fear of enemies. The bishop beiyng as wyttye as the duke was wily, did not
tarry till y^ dukes compaignie were assembled, but secretly disguysed in a
night departed (to the dukes great displeasure) and came to his see of Ely,
where he found monye and friends and so sailed into Flaunders, where he did
the earl of Richemonde good service and never returned again till the earl
of Richemoude after beyinge, king sent for him, and shortly promoted him to
the sea of Cauntorbury. Thus the bishop wound him self from the duke when he
had most need of his aid, for if he had tarried still y^ duke had not made so
many blabbes of his counsel, nor put so much confidens in the Welshemen, nor
yet so temerariously set forward with out knowledge of his friends as he did,
which things were his sodanie overthrow as they that knew it did report.

When Reignold Bray had declared his message, and preuie instruction to the
countess of Richemonde his maftres, no meruell though she were joyous and
glad, both of the good news and also for y^ obteynyng of such a high friend
in her sons cause as the duke was, wherefore she wyllyng not to sleep this
matter, but to farther it to the uttermost of her power and ability, devised a
means how to break is matter to quen^ Elizabeth then being in sanctnarie at
Westminster. And there upon she having in her family, at that time for the
preseruacion of her health a certain Welsheman called Jews learned in
physic, which for his gravity and experiens, was well known and much
esteemed amongst great estates of the realm: with whom she used sometime
liberally and familiarlye to talk, now having opportunity and occasion to
break her mind unto him of this weighty matter, declared that the time was
come that her son should be joined in marriage with lady Elizabeth daughter
and heir to king Edward, and that king Richard being taken and reputed of all
men for the common enemy of the realm, should out of all honor and estate
be dejected, and of his rule and kyngedome be clearly spoiled and expulsed: and
required him to goo to queen Elizabeth (with home in his faculty he was of
counsel) not as a messenger, but as one that came frendelie to visit and
consolate her, and as time and place should require to make her preuie of this
devise, not as a thing concluded, but as a purpose by him imagened. This
phisician did not long linger to accomplish her desire, but with good diligens
repaired to the queen being still in the sanctuary at Westminster. And when he
saw time propice and convenient for his purpose, he said unto her: Madame,
although my imaginacion be very simple and my deuyce more folishe, yet for the
entier affection that I bear toward you and your children, I am so bold to
vttre unto you a secret and preuie co^ceite that I have cast and compassed in
my fantastical brain. When I well remember and no less considre the great
loss and damage that you have su^^eyned by the death of your noble and
loving husband, and the great dolor and sorrow that you have suffered and
tolerated by the cruel murder of your innocente chil^ren: I can no less do
both of bounden deutie and christian charity, then daily to study and hourly
ymagen not only how to bring your heart to com^orte and gladness but also
deuyse how to revenge y^ ^^ghteous quarrel of you and your children on that
bloody blood^^pper and cruel tyraunte king Richard. And first considre, what
battle, what mans^aughter, what mis^hie^e has risen in this realm by the
dissencion between the.ii. noble houses to York and Lancaster, which.ii.
families (as I have contryued) if they man be joined in one, I think, ye and
doubt not but your line shall be again restored to the pristmate estate and
degree to your great joy and comfort, and to the vttre confusion o^ your
mortal enemy the usurper king. You know very well madame that of the house
of Lancaster, the er^e or Richemond is next of blood, which is living and a
iusty young batcheler, and to the house of York your daughters now are
heirs: if you could agree and invent the mean how to couple your eldest
daughter with the young earl of Ric^emo^d in matrimony, no doubt but the
usurper of the realm should be shortly deposed, and your heir again to her
right restored.

When the queen had heard this frendely mocion (which was as far from her
thought as the man that the rude people say is in the moon) lord how her
spirits reuyued, and how her heart lept in her body for joy and gladness. And
first geuynge lawde to almighty God as the chief aucthore of her comfort,
secondarely to master jews as the deuyser of the good news and tydinges,
instantely besought him that as he had been the ^^rst inue^ter of so good an
entreprise, that now he would not relinquishe nor desiste to follow the same:
requirynge him farther (because he was apperteynynge to the countess of
Richemonde mother to the earl Henry) that he woul^e with all diligente celerite
resort to her then lodgyng in her husbands place within the cite of London,
and to d^clare on the Queen's behalf to the countess, that all the friends and
fautoures of king Edward her husband, should (...) and t^ke part with the
earl of Richemonde her son, so that he would take a corporal oath after
the kyngedome obtained, to espouse and take to wife the lady Elizabeth her
daughter, or else lady Cecile, if theldest daugh^er were not then living.

Master Jews with all dexteritee so sped his busynes that he made and
concluded a final end and determinacion of this entreprise between the.ii.
mothers, and because he was a phisician and out of al suspicion and
mysdemynge, he was the common (...) and daily messenger between them, aidynge
and setting forth the invented conspiracye against king Richard. So the
lady Margarete countess of Richemonde brought into a good hope of the
prefermente of her son made Reygnolde Braie her most faithefull servant
chief soliciter and preuie procu^er of this conspiracy, geuynge him in charge
secretly to enuegle and attracte such persons of nobilite to join with her
and take her part as he knew to be ingenious, faythefull, diligente and of
actiuitie. is Reygnolde Breie within few days brought unto his lure (first
of all taking of every person a solemn oath to be true and secret) sir
Gyles Daubenei, sir Ihon Cheiney knight, Richard Guylforde and Thomas Rame
esquyers and diverse other. The coun^esse of Richemonde was not so diligente
for her part, but Queen Elizabeth was as vigilaunte on the other side and made
friends and appoyncted councelers to set forward and auaunce her busynes. In
the mean ceason the countess of Richemond took into her service Christopher
Urswike an honest and a wise priest, and after an oath of him for to be
secret taken and sworn, she vttred to him all her mind and council,
adhibityng to him the more confidence and truth that he al his life had
favored and taken part with king Henry the.vi. and as a special ^uell put to
her service by sir Jews her physician. So the mother studious for ye
prosperity of her son appointed this Christopher Urswike to sail into
Britayne to the earl of Richemond and to declare and to demonster to him all
pactes and agrementes between her and the queen agreed and concluded: But
suddenly she reme^bryng that the duke of Buckyngha^ was one of the first
^ue^ters and a secret founder of this entreprise, determined to send some
personage of more estimacio^ then her chapelain, and so elected for a messenger
Hugh Conwey esquier and sent him into Britayne with a great some of monei to
her son, giving him in charge to declare to y^ earl the great love and
especial favor y^ the most part of the nobilite of the realm bare toward
him, the loving hearts and beneuo^ent minds which the whole comminaltie of
their own frewill frankely offered and liberally exhibited to him, willing and
aduisynge him not to neglecte so good an occasion apparently offered, but with all speed and diligence to addicte and settle his mind and full entencion how
to return home again into England where he was both wished and looked for,
geuynge him farther monicion and council to take land and arriual in ye
principalite of Wales, where he should not doubt to find both aid, comfort
and fre^des. Richard Guylford least Hugh Conwey might fortune to be taken or
stopped at plimmoth, where he ente^ded to take his nauiga^ion, sent out of
kent Thomas Rame with the same instruccio^s: and both made such diligence and
had such wind and wether, y^ one by land from Caleys, and the other by water
from plimmoth, that within less then an hour both arrived in the duke of
Britaynes court and spoke with the earl of Richemond, which from the death of
king Edward went at his pleasure and liberty, and to him counted and
manifested the cause and effect of their message and ambassade. When the earl
had rec^aued this ioyefull message, which was the more pleasant because y^
was unlooked for, he rendered to Jesus his savior his most humble and hearty
thanks, being in ferme credence and believe that such things as he with busy
mind and laborious entente had wished and desired, could never have taken any
effect without the help and prefermente of almighty God. And now being
put in comfort of his long longing he did communicate and break to the duke
of Britayne all his secrets and preuy messages which were to him declared,
aduertisynge him that he was entered into a sure and steadfast hope to obtain
and get the crown and kyngedome of the realm of England* desiring him both
of his good will and frendely help toward the acheuynge of his offered
entreprise, promising him when he came to his intended purpose, to render to
him again equal kyndenes and condign gratulacion.

Although the duke before that day by Thomas Hutton ambassador from king
Richard had both by money and prayers been solicit and moved to put again
into safe custody the earl of Richemonde, he nevertheless promised faithfully
to aid him, and his promise he truly performed.

The.iii. year.
Whereupon the earl with all diligence sent into England again Hugh conwey and
Thomas Rame, which should declare his coming shortly into England, to
thentent that all things which by council might be for his purpose provided,
should be accelerate and hasted, and that all things doubtful should of his
friends be prudently forseen, in aduoydyng al engines and snares which king
Richard had or might have set in disturbau^ce of his purpose, and he in the
mean ceason would make his abode still in Brytayne, till al things necessary
for his journey were prepared and brought in aredynes.

In, the mean ceason the cheuetaynes of the coniuracion in England began
together many entreprises: Some in conueniente fortresses put strong garrisons:
Some kept armed men preuely, to thentente when they should have knowledge of
the earls landynge, they would begin to stir up the war: Other did
secretly move and solicit the people to rise and make an insurrecion: Other
(emongeste whom Ihon Morton bishop of Ely then being in Flaunders was chief)
by peruie letters and cloked messengers, did stir and inuit to this new
coniuracion, al such which they certeynely knew to have a roted hatred or to
bear a cankard malice toward king Richard and his procedynges.

Although this great entreprice were never so preuely handeled and so
secretly emongeste so circumspecte persons treated, compassed and conueyghed,
yet knowledge thereof came to the ears of king Richard, which with the ^odayne
chance was not a lyttel moved and astonned. (...) because he had no host ready
prepared and conscribed. Secondarely if he should reyse and army so sodaynely
he knew not where to (...) and mete his enemies or whether to goo or where to
^arie. Wherefore he determined to dissimule the matter as though he knew
nothing till he had assembled his host, and in the mean ceason either by the
rumor of the common people or by the diligence of his exploratours and
espialles to inuestigate and search out all the councelles, determinacions*
ententes and compasses of his close adversaries, or else by crafty pollecie
to intercepte and take some person of the same coniuracion, con^^^erynge that
there is no more secret nor hyd espyall then that which lurketh in
dissimulacion of knowledge and intelligence, or is hidden in the name and
sha^owe of countre^^i^te humanite and feined kyndenes. And because he knew the
duke of Buckyngham to be the chief h^d and aid of the con^uracion, he
thought yt most necessary to pluck him from that part either by fair
promyses or open war. Whereupon he addressed his loving letters to the duke,
as full of (...) words, humanite and familiarite as the in^erior cogitacion
and preuy meaning was full of malice, rancor and poison: geuyng farther in
charge to the messenger that carried the letter to promise to the duke on his
beh^lfe golden hills and silver ryuers, and with all gentle and pl^asaunte
means to persuade and exhort the duke to come to the court. But the duke as
wily as the king, mystrustyng the f^yre flatteryng words and the gaye
promyses to him so sodayuly without any cause offered, knowing the crafty
castes of king Richardes bow, which in diverse affairs before time he had
seen practiced required the king to perdon him, exculynge him self that he
was so deseased in his stomach at skante he could take either refeccion or
rest* King Ri^harde not being content with this excuse would in no wise
a^mytte the same but incontinente directed to the duke other lett^rs of a more
rough^t and hawter sort, not without minatorie terms and checkynge words,
commaundynge him all excuses set aperte to repair without any delaie to his
royal presence. The ^uke made to the messenger a determynate answer that he
would not come to his mortal enemy, whom he neither loved nor ^auoured:
and ymmediately prepared open war against him, and persuaded all his
accomplices and partak^^s that every man should in his quarter with all
diligence ^^yse up the people and make a commocion. And by this means almoo^^e
in one momente Thomas Marquis dorcet came out of sanctuarye where he since the
beginning of Richardes days had continued, whose (...) by the only help of
sir Thomas louell e^quyer was preserved from all daungier and perell in this
troubleous world, gathered together a great band of men in Yorkshire. Sir
Edward Courtney and Peter his brother bishop of Exsetter, reised another army
in deuoushire and cornwall. In kente, Richard Guylforde and other gentlemen,
collected a great company of souldyoures and openly began war. But king
Richard which in the mean time had gotten together a great strength and
puissaunce, thinking yt not most for his part beneficial to disparse and
deuyde his great army into small branches, and particulerely to persecute any
one of the coniuracion by him self, determined all other being set aside,
with his whole puyssaunce to set on the chief head which was the duke of
Buckyngham. And so remouynge from London, he took his journey toward
Salsburie, to thentente that in his journey he might set on the dukes army if
he might know him in any place encamped or in order of bataylle araied. The
king was skace.ii. days journey from Salsburie when the duke of Buckyngham
accompanied with a great power of wild Weleshmen, whom he being a man of
that courage and sharp speech in manner against their wills had rather thereto
enforced and compelled by lordely and streite commandment then by liberal
wayges and gentle reteynoure, which thing was the very occasion why they
left him desolate and cowardely forsook him. The duke with all his power
mershed through the forest o^ deane entendyng to have passed the river of
Seuerne a^ Gloucester, and thereto have joined in army with the courtneys and
other Westernmen of his confideracy and affinite, which if he had done, no
doubt but king Richard had been in great ieopardie either of priuacion of his
realm or loss of his life or both. But se the chance, before he could
attain to Seuerne side, by force of continual rain and moisture, the river
rose so high that yt ouerflowed all the country adjoining, in so much that men
were drowned in their beds, howses with the extreme violence were ouerturned,
children were carried about the feldes, swymmynge in cradelles, beasts were
drowned on hills, which rage of water lasted continually.x. days, in somuche
that in the country adioynyng they call yt to this day, the great water, or
the duke of Buckynghams great water. By this innudacion the passages were so
closed that neither the duke could come over Seuerne to his accomplices, nor they
to him, during the which time, the Welshemen lyngerynge ydely and without
money, vitayle, or wages, sodaynely scaled and departed: and for all the dukes
fair promyses, manaces and enforcementes, they would in no wise neither goo
farther nor abide. The duke thus abandoned and left almost post alone was of
necessite compelled to fly, and in his flight was with this sodeyne oif
fortune meruelousely dismayed: and being unpurveyed, what council he should
take and what way he should follow, like a man in dispeire not knowing what
to do, of very trust and confidence conueyghed him self into the house of
Homfrey Banaster his servant beside shrewsburie, whom he had tendrely
brought up, and whom he above all men loved, favored and trusted, now not
doughtynge but that in his extreme necessite, he should find him faythefull,
secret and trusty, entendynge there couertely to lurk till either he might
reise again a new army, or else shortly to sail into Britayne to the
Earl of Richemond.

But when y^ was known to his adherentes which were ready to give battle,
that his host was scaled and hd left him almoost alone, and was fled and
could not be found, they were sodaynely amassed and stricken with a soden
fear, that every man like persons desperate shifted for him self and fled,
some went to sanctuarye and to solitary places, some fled by see, whereof the
most part within a few days after arrived sauely in the duchye of
Britayne. Emonge which nombre were these persons, Peter Courtney bishop of
Exce^^re and sir Edmonde Courtney his brother, by king Henrye the vii. after
created Earl of Denoushire, Thomas Marquis dorcet, Ihon lord Wells, Sir Ihon
Burchier, Sir Edmonde Wooduile a valyaunte man in arms brother to queen
Elyzabeth, Sir Roberte Willoughby, Sir Gyles Dabeney, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir
Ihon Cheyney and his two brethren, Sir Wylliam Barkeley, Sir Wylliam Brandon
and Thomas his brother, Sir Richard Edgcombe, all these for the most part
being knights, and Ihon Halwell, Edward Pownynges a pollytike captain. At
this very ceason Ihon Morton bishop of Ely and Christopher Urswike priest and
another company of noble men soiourned in Flaunders, and by letters and
messengers procured many enemies against king Richard, which using a
vigilaunte iye and a quycke remembrance, being newely come to Salsburye,
having perfight notice and knowledge how the duke was fled, and how his
accomplices intended to pass out of the realm. First he sent men of war to
all the next ports and passages to keep streightely the sea coast, so that no
person should pass outward nor take land in the realm without their
assente and knowledge. Secondarely, he made proclamacion, that what person
could show and reuele where the duke of Buckyngham was should be highely
rewarded, if he were a bondsman he should be enfraunchised and set at liberty,
if he were of fre blood he should have a general perdon and be remunerate
with a thousand pounds. Farthermore, because he understood by Thomas Hutton,
which as you have hard was newely returned out of Britayne, that Fraunces
duke of Brytayne not only refused to keep therle of Richemonde as a prisoner
at his contemplacion and for his sake, but also was ready to aid and succoure
thesaide Earl with men, money and all things necessary for his
transportyng into England. Wherefore he rigged and sent out ships of war well
furnished and decked with me^ and artillary, to skoure and keep that part of
the sea that lies against Britayne, to thente^t that if the earl of Richemond
would adventure to fail toward England, either he should be taken captyue or
be profligate and driven from the coast of England. And moreover, to thentent
that every cost, way, passage, and corner should be diligently watched and
kept, he set at every dubious and suspected place men of war, to seek,
search, and inquire if any creature could tell tidings of the duke of
Buckyngham or of any of his confederacyon, adherentes, fautoures or partakers.

While this Busy search was diligentely applied and put in execucion, Homfrey
Banaster (were it more for fear of loss of life and goods, or attracted and
provoked by the auaricious desire of the thousand pounds) he bewrayed his
gest and master to Ihon Mitton then shriefe of shropshire, which sodaynely
with a strong power of men in harnes apprehended the duke in a little grove
adioynynge to the mansion of Homfrey Banaster, and in great have and evil
speed conueighed him appareled in a pilled black cloak to the city of
Salsburie where king Richard then kept his household.

Whether this Banaster bewreyed the duke more for fear then covetous many men
do doubt: but sure it is, that shortly after he had betrayed ye duke his
master, his son and heir waxed mad and so dyed in a bores stye, his eldest
daughter of excellent beauty was sodaynelie stryken with a foul leperye, his
second son very meruelously deformed of his limnes and made decrepite, his
younger son in a small puddel was stra^gled and drouned, and he being of
extreme age arraigned and found gyltie of a murder and by his clergy saved.
And as for is thousand pound king Richard gave him not one farthing, saying
that he which would be untrue to so good a master would be false to al other,
howbeit some say ye he had a small office or a ferme to stop his mouth with all. The duke being by certain of the kings council diligently upon
interrogatories examined what things he knew prejudicial to ye kings person,
opened and declared frankely and freely all the coniuracion with out
dissimulynge or glosynge, trusting because he had truly and plainly reveled
and confessed all things that were of him required, that he should have
lyce^ce to speak to ye king which (whether it were to sue for perdon and
grace, or whether he being brought to his presence would have sticked him with
a dagger as men then judged) he sore desired and required. But when he had
confessed the whole fact and conspiracye upon Allsoulen day without
arreignemente or judgment he was at Salsburye in the open merker place on a
new skaffolde behedded and put to death. This death (as a reward) the duke
of Buckyngham received at the hands of king Richard, whom he before in his
affairs, purposes and entreprises had holde^ sustained and set forward above
all Gods forbode.

By this all men may easelye perceive that he not onley loses both his
labor, traueyle and industire, an ferther steynethe and spotteth his ligne
with a perpetual ignomony and reproach, which in evil and mishiefe assisteth
and aydeth an evil disposed person, considering for the most part that he
for his frendely favor should receive some great displeasure or unfortunate
chance. Beside that God of his justice in conclusion appoyneteth to him a
condign pain and affliccion for his merits and deserts. While these things
were thus ha^deled and ordered in England, Henry Earl of Richemond prepared
and army of five thousand manly Brytons, and forty well furnyshed ships.
When all things were prepared in aredynes and the day of departing and
setting forward was appointed, which was the.xii. day of the month of
October, in the year of the incarnacion of our redemer.M.CCCC.xlviii. and in
the second year of king Richardes reign, the whole army went on shipboorde
and halsed up their sails, and with a prosperous wind took the sea: but
toward night the wind changed and the wether turned, and so houge and
terrible a tempeste sodaynely roase, that with the very power and strength of
the storm, the ships were disparcled, severed and separate a sondre: some by
force were driven into Normandye, some were compelled to return again into
Britayne. The ship wherein the Earl of Rychemonde was, associate only with
one other barcke was all night tossed and turmoyled. In the morning after
when the rage of the furious tempeste was assuaged, and the Ire of the
blusterynge wind was some deal appeased, about the hour of none the same
day, the Earl approached to the southe part of the realm of England even at
the mouth of the haven of pole in the county of dorcet, where he might
plainly perceive all these banks and shores garnisshed and furnyshed with men
of war and souldioners appointed and deputed there to defend his arryuall
and landynge as before is mentioned. Wherefore he gave streyghte charge and
sore commandment, that no person should once presume to take land and goo
too the shore, until such time as the whole nauye were assembled and
congregate. And while he exspected and lyngered tariyenge for that purpose, he
sent out a ship bote toward the land side to know, whyther they which
stood there in such a nombre and so well furnysshed in apparel defensive
were his capital foes and enemies or else his friends fautoures and
comforters. They that were sent in exploracion and message were instantely
desired of the men of war keeping these coast (which thereof were before
instructed and admonished) to dissende and take land, affirmynge that they
were appoyncted by the duke of Buckyngham there to awayte and tarry for the
arryuall and landyng of the earl of Rychemond, and to conduicte sauely to the
camp where the duke not far of lay enca^ped with a populous army and an
host of great strength and vigor, to thentent that the duke and the earl
ioynynge in puyssaunces and forces together, might prosecute and chase king
Richard being destitute of men, and in manner desperate and fugityue, and so by
that means and their own labors and industry to obtain the end of their
entreprise which they had before begone.

The earl of Richemonde suspectynge their flattering request to be but a
fraud (as yt was in deed) after that he perceived none of his ships to apere
in sight, he we^ed up his ancors and halsed up his sails having a prosperous
and strenable wind and a fresh gale sent even by God to deliver him from
that perell and ieopardie, arrived safe and in security in the duchy of
Normandye, where he to re^teshe and solace his souldyours and people, took his
recreacion by the space of.iii. days, and clearly determined with part of his
company to pass all by land again into Britayne. And in the mean ceason he
sent oratoures to the french king called Charles the.viii. which newely
succeeded his father king Jews the.xi. not long before departed to God,
requirynge him of a safe conduicte and license to pass through his country
of Normandye into Brytayne. The young king having compassion of the
misfortune and unfortunate chance of the earl of Richemonde, not only gently
granted and assigned to him a pasporte, but also liberally disbursed and
departed to him a conuehtente some of money for his conduicte and expenses
necessary in his long journey and passage. But the earl trusting on the
French kings humanitee auentured to send his ships home into Britayne, and
to set forward him self by land on his journey making no great have till
his messengers were returned, which being with the benefit so comforted,
and with hope of prosperous success so encouraged, mershed toward Britayne
with all diligent celerite entendyng there to consulte farther with his lovers
and fre^des of his affairs and entreprises. When he was returned again into
Britayne he was certified by credible informacio^ that the duke of Buckyngham
had lost his head and that the Marquis dorcet and a great nombre of noble men of
England had a little before inquired and searched for him there, and were now
returned to Ua^nes. When he had heard these news thus reported, he first
sorowed, and dolorously lamented the first attempt and setting forward of his
friends, and in especial of the nobilyte not to have more fortunatly succeeded.
Secondarely, he reioysed on theother part that God had sent him so many
valiaunte and prudent captains to be his compaignions in his mertiall
entreprises, trusting surely and nothing doubting in his own opinion, but
that all his busynes should be wisely compassed and brought to a good
conclusion. Wherefore he determinyng with all diligence to accelerate and set
forward his new begone busynes departed to Renes and sent certain of his
preuie seruitours to conducte and bring ye Marquis and then other noble men to
his presence. When they knew that he was sauely returned into Britayne, lord
how they reioysed and applauded, for before that time they myssed him and
knew not in what part of the world to make inuestigacion or search for him.
For they doubted and no less feared least he had taken land in England, and
fallen in the hands of king Richard, in whose person they knew well was
neither mercy nor compassion. Wherefore in all spedy manner they galloped toward
him, and him reuerentely saluted, which metynge after great joy and solace and
no small thanks and gratificacions given and rendered on both parts, they
consulted and aduisedely debated and commoned of their great business and
weighty entreprise, in the which ceason the solemn feast of the natiuite
of out savior Christ happened, on which day al thenglishe lords went with
great solempnyte to the chief church of the city, and there each gave
faith and promise to other. The earl him self first took a corporal oath,
and on his honor promising that incontynente after he should be possessed of
the crown and dignytie of the realm iof England, he would be conjoined in
matrymonye with the lady Elizabeth daughter to king Edward the fourth. Then
all the company swear to him fealty, and did to him homage as though he had
been that time the crowned king and anointed prince, promisynge faythefully
and fermely assuring that they would not only lose their wordely substance,
but also be priuated of their lives and worldely felicitee, rather then to
suffer king Richard that tyrant longer to rule and reign over them. Which
solemn oaths made and taken, the Earl of Rychemonde declared and
communicated all these doings to Fraunces duke of Britayne, desirynge and
most heartily requyrynge him to aid him with a greater army to conduicte him
into his countreye, which so sore longed and looked for his return, and to
the which he was by the more part of the nobilite and comminaltie called and
desyced which (with gods aid and the dukes comfort) he doubted not in
short time to obtain, requirynge him farther to pressed to him a conueniente
some of money, affirmynge that all such somes of money which he had received of
his especial friends, were spente and exhausted in the preparacion of the
last journey made toward England, which somes of money after his entreprise
once acheued, he in the word of a prince faythefully promised to repaye and
restore again. The duke promised him aid and help, upon confidence whereof
the rigged his ships, and set forth his navy well decked with ordinance,
and warlykely furnyshed with all things necessary, to thentente to sail
forward shortly, and to se no convenient time slackely ouerpassed nor be
pretermitted.

In the mean ceason, king Richard apprehended in diverse parts of the
realm certain gentylmen of the earl of Rychemondes faccion and
confederacion, which either intended to sail into Britayne toward him, or
else at his landynge to assiste and aid him. Emongeste whom, sir George
Brown, sit Roger Clyfforde and.iiii. other were put to execucion at London,
and sir Thomas Sentliger which had married the duches of Exceter the kings own
suster, and Thomas Rame and diverse other were executed at exceter. Beside
these persons, diverse of his household servants whom either he suspected or
doubted, were by great cruelty put to shameful death. After this he called a
parliamente in the which he attaynted the earl of Richemond and al other
persons which were fled out of the realm for fear or any other cause, as
enemies to him and to their natural country, and all their lands, goods and
possessions were con^iscate and seized to ye kings use. And yet not content
with this pray which no doubt was of no small valor and moment, he laid on
the peoples necks a great tax and tallage, and surely necessite to that act
in manet him compelled. For what with purging and declaryng his innocence
concerning the murder of his nephews toward the world, and what with cost
to obtain y^ love and favor of the comminaltie (which outwardely glosed and
openly dissimuled with him) he gave prodigally so many and so great rewards
that now both he lacked and skace wist honestely how to borowe. In this
troubleous ceason, nothing was more merueled at then that the lord Stanley had
not been taken and reputed as an enemy to the king, considering the workynge
of the lady Margarete his wife mother to the earl of Richemonde, but
forasmuch as the entreprise of a woman was of him reputed of no regard or
estimacion, and that the lord Thomas her husband had purged him self
sufficientely to be innocente of all doings and attemptes by her perpetrated
and committed, yt was given him in charge to keep her in some lecrete place at
home, without having enie servant or company, so that from thence forth
she should never send letter nor messenger to her son nor nay of his
friends or confederates, by the which the king might be molested or
troubled, or any hurt or prejudice might be attempted against his realm and
comminaltie. Which commandment was a while put in execucion and
accomplished according to his dreadful commandment. Yet the wild worm of
vengaunce wauerynge in his head could not be contented with the death of
diverse gentlemen suspected of treason, but also he must extend his bloody
furye against a poor gentleman called Collyngborne for making a small ryme
of three of his unfortunate councelers, which were the lord louell, sir Richard
Radelyffe his myscheuous mynion, and sir Wylliam Catesbey his secret seducer,
which meter was. The Rat, the Catte and Louell our dog
Rule all England under the hog.
Meaning by the hog, the dreadful wild bore which was the kings
cognisaunce, but because the first line ended in dog, then metrician could
not observing the regimentes of meter end the second verse in Bore, but
called the bore an hog. This poetical schoolemayster corrector of breues and
longes, caused Collyngborne to be abbreuiate shorter by the head, and too be
divided into four quarters.

King Richard being thus turmented and tossed in his own concepte and
imaginacion, called to his remembrance that consideracions amiti^s, and other
honest bonds and pa^tes, made, conc^uded and appointed between princes and
politic governors are the cause efficie^t and esp^^cia^l introduction that
their re^lmes and countries are ^ortified and munited with a double power, that
is to say, with their own strength and the aid of their friends devised with
him self to prac^^se a league and amity with the king of Scotts, which not
long before had made diverse incursions and roodes into the realm of
England, where although he garte lyttel, yet surly he lo^^ not much* and
thereupo^ sued to have a treuce or peace concluded, which ^^me even as king
Richard had wished it. Wherefore commissioners were assigned for both parts
to mete at Nothyngham the.vii. day next ensuynge, at why^he time came thither
for the king of England Ihon bishop of Lyncolne chaunceller of England,
Richard bishop of saint Ass, Ihon duke of Norffolke, Henrye earl of
Northumberlande* Thomas lord Stanley, George Stanley lord strange, Ihon Gray
lord powes Richard lord Fyt^hughe, Ihon Gunthorpe keeper of the kings preuie
(...), Thomas Barowe master of the rolls, sir Thomas Bryane chie^e iusti^e o^
the common place, sir Richard Ratelyffe knight, William Catesbey and Richard
Salkeld esquiers. And for the king of Scotts were deputed Colyn earl of
Ergile lord Camplell and lord chaunceller of Scotland, Willi^m bishop of
Aberdene, Robert lord Lyle L^urence lord Olyphant, Ihon Drummond of Stobhall,
Arch balo Qwhitelator ^rchedeacon of Lawdene and secretorie to king James.
Lion king of Arms and Duncane dundas. These councellers ^yuerse times met,
and after long debatynge, demanding, and denyenge in the end of September
they fully concluded, and made a determinacion the effect whereof follows in
articles.







Item that all other castelles, holds and fortresses, shall peaceably

Item if the king of Scotts do intymate and declare to the king

Item if after thesayde.vi. months any variaunce or war shall arise

Item it is concluded and appointed between the parties aforsaid, that

Item if any such rebel or treytoure shall fortune herafter to arryue

Item that all scottyshmen now inhabityng in England, and sworn

Item if during thesaide amity and peace, it shall fortune any of the thesaide
wardeyn a treytour and rebel, and thereof shall make certificate to the other
prince to whom the injury was committed within.xii. days after thesaide
declaracion made and denounced.











For the king of England.
Ihon earl of Lyncolne Henry earl of Northumberland Raufe lord Neuell Raufe
lord Greystocke Richard lord Fitz Hugh Ihon lord Scrope Thomas lord Scrope
of Massam Sir Christopher Moresby William Clapton, esquier Homfrey lord Daker
Sir Richard Ratcliffe Sir Ihon Conyers Sir Edmond Hastynges Sir Robert
Donstable Sir Hugh Hastynges Sir William Euers Sir Ihon Huldeston William
Musgraue, esquier Richard Salkeld, esquier.
For the king of Scotts.
David earl of Crafford and lord lynsey George Earl of Huntley, lord Gorden
and Badzenath. Ihon lord Dorneley Ihon lord Kynedy Roberte lord Lile
Patricke lord Hales Lawrence lord Oliphaunt Willam lord Borthwike Sir Ihon
Rosse of Halkehed Sir Gilbert Ihonson of Elphynston Sir Ihon Lundy Sir James
Ogilly of Arly Sir Robert Hamilto^ of fingalto^ Sir William Balze of Lamyngto^
Sir Ihon Kynedy of Blarqhon Sir Ihon wemes Sir William Rochewen Edward Crochton
of kirk paty Ihon dundas Ihon Rosse of Montgrenane these.iii. last were
esquyers.
Item yt is farther condiscended and agreed that these commissioners

Commissioners of the English part.
The lord Dacre The lord Fitz Hugh Sir Richard Radclyffe Sir Christopher
Moresby Sir Richard Salkeld or three of them.
Commissioners for the Scottishe part.
The lord kenedy The lord Mountgomory The lord lile Ihon Maxwell stuarde of
Annerdale. Robert Crechton of sanquhane or three of them.
Item like commissioners were assigned to mete at Roydon borne for

Commissioners for the king of England.
The earl of Northumberlande The lord Greystorcke The lord Scrope of Massam
Sir William Gastoyn Sir Robert Conestable
Commissioners for the king of Scotts.
The earl of Huntley The earl of Angus The earl of Ergile Chaunceller of
Scotland The lord wandale The lord Seton The lord Olyphaunt Te lord
Stobhill
Item yt is agreed that ye commissioners aforsaid shall depute and assign



When this league and amity was thus concluded, finished and sealed with all
dew circumstaunces thereunto required. Although king Richard judged and demed
him self somewhat the more stronger and quyeter by force of this new amity
and concluded confederacy, yet to augemnte more the familiarite begone
between the king of Scotts and him, and to have a double string for his
bow, he entreated a new aliaunce and marriage to be concluded between the
prince of Rothsaye eldeste son to the king of Scotts, and lady Anne de la
poole daughter to Ihon duke of Suffolk and lady Anne suster to king Richard,
which suster he so much favored that he studyenge all the weies by the
which he might auaunce her offprynge and lignage, did not only procure and
seek means how to make her daughter a pryncesse, and consequentely a Queen,
but also after the death of his son, he proclaimed Ihon earl of Lyncolne his
nephew and her son, heir apparaunt to ye crown of England, dishenetityng
king Edwardes daughters, whose brethren before you have heard he shamefully
killed and murdered.

The king of Scotts having need of Friends, but not so much need as king
Richard which was of necessite compelled to seek aiders and to entreteyne
fautours, the one for fauourynge of flatterers and base borne persons, and
theother not only for tyranny and unnatural homicide, but also for the
usurpation of the crown being of all the realm detested and disdayned,
gladly accepted and ioyousely concented to king Richardes deuyce and
coniuncion of amity, perfightely remembrynge that amongst all bonds and
obligacions of love and amity, that there is neither a surer nor a more
perfighter lock, then the knote of coniuncion in the sacrament of Matrimonye,
which was in the very beginning of the first age of man, ordained and
instituted in the holy place of paradise terrestiall by God him self: by
reason whereof, the propagacion and succession of the humane nature, stablished
upon the sure seat of lawful matrimony between princes, may norishe peace
concord and unite, aswage and break the furyous rage of truculente Mars and
terrible battle, and encreace love, favor and familiarite. Wherefore
thesayde princes sent their ambassadors and councelours again to the town
of Nottyngham, where thesayde marriage was by writings and instruments
couenau^ted, co^discended and agreed, and affiances made and taken by procters
and deputies on both par^es, and she ymediately called pryncesse of Rothsay,
which name she shortly lost by the short life of king Richard her loving
uncle. Here may well be noted the unnatural love and disordered affeccion
which this kind kynseman showed to his blood: For he not remembryng the
tyranny that he had executed against his brothers sons, the wrong and
manifest injury that he had done to his brothers daughters, both in taking
from them their dignyte, possessions and living, thought yt should redounde
greatly to his honor and fame, if he promoted his susters child (to whom
he was nothing bound in conscience to make restitucion) to the dignyte of a
Queen, rather then to prefer his brothers daughter whom he had untruly and
by force dishenerited, and of all their right depryued, to the marriage of a
mean esquyer: such was his fraternall kyndenes toward his brother, and such
was his large conscience toward his brothers children.

After this league and marriage thus concluded and agreed, the king of Scotts
disdeignynge that the strong castle of Dumbarre should remain in thenglish
men's hands and possession, wrote a gentle letter to king Richard, delcaryng
to him that where in the league concluded between them, yt was agreed and
appoyncted that he should within.xl. days next ensuynge, express and declare
his opynion and meaning concerning the castle of Dumbarre, whether the said
castle should be occupied and stand still in the hands of thenglishemen
during the whole time of the truce, or else for the term of six months
only. He now certefyed king Richard by his letters, that he was content
that he and his should enjoy the possessyon of thesayde castle quyetely and
peaceably during thesayde truce and amity. Nevertheless he required him for
the love and familiarite that now both by treaty and alyaunce was spronge
and knyt between them, that he would redelyuer thesayde castle into his
hands, which was untruly possessed of thenglishe nation by delyuerye of
rebels and treytours, contrary to all right, equity, and conscience. King
Richard dalyed with pleasant letters and fair words, and so foded forth
the king of Scotts, that he never had Dumbarre delivered while king Richard
lived, after whose death, whether yt were by treason or by apoyntemente, the
castle was rendered to the king of Scotts to his great contentacion and
reioysyng. Albeit this league and amity thus couenaunted and concluded, it
might manifestely seem to all persons, that all coniuracions and confederacies
against king Richard were extinct and put scylence, and in especial
considering that ye duke of Buckyngham and his alyes were made out of his
way, some by death, and some by banyshment and exilynge into far countreies
and regions. Yet king Richard more doubtyng then trustyng to his own people
and friends was contynually vexed, tossed and vnquyeted with fear of the
return of the earl of Richemond and his accomplices and fauroures, which dailye
dread and hourly agony, caused him to live in doleful misery, ever unquiet,
and in manner incontinual calamity. Wherefore he entendynge to be releued and to
have all his dolorous imaginacion alleuyated, determined clearly to extirpate
and pluck all the matter and ground of his fear and doubts. Wherefore after
long and deliberate consu^tacion had, nothing was for his purpose and entente
thought either more necessary or expedient then once again with price, prayer
and rewards, to attempt ye duke of Britain in whose territory y^ earl of
Richemond then abode, to deliver thesaide earl into his hands, by which only
means he should be discharged of all fear of perel, and brought ot rest and
quietness both of body and mind. Wherefore incontinent he sent certain
ambassadoures to y^ duke of Britayne, which took upon them (beside the great
and ample rewards ye they brought with them into Britayne) that king Richard
should yearly pay and answer the duke of all the revenues, rentes and
profits, of the seignories, lands and possessions as well belonging and
apperteigning to the earl of Richmo^d, as to any other noble or gentleman
which then were in the earls company, if he after that time would keep them
in continual prison and restreine them from liberty.

The Oratoures furnished with these and other instruccions, arrived in Britayne
and came to the dukes house, where with him they could have no manner of
communicacion concerning their weighty affairs, by reason that he being
fatigate and weakened by a long and daily infirmity, began a little to wax
idle and weak in his wit and remembrance. For which cause Peter Landoyse his
chief treasouter, a man both or pregnaunt wit and great authorite, ruled and
adiuged al things at his p^easure and commandment, for the which cause (as
men set into high authorite be not best beloved) he excited and provoked
against him the malice and evil will of ye nobilite of Britayne, which
afterward for diverse great offenses by him during his authorite perpetrate
and committed, by their means was brought to death and confusion. Thenglishe
ambassadoures moved their message and request to Peter Landoyse, and to him
declared their masters commandment, instantely requiringe, and humbly
disirynge him (in whose power it lay to do all thing in Britayne) that he
would fren^ely assent to the request of king Richard offering to him the same
rewards and lands, that they should have offered to the duke.

This Peter which was no less disdeyned then hated almost of all the people
of Britayne* thought that if he did assent and satisfy king Richardes
petycion and desire, he should be of power and habilite sufficient to
withstand and re^ell the malicious attemptes and disdeynfull inuencions of his
envious adversaries. Wherefore he feithefully promised to accomplish king
Richardes request and desire, so that he kept promise with him, that he might
be hable to withstand y^ cancard m^lice of his secret enemies. This act that
he promised to do, was not for nay grudge or malice that he bate to the earl
of Richemonde* for as you have heard before, he delivered him from perell of
death at saynct Malos when he was in great doubt of life and ieopardie but as
cause rises we ever offend, and that cursed, hungre of gold and execrable
thirst of lucre, and inward fear of loss of aucthorite, drives the blind
minds of covetous men and ambicious persons to euilles and misch^^es
innumerable, not remembryng loss of name, obloquy of the people, nor in
conclusion the punyshement of God for their merits and deserts. But fortune
was so favorable to the public wealth of the realm of England that this
deadly and dolorous compact took none effect or place. For while posts ran,
and letters were sent to and frotor ye finisshyng of this great entreprise
between king Richard and Peter Landoyse, Ihon Morton bishop of Ely soiornynge
then in Flaunders, was of all this crafty co^ueighaunce certified by his secret
and sure fre^des: wherefore he sent Christopher Urswike (which at that very
ceason was come out of Britayne into Flaunders) to declare to the earl of
Richmo^d how all the deceipte and crafty working was conueighed and compassed,
geuyng him in charge to council and advise ye earl in all have possible with al
his company to retire out of Britayne into France. When these news were
brought to the earl he then kept house in Uannes, and incontinent dispatched
again Christopher Urswike to Charles the French king, requyring him that he
and his might sauely pass into France, which desire, impetrated and
obtained, the messenger shortly returned to his lord and prince. The earl
well perceiving that it was expediente and necessary with all speed and
diligence, to look to this weighty mattre, calling very few to council, he
made exploracion and search of all secret and by weyes, and sent before all
his noble men, as though for a certain familiaritee and kyndenes they should
visit and comfort ye duke* which then for recreacion and change of air,
lay on the borders and confynes of France. And secretly he gave charge to
the Earl of pembrooke which was the leader and conducter of his compaigny,
that when they approached the marches and lymites of Britayne, they should
dyuerte and take the next weye into France. The noble men somewhat suspicious
of things newely imagened, without any tariyng or by the journey ga^ynge,
scouryng the weies as fast as there horse would run, or as they conuenientely
might bear and sustain, came out of the duchy of Britayne into y^ duchy of
Angeou in the dominion of France, where they exspected the earls coming,
which.ii. days after departed out of Uannes only accompaignied with.v.
seruytoures, as though he had gone secretly to visit a familier friend of his
in a small village adioynynge. No man suspected that he would depart,
considering that a great multitude of Englishemen were left and continued in
the city, but after that he had passed directly five miles forward, he
suddenly turned into a solitarye wood next adioynynge, where clothinge him
self in the simple cote of his poor servant, made and appointed his said
mynister leader and Master of his small compaignye, and he as an humble page
dyligently followed and served his countrefeate gouernoure, never resting nor
them selves refreshynge except the baytyng of their horses till they by ways
unknown now this way, now turnynge that way, came to their company abidyng
them in angiers.

The fourth day after the earl of Richemonde was thus departed, that crafty
marchaunte Peter landoyse, trusting still after his pray promised by king
Richard, was ready to set forward his crew of souldyours, which he preuely
had consigned with certain trustye capiteynes for that only purpose appointed
and elected, to perform and acheue his pretensed entreprise, dissymulynge and
feignynge them to be conducted and hired by him to serve the Earl of
Richemond, and him to conduyte in his return toward his native country,
meaning none other thing but to apprehende him and theother noble men in his
retynue, which no such fraud suspectynge, nor yet any treason ymagenynge,
unware and unprovided and destitute of all aid, and them to cast and detrude
suddenly into continual captivity and bondage* to the^tente that by this
facinorous and naughty act, he might satisfy the charitable request and
loving desire of good king Richard, more for his own profit then king
Richards gain. But when this crafty dissymuler Peter Landoyse, which was no
Wylyer then an old Fox, perceived that the earl was departed (thinking that
to be true that he ymagened) lord how currioures rane into every coaste,
how light horsemen galloped to every streyt to follow and deteyne him, if by
any possibilite he could be subsecuted and overtaken, and him to incarcerate
and bring captyue into the city of Uannes. The horsemen made such diligence,
and with such celerite set forward their journey, that nothing was more likely
them they to have obtained, ye and seized their pray. For the earl of Richmond
was not entered into y^ realm of France scace one hour, but y^ folowers came
to the lymites and confines of Britayne, and durst adventure no farther but
veinely without their desire sorofully re^ourned. At which season were left at
Uannes about the nombre of.iii. Englishemen, which not being called to
council and unware of this entreprice, but knowing of the earls sodeyne
departure were so incontinently astouned, that in manner they were al in
despair both of him and their own securite and sauegarde. But fortune turned
her sail, and otherwise yt happened then there fear them encombred. For the
duke of Britayne now being somewh^t recovered, was sore displeased, and
nothing contented that the earl o^ Richmonde was in his dominion so
discourteously tracted and entreated, that he should be by fraud and untruth
compelled to leave and fly out of his duchye and country contrary to his
honor. Wherefore he took great displeasure with Peter Landoyse his
treasourer, to whom (although he knew not and was ygnoraunte that all the
drifte was driven and devised by him) he laid the faut and imputed the crime.
Wherefore he sent for Edward Wooduile, and Edward pownynges valiaunte esquyers
of England, and delivered unto them monye sufficient for their conduyte,
willing them to convey the rest of thenglishmen being in Brytayne, to the
earl of Richemondes presence. When the Earl was thus furnyshed and appointed
with his trusty company, and was escaped all y^ dangerous labirinthes and
snares (...) were set for him, no meruel though he were io^unde and glad of ye
prosperous success that happened in his affairs. Wherefore, lest he should
seem to be blotted with the note of ingratitude, he sent diverse of his
gentlemen to the duke of Britain, the which should publishe and declare to him
on the behalf of the earl, that he and his, were only by his benefit and
favor conserved and delivered from the imminente danger y^ they were like to
be trapped in. Wherefore at that time he rendered to him his most hearty thanks
in words, trustyng and not doubtyng but in time to come liberally to
recompense him with acts and deeds.

After this, the earl took his journey to Charles y^ French king, lyeng then
at Langes upon the river of leyre, to whom after great thanks given for
manifold gratuytes by him to the earl showed, he disclosed and manifested y^
cause and occasion of his access and repair to his person. After that he
required of him help* and succor, to thentente that by his immortal benefit
to him at that time showed, he might sauely return to the nobilite o^ his
realm, of whom he was generally called to take upon him the croune and
scepter of the realm* they so much hated and abhorred the tyranny of king
Richard. King Charles promised him aid and comfort, and bad him be of good
courage and make good chere, for he assured him that he would gladly show to
him his beneuolent mind and bountefull liberalite. Which king from thence
removed to Mou^targis, leadyng with him the earl ofn Richemond, and all the
noble personages of his retynue and faccion.

While the earl was thus attendaunte in the French court, Ihon vere earl of
Oxforde (which as you have heard before was by king Edward kept in prison
within the castle of hammes) so persuaded Ihon blount captain of thes^^e
fortress, and six Ihon Fortescewe porter of the town of Caleys that he him
self was not only dismyssed and set at liberty, but the ^^lso abandoning
and leaving their fruitful offices, condiscen^^^ goo with him into France
to the Earl of Rychmonde and to (...) part. But James Blount like a wise
capiteyne, because he (...) wife remaining in the castle before his
departure, he forte^^ the same both with new inuencions and new souldyours.
(...) the Earl of Richemonde saw the Earl of Oxforde, he was rauy^^ed with an
incredibile gladness, that he being a man of so high nobil^^e, of such
knowledge and practice in feats of war, and so constante, trusty and assured
(which alweie had studied for the maintenance and preferment of the house of
Lancaster) was now by gods provision delivered out of captivity and
imprisonment, and in time so necessaty and convenient come to his aid, succor
and auauncement, in whom more surer then any other he might put his trust
and confidente, and take less pain and travail in his own person. For it
was not hid from him that such as had ever taken part with king Edward before
this time, came to do hi^ service either for malice y^ they bare to king
Richard, or else for fear to time under his truculent rule and tempestious
governance. But this man which so often times had personally fought in mortal
battle in the querell of king Henry the.vi. he judged by deuyne power and
heavenly inspiracion to be delivered out of captivity, and emprisonment for
this only purpose, that he should have a man of his own faccion and school*
to whom he might surely and faithfully communicate and credit all things as
to his own propre person, and therefore being en^^amed with all immortal joy
for the earls coming he began to have a good hope of the happy success
of all his pretensed entreprises.

Not long after, the French king returned again to Paris, whom the earl of
Richmond followed, entending there to solicit his mattre to y^ conclusion.
Whereupon he besought king Charles to take upon him y^ whole tuicyon and
defense of him and his cause, so that he and his compaigny being by his means
aided and comforted, should confess and say, their wealth, victory and
auauncement to have flowed and budded forth of his bountyfulnes and
liberalite, which they would God wyllyng shortly reacquyte. In the mean
ceason diverse Englishemen which either fled out of England for fear, or
were at Paris to learn and study good litterature and verteous doctrine come
voluntarely and submitted them selves to the Earl of Rychemonde, and vowed
and swear to take his part. Emongeste whom was Richard Fox a priest, a man
of great wit and no less learning, whom the earl incontinent received into
secret familiarite and in brief time erected and auaunced him to high
dignitees and promocions, and in conclusion he made him bishop of Wynchester.

In the mean ceason king Richard was crediblye advertised what promyses and
oaths the earl and his co^federates ha^ made and sworn together at Renes, and
how by the earls means a^^henglishme^ were passed out of Britayne into
France. Wherefore be^^ge sore dysmaied and in manner desperate, because his
crafty cheuesa^^ took none effect in Brytayne, ymagened and devised how to
(...) and disturb the earls purpose by another mean, so that by the (...) of
lady Elizabeth his nece he should pretend no clayne nor tytl^ (...) croune.
For he thought if that marriage failed, the earls chief com^^ad been clerly
cut. And because that he being blinded with the amb^^ns desire of rule before
this time, in obteynynge the kingdom, had p^^petrate and done many flagicious
acts and detestable tyrannies, ye^ a^^rdynge to the old proverb, let him
take the bull that stale away ye calfe*^^ thought all factes by him committed in
times passed to be but of sma^l moment and not to be regarded in comparison of
that mischeuous ymaginacion which he now newely began and attempted. There
came into his ungracious mind a thing not only detestable to be spoken of in
the remembrance of man, but much more cruel and abominable to be put in
execucion. For when he reuolued in his wauerynge mind how great a founteyne
of mischief toward him should spring, if the earl of Richmond should be
auaunced to the marriage of his nece, which thing he heard say by the rumor
of the people that no small nombre of wise and wittye personages entreprised to
compass and bring to conclusion. He clearly determined to reconcile to his
favor his brothers wife queen Elizabeth either by fair words or liberal
promises, firmly beleuynge her favor once obtained that she would not
stick to commite and louyngly credit to him the rule and governance both of
her and her daughters, and so by that means the earl of Richemonde of the
affinite of his nece should be utterly defrauded and beguyled. And if no
ingenyous remedy could be otherwise invented to save the innumerable
mischiefs which were even at hand and like to fall, if yt should happen
queen Anne his wife to depart out of this present world, then he him self
would rather take to wife his cousyn and nece the lady Elizabeth, then for
lack of that affinite the whole realm should run to ruin, as who said, that
if he once fell from his estate and dignite, the ruin of the realm must needs
shortly ensue and follow. Wherefore he sent to the queen being in sanctuary
diverse and often messengers, which first should excuse and purge him of all
things before against her attempted or procured, and after should so largely
promise promocions innumerable and benefits, not only to her but also to her
son lord Thomas Marquis Dorcett, that they should bring her if yt were
possible into some wanhope, or as men say into a fools paradise. The
messengers being men both of wit and gravity so persuaded the queen with
great and pregnaunte reasons, then with fair and large promises, that she
began somewhat to relent and to give to them no deffe ear, in somuche that
she faithfully promised to submyt and yield her self fully and frankely to the
kings will and pleasure. And so she putting in oblivion the murder of her
innocente children, the infamy and dishonor spoken by the king her husband,
the living in auoutrie leyed to her charge, the bastardyng of her daughters,
forgettyng also y^ feithfull promise and open oath made to the countess of
Richmon^ mother to y^ earl Henry, blinded by auaricious affeccion and seduced
by flattering words, first delivered into king Richards hands her.v.
daughters, as Lambs once again committed to the custody of the ravenous wolf.
After she sent letters to the Marquis her son being then at Paris with the
earl of Richmonde, willing him in any wise to leave the earl and without
delaie to repair into England, where, for him were provided great honors
and honorable promocions, asserteignynge him ferther, that all offenses on
both parties were forgotten and forgeuen, and both he and she highely
incorporate in the kings heart. Surely the inconstancy of this woman were
much to be merueled a^, if all women had been found constante, but let men
speak, yet women of the very bond of nature will follow their own kind.
After that king Richard had thus with glorious promyses and flattering
words pleased and appeased the mutable mind of queen Elyzabeth which knew
nothing less then that he most intended, he caused al his brothers daughters
to be conueighed into his paleys with solemn receauyng, as though with his
new familier and loving entreteinement they should forget, and in their
minds obliterate the old committed injury and late perpetrate tyranny. Now
nothing was contrariant and obstacle to his pernicious purpose, but that his
mancion was not void of his wife, which thing he in anywise adiuged
necessary to be done. But there was one thing that so much feared and dragged
him from committing this abominable murder, because as you have heard
before he began to countrefaycte the image of a good and well disposed person,
and therefore he was afeard least y^ sodeine and immature death of his wife
once openly known, he should lose the good and credible opinion which the
people had of him, without deserte conceived and reported. But in conclusion,
evil council prevailed in a wit lately minded to mischief, and turned from
all goodness. So that his ungracious desire overcame his honest fear. And first
to enter into the gates of his ymagened entreprise, he absteyned both from the
bed and company of his wife. After, he compleyned to diverse noble men of the
realm, of the unfortunate sterilite and barennes of his wife, because she
brought forth non fruit and generation of her body. And in especial he
accounted to Thomas Rotheram archbishop of York (whom lately he had
delivered out of ward and captivity) these impedymentes of is queen and
diverse other, thinkyng that he would enucleate and open to her all these
things, trusting the sequel hereof to take his effect, that she herynge this
grudge of her husband, and taking therefore an inward thought, would not long
live in this world. Of this the bishop gathered (which well knew the
complexion and usage of the king) that the queen's days were short, and that he
declared to certain of his secret friends. After this he procured a common
rumor (but he would not have the author known) to be published and spread
abroad emonge the common people that the queen was ded, to thentent that she
taking some co^ceipte of this straung fame, should fall into some sudden
sickness or grievous maladye, and to prove (...) a^terward she should fortune by
y^ or any other ways to lose her li^e, whyther y^ people would impute her
death to the thought or sickness, or thereof would lay y^ blame to him. When y^
queen heard tell that so horrible a rumor of her death was sprung amongst the
comminaltie, she sore suspected and iuged ye world to be almost at an end with
her, and in that sorofull agony, she with lamentable countenance and soroful
chere, repaired to the presence of the king her husband, demanding of him,
what yt should mean that he had iuged her worthy to dye. The king answered
her with fare words, and with dissimulynge blandimentes and flatteryng
lesynges comforted her, biddynge her to be of good comfort, for to his
knowledge she should have none other cause. But howsoever y^ it fortuned,
either by inward thought and pensiveness of heart, or by intoxicacion of poison
(which is affirmed to be most lik^ly) within a few days after, the queen
departed out of this transitory life, and was with dew solemp^ite buried in
the church of s^int Peter at Westminster. This is the same Anne one of the
daughters of y^ earl of Warwyk, which as you have heard before at the request
of jews y^ French king, was married to prince Edward son to king Henry the vi.

The king thus (according to his long desire) losed out of the bo^des of
matrimony, began to cast a foolyshe fantasy to Lady Elizabeth his nece,
making much suite to have her joined with him in lawful matrimony: But because
all men, and the maiden her self most of al, detested and abhorred this
unlawful and in manner unnatural copulacion, he determined to prolonge and
defer the matter till he were in a more quietness. For all that very reason
he was oppressed with great, weighty and urgent causes and busynesses on every
side, considering that dailye part of the nobilite sailed into France to the
earl of Richmond: Other preuely favored and aided certain of the coniuracion,
so andof his short end, few or none were in doubt. And ye common people for
the most part were brought to such desperacio^, y^ many of them had rather be
reputed and taken of him in ye no^bre of his enemies, then to abide the chance
and hazard to have their goods taken as a spoil of victory by his enemies.
Amongst the noble men whom he most mystrusted, these were the principal,
Thomas lord Stanley, Sir William Stanley his brother, Eylbert Talbot and.vi.
hundred other, of whose purposes although king Richard were ignorant, yet he
gave neither confidence nor credence to any one of them, and least of all to
the Lord Stanley, because he was joined in matrimony with the lady Margarete
mother to the earl of Richmond as afterward apparauntly ye may perceive. For
when thesayde lord Stanley would have departed into his country to visit
his family, and to recreate and refreshe his spirits (as he openly said) but
the truth was to thentent to be in a persight readiness to receive the earl of
Richmo^d at his first arriual in England: the king in no wise would suffer him
to depart before that he had left as an hostage in the court George Stanley
lord straung his first begotten son and heir. While king Richard was thus
troubled and vexed with ymaginacions of the tumulteous time that was like to
come: Lo^, even sodeinly he herd news that fire was sprung out of the smoke
and the war, recently begone, and that the castle of hammes was delivered
into the hands of the earl of Rychmonde by the means of the earl of
Oxenforde and that not only he but also James Blount capiteine of the castle,
were fled into France to aid the Earl Henry. Wherefore he thinking yt great
policy to withstand the first brunt sent the most part of the garrison of
Caleis, to recover again by force the castle of Hammes. They which were in
the castle perceauing their adversaries to approach, prepared municions and
engines for their defense, and sent also to the Earl of Richemonde, to
advertise him of the^^ sodeine obsession, requirynge him of hasty aid and
spedy succoure. The earl ^epynge not this first begone as^au^e, sent the earl
of Oxe^forde with an elected company of souldioures to reise the siege and
re^kewe the castle: Which at their first arryuynge pitched their camp not
far from their enemies. And while king Rychardes men gave vigilaunt iye,
weytynge least the Earl of Oxforde should take any adua^ntage of them that
la^e on that side of the Castle. Thomas Brandon with.xxx. approved men of
war by a marishe which lay on theother side entered into the castle. The
souldioures within greatly animated and much comforted by this new succor
and aid, grieved thenemies by shortyng from y^ walls more then they were
accustomed to do. And they of the Castle vexed their enemies on the foreparte:
the Earl of Oxenforde no less molested and vnquiet^d them on theother part,
which was the occasion that king Richardes men offered of their own mere
mocion license to all being within the castle to depart in sauetie with
bag and baggage nothing excepted: which condition the earl of Oxenforde
coming only for that purpose to deliver his loving friends out of all
pe^ell and danger* and chiefly of all, his old hostess Jane Blount wife to
James Blount the captain, would in no wise repudiate or refuse. And so
leaving the Castle bare and vngarnysshed both of vitaile and artillary, came
safe to the earl of Richmond soiournyng in Paris. During this time, king
Richard was credebly informed of his explorators and espialles y^ y^ earl of
Richmond was with long suyte in the court of France sore fatigate and weried,
and desyryng great a^de, could obtain small releue. In so much y^ all thing
went so far backward, that such things as were with great diligence and no
less deliberation purposed and determined to be set forward, were now dasshed
and overthrown to the ground. King Richard either being to light of
credence, or seduced and deluded by his crafty taletellers, grea^ly reioysed
as though he had obtained the ouerhand of his enemies with triumph and
victory, and thought him self never so surely delivered of all rear and
dreadful ymaginacions, so that he neded now no more once for that cause
either to wake of break his golden sleep. Wherefore he called home again his
ships of war which he had appointed to keep the narowe sees, and dispatched
al such souldioures as he had deputed to keep certain garrisons and to stop
certain passages as you have heard before. Yet least he might for lack of
prouisyon be sodeinly trapped he straightly charged and gave in commandment
to all noble men and in especial such as inhabited nere to the sea coaste and
on the frontiers of wales, that according to the usage of the country, they
should keep diligent watch and strong ward, to ye intent ye his adversaries
in no wise should have any place apt or oportune easily to t^ke land without
defense or rebuttynge back. For the custom of the countries adioynyng nere to
y^ see is (especially in the time or war) on every hill or high place to erect
a bekon with a great la^terne in the top, which may be seen and discerned a
great space of. And when the noyes is once bruted that the enemies approach
nere y^ land, they sodeinly put fire in the lanthornes and make showtes and
outrages from town to town and from village to village. Some run in post
from place to place admonisshyng the people to be ready to resist the ieopardy,
and defend the perell. And by this pollecy y^ fame is sone blown to every
city and town, in somuche that as well the cytezens as the rural people be in
short space assembled and armed to refell and put back the new arrived enemies.

Now to return to our purpose, king Richard thus alleuiate of his
accustoned pensiuenes, began to be somewhat more merier and took less
thought and care for outward enemies then he was wont to do, as who say,
that he with polletique provision should withstand the desteny which hong
over his head, and was ordened in brief time sodeinly to fall. Such is the
force and puissaunce of deuyne justice* that every man shall less regard,
less provide, less be in doubt of al things, when he is most nerest
punishment, and next to his mischaunce for his offenses and crimes.

About this ceason, while the earl of Richmonde was desirynge aid of the
French king, certain noble men were there appointed to rule the realm of
France during the minorite of king Charles, which amongst them selfs were
not of one opinion. Of which dissencion, Jews duke of Orlyaunce was the
chief sturrer, which because he had married lady Iohanne suster to the French
king, took upon him above other the rule and administracion of the whole
realm. By reason of which controversy, no one manne only was suffered to rule
al, wherefore the earl of Rychemond was compelled to make suyte to every one of
the council severally one after another, requiringe and desirynge them of aid
and releue in his weighty busynes, and so his cause was prolonged and
deferred. During which ^ime, Thomas Marquis Dorsett which was as you have
heard entised by his mother to return again into England partly despayring
in the good success of the earl of Richmo^d and partly onerate and
vanquesshed with the fair glosynge promises of king Richard: secretly in the
night ceason stale out of Paris, and with all diligent expedicion took his
journey toward Flaunders. When relacio^ of his departure was made to the earl
of Richmond and theother noble men, no marvel though they were astonnyed and
greatly amassed. Yet y^ not wtsta^dyng they required of the French king thast yt
might be lefull to them in his name and by his commandment to take and steye
their co^paignion, confederate, and partaker of all their council, in what
place within his realm and territorye so ever they could find him. Which
peticio^ once obtained, they sent out curriers into every part, amongst
whom Homfrey Cheiny pl^iyng the part of a good blood hounde, foloed the tract
of y^ flyer so even by ye sent* that he ouertooke and apprehended him not far
from Co^peign and so what with reason and what with fa^re promises being
persuaded, he returned again to his co^paignions. The earl of Richmond
unburdened of this misauenture, least by procrastinacion of days and
prolongyng of time, he might lose y^ great oportunitee of things to him offered
and ministered: also least he should ferther wound or molest the minds of his
feithfull and assured friends which daily did aspect and tarry for his coming,
determined no longer to protract and defer y^ tune, but with all diligence and
scelerite to attempt his begone entreprice and so obteinyng of king Charles a
small crewe of men, and borowyng certain sommes of money of him and of diverse
other his pryuate friends. For the which he left as debtor or more likelyer as
a pledge or hostage lord Thomas Marquis Dorsett (whom he half mistrusted) and
Sir Ihon Burchier, he departed from y^ French court and came to the city of
Roan. While he tarried there making provision at harflete in the mouth of the
river of Seyne for all things necessary for his navy and nauigacion, tidings
were brought to him that king Richard being without children and now wydower,
intended shorte^y to mary with Lady Elizabeth his brothers daughter, and to
prefer the lady Cicile her suster to a man found in a cloud and of an
unknown lignage and family. He took these news as a matter of no small
momente (and so all things considered, yt was of no less importance then he
took yt for. For this thing only took aweie from all his compaignions their
hope and courage that they had to obtain an happy enterprice. And therefore no
marvel though it nypped him at the very stomach when he thought that by no
possibilite he might attain the marriage of any of king Edwardes daughters,
which was the strongest fou^dacion of his buyldyng, by reason whereof he
judged that all his friends in England would abandon and shrynke from him.
Wherefore making not many of his council, after diverse consultacions he
determined not yet to set forward, but to tarry and attempt how to get more
aid, more friends and more stronger succoures. And amongst al other, yt was
thought most expedient to allure by affinite in his aid as a compaignion in
arms Sir Walter Herbert a man of an aunciente stock and great power amongst
the Welshemen, which had with him a fair Lady to his suster, of age mature
and ripe to be coupled in matrimony. And for the acheuynge of this purpose,
messengers were secretly sent to Henry Eearle of Northumbreland (which had
before married another suster of Sir Walter Herbertes) gto thentent that he
should set forward all this deuyce and purpose, but the weies were so narowly
watched and so many spies laid that the messenger proceeded not in his journey
and busynes. But in the mean ceason, there came to the Earl a more ioyfuller
message from Morgan Kydwelly learned in the temporal law, which declared
that Ryce ap Thomas, a man of no less valyauntnes then actyuitee, and Ihon
Savage an approved Capteyne, would with all their power be partakers of his
quarrel.

And that Reignolde Breye had collected and gotten together no small some of
money for the payment of the wages to the souldioures and men of war:
admonisshynge him also to make quick expedicion and to take his course
directely into Wales. The Earl of Richmonde because he would no longer linger
and weery his friends living continually between hope and fear, determined in
all conueniente have to se^f forward, and carried to his ships armoure,
weapons, vitayl^ and all other ordinances expedient for war. And shortly to
speak, all things he prepared which are wont to be necessary and profitable
to the variable chances and incerteine accidents and ieopardies or war,
which requires preparacio^ of many instruments and things chargeable.

After that the earl had made his humble peticion and devout prayer to
almighty God, besechynge him not only to send him most prosperous wind and
sure passage in his journey, but also effecteously desiring his goodness of
aid and comfort in his necessite and victory and supremitie over his
enemies, only accompaignied with.ii. thousand men and a small nombre of
ships, weyed up his ancres and halsed up his fails and in the calendes of
August he sailed from harflet with so prosperous a wind that the.vii. day
after his departure he arrived in Wales in the euenyng at a port called
Mylford Haven, and in co^tine^t took land and came to a place called Dalle,
where he heard say that a certain company of his adversaries were leyed in
garrison to defend his arryuall all the last winter. And the earl at the
son rysyng removed to harfford west, being distant from dalle not fully ten
mile, where he was applauded and received of the people with great joy, and
he arrived there so sodeinly that he was come and entered the town at the same
time when the cytezens had but knowledge of his coming.

Here he heard news which were as untrue as they truly were reported to him
in Normandy, that Rice ap Thomas and Ihon savage with body and goods were
determined to aid king Richard. While he and his compaignie were somewhat
appalled of these new tidings, there came such message from thinhabitauntes
of the town of Pembrooke y^ refresshed and reuyued their frosen hearts and
daunted courages. For Arnold Buttler a valiant capitain, which first asking
perdon for his offenses before time committed against the earl of Richmond, and
that obtained, declared to him that the penbrochians were ready to serve and
give their attendaunce on their natural and immediate lord Jasper earl of
Penbrooke. The earl of Richmond having his army thus increased, departed from
Herforde west to the town of Cardygan being.v. mile distant from thence. While
the souldioures were refresshyng and trimmynge them selves in their camp,
strange tidings spronge emonge them wtoute any certain author, y^ sir
Walter Herberd which lay with a great crewe of men at Carmarden* was now
with a great army ready to approach and hyd them battle. With which news
the army was sore troubled, and every man assaied his armure and proved his
weapon and were pressed to defend their enemies. And as they were in this
timorous doubt, certain horsemen which the earl had sent to make exploracion
and search, returned and reported all the country to be quiet and no let
nor impedimente to be laid or cast in their journey.

And even at that same time the whole army was greatly recomforted by reason
that the coming of Richard Gryffyth, a man of great nobilite, the which
notwithstanding that he was conferate with Sir Walter Harbert and Richard app
Thomas, yet at that very instant he came to the Earl of Richemund with all
his compaignie, which were of no great number. After him, the same day came
Ihon Morgan with his men. Then the Earl auaunced forward in good have,
making no repose or abode in any one place. And to thentent to pass forward
with sure and short expedicion, he assauted every place where his ennemies had
set any men of war, which with small force and less difficulty he briefly
did expugne and vanquishe. And suddenly he was by his espialles asserteyned
that Sir Walter Harbert and Rice app Thomas were in harnes before him ready to
encountre with his atmye and to stop their passage. Wherefore like a valiant
capteyn he first determined to set on them and either to destroy or to take
them into his favor, and after with all his power and puyssaunce to give
battle to his mortal enemy king Richard. But to thentent his friends
should know with what dexterite his attempted entreprice proceeded forward,
he sent of his most secret and feithfull servants with letters and
instruccions to the lady Margarete his mother, to the Lord Stanley and his
brother, to Talbote and to other his trusty friends, declarynge to them, that
he succored and helped with the aid and releue of his friends intended to
pass over y^ river of Seuerne at Shrewsburie, and so to pass directely to the
city of London, requirynge them as his especial trust and confidence was
perplanted in the hope of their fidelite, that they would occur and mete him
by the way with all diligent preparacion to thentent that he and they at time
propice and place convenient might communicate together the profundyte and
depnes of all his dubious and weighty busynes. When the messengers were
disparcled with these commandments and admonicions, he marched forward
toward Shrewsbury, and in his passing there met and saluted him Rice ap Thomas
with a goodly ba^d of Welshmen, which making an oath and promise to the earl,
submitted himself whole to his order and commandment. For the earl of
Richemond.ii. days before made to him promise y^ if he would swear to take
his part and be obedient to him, he would make him chief governor of Wales,
which part as he feithfully promised and granted, so after that he had
obtained and possessed the realm and diadem, he liberally performed and
accomplished the same. In the mean time, the messenge^s that were sent,
diligently executed the things given to them in charge, and laden with
rewards of them to whom they were sent, returned to him the same day that
he entered into Shrewsburie, and made relacion to him that his friends were
ready in all points to do all things for him which either they ought or might
do. The earl Henry brought in good hope with his pleasant message continued
forth his intended journey and came to a little town called Newporte and
pitchynge his camp on a little hill adioynynge, reposed him self there that
night. In the evening, the same day came to him Sir George Talbott with the
whole power of the young Earl of Shrewsburye then being in ward, which
were accounted to the nombre of two thousand men. And thus his power
encreasynge he arrived at the town of Stafforde and there pawsed. To whom
came Sir Wyllyam Stanley accompaignied with a few persons, and after that the
Earl and he had communed no long time together, he reuerted to his
souldioures which he had congregate together to serve the Earl, which from
thence departed to Lichefelde and lay without the walls in his camp all the
night. The next morenynge he entered into the town, and was with all honor
like a prince received. A day or two before the lord Stanley having in his
band almost five thousand men, lodged in the same town, but herynge that the
Earl of Richemonde was marshynge thetherward, gave to him place, dislodgynge
him and his, and repaired to a town called Adrestone, there abiding the
coming of the Earl, and this wilye fox did this act to aduoyde al
suspicion, being afraied least if he should be seen openly to be a fautoure
or ayder to the Earl his son in law before the day of the battayll, that
king Richard which yet did not utterly put in him diffidence and mystruste
would put to some cruel death his son and heir apparaunt George Lord
Strange whom king Richard as you have heard before kept with him as a
pledge or hostage to thentent that the lord Stanley his father should
attempt nothing prejudicial to him.

King Richard at this ceason keeping his house in the Castle of Notyngham
was infourmed that the Earl of Richemond with such bannysshed men as fled out
of England to him were now arrived in Wales, and that all things necessary
to his entreprice were unprovided, unpurveyed and very weak, nothing mete to
withstand the power of such as the king had appointed to resist him. This
rumor so enflated his mind, that in manner disdeignyng to here speak of so
poor a compaignye, determined at the first to take little or no regard to this
so small a sparcle, declarynge the Earl to be innocente and unwise because
that he temerariously attempted such a great entreprice with so small and
thynne a nombre of Warlyke persons, and therefore he gave a definityue
sentence, that when he came to that point that he should be compelled to
fight against his will, he either should be apprehended a live, or else by
all likelyhode he should of necessite come to a shameful confusion, and that
he trusted to be shortly done by Sir Walter Harbert and Rice ap Thomas, which
then ruled Wales with egall power and like aucthoritee. But yet he reuoluynge
and casting in his mind that a small war begone and wynked at and not
regarded, may turn to a great broyle and tumulteous trouble, and that
yftwas prudente pollecie not to asperne and disdeyne the little small power and
weakness of the enemy, be yt never so small, thought yt necessary to provide
for after clappes that might happen and chance. Wherefore he sent to Ihon duke
of Norfolk, Henry earl of Northumberlande, Thomas Earl of Surrey and to
other of his especial and trusty friends of the nobilite, which he judged
much more to prefer and esteem his wealth and honor then their own
riches and private commodite, willing them to mustre and view al their
servants and tenentes, and to elect and choose the most courageous and
active persons of the whole number, and with them to repair to his presence
with all speed and diligence. Also he wrote to Robert Brakenbury Lieutenaunt of
the tower, commaundynge him with his power to come to his army and to bring
with him as fellows in arms Sir Thomas Butchier and sir Walter Hungerforde and
diverse other knights and esquiers in whom he had cast no small suspicion.
While he was thus ordrynge his affairs, tidings came that the Earl of
Richemond was passed Seuerne and come to Shrewsbury without any detrymente or
encombreaunce. At which message he was sore moved and broyled with Melancolye
and doloure, and cried out, asking vengeance of them that contrary to their
oath and promise had fraudulently deceived him. For which cause he began to
have diffidence in other, in so much that he determined him self out of hand
the same day to occur and resyste his adversaries. And in all have sent out
explorators to view and epsy what way his enemies kept and passed. They
dilygentely doing their dewtie, shortly after returned, declarynge to the
king that the Earl was encamped at the town of Lichfelde. When he had
perfighte knowledge where the Earl with his army was soiournynge, he having
continual repair of his subjects to him, began in contynently without
delaie to marshall and collocate in order his battles (like a valiant
captain and polletique leader) and first he made his battayles to set forward
four and four in a rank, marchynge toward that way where his enemies as
was to him reported intended to pass. In the myddle part of the army he
appointed the traffic and carriage apperteignynge to the army. Then he
(environed with his satellytes and yomen of the crown (with a frowning
countenance and truculente aspect mounted on a great white courser, followed
with his footmen, the wings of horsemen coastynge and rangynge on every side:
And keeping this array, he with great pomp entered the town of Lecester after
the son set. The Earl of Rychmonde reised his camp and departed from
Lychefelde to the town of Tomwoorth thereto nere adioynynge, and in the myd
way passing, there saluted him Sir Walter Hungerforde and Sir Thomas Burchier
knights and diverse other which yielded and submitted them selfs to his
pleasure. For they being advertised that king Richard had them in suspicion
and gealosye, a little beyond stony stratforde left and forsook prcuely their
Capteyne Robert Brakenbury, and by nocturnall wandryng, and in manner by
unknown p^thes and uncertain ways searchyng, at the last came to the earl
Henry. Diverse other noble p^rsonages which inwardely hated king Richard
worsse then a toade or a serpent, likewise resorted to him with all their power
and strength. There happened in this progression to the Earl of Richmond a
strange chance worthy to be noted: for albeit that he was a man of hau^e and
valyaunte courage, and that his army increased, and daily more and more he
waxed puysaunt and stronger, yet he was not a little afeard because he in no
wise could be assured of his father inlawe Thomas Lord Stanley, which for
fear of the destruction of the Lord strange his son (as you have heard) as
yet enclyned to neither party. For if he had gone to the Earl, and that
notefied to king Rychard, his son had shortly been executed. Wherefore sith
the Earls fear sprange not of nothing, he accompaignyed with twenty light
horsemen lyngered in his journey as a man disconsolate, musyng and ymagenynge
what was best to be done. And the more to aggrauate his melancoly pensiveness,
yt was showed him that king Richard was at hand with a strong power and a
populous army. While he thus pensive dragged behind his host, the whole
army came before the town of Tomwoorth, and when he for the deep darcknes
could not perceive the steps of them that passed on before, and had wandered
hither and thither, seeking after his compaygnie and yet not once herynge any
noise or whysperynge of them, he dyuerted to a very little village being
about.iii. miles from his army, taking great thought and much fearing
least he should be espied, and so trapped by king Rychardes skoute watch.
There he tarried all night, not once auenturynge to ask or demand a question
of any creature, he being no more amassed with the ieopardye and perell that
was passed, then with this present chance, sore feared that it should be a
pronosticacion or prodygall sign of some unfortunate plague afterward to
succeed. As he was not merry being absent from his compaignie, likewise his
army much marueled and no less mourned for his sodeyne and intempestious
absence.

The next morenynge early in the dawning of the day he returned, and by the
conduyte of good fortune espied and came to his army, excusing him self, not
to have gone out of his way by ignorance, but for a pollecie devised for the
nones he went from his camp to receau^ some glad message from ecrteyne of his
preuy friends and secret alies. This excuse made, he preuely departed again
from his host to the town of Aderstone, where the lord Stanley and sir
William his brother with their bands were abidynge. There the Earl came
first to his fatherinlawe in a little close, where he saluted him and Sir
William his brother, and after diverse congratulacions and many frendely
embracynges, each reioysed of the state of other, and sodeinly were surprised
with great joy, comfort and hope of fortunate success in all their affairs
and doings. Afterward they consulted together how to give battle to king
Richard if he would abide, whom they knew not to be far of with an houge
army. In the evening of the same day sir Ihon Savage, Sir Bryan Sanforde, Sir
Simon Digby and many other leuyng king Richard, turned and came to the part
of the earl of Richmond with an elect company of men. Which refusal of king
Richardes part by men of such experience, did augment and encreace both the
good hope and the puissaunce of the earl of Richmond.

In the mean ceason king Richard (which was appointed now to finyshe his last
labor by the very deuyne justice and providence of God, which called him to
condign punyshemente for his scelerate merits and myscheueous deserts)
marshed to a place mete for two battayles to encountre by a village called
Bosworth, not far from Leycester* and there he pitched his field, refreshed
his souldioures and took his rest. The fame went that he had the same night a
dreadful and a terrible dream, The dream of king Richard the.iii.
for yt seemed to him being a sleep y^ he saw diverse images like terrible
deuelles which pulled and haled him, not sufferynge him to take any quiet or
rest. The which strange vision not so sodeinly struck his heart with a
sodeyne fear but it stuffed his head and troubled his mind with many dreadful
and busy Imaginacions.

For incontinent after, his heart being almost damped, he pronosticated before
the doubtful chance of the battle to come, not using the alacrite and
mirth of mind and of countenance as he was accustomed to do before he came
toward the battle. And least that it might be suspected that he was abashed
for fear of his enemies, and for that cause looked so piteously, he recyted
and declared to his famylyer friends in the morenynge his wonderful visyon and
terrible dream. But I think this was no dream, but a punccion and prick of
his sinful conscience, for the conscience is so much more charged and
aggrauate as the offense is greater and more heinous in degree, which prycke
of conscience allthough it strike not all way, yet at the last day of extreme
life it is wont to show and represent to us our faults and offenses and the
pains and punishementes which hand over our heddes for the co^mittyng of
the same, to thentent that at y^ instant we for our deserts being penitent and
repentau^t may be compelled lame^tyng and bewalyng our sins like forsakers
of this world, iocund to depart out of this miserable life. Now to return
again to our purpose, y^ next day after* king Richard being furnished with men
and all abilime^tes of war, bringyng al his men out of there camp into y^
plain, ordered his forward in a marvelous length, in which he appointed both
horsemen and footmen to thente^t to emprynte in y^ hearts of the^ y^ looked a
far of, a sodeine terror and deadly fear, for y^ great multitude of y^
armed soldiers: and in the fore Frount he placed y^ archers like a strong
fortifi^d trench or bulwark: over this battle was captain Ihon duke of
Norfolk with whom was Thomas earl of Surrey his son. After this long
va^tgard followed king Richard hi^ self, with a strong co^paigny of chosen and
approved me^ of war having horsemen for wings on both y^ sides of his battle.

After y^ therle of Richmond was departed from y^ co^municacio^ of his friends
as you have hard before, he began to be of a better stomach and of a more
valiant courage, and with al dilige^s pitchid his feld just by y^ ca^p of his
enemies, and there he lodgid y^ night. In the morning ^e time he caused his men
to put on there armure and appareyl the^ selfs ready to fight and give
battaill, and sent to y^ lord Stanley (which was now come with his ba^de in a
place indifferently between both y^ arms) requiryng him with his me^ to approach
nere to his army and to help to set y^ soldiers in array, he an swered y^
therle should set his own me^ in a good order of battle while he would array
his co^paigny and come to him in time convenient. Which answer made otherwi^e
then therle thought or would have ruoged, considering y^ oportunite of the
time and the wait of y^ busynes, and although he was there with all, a little
vexed, began somewhat to hang y^ hedde, yet he without any time delaiyng
compelled by necessite, after this manner instructed and ordered his men. He
made his forward somewhat syngle and slender* according to y^ small number of
his people In y^ Frouut he placed the archers, of whom he made captain Iho^
earl of Oxford: to the right wyng of y^ battaill he appointed, sir Gylbert
Talbott to be y^ leder: to y^ left wing he assigned sir Ihon Savage, and he with
y^ aid of y^ lord Sta^ley accompaignied with therle of Penbroke having a good
compaignie of horsemen and a small number of footmen: For all his hole number
exceded not v. thousaide men beside the power of the Stanleys, whereof.iii.
thousand were in the field under the sta^dard of sir William Stanley: The
kings number was doble as much and more. The oracio^ of king Richard the.iii.
When both these armies were thus ordered and al men ready to set forward king
Richard called his Cheuetains together and to the^ said. Most faithful and
assured fellows, most trusty and well-beloved friends and elected captains, by
whose wisdom and policy, I have obtained the crown and type of this famous
realm and noble regio^: by whose puissau^ce and valiauntnes I have enioied and
possessed thestate roial and dignite of y^same, maugre y^ ill will and sedicious
attemptes of all my cancarde enemies and insidius adversaries, by whose prudent
and politic cou^saill I have so governed my realm, people and subjects, y^ I
have omitted nothing appertainig to y^ office of a just prince, nor you have
pretermitted nothing belo^gyng to y^ dewtie of wise and sage counsailers. So y^
I may say and truly affirm, that your approved fidelite and tried
constancye, makes me to believe firmly and think, y^ I am an undoubted king
and an indubitate prince. And although in y^ adepcion and obteinyng of y^
Garla^de, I being seduced and provoked by sinister cou^sail and diabolical
temptacio^ did commyt a facynerous and detestable act. Yet I have with strayte
penance and salt teryes (as I trust) expiated and clearly purged the same
offense, which abominable crime I require you of friendship as clearly to
forget, as I daily do remember to deplore and lament the same. If you will now
diligently call to remembrance in what case and perplexity we now stand, and
in what doubtful perell we be now intricked? I doubt not but you in heart will
think and with mouth confess, that if ever amity and faith prevailed
between prince and subjects or between subject and subject: or if ever bond
of allegians obliged the vassal to love and serve his natural sovereign
lord, or if any obligation of dewtie bound any prince to aid and defend his
subjects? All these loves, bonds and deuties of necessite are this day to be
experimented, showed and put in experience. For if wise men say true, there
his some pollycie in gettyng, but much more in keeping. The one being but
fortunes chance, and the other high wit and policy, for which cause, I with
you: and you with me, must needs this day take labor and pain to keep and
defend with force, that pre-eminence and possession which by your prudent
devises I have gotten and obtained. I doubt not but you know, how the deuell
continual enemy to humane nature, disturber of concord and sower of
sedicion, has entered into the heart of an unknown welshman, (whose father I
never knew nor him personally saw) excitynge him to aspire and covet our
realm, crown and dignity, and thereof clearly to depryue and spoil us and
our posterite: y^ se farther how a compaigny of traitors, thefes, outlawes and
ronneagates of our own nation be ayders and partakers of his feate and
enterprise, ready at hand to ouercomme and oppress us: You se also, what a
number of beggarly Britons and faint hearted Frenchmen be with him arrived to
distroy us our wyfes and children. Which Imminent mischifes and apparaunt
inco^ueniences, if we will withstond and refel, we must live to gether like
brethern, fight together like lio^s, and fear not to dye together like men.
And obseruyng and keeping this rule and precept, believe me, the fearful hare
never fled faster before the gredy greyhou^d, nor y^ sylye lark before y^
sparowhauke, nor the simple sheep before the ravenous wolf, then your proud
bragging adversaries asto^ned and amassed with y^ only sight of your manly
visages, will flee, run and skyr out of the field. For if you consider and
wisely ponder althings in your mind, you shall perceive that we have manifest
causes, and apparent tokens of triumph and victory. And to begin with the
earl of Richmond Captain of this rebellion, he is a Welsh mylkesoppe, a man
of small courage and of less experience in marcyall acts and feats of war,
brought up by my brother means and mine like a captive in a close cage in the
court of Fraunces duke of Britain, and never saw army, nor was exercised in
marcial affairs, by reason whereof he neither can nor is able on his own wit
or experience to guide or rule an host. For in the wit and pollecie of the
captain, consists the chief adeption of the victory and ouerture of the
enemies. Secondarely fear not and put a way all doubts, for when y^ traitors
and runagates of our realm, shall see us with banner displaied come against
them, reme^bryng there oath promise and fidelity made unto us, as to there
sovereign lord and anointed king, they shall be so pricked and stimulate in y^
botome of there scrupulous consciences y^ they for very remorce and dread of y^
divine plage will ethe^ shamefully fly, or humbly submit them selfs to out
grace and marcie. And as for the Frenshme^ and Brytons* there valia^tnes is
such, y^ our noble progenitors and your valiant pare^tes, have them oftener
vanquished and overcome in one month, then they in y^ beginny^g imagened
possible to compass and fynishe in a hole year. What will you make of the^,
braggers without audacite dronkards without discrescion, rybaudes without reason,
cowardes without resistyng and in conclusion y^ most effeminate and lascivious
people, y^ ever showed them selfs in Frunt of battle, ten times more
coragious to fly and escape then ons to assaut y^ breast of our strong and
populous army. Wherefore, considering al these auau^tages, expel out of your
thoughts al doutes and avoid out of your minds al fear, and like valiant
cha^pions auau^ce forth your standards, and assaye whither your enemies can
decide and try y^ title of battle by dent of sword, auaunce (I say again)
forward my captains, in whom lacks neither policy wisdom nor puissaunce.
Every one give but one suer stripe, and suerly y^ journey is ours. What
preuayleth a ha^dfull to a hole realm? desiryng you for y^ love y^ you bear
to me, and y^ affeccion y^ you have to your native and natural country, and
to y^ sauegard of your prince and your self, y^ you will this day take to you
your accustumed courage, and courageous spirits for y^ defense and sauegard of
us all. And as for me, I assure you, this day I will triu^phe by glorious
victory, or suffer death for immortal fame. For they be ma^h^^eed and out of
y^ palice of fame disgraded die^g without renoune, which do not as much prefer
and exaltey^ perpetual honor of their native country, as there own mortal and
transitory life. Now sent George to borowe, let us set forward, and remember
well y^ I am he which shall with high auauncementes, reward and prefer y^
valiant and hardy cha^pions, and punish and turment the shameful cowardes and
dreadful dastardes. This exhortacion encouraged all such as faroured him, but
such as were present more for dread then love, kyssed the^ openly, whom they
in wardely hated other swear outwardely to take part with such, whose death
they secretly compassed and inwardly imagened, other promised to invade the
kings enemies, which fled and fought with fyrce courage against the king:
other stood still and looked on, entendynge to take part with the victors and
ouercommers: So was his people to him unsure and unfaithful at his end* as he
was to his nephews untrue and unnatural in his beginning.

When therle of Richmond knew by his forriders that the king was so nere
embattayled, he rode about his army, from rank to rank, from wyng so wyng,
geuyng comfortable words to all men, and that finyshed (heynge armed at all
pieces saving his helmet) mounted on a little hill so that all his people might
se and behold him perfitly to there great reioysyng: For he was a man of no
great stature, but so formed and decorated with all gifts and lyniamentes of
nature that he seemed more an angelical creature then a terrestrial personage,
his countenance and aspecte was cherefull and courageous, his hear yelow like
the burnished gold, his eyes gray shynynge and quick, prompte and redye in
aunswerynge, but of such sobriety that it could never be judged whyther he
ware more dull then quick in speaking (such was his temperaunce.) And when
he had over looked his army over every side, he pawsed a while, and after with a
loud voice and bold spirit spoke to his compaignions these or like words
following.

If ever GOD gave victory to men fighting in a just quarrel? The oracio^ of
king Henry the.vii.
or if he ever aided such as made war for the welthe and tuycyon of there
own natural and nutritive country? or if he ever succored them which
adventured there lives for the relefe of innocents, suppressynge of
malefactores and apparaunt offenders? No doubt my fellows and friends, but he
of his bountefull goodness will this day fend us triumphaunt victory and a
luckey journey over our proud enemies, and arrogant adversaries: for if you
remember and consider the very cause of our just quarrel, you shall apparantlye
perceive the same to be true, Godly, and virtuous. In the which I doubt not
but GOD will rather aid us (ye and fight for us) then se us vanquished and
profligate by such as neither fear him nor his laws, nor yet regard justice
or honesty. Our cause is so just that no enterprice can be of more virtue,
both by the laws divine and ^iuile, for what can be a more honest, goodly, or
Godly quarrel then to fight against a Captain, being an homicide and
mutderer of his own blood and progenye? An extreme destroyer of his
nobylytie, and to his and our country and the poor subjects of the same, a
deadly malle a fyrye brande and a burden intolerable? beyde him, consider who
be of his band and compaignye, such as by murder and vntreuthe committed
against there own kynne and lynage, ye against their Prince and souereygne
Lord have disheryted me and you and wrongefully deteyne and usurp over
lawefull patrymonye and lyneall inherytaunce. For he that calls him self
king, keeps from me the Crown and regymente of this noble realm and
country contrary to all justice and equity. Likewise, his mates and friends
occupy your lands cut down your woddes and destroy your manners, lettynge
your wifes and children range a broad for there living: which persons for there
penance and punishment I doubt not but GOD of his goodness will either deliver
into our hands as a great gain and booty, or cause them being grieved and
compuncted with the prick of there corrupt consciences cowardely to fly and
not abide the battaill: beside this I assure you that there be yonder in that
great battaill, men brought thither for fear and not for love, soldiers by
force compelled and not with good will assembled: persons which desyer rather the
destruction then salvation of there master and captayn: And finally a multitude:
whereof the most part will be our friends and the lest part our enemies. For
truly I dout which is greater the malice of the soldiers toward there
captain, or the fear of him conceived of his people: for suerly this rule is
infallible, that as il men daily couyte to destroy the good, so God appoynteth
the good to confound the ill, and of all worldly goods the greatest is, to
suppress tirauntes, and releue innocences, whereof the one is ever as much
hated as y^ other is beloved. If this be true (as clerks preche) who will
spare younder tyrant Richard duke of Gloucester vntrewely calling him self
king, considering that he has violated, and broken both the law of God and
man, what virtue is in him which was the confusion of his brother and
murderer of his nephews? what mercy is in him that sleythe his trusty
friends as well as his extreme enemies? Who can have confide^s in him which
puts diffidens in all me^? If you have not read, I have hard of clerckes
say, y^ Tarquyne y^ proud for the vice of the body lost the kingdom of Rome,
and the name of Tarquyne bannyshed the City for ever: yet was not his fault so
detestable as the fact of cruel Nero, which s^ew his own mother and opened
her entrayles to be hold the place of his conception. Behold younder Richard
which is both Tarquine and Nero: Ye a tyrau^t more then Nero, for he has not
only murdered his nephewe being his king and sovereign lord, bastarded his
noble brethern and defamed the womb of his verteous and womanly mother, but
also compased all the means and ways y^ he could invent how to stupra^e and
carnally know his own nece under the pretense of a cloked matrimony, which
lady I have sworn and promised to take to my make and wife as you all know and
believe. If this cause be not just, and this quarrel Godly, let God the geuer of
vyctorie judge and determine. We have (thanks be given to Christ) escaped y^
secret treasons in Brytaine, and avoided the subtle snares of our fraudule^t
enemies there, passed the troublous sees in good and quiet sauegarde, and with
out resistance have penetrate the ample region and large country of Wales, and
are now comme to the place which we so much desired, for long we have sought
the furious bore, and now we have found him. Wherefore, let us not fear to
enter in to the toil where we may suerly sley him, for God knows y^ we have
lived in the vales of myserie, tossyng our ships in dangerous storms: let
us not now dread to set up our sails in fair wether having with us both him
and good fortune. If we had come to conquer Wales and had acheued yt, our
praise had been great, and our gain more? but if we wyn this battaill y^ hole
rich realm of England with the lords and rulers of the same shall be ours,
the profit shall be ours and the honor shall be ours. Therefore labor for
your gain and swet for your right: while we were in Brytaine we had small
livings and little plentye of welthe or welfare, now is the time come to get
abundaunce of riches and copy of profit which is the reward of your service
and merit of your pain. And this remember with your selves, that before us be
our ennemies, and on either side of us be such as I nether suerly trust, nor
greatly believe, backwarde we cannot fly: So that here we stand like sheep in a
fold circumcepted and compassed between our enemies and our doubtful friends.
Therefore let all fear be set a side and like sworn brethern let us join in
one, for this day shall be the end of our travail and the gain of our labor
either by honorable death or famous victory: And as I trust, the battaill shall
not be so sour as y^ profyt shall be sweet. Remember y^ victory is not gotten
with the multitude of men, but with the courages of hearts and valiauntnes of
minds. The smaller that our nombre is, the more glory is to us if we
vanquishe, if we be overcome, yet no laud is to be attributed, to the victors,
consyderyng that.x. men fought against one: and if we dye so glorious a death
in so good a quarrel, nether fretyng tynne, nor cancarding obliuio^ shall be
able to obfuscate or race out of the book of fame either our names or our Godly
attempt. And this one thing I assure you, that in so just and good a cause,
and so notable a quarrel, you shall find me this day, rather a dead carrion
upon the coold ground* then a fre prisoner on a carpett in a laydes chamber.
Let us therefore fight like invincible gyantes, and set on our enemies like
vntimerous Tigers and banish all fear like ra^ping lions. And now auau^ce
torward true men against traitors pitiful persons against murderers, true
inheritors against usurpers, y^ skorges of God against tirau^tes, display my
banner with a good courage, march forth like strong and robustious champions,
and begin y^ battaill like hardy conquerers, the battaill is at hand, and y^
victory approaches, and if we shamfully recule or cowardly fly, we and all
our sequel be destroyed and dishonored for ever. This is y^ day of gain, and
this is y^ time of loss, get this day victory and be co^querers, and lose
this days battle and be villains and therefore in y^ name of god and sai^ct
George let every man coragiosly auau^ce forth his sta^dard.

These cherefull words he set forth with such gesture of his body and
smylyng countenance, as though all redye he had vanquyshed his enemies and
gotten the spoil.

He had scantly finyshed his saienge, The battle between king Richard and
king Henry the.vii.
but the one army espied the other, lord how hastily the souldioures ^uckled
their healmes, how quikly the archers bent there bows and frushed their
feathers, how redely y^ byllmen shoke there bylles and proved there staves,
ready to approach and join when the terrible trompet should sownde the bluddy
blast to victory or death. Between both armies there was a great marrysse
which therle of Richemond left on his right hand, for this intent that it
should be on that side a defense for his part, and in so doing he had the
son at his back and in the faces of his enemies. When king Richard saw the
earls compaignie was passed the marresse, he commanded with all have to set
upon them, then the trompettes blew and the soldiers showted and the kings
archers couragious^y let fly there arrows, the earls bowme^ stood not still
but paid the^ home again. The terrible shot ons passed, the armies joined,
and came to hand strokes, where another sword nor byll was spared, at which
encounter the lord Stanley joined with therle. The earl of Oxforde in the mean
season feryng lest while his co^paignie was fightyng, they should be compassed
and circu^uented with y^ multitude of his enemies, gave commandment in every
rank y^ no man should be so hardy as go above.x. foot from y^ standard, which
co^manndement ons known, they knyte the^ selfs together, and ceased a littel
from fightyng: the adversaries suddenly abashed at the matter, and mystrustynge
some fraud or deceate, began also to pause and left strikyng, and not against
the wylles of many which had lever have had the king destroyed then saved, and
therefore they fought very faintlye or stood still. Therle of Oxforde bryngyng
all his bend together on the one part, set on his ennemies freshly, again,
the adversaries perceiuyng that, placed there men slender and thine before and
thick and broad behind, beginning again hardely the battaill. While the two
forwards thus mortallye fought, each entendyng to vanquishe and convince ye
other, King Richard was admonished by his explorators and espialles, y^ therle
of Richmo^d accompaignied with a small number of men of arms was not far of,
and as he approached and marched toward him, he perfitely knew his personage by
certain demonstracions and tokens which he had learned and known of other.
And being inflamed with ire and vexed with outrageous malice, he put his spurs
to his horse and rode out of the side of y^ range of his battle, leuyng the
auantgardes fightyng, and like a hungery lion ran with spear in rest toward
him. Therle of Richmonde perceived well the king furiusly coming toward him,
and by cause the hole hope of his wealth and purpose was to be determined by
battaill, he gladlye proferred to encountre with him body to body and man to
man. King Rychard set on so sharply at the first Brou^t y^ he overthrew
therles standarde, and slew Sir William Brandon his standarde bearer (which
was father to sir Charles Brandon by king Henry y^.viii. created duke of
Suffolk) and matched hand to hand with sir Ihon Cheinye, a man of great force
and strength which would have resisted him, and the said Ihon was by him
manfully overthrown, and so he making open passage by dent of sword as he
went forward, therle of Richmond with stood his violence and kept him at the
swerdes poincte without auantage longer then his compaignions other though or
judged, which being almost in despair of victory, were suddenly recomforted
by Sir William Stanley, which came to succors with.iii. thousand tall men,
at which very instant king Richardes men were driven back and fled, and he
him self manfully fighting in the mydell of his enemies was slain and
brought to his death as he worthily had deserved.

In the mean season therle of Oxforde with the aid of the Lord Stanley,
after no long fight disconfited the forward of king Rychard, whereof a great
number were slain in the chase and flight, but the greatest number which
(compelled by fear of the king and not of there mere voluntary mocion) came
to the feld, gave never a stroke, and having no harm nor damage sauely
departed, which came not thither in hope to se the king prosper and prevail,
but to here that he should be shamefully confounded and brought to ruin.

In this battaill died few above the number of a thousand persons: And of
the nobility were slain Ihon Duke of Norfolk, which was warned by diverse to
refrain from the field, in so much that the night before he should set
forward toward the king, one wrote on his gate. Jack of Norffolke be not to
bold
For Dykon thy master is bought and sold.
Yet all this notwithstanding he regarded more his oath, his honor and
promise made to king Richard, like a gentleman and a faythefull subject to
his prince absented not him self from his master, but as he faythefully lived
under him, so he manfully dyed with him to his great fame and lawde. There
were slain beside him water lord Ferrers of Chartley, Sir Rychard Ratclyffe,
and Robert Brakenburie Leutenaunt of the Tower and not many gentlemen mo. Sir
Willyam Catesbey learned in the laws of the realm, and one of the cheffe
counsailers to the late king, with diverse other were *ii. days after behedded
at Leycester. Amongst them that ran away were Sir Fraunces Uicou^t louell
and Humfrey Stafforde and Thomas Stafford his brother which took sanctuary in
saynct Ihones at Gloucester. Of captives and prisoners there was a great
number, for after the death of king Richard was known and publyshed, every
man in manner vnarmynge him self and casting a way his abilimentes of war,
mekely submitted them selfs to the obeyssaunce and rule of therle of
Richemond: of the which the more part had gladly so done in the beginnynge if
they might have conveniently escaped from king Richardes espialles, which
having as clear eyes as lynx and as open ears as Mydas ra^ged and serched in
every quarter. Amongst these was Henry the.iiii. earl of Northumberlande,
which whither it was by the commandment of king Richard putting diffidens
in him, or he did it for the love and favor that he bare unto the Earl, stood
still with a great compaignie and intermitted not in the battaill, which was
incontinently received in to favor and made of the counsel. But Thomas Haward
earl of Surrey which submitted him self there, was not taken to grace by cause
his father was cheffe cou^sailer and he greatly familiar with king Richard, but
committed to the Tower of London, where he long remained and in conclusion
delivered, and for his treuth and fidelity after promoted to high honors
offices and dignites. On therle of Richmo^ds part were slain^scace one hundred
persons, amongst whom the pryncipall was Sir William Brandon his standard
bearer.

This battaill was fought at Bosworth in Leycester shire the.xxii. day of
August in the year of our redemption a.M.CCCC.lxxxvi. the hole conflicte
endured little above two hours. King Richard as the fame went might have
escaped and gotten sauegarde by fliynge. For when they which were next about
his person saw and perceived at the first ioynyng of the battaill the
^ouldiours fayntly and nothing courageously to set on their enemies, and not
only that, but also that some with drew them selfs pryuely out of the prease
and departed. They began to suspect fraud and to smell treason, and not only
exhorted but determinatly aduysed him to save him self by flight: and when the
loss of the battle was imminent and apparante, they brought to him a swyfte
and a light horse to convey him away. He which was not ignorant of y^ grudge
and ill will y^ the common people bare toward him, casting away all hope of
fortunate success and happy chance to come, answered (as men say) that on
that day he would make an end of all battles or else there finyshe his life.
Such a great audacitie and such a s^owte stomach reigned in his body, for
suerly he knew y^ to be the day in the which it should be decided and
determined whither he should peaseably obtain and enjoy his kingdom during
his life, or else utterly for go and be depryued of the same, with which to much
hardines he being overcome hastily closed his helmett, and entered fiercely in
to the hard battle, to thentent to obtain that day a quiet reign and
regiment or else to finyshe there his unquiet life and unfortunate governance.
And so this miser at y^ same very poinct had like chance and fortune, as
happens to such which in place of right justice and honesty following there
sensual appetite, love, use, and embrace, mischief, tyranny, and
unthriftiness. Suerly these be examples of more vehemencye then man's tongue can
express, to fear and astu^ne such yuell persons as will not live one hour
vacant from doing and exercisyng cruelty myschiefe or outrageous living.

When therle had thus obteigned victory and slain his mortal enemy, he
kneled down and rendered to almighie God his hearty thanks with devout and Godly
orisons, besechyng his goodness to send him grace to auaunce and defend the
catholic faith and to mayntaine justice and co^corde amongst his subjects
and people, by God now to his governance committed and assigned: Which prayer
finyshed, he replenyshed with incomperable gladness, ascended up to the topp of a
littell mountain, where he not only praised and lawded his valiant
soldiers, but also gave unto them his hearty thanks, with promise of co^digne
recompen^e for their fidelite and valiau^t factes, willing and commaundyng all the hurt and wounded persons to be cured, and the dead carcases to be
delivered to y^ sepulture. Then y^ people reioysed and clapped hands criyng up
to heaven, king Henry, king Henry. When the lord Stanley saw the good will and
gratuite of the people he took the crown of king Richard which was found
amongst the spoil in the field, and set it on therles head, as though he had
byne elected king by the voice of the people as in ancient times past in
diverse realms it has been accustomed, and this was the first sign and token
of his good luck and felicite. I must put you here in remembrance how that
king Richard putting some diffidence in the lord Stanley, which had with him
as an hostage, the lord strange his eldest son, which lord Stanley as you
have heard before joined not at the first with his son in laws army, for
fear that king Richard would have slain the Lord Strange his heir. When
king Richard was come to Boswoorth, he sent a purseuau^t to the lord Stanley,
commaundyng him to auaunce forward with his compaignie and to come to his
presence, which thing if he refused to do, he swear by Christ's passion that
he would stryke of his sons hedde before he dined. The lord Stanley
answered the pursiuaunt that if the king did so, he had more sons a live,
and as to come to him he was not then so determined: when king Richard hard
this answer he commanded the lord Strange incontinent to be behedded,
which was at that very same season when both the armies had sight each of
other. The counsaillers of king Richard ponderyng the time and the cause,
knowing also the Lord Strange to be innocente of his fathers offense,
persuaded the king that it was now time to fight and not time to execucion,
aduisynge him to keep the Lord Strange as a prisoner till the battayll were
ended, and then at Leyser his pleasure might be accomplished. So as God would
king Richard enfrynged his holy oath, and the Lord was delivered to the
kepers of the kings tents to be kept as a prisoner, which when the field was
done and their master slain and proclamacion made to know where the child
was, they, submitted them selfs as prisoners to the Lord Strange, and he
gently received them and brought them to the new proclaimed king, where of him
and of his Father he was received with great joy and gladness. After this the
hole camp removed with bagg and baggage and the same night in the euenyng king
Henry with great Pomp came to the town of Leycester. Where as well for the
refreshynge of his people and souldioures as for preparynge all things
necessary for his journey toward London, he rested and reposed him self two
days. In the mean season the dead corpse of king Richard was as shamefully
carried to the town of Leycester, as he gorgiously the day before with pomp
and pride departed owte of the same town. For his body was naked and despoyled
to the skyne, and nothing left above him not so much as a clowte to cover his
pryue members, and was trussed behind a pursiuaunt of arms called blaunche
senglier or white bore, like a hog or a calfe, the head and arms hanging on
the one side of the horse, and the legs on the other side, and all by
spryncled with mire and blood, was brought to the graye friars church within
the town, and there lay like a miserable spectacle: but suerly consyderyng
his mischeuous acts and Facinorous doings, men may worthily wonder at such a
caytiue, and in the said church he was with no less funeral pomp, and
solempnitie enterred, then he would to be done at the beryng of his innocent
nephiwes whom he caused cruelly to be murdered and unnaturally to be quelled.

When his death was known, few lamented, and many reioysed, y^ proud braggyng
white bore (which was his badge) was violently rased and plucked down from
every sign and place where it might be espied, so ill was his life that men
wished the memory of him to be buried with his carren corpse: He reigned.ii.
years.ii. months and one day.

As he was small and little of stature so was he of body grraiely deformed, the
one shoulder higher then the other, The description of king Richard y^.iii.
his face small but his co^tenaunce was cruel, and such, that a man at the
first aspect would judge it to savor and smell of malice, fraud, and deceit:
when he stood musyng he would byte and chaw besely his nether lip, as who
said, that his fyerce nature in his cruel body always cha^ed, sturred and
was ever unquiet: beside that, the dagger that he ware he would when he
studied with his hand pluck up and down in the shethe to the mids, never
drawing it fully out, his wit was pregnaunt, quick and ready, wyly to feign and
apt to dissimule, he had a proud mind and an arroga^t stomach, the which
accompaignied him to his death, which he rather desiring to suffer by dent of
sword, then being forsaken and destitute of his untrue compaignions, would
by cowarde flight preserve and save his uncertain liffe: Which by malice,
sickness or condign punishment might chance shortly after to comme to
confusion.

Thus ended this prince his mortal life with infamy and dishonor, which
never preferred fame or honesty before ambicion tyranny and myschiefe. And if
he had continued still Protectoure and suffered his nephews to have lived and
reigned, no doubt but the realm had prospered and he much praised and beloved
as he is now abhorred and vilipended, but to God which knew his interior
cogitacions at the hour of his death I remitte the punishment of his offenses
committed in his life.

The politic governance of King Henry the.vii.
Considering now that I have sufficiently declared what mischief king Richard
the third wrought with in this realm after ye death of his noble brother king
Edward the fourth: and how the nobilite of his kingdom maligned and conspired
against him, and abandoned and left him in manner desolate at the day of his
most need and tribulacio^: Also how miserable he ended his life at y^ town of
Boswoorth, and how irreverently he was enterred at ye town of Leicestre which
I doubt not but is sufficiently declared unto you. And now only rests to
show you what happened after his fall and confusion to him, that both
vanquished and deprived him from his princely power and royal dignity.

When king Henry had not only obtained this triumphant battle at the plain of
Boswoorth against his malicious enemy king Richard, but also by the glorious
victory gatt the diadem and possession of thestate royal and princely
pre-eminence of this famous Empire and renoumed kingdom. He having both the
ingenious forcast of the subtyl serpent, and also fearyng the burning fire
like an infant that is a little synged with a small slame: and farther
vigilantly forseyng and prudently prouidyng for doubts that might accid^ntally
ensue: devised, studied and compassed to extirpate and eradicate all interior
sedicions and apparent presumpcions which might move any tumulteous route or
sedicious coniuracion against him within his realm in time to come. And to
obsist the first likely mischief he sent before his departure from Leycestre
Sir Robert wylloghby knight to the manner of Sheryhutton in the county of York,
for Edward plantagenet Earl of Warwike son and heirs to George duke of
Clare^ce then being of the age of.xv. years, whom king Richard had kept there
as a prisoner during the time of his usurped reign. And surely ye king was
not afeard without a cause, for he much mistrusted least by this you^ge man,
some duill disposed and envious persons of his glory and auaunceme^t might
invent some new occasion of renuyng of battaill against him, which being even
from his infancy with many encombrances and troubles vexed and endaungered,
desired nothing more heartily then now to live in quyetnes, peace and
tranquilite. Sir Robert willoghby according to his commission received of the
conestable of the castle the Earl Edward, and him conueighed to London, where
the youngelynge borne to perpetual calamity was incontinent in the tower o^
London putt under safe and sure custody. There was beside him in the same
Castle of Sheryhutton the lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to king Edward, whom
king Richard foolyshly phantasiyng and deuelyshly dotyng did entende to mary as
you before have heard, but the damsel dy^ not alonly disagre and repudiate
that matrimony, but abhorred and detested greatly his abhommable desire. At
which most importunate and detestable concupiscence the common people of the
realm so much grudged and maligned that they did not only attribute ye fault
and crime to the king, but much more culpate and blame his preuy cou^cellers
which did not dissent, but consent to so pernicious a counsel and so
shameful a conclusion: But God of his only goodness preserved y^ christian mind
of that verteous and immaculate virgin, and from that flagicions and facinerous
act, did graciously protect and de^ende: The which lady not long after
acco^pa^yed with a great nombre as well of nobleme^ as honorable matrones was
with good speed conueighed to London and brought to her mother.

In the mean ceason the king removed forward by iorneyes toward London and
even as he passed, the rusticall people on every side of the ways assembled in
great nombres and with great joy clapped their hands and showted, criyng,
king Henry, king Henry. But when he approached ^ere the city the Mayre, the
Senate and the magistrates of the same being all clothed in vyolet met him at
Shordiche, and not only saluted and welcomed him with oue voice in general,
but every person perticul^^ly preased and aduau^ced him self, gladly to touch
and kiss that victorious hands which had overcome so monstrous and cruel a
tyrant, geuyng lands and praysynges to almightye God, and rendryng immortal
thanks to him, by whose mean and industry the common wealth of the realm was
preserved from final deslruccion and perpetual calamite, and the aucthores of
y^ mischief ^ublated and plucked away. And with great pomp and triumph he
road through the city to the cathedral church of S. Paul where he offered
his.iii. standards. In the one was the image of S. George, in the second was a
red firye dragon beaten upon white and grene sarcenet, ye third was of yelowe
tartern^, in the which was peinted a do^ne ^owe. After his prayers said and Te
deum song, he departed to the bishops palace and there soiourned a ceason,
during which time, plays, pastymes and pleasures were showed in every part
of the city. And to thentent that their good mind toward God should not be put
in oblivion, they caused general processio^s solemply to be celebrate to render
and yield to God their creator and redemer their hartye and humble thanks
which had delivered them from miserable captivity and restored them to
liberty and fredome. Beside this, they that favored and loved the king were
inwardly joyous to se and perceive that their adversaries and back friends were
all ready or like to be suppeditate and overthrown.

When these solempnities and grati^ications were done and passed: according as
other kings had been accustomed, he co^gregated together the sage councelers
of his realm, in which cou^sail like a prince of just faith and true of
promise, detestyng all intestine and cyuel hostilite, appointed a day to join
in matrimony y^ lady Elizabeth heir of the house of York, with his noble
personage heir to y^ line of Lancastre: which thing not only reioysed and
comforted the hearts of the noble and gentlemen of the realm, but also gained
the favor and good minds of all the common people, much extollyng and
praysyng the kings constant fidelyte and his polletique deuyce, thinkyng
surely that the day was now come that the seed of tumulteous faccions and the
fountain of ciuyle dissencion should be stopped, euacuate and clearly
extinguished.

After this, he with great pomp was co^ueighed to Westmynster, and there the
thirty day of Octobre was with all ceremonies accustomed, enoynted and crouned
king by the whole assent as well of the commons as of the nobilite, and was named
king Henry the.vij. of that name, which was in the year of our
redemption.M.cccc.lxxxvi. Frederyke the.iij. then being Emperor of Almayne,
Maximilian his son then being newely elected king of Romans, Charles
the.viij. reignyng over the French nation, and James the.iii. rulyng the
realm of Scotland. Which kingdom he obtained and enjoyed as a thing by God
elected and provided, and by his especial favor and gracious aspecte
compassed and acheued. In so much that me^ commonly report that.vii.C.xcvii.
years passed, it was by a heavenly voice reveled to Cadwalader last king of
Brytons that his stock and progeny should reign in this land and bear
domynion again: Whereupon most men were persuaded in their own opinion that by
this heavenly voice he was provided and ordained long before to enjoy and
obtain this kingdom, Which thing king Henry the.vi. did also show before as
you have heard declared. Wherefore he being by right and just title of
temporal inheritance, and by provision of deuyne purueyau^ce thus crouned and
proclaimed king: First of all vsyng the antique example of the Athenienses,
which is to perdon and put out of memory all crimes and offenses before time
against him or his laws perpetrated or committed, he called his high court of
parliament at Westmynster the.vii. day of Nouembre for thestablishyng of all
things as well concerning the preseruacion and maintenau^ce of his royal
person, as the admynistracion of justice and preferment of the common wealth of
this realm and domynion, in thewhich he caused to be proclaimed that all men
were perdoned, acquyted and clearly discharged of all offenses, peynes of death
and execucions, and should be restored to their lands and mouable goods
which would submyt them selfs to his clemency and by oath be obliged truly to
serve and obey him as their sovereign lord, and who would be obstinate and
refuse to return to his part, should be accepted and taken as a public enemy
to him and his country. By reason of which proclamacion, a great nombre that
came out of diverse sanctuaries and priuileged places obtained grace,
forgetting clearly the diversity of faccions and voice of partakyng. After
this he began to remember his especial friends and fautours, of whom, some
he auaunced to honor and dignite, and some he enriched with possessions and
goods, every man according to his desert and merit. And to begin, Iaspar
his uncle Earl of Penbrooke, he created duke of Bedforde, Thomas lord Stanley
he promoted to be earl of Darby, and y^ lord Chandew of Briteine his especial
friend he made earl of Bathe, Sir Eyles Dawbeney was made lord Dawbeney, sir
Robert Willoughby was made lord Brook which be in their degree bar^ns and
peers of the realm. And Edward stafford eldest son to Henry late duke of
Buckyngham, he restored to to his name, dignity and possessions, which king
Richard did cofiscate and attaynted. Beside this, in this parliament was this
notable act assented to and concluded as follows.

To the pleasure of almighty God, wealth prosperity and surety of this realm
of England, and to the synguler comfort of all the kings subjects of the same,
in aduoydyng all ambiguyties and question^: Be it ordained established and
enacted by this present parliamente, that the inheritance of the croune of
this realm of England and also of France with all the pr^hemyne^ce and
dignity royal to the same apperteignyng and all other seigniories to the king
belongyng beyond the sea with the appurtenau^ces thereto in any wise dew or
apperteignyng, shall rest, remain and abide in the most royal person of our
now sovereign lord king Henry the.vii. and in the heirs of his body lawfully
coming, perpetually with the grace of God so to endure, and in none other.

And beside this act al attainders of this king, enacted by king Edward and
king Richard were adnichilated, and the record of the same adjudged to be
defaced and put out of memory, and al persons attaynted for his cause and
occasion, were restored to their goods, lands and possessions. And in
conclusion, diverse of the acts made in the time of king Edward and king
Richard were adnulled and revoked, and other more expedient for the utility of
the common wealth were subrogated and concluded. When all things necessary
were discretely ordered and the parliamente for the time dissolved, the king
thought it not necessary to put in oblivion his friends and hostages being
beyond the sea, wherefore with all diligent (...) he redeemed the Marquis Dorcet
and sir Ihon Bourch^er whom he had left as pledges at Paris for money there
before borrowed. And sent also into Flaunders for Ihon Morton bishop of Ely.

These acts performed, he stablished in his house a grave counsel of wise
and pollitique men, by whose judgment, order and determinacion the people
might be governed according to justice and equity, and that all causes might
be finyshed and ended there, without great bearyng or expense in long ^ute.
And for hearing and decydynge these causes justly and spedely he swear of his
counsel diverse noble and discrete persons which for their pollecy, wytt
and synguler gravity, were highly esteemed and renoumed, whose names follow,
Iaspar duke of Bedfoorde, Ihon earl of Oxenforde, Thomas Stanley earl of Darby,
Iho^ bishop of Ely, Sir Wyllyam Stanley lord Chamberleyn of his household, Sir
Robert Willoughby, lord Brook, lord Stuard of his household, Gyles lord
Dawbeney, Ihon lord Dynham after made tresorer of England, Sir Reignold Brey,
Sir Ihon Cheiney, Sir Richard Guyldforde, Sir Richard Tunstall, Sir Richard
Egecombe, Sir Thomas Louell, Sir Edward Pownynges, Sir Iho^ Risley, with
diverse other wise men, which as the time required he called to his counsayll
and service now one and now another.

Although by this eleccion of wise and grave councellers all things seemed to
be brought to a good and perfight conclusion, yet there lacked a wrest to the
harp to set all the strings in a monacorde and tune which was the matrimony
to be fineshed between the king and the lady Elizabeth daughter to king
Edward, which like a good prince according to his oath and promise, he did both
solempnise and co^summate in brief time after, that is to say on the.xviii.
day of January. By reason of which marriage peace was thought to discende out
of heaven into England, considering that the lines of Lancastre and York,
being both noble famylies equiuale^t in riches, fame and honor, were now
brought into one knott and connexed together, of whose two bodies one heir
might succeed, which after their time should peaceable rule and enjoy the
whole monarchy and realm of England.

These things thus passed, albeyt that apparauntly all things seemed to be
reduced to a good point and set in a sure steye: King Henry being made wise
and expert with troubles and myschiefes before past, remembered that yt was
wisdom to fear and provide for the crafty wyles and lurkyng trappes of his
secret enemies, remembryng all me^ for the most part embrued and exercysed in
plantyng of dyuision and sowynge dissencion, can not lightely leave their
pestiferous appetite and sedicious occupacion. Wherefore, for the sauegarde and
preseruacion of his own body, he co^stituted and ordained a certain nombre
as well of good archers as of diverse other persons being hardy, strong and of
agilitie to give dailye attendaunce on his person, whom he named Yomen of his
guard, The first Yomen of the guard.
which president men thought that he learned of the French king when he was in
France: For men remember not any king of England before that time which used
such a furnyture of daily souldyours. Yet forasmuch as to avoid and eschew
all doubtful dangers and perelles unlooked for, little avails ourward war,
except there be a sure stay, and a steadfast backstande at home, as well for the
sauegarde and securite, as for the good governance of such as be left behind:
He therefore sommoned again his great court of parliament, whereto he would
that there should be elected the most prudent and grauous persons of every
county, city, port and borogh, and in especial such as he in all his
dangers, calamities, miseries and tumulteous affairs, used, trusted and
favored, as parttakers, councelers, and compaignious both of his woo and
adversity, and also of his triumph and glorious victory, whose minds and
studyes he perfightly knew to be fixed and set in the poletique regunent and
prudent governance of the public wealth of his realm and domynion. Not
^orgettynge, but having in fresh memory that he for that cause principally was
so sore desired, and instantly called of the English nation his natural
countrymen: Estemynge yt as a chief and principal part of his ductie to se
his realm both adourned and decored with good and profitable laws and
statutes, and also to florishe in verteous operacions and good and cyuile
manners, which should be an ^ccasyon to cause all men to hope that all thing
would continually amend, from evil to good, from good to bettre, and from
bettre to the best. This sure foundation king Henry laid at the beginning of
his reign, entendyng thereon contynually to build.

In this same year a new kind of sickness came suddenly through the whole
region eue^ after the first entryng of the king into this Isle, which was so
sore, so peynfull and sharp that the like was never hard of, to any man's
remembrance before that time: The Sweatyng syc^nes.
For suddenly a deadly and burning sweat i^uaded their bodies and vexed their
blood with a most arde^t heat, infested the stomach and the head grievously: by
the tormentyng and vexacion of which sickness, men were so sore handled and so
peynfully pangued that if they were laid in their bed, being not hable to
suffer the importunate heat, they cast away the shetes and all the clothes
liyng on the bed. If they were in their apparel and vestures, they would put
of all their garments even to their shirtes. Other were so dry that they
drank the cold water to quench their importune heat and insaciable thirst.
Other that could or at the least would abide the heat and styntche (for in
deed the sweat had a great and a strong sauoure) caused clothes to be laid
upon them as much as they could bear, to drive out the sweat if it might
be. All in manner as soon as the sweat took them, or within a short space after,
yielded up their ghost. So that of all them that sickened there was not one
amongst an hundredth that escaped: In somuche, that beside the great nombre
which deceased within the city of London, two Mayres successively dyed of
the same desease within.viij. days and.vj. Aldermen. And when any person had
fully and completely sweat, xxiii^. hou^es (for so long did the strength of
this plague hold them) he should be then clearly delivered of his desease: Yet
not so clean ryd of yt, but that he might shortly relaps and fall again into
the same evil pyt, yea again and twyse again as many one in deed did, which
after the third time dyed of the same. At the length by study of Phisicians and
experience of the people, driven thereunto by dreadful necessytie, there was a
remedy invented: For they that suruyued, consyderyng thexstremytie of the pain
in them that deseased, devised by things mere co^trariaunt, to resyst and
withstand the furious rage of that burning furnesse, by luke warm drink
temperate heat, and measurable clothes. For such persons as relapsed again
into the flame after the first delyueraunce, observed diligently and marked
such things as did them case and comfort at their first vexacion, and vsyng
the same for a remedy and medicine of their pain, addyng ever somewhat thereto
that was sanatyue and wholesome. So that if any person ever after fell sick
again, he obseruyng the regyme^t that amongst the people was devised could
shortly help him self, and easily tempre and avoid the strength and malice
of the sweat. So that after the great loss of many men, they learned a
present and a spedy remedy for the same desease and malady, thewhiche is this:
If a man on the day time were plagued with the sweat, then he should
straight lie down with all his clothes and garments and lie still the
whole.xxiiii. hours. If in the night he were taken, then he should not rise
out of his bed for the space of.xxiiii. hours, and so cast the clothes that
he might in no wise provoke the sweat, but so lie temperately that he water
might distille ^ute softly of the own accord, and to absteyne from all meat
if he might so long sustain and suffer hungre and to take no more drink
neither hot nor cold, then will moderately quentche and delay his thrustye
appetyde. And in this his amendynge, one point diligently above all other is
to be observed and attended, that he never put his hand or foot out of y^ bed
to refreshe or cool him self, thewhich to do is no less peine then short
death. So you may pleynly see what ^emedy was by the daily experience
excogitated and inverted for this strange and unknown desease, thewhich at
that time vexed and grieved only the realm of England in every town and
village as yt did diverse times after. But.lv. year after, it sailed into
Flaunders and after into Germany, where it destroyed people innumerable for lack
of knowledge of the English experience. This co^tagious and evil plague
chanced in the first year of king Henryes reign as a token and a plain sign
(if to the vain iudgem^t of the people which commonly common more
fantastically then wisely, any faith or credit is to be had, given or
attributed) that king Henry should have a hard and sore beginning, but more
truly if vain snpersticion can set forth any truth, it pretended and
signified that king Henry to the extreme point and end of his natural life
should never have his spirit and mind quiet, considering that now in the
very beginning of his new obtained reign, he was (as yo^ shall shortly hear)
with sedicion and co^mocion of his people, troubled, vexed and vnquyeted, and
it was in manner a manifest proof that herafter he should live in small rest and
great mystrust of such rebelious and sedicious co^spiracies. These were the
fantastical judgments of the unlettered persons which I ouerpasse, and
return to my purpose.

When all things by y^ king were appeased at London and that he had set and
appointed all his affairs in good order and sure state, as he with him self
co^iectured* he thought it best to make a peregrinacio^ and take his progress
into y^ other quarters of his realm, y^ he might wede, extirpate and purdge
the minds of me^ spotted and co^taminate with the co^tagious smoke of
dissencion, and preuy faccions, and especially the county of York which were
preuy faut^ures and co^forters of the contrary part, and not without a cause.
For king Richard more loved, more esteemed and regarded the northern me^ then
any subjects within his whole realm, which thing to king Henry was not
unknown. Wherefore he the more studied to keep the^ in dew obeisaunce and
faithful obsequy, who^ he knew of long custom to have borne their hearts and
favorable minds to his adversaries: therefore in y^ pryme time of the year he
took his journey toward York, and because the feast of Ester approached, he
diuerted to the city of Lyncoln, where he tarried during the sole^pnite of that
high feast: and making there his abode, he was certified y^ the lord Louel and
Homfrey stafforde were departed out of sanctuary in Colchestre: but to what
place or whether, no man as yet could tell. For which cause the king little
regardyng the tale went forth his appointed journey to York. And as soon as he
was there received and settled, it was bruted, and openly showed to the king
him self that Fraunces lord Louell was at hand with a strong and mighty
power of men, and would with all diligence invade the city: also that the
forenamed Homfrey Stafforde and Thomas his brother were^ in worcettre shyre and
there had raised a great band of rude and rusticall people, and had cast
lottes what part should assaute the gates, what me^ne should scale the walls
of the city of Worcestre, and who should keep the passages for lettyng of
reskewes and aiders.

At the first heryng of this, the king esteemed it for vain and uncertain, and
therefore was with it but little moved: but after that he was certified by the
letters of crede^ce sent from his friends, that all was true that was by the
common voice spoken and published, he was afflicted with no small fear. And
surely not without a cause, for he wisely co^sidred that he had neither a
compete^t army ready prepared, nor harneys nor weapons for them that were
present. And also he was now in such a doubtful place, where he nether might
nor could conveniently gather an host together, co^sideryng that in the same
city, the memory of king Richard his mortal enemy was yet recent and lively
and not all forgotten of his friends, but because the matter required dilygent
celery^ie, least that by long tariyng the power of his adversaries by daily
aides might be increased and multiplied, he commanded the duke of Bedforde
with.iii. thousand men not strongely armed to do a great entrepryce (for their
breast plates for the most part were made of tanned lether) to encountre and
set upon them with all have and diligence, and made him preuy what he him self
intended to do. After this, the king congregated together an host in every
place where he might retain them. The duke setting forward after the fassion
of an eger and fierce captain came nigh to the tents and camp of his enemies
where he consulted and co^munycated his mind with certain capitaynes and sage
soldiers of his compaigny, by what way he might treyne and allure them to
peace, without battaill or bloodsheddyng. After which deliberacion and
aduysement had, yt was decreed that the Herauldes should proclayme openly, that
all such should have grace and pardon that would cast down their weapons and
harneys, and as faithful subjects submyt them selfs to their natural
scuereigne lord. Thewhich proclamacion auayled and much proffited: For the
lord Louel, either for some fear or diffidence that he had in his people and
souldyours, or fearyng him self on his own behalf, fled preuily in a night
from his compaignye and left them without a head* as a flock of sheep without
a shepard, which departure when it was to his army disclosed, they put of
their armure and came directly to the duke, every man humbly submittyng him
self and desiryng pardon for their offenses, wholly trusting in the kings
mercy and favorable goodness. So by this pollitique wisdom and ingenious
means of the good duke, this great rage and fierce route of sturdy and
valyau^t traitors which was prepared against the king, and were like to have
been the ^^aughter of many a man, were pacefyed and repressed and brought to
good conformytie and obedient subieccion. And the lord Louell cheueteyne and
chief leader of this tumult and rebellion, fearyng more perell and daungier,
then desiryng renoune or fame of cheualry, never tariyng ye doubtful chance
of battle, fled in all post haste into Lancashire, and there for a certain
space loytred and lurked with sir Thomas Broughton knight, which in those
quarters bare great swing, and was there in great authority. Homfrey
Stafford also hearing of this myschaunce happened to the lord Louell, in a
great dolor and agony, and for fear, in like manner fled and took sanctuary in
a village called Culnaham, two miles from Abyndon. But because the sanctuary
was not a sufficient defense (as it was proved before the justices of the
kings benche) for traytoures, he was taken by force from that place, and
brought to the tower, and from thence conueyghed to Tyborne and there put to
execucion: but his younger brother Thomas, that was with him, was perdoned and
remitted because he was thought not to have done yt of his own will and
malicious mind, but through the evil counsel and mischeueous persuasyon of
his Eldre brother.

After that the king had thus by pollecy of his cou^saill appeased and
repressed this tumulteous sedicion which greatly vexed and vnquyeted his
spirits, and had reduced to reason and co^formitie the rude and bablyng people
of the north parties, and in especial thinhabitau^tes of the countye of York,
he returned to London, and shortly after that to Wynchestre, where queen
Elizabeth his wife was delivered of a fair prince named Arthur at his baptyme.
The birth of prince Arthur
Of which name Englishemen no more reioysed then outward nations and foreyne
princes trymbled and quaked, so much was that name to all nations terrible and
formidable: And from Wynchestre he returned back again to London.

In this mean time, of a small matter and the same altogether being false and
feyned, there was an open pathe and a apparau^t high weye made for a greater
inconueniency to ensue. The which matter for the subtyl iuggelyng and crafty
co^ueighaunce of the same, no less deceytfull then ligier de main in the hand
of a iuggeler, was to be esteemed emo^gest all wise men at the first a very bold
and over presumpteons an act to be atte^ped: but ye time well weyed and
considred it was not so mo^streous that it were worthy great wonderyng and
admiracion, co^syderyng that many persons of late, either borne in the womb of
continual dissencion, or norished with the milk, or suckyng the pappes of
civil sedicio^, could not live well in rest, and less forbear their usual
custom of moving strife and daily debate. But they sometime sittyng at home
co^passyng and ymaginyng hurt and damage toward such as they in their hearts
disdeyned, sometime remembryng that by the liberty and privilege of war, A
Proverb.
all is fish that comes to the net, ever delitynge in spoylyng, robbyng and
reuynge, vehemently thristyng for the distruccion and loss of such as they
would be reue^ged of, willing to live without law in time of peace and war,
wisshyng the world never to be at a bettre stay. And as persons only dedicate
and given to mischief and scelerous inuencio^s, either for hatred, evil will
or malice of the^ that they favored not, or for some emolume^t, proffite and
commodity of such y^ they thought to set up and auaunce, were by fraud, couyn
and crafty collusio^ prone and ready to disquyet every day the king and his
whole realm, thinking y^ heaven had to much peace and quietness, and hell to
little trouble and vexacion. And there was furtherers and setters on, none
lackyng, in so much that.xx. persons would sooner prick them forward with a
sharp spur, then one pluck the^ back with a dull snaffle. Among the which
mo^stres and lymbes of the deuell, there was one sir Richard Symond priest, a
ma^ne of a base and obscure family, which from his birth delited in fraud and
crafty conueighyng, and yet was he well learned, but not so well learned as
wilye, nor so wilye as ungracious. Which sir Richard Symond had elected a
scoler called Lambert Symenell, one of a gentle nature and pregnau^t wit to be
the organe and conduyte by whom he would convey his false feigned enterprice
and attempt. The deuel chief master of mischief put in the wicked mind and
venemouse brain of this most pernicious disloyal and traiterous person, to
co^mence, feign and deuyse how he might make his child and scolar Lambert to
be the right inheritour to the croune of England, and so thereof to make him
king and to promote him self to the chief Archebishopricke or some high
potestate w^in the realm. The chief foundation of his occasion was (by
thewhich he was the more bold) that the fame went and many men surely
supposed king Edwardes children not to be dead, but to be fled secretly into
some strange place and there to be living, and that Edward earl of Warwike
son and heir to y^ duke of Clare^ce, either was or should be put to death
shortly. These rumoures although they were friuelous and vain and with out all
likelyhode of verite or truth, animated and encouraged this priest much, to
think and judge the time to be come that this Lambert might assume and take
upon him the person and name of one of king Edward the fourthes children, and
to claim and make title both to the realm and kingdom, having sure knowledge
that neither friendship should want nor aid should lack: and considering that
cancard hatred rooted and founded upon facinorous faccions and sedicious
deuysions be so perdurable and in manner everlasting that they can never be
clearly extirpate or dug out of their rotten hearts, but that they will
with hand and foot, toothe and nail further if they can their pretensed
entreprice. And this poor priest brought into this foolish paradise through
his own fantastical ymaginacion, informed and taught the child diligently at
Oxenforde where he went to scoole, both instructyng him with princely
behaueour, ciuyle manner and fruitful litterature, declaryng to him of what
high parentage and of what noble progeny he was lyncally descended, thus
persuadyng and teaching him his lesson clerckly and craftily, for his purpose,
that y^ people hearing the child thus rehersyng his stock so sagely, might the
rather give credit to his deceytfull pretense and false colored inuencion:
Sone after the rumor was blown abroad that Edward y^ young earl of Warwike
was broken out of prison. And when sir Symo^d heard of this, he now inte^dyng
thereby to bring his mue^ted purpose to a conclusion, changed y^ childs name
of baptime and called him Edward after y^ name of the young Earl of Warwike, ye
which were both of one years and of one stature, and then he with his pupille
sailed into Ireland, there openyng his mind, and declaryng his mattre to
certain of the Irishe nobility, who^ he knew by true fame and report to
bear but little favor to king Henry nor his partakers, and having oath and
promise of aid to him sworn and made, he showed them that he had saved and
preserved the duke of Clare^ce son from death, and had for very good will
brought him into that country and region where he knew that both king Edward
and all his stock were favored and loved above all other. This matter was
believed straight of the nobility which so showed and publyshed this feigned
fable and ymagined iuggelynge from one to another till at the last yt was
accounted to be as true as the Gospel without any co^trouersye, ambigiutie or
question. In so much that the lord Thomas Gerardyne chauncelour of all y^
country defrauded by his illusion under the color of plain truth received
him into his castle and with honor and reverence him entreteyned as one that
descended from the high progeny of the sangue royal, and began much to aid
and help him. First calling together all his friends and lovers and such
other as were of band or affinity, declaring first to them the coming of
this child, and after affirmyng that the croune and scepter of the realm of
right apperteyned to this you^ge prince as sole heir male left of the ligne
of Richard duke of York: Exhortyng and desiryng them both for the childs
sake and his awn, as he was true inheritoure to the croune, to help and assyst
him to obtain the garland and possession of the same by his graundfather to him
lyneally descended. And so after communicatyng the same matter with other of the
nobility, every man promised according to his power, aid of monye, men and
municyons. By this means the same was shortly bruted throughout all Irelande,
and every man was willing to take his part and submyt them selfs to him,
calling him of al hands king. So that new they of this sect thus compassed
and sortyd, thought to have in other places their compaignyons and furtherers
of their malicious purpose and most pestiferous faccion, and straight forth
they sent to England certain preuy messengers to desire them, whom they
knew to have been true and faithful trendes to King Richard, now to continue
in their accustomed love and faithful friendship toward his nephewe and to
help the child with treasure and substance as far as they conveniently
might. And that his power might be the stronger to overcome his enemies and to
obtain his pretensed purpose, he and his confederates sent messengers into
Flaunders to the lady Margaret sister to king Edward and late wife to Charles
the duke of Bourgoyne to further his purpose with all her power and help. This
duke Charles having no children by this lady Margaret, left one sole daughter
named Mary behynd him, begotten of his first wyfes daughter to the duke of
Burbone, which was married to Maximilian lonne to Frederick the Emperor, on
which wife he had engendered two children, the one Philip, and the other
Margaret. The which two children after the death of the lady Mary their
mother, this lady Margaret late wife to duke Charles so entierely beloved, so
tenderly brought up, and so motherly norished beside the dailye pain that she
took in ordrynge their affairs and busynes for the mayntenaunce of their
honor and preferment of their proffite that she both for her motherly love
toward the you^ge children, and also for the good administracion of justice
intheir countries, was highly reputed and esteemed and bare great authority
and swing through all Flaunders and the low countries thereto adi^ce^t. This
lady Margaret, although she knew the familye and stock of the house of York
to be in manner distroyed and utterly defaced by her brother king Richard, yet
not being saciate nor content with the long hatred and continual malice of her
parents which subucrted and overthrew almost the progeny and lignage of king
Henry the.vi. and the house of Lancaster, nor yet remembryng the new affinity
and strong alliance that was lately concluded, by thewhiche the heirs of
both the houses and progenies were united and comoyned together in lawful
matrimony, like one forgettyng both God and charity, inflamed with malice and
diabolical instinctio^, invented and practiced all mischiefs, displeasures
and da^mages that she could deuyse against the king of England. And farther in
her fury and frantyke mood (according to the saying of the wise man there is
no malice equivalent nor above the malice of a woman) she wrought all the ways
possible how to suck his blood and compass his destruction as the principal
head of her adverse part and contrary faccion, as though he should be a dew
sacrifice or an host immolated for the mutual murder and ^^amefull homicide
committed and perpetrated by her brother and progeny. So vehe^ e^t so full of
poison and so strong is the power of ciuyle dissension and preuye hearted, that
sometime it will auert and withdraw the wisest and most sapient men from
goodness, honesty and their bounden allegeaunce. Therefore this lady knowing
of this tumulteous sect and conspiracy, prepared and suddenly devised against
king Henry (although she knew it to be but a feigned and peinted mattre and
not worth two strawes) yet (having such an occasion to work her malice upon)
she promised gladly to the messengers not only to mainteyne, aid, further and
succoure their purposed intent with money and substance, but with all the
labor and pain that she might, to encourage, stomach and entyce many other
to be aiders, assisters and partakers to the same conspiracy, and shortly to
join with the cheueteines of thesaide enterprice.

When king Henry was certefied of these doings by messengers sent into
England, no meruell although he was none other wise then he had occasion, sore
vexed and moved, co^sideryng that by the disc^ate and fraud of such a
dongehyll knave and vile borne villeyne, so great a sedicion should be excited
and sturred against him: Nevertheless, he like a circu^spect, ingenious and
prudent prince, well considering and pollitiquely forseynge, ymagined that if
this entreprice came to pass, that the final end would be the bluddy darte
of mortal warrre, and if they should join and combat in open battle, in
the which for the most part, the large camp of all mischief is commonly
opened and showed, many innocent men on both parts should perish and come
to ruin and confusyon without desert or offense. For which reason, before all
things he determined to attempt and prove if that he might without any
battle or stroke stryken (the end whereof is ever ambiguous and doubtful)
pacefye and reduce these rebels to rule, reason, and dew subieccion, before
that this evil newly planted wede should straye and wander over the good
herbs of his whole realm. Therefore he called his whole cou^saill together at
the Chartrehouse beside his royal manner called Richemonde, and there
consulted how to pacefye this sodeyne rage secretly begone, without any more
disturbaunce or open trouble: which mocion of all men was thought mete,
necessary and proffitable to be as^ayed and prosecuted with celerite and
effect. And that before any other thing were attempted and begone, that a
general pardon should be published to al offenders that were content to
receive the same and after would be true, loving and obedient to the king their
sovereign lord according to their bounden duty and allegiaunce: Thinkyng that
if that pardon were any longer space procrastened or prolonged, that in the
mean ceason (as the proverb says, taryenge draws and ieopardeth perell)
Sir Thomas Broughton knight which had hyd and kept the lord Lou^ll from the
king a great ceason, and was at hand with diverse of his friends, in so
troubleous and perelous a time utterly dispeiryng of pardon and remission, and
as men without hope of any grace setting all on.vi. and.vii. should suddenly
move a new insurreccion against him, and unquiet him in some place where he
had left least resistau^ce. For although they were thought to have been
conferates and Iurates of this new conspiracy, yet, because there was no sure
proof nor apparaunt argument thereof, yt was supposed to be most proffitable
for that time present, to extend no manner of extremyt^e nor cruelty against
them by any color or pretense, partly that by such lenytie and gentle
sufferaunce, the rebellyous power should not augment and in^r^ace, and partly
that if hereafter they should be found to draw back, and negligent in
doing their due duetye and allegiaunce, that then by this pollitique provision
they should be rewarded with punyshme^t accordyngly as they had deserved, and
according to the common saiynge, such bread as they bake, such must they
eat: Whereupon the king gave a general pardon throughoute all England
(without exception of any offense) yea even to them that had committed high
treason against his majesty and royal person. Furthermore, after long
consultacion had and all things maturely decyded, it was thought by the whole
senate for the time then present most necessary and conuenyent to avoid that
erronyous rumoure, rumblynge and blastynge abroad, that the son of the duke
of Clarence was in England, and that he personally should be showed abroad
in the city and other public places whereby the untrue opinyon falsy
affyrmynge that he was in Irelande might be amongst the co^mynaltye
repressed, put down, and accounted as a comment and vain ymagyned fable.

In this solemn counsel dyucrse and many things of the realm were there
debated and concluded: and amongst other, yt was determined that the lady
Elizabeth wife to king Edward the.iiii. should loase and forfeyte all her
Lands and possessions, because she had voluntarely submytted her self and her
daughters wholly to the hands of king Richard, contrary to the promise made to
the lords and nobles of this realm in the beginning of the conspiracy
ymagyned against king Richa^d, which at her desire and request left all that
they had in England and fled to king Henry into Briteyne, and there received a
corporal oath of him to mary her eldest daughter, which offer she abode not
by, but made yt frustrate and void, through whose double doings yt had like
to have succeeded, that neither the marriage could take place* nor yet the noble
men which at her request took king Henryes part, might not return again
without ieopardie of life, but live still in perpetual banyshement and
miserable exyle. This was a greueous offense and a heinous crime: howbeyt the
sequel thereof well dygested, yt was thought by some man that she deserved not
by equytie of justice so great a loss and so great a punyshement: For surely
she did not so great hurt or hynderaunce to king Henry and his confederates
by her reconciliacion to king Richard, but ten times more she proffyted
them and auaunced their cause. For her submyssyon made to him, he heglectynge
Gods laws, ^onest order and Christyan relygion, presumynge to accumulate
myschiefe upon myschiefe, desired of her the marriage of her daughter his
natural nyece, which thing he would not have thought lykely to have
obtained: The queen and her daughters still for fear of him contynuyng in
sanctuary. Which unlawful desire (considering for that intent he had^yd his
wife out of the world) provoked the Ire of God and the swoorde of vengeance
against him, whereby his fynall ruin and fatal fall shortly after ensued
and succeeded to his miserable confusyon, and to the exaltacyon of King Henry
and auauncemente of his whole company.

Hereby a man may perceive that wicked and malign persons be not brought to
ruin by the hand of a temporal judge, but by the will of God led and thereto
appointed, as men that make have to approach and to come to that end that
they have deserved. By this folly and inconstancy of the queen, she incurred the
hatred and displeasure of many men, and for that cause lived after in the Abbey
of Barmandsey beside Southwarke a wretched and a miserable life, where not many
years after she deseassed and is buried with her husband at Wyndsore. Such
are all worldly chances, now in prosperyte and abundance, mutable and
chaungeable and full of inconstancy: and in aduersitye often change from evil
to good and so to bettre, to the intent that they that be in wealth and flow
in the abundance of all things, shall not think them selfs in suretye to
tarry still in that degree and state: and that they that be in misery and
calamytie shall not despair nor mystrust God, but live in hope, that a bettre
day of comfort and gain will once apere and come. And yet although fortune
rules many things at her will and pleasure, yet one work that this queen
has made cannot be forgotten nor put in oblivion. At what time that king
Edward her husband reigned, she founded and erected a notable College in the
vniuersyte of Cambridge for the finding of Schloers desirous of good
litterature and learning, and endued yt with sufficient possessions for the
long mayntenaunce of the same, which at this day is called the queen's
College, a name surely mete for such a place, wherein Scholars diligently
studyeng in all doctrine and sciences, prove excellent clerckes and come to
great honors.

When all things in this counsel were seriously concluded and agreed to the
kings mind, he returned to the city of London, geuynge in commandment that
the next sunday ensuyng, Edward the young Earl of Warwike to be brought from
the Tower through the most publyke and usual s^retes of London, to the
cathedral church of saint Paul. This young gentleman (as he was commanded)
showing him self openly to every body in the procession time, tarried there the
high mass, having communicacion openly with many noble men, and with them in
especially that were suspected and thought to have been partakers of the
commocio^ against the king, to this purpose and effect, that they might
perceive the fond Iryshemen, for a vain shadow and untrue tyccyon
unadvisedly to excytate and move war against him and his realm, without any
just cause or laufull occasion. Howbeyt to evil dysposed persons or brayneles
men, this medecyne nothing auayled nor proffyted. For the earl of Lyncolne
son to Ihon de Lapoole duke of Suffolk, and Elizabeth sister to king Edward
the fourth, thinkyng it not mete to neglect and omyt so open an occasion of new
trouble and mi^chiefe offered and exhibited, determined to uphold, fortefye,
and bolster the enterpryce of the Irishemen, least that they might be se^uced,
and caused to de^yst and leave of their incepted enterpryce, and attempted
purpose: And doubteles the man being of great wit and intelligence, and of no
small judgment, but half infected with the venomous sk^bbe of the late ciuyle
battle, could not with a quiet mind suffer king Henry being principal
head of the contrary faccion to reig^e in quiet, but co^^ultyng with sir Thomas
Broughton, and certain other of his trusty friends, purposed to sail into
Flanders to his aunte the lady Margaret duches of Bourgoyne late wife to duke
Charl^s, trusting by her healpe to make a puyssaunt army of men, and to join
with the compaignyous of the new raised sedicio^. Therefore, after that the
king had di^^olued the Parliament, which then was holden: he fled secretly
into Flaunders to the lady Margarete, where Fraunces lord Louell landed
certain days before. And there they being altogether, every man according to
his mind reasoned, argued, and debated what was best to do. After long
co^munycacion had, this fynall conclusyon was agreed upon, that the earl of
Lyncolne and the lord Louel should go to Irelande, and there attend upon her
countrefeacte nephewe, and to honor him as a king, and with the power of the
Irishemen to bring him to England, and sendyng for all their friends, should
without delay give battle to king Henry: So that if their doings had good
and prosperous success then the forsayde Lambert (mysnamed the Earl) should
by the consent of the counsel be deposed, and Edward the true Earl of
Warwyke to be delivered out of prison, and after by the authority and aid
of his friends of the nobility, should be published, proclaimed, and anointed
king.

But king Henry thynkyng his nobles to be well appeased with the sight of
Edward the very son of the duke of Clarence, nothing mystrustyng any man to
be so folishe to muent, feign* or countrefeate any thing more of him, or any
so mad or indiscreet (especially of his realm) as to believe that Lambert was
very Edward, only minding the suppressyng of the Flagicius Irisheme^, studied
how to subdewe and repress their bold entreprice and sedicious coniuracion.
And hearing suddenly that he Earl of Lyncolne with other were fled and gone to
his adversaries being therewith suddenly moved: thought even with strong hand
and marciall power* to overcome his enemies and evil wyllers, whose
maliciousnes he could by no counsel nor pollecy eschew nor avoid: And being
thus determined, he commanded certain of his capitaynes to prepare an host
of men out of every part of his realm, and them to bring and conduyte into
one place assygned, that when his adversaries should come forward, he might
with his populous multitude and great power suddenly set on them, and so
overcome and vanquishe them altogether. And mystrustyng that other would follow
the Earl of Lyncoln into Flaunders, he caused the East parts, and all the
borders theraboutes to be diligently kept, that none other might escape or give
them succoure. And coming to the town of saint Edmondes bury, he was
certifyed that the lord Thomas Marquis of Dorcet was coming to excuse and
purge him self before him, for certain things that he was suspected to have
done lightely when he was in France. To whom the king did send the Earl of
Oxenford to intercept him ridyng on his journey and to conueigh him to the Tower
of London, to try his truth and prove his patience. For if he were his friend
as he was in deed, he should not be miscontented to suffer so little a reproach
and rebuke for his princes pleasure. If he were not his friend, there to tarry in
sauetye that he might do no damage nor hurt to him. And from thence the king
went forth to Norwiche, and tariyng there Christmas day, departed after to
Walsyngham, and coming there into the church of our lady, prayed devoutly
and made supplicacio^s to almighty God, that by his divine power and through
the intercession of our lady, he might eschew the snares and preuy workings of
his enemies, and preserve him self and his country from the immine^t daungier,
and to reduce again the streiynge sheep to their right fold and true shepard,
that be amysse: his orysons fyn^shed, from thence by Cambridge he returned
shortly to London.

In this mean time the Earl of Lyncolne and the lord Louell, had gotten by
the aid of the lady Margaret, about two thousand Almanyes, with Matyne
Swarde a noble man in Germany, and in marciall feactes very expert, to be
their cheuet^yne, and so sailyng into Ireland. And at the city of Dyuelyn,
caused young Lambert to be proclaimed and named king of England, after the
most solemn fassyon, as though he were there of the very heir of blood
royal lyneally borne and descended. And so with a great multitude of beggarly
Irishemen, almost all naked and unarmed saving skaynes and mantelles, of whom
the lord Thomas Gerardine was capiteyne and conductor, they sailed into England
with this new found king, and landed for a purpose at the pyle of Fowdrey
within little of Lancastre, trusting there to be aided with money by Sir Thomas
Broughthon one of the chief compaignious of this unhappy conspiracy.

The king not slepynge his matters, but mystrustyng and smellyng the storm
that followed, before the enemies arrived, he dispatched certain horsemen
throughout all the west parts of the realm, chiefly to attend the coming
and arryuall of his enemies, secondarely to wait for such espialles as came
out of Ireland, and them to apprehend and compel to show and declare the
secrets of their enemies. When he had gathered all his host together, over
thewhich, the duke of Bedforde and the earl of Oxenforde, were chief
capiteynes, he went to Couentry, where he being, his light horsemen according
to their duty returned and certefyed him that ye earl of Lyncoln was landed
at Lancastre with his new king. Thewhich when the king understood was so, he
consulted with his nobility and councellers to know if it were for the best
to encountre with them out of hand, or let them dragge awhile, for this
mattre both required counsel and also celerite. After they had laid their
heads together and well debated the matter, it was determined that they should
set upon them without any further delay, least that their power by long
sufferaunce and delaiyng of time might be augmented and greatly multiplied. And
so after such aduyseme^t taken, he removed to Nottyngham, and there by a little
wood called Bowres he pytched his feelde: to whom shortly after came the lord
George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, the lord Strange, Sir Ihon Cheyny valeaunt
capitaynes, with many other noble and expert men of war, For the king had
commanded and given in charge before, that all persons of the counties
adioynyng that were hable and of strength to carry weapon should be ready in an
hours warning, in case that any need should require. Therefore pycked fellows
and hardy personages and such as were like men, were chosen in all the
ha^^e, and of this sort a great army was coacted and gathered together: So
the kings army was wondrefully increased, and from time to time greatly
augmented.

In this space, the earl of Lyncoln being entered into Yorkshire, passed
softely on his journey without the spoylyng or hurtyng of any man, trustyng
thereby to have some company of people resort unto him: but after that he
perceived few or none to follow him, and that it was to no purpose to return
back, consydryng his enemies were all ready to set upon him, he determined
firmly to try the fortune of battle, remembryng that he chance of Mars
does stand ever upon.vi. or.vii. and that king Henry not.ii. years before with
a small power of men vanquished king Richard and all his mighty army. And
herupon puttyng a sure confidence upon his compaigny, directed his way from
York to Newarke upon Trent* to thentent that there he (as he trusted)
augme^tyng his co^paigny might set upon the king, who^ he knew to be but.ii.
days journey from him. Albeit, before he came there, king Henry was in his
bosom and knew every hour what the Earl did, came the night before that he
fought, to Newarke, and there approached nere his enemies sooner then they looked
for him, and there tariyng a little went.iii. miles further and pitched his
feelde and lodged there that night. The earl of Lyncolne certefyed of his
coming, was nothing afearde, but kept still on his journey* and at a little
village called Stoke nygh to the king and his army planted his camp. The next
day following, the king divided his whole nombre into three battles, and
after in good arraye approached nigh to the town of Stoke, where was an equal
and plain place for both parties to darreigne the battle.

When the place was appointed and ordained to try the vttermo^^ by stroke of
battle, The (...) of S^oke.
the earl set forth his army, and geuyng a token to his compaignye, set upon
his adversaries with a manly courage, desirynge his souldyours that day to
remember his honor, and their own lives. And so both the armies joined and
fought earnestly and sharply, in so much that the Almanyes being tried and
expert men in wars and marciall feats, were in all things, as well in
stengthe as pollecye egall and equyualent with the Englishemen: but as for
Martyne Swarde their chief captain and leader, not many of the Englyshemen,
both for valiant courage of a stout stomach and strength and agilyte of
body was to be compared or resembled with his manhood. Of the othersyde, the
Iryshemen, although they fought hardely and stuck to yt valyauntly, yet
because they were after the manner of their country almost naked, without
harneys or armure, they were stryken down and slain like dull and brute
beasts whose deaths and destruccyons was a great discouragynge and abash^ment
to the residue of the company. Thus they fought for a space to sore and so
egrely of both parts, that no man could well judge to whom the victory was
like to enclyne: But at length, the kings ^orward being full of people and
well fortefyed with wings, which only both began and continued the fight,
set upon the adversaries with such a force and violence, that first they
oppressed and killed such capitaynes one by one as resysted their might and
puyssaunce, and after that put all the other to fearful flight, thewhiche were
either apprehended as captyues and prisoners in their flight runnynge away, or
else slain and brought to confusyon in a small moment. But when this battle
was fynished and fought out to the extremytie, then yt well apered what high
prowes, what manly stomakes, what courageous hearts and what valiant courage
was in the kings adversaries. For there their chief capiteynes the Earl of
Lyncolne and the lord Louell, Sir Thomas Broughton, Martyn Swarde ^layne.
Martyn swarde and the lord Gerardyne capiteyne of the Irishemen were slain
and found dead. Howbeyt, some affirm that the lord Louell took his horse
and would have fled over Trent, but he was not hable to recover the fartherside
for the highness of the bank and so was drowned in the river. There were killed
at that battle with their five capiteynes before reherced of that party
about four thousand: Of the kings part there were not half of them which
fougthe in the forward and gave the onset slain or hurt: Then was Lambert the
yonglynge which was falsely reported to be the dukes son of Clarence, and his
master sir Richard Symond priest both taken, but neither of them put to
death, because that Lambert was but an innocent poor soul, a very child, and
was not of age to do any such entreprice of his own deuyce, and the other was
a priest, which yet to thente^t he might remember that the stone often times
falls on the head of him that casts it into y^ air, and that many a man
makes a rod for his awn tail when he entendeth it for another, this priest
for penance was committed to perpetual prison and miserable captivity. But
this Lambert in conclusion was made the kings faulkener, after that he had
been a turn broche and executed such vile officies in the kings kytchyn and
suyllarye for a space. And thus was all the high entrepryce that lady Margaret
had devised and set furthe at this time, turned to naught and brought to none
effect, and to an evil conclusion. Of which chance, when she was aduertysed
and informed in the country of Flaunders, she was very sorye at the heart and
much lamented and deplored, that her ymagined purpose sorted to such an
unfortunate end and effect, incontinently deuisyng, practisyng and ymagenyng
some great and more difficile enterpryce, by thewhich she might vex and
perturbe yet once again the king of England and his whole region: Which
purpose, even as she invented yt, so she set yt forward as shall be showed
herafter plainly.

After that king Henry had thus assuaged and appeased these matters being of
so great a moment and weight, with no great mocion, tumulte or trouble, and had
not only escaped and defaced the apparent and ymmine^t perell with a small
conflict* and no great dangerous brunt or ieopardy* but also repressed and
suppeditate the cyuile dissencion and inte^ior strife, in manner as he would
have wyshed it, he might think himself at one time clean ryd and delivered
from two euelles together, both from fear present and also that was to come.
For certeynly when he pondred and diligently considered his adversaries (whose
puissaunce he both in nombre and force, far did surmount and precell) at the
very point so fiercely to join and to bid him battle, he much suspected and
no less mistrusted that they had some preuy fautoures and secret cou^celers
(the which when time and place should require or expostulate) would with their
strength, aid, succoure and assyst them against him and his puyssaunce. But
when he perceived and saw the host of his enemies manifestly vanquished and
put to flight, he commanded that no man should kill or sleye the Earl of
Lyncolne, but that he should be brought to him alive, to thentent that he might
show and bewraye both the fou^tayne and original beginning, and also the
confederates, aiders and comforters of his late practysed sedicious co^spiracy.
But the fame is, that the souldyours would not so do, fearing least
paradue^ture the saving of his only life (as yt should have been in deed) the
life of many other should have been lost, or at the least in ieopardye. This
battle was fought on a saturdaye being the.xv^. day of Iuyn the year of our
lord thousand four hundredth.lxxxix. and toward the end of the second year of
the reign of this king: In the which year also Thomas Burchier Archebishopp
of Cauntourbury dyed, into whose rome Ihon Moorton late bishop of Ely, a man
of egall learning, virtue and pollecye with his predecessors, whom Alexander
of that name the.vi. bishop of Room created Cardinal, and the king preferred
him to thoffyce of the high Chauncelour of England: Now to return to my
purpose.

After this victory obtained, and after the king had gathered and collected
the prays and spoils of the Feelde together, and buried them that there were
slain, he removed to Lyncolne, and there reposed himself three days, and
c^used every day one processyon to be celebrate, to render humble thanks to
almightye God, for his tryumphant victory and overthrow of his enemies. Then
did he execucion of such rebels and traytoures as were taken in the field,
either at the battle, or in the chase. And shortly after he went into
Yorkeshyre, and there costed the country overthwart, searchynge by exploratours
and preuy enquyries, where his adversaries gathered their army against him,
entendyng earnestly to wede out, and purge his land of all sedicyous seed,
and double hearted fruit if yt were possible: and such as were found culpable
in any one point, were committed to prison, and other mulcted by fine or
extinct by death.

The third year.
IN the myddest of August entering into the.iij. year of his troubelous reign,
he by iorneiyng arrived at New^astell upon Tyne, a very propre town ^ituate on
the heth^r part of Northumberland, where he tarried the remnaunt of the somer,
and being there, sent in Ambassade into Scotland to king James the third king
of Scotts, Richard Fox which not long before was made bishop of Excettre,
and with him sir Richard Edgecombe kynght comptroller of his house.The summarye
of their commyssion was to conclude a truce for a time, or a long league and
an amytie. For king Henry esteemed it both honorable and proffytable if he
might have pertyght peace and assured amytie with princes adioynyng and his
next neighbors. And before all other with king James of Scotland, to
thentent that his subjects having knowledge of the amytie and despairyng
utterly to have any refuge, comfort or succoure of the Scotts, or other their
neighbors circumuosyn and adioynyng contrary to their old usage, trust and
expectacion, might the be^tre be continued in the faith, duty and loyalty
toward their prince and sovereign lord. The Ambassadors when they were
come into Scotland to the king, were of him both gently entreteined and after
the most loving fassyo^ received and fully hard. To whom at the first he
showed his good heart, his true mind, tendrez^le, and fraternall affeccio^,
that the him self contynually bare, and yet did entende to show toward king
Henry, although his subjects were of a contrary mind and opinyon, plainly
protestyng and declaryng to them his vasselles to be both by nature and
wylfull disposicion, diverse and contrary ever to the English nature and
English nacio^: thinkyng surely that they for the most part, would never
consent and long agree with the Englishmen, according to their old vaffrous
variety: wherefore least ye he should offend or ministre cause of occasion to
them (as in deed all me^ were not his friends in Scotland at that time) he
desired y^ Ambassadors to consent with truce and abstine^ce of war for s^uen
years, not only in open audience, but on his honor he promys^^ ^^mely in
secret communicacion (as secret as a concession made to a priest) that he for
his part would keep contynuall peace with the king of England during their
lives, but apparauntly he promised that or these.vii. years should be passed
and fully fyneshed that he would re^ue again the truce for other.vii. year, so
that king Henry and he should be and live in peace, concord, and most
assured amitye, during their natural lives. And this did king James conclude
with king Henry, because that he knew him self, his acts, yea and his name
to be had in such despyte and hatred of the more part of his dysloyall
people, that nothing (whatsoever he did) was esteemed, regarded, well spoken of
or had in any price: Such was the malicious hartburnynge of the Scotts
against their natural lord. The Ambassadors perceauyng the hartye mind and
faithful benevolence of this king toward their master king Henry, accepted
and assented to his offer, and ratefyed the same: And returnyng home showed the
king all the matter in order as yt was pro^oned, assented and concluded. With
which tidings, he perccauynge the king of Scotts good mind toward him,
and apparauntly perceauyng that as that tempestyous and stormy ceason required,
yt was not to his small commodity and proffyte, reioysed meruelously that his
Ambassade came to so good an effect: and shortly after reculed back again
from Newcastell to York, and so toward his city of London. And in the way
being at Leycestre, diverse Ambassadors sent from Charles the French king
came to his presence, which declared and showed to him that their king Charles
had recovered many Tounes, Cities and garrysons which before that time were
possessed and holden of Maximilian king of Romans and Archeduke of Austryce,
and that he now moved battle against Fraunces duke of Briteyne, because he
kept, aided and succored in his territory and dominion diverse noble princes
and high personages of the realm of France, which were treytoures and
rebels against him, his realm and seigniory, of thewhich the chief leader
was Jews duke of Orlyaunce: And therefore he desired him for the old frendshyp
and familiarite practysed between them* that he would either aid, assyst and
help him, or else stand neuter between both parties, neither helping nor
hurtyng any of both parts, like a cipher in algorisme that is joined to no
figure but only occupies a place.

King Henry well remembryng that although he had found much frendshyp at the
French kings hand in his necessity and that by him partly and his he
obtained his kingdom, yet forasmuch as he espied upon what unsure ground this
querell was begone against the Brytones, with this message was not well
contented nor yet pleased. For he which saw as far in the French kings
breast as his Phis^cion did in his vryne, knew perfightly that he had neither
occasyon by any just title to invade the duchy of Briteyne, nor yet any
displeasure mynistred to him, by reason whereof he might justly have any
shadow to make a quarrel to the duke of Briteyne, but only to delate,
amplifye and propagate farther his authority, domynion and possession. For
the French king and his counsel knew well that duke Fraunces was an impotent
man, lytargious, sore deseased and well stryken in age, and had never any
heir male to inheret and possede his duchy, wherefore they determined by some
means easily to compass that the duchy of Bryteyne should breuely come under
their liver and subieccio^, and so without ground, without cause or
reasonable demonstracion, uncompelled, he intymated and made open war against
the duke and Brytanicall nation. King Henry perceiving that this new
attempted enterprice nothing sounded to his proffit or emolume^t, calling to
mind and considering that if the Duchy of Briteyne and the people of the same
which had been ever friendly and loving to Thenglishe nation, and was always
for their entrecourse to his realm both necessary and proffytable, should come
under the thraldom and subieccion of the French king that damage more then
poffite were likely to ensue and follow, determined with him self to aid and
take part with the duke, perceauyng well that all his affairs was now in
perell and set in a broyle and hasard. The occasion that moved him thereunto
was, the kyndelyng of the paternall love and tender affeccion which the duke
ever showed him, since his first arrival and entryng into Briteyne, and his
fidelite to him always apparauntly showed during the time of his there
abiding and resydence. On the other part, when he remembered the great
benefyte that he had accepted and received at the French kings hand by his
bountyfull and pryncely liberality, thought it both necessary, honest and
consonant to reason to forgett the ungrate offense against the duke of Briteyne
committed and perpetrated, and to persuade and advise the French king to
desyste from vexynge or inuadynge the duke of Briteyne, least any scruple or
spark of ingratitude might insurge or kyndle between them two. This matter was
so doubtful and so full of ambyguities that the king in long consultacion
left no questyon nor doubt unasked nor undiscussed, and yet no answer nor
no conclusyon could satisfye or please his doubtful mind and gentle heart,
loathe to offend any of them, of whom he had received either benefit or
friendship: But in conclusion, he fell to this full determacion, that y^ battle
should needs succeed and follow, then he of very duty was bound and obliged
not to deny nor to forsake the duke of Briteyne, to whom he was so much
beholding but to aid, assist and comfort him with all his power, and openly to
keep from him all wrongs and injuries, and to defend and resist all his
adversaries and enemies. Yet in the mean season, least he should of the other
part make his high friend his exstreme enemy, his answer was to the
Ambassadoures that he would take travail and study both to his great pain and
cost, that between the French king their sovereign lord and the duke of
Briteyne, both being his indifferent friends, some gentle pacificacion or
amicable accord might be concluded and accepted. And so as soon as the kings
Ambassadors were dimyssed, he sent on message Christopher Urswike to Charles
the French king: First to gratulate in his behalf the victory that he had
obtained upon Maximilian king of Romans. Secondarely and after to declare what
tumulte and insu^reccion was here in England, and how by mere force and
manhood he had vanquyshed and repressed the rebels and traitors, and either
dystroyed or brought to subieccion, the whole rablem^t and nombre. Thyrdly,
offryng him sefle as a mean and intercessor of peace and amytie between the
French king Charles and the duke of Briteyne: geuyng him farther in charge
that if he should perceive the French king to give open ear to his request
and to enclyne to his desire, that then he should without delay resort to
the duke of Briteyne and desire him to be contented at his desire to endeuer
him self to an honorable peace and concord, rather then to war and dubyous
dissencion, which peace with Gods grace he little doubted, the duke being
wyllyng shortly to compass and bring to conclusion. While Christopher
Urswicke was traueylynge in this co^missyon, king Henry returned with great
tryumphe to his city and chamber of London, having the victory and ouerhand
of his enemies and rebellious aduersari^s, whereof the cytezens were very glad
and reioysed heartily, considering that such da^mages, such oppression, such
perel and loss as they thought to have sustained, was by the death of such
disturbers of peace and tra^quillitie, as the king had late overcome, clean
taken away, avoided and suppressed. Also the king him self trustyng faithfully
that all the bra^des of mischief kyndled before against him, was by this
victory utterly extinguished and brought to ashes, could not but be merry and
rejoice. For which cause, he showed him self both lowely and courteous
toward all, rewardyng and promotyng most bountifully and liberally all such
persons, which not only did hasarde their goods, their possessions, livings
and substance, but also their lives and bodies in his defense and quarrel. And
not long after, he delivered lord Thomas Marquis Dorset out of the Tower of
London, acceptyng him to his high favor and old familiarity, because his
truth and fidelity had been tried and proved by sundry and diverse arguments
and assaies, In which pastyme, the king for the perfyght love and sincere
affeccion that he bar^^^ his queen and wife lady Elizabeth, caused her to be
crouned and enoynted queen on saint Fatherynes day in Nouembre withal
solempnytie to such a high esate and degree apperteignyng. In the mean ceason
Christopher Urswike was come to the French king liyng at Toulouse, and of him
after the most loving and frendely fassyon that could be, received and
entreteined. And affone as he had showed and declared his message, the French
king showed him self outwardly, although inwardly he otherwise intended to be
therewith contended and that very well pleased that the king of England shoud
be the mean of peace and Arbiter indifferent between the duke and him. This
answer made, the English Ambassador took his journey straight thence as he
was commanded into Briteyne, and showed the duke upon his Masters behalf all
things given him in charge and co^missyon: But the duke (because him self had
been long sick and thereby his memory and wit was decayed and appaired) he
appointed to hear the message with other of his councelers, Jews duke of
Orleau^ce which was fled thither out of France. When this duke had heard the
Ambassadors declare their message, perceiving that it touched a peace which
he thought sounded neither to his proffyt nor pleasure, wherefore he being
somewhat tyckeled with the message answered and said, that it was more me^e and
convenient that king Henry (considering and remembryng the great kyndenes and
humanity that he had received at the dukes hand) should with all the power
and strength he might, help the duke of Briteyne being by the Frencheme^
invaded with iron* fire and blood, then to attempt or procure any fryuelous or
vain composycion or co^corde. Yea and although he had neither received nor
remembered any benefyte done to him by the duke, yet should he consydre that the
country of Briteyne was in manner a bullwerck and a strong wall for the
Englishmen in defense of the Frenchemen, the which if yt should come into the
hands of the French nation, then were his continual enemies next to the gate
of his realm, which thing he would not suffer if he remembered the Proverb
that says, when thy neighbors house is a fire, thy staff stands next the
door. Thus much was the duke of Orlyaunce being of the French blood, an enemy
to his natural country, because that he being next of the blood royal to the
croune of France, was repulsed from the chief estate and governance of the
realm, and the kings suster put in highest authority, during the minorite
of the king, he abandoned his own native country, and having only refuge
in the duchy of Brytayne for his own sauegarde, profyt and emolume^t, spoke
these words that he declared and opened. For well he knew, that king Henry was
not thereof all ignorant, that it was neither profitable nor commodious ^or y^
realm of England, to have the duchy of Briteyne possessed of the Gaul^s,
considering the sea costs of both the countries, to lie directelye one
against the other. Then returned this Christopher again into France, and
there tarried certain days, declaryng to king Charles what answer was made to
him by the Briteynes, and shortly after returned into England again. While
these things were thus in doing, the French king beseged with a great
puissaunce the strong city of Nauntes in Briteyne. And the more gredyer that
he was of his purpose, and the more have he made for gayning his pray, so much
the more did he exhort ye king of England with letters, writings and
blandyme^tes, by sondrie and diverse messengers, for to treat and conclude a
peace, unity and concord betwixt the duke of Briteine and him, fearing least
when he had almost won his race, king Henry would put him beside his sadle,
whom he did half suspect to be a back friend of his, and prone and ready to
take the Brytones part.

Wherefore he sent in Ambassade Bernarde a Scotte borne, caled y^ lord Daubeney,
in all the have to king Henry, to desire him in any wise to make some end
whatsoever it were, of this war and controversy. And thereupon the king being
desirous of the same, which had rather al things might be ended by peace
rather then by dynt of sweard, least that he should be driven to take part
with the Brytons against the French nacio^, elected among all other.iii.
orators. The first was Ihon saint Abbot of Abyndon, Ihon Lilye borne in Luke,
the bishop of Romes collector, doctor of law, and Rychard Edgeco^be knight,
both for age and prudent fagacitie, fatherly, a wise and a grave personage,
which for renuyng of the old amity, were commanded first to go to repair to
the French king, and after that to the duke of Briteyne, to whom he gave a
long commission with sufficient instruccions. But or ever these Ambassadors
proceeded over their journey, Ihon Lilie fell sick on the gowte, so that he was
not able to traueyle in so long a journey, and so weightye a busynes, for whom
was elected and choosen Christopher Urswike* and so they.iii. sailed into
France (as they were commanded) and when they had communed a space with the
French king, concerning the form of the peace and concord to be concluded,
Rychard Egecombe, and Christopher Urswike, departed straight to the duke of
Briteine, thinkinge ye and nothing doubting, but they there should knyt up the
knot, and final conclusion of their Ambassade, according to their own request
and desire, but all their hope was vain, and turned to a vanity. For the
duke, upon great deliberacion, consiantly repudiated and refused every
condition by them offered or demanded. Which things, when they succeeded not
according to their exspectacion, the Ambassadors deposinge and relinquisshynge
all hope and esperance of any peace or concord to sort to any good effect or
purpose, reculed back to the French king again, detrauded and spoiled of
their intent and purpose, and there to him declared what was their answer and
final resolucion, and yet making there abode in France, they intimated to the
king of England by their letters all their acts and exployt. But, or their
letters came to the kings hands, lyr Edward, lord Wooduile uncle to the
Queen, a valiant Captain, and a bold Cha^pion, either abhorryng ease and
ydlenes, or inflamed with ardent love and affeccio^ toward the duke of
Britayne, desired very earnestly of king Henry, yt if it were his will and
pleasure, that he with a convenient number of good men of war would
transport him self into Briteine, for ye aid and defense of duke Fraunces,
the kings assured and proved friend. And least it should sow or kyndle any
dissencio^ or ingratitude between the French king and him, he said that he
would steal privily over, and without any license or pasporte, as though no
man should think or doubt but he were fled, and abandoned the realm without
any fraud or male engyn. But the king, which had a firm confidence, that
peace should be made by the polletique provision and wise muencion of his
elected Ambassadors, would in nowise give the bridle to his hot, hasty and
wild desire, but streyghtly prohibited him to attempt any such strategeme
or enterprice, thinking that it ^^ode not with his honor to offend the
French king, to whom he would show as much amity and humanity as he
might, for such a matter that could neither greatly profit the Brytonnes,
nor yet cause him to surceas^e of his appointed invasion and pretensed
enterprice. Yet this lord Wooduise having plain repulse and denial of the
king, could not thus rest, determined to work his busynes secretly without
any knowledge of y^ king, and went straight into the Isle of wight, whereof he
was made ruler and captain, and there gathered together a c^ewe of tall and
hardye personages, to the number of.iiii.C. and with prosperous wind and
wether arrived in Briteyne, and joined him self with the Brytons ag^yn^t the
French power and nation. The rumor of this doing was sone blown into the
court of France, which made the Ambassadors of England not smally abashed,
which knowing perfightly ye French hearts to be prone and ready at all times
to revenge and do ^outrage to such as displeased them, were suddenly afraied
least the common people could not withoolde their hands from quer^ling or
fraiyng. Albeit the law of arme^s, and the treuth it self did defend and
preserve them from injury. But whiles the oratoures were in this perplexite and
fear o^ daungier, and whiles the Frenchmen suspected this fact to be done by a
cau^ell of king Henry, there came other new messengers from him to the French
king to purdge himself to his friend of the suspected ingratitude certefiyng him
and declaring (by most evident tokens and appar^^ arguments) that the lord
Wooduile without his knowledge or consent, was sailed over into Britayne with so
small a number of men, which small handful, neither it beco^med a prince to
send or set forward, neither yet could do to the Brytaynes any great aid or
succoure: To the which message and excuse, albeit the French king adhibited
but small credence, yet, he some what mitigate of his anger and furious agony,
dissimuled the matter (according to the French nature) with a flatteryng
countenance. So the Ambassadors renuynge a leagueand amity between their
king and him for.xii. months, returned into England again, and showed the
king al such things that they had either heard or seen there. The king of
England well perceived by the report of his newly returned Oratoures, taht the
French king wrought all his factes by subtle craft and cloked collusion,
treatyng and mocionynge peace and concord, when he desired nothing so much as
discord and war, and that purpose he auaunced and set forward with sail and
ower, to the uttermost point of his habilite. Wherefore king Henry being assured
of all the French kings acts and cogitacio^s, determined now with all
celerite to set forth out of hand al such things as here before had concluded,
concerning the war of Britayne, as you have heard. Wherefore he called his
high court of Parliament, and there first consulted with the peers and
co^mynaltie of his realm, for the aidyng of y^ duke of Britayne. Then for the
maintenance of y^ wars, diverse sums of money were granted and given,
beside certain decrees and acts made for the vtilite of the common wealth.
And as soon as the Parliament was ended he caused mustres to be had in certain
places of his realm, and soldiers mete for the war to be put in a redynes.
Yet least peradventure he might seem willingly to break the amity, which was
between the French king and him, he sent diverse notable Ambassadoures into
France, to certefye the French king, that of late he had kept a solemn
Parliamente, in the which it was condiscended and agreed by the lords
temporal and spiritual, and knights of couuties, and magistrates of cities,
and boroughes of his realm not only considering the relief, comfort, and
aid that he had received at the dukes hand, both for the sauegard of his
life, and for the recoueryng of his enheritaunce and kingdom, but also
remembryng that Brytayne of ancient time was subject and vassal to the realm
of England, which country also has been friendly, and aiders to the English
nation when it was vexed, both with foreyne powers and domestical sedicion,
to aid, comfort and assist the Brytishe nation with all their strength, might
and habilite against all their enemies, friendly admonishyng him that he should
either desist from his war in Brytayne newly incepted, or else not be grieved
if he did agree (as reason would) to the minds, judgment and determinacion of
the princes and prelates of his realm, assuryng him in the word of a king,
that his army should only discende in the duchy of Britayne, not to invade or
make war in the French kings realm or territoryes, but only to defend the
duchy of Britayne, and to profligate and expel all the intrudors and inuasours
of the French nation, which miustly occupied and muaded the Brytannicall
tytles and seignories. With these commandments the English Ambassadors
departed, and declared to the French king all the mind and will of their king
and sovereign lord. Which message he dissimuled as little to regard as the
bytyng of a flee, as though the Englishmen in the battle, which he knew to
be at hand, could do no enterprice (as it happened in deed) either necessary
to be feared, or worthy to be remembered. The cause of his so saying was this,
he knowing that his army was puissaunt and strong in Britayne, and that the
Britaynes had but a few Englishmen with the lord Wooduile, of whom he passed
little, and seeing that England had not yet sent any army thither for the dukes
succor, judged surely that his army would do some gyeat exployte (as they did
in deed) before either the duke should be purueyed or any aid ministered. And
as he imagened so it followed, for the Frenchmen so sore oppressed the country
of Britayne, and brent and distroyed cities, and beseged the town of Fo^geres,
so that the duke of Britayne was encouraged by the duke of Orliaunce, and other
rebels of the French king, manfully to fight and give battle to ye French
army. And so the.xxv. day of July they set forward, and came to a town which
the Frenchmen had gotten, called saint Aulbyne. The Frenchmen were not
ignorant of their coming, but put them selfs in a redynes. Of which army
was Capitaynes, The lord Jews of Tre^oyle, vyscount of Thonars a Gascoyn,
Adryan lord of Mountfalcoysse. On the Brytones part were cheueteynes, Jews
duke of Orliaunce, and the prince of Orange, which because they and other of
the Frenchemen were all on horseback, were mistrusted of the Brytones, least
they would at their most need fly.

Wherefore they descended on foot, and the duke and the prince put themselves in
the battle of the Almaynes: The Marshal of Rieux was appointed to the
vauntgarde. The middle ward was delivered to the lord Dalebret, and the
rereward to the lord Chateaw Bryand, and to make the Frenchemen believe that
they had a great number of Englishmen (notwithstanding there were but four
hundredth with the lord Wooduile) they appareled a thousand and seven hundred
Brytons in cotes with red crosses after the English fasshion. When both the
armies were approchyng to the other, the ordinance shot so terribly and with
such a violence, that it sore dammaged and encombred both the parties. When
the shot was finished, both the vantgardes joined together with such a force
that it was marvel to behold. The Englishmen shot so fast, that the Frenchmen
in the forward, were feign to recule to the battle where their horsemen were.
The rereward of the French men, seeing this first disco^siture began to fly,
but the Capitaynes retired their men together again, and the horsemen set
fiercely on ye Brytaines, and slew the most part of the foteme^. When the
forward of the Brytones perceived that their horsemen nor the Almaines came not
forward they provided for the^ selfs and fled, some here, and some there,
where they thought to have refuge or succor. So that in conclusion the
Frenchmen obtained the victory, and slew all such as ware red crosses,
supposyng the^ all to be Englismen. In this conflict were slain almost all the
Englishmen, and six. M. Brytones, Emo^gest whom were sound dead the lord
Wooduile, and the lord James Galeas borne in Napels. And of y^ Brytones there
were slain the lord of Leon, the lord Mountsort, the lord Pontlabbe and many
noble and notable persons of the British nation. Of the French nacio^ were
slain.xii.C. persons. The prince of Orange, and the duke of Orliaunce were
taken prisoners, which duke (although he were next heir apparau^t to the
croune of France) should have lost his head, if lady Jane his wife which was
sister to Charles y^ French king, had not obtained pardon and remission of his
trespass and offense. Howbeit he was long after kept prisoner in the great
Toure at Bourges in Berry. This unfortunate metyng chanced to ye Britaynes on
a mo^day, being the.xxvii. day of July, in ye year of our
rede^pcio^.M.cccc.lxxxviii, and in ye iii. year of king Henry the.vii.

When these news were brought into England, the king vigilantly forseyng
what was like to chance, thought it necessary to accelerate the mattre before
concluded, wherefore with all speed he sent Robert Lord broke Sir Ihon Cheyny,
sir Ihon Middelton, sir Raufe Hilton, sir Rychard Corbet, sir Thomas Leighton,
sir Richard Laton and sir Edmond Cornwall, all lusty and courageous capitaynes
with viii. M. men well armed, and warlike furnished to aid and assist the
Brytones against the Frenchemen. These iolymen of war had such prosperous
wind, that they arrived in Britayne even as they would wyshe or desire. And
after that they had recreated their spirits, and refreshed them selfs a little
after their labor and journey, they putting the^ selfs in good order of
battle, marshed forward toward their enemies, and not far from them
encamped them selfs. But when the Frenchmen knew of their landyng, whom they
knew by no small experience (and especially so long as they were fresh and
lusty) to be in manner invincible. And so at the beginning they were all blanke,
and for fear kept them selfs craftily and polletikly within their camp. And
after that, they sent forth a small company of light horsemen, the which to
weary and fa^gate the stout stomachs and haute courages of the English army*
made in diverse places of the army, skyrmisshes, outeryes and alaromes. So for a
certain space they used this kind of daliyng with the Englishmen, but ever the
loss turned to the Frenchmen, and they bare the worse away, by reason of the
archers y^ so sore galled the^ and their horses with arowes, that their
braggyng incursions were sone left and done. But behold the mutacion of this
world, while this war was thus set forward, Fraunces duke of Britayne
departed out of this life, so that the Englishmen were in a doubtful
labirinth, and a great ambiguyte. For the chief rulers of the Britaynes, being
some of them corrupted with money, and some sturred with desire of division and
controversy, fell into division emonge them selfs, so that they seemed not to
tenore the defense and proteccion of their natural country, but rather minded
the distruccion and vttre confusion of the same. Which division the Englishmen
perceauyng, and also considering that it was in ye midst of winter, in the
which time it is not wholesome for men to lie in the frosty and moist feeldes,
were compelled in manner by necessity within.v. months that they went
forward, to return back again in to England.

After this Charles the french king having thus the upper hand of the
Brytones, perceauyng that Maximilian king of Romans labored to have in
marriage, Anne sole heir to Frau^ces duke of Britain for her younger suster was
late dead, which he thought was neither for his profit nor advantage,
concluded a peace with the Brytones. By which treaty he had the lady
delivered into his possession, and after her deliverance, he refusyng and
repudiatynge the marriage of ye lady Margaret, daughter to the foresaid king of
Romans, espoused y^ lady Anne duches of Brytayne, by which means the duchye
of Britayne was annexed to the croune of France, as here after shall appear
when it took effect, which was not two years after.

The iiii year.
Now to the money laid out, as concerning the sumpteousnes of this battle.
It was decreed by the.iii. estates (as you have heard) in England before that
any souldioures were sent into Britayne, that for the expense of that war,
every man should be taxed and assessed at the some of his substance, and
should pay the tenth penny of his gooddes, for the maintenance of the war
in Britayn. Which money the most part of them that dwelt about the Bishoprike
of Durham and Yorkshire, refused utterly to pay, either thinking the^ selfs
ouercharged with the greatness of the same, and therewith grieved, or excited and
procured through the evil counsayll and sedicious pe^^asion of certain
persons, which preuely conspired against the king, to put him to new trouble
and business. Therefore such as were by the kings commandment made
Collectoures and gatherers of the sum taxed, after that they could not get
the money, according to the extractes to them by the commissioners delivered,
made their complaint preuely to Henry the.iiii, Earl of Northumberland, chief
ruler of the Northeparties. And he immediately upon the knowledge thereof,
signefied the kings grace by his letters, that the people greatly grudged and
murmured, making open Proclamacion that they have been charged of late years
with innumerable incommodities and oppressions, without any defaut or desert,
and that now there was a houge some required of them, which neither they were
hable to satesfie so great a demand, nor yet would once consent to pay any
one penny of the said sum required. The king commanded the earl in any wise
by distress or otherwise according to his discrecion, to exact the money of
the people, and by co^pulsion to enforce such to payment as whyned most at
it, least yt it might appear that the decrees, acts and statutes, made and
confirmed by him and his high court of Parliament, should by his rude and
rusticall people be infringed, despised and vilepended. The rude rash and
unadvised people, hearing this answer of the king, by and by, violently set
upon the earl by the procurement of a simple fellow called Ihon of Chamber,
whom the earl entreated with fair words to come to reason, but they laiyng
to his charge that he was the chief author and principal causer of this tax
and tribute paiynge, both him and diverse of his household servants, furiously
and shamefully murdered and killed. Diverse afferme that the Northenmen bare
against this earl continual grudge, since the death of king Rychard, whom they
entirely loved and highly favored, which secret serpent caused their fury to
wade farther then reason could retract or restreyne. Although this offense
were great and heinous, yet there succeeded after a more mischief and a greater
inconvenience. For incontinent the Northenme^ to cloak the homicide and
manslaughter, by a violence put on their armure and assembled in ^^ockes, and
elected to them a captain called sir Ihon Egremonde knight, a person no
less sedicious then faccious and desirous of trouble, and ordered them selfs
like men of war, and passing by the countries, they published and declared
that they would bid battle to the king, only for the tuicion and defense of
their common liberty and fredome, which he would pluck, and by his extreme
power take and bereue from the^. But when their cause should be discided with
blows and handstrokes, their fury was assuaged and refrigerate, their hearts
were in their heels, and their stomachs as could as any stone, and every one
wished yt this tumult were retracted and quenched which was now al ready not
smokynge but enflamed: And in conclusion, every man tanne away, some this way,
and some that way, as men amassed when they lack counsel, skatered and
dispersed in diverse places. When every man was returned, the mattre was ended
as they imagened, but while they diligently labored to save their life's by
flight, they sought their own destruccio^. For the most part of the^ were
punyshed by death or by imprysoment for the same offense. For the king heryng of
this tumulteous busynes, sent forth Thomas earl of Surrey, whom not long after
he had delivered out of ye Toure, and received to his grace and especial favor
(as he was both for his wit and fidelite well worthy) with a co^petent crewe of
me^ into the North parts, which skyrmished with a certain company and
disco^fited the^, and took a live Ihon a chamber the first beginner of this
rebellion. The king him self road after the earl into Yorkshire, of whose
coming the slaves and sturdy rebels were so abashed and afraid, that they
fled more and less, which afterward were apprel, ended and grievously
punished, according to their demerites and deseruyng. Yet the king of his
magnificent mind, ^er^oned the innocent and rural people, and pl^ged and
executed ye inuenters of the mischief, and the furtherers of the same. For Ihon
a chamber was hanged at York, upon a gybbet set upon a square pair of
gallows, like an archetraytoure, and his accomplices and lewd disciples were
hanged on the lower gallows round about their master, to the terrible
example of all other. But sir Ihon Egremo^d, whom these sedicious persons
preferred to be their Capitayn, fled into Flanders to ye lady Margaret duches
of Butgoyne, which ever envied the prosperity of king Henry.

When this folishe enterprice was thus quenched, the king gave commission and
charge to sir Rychard Tunstall knight, a man of great wit, pollecie and
discrecion, to gather and receive the subsidy to him dew of the people, and
he him self returned shortly to London, leaving the earl of Surrey to rule
the Northpartes, perceiving well the Englishmen, not so much to grudge at the
paymente of the tax or tribute, as they did groan at the excessyue and
importable some upon the^ assessed, remembryng the old proverb, love me little
and love me long. And this was the year of our Lord.M.cccc.xc. and the fourth
year of this kings reign.

Before this time, Maximiliaen king of Romans, which as you have heard in
the time of king Edward the.iiii. had contrary to the mind and will of the
French king espoused lady Marie, daughter and heir to Jews the French king,
and by her had issue, a son called Philip, and Margaret which was affied to
Charles the.vii. French king and by him repudiate and forsaken, was sore
offended and greatly grieved with the Flemynges, but most of all with the
Eauntoys and Brugians, for keeping from him perforce his son and heir duke
Philip, which neither by gentle request nor cruel menace would deliver the
son to his natural father and lawful parent. Wherefore the king Maximiliaen
assembled a company of Almaynes and Ouerlanders (for he did not greatly put his
confidence in the Brabanders nor Hollanders) and made sharp war on the
Flemynges, in the which he little prevailed. For the Fleminges sent to the
French king for aid and succor, which being glad of that request, s^nt
Philip de Creuecure lord Desquerdes, commonly called the lord Cords into the
confines of Flaunders with a great army of men, to aid and succor the
Fleminges, trusting by that means to obtain both the possession of ye young
enfaunt duke Philip, and the whole country of Flaunders. Wherefore Maximilian
entending to allure the Flemynges from the Frenchmen, began first to practice
with them of Bruges, of which town the grauous men, sone condiscended and
astipulat to reason, requyringe him to come to their town, and sent to him
with their request, the Scult called Peter Longoll with diverse other, to
advertise him that at his coming thither, he should find him conformable to
his will, pleasure and request. Upon trust whereof he entered into the town
finally accompanied, and came before the town, thinkyng that the lords and
senate would ioyously have received and welco^med him. But the whole turned
clean contrary, for the light witted persons, to whom peace was treason, and
concord venomous poison, taking this occasion to them offered, cried to
harneys. When they, which had brought the king into the town, saw the tumult
of the people, and that no man came to their relief, they left their lord post
alone, and fled into corners. The warden of the smythes was the chief of the
route, which bad the king to take patience a while, and he should have a gentle
enprysonement, and so conueighed him to the house of Ihon Gross, judge of the
audience. Then the Almaynes were all banished, the town and the lords of
Gau^t were sent for, which tarried not long. When they had the pray that they
espected, first diverse citezens which they thought favorable to Maximiliaen
they beheaded. Matthew Spert, one of his chief counsailours and trusty friends,
was sent to Gaunt, and there put to death. James Dudenezell, and James of
here.ii. wise burgeses, notwithstanding that all the priests and religious of
the town made intercession for them, were at Bruges executed. Then Ihon
Capenoll a busy merchaunt, would in all ha^^e have rydden to induct the French
king as their sovereign lord, to wh^me the moest part would in nowyse a
stipulate nor consent nor yet intended to disheneryt the young duke Philippe of
his graundfathers inheritance.

When e^ecucion was done of the wise and sad counsaylers, ye new made ^^lers
caused their prince king Maximilian to be brought to the town house, and
there they laid to his charge, that he had not observed the treaty, which
they of Gaunt and Bruges had concluded with the French king. Secondarely, they
alleged that he put high Almaynes in officies and great authority, which
without their assent would have changed and inhaunced their coin and money
to their great prejudice and detrument. Many other ridiculous articles they
laid to him, which the cares of every honest creature knowing the duty of
the subie^^ to his prince, would abhor and floccipend, to the which he so
wisely and boldly answered, that in part he assuaged their malice, and
mitigated their rage. In so much that he was more gentler entreated then he was
before. For if his answer had been to the displeas^unt, or (...) he had
menaced them but one word, I think in their fury they would have dispatched
him out of his lyie and land. The Gau^toys would have delivered him to the
French king, but the Brugia^s would not assent. They of Gaunt desired to have
him in their custody in Gaunt, but ye citezens of Bruges utterly denied his
delivery. Wherefore the Eauntoyes in great displeasure departed. After whose
departure the Brugians were content to set him at liberty, so that he and
diverse o^^ys nobility should swear on the holy Sacrament, not only to re^^t,
pardon and forgive all offenses p^^petrated and committed by them of Flaunders,
but also should swear and promise, neither to ^^me^bre nor revenge the same.
This oath he swear in the great Church of Bruges, and the lord of Raues^on
called Philip Mounseur, and the lord of Beners and diverse other swear the same,
addyng thereunto, that if he did attempt any thing contrary to his oath and
promise, then they swear to t^ke part with the good tounes of Flaunders
against him and his adherentes. And upon this promise he was delivered, and
fra^kly set at liberty.

But Frederick the Emperor could not forget the reproach and despite that was
showed to him in his son, and the great injury and wrong that was done to his
son partly to his dishonor, scourged Flaunders with sharp war and
mortal affliccions (Maximilian liyng in quiet and nothing attemptynge) but
Philip Mounseur, lord of Ra^^^^ton, the which took his oath with king
Maximilian, to show that the war was renouate without his knowledge and
assente, forsook Maximilian his lord, and took the tounes of Ypere, and Sluse,
with both the Castles of the same haven, which he manned and viteyled, and kept
two years against the power of Maximilian, till he rendered them to sir Edward
Pownynges sent thither by the king of England, as you shall hereafter well
perceive. Beside this, the foresaid Philip not only exacted and stirred the
Gauntoys, Brugians and other tounes of Flaunders, to rebel against their
souereygne lord, but also sent to the lord Cords, to aid him to conquer
such tounes of Flaunders, as were not of their opinion and confederacy. This
lord Cords, which untruly revolted from duke Charles of Burgoyne, being his
brynger up and chief preferrer to Jews the French king (as you have heard
before) was glad of this, and so sent to the aid of the Fleminges.viii.M
Frenchmen, willing them to take and conquer such tounes, as were in the way
between France and Bruges, or Caleys and Bruges. The Capitaynes following his
device, beseged a little walled town, called Dipenew, to whom came.iiii.M.
Flemynges with vitayle and artillary, sent from Philip Mounseur. They laid
siege on the Northsyde of the town in a marishe ground then being dry, and
so depely dyched their camp, and so highly trenched it, on which trenche they
laid their ordinance, that it was in manner impossible to enter into their
camp, or to do them any displeasure or damage. The king of England was
daily advertised of these doings, which nothing less desired then to have
the Euglish pale and territory enuyroned with French fortresses. For he
perceived well that if the Fre^cheme^ gate Dipenewe, they would afterward
assail Newport and Grauelynge, and consequently, what with force and what with
corrupcion of rewards, their purpose was to have the possession of duke Philip
and all Flaunders, which should not be to the profit of him nor his
subjects. Wherefore this.v. year, sodeinly with great expedicion he sent over
to the lord Dawbeney to Caleys, the lord Morley with a Crewe of valiant
archers and soldiers, to the number of a.M. men, with preuy instruccions what
they should do.

When they were la^ded, they published and said that they came to defend the
English pale, if the Frenchemen or Flemynges would attempt any mastryes there:
But their enterprice was all otherwise. For on a Tuesdaye at the shuttyng of
the gates at night, the lord Dawbeney chefetayne of the army, the lord
Morley, Sir James Tyrrell, Capytayne of Guysnes, Sir Henry Willoughby, Sir
Gylbert Talbot, sir Homfrey Talbot, Marshall of Caleys, and diverse other
knights and Esquyers, and other of the garrison of Hammes, Guysnes and Caleys,
to the number of two.M. men or there about, issued preuely out of Caleys, and
passed the water of Grauelynge in the morning be times, and left there for a
stale and to keep the passage, sir Homfrey* Talbot with.vi. skore archers, and
came to Newporte, where they found ye soueraygne of Flanders with.vi.C.
Almaynes, and there they commoned and paused that night.

On the next day as they came secretly toward Dipinew (se ye chance) at a
place of execucion, nere the high way was a Gau^toys (which was come out of
the army for a spy, and apprehended by them of Dipenew) led to hangyng, which
amongst the Englismen knew sir James Tyrrell, and called to him for comfort
and succoure, promisynge him that if he would save his life, he would guide
them where they should enter on the Gauntoys, to their honor and advantage,
and he would be the first assaylaunt of all the company. When his promise was
regarded, after request made to the Borough masters and capitaynes of the
town, he was perdoned but not delivered. The next day in ye morning, after
they had ordered their army, their guide conueyghed them out at the Southgate
of the town by a high bank set with willowes, so that the Gauntoysses could
not well epsy them, and so secretly came to the end of the camp of their
enemies and there paused. The lord Daubeney commanded al men to send their
horses and wagons back, but the lord Morley said he would ride till he came
to handstrokes (but he was deceived) so they passed on till they came to a low
bancke and no deep dyche, where their ordinance lay, and there the archers
shote altogether every man an arrowe, and so fell prostrate to ye ground, their
enemies discharged their ordinance all atones, and ouershot the^ The archers
roase and shot again, and bet them from their ordinance. The Almaynes lept
over the dyche with their morishe pykes, the Englishmen in the forefront waded
the dyche, and were helped up by the Almaynes, and set on their enemies, and
slew and took many prisoners. The other Englishmen hasted by the cawsey to
enter in at the Northgate of the camp, where the lrod Morley being on
horsoacke in a rich coat was slain with a gonne. When his death was known,
every man killed his prisoner, and flew all such as did withstand them to the
number of.viii.M. men, in so much that of.ii.M. that came out of Bruges (as the
Flemysh chronicle reports) there came not home an hundred. There were slain
in the said place two chief Capitaynes, George Peccanet, and Anthony Nyewnhome.
On the English part was slain the lord Morley, and not an hundred moo. The
Englishmen took their ordinance and sent it to Newport with all their spoil
and great horses. And by the way, hearing certain Frenchmen to be at Ostend,
they made thetherward, but the Frenchmen fled, and so they burned part of the
town, and came again to Newport, where the lord Dawbeney left all the
Englishmen that were hurt or wounded, and carried with him the dead corpus of
the lord Morley, and buried it honorably at Caleys. This field was profitable
to the Englishmen, for they that went forth in clothe, came home in sylke, and
they that went out on foot, came home on great horses, such is the chance
of victory.

The lord Cords, being at Yper with.xx.M. men, was sore discontent with this
overthrow, wherefore he thynkyng to be revenged, came and beseged the town of
Newport stro^gely (the which captain, Mo^seur de Merwede, before captain of
Dipenew, and all the gentelmen of Westflaunders, and the three principal cities
of Flaunders, viteyled the French host so well that all things was to good
chepe) they without shot at the walls, and brake the^ in many places, and they
within sore grieved them without with their artillary. But the Englishmen y^
were hurt at Dixmewe field before, and might either stand or draw a bow,
never came from the walls. One day the Frenchmen gave a great assaute to a
Tower, and perforce entered it, and set up the banner of the lord Cords: but
as God would, during the time of the assaute there arrived from Caleys, a
Bark with.lxxx. fresh English archers, which came straight to the Tower. The
women of the town, perceiuinge the Englishmen come, cried with lamentable and
loud voices, help Englishmen, help Englishmen, shote Englishmen, shote
Englishmen, so that, what with the help of such as before were wounded and
hurt men, and of the courageous hearts of the new come Archers, and the stout
stomachs and diligency of the women, which as fast as the Englishmen struck
down the enemies, the women were ready to cut their throtes, they wanne again
the Tower, and slew the Frenchmen, and re^t the banner of the lord Cords,
and set up the penon of saynct George. Then the Frenchmen, supposyng a great
aid of Englishemen, to have been come to the town by sea, left the assault.
And the night following the coueteous lord Cords (which so sore lo^ged for
Caleys, yt he would commonly say that he would gladly lie.vii. years in hell,
so yt Caleys were in the possession of the Frenchmen) brake up his siege and
shamefully returned to Hesdyng. And the Englishmen glad of this victory
returned again to Caleys.

This year also, the realm of Scotland suffered an infeccious and mortal
plage, because the name of James the third king of Scotts was so odyous, so
hated and disdayned of the whole nobility of the realm of Scotland, chiefly
because they perceived that he set more by vile borne vileyns and light
persons, then by the princes and nobles of his realm, as I have declared to
you in the history of king Edward the.iiii. which mischief and ungrate
discommoditie, after they had tolerated and patiently suffered no small time to
their great grudge and displeasour. They now thought it most expedient for
their purpose and welfare, even by force of arms to recover their pristinate
liberty and ancient freedom. Therefore making preuely a coniuracio^ and
co^spiracy together against their prince and sovereign lord, compassed his
death and destruction. Yet that it might not be thought that they did intend
the destruction of their natyue country, they made the kings son named
after his father James, prince of Rothsay (a child borne to goodness and
virtue) their Captain, in manner against his will, openly protesting, that
they purposed the confusion, affliccion and deposyng of an evil king and
wretched prince, and not the subversion and destruccio^ of their country: by
which crafty ymagened inue^cion they might either cloak or propulse from the^
all suspicion, of their purposed untruth and shameful disloyaltye. Whereof the
king being credibly informed, was pensyfe, sorry, careful, vexed and sore
forme^ted in his mind for this cause in especial, that he should have cyuile
dissencion with his own subjects and native country men, ye and against his
own son being made Capyteyne of that untrue and perverse company, whom
next to him self he loved, favored and honored, ymagenynge with him self
that this co^mocyon sounded to none other effect but that the head should fight
and strive with the other me^bres and parts of the natural body: and yet on
the other side, not to resyst shortly their new incepted entreprice might
easily encourage and inflame the malicious hearts of his domestical enemies
with more boldenes and audacite to attempt farther mischef and inco^uenie^ce.
Therefore to the^tent to make a plaster for both these sores to be healed: First
to apease and assuage the fury and rumor of the people, being this in a rage,
he prepared an army of me^. After that he sent Ambassadors to his son and
the nobilitee assembled with him, for a love, peace, concord, quiet^nes and
unity to be concluded amongst them. Also he sent letters to ye king of
England and the French king, requyringe them that they would vouchesafe with
their good and Godly counsel, help and assaye to mitigate and assuage this
furious enormitie of his rude and savage people, which was incepted and begone
thorough the persuasion and procurement of certain pernicious and sedicious
persons. And besides this, he wrote to the bishop of Rome Innocent for the same
matter, in the which he earnestly obtested, desired and prayed him that he
would of his goodness, faith and charity send some one legate to these rebels
of his nobility to charge and command, that they setting aside all war
and hostilite, embrace quietness, rest and unity.

This miserable decrepite and aged king, thinking that both delaiynge and
continuance of time, and also the entreating and hartye prayers of his friends
and alies would quench and mollefie their inordinate wildenes and furious
rage, and persuade the^ to sobriety and good conformite, had rather with these,
and other sembleable medecynes remedy this young springyng sore, then he
would have it experimented, and tried with cyuyle battle and intestine
destruction* which he thought to be a thing both ungodly, unnatural and
execrable. For all this, no medecyne, no cou^sail, no wholesome precepts could
appease or pacefie the angry minds and ragynge wits of the Scottishe
nobility, so much were they addicted and bent too this folly and unreasonable
madness. In so much, as to the messengers sent from him to the^ being their
soueraygne lord, they made this unreasonable and dishonest answer, that is: if
he would resign the title of his croune and realm and depose him self of his
royal dignite, then they would common with him of a peace, or else their ears
were stopped from heryng of any entreatie or persuasion. The Same answer
brought the Ambassador of England and France to their princes, which sore
lamented and deplored the perverse fortune and mischaunce of their friend the
Scottish king, as though they had been partakers of his affliccio^: But Adria^
the bishop of Romes legate, of whom we will speak more hereafter came to
late, and as who should say, a day after the fair.

When nothing could move or perce these stony hearts or frosty minds of the
nobility of Scotland: In conclusion they met together in a pitched feclde,
where after great slaughter of many men, the poor sely king fled into a Myll
for succoure, whether he was followed and prosecuted, and there shamefully
murdered, and irreverently, (not like a prince or a crouned king) left stark
naked like a stinkyng caryon. Then the princes of Scotland being saciat and
filled with the blood and slaughter of their soueraygne lord and king
(thynkinge that they had well revenged the old displeasures to them done and
committed by king James the third) set up in the trone and estate royal, the
prince his son, and named him James the.iiii. of that name.

Before this time, as you have heard, Innocent bishop of Rome had sent in
legacy Adryan of Castella, a man of hetouria, borne in y^ town of Cornere,
called in the old time Newcastel, which should have gone to Scotland, too
have pacefied by his authority and commandment this troublesome busynes,
moved and sturred between the king and his subjects. Yet this man, although he
made many great iourneys, when he came to England, was informed of the king,
to whom he had certain commandments and messages to say from the
Romyshe Bishop, that he came to late for too accomplysh the commission of his
legacy, asserteynynge him that the Scottishe king was dead, gentely aduisinge
him, that he should not move one foot ferther but tarry still in England,
wehre he was not past two days, but that he was plainly certefied by the
Bishops of Scotland of the kings death. This Adryan tarried certain months
after this in England and was made much of, and highly commended and lawded
too the king by Ihon Morton bishop of Caunterbury, which for the good
learning, virtue, and humanite, that he saw and perceived to be in him showed
to him all points of humanite and frendshippe, that a friend might do to a
friend. And upon his commendacion, the king thinking this man worthy to be
looked upon, and mete to do the king pleasure, much phantasied and more
favored this legate Adryan, in somuche as he was Orator and solicited his
cause, both to Innocent and also to Alexander the sixth, Bishops of Rome. And
after this, for his diligent service, he so loved and favored him y^ he made
him Bishop of Herford, and shortly after, that resigned and given over, he
promoted him to the Bishoprike of Wells and Bathe. And not long after this
Adryan was returned with these honors to Rome, where he was promoted
successively by all the degrees of spiritual dignitees into the College and
societee of Cardinals. For Innocent first made him his Collectour in
England, and also one of.vii. Prothonotaries. After this Alexander the.vi. had
him as one of his priuye counsayll, and promoted him to the degree of a
Cardinal: But who is that I pray you that will meruell at this, which as well
may be given to fools and dyzerdes as to wise and well learned men? There is
another praise of this Adrian, and the same in manner eternal: The manne was of
profounde learning and knowledge, not vulgar, but strange, new and
difficile, and in especial he was a man or a ripe judgment in electinge and
choosing concinnate terms, and apt and eloquente words, which first of
our time, after that golden world of Tully, moved men with his writynge to
imitate and foloe the most approbate, and allowed authors that were of
eloque^cte, and taught y^ trade and phrase to speak fine, pure, fresh and
clean latin, so that by his example and docume^t, eloquence flourishes at
this hour in all places of Christendom, wherefore after my judgment he is not
worthy to be put in oblivion: but now to my purpose.

The vi. year.
THe Britishe affairs in the mean ceason, because that all discord was not
pacefied and appeased, began again now to flow out and to trouble, and set
all things in a new broyle and busynes. For Maximilian king of Romans
being without a wife, before this time, made ^uite to Frau^ces duke of
Briteyne, to have in marriage the lady Anne his daughter, to the which request
the duke gentely condiscended.

And one, which by proxy wooed for him: too the intent that the lady should
perform that she promised on her faith and honor, he used a new inuencio^ and
trick, after this manner: When the lady did take her chamber, the night after
the affiaunce, she was laid naked in the bridebed, in the presence of diverse
noble matrones and Princes, called thither as witnesses. The procuratour or
Deputy for the husband which represented his person, was laid in the place
of her husband, and put one of his legs into she bed up to the hard knee,
in the sight and compaigny of many noble personages, as who said that the
virgin had been carnally known, and so the matrimouy perfighte and consummate,
and they two as man and wife. But this fond new found ceremony was little
regarded and less esteemed, of him that only studied and watched, how to
surrept and steal this turtle out of her mewe and lodging. For Charles the
French king (as no man can blame him) was desirous and gredy too be coupled
in marriage, with so great an inheritoure, and reputing the marriage made with
Maximilian, to be of no validite and effect, the more busely and incessantly he
made sharp war, and skourged the Bryto^nes, to thentent he might both have
the lady and her dominions also at his will and pleasure. But he imagined that
the king of England would cast a trumpe in his way, and be an impediment
to his purpose by sendynge into Britayne a new army of Englishemen, for he had
intelligence by his preuy fautours.

King Henry and Ferdinando king of Spaygne, were fully decreed to aid, assist
and defend the duches and duchy of Briteyn, in all ieopardies and adventures,
to thentent that they against their will and affeccion should not be by force
compelled, to submit them selfs to the subieccion and ponderous yoke of the
French king. For the which cause, these two princes were joined in a league
and confederacy to resist and propulse this manifest wrong and apparent
injury. Wherefore he sent in all post have the lord Frau^ces of Luxenborough,
Charles Marignane, and Robert Gagime, ministre of the bone homes of the
Trinitee, to king Henry for a peace to be confirmed and had, which when they
came before the kings presence, were accepted and entreteyned after the best
manner. And when they were demanded of theffect of their legacion, their
request was that king Charles, as chief and supreme lord over the seignorie
and duchye of Briteyne, might without any spot of ingratitude to be imagined or
conceived by king Henry, lawfully order and dispose at his will and pleasure
the marriage of lady Anne of Briteyne, as his ward and orphan, without any let
and disturbaunce of the king of England, or any of his alies and confederates.
King Henry thereto would not condiscende, but still harped on this stryng, that
the virgyn, which was lawfully combyned in matrymony with Maximilian king of
Romans, should nto be compelled against her will and promise (being contrary
to all law, right and equity) too take any other person then him to her
spouse and husband, for that it was clearly repugnaunt to all verity and law,
both of God and man. So when they had lyngred the time, and consumed many days
in vain arguments and superfluous reasons, without any of their rquestes
obtained: after long debatyng and consultacion, they were resolved on this
point, least it should be thought that all their legacion had been in vain
and brought to no efficacy or purpose, a form of a league and amity should
be drawn with conditions, clauses and couenauntes. And for the farther
furtheraunce of that purpose, it was thought necessary and expedient that the
king of England should send Ambassadors to the French king, which in
his name and by his authoritee might breuely conclude and finishe the league
and treaty that was in communicacion incepted and begone. Whereupon king
Henry dismissed the French Ambassadors laden with ample and large rewards
into their country, and dispatched and sent streyghte after them by his
commission and authorite, Thomas earl of Ormond, and Thomas Goldeston, prior of
Christ's church in Cauntourbury his Orators and Ambassadors, to Charles the
French king, instructing them fully of all things that we would have either
moved or determined.

In this mean space, Alexander bishop of Rome ye.vi. of that name which
succeeded after Innocent, a man full of diligence and of wit pregnant, sent
Lyonell bishop of Concord legate, to the French king for certain matters,
and among other things, gave him in charge to conclude a peace and vinitie
between king Charles and king Henry. When he had declared his message to the
French king fully, and had easily obtained all things that he required, then
he began to move unto the French king and his nobles, with a long and
prolixe exhortacion to make and conclude a perpetual peace, between him and
the king of England. And when he perceived the Frenchemen to make no great
denial to his request, he determined to attempt and move king Henry to
concente and agree too the same desire and peticion: and took his journey
toward England, and at Caleys he encountered the Ambassadors, both of
England and of France, which received him into the town of Caleys, with many
ceremonies and great reverence. Where after they had communed the matter a
certain space, as concerning their affairs and busynes, they departed toward
the French king, and the Bishop was transported into England. The king
honorably received and gentely entret^yned this Orator Lyonell, and gave good
ear to his ^uculent and eloquent oracion, wherein he persuaded him with many
flatteryng and glosinge words, to enter into a league and amity with king
Charles of France, and the French nation. To the which request the king made
answer that he would be glad and joyous, if it might be compassed and brought
about, after long trouble and pernicious dissencion to live in peace and
mutual amite with all christe^me^. Bishop Lyonel perceauyng the kings mind
and intent, reculed again to France with all speed and diligence (and as it
was mete and decent for the bishop of Concord) he determined to extirpate and
drive out of the kings memory all old reconynges and injuries done too him
heretofore, and plant if it might be, in his heart and mind, the very goodly
and gracious greyne of concord and unity.

The English Ambassadors, then being with the French king purposed and
setforth articles and conclusions of peace. The Frenchmen prudently made
answer, so that on both parties the matter was pollitiquely and artificially
proponed and oppugned. The English Ambassadors, to thentent that they might
assente and obtain of few things, which they much desired, required and
demanded many great and diverse things. The Frenchmen on the other side,
mynding to assent to no one demand at thend, did deny and repudiate all
Thenglishmens desires, and conditions, and were sore angry and moved with their
great requests and high demaundes. And in the mean ceason, trustyng more to
their coffers then to their cheualry, as the manner of their country is, for to
obteyn their purpose* they spare not to disburse and launche out treasure,
gifts and rewards innumerable, which is the very cause that they conquer
more with crounes of gold, then with spear and shylde, or dynt of sword in
battle. So that shortly after the French king, sent to ye noble men of
Briteyn great and many rewards, solicityng* exhortyng and praiyng them al to
become his subjects and vassals. And in especial he allured and enticed with
most flatrerynge words and trappynge terms, the lady Anne by such honorable
matrones and ladies, as had the governance and educacion of her to confirm
her self true to him in due obedience and love, and not disdeyne to be coupled
in such a noble marriage, with so high and mighty a prince, as king Charles
was. And least perauenture the Damsel fearyng the rigor of the
Ecclesiastical laws would not consent too him for offending her conscience
and infringyng her promise: To aduoyde that scruple, he caused diverse to
inculcate and put in her head and tyttle in her ear, that the marriage made with
Maximilian was of no strength and less efficacy, considrynge that it was
concluded and made without the consent, agreement and will of him, which is the
chief lord and ought to have the governance over her as his ward, and the
whole duchy of Briteyne, assuring her that she was deluded, and that the
marriage with Maximilian was never consummate nor perfight. And this was the
very cause that no sure concord or peace could be concluded and agreed between
these two Princes. And where as the French king had long kept with him the lady
Margaret, daughter to Maximilian and her solemply espoused at Amboys, he said
that that marriage might be lawfully dissolved again, because the lady was of
that age, that she could neither be given nor yet taken in marriage, for which
cause he might lawfully repudiate and honestly put her from him.

By this craft and persuasion they led and entised the fair mayde^,
suspectyng none evil, and brought her to this point, that in conclusion, she
being proclaimed by diverse, Princes of Briteyne, subornate and corrupted with
mede contrary to their duty and allegeau^ce, was content to condissende and
agree to that the Frenchmen demanded, and not only to submit her self to the
French king, but also to take him to her make and husband, by the reason
whereof the war might cease, which with violencie and impression of
the same, had infested and afflicted all her whole country. To this marriage
agreed all the nobility of Briteyne, which held of the French part,
thinkinge it verily for the auauncement of the common weal and their ease,
because to trust to y^ power of Maximilian, which vas of no puyssau^ce, they
thought it vein and of no efficacy. And when the French king had composed and
ordered his matters of this fassion, preuely with the lady Anne, he accelerated
the marriage with all the expedicion and diligence that was possible: So that
the English Ambassadors returned again to their country, and nothing done or
agreed upon their matter.

King Henry, still patiently forbearynge and suffryng till such time that he
perceived more plainly what way the world went: and understanding before the
return of his Ambassadors, that the Frenchmen me^ned none other but plain
guyle, fraud and deceipte, determined no more with peaseable legacions, but
with open war to finish and determyn all controversies and displeasures
between him and the French king. Wherefore he sommoned his court of Parliament,
and there declared first y^ cause why he was justly provoked to make war
against the French king: And after desired them of their beneuolent aid of
men and money for the maintenance of the same. The cause of this battaill,
every man did allow and approbate, and to the setting forth of the same,
promised their industry, labor and all that they could make. The king
commending them for their true and loving hearts, too thentent he might not
aggraute the common people, with paiynge of great taxes and sums of money,
whom his mind was ever to keep in favor, would first exact money by a
little and a little of y^ beneuolent mind of the rich sort, and this kind of
exaccion was first excogi^ated by king Edward the.iiii. as it apereth before in
his story. Therefore he consulted with his friends, (...)
to invent how to gather together a great sum of money, and published abroad
that by their open gifts he would measure and search their beneuolent hearts
and loving minds toward him, so that he that gave most should be judged to
be most loving friend, and he that gave little, to be esteemed according to
his gift: By this a man may apparauntly perceive as it were for a great
common wealth, that, that thing that is once practiced for the vtilitee of a
prince, and brought too a president by matter of record, may be turned to
the great prejudice of the people, if rulers in authority will so adiudge and
determyn it. So by this means the king gathered innumerable sums of money,
with some grudge of the people for the extremitee showed by the commissioners
in diverse places.

You have heard before how Philip Mounsure, lord of Raueston by the aid of
Bruges and Gaunt had taken the town and.ii. castles of Sluys and was become
adversary to Maximilian, by reason of the.iii. chief cytyes of Flaunders: Now
ye shall understand that he did not only so fortefie as well with municions as
men, both the town and.ii. Castles, but also gat into the haven diverse
ships and barks, and by this means he spoiled and took prisoners all
nations, passing either by sea or by land to the mart at Antwarp, or into
Brabant, Zeeland or Frisland and was ever plentifully viteyled out of France
and Pycardy, to the great damage of the Englishmen, which were spoiled daily
and taken prisoners: Which thing Maximilian king of Romans could not well
remedy, nor the king of England without great cost and loss of men. For to it
behooved an army, both by sea and land, for when he was set for by land, he
fled to the sea: And when he was chaced on the sea, he sought refuge in his
two strong Towers, and ever he had succors from Bruges and Gaunt. Now was
here a little town two mile from Bruges, toward the sea call Damme, which was
a Bulwerke to Bruges, and a hedsprynge to Sluys. The king of Romans did
oftentimes attempt the apprehendinge of this town, to the intent that the
Brugians should have no recourse to the haue^ of Sluys, nor the Sluysians
should have no succor out of the town of Bruges. But there were slain a
great number of gentlemen of Germany, for they within made no sign of defense,
till all their enemies were in their danger, and so slew and confuted them.
There was a great duke in Almayne, called duke Albert of the upper Saxony, a
great friend to the king of Romans, which made him self Neuter, and never
intermitted with the affairs of Flanders, a man of no less pollecy then
valiant hardynes. This duke required of the lords of Bruges, that he might
enter peaceably into their town, according to his estate with a certain
number of men of arms to communicate with them diverse matters of great
weight and no small importance, and sent before his cariages and herbingers to
make provision. The estates of Bruges little doubted to admit so small a number
into so populous a company, ye though the number were duplicate, and
especially, because they hard say that he would lodge in the town all
night, wherefore no man thought of that crafty stratageme that he had
invented. His elected and warlike company entered into the city in good order,
and he followed, they that went before inquyred after ynnes and lodgings as
though they would repose them selfs there all night, and so went forth
still in order asking for lodgyng, till they came to the gate that goes
directly toward the forsayde town of Dam, distant from Bruges a Flemysh mile,
which is called the Bulwerke of Bruges. The Capitaynes and inhabitauntes of the
town of Damme, suspecting no harm to come out of Bruges, thinkinge that their
friends knowing some sodeyn chance coming to have sent to them aid and
succors, and so nothing mistrustinge, did let them enter, and take the town
of Damme, and so that town, which could not be won by force of arms, was
by a slight and pollecy attrapped and surprised to the great detriment and
displeasure of the town of Bruges, for now had they no recourse to the sea,
which stop so continuyng, no doubt, but the town of Bruges must needs fall in
ruin and utter exterminion.

When duke Albert of Saxony had gotten Dam, he certefied ye king of England ye
he would besege Sluyse by la^d, if it pleased his majesty to ministre any aid
by the sea. King Henry which was wise, and forcasting in all his affairs,
reme^bryng that Sluyse was the den of thieves to the^ y^ trauerse y^ seas
toward the East parties, incontine^t dispatched sir Edward Powni^ges, (a
valiau^t knight and hardy Capitayn) with.xii. ships well furnished with bold
soldiers and strong artillary. Which sir Edward sailed i^to ye haue^, and
kept Philip mou^sure from sterti^g by ye sea. The duke of Saxo^ beseged ye one
castle, liyng in a church over against it, and ye Englismen assauted y^ less
castle daily, and issued out of ye ships at the and although they stood in
the water to the knees, yet they never gave their enemies one day to repose or
play by the space of.xx. days, and every day slew some of their
adversaries, and on the English part were slain. Uerte brother to the Earl
of Oxforde and fifty moo.

The lord Philip of Rauestone, had made a bridge of boats between both the
Castles, by the which one might succor ye other, Which bridge the Englishmen
in a night set on fire. Then, he perceauinge y^ he must needs lose his castles
by force, and that the Fleminges could not aid him, yielded the castles to sir
Edward Powninges, and the town to the duke of Saxony, upon certain
conditions. When the duke and the English captain met in the town, there was
between them great salutacions, and sir Edward kept the Castles a while, of
whom y^ Almaynes demanded stipend and salary, because that the duke had
nothing to pay. Then these two capitaynes so handled them of Bruges that they
were content not only, to submit the^ selves to the lord Maximilian, but also
to pay and dispatche the Almaynes. And so sir Edward Pownynges tarried there a
long space, and returned to the king before Boleyne. And so they, which by
reasonable order, would not be governed: by unreasonable conditions were
brought to conformyte and order.

The.vi. day of April this present year, the king commanded all the
nobilite of his realm, to assemble at the Cathedral church of saint Paul in
London, where after Te deum solemply song, the Cardinal of Caunterbury,
standing on the steps before the queer door, declared to the people, how the
famous city of Granado, which many years had been possessed of the Moors or
Mawritane nation, being infideles and unchristened people, and now of late
beseeged by a great time by Donfernando and Elisabeth his wife, king and queen
of Spain, Arragon and Castle. And thesayde infideles, by reason of this siege
brought to great penurye and misery, for lack of viteile and necessary viand,
perceauyng that all succors were clearly estopped and propulsed from them, and
so brought into utter despair of aid or comfort: after long consultacion
had amongst them, determined to render the^ selves and their city, to
thesayde king, upon diverse couenauntes and conditions, and thereupon sent to
him diverse Senators of the city, fully ins^ructed of their mind and purpose.
The king of Spain and his counsel, considering and sagely ponderinge that
winter approached and was at hand, and that the Christen host had long lain in
y^ feeldes in sore tempests and grievous storms (which they gladly suffered for
Christ's sake, in whose cause and quarrel they made that present war)
remembrynge also that the city was of such riches, fame and estimacion, that
it contained an hundred and fifty thousand houses of name, beside other small
houses and cotages, and that it was replenisshed with people innumerable, and
furnished with.lxx. thousand good fightyng men. And finally, perceauyng that he
might enjoy now the possession of the same, without assault or effusion of
Christen blood, by the advise of his counsayll, he accepted, accorded and
agreed to their offres the.xxv. of November, in the year of Christ's
incarnacion. M.cccc.xci. then being the day of saynct Katheryn. By the which
composicion, the royal city of Granado, with all the holds and fortresses of
the realm, and the Towers and Castles of Alpussarare was rendered into the
hands of thesayde king of Speygne, and that the king of Granado should become
subject and vassal to the king of Speygne, and to relinquishe and forsake the
usurped name of a king for ever. And y^ all men of war should franckly
depart out of the city, and none there to remain, but artificers and
merchauntes, and all these things to be done before the.xxv day of January,
but the time was anticipate, for y^ Moors on the first day of Ianuarij,
sent.vi.C. notable personages out of the city with their children for hostages
into the camp of the king of Spain, to thentent that he should put no
diffide^ce nor mistrust in the citezens, but that he might peaceably and
quietly with his people enter into the city, and take possession or the same.
The which hostages were distributed and lodged in the tents and pauylions of
the Spanyshe army.

The third day of January, the lord of Gutterins Cardenes, great Master and
governor of Lion, of the order of saint James, departed from the army,
nobly and triumpha^tly accompanied with five hundred horsemen, and three
thousand footmen, toward the city. And as he approached nere to the
suburbs, there issued out diverse noble and valiant Capitaynes of the Moors,
making to him humble obeysaunce, and conducting him to a palace, adjoining to
the city, called the palace of Anaxaras, and from thence conueyghed him to the
palace royal of the same city called Alha^bra, whereof he took quiet and
peacesable possession, to the behoue of y^ king of Speigne, whom the Moors
promised and confessed to take and obey, as to their king and souereygne. And
in sign and token that they thought in their hearts, that which they promised
by mouth, they prostrated and humbled them selves before thesayde great Master,
and with dolorous lamentacion and salt tears, delivered to him the keys of
thesayd palace. When he had the keys, and was also possessed of that strong
and magnificent place, he first of all dispatched the house of all the Moors
and paganes, and appointed a garrison of valiant and noble christians to keep
and defend the same. And the same day caused a mass solemply too be celebrate
in a place of the same palace called Melchita, which done and finished, he took
possession of all the fortresses. Towers and holds too thesayd city and town
of Granado, belonginge or apperteyning. And then he caused to be elevated and
exalted upon the highest to wre of the palace (where it might best be seen) the
sign and token of the cross, whereon Christ for us sinners suffered his bitter
passion. At the reysing whereof, were present an Archbishop, and three Bishops
and other prelates, which deuoutely sange this antheme: Ocrux, aue spes vnica.
Thesayde cross was.iii. times devoutly eleuate, and at every exaltacion, ye
Moors being within the city, roared, howled and cried, prosternyng them
selfs grouelynge on the ground, making dolorous noyes and piteful outcryes.
The army encamped without the city, seeing these things, humbled them selfs
mekely before the cross, rendrynge too almighty God their most humble and
hearty thanks. The king of Spain, being mounted on horsoacke, perceiving the
ereccion of the cross, descended from his Genet, and kneled down on the bare
ground, and rendered to God, laud, honor and praising for that noble and
triumphant victory. And after that the cross was thus set upon the high
Tower, the banner of saint James and the kings banners were pitched and fixed
upon the turrets and pynacles of the city: A Herault standing in the top of
the high Tower, proclaimed and published these words following.

Saynct James, saynct James, saynct James, Castil, Castil, Castil, Granado,
Granado, Granado: By high and mighty power, lord Ferdinando and Elizabeth,
king and queen of Spain, have won from the Infideles and Moors, the city
and realm of Granado, through the help of our lord God and the most
glorious virgyn his mother, and the verteous apostle saynct James, and the holy
Father Innocent the.viii. togethers with the aid and succors of y^ great
prelates, knights and other gentlemen borne, and commons of their realms and
countries.

When the Herault had finished, the artillary sounded, the mynstrelles blewe,
the people applauded and clapped their hands for gladness, that the earth seemed
to trymble and quake vndreneth them. After this joy ended, there issued out of
the city in manner of procession.vii. hundred, and mo Christians, as well men as
women and children, which had been there prisoners and lived in bonds,
servitude and miserable capt^^^re, where of the most part were naked, wounded
and in manner famyshed for hungre. To whom the king of his great liberalite
gave both apparel, vyand and money. These poor prisoners coming out of
the city sange this Psalm. Benedictus dominus deus Israel, Quia visitauit and
fecit redem prionem plebis sue. Blessed be the lord God of Israel, which has
visited and redeemed his people, and so singynge forth the whole Psalm, went
to the church of saint Feith, which the king Ferdinando had caused to be
most sumpteously edefied during the time of the siege, being distant from
Granado two or three mile. And as this poor procession passed by the host,
one espied his son, and another saw his brother, and the son perceived the
father, and the father found the daughter, which were now delivered out of
miserable servitude and bondage. But they could not refrain nor bridle them
selves from distillynge of tears and sobbing, seeing their parents and
kynsfolke restored to liberty and fredome. And when these people had said
their Orysons in the church of saynct Feith, and were come to the army, they
kneling before the king kyssed his foot, criynge with one voice, God grant to
the king of Speygne everlasting life.

The next day after the lord Euerus de Mendosa, Earl of Tediglie was by the
king made Capitayn of the house royal, and principal Tower of the city of
Granado, called Alhambra, having to him appointed and assigned one thousand
men of arms, and two thousand fotemen. Unto the which Earl, the great Master
delivered the keys of thesaid palace and Tower, and other ports and
fortresses. On Saturdaye the.viii. day of January, in the year of our
Lord.M.cccc.xcii. Ferdinand king of Speyne and Granado, the queen and their
eldest son done Ihon prince of Speyne, the lord Peter of Me^dosa, archbishop
of Toleto, the patriarche of Alexandry, the Cardinal of Speyne, the lord Peter
Prince of Lion, duke of Gaditane, the Marquis of Uillena and Moya. The earl of
Capre, the earl of Uinenna of Cifnentes, and many other Earls, Barons and
nobles, whereof some were Englishemen, whose names I have not, wih.x. thousand
horsemen, and fifty thousand footmen, with great tryumphe and royalty entered
into the city of Granado, and thereof took real possession and season, and
caused mass to be song in a great place called Meschita, where he caused a
sole^pne church to be builded in the honor of God and his mother. When Mass
was ended, the king and queen repaired to the palace royal of Alhambra, the
which was wonderful, both in quantite and sumpteous building, which house
was adourned with rich Arras and Tapestry in every chamber. The Earl of
Tendiglie Captain of the palace, feasted the king and Queen, and all the
nobility at his own costs and charges. So the king of Speygne there
remained till the country was reduced too a good confromytye and order, and
diverse Castelles and fortresses were made for the sauegarde and tuycion of the
realm. And because this victory obtained, was to the glory of God, and to the
public wealth of all Christianite, thesayde Cardinal of Caunterbury*
declared to* the people that the king had sent him and the other nobles thither
that day, not only to notefye and declare to them the verite of the fact, but
also to exhort the^ to give lauds and praysinges to almighty God, for
delivering so goodly a city, so plentiful a country, and so notable a regio^
out of the hades of his enemies and persecutours of his faith and religion.
Which declaracio^ ended the Archbishop with the clergy, the nobles with ye
co^minaltie in most devout manner went in general processio^, re^dring to God
for this great acheued enterprice, glory, honor and most reverent and hearty
thanks.

About this ceason, Maximilian king of Romans having the upper hand of the
Fleminges, by aid of the king of England (as you have heard before) intended
to revenge him self of ye French king, for y^ he had repudiate his daughter
lady Margaret, and sent her home to him, ente^di^g as he thought to take to his
wife ye lady Anne of Briteyn. But because he was not of sufficient habilite of
him self to sustain and furnish y^ war, he determined to desire king Henry
to take part with him. Whereupon he sent James Contibald Ambassadoure, a man
of great gravity to exhort and require the king of England, to enter his
company and societee in arms, faithfully promising on his honor y^ he would
in sembleable matters of his, take part with.x, M. men at the least, for the
space of.ii. years whenever he should require him. And because it is his
chance to try the fortune of battle and to intimate the war, he promised
to certefie king Henry.vi. months before that he would invade or occupy the
territory of his enemies. And by this message, Maximilian greatly inflamed and
set a fire king He^ryes heart to bear with him. And as he was minded before
this time as you have hard before, to aid and assist the Britones in the
extremetie of their peril, he now reconed y^ time to be come, that he must
collect an army to help them now at a pynche in their most perell and
daungier, to thente^t to restore again the Britishe nation to their ancient
liberty, and to expulse the French nation, which thrusted for the blood,
death and destruction of the poor Brytones, clearly out of that duchy and
country. And he was the more ardently thereunto encouraged, because he perceived
Maximilian him self so earnestly set and bent toward that enterprice, and
therefore he made this answer to James the Ambassador, y^ he would be
ashamed to be found slack or unprovided at any time of Maximilian his fellow
and compaignio^ in arms. And so these matters well brought to effect on both
parties, the king dimissed the Ambassadoure from his presence.

The.vii. year.
IN this very ceason Charles the French king, received lady Anne as his pupille
into his hands, and with great solempnite her espoused, having with her for
her dower the whole country of Briteyne. And so by this mean the Brytones
became subject to the French king. Maximilia^ being certefied of this, fell
into a great rage and agony, for y^ he was not content with the forsaking and
refusing of his daughter lady Margaret, but also had taken and ravished away
from him his assured wife lady Anne duches of Britayne. And calling upon God
for vengeance and ponishme^t for such an heinous and execrable fact, cried
out and rayled on him, wishynge him a thousand deaths. Yet after that he was
pacefied, and came to him self again, and had gathered his wits together,
he thought it was most expedient to vindicate and revenge his honor and
dignitee so manifestly touched, with the dynt of sword. And being in this
mind, sent certain Ambassadors to king Henry with his lettres, desyringe him
with all diligence to prepare an army, and he him self would do likewise, to
invade the French kings realms with fire, sword and blood.

King Henry hearing of this, and putting no diffidence in the promise of
Maximilian, whom he knew to have a deadly hatred and long grudge against the
French king, caused a muster to be made in all the parts of his realm, and
put his men of war in a redynes armed and weaponed according to their feats:
beside this he rygged, ma^ned and vyteiled his navy ready to set forward every
hour, and sent curryers into every shyre to accelerate, and have the
soldiers to the sea side.

After the message was declared, there came without any delai an houge army of
men, as well of the low sort and commonaltie as other noble men, harnyssed and
armed to battle, partly glad to help their prince and to do him service,
and partly to buckle with the Frenchmen, with whom the Englishmen very
willingly desire to cope and fight in open battaill. And immediately, as
monicion was given, every man with his band of souldioures repaired to London.

After that, all this army was arrayed and even ready to set forward whereof
were cheuetaynes and leaders. Jasper duke of Bedford, and Iho^ earl of Oxforde
beside other, the king sent Christopher Urswike his aulmoner, and sir Ihon
Ryseley knight to Maximilia^, to certefie him that the king was all in a
redines, and would shortly arryue in the continent land, as soon as he were
advertised that Maximilian and his men, were ready and prepared to join with
him. The Ambassadors sailed into Flaunders, and after their message done, they
sent.ii. letters in all have to king Henry, the which not only sore vnquyeted
and vexed him, but also caused him to take more thought, care and study on him
then he did before: for they declared that no prince could be more unprovided
or more destitute of men and armure, no more lacking all things,
apperteignynge to war, then was Maximilian, and that he lay lurkyng in a
corner, sore sick of the flux of ye pursse, so that he had neither men,
horses, municions, armure nor money, nevertheless his mind and will was good,
if his power and habilitee had been correspo^de^t and therefore there was no
trust to be put in his aid or puissaunce. Their letters both appalled, and
made sorrowful the king of England, which like a prudent prince did well
consider and ponder, y^ it were both ieopardous and costly, for him alone to
enterprice so great a war. And on y^ other part, if he should desist and
leave of his pretensed purpose, all me^ might call him cowarde and recreant
prince. Beside this, he thought that his own nation would not take his
tariyng at home in good nor favorable part, co^sideryng ye sith they had
given so large money for the preparacio^ of all things necessary and
convenient for the same, they might conceive in their heddes and ymagen, that
under color and pretense of a dissimuled war, he had exacted of the^
notable sums of money, and now the treasure was once paid, then ye war was
done, and his cofers well enryched, and the commo^s enpouerisshed. So that at
this time he doubted and cast perels on every side and part, and beside this,
he was not a little sorry y^ Maximilia^ author of this war did absent him
self, and defraude him of his societe and assiste^ce. And while he studied and
mused what counsel he should best take in such a doubtful and sodeyne
case, he like a grave prince, remembering the saying of the wiseman, work by
counsayll and thou shall not repent the, assembled together all his lords and
other of his private counsayl, by whose minds it was concluded and determined,
that he should manfully and courageously perceauer and proceed in this broched
and begone enterprice, recordynge well with them selfs, and affirming
plainly that all cheualry and marsial prowesses, the more di^^icile and heard
that it is to attain to, the more renoumed is the glory, and the fame more
immortal of the vanquisher and obteyner. Therefore by this counsayl of his
friends and senate, he made Proclamacion that every man should set forward into
France, and yet not opening how Iudas^y Maximilian had deceived him, least
that they knowing the whole fact, should not be so courageous to go toward
that battle and proceed forward on their journey. And therefore to provide and
forse all perels and daungiers that might accidently ensue, he so strengthened,
multiplied and augmented his army in such number before he took ship, that he
with his own power might discourage and overcome the whole puissau^ce of his
adversaries.

When he had thus gathered and assembled his army, he sailed to Caleys the.vi.
day of October, and there enca^ped him self, tariyng there a certain space
to se his men harnessed and appareled, that neither weapon nor any engyne
necessary for his journey should be neglected. At which place all the army had
knowledge by the Ambassadors, which were newly returned out of Flaunders (for
they did not know of it before) y^ Maximilian could make no preparacio^ for
lack of money, and therefore there was no succor to be exspected at his hand.
At the which report, y^ Englishmen were nothing abashed nor dismayed, trusting
so much to their own puissau^ce and company: but yet they meruayled and
wondered greatly y^ heard it related, y^ Maximilian receauyng such great vilany
not long before at the hand of king Charles, was not present to prick them
forward, to cry and call, to move and excite the Englishmen, ye and if he had
had.vi. hundred bodies to put them all in hasard, rather then to leave the
Englismen, now setting upon his daily enemies and deadly adversaries. Albeit
Maximilia^ lacked no heart and good will to be revenged, yet he lacked
substance to co^tinew war, for he could neither have money nor men of the
dronke^ Fleminges, nor yet of the crakyng Brabanders, so ungrate people were
they to their sovereign lord

In the mean ceason, although the French king was as well with courage
replenished as with men furnished mete to try a battle, yet all this
notwithstanding he made semblau^ce, asthough he desired nothing more then
peace, being not ignorant that peace to be obtained was of no small valor and
price, and yet he determined to make more expe^ce in getting of peace, then in
settinge forth of war and hostilitee, and regarded so much the less the
treasure too be dispensed for the acquyrynge of unity and concord, for as much
as he was afraid that he being diligent to resist the invasion of the
Englishmen, that the Britones whereof the most part bare the yoke of his
subieccio^ contrary to their hearts and minds, would suddenly rebel and set
them selfs at liberty, and pluck out their heddes out of his color, and set
up another duke and governor. And at the same very time he was invited and
desired of Jews Sforcia duke of Millayn, to war against Ferdinand king of
Napels, at whose desire he was pressed and joyous, thinking that he had that
occasion sent to him from God, for the which he long before thristed and sore
wished. The which kingdom he pretended to be dew to him by succession, and
intended long before to acquyre and co^quere it by force of arms, as his very
right and inheritance. For when Rene duke of Angeou last king of Scicile,
departed without any heir male of his wife lawfully begotten, he did adopt to
his heir of all his realms and dominions, Jews the.xi. father to y^.iii.
king Charles, to thente^t that he should deliver queen Margaret his daughter,
out of the hands of king Edward the.iii. as you have well before perceived,
wrongfully and without cause disheneriting his cosyn, Godsonne, and heir, Rene
duke of Lorayne and Bar. For the which cause he did the more busily procure
and labor for y^ amity, favor and friendship of his neighbors round about
him, y^ when al things were appeased and set in good slaye at home he might
the better employe his whole force and puissau^ce on his war in Italy.
Wherefore being much desirous to have all things pacefied and set in a perfect
co^corde and securitee, he sent Philip Creueceur lord Cords his chief
counsailer and dilligent officer to entreat, move and persuade the king of
England to be reconciled and made again as a new friend to the French king.
He not forgetting his message, sent letters to king Henry before he passed the
sea, and arrived in the ferme land, by the which he notefied to him, yt he of
his bou^de^ duty and obseruau^ce, which he ought to the king his master, and
to the proffite of his realm, would take pain to invent and excogitate some
mean and way, y^ his highness and king Charles his master being disseuered in
amity, and made exstreme enemies, only for the the cause of Maximilian newly
elected king of Romans, should be reducted and brought again into their
pristyne estate and consuete familiaritee, doubting not to bring his ship to
the port desired, if it might stand with his pleasure to send some of his
cou^sailers to the confynes and borders of the English pale, adioyninge to
France, there to here what reasonable offres should be demonstrated and
proffered: which conditions of peace should be so reasonable and so ample that
he doubted not, but that he might with his great honor break up his camp,
and retire his army back again into his own seignory and dominion.

The king of England, maturely considering that Britayne was clearly lost*
and in manner irrecuperable, being now adjoined too the croune of France by
marriage, which duchy his whole mind was to defend, protect and conferme, and
that Maximilian what for lack of money, and what for mistrust that he had in
his own subjects, lay still like a dormouse nothing doing, perceiving
also that it should be both to his people profitable, and to him great honor
to determyn this great war without loss or bloodshed, appointed for
commissioners the bishop of Exceter, and Gyles lord Dawbeney to pass the seas
to Caleys, to common with the lord Cords of articles of peace to be agreed
upon and concluded.

When the commissioners were once met, they so ingeniously and effecteously
proceeded in their great affairs, that they agreed that an amytie and peace
should be assented to and concluded, so that the conditions of the league
should be egall, indifferent and acceptable to both parts as after shall be
declared.

While the commissioners were thus consultinge on the marches of France, the
king of England as you have heard, was arrived at Caleys, where he prepared
all things necessary for such a journey. And from thence he removed in.iiii.
battles, Boleyn beseged.
nere to the town of Boleyne, and there pytched his tents before the town,
in a place propice and convenient and determined to give a great assaute to the
town. In y^ which fortress was such a garrison of Warlike soldiers, that
valiauntly defended the town, and the same so replenyshed with artillary and
municious of war, that the loss of the Englishmen assautyng the town,
should be greater damage to the realm of England, then the co^queryng and
gaynyng of the same should be emolument or proffite. Howbeit the kings daily
shot, rased and defaced the walls of thesaide town: but when every man was
pressed and ready to give the assaute, a sodeyne rumoure roase in the army, that
a peace was by the commissioners taken and concluded, which brute as it was
pleasant and mellifluous to the Fre^chme^, so it was to the English nacio^
bitter, sour and dolorous because they were pressed and ready at all times to
set on their enemies, and refused never to attempt any enterprice, which might
seem either to be for their laud or profyt: they were in great fumes, angry
and euel content, railing and murmuringe amongst them selfs, that the
occasion of so glorious a victory to them manifestly offered, was by certain
conditions to no man, nor yet to the king commodious or profitable, refused,
put by and shamefully slacked: But above all other, diverse lords and
capitaynes, encoraged with desire of fame and honor, trustyng in this journey
to have won their spurs, which for to set them selfs and their band the
more gorgeously forward had mutuate, and borrowed diverse and sundry sums of
money, and for the repayment of the same, had morgaged and impignorate their
lands and possessions, sore grudged and lamented this sodeyne peace, and
return of them unthought of, and spoke largely against the kings doings,
saiynge and affirmyng, that he as a man fearyng and dreading y^ force and
puissaunce of his enemies, had concluded an inconvenient peace without cause or
reason: But the king as a wise man and most prudent prince to assuage the
indignacion and pacefie the murmoure of y^ people, declared what damage and
detryment, what loss and perdicio^ of many noble Capitaynes and strong
soldiers must of necessitee happen and ensue at the assaute of a town, and
especially when it is so well fortefied with men and municious, as the town
of Boleyn at that present time was: protestyng farther, that he might be justly
accused and condemned of iniquite and untruth, except he did prefer the
sauegard of their lives, before his own wealth, health and advantage.

When he had thus prudently co^solate and appeased the minds of his me^ of
war, he returned back again with his whole army, to ye town of Caleys, where
he began to smell certain secret smoke, which was like to turn to a great
flame, without it were well watched and polletiquely seen to. For by the
crafty inuencion and deuelishe ymaginacio^ of that pesteferus serpent lady
Margaret, duches of Burgoyne, a new ydoll was set up in Flaunders, and called
Richard Plantagenet, second son to king Edward the.iiii. as though he had
been resulcitate from death to life, which sodeyne news more stacke and
fretted in his stomach, then the battle which now was, set late forward and
more pain he had (not without great ieopardie of him self) to appeache and
que^che this new spronge conspiracy, then in making peace with the French
king his enemy. And so he was content to accept and receive (and not to offer
and give) the honest conditions of peace of his enemy proffred and oblated,
except he would at one time make war, both at home in his own country,
and also in foreyne and externe nations. Wherefore king Henry forseynge all
these things before (and not without great counsayll) concluded with the
French king, to thente^t that he being delivered of al outward enuytie might
the more quickly provide for the ciuyle and domestical co^mocions, which he
perceived well to be buddyng out. The conclusion of the peace was thus, y^ the
peace should continue both their lives, and that the French king should
pay to king Henry a certain sum of money in hand, according as the
commisioners should appoint for his charges sustained in his journey:

Which (as the king certefied the Mayre of London by his letters the.ix. day
of Nouembre) amounted to the sum of.vii.C.xlv.M. ducates, which is in
sterlynge money.i.C.lxxxvi.M.ii.C.l. l, and also should yearly for a certain
space pay or cause to be paid for the money that the king of England had
sent and exspended in the tuycio^ and aid of the Britones.xxv.M. crounes,
which yearly tribute, y^ French king afterward vexed and troubled with the
wars of Italy, ye rely satisfied, contented and paid, even to the time of
his son king Henry the.viii. to thentent to pay the whole duty and
tribute, and for the further co^seruacion and stablishyng of the league and
amity between both the realms.

Shortly after that king Henry had tarried a convenient space, he transfreted
and arrived at Dover, and so came to his manner of Grenewiche. And this was the
year of our lord a.M.CCCC.xciii. and ye.vii. year of his troubleous reign.
Also in this soiournynge and besegynge of Boleyne (which we spoke of before)
there was few or none killed, saving only Ihon Savage knight, which going
preuely out of his pauylion with sir Ihon Riseley, road about the walls to
view and se their strength, was suddenly intercepted and taken of his enemies.

And he being inflamed with ire, although he were captyue, of his high courage
disdeyned to be taken of such vileynes, defended his life to y^ uttermost and
was manfully (I will not say wilfully) slain and oppressed, albeit sir Ihon
Riseley fled from them and escaped their danger.

When king Henry was returned into England, he first of all things elected
into the societe of saynct George, vulgarely called the order of the garter,
Alpho^se duke of Calabres son, according to his desire which Alphonse was
son and heir to Ferdinand king of Napels, and after king of the same realm,
til he was overcome by king Charles. And after, the king sent Christopher
Ursewike, Ambassador with y^ gartier, collar, mantell, and other habiliamentes
apperteyninge to the companyons of thesayde noble order. Which Ambassadoure
arryuing at Napels, delivered to the duke the whole habit, with all the
ceremonies and dew circumstaunces thereunto belonging. Which duke very
reverently received it, and with more reverence reuested him self with the same
in a solemn presence, thinkyng that by this apparel and inuestiture, he was
made a friend and compaygnion in order with y^ king of England, whose friendship
obtained, he feared nothing the assautes or invasions of his enemies. And this
was the cause that he desired so much to be compaygnion of that noble order,
fermely beleuyng that y^ king of England souereygne of that order, should be
aider and mainteyner of him against the French king, whom he knew would
pass the mountains and make war on him. But this custom of assiste^ce in
ordres was, either never begone, or before clearly abholished: For in our
time there have been many noble men of Italy, compaignio^s as well of the
golden Flese in Burgoyne, as of the order of saint Mighel in France, that
have been banyshed and profligate from their natural country, and yet have
not been aided by the souereygne nor co^panyons of the same order. For surely
the statutes and ordinances of all thesayde orders does not oblige and bind
them to that case, but in certain points. After this the duke dimissed the
Ambassador, rewardyng him most pryncely.

Shortly after this Charles, the French king concluded a league with
Ferdinand king of Spain, and also being entreated and solicited with the
Oratoures of diverse princes, which persuaded and mollefied the stony heart of a
frosen prince, caused him to come to communicacion and treaty with Maximilian
king of Romans, and to conclude a peace with him for a season, to the intent
that he might without disturbaunce of his neighbors adioyninge, prosperously
and safely make war on Ferdynand king of Napels, and on all Italy, as he
before had minded and excogitated.

And so Charles, being furnished with men, of arms, horsemen, fotemen, nauye,
and aid of some Italians, passed through Italy by Rome and without any great
labor wanne the city of Napels. When he had obtained his victory: in his
return being assailed with the Uenicians at the town of Fornouoe, he had a
great dangerous victory. And so like a conqueror, with great triu^phe
returned into his realm and country. After him Jews the.xii. being king,
when he found oportunitee and saw the gappe open, invaded the Italians
again, and recovered again the realm of Napels, which Frederyck the son of
king Alphonse, not long before had gotten from the French nation: and after
that he subdued and conquered the whole duchy of Millayn. Albei^^ ^ot long
after (fortune turnynge her whele) he lost both the kingdom of Napels, and
the fair city and duchy of Millayne both together. And so the Frenchmen
warrynge upon the Italians had no better success in their co^questes, then
their parents and predecessors heretofore have been accustomed. For
undoubtedly, as many places as they vexed and sacked with murder and spoylinge,
so many or more in conclusion they did enoble and decorate with their blood and
slaughter. Which small recompense little profited and less releued, such as
before were robbed and spoiled of all their goods, substance and riches.

After this the Spanyardes arrived in Italy, and their putting too flighte the
Frenchemen, obtained the possession of the realms of Napels and Scicile, the
which they possess and enjoy at this hour. And at length a certain nation
of Germany, called the Swytsers, called to be partakers of the spoil of Italy,
wa^ne certain tounes there, which they possess and enjoy at this present time.

In this war and tumulteous busynes in Italy, which was y^ most terrible and
sorest plague, that any man can remember of that nation, there was no person,
no place, no private house, no noble familye, no captain or prince, but he
was oppressed either with the heaps of the dead carcasses, or with the blood
of his friends or subjects, or else suffered some affliccion Injury or
detryment. And insome wise at one time or another, every man did taste and
suffer all the mischeues that apperteyned to the victory gotten by their
enemies. The which defacynge and blottyng of the beutye of that country,
sometime called the queen of y^ earth, and flower of the world, chanced not
of her own self or her own cause or desert, but the Italians her own
suckyng children opened the gappe, and made the way of her destruction. For at
that time thus it chanced, that when the pote^tates and seignories of Italy
perceived, that all thing under them succeeded, even as they would desire and
wish, to their great exultacion and reioysinge: by reason whereof they sat
still at home like sloggardes (as women be accustomed to do) skoldynge and
brawlyng, exercisyng and practisyng preuy displeasure and malice, not again
their enemies as they were accustomed, but among them selfs one against
another, castinge out of memory and drownynge their ancient renoune, glory and
honor with desire of rule and appetite to be revenged, and so destroyed the
common weal, and subue^ted the old monumentes and acts of their forfathers
and predecessors. And because some of them, thinking them selfs, not of force
and puissau^ce sufficient enough to bring their purpose to effect, and to
revenge their quarrel, they entysed, stirred and procured with gifts, rewards
and promyses, strangers and foreyne nations to their aid and assistence. The
other seeing them so desirous to have their help, partly moved with their
gifts, partly with desire of rule, spoils and prays, gathered together a
great company and entered into Italy, and there distroyed, spoiled and possessed
the better part of it. And so the Italians, as men out of their wit, where as
they thought one to noye and hurt another with hateful warryng, they
destroyed their natyue country, being of nature enclosed and mu^yte with high
hills, and the main sea round about, and opened the way to straungiers to
their vttre ignominy and final destruction, which they might have kept out of
all danger, if they had been their own fre^des, and loved their own wealth
and commodite. Therefore I may say: O progeny, as well wicked as ungodly, has
discord and dissencion pleased the so much that thou would utterly
extinguishe and confou^de the glory and honor or thy native country? And in
conclusion, thou thy self art come to the depest pyt of wretchedness, because
that thou perceauing the ruin that thou have caused and procured, thou art
more repentaunte for the beginning of it* then glad to desist and leave it,
and so according to thy desert, thou have thy penance and guardon. The grand
captain and beginner of this mischief was Sforcia, which at that time ruled
at ^ys will the duchy of Millayne under duke Ihon Galeas his nephew: but for a
truth this Jews ruled al, and the duke did nothing. Wherefore Alphons duke of
Calabre, and after king of Napels, grudgynge that this duke Ihon his son in
law, should be de^rauded of his superiorite and dominion, threatened sore this
Jews Sforcia. Where he fearyng to be put from his authoritee, solicited and by
great entreatie procured Charles the French king* to invade the realm of
Napels.

By reason of which procurement, Alphonse duke of Calabre, which succeeded his
father Ferdinand in the kingdom of Napels (which also as you have heard, was
made knight ^f the garter) was first depryued of his kingdom by thesaide king
Charles, and shortly after of his life. But Jews Sforce had no long joy
after the death of his ennemy, for he was betrayed and taken by the Swytzers,
which warred under king Jews the twelfth, then being French king, and
carried into France, where he in the Castle of Lothes miserably finished his
life, according to the saiynge of the Gospel, woo be too him by whom a
slaundre begins. This mischief began at that time when Charles came
thither, and contynueth yet, which is the year of our Lord.M.D.xliii. for an
example to other, y^ strangers invited to a prosperous country be loathe to
depart from the sweet sauoure once thereof tasted.

This year was borne at Grenewiche lord Henry, second son to y^ king, which
was created duke of York, and after prince of Wales, and in conclusion
succeeded his father in croune and dignitee. Now let us return to the new
found son of king Edward, coniured by men's policies from death to life.

And first to declare his lignage and beginning, you must understand that the
duches of Burgoyne so norished and brought up in the sedicious and scelerate
faccions of false contryuers and founders of discord could never cease nor be
in quiet (like a vyper that is ready to burste with superfluyte of poison)
except he should infest and unquiet y^ king of England, for no desert or
displeasure by him to her committed, but only because he was propagate and
descended of the house of Lancaster, ever being adverse and enemy to her line
and lynage. For which only cause she compassed, ymagened and invented how to
cast a scorpio^ in his bosom, and to infect his whole realm with a
pesliferous discord. To thentent that he being vanquyshed and brought to
confusion, both the boylynge heat of her malicious heart might be fully
saciated with his innocent blood, and also auau^ce and prefer some darlyng
of her faccion to his Empire, rule and dignitee. And principally remembering
taht the earl of Lyncoln, which was by her set forth and al his company had
small fortune and worsse success in their progression and enterprice, contrary
to her hope and expectacion, she like a dog reuertynge to her old vomyte,
began to deuyse and spynne a new web, like a spyder that daily weueth when
his call is torn. And as the deuell prouydeth venomous sauce to corrupt
banckettes, so for her purpose she espied a certain young man, of visage
beutiful, of countenance demure, of wit subtle crafty and pregnau^t, called
Peter Warbecke. And for his dastard cowardnes of the Englishmen, in derision
called Perkyn Warbeck, according to the duche phrase, which change the name
of Peter to Perkyn, to yo^gelinges of no strength nor courage for their
timorous hearts and pusillanimitee: Which young man traueylyng many
countries, could speak English and many other languages, and for his baseness
of stock and birthe was known of none almoost, and only for the gain of his
living from his childehoode was of necessitee, compelled to seek and frequent
diverse realms and regions. Therefore the duches thinkyng to have gotten God by
the foot, when she had the deuell by the tail, and adiudging this young man
to be a mete organe to convey her purpose, and one not unlike to be ye duke of
York, son to her brother king Edward, which was called Richard, kept him a
certain space with her preuely, and him with such diligence instructed, both
of the secrets and common affairs of the realm of England, and of the
lignage, dissent and order of the house of York, that he like a good scholar
not forgettyng his lesson could tell all that was taught him promptly without
any difficulty or sign of any subornacion: and besides, he kept such a
pryncely countenance, and so cou^trefeare a ma^^stie royal, that all men in
manner did fermely believe that he was extracted of the noble house and family
of the dukes of York. For surely it was a gift given to that noble progeny as
of nature in the root plated that all the sequel of that line and stock did
study and deuyse how to be equyualent in honor and fame with their
forefathers and noble predecessors.

When this diabolical duches had framed her cloth mete for ye market, and
ymagened that all things was ready and prepared for the co^^usion of king
Henry, suddenly she was informed that thesayde king of England prepared a
puissant army against Charles the French king. Then she considering the
opportunity of the time, as who would s^ye, a time wished and a day desired to
acheue and bring too pass her (...) malicious and cancarde muencions, which
always nothing less minded then peace and tranquilite, and nothing more
desired then dissencion civil war and destruction of king Henry. Wherefore
she sent Perkyn Werbeck, her new invented Mawmet first into Portyngall, and so
craftily into the realm of Ireland, to thentent that he being both witty and
wilye might move, inuegle and provoke the rude and rusticall Irishenacion
(being more of nature enclyned to rebellion then to reasonable order) to a new
conflict and a sedicious commocion. This worshipful Perkyn, arriuyng in
Ireland, whether it were more by his crafty wit, or by the malicious and
beastly exhortacion of the saluage Irish governors, within short space entered
so far into their favors, and so seriously persuaded and allured them to
his purpose, that the greatest lords and princes of the country, adhibited
such faith and credit to his words, as that thing had been true indede,
which he untruly with false demonstracions setfoorth and diuulged. And as
though he had been the very son of king Edward, they honored, exalted and
applauded him with all reverence and dew honor, promisyng to him aid,
comfort and assistence of all things to the feat of war, necessary and
apperteynyng.

In the mean ^eason these news were related to Charles the French king, then
being in displeasure with king Henry, which without delay sent for Perkyn into
Irelande, to the intent to send him against like king of England, which was
inuadyng France (as you before have heard) This Flemyng Perkyn was not a little
joyful of this message, thinkinge by this only request to be exalted into
heaven, when he was called to the familiarite and acquayntaunce of kings and
princes: and so with all diligence sailed into France, with a very small navy,
not so small as smally furnished. And coming to the kings presence was of
him royally accepted, and after a princely fassion entreteyned, and had a guard
to him assigned, whereof was governor y^ lord Co^greshal. And to him at Paris
resorted sir George Neuell bastard, Sir Ihon Tailor, Rouland Robynson and an
hundred English rebels. But after that a peace, as before is said was
appointed and concluded betwixt him and the king of England, thesayde king
Charles dismissed the young man, and would no l^nger keep him. But some men
say which were there attendynge on him, that he fearing that king Charles,
would deliver him to the king of England, beguyled the lord Congreshall,
and fled away from Paris by night. But whether he departed without the
French kings consent or disassent, he deceived in his expectacion, and in
manner in despair, returned again to the lady Margaret his first foolish
foundation.

The duches thinking every hour from his departure a whole year, until such
time she heard from him, and effecteously desiring to know which way lady
Fortune turned her whele, herynge him to be repudiate and abiected out of the
French court, was in a great agony and much amassed and more appalled: But
when she was asserteyned of his arryuall in Flaunders, she no less revived,
then he that has in stead of the sword of execucion, a perdon and
restauracion of his life and degree to him delivered and showed. And at his
coming to her presence, she received him with such gladness, with such
reioysyng and such comfort (as in deed she could dissemble alone above all
other) as though she had never seen nor known him before, or as he were newly
cropen out of his mothers lap again, that what in trust to prefer him to
the prehemynence by her ymagened, and what for the hope that she had to
destroy king Henry, she fell into such an unmeasurable joy, that she had
almost lost her wit and senses. And that this her gladness might be notified
and made apparaunt to every man, she first rejoiced of her nephews health and
welfare: And secondarely she much thrusted and sore longed, not once, but
diverse and sundry times in open audience, and in solemn presence to here him
declare and show by what means he was preserved from death and destruction,
and in what countries he had wandered and sought frendshippe: And finally, by
what chance of fortune he came to her court and presence. To the intent that
by the open declaracion of these feyned fantasies, the people might be
persuaded to give credit and belefe, that he was the true begotten son of
her brother king Edward. And after this she assigned him a guard of thirty
persons in Murrey and blewe, and highly honored him as a great estate and
called him the white Rose, prince of England.

By reason whereof, the nobilite of Flaunders were to him diligent, and with
dew reverence did him all the pleasure that lay in their power or officies.
And to be short, the more that this poetical and feyned inuencion was
shadowed with the pretense of sincere verity, the more faith and vndubitate
credence, was adhibited to it. In so much that many one thought him to be
preserved, only by the will and mighty power of almighty God, and to be
conueyghed at the first daungier by some faithful friend of king Edward his
father into some strange country, and so escaped the violent tyranny of his
uncle king Rychard, which vndubitately hereafter should recover his fathers
possessions and kingdom. The fame and bruyte of this iuggled miracle was
almoost in one moment blowe^ over all the country of Flanders, and the
territories therabouts. But in England it was blased in every place sooner then
a man could think or devise it: In which country more then in other places it
was received for an infallible verity and most sure truth, and that not
only of the common people, but also of diverse noble and worshipful men, of
no small estimacio^, which swear and affirmed it to be true, and no coment or
fable phantastically ymagened. After this deuulgacio^ y^ Rychard son to king
Edward was yet living, and had in great honor amongst the Fle^minges, there
began sedicion to spring on every side, none otherwise then in ye pleasant
time of vere, trees are wo^te to budde or blossom. For not only they y^ were
in sanctuaryes, for great and heinous offenses by them committed, but also many
other y^ were fallen in debte, and doubtyng to be brought to captivity and
bondage, assembled together in a company, and were passed over the sea into
Flaunders to their cou^tre^cate Richard son to king Edward, otherwise named
Perkyn Warbeke. After this many of the noble me^ conspired together some
through rashness and temerite induced thereunto, some being so earnestly
persuaded in their awn co^ceipt, as though they knew perfightly that this
Perkyn was y^ vndubitate son of king Edward the.iiij. solicited, sturred and
allured to their opinion al such as were fre^des and fau^oures of the house of
York. Other through indignacio^, envy and aua^^^e, ever grudginge and
thinking they were not condignly rewarded for their pains and parts taken in
the kings behalf and quarrel. Other whom it grieved and vexed too see the
world stand still in one stay, and all men to live in peace and
tranquillity, desirous of some change, ran hedlinge into that fury, madness
and sedicious co^iuracion.

This rumor and vain fable of this twice borne duke Richard, divided all
England and brewe the realm into Partakynges and several faccions, so that
the minds of all men were vexed either with hope of gain and preferment, or
with fear of loss and confusion. For no man was quiet in his own mind, but
his brains and senses daily labored and bet about this great and weighty
matter, every man according to their intelligence, po^dering and weiyng in egal
balau^ce, the inco^moditie and daungier that might hereof ensue, and the gain
and commodity that by the same might be obtained and gotten. Albeit the king,
and his cou^sayl and other his faithful friends, not a little mer^ayled that
any person (being in his right wit) could induce in his mind or find in his
heart falsely to think and fraudulentlye too ymagen, such a pernicious fable
and ficcion, being not only strange and marvelous, but also prodigious and
unnatural, to teyne a dead man to be renated and newely borne again. By the
which open ^allax and untrue surmyse setfoorth and palliated with the vesture
and garment of a professed veritee.

Many of the noble men (as he well then perceued) took and reputed it, which
was folishely and maliciously setfoorth to unquiet and perturbe him and his
realm, to be a thing true, just and unfeigned. So that he then saw as far
as lynce with his bright eyes, that this new invented coment and poetical
peynted fable, would make some broyle and discord in his realm. Except it
were manifestly published and openly declared to be a feigned fable, a sedicious
fraud and a craftye imagened mischief. Other persons, to whom war,
sedicion, and strife, were as pleasant as delicate vyand or Epicures living,
were very joyous of these news, and beleuinge no fraud nor deceate to be hid
or cloked under this golden tale. But whatsoever the fame was and the voice
that ran abroad, that they reputed, sincere, true, and as an open plain
thing, thinking that to redounde both to their advantage, co^moditee and high
preferment and honor, which thing did greatly animate and encourage them to
set up the sails, and lanchefoorth the ower of their pernicious and detestable
entreprice. And because the matter was weighty and required great aid and
assistence. Therefore they determined to send messengers to the lady Margaret,
to know when Rychard dnke of York might come conveniently into England to
thentent that they being thereof certefied might be in a redynes to help and
succoure him at his first arryuall.

The.viii. year.
SO by the common consent and agreement of the coniured confederates, sir Robert
Clifford knight, and William Barley were sent into Flaunders, which enucleated
to the duches all the secret ententes and preuy counsayles of y^ fre^des and
fautoures of the new found duke. The duches this message did gladly accept and
louyngly embrace, and of their tydinges was not a little joyous, easily by her
persuasion inducynge to their heddes, that all things that were spoken of duke
Richard were true and unfeigned. And afterward brought them to the sight of
Perkyn, the which countrefeated the countenance and the manner and fassion of
Rychard duke of York, praising his virtues and qualitees, with y^ which he was
endued above the moon. Thesayde sir Robert Clifford, when he had seen and w^l
advised the young man, believed surely that he was extracted of the blood
royal, and the very son of king Edward the.iiii. and thereof he wrote a
lettre of credit and confidence into England to his company and fellows of his
co^spiracy, and to put them out of all doubt he affirmed yt he knew him to be
king Edwardes son by his face and other lyniamentes of his body. And when
these lettres came to England, the ^heuetaynes of this busynes, to the intent
to stir the people to some new commocion and tumult, and to set forth some
cause of mattre apparaunt, caused it openly to be diuulged and published, that
it was true and not feigned that was spoken and said abroad of the duke of
York: but it was done by such a secret craft, that no man could tell who was
the authoure and founder of that rumoure.

When the king perceived that this vain fable was not vanyshed out of the mad
breynes of the commen people, he thought it expedient both for the sauegarde
of him self and also of his country, whose hurtes were joined and mixed
together, to provide some remedy to repress this Immynent mischaunce, not a
little suspectynge, that some conspiracy had been concluded and agreed, because
that sir Robert ^lyfforde had late fled preuely into Flaunders. Wherefore he
sent certain knights that wre chosen and picked men of war, with a bond of
sou^dioures into every part to keep the shores and the sea costs surely, that
no man might pass over into any foreyn land bey o^d ye sea nor repasse into
this realm without search, or pasporte or save co^duyte by him given, and all
streytes* passages and by paths were kept and searched, so that no man
vnapprehended could pass to the sea coaste, nor make any conuenticle or
assemble without he were espied and taken. And so thentent that many men, being
both of England and other places for very malice by this new inuencion enflamed
and indurate, should no farther run in their freneticall madness, he secretly
sent wise espialles to all the cytyes of the Gaul Belgique or low country
within the Archedukes dominion, and the confynes of the same, to search and
pryeou^e of what progeny this misnamed Richard was dissended and propagate,
promising highly too reward and thank such persons, which would manifest
and open the secret doubts and deuyses of the same matter: and beside this he
wrote to his trusty friends to do the same. So they sailynge into France,
divided and severed them selfs every man into a lymyte and prouynce. And when
certain of them repaired to the town of Turnay, they were there certefied by
the testimony of many honest persons, that this feigned duke came but of a low
stock, and of a base parentage, and was named there Peter Warbecke. And so
shortly after the kings inquisitoures returned into England, reportynge to
the king what they had known and heard: Of which thing the king was also
more plainly certefyed by his trusty and faythefull friends, both by letters
and trusty messengers.

Whereupon seeing that now the fraud was openly and apparau^tly manifested and
espied, he determined to have it published and declared with all diligent
celerite, both in the realm of England and also in all parts beyond the
sea, in the prouynces of Foreyn princes and strange pote^tates. And for
the same cause he sent to Philip archeduke of Burgoyn and to his counsayl^ers
(because that he was not yet of mature age, apt and convenient to take the
regiment of his countries and ^^igniories) Sir Edward Pownynges a valyau^t
knight, and sir William Warram doctor of the laws, a man of great modesty,
learning and grauite, y^ they should openly to the^ declare, that y^ yo^ge man,
being with the lady Margaret was descended of a bsse and obscure parentage, and
that he had falsely and untruly usurped the name of Richard duke of Yroke,
which long before was murdered with his brother Edward in the Tower o^
London, by the commandment of king Rychard their uncle, as many men living
can testefie. And to think and say otherwise then this that apertly is
known, it were the highest point and degree of madness, for as much as it is
probable by an invincible reason and an argument infallible, that king Richard
their natural uncle, in dispatching and destroiyng prince Edward the eldest
son of king Edward his brother, was in no suertie of his realm or usurped
dominion, if he had permitted Richard the you^ger son to live and continue:
For then might he as next heir to his brother have lawfully and by just title
claymed the scepter and diadem royal, which was his fathers, and after
diuoluted to his elder brother. And therefore they should desire the Archeduke
and the princes of his cou^sayl, that it would please them to give no credit,
nor them selfs suffer any more to be blinded or seduced with such mere
impostures and crafty illusions being full of untruth and apparaunte
falsehed, nor yet to aid or assist such a craftye merchau^t, which had
falsely feigned his name and stock, and in especially against him, which in
few years passed, had succored and releued Maximilian their lord being sore
oppressed and almost overcome both with the extort power and puyssaunce of the
French king, also with the cyuyle discord and intestine rebellion of his own
subjects and vassals. With these commandments the Ambassadoures ^ayled into
Flaunders, and there ge^tely received and louingely enterteyned of the
Archeduke Philip and his cou^sayll, And after that they were commanded to
declare the intent of their legacion, docter William Warram priest, made before
them a pleasant and a luculent oracion, showing therein discretely the mind
intent and desire of the king his master: And in the later end of his
oracion, he a little rebuked the lady Margaret and hit her of the thombes,
saiynge that she now in her old age, within few years had produced and
brought forth two detestable monsters, that is to say Lambert (of whom
rehearsal was made before) and the other Perkyn Warbeck, And being conceived of
these two great babes, was not of them delivered in eight or nine months as
nature does require and as all other women commonly do, but in the hundredth
and lxxx. months, she brought them forth out of her womb: for both these
at the least were fittene years of age before that she would be brought in
bed of them, and show them openly.

And when they were newly crept out of her womb, they were no infau^tes, nor
suckyng children, but lusty yongelinges, and of age sufficient to bid battle
to kings. Although these tau^tes and Iestes did anger and trouble the lady
Margaret, yet Perkyn was more vexed and encombered with the things declared in
this oracion, and in especial because his fraud and false feigned iuggelinge
was brought to light and opened: yet the duches being therewith more incensed
then quenched, nothing refreignynge her old malice and cancard hatred, but
entendyng to cast whote Sulpher to the new kyndled fire, determined clearly
to arm and fetforward pretty Perkyn against the king of Engeland with spear
and shilde, might and main.

When the Ambassadors had done their message, and the Archedukes counsayll had
long debated whether Perkyn were the true son of king Edward the fourth,
they answered the Ambassadors: That to the intent to have the love and
favor of the king of Engelande assuredly after that time, the Archeduke nor
they would neither aid nor assist Perkyn nor his complyces in any cause or
quarrel.

Yet notwythstandinge, if the lady Margaret persistynge and contynuynge in her
roted malice toward the king, would be to him aidynge and helping, it was
not in their power to let or withstand it, for because she in the lands
assigned to her for her dower, might frankely and freely do and order all
things at her own will and pleasure without contradiccion of any other
governor.

The.ix. year.
WHen this answer was given to them, they returned again into England.
After that, king Henry loking circumspectly to his matters, purposed to pacefie
the storms and blastes that he perceived to be growyng, rather by pollecy and
counsayll, then by dubious war and manslaughter, if his nobilite would
thereunto condiscende. For he well co^sidred that of one busynes rises another,
and of one small sparcle comes a great flame. And therefore straight he sent
forth certain espialles into Flaunders, which should ^eigne them selves to
have fled unto the duke of York, and by that means search forth and
inuestigate, the whole intent of their coniuracion, and after what way they
intended to proceed in the same. Other were sent also to allect and entice sir
Robert Clyfford, and William Barley to return into England, promisynge to
them frank and free pardone, of all offenses, and crimes committed, and
promocions, and rewards, for obeynge to the kings request. These exploratours
so traueyled in their affairs and busynes that they brought to pass all
things to their masters desire. For first they had perfight knowledge of the
names of certain conspiratours against the king. After they persuaded sir
Robert Clifford to leave of that foolish opinion, which had no sure ground
nor foundation to stay it self upon. Albeit William Barley could not be
deduced from his begone enterprice, but that he would go forward hedlynge
with the same, which tarried not long in that deuelish opinion. For within two
years after this, he repenting him of his folly, being reclaymed, and having
perdone given him of the king, repaired home to his native country, detesting
hi and his foolish blindness. When the espialles had sped their purpose, one
after another stale away preuely from the feyned duke, and returned into
England, bringynge with them the names of certain, which were chief of that
conspiracy. Other tarried still behynd to accompany sir Robert Clifforde, when
he returned again into England, whose tariynge meruelously debilitated and
appalled the courages, and hearts, of the coniuratours. For they perceived
daily that their enterprice more and more feynted, and that they were by a
little and little dampnified and hurted. And yet they saw no man whom they
might perfightly put diffide^ce in, or yet once mistrust.

When the king had knowledge of the chief Capitaynes of this tumulte by the
ouerture of his espyes, which were returned, he caused the^ all to be
apprehended and brought to London before his presence. Of the which the chief
were Ihon Ratclyffe lord Fitzwater, sir Symonde Mou^forde, sir Thomas Twhaytz
knights, William Dawbeney, Robert Ratclyffe, Thomas Cressenor, and Thomas
Astwood. Also certain priests and religious men, as sir William Richeforde
doctor of deuinitee, and sir Thomas Poynes, both freers of saint Dominikes
order, docter William Sutton* sir William Worsely deane of Paul's, and Robert
layborne and sir Rychard Lessey. Other that were giltye of the same crime,
hearing that many of their company were taken, fled and took sanctuary. And the
other that were taken were condemned al of treason, of the which there was
hedded sir Symond Mounforde, sir Robert Ratclyffe, and William Dawbeney, as
aucthoures and chief Capitaynes of this busynes. The other were perdoned, and
the Priests also for their order sake that they had taken, but few of them
lived long after. Also sir Ihon Ratclyfe, lord Fitzwater was pardoned of his
life, but after that he came to Caleys, and there laid in hold, he was
behedded, because he corrupted the kepers with many promises to have escaped
out of the same, ente^ding as was thought to have gone to Perkyn.

King Henry of England, partly grieved with the king of Romans for breakyng
his promise, when he should have associated him in his journey against the
French king, and partly displeased, with the Fle^mynges, but principally with
the lady Margaret, for keeping and setting forward Perkyn Warbeck, not only
banished all Fle^myshe wares, and marchaundises, out of his realm and
dominions, but also restreyned all English merchau^tes, from their repair and
traffic, into any of the lands and territories, of the king of Romans, or
the Archeduke his son, causynge the mart of merchaundises and commoditees of
this realm to be kept at his town of Caleys. The mart (...)
Wherefore the said king and his son banyshed out of their lands and
seigniories all English clothes, yarne, tynne, lead and other commodities
upon great forfeytures and penalities. The restreint made by the king sore
grieved and hindered the merchauntes, being adventurers: For they by force of
this commandment had no occupiynge to bear their charges and supporte their
contynuaunce and credyte. And yet one thing sore nypped their hearts, for the
Easterlynges which were at liberty, brought into the realm such wares as
they were wont and accustomed to do, and so served their customers through
out the whole realm: By reason whereof the masters being destitute of sale
and commutacion, neither retained so many covenant servants and apprentices
as they before were accustomed, and in especial, Mercers, Haberdasshe^s and
Clothewoorkers, nor yet gave to their servants so great s^ipende and salarie,
as before that restreynte they used to do.

For which cause thesayde servants entendyng to work their malice on the
Easterlynges, the Tuesdaye before sayn^t Edwardes day came to the Styl^ard in
London, (...) made upon the Easterlinges.
and began to rifle and spoil such chambres and warehouses as they could get
into: So that the Easterlynges had much a do to withstand and repulse them
out of their gates. And when their gates were fermed and closed, the multitude
russhed and beat at the gates with clubbes and leuers to have entered, but the
Easterlynges by the help of Carpenters and Smythes, which came to their aid
by water out of the borough of Southwarke had so strongly shored and fortefied
them selfs that they could not prevail. The Mayre of London hearing of this
riot, assembled ye Magestrates and officiers of the city together, and so
being furnisshed both with me^ and weapon, set forward toward the Stylyard.
As Soon as the coming of ye Mayre was intymate and known to the ryotous
persons, they fled away like a flock of sheep: howebeit he apprehended
diverse of the malefactors and committed them too several prysons. And upon
the inquiry before the kings commissioners, there were found gyltie
above.lxxx. servants and apprentices (and not one householder) which were
confederate together to make this attempt and sworn in no wise to discover or
reuele the same: Whereof, some that were the cheueteynes and beginners of this
mischeuous riot, were sent to the Tower, and there long continued. But in
conclusion, because none of their Masters were invented culpable of this
naughtye act, the king of his goodness remitted their offense, and restored
them to their liberty.

The.x. year.
Shortly after, sir Robert Clyfford, partly trusting on the kings promise,
and partly mistrustyng the thing, because he knew that diverse that were
accused to be partakers of that faccion and conspiracy were put in execucion:
and therefore perceauyng that their could not be a more pernicious nor more
desperate begone thing then that deuelishe enterprice, returned suddenly
again into England. The king being certefied before of his coming, went
straight to the Tower of London the morrow after the day of Epiphany, and there
tarried til such time that sir Robert Clyfford was there presented to his
person, which thing he used under this pretense, that if sir Robert Clifforde
had accused any of the nobility to be partakers of this ungracious fraternity
and diabolical comuracio^, that then every such person might be called thither
without suspeccion of any evil, and there straight to be attached and cast in
hold.

But before I go any farther I will show the opinion that at that time ran in
many men's heddes of this knights going into Flaunders. Some men held this
opinion, that king Henry for a polecy did send him as a spy to Flaunders, or
else he would not have so sone received him into his grace and favor again:
Nevertheless this is not like to be true by diverse reasons and apparau^t
arguments, first, after that attempt begone by sir Robert, he was in no small
dau^gier himself, and by that was not a little noted, and his fame blemished,
but also his friends were suspected and had in a gealosy. Secondarely he was
not after y^ in so great favor, nor so esteemed with the king as he had been
in times past, because he was blotted and marked with that crime and offense.
And therefore he bearing his favor to the house of York entendynge in the
beginning to administer displeasure to king Henry, sailed to the lady Margaret,
being seduced and brought in belefe y^ Perkyn was the very son of king
Edward. But to my purpose, when sir Robert came to the presence of the king,
he knelyng on his knees most humblye, beseched him of grace and pardone, which
he shortly obtained. And after that being required of the manner and order of
the comuracion, and what was done in Flaunders, he opened every point to his
knowledge, and after disclosed the names, as well of the aiders and fautoures as
of the inceptors and begynners. Amongst whom he accused sir William Stanley,
whom the king made his chief chamberleyn, and one of his preuy counsayll.
When he had so said, ye king was greatly dismayed and grieved, that he should
be partaker in that greueous offense, considering first that he had the
governance of his chamber, and the charge and comptrolment of all such as
were next to his body, and also calling to remembrance the manifold
gratuities, which he had received at his hand, but in especial not
forgetting that benefit above all other, that only by his aid and succoure,
he had vanquished and overthrown his mortal enemy king Richard. Wherefore,
at the beginning he could in no wise be induced nor persuaded to believe that
he was such a preuy conspiratoure or malicio^s offender, but when the crime was
openly proved and probably affirmed, then the king caused him to be restrained
from his liberty in his own chamber within the quadrate tower. And there
appointed him by his preuy counsayll to be examined. In which examinacion he
nothing denied, but wisely and seriously did astipulate and agree to all
things laid to his charge, if he were in any of them culpable or blame
worthy.

The report is, that this was his offense. When communicacio^ was had between
him, and this sir Robert Clifforde, as concerning Perkyn which falsely usurped
the name of king Edwardes son, sir William Stanley said and affirmed there,
that he would never fight nor bear armure against the young man, if he knew of
a truth that he was the indubitate son of king Edward the.iiii. This point
argues and proves him at that time, being moved with melancholy, to bear no
great good will to king Henry, whereof suspicion first grew, and after this
ensued the accusacion of sir Robert Clyfforde.

Then the king doubtinge what to do with him, did co^sulte and breath with him
self of this sodeyne chance. For he feared least that his brother lord
Thomas Stanley, in whom he had found great friendship, would take this mattre
greueously. And if he should remit that fault, or abusing his lenyte and
mercy, would be the more bolder to offend and treaspace more highly. Albeit at
the last, seueritee took place, and mercy was put back, and so he was
arreigned at Westmynster, and adjudged to dye, and according to that
judgment was brought to the tower hill the.xvi. day of February, and there
had his head ^^ryke^ of. What was the occasion and cause why the sincere and
faithful mind that sir William allways before bare to king Henry, was turned
into cancarde hatred and dispite, and why the especial favor that the king
bare toward him was transmuted into disdeyne and displeasure, dyuersemen
allege diverse causes, affirmynge that when king Henry (what other mutual
benefits the one had received of the other, I will now pretermyt and
ouerpasse) in that battle, in the which he bereft king Richard both of
his life and his kingdom, being associate and accompanied but with a small
number, and circu^uented by king Richardes army, and in great ieopardy of his
life, this sir William being, sent from the lord Standley his brother with a
good company of strong and hardy men (which lord Stanley was nere the field
with a great army) came suddenly and fortunately to the succors of king
Henry, and saved him from destruction, and ouerthrewe king Rychard as before
you have heard. Surely this was a benefit above all benefits to be remembered,
by the which king Henry was not only preserved alive, but also obtained the
croune and kingdom, which great benefit, after the kingdom once obtained, he
did neither forget nor yet left unrewarded. For the lord Thomas Stanley he
invested with the swoorde of the county of Darby and beside other great gifts
and officies given to William Stanley, he made him his chief cha^berleyn. This
sir William, although he were in great favor with the king, and had in great
and high estimacion, more remembering the benefit done to the king, then the
rewards and gratuitees of his liberalite received, thinking that the vessel of
oil, (according to the Gospel) would ouerflowe the brymmes, and as some say,
desiryng to be earl of Chestre and thereof denied, began to grudge and disdeyne
the king his high fre^d: and one thing encoraged him much, which was the riches
and treasure of king Richard, which he only possessed at ye conflict of
Boswoorth: By reason of which haboundance of riches and great power of people,
he set naught by ye king his souereign lord and Mastre. When the king perceived
that his stomach began to canker and wax rusty, he was with him not a little
displeased, and so when both their hearts were enflamed with melancoly, both
lost the fruit of their long co^tmued amity and favor. And so it often
chances, that when men do not consider nor yet regard the great benefits to
them exhibited, they render again hatred for liberalitee, and for bread
given, they yield again a scorpion. Now to return to the matter.

At this time the king thought it best, ye and very necessary, not only to
take heed about him, but also to use some sharp punyshme^t and correccio^ of
the offenses of his subjects, to the^tent y^ the late begone sedicion might the
sooner be repressed, and for this cause specially y^ some persons void of all
honest fear and reverent dread, had taken such courage and audacitie to them,
that they feared not to speak evil of their king and souereign lord, with
most spiteful and contumelious words, as though they neither feared nor
would obey him, or his precepts and commandments, expecting daily and
hourly the arryuall and landing of the feyned Rychard duke of York, now
lately risen from death to life. But when knowledge of the slanderous and
opprobrious words were brought to the kings ears, he caused diverse
persons to suffer condign punyshme^t for their heinous offenses, whereby their
co^plices well perceauyng y^ their entreprice had no prosperous success nor
took any good effect, and especially such as temerariously began to make
mastries and farther seeing what preparacion was made and provided against their
tumulteous commocion and frantique enterprice, they of their own swing
pacefied them selfs, and began to turn to their king and natural liege
lord.

The.xi. year.
AFter the death of sir William Stanley, Gyles lord Dabeney, a man of Great
fidelity and circumspeccion was elected and made the kings chief
chamberleyne. When the king had thus polletiquely weded out the evil and
corrupt hearts of his English subjects, and had pacefied and brought all his
realm to a monacorde and a quiet life. Then he perceived that it was necessary
also to purge and cleanse his realm of Ireland to thentent y^ the venomous sede
sown and planted.ii. years past emo^gest the wild and la^age Irish persons by
Perkyn Warbeck might be clean cradicated and plucked up. Wherefore he sent sir
Henry Deane late Abbot of Langtonye, a man of great wit and diligence (whom he
made chau^celour of the Is^e) and sir Edward Pownynges knight, with an army of
men into Ireland, to search and purge all such tounes and places where Perkyn
was received, releued or favored. And if they espied any of his affinitee or
faccion, then he would they should be punished with all extremity to the
terrible example of all other that would enclyne too that unfortunate part.
And first, after their arryuall into Irelande, they called in the kings name
the nobilitee of that country to a cou^sayll, where they being assembled all
together, the Chauncelour with a gentle exhortacion required them first to
persist in due obedyence and fidelity toward their king, and to aid his
captain sir Edward Pownynges with their might, power and strength against
such rebels which either through blyndnes and folly, or else through desire
and appetide to do evil, lusteyned and aided Perkyn with harneys, men or
money. Every man promised openly to help with all their power and might: But
they promised not so quickly, but they performed it as slowely, for few or
none either aided or assisted him, as who would say, that they loved the
English nation more with their outward countenance, then in their inward
hearts and minds. But when they heard that sir Edward Pownynges was come to
persecute al such as were fautoures and friends to Perkyn Warbeck, there was
no man, although he were but a little contamynate with that ^edicious infeccion,
but he fled out of hand into woods and marises for the defense and sauegarde
of them selfs, there consultyng together, after the manner of their country,
in what places they might best lie in wait to infest and skyrmyshe with the
Englishmen, or else if need should so require to fight with them hand to hand.

In Ireland there be two kind of men, one soft, gentle, civil and courteous:
And to these people, as to the most rychest and best nurtured persons does
many merchaunt men of the countries adjoining, daily resort, frequent,
contract, bergayne, and make marchaundise. But because the most resort
thither is of the English nation, the Irish men follow and cou^trefeate their
civil manners and honest co^dicio^s. And by reason of ye common trade and
entrecourse between the^, they have learned ye English tou^g, and can both
speak and understand it. And all this kind of people is under y^ subieccio^
and dominion of ye king of England. The other kind is clean contrary from
this, for they be wild, rustical, folish, fierce, and for their unmannerly
behauior and rude fassio^s, are called wild^ and savage Irishmen. And these men
have many governors and seuetall rulers, which keep continual battle, and
daily war amongst them selfs. for y^ which cause they be more fierce, more
bold and hardy then theother Irishme^, and they be very desirous of new
things and strange sightes and gasynges, and after robbery, theft and rapyne,
in nothing so much delytyng as with tumulteous sedicion and continual strife.
And to these wild coaltes Perkyn showed him self first, easily persuadynge
them to believe that he was the same verey person whom he falsely feigned and
countrefeated.

Wherefore Sir Edward pownynges according to his commission, entending to
punish such as have been aiders and auauncers of Perkyns foolish enterprice,
with his whole army, marched forward against this wild Irishmen, because yt
all other being culpable of that offense fled and resorted to them for
succoure and defense, to thentent that they both together might be hable to
resist and defye their enemies. But when he saw that his purpose succeeded not
as he wisshed it, both because the Irysh lords sent him no succor according
to their promises, and also considering that his nombre was not sufficient to
set on the wild people being dispersed amongst woods, mounteyns and
marshes, was of necessitee, compelled to recule and return, frettyng and
vexed in his stomach, because he suspected ye Geralde earl of Kyldare being
then the kings deputy, was the cause and occasion yt he had no succoures nor
aid sent to him, and so he was informed of such as bare to the earl no good
will. And therefore sodeinly he caused the earl to be apprehended, and as a
prisoner brought him in his company into England: Where, when he was examined
and certain matters of treason laid to his charge, he avoided them all, and
clearly (such was his wytt and innocencye) quit him self and laid the burden
in other men's necks:

Whom the king dimissed and sent him into Ireland again, there to be his
deputy and Lieutenaunt as he was before. The king like a polletique prince had
many great and weighty consideracions which refreyned him from using of any
severity or extremity against this earl, contrary to the minds and wills
of his malicious adversaries. One was the great aucthoritee and swing that he
bare emo^gest the Iryshe nation: Also the condition and state of the time,
wherein he favored some sedicion to be in brewyng: And chiefly of all the
assured hope and affiaunce that he conceived in him.

So that now the king being out of all fear of battle, did take his
progress into Lancasshire the.xxv. day of Iuyn, there to recreate his
spirits and solace him self with his mother the Lady Margarete wife to the
Earl of Darby, which then lay at lathome in that country. While these
things were thus done in England, Perkyn warbeck then being in Flaunders,
although he had taken great care and sorrow for that his crafty conueighaunce
was espied and openly known, and also that king Henry had afflicted and
punished diverse of his confederates and alyes, and thereby in despair of all
the aid and succor that was to him promised and appoyncted: Yet he determined
not to leave the hope and trust that he had conceived in his mad head to
obtain the crown and realm of England, and so gatherynge a great army of
valiant Capiteyns of all nations, some banqueroutes, some false English
sanctuary men, some thieves, robbers and vacaboundes, which leaving their
bodily labor desiring only to live of robbery and rapine, came to be his
servants and souldioures. And so being furnyshed with this rablemente of
knaves, took such ships as his friends had provided for him, and departed
out of Flaunders, entendynge to arryue in England whersoeuer the wind
brought him. And by chance of fortune he was driven upon the Kentyshe coaste,
where because y^ see was calmed, he cast his anchors and there made his abode,
and sent certain of his retinewe to the land to signify to all the country
that he was so furnyshed of all things mete and co^uenye^t for his entreprice,
that there was no doubt but the victory would enclyne to his part. And by
this means to make exploracion and enquirye whether the Kentishmen would take
his part and follow him as their captain, which before times was not
tymerous nor afraid of their own mind in troubleous seasons to move war
against their princes. The Kentyshmen hearing that this feyned duke was come,
and had heard that he was but a peinted image, doubtyng a space what to do,
whether to help him or to resist his power, at the last reme^bryng what evil
chances their forefathers had, and how small a profit such as have rebelled
have gained, thought yt neither expedient nor profitable for them to aid and
assyst him that came rather to spoil, destroy and wast the country, then to
conquer it for their wealth and co^moditee. And this they firmly coniectured
because he had none other with him but Alienes and strange people, which would
take and account every church town, chapel, house and every private man as a
pray and a lucre, and not as their natyue country. Wherefore they fearyng the
sequel, determined st^ll to abide true to their king and prince, and to fall
upon such as were new come to land out of their ships. Andwhile they were
assemblyng of them selves together, other should by fair promises and fre^dly
words allure and call unto them the great nombre out of the ships, and so
give them battaill. And so vsyng this guyle and imposture, they promised all
to follow him and to fight under his banner: Howbeit the prolongyng of time
drove Perkyn into a suspicion, which well remembered y^ a comminaltie is not
accustomed sagely to co^sult, but sodeinly and temerariously to run hedlyng
ever into rebellion and new flirred co^mocion. Wherefore Perkyn determined not
once to set foot out of his ship till he saw al thing sure without any scruple
or ambiguitee. And although he minded not to take land him self, yet he
permitted certain of his soldiers to go on land, which persons being a
pretty way from their ships, were sodeinly circu^uented and compassed by the
Kentyshmen, and at one stroke vanquyshed and driven back to their ships, and
there were taken prisoners an hundred and.lx. persons, whereof.v. were named
capticins Mountfo^rde, Corbet, white belt, quyntine or otherwise Genyn. Which
rebels were brought by sir Ihon Pechy shreue of ke^t, to London railed in
ropes like horses drawyng in a carte. And after upon their arraynement,
confessed their offense, and were executed, some at London, and other in the
tounes adioynynge to the sea coaste. Wherefore Perkyn failyng of his purpo^e
fled back into Flaunders and there tarried, consultyng with his friends until
such time as he had better prepared for things to come more prudently then he
had done before time.

In this veri^ ceason departed to God Cicile Duches of York, mother to king
Edward ye fourth and king Richard at her castle of Barkamstede, a woman of
small stature, but of much honor and high parentage, and was buried by her
husband in the college of Fodringey.

The king being advertised y^ his enemies had made entreaunce into his realm,
left of his progress and purposed to return to London again, but being
certified ye next day after of ye lucky speed and fortunate chance continued
and went forth of his progress, sendyng to them sir Richard Gylforde, both
to praise the ^idelite and manhood of the people, and also to render to them
his most hearty thanks for their good service to him done, with faithful promise
not to forget them herafter in their suits, requests and peticions. Also that
they might not have any success herafter into those parts, the king
commanded the watches to be kept all alo^ge the sea coasts, and bekons to be
erected according to the ancient usage and custom of the country.

Peter and his capiteins taking counsel together in Flaundres, were of one
assent resolved to this poinct, y^ there was nothing more surer to them, then
to proceed quickly with all celerite in their incepted entreprice. And when they
perceived y^ there was neither people town nor country in England y^ would
associate them in their phantas^ical frenesy which nothing was mitigated,
least y^ by protractyng of time and long space king Henry might fortefie and
munite all dangerous places, and passages with soldiers and men of war,
which thing they heard say yt he neither forgate nor fors^owed, and beside yt
he was not a little afeard yt his long tariyng should appalle and disco^forte
his preuy friends wtin y^ realm of England. Wherefore he gathered together his
ungracious company, and determined first to sail into Ireland, there to
augme^t his number. And from thence if yt were possible to sail into y^ west
parts of England. And if there were any let or obstacle in that place, then he
determined to sail straight into Scotland, knowing y^ seldom or never is
perfight co^corde and amity between ye Scotts and ye English nacio^. When
this gentle counsel was dissolved, and wynd and wether served, he set up his
sails, and having a prosperous gale after his phantasy, sailed into Ireland,
where he reposed him self a space. And remembryng yt the hope of victory
co^sisted not whole in the Irysh nation, which being naked men without harneys
or armure were not hable to co^bate with the Englismen wherefore when the wind
served him he departed from Corffe and arrived in Scotland, and coming to the
kings presence, with great solempnite, framed his tale after the form and
fassion following.

I think yt is not unknown to you, most noble king and puissau^t prince,
into what ruin the stock, house and family of Edward ye fourth of that name
king of England, is now of late brought to and fallen in, either by Gods
permission or by divine punishment, whose vndubitate son (if you know not
all ready) I am, and by the power of almighty God, preserved a^yue to this
hour from the mighty hand of a tyrau^t. For my father king Edward when he
dyed, appoyncted his brother Richard duke of Gloucester to be our governor,
protector and defendor, whom y^ more that he loved and studied to auaunce and
promote, y^ better he thought y^ he would love, favor, and tender his
children. But alas my unfortunate chance I may say, how has his trust be
turned into treason? and his hope turned to hindreaunce? All men know and I
feel. Our uncle was not the tutoure and preserver of our stock and lynage,
but the confounder and destroier of our blood and progenye.

For that tyrant blinded and glutted with the cupiditie of rulynge and
souereigntie commanded Edward my brother and me to be slain and dispatched
out of this mortal life. Whereupon that person, to whom the weighty and
cruel charge was committed and given to oppress and destroy us poor
innocent enfantes and gilteles babes, the more that he abhorred this heinous
and bocherly offense the more he feared to commit yt. And so waueryng in mind
and dubious what to do, at the length, willing in part to saciate the blody
thrust of the unnatural tyrant, and in part to absteyne from so facinerous
and detestable homicide, destroyed my brother and preserved me, like the good
Priest Iosada which saved little Ioas when all the children of the blude,
royal were commanded by Athalia the queen to be slain and utterly destroyed.
And farther, to thentent that my life might be in a surety, he apoincted one
to convey me into some strange country, where when I was furthest of and had
most need of comfort he forsook me sodeinly (I think he was so apoincted to
do) and left me desolate alone without friend or knowledge of any relief or
refuge. And so king Richard did obtain the croune as a pray mischeueously
gotten by the dispatchynge away of my brother and me. So that I thus
escapynge, by reason of my tender infancy, for gate almost my self and knew
not well what I was, but after long wanderyng from country to country, and
from city to city, I perceived and learned a little and little what was my
^state and degree, and so in conclusion came to mine own anute the lady
Margaret liyng in Flaundres, which was sometime married to Charles duke of
Bourgoyne, which as joyfully received and welcomed me as if I had come out
of hell into heaven, as the only type and garland of her noble stirpe and
lynage, but forasmuch as she being only dowager of ye duchy of Bourgoine, and
having nothing but her dowre propre unto her self, was not of power to help me
with men and munime^tes of war as she would gladly have done for the recovery
of my fathers realm and rightful inheritance, I therefore am driven to seek
farther aid and succoure. And therefore by her council and advertisement,
with this small handful of men of war and souldioures, I am repaired to your
presence for succors, of whom (as the public fame is spread over y^ whole
world) there was never man by wrong or injury profligated or driven out of
his country, region or inheritance, or by extorte power and tyranny kept out
of the same (as I my self from mine infancy have been) whose request was
frustrate and repulsed at your hand. Therefore by the maieitie of your realm
and country I desire, and heartly with prayer as I can, I beseech and exhort
you to help and releue me now in my extreme necessite. And if yt chance me by
your aid and succor to recover and possede my fathers realm and dignity,
not only I, but all the kings of our lynage which her after shall obtain
the same, shall be so much obliged and bound unto you, that they must needs
think that doing to you all the pleasure and benefits that they can, yet with all the thanks y^ can be given, your great kindenes can never be equiualently
recompensed.

When he had thus said, the king bad him be of good comfort, and promised him
that whatsoever he ware, yt should never repent him of his coming to him.
And after this the king assembled his council together, and demanded of
every man severally, what they said, of these things which perkyn had both
enucleated and required, or whether they would take any farther deliberacion
to advise them selfs what to do in so great and weyghtie a matter. They that
were of greatest experience and of the mysest sort did prove by many apparaunt
arguments that his sayings were but dreams and fantesies and of no force or
truth and therefore they thought yt not convenient to encombre them selfs
with any lengre consultation. Another sort, which was not very great, neither
of wit nor experience, but greater in number, esteemed this matter very
profitable to the common wealth, considering yt ministered to them occasion to
make war in England. And although they had knowledge what good success
Perkyn had enjoyed in all his former attemptes, yet they esteemed that now all
things should succeed according to their expectacion, if his cause (although
yt were as light as a fether) were assumed and taken in hand to be defended,
considering that when the war was once intimate and begone, and if perkyn
did prevail, he would deny nothing convenient to his friends and helpers. Or
else at y^ least they doubted not but king Henry would make to them large
and ample offers and conditions of peace, rather then king James should take
part with his adversary and mortal enemy.

When this council was given by the more number, yt was well accepted, and the
Skottishe king, whether he were blinded by error, or else did dissimule the
matter, began to have Perkyn in great honor, and caused him openly to be
called duke of York. Also, that this might be more apparaunt to the people y^
he was so in deed, he caused lady Katheryn daughter to Alexandre earl of
Hu^tley, his nigh kynsman and of a high lignage in Scotland, to be espoused to
him. And this affinite he caused to be made for this end and purpose, partly
yt he might extenuate ye evil will and malice which was like to succeed of
this matter, for that it might be notoriously blasted and known abroad yt he
had peace and amity with y^ king of England, and partly least he might be accused
of to much light crede^ce it Perki^ were found and proved to be another man
then he was reported.

When all things were prepared, ordered and apoyncted for y^ war. This Perkyn
swellyng with joy that he after his own phantasye had made the Scotts to be
his partakers. And to thentent that they should put no diffidence in the
sequel of his entreprice, and to encourage them y^ more he pronounced suerly
y^ he should have great succor and aid of his friends in England sent even
from y^ farthest part thereof as soon as ever the trompet of war was blown.
The Scotts although they had but little confidence and less trust in his
words, yet puttyng their hope more in ye gain of spoil then in y^ gainyng of
the victory by battle, armed them selfs in all y^ have and marched toward
the confines and borders of (...). Albeit the Scottish king myndyng not to be
to rash, mystru^^^ y^ the Englishmen knowing Perkyn to be arrived in Scotland
had (...) some army for ye defense of y^ frontiers, sent out certain light
horsemen to epsy and search if the husbandmen of the country were assembled
(...) armure to defend their enemies. The horsemen rangyng over y^ feldes and
playnes belongyng to their enemies, seeing all things quiet, returned to their
king and certified him that now was the time most apt and co^^^^^ent to
invade the realm and set on the English nation. Then ye Scott^^^ king marchyng
toward England with all his puyssau^ce, first pro^^^med openly that al such
should only be pardoned that would take part and submit them selfs to
Rychard duke of York, and fight in his cause and quarrel. And to thentent to
appalle and danute the hearts of the poor commons, so that for very fear they
should be enforced and (...) to submit them selfs to this new found Mawmet,
they (...) so ^^uell and deadly war, that not like men, whose nature is to
(...) with the sla^ghter of men, and to be merciful to the impotent and sick
persons, brent tounes, spoiled houses and killed me^ and children, and allected
with the swetnes of spoil and prays, wasted all the country of
Northumberla^d, and had gone forth farther, but that they perceived no aid or
succoure to come out of England to attend upon this new duke. And the
soldiers being fully laden with blood and spoil, refused to go one foot
farther at that time, and the country roase on every part, which made the
king suspecte some army to approach. Wherefore he determined rather to return
with his assured gain, then to tarry the nuncupatiue dukes unsure and
uncertain victory, and so he rec^led again into Scotland.

It is a world to remember in this place of a certain kind of ridiculous
mercy and foolish compassion, by the which Perkyn was so sore moved that yt
seemed him to regard nothing more then the commodite of another man. For wile
the Scottish king thus vexed and haryed y^ poor inhabitau^tes on the borders
of Northumberland, so y^ nothing was heard but torynge, weeping and lamentyng.
This new muented duke being returned into Scotland, even like him self, which
wrought all thing with fraud and deceyte, perceauyng that no concurse nor
resort of Englishmen showed them selfs in open apparaunce to ministre to him
aid or succor, and fearyng not a little that the box of his crafty dealyng,
and bag of his secret cou^trefeatyng should be elucydate and set in an open
glass by reason whereof he should be floccipended and had in contempt and
disdeyg^^e of the Scottish people, as though he had been theru^to provoked by a
natural inclinacion and paternal pity (to thentent to hide and palliate his
subtyl subornacion) cried out openly, Oh, my stony and heard frosen heart which
art not once moved nor yet afflicted with the loss and slaughter of so many of
thine own natural subjects and vassales. And at that glorious sighynge, he
beseched the Scottish king that from thence forth he would not afflicte and
p^age his people, nor deforme and deface his natural realm and country with
such terrible fire, flame and havoc. As who would say, that he being
overcome with the perfight love of his native region, began now to have
compassion and to lament the cruel destruction of the same. The Scottish king
which began to perceive which way the wind blewe answer him again, Sir
me thinks you take much pain, and very much imagen how to preserve the
realm of another prince which is not youres (but I think you would gladly
have it) but my mind gives me that you be as far from the obteygnyng
the same, as you be nere the soil and aspect of the country considering that
you call England your land and realm, and thinhabitauntes thereof your people
and subjects, and yet not one man, neither gentle man nor yoman will once
show him self to aid or assist you in ye war begone for your cause and in
your name wtin your realm to the which you be both (as you say) inheritoure,
and by your people accereited and vocated unto. And so the king reproved the
lightness of this young fond foundelyng, and every day more and more neglected
and less phantesied and gave credit to him, nothing well and wisely y^
neither his words, with his deeds, not the sequel of factes with his
promises were neither agreeable nor consonant.

The nobles inhabitynge in the north parts herynge the clamor of the commen
people, and perceiving that they fled to aduoyde the cruelty of y^ Scotts,
were sodeinly abashed and fortefied their holds and manned their fortresses
ready to defend their enemies, laiyng embushementes in ye ways, where they
imagened yt there enemies would resort. And without delay certified the king of
y^ Scotts invasion and entreprice. The king was not a little abashed at this
sodeyne chance, and pricked also with his awn domestical business, not alonely
feari^g his outward enemies but also his own nobles and natural subjects
least any of them would step from him to theother part, and put him to
farther trouble and vexacion. Wherefore, as soon as he heard these news,
considering the matter to be (...) no small importance and mete to be
vigilantly forsene, with all diligence prepared oportune remedies to resist and
withstand ye first brunt of so great a sourge newely begone. But the sodeine
retreyte of the Scotts again assuaged all the English men's swift
acceleracions and spedy provisions: For when they were once laden with prays
and spoils, they returned home again or thenglishme^ could assemble together.

The xii year.
WHen the king was truly certified yt the Scotishe king was returned, he giving
praise to his captains and other inhabiting on the bordures of his realm,
which had duly and truly served him at that time, did desiste and leave of for
to occur and repugne the malicious invasions of the Scottishe king. And yet
fearing least his enemies should be encouraged and indated with this great
gain of spoils and prays, he determined by ^ent of sword and mortal war
to revenge and reform the manifest injury and apparaunt wrong to him by king
James and his people done and committed. Wherefore he assemblynge his court of
parliament, declared the cause of the instant war, and what remedy he him
self had invented and devised, persuadynge with many strong arguments and
reasons invincible, that it should be for the profit and vtilite of the
public and common wealth to prosecute and follow y^ war by his mortal
enemies begone and attempted. To this opinion all his nobilitee (which were
no less offended with this proud bragg of the Scottish nation then he him
self) did wyllingly agree and gladly assent. And to the maintenance of the
war and toward the charges of the same, a certain subsedy and tax of money
was with one assent by the whole parliament liberally and freely given and
granted: Which payment although it was but easy and small, yet many of the
common people which ever abhor such taxes and exaccions, grudged sore to pay
thes^me.

At this parliament also and conuocacion, there was certain laws, a^ts and
statutes confirmed and made, as were thought most necessary and expedient for
the public weal of the realm. And thus the king dissoluynge his court of
parliament, prepared for war out of hand. In this mean ceason the king of
Scotts not slepinge his matters because he perceived well that the Englishmen
would shortly revenge their loss and harm, with no less diligence gathered
an host and puyssant army, that either he might withstand and resist the
English power inuadyng his realm and country, or else of fresh enter upon the
bordres: and going forth, spoil, rob and make hauoke again. And so these
two valiant princes minded nothing less the one to hurt and prejudice
theother, But the king of England sore prycked and wounded with the injury to
him committed, was so sore moved against the Scottysh king, that he would not
procrastinate nor defer one hour till he were revenged. And so prepared a
puissaunt and vigorious army to invade Scotland, and thereof ordained for
cheuetayne Gyles lord Dawbeney his chief chamberleyn, a man of no less wytt
then pollecy and of no less pollecy then hardines.

When the lord Dawbeney had his army assembled together and was in his journey
forward into Scotland, he sodeinly was stayed and revoked again, by reason of
a new sedicion and tumult begone within the realm of England for the subsedy
which was granted at the last parliament for the defense of the Scotts with
all diligence and celeritee, which of the most part was truly satisfied and
paid. But the Cornyshe men inhabityng the least part of the realm, and
the same sterile and without all fecunditee, compleyned and grudged greatly
affirmyng that they were not hable to pay such a great sum as was of them
demanded. And so, what with anger, and what with sorrow, forgetting their due
obeysaunce, began temerariously to speak of the king him self. And after
leuyng y^ matter, lamentyng, yellyng and criyng maliciously, said, that the
kings cou^sayll was the cause of this pollyng and shauyng. And so being in this
rage menaced to death the aucthoures (as they imagened) of this myschiefe and
sorrow, whom they threatened shortly to dispatche out of this world. And so
being in aroare.ii. of the same affinitee, ye one called Thomas Flamocke
gentleman, learned in the laws of the realm, and theother Mighell Joseph a
smyth, me^ of high courages and stout stomachs, took upon them to be
captains of this ungracious flock and sedicious company. And although they
perceived their company to be accensed and inflamed with fury and malice enough,
yet to augme^t and encreace their madness, they cast oil and pitche into a fire
and ceased not to provoke and prick them forward like frantique persons to
more mischief cryenge out openly and pronouncynge y^ it was shame (for a small
co^mocion made of y^ Scotts, which was assuaged and ended in a moment (for
they thought poor folishe and ignorant fools, ye al things was ended and
assuaged when it was eue^ at the whottest and most fervent) they should be
exacted and polled, and such great exaccions laid upon their necks, and
especially on ye Cornyshmen, which they affirmed to be but poor men, and
being in a sterile and unfruitful country gate their living hardly by
minynge and diggyng tynne and metal out of the ground both day and night
labouryng and turmoylyng. And therefore they had rather dye and suffer extreme
punishment, then live in such calamitee and wretchedness. And they laid the
fault and cause of this exaccion to Ihon Morton Archebyshop of Cauntourbury,
and Sir Reignold Breye, because they were chief of the kings preuy,
cou^sayll. Such rewards have they that be in great aucthorite with kings and
princes. For if any thing succeed well according to the mind and pleasure of
the commynaltie that is ever referred and gratified to the king or governor.
But contra^iwise, if any thing be done, either by chaune or by council that
sounds not well in their ears, or is contrary to their opinion or fantesy,
they will lay it straight to the council saying that they have persuaded him
to do this and that. Therefore if all men would well remember and diligently
pondre in their minds what is the reward and guerdone, few would labor and
affectcously de^yre to mou^te so high, or aspyre to that place of dignitee. But
now to the mattre.

These capiteynes exhorted the common people to put on harneys, and not to be
a^earde to follow them in this quarrel, promisyng them that they should do
no damage to any creature, but only to se ponyshement and correccio^ done to
such persons which were the aucthours and causers that the people were molested
and vexed with such unreasonable exaccions and demau^des. And if they perceived
any person (as they espied many in deed) which did impugn and reprove their
mad, unreasonable and sedicious council, affirmynge that it was the highest
poynct of madness for a man to put his life in hasard for that thing, which he
ought mekely and humbly to require and desire of his prince and sovereign
lord, then they called them dastardes fools, and cowardes, and taunted and
rebuked them with most shameful reproaches and contumelious inu^ccions. So
these unhappy capiteynes nothing more desired then to bring their flock and
them selves to small perdicion and vttre confucion. With these bragges and
mocyons a great part of the people were eleuate and encouraged and condescended
to do as the capiteynes and the most multitude would agree and appoynct. Then
the capiteynes preysinge much the hardynes of the people, when all things
were prepared mete for their unfortunate journey, set forward with their army,
and came to Tawnton, where they s^ewe the provost of peryn which was one of
the commissioners of the subsedy, and from thence came to wells, and so
entendynge to go to London where the king then so iourned.

When the king was advertised by his collectours, and officiers of all these
doings, and attemptes, he was meruelously asto^ned, and especially because at
that one time he was enuyrored with double war, both externe and intestyne.
And because perell did depend on both, he was in great doubt which of both
he should most regard. And as he was musing of this mattre, he was
asserteyned that ^ames Twichet lord Awdeley and diverse other of the nobilitee
were associate with the Cornishemen, and were in great have and no good speed
marchyng toward London. The king pe^ceauyng the cyuile war to approach and
draw nerer and nerer, almost to his very gates, determined with all his whole
power to resyst and repress the same. And after that tumult appeased and
suppeditate he would with all expedicion set upon Scotland. Wherefore he revoked
again the lord Dawbeney which as you have heard was with a puyssaunt army going
into Scotland, whose army he encreaced and multiplied with many pycked and
fresh warryers, that he might y^ better, and with less labor overcome these
rebels. Also mystrustynge that the Scotts might now (having good
opportunity seeing him troubled with this civil discord) invade the realm
again, and so spoil, rob, violate and destroy the borderers, he appoincted
the lord Thomas Hawarde Earl of Surrey, a puissaunt and polletyke capyteyne
(which was taken prisoner at the overthrow of king Richard as you have
heard, and after set at liberty, and within two years next after was made
high treasourer of England after the death of Ihon Lord Dynham) to gather
abonde of men in the countye palantine of Durham, and they with the aid and
help of the inhabitauntes adioynynge and the borderers, to drive out and
expel the Scotts from of y^ borders if they should fortune again to invade,
until such time y^ the Cornyshemen being subdued and pacefied (which he
thought easy to be done) he might send to them the forsaide lord Dawbeney
again with all his power and army. When the nobles of the realm heard of this
tumul^eous busynes and terrible co^mocion, they came to London every man with
as many me^ of war as they could put in aredines to aid y^ king if need
should be: In the which company, there was the earl of Essex, y^ lord Mongey
with diverse other.

At this time and ceason, Charles the French king returning from y^ wars yt
he had at Napels, sent ambassadoures to inform the king of the prosperous
success and victory that he had obtained in Italye, and gave to them in
charge to desire of the king of England nothing so much as the contynuaunce
of his amity and favor toward their master and sovereign lord. For the
French king sore desired to continue in perfight peace and amity with the king
of England. And not without a cause, for he had so vexed and combred him self
and his people with such Italian snares and crafty engynes, out of y^ which at
this day being the year of your lord a thousand.v.C.xliiii. his successors
cannot clean be ryd, and delivered.

When y^ king was informed y^ king Charles orators were come to Calys, he sent
certain of his nobility, honorably to receive them, and so to co^ueigh them
to Dover, and there for a polleey to make their abode till the rebellion were
extinct and suppressed, and not one word thereof to be sounded in the ears of
the Ambassadors: Which commandment was circumspectly kept and observed.

And now y^ Cornyshmen departing from Wells (where they received their chief
capiteyne, James lord Audeleigh) went to Salsbury, and from thence to
Winchester, and so to ke^t, where they looked for help, but they were deceived
in their expectacion. For the earl of Kent, George lord of Burgemy, Ihon brook
lord Cobham, Sir Edward pownynges, Sir Richard Guldeforde, Sir Thomas Burchier,
Ihon Peche, Wyllyam Scott and a great nombre of people were not only pressed and
ready to defend the country from all mischief and destruction, but also bent
and determined to fight and combat with such as would not be obedient to
their natural sovereign lord, and to his laws and precepts. Also y^ kentysh
men them selves, partly remembryng that other commocions have been to their
damage and great hindreaunce, and partly being under the defense of their
nobilitee, as under the Earl and other, would not so much as come nere to the
rebels, nor yet either make cou^tenau^ce or once speak to any of them, to
thentent that the king should in no wise conceive any poynct of untruth or
treason in the poorest of them. Which thing so appalled and dismayed the
hearts and courages of many of the brute and rural Cornyshmen (which seeing
them selves deceived and defrauded of their chief hope and succors, and
fearing the evil chance that might happen to them) that they to save them
selfs fled preuely in the night from their own company and co^paignio^s. The
capitaynes of the rebels perceauyng they could have no aid of y^ Kentysh
people, puttyng their only hope to their own power and fortitude (for surely
they were men of great strength, and of no less force then valiant courage)
brought them to Black hethe.iiii. miles from London, and there in a plain
upon the top of an hill they ordered their battles, either ready to fight
with the king if he would assail them, or else to assault and beat the
city of London: For they thought verily y^ the king was so afraied of their
puissaunce, y^ he minded nothing less then to encountre with their army. And
therefore being enflamed with arrogance, nothing mystrustyng, but fermely
beleuynge y^ the victory was sure in their hands, they determined to enter
into the cytee of London and to assaute the tower, wherein the king (as they
thought) had pr^uely enclosed him self. But king Henry wrought clean
contrary to their mind and expectacion, for he never thought to give them
battle till he had them far from their domestical habitacions and native
region, so that they should be out of all hope of aid and comfort.

And when they were with their long and tedyous journey weried and tired, and
that their furye were somewhat assuaged and fell to repentance of their mad
commocion and frantike progressio^, ^lack heth (...).
then he would in some place convenient for his purpose, circumuent and
enuyron them to his advantage and their destruction as he did in deed
afterward. In the mean ceason there was great fear thorough the city and
cries were made, every man to harneys, to harneys, some ran to the gates,
other mounted on the walls, so that no part was undefended, and continual
watch was kept by the magestrates of the city least the rebels being poor
and nedy would dissende from their camp and invade the cytee and spoil, and
rob the riches and substance of the merchants. But the king delivered and
purged their hearts out of this fear, for after y^ he perceived that the
Cornyshmen were all the day ready to fight and (...) upon the hill, he sent
straight Ihon Earl of Oxforde, Henry Bur^^^^^ Earl of Essex. Edmond de la
Poole earl of Suffolk, and sir Ryes app Thomas, and Sir Homfrey Stanley noble
warryers with a great company of archers and horsemen to enuyron the hill on the
right side and on the left, to thentent ye all hywayes being stopped and
forclosed, all hope of flight should be taken from them: And incontinent, he
being as well encouraged with manly stomach and desire to fight as furnished
with a populous army and copy of artillery, set forward out of the cytee and
enca^ped him self in Sainet Georges field, where he the frydaye at night then
lodged.

On the saturday in the morning, he sent the Lord Dawbeney with a great
compaignye to set on them early in the morenyng, which first gate the bridge
at Detforde Strande which was manfully defended by certain archers of the
rebels, whose arowes as is reported were in length a full yard. While the
earls set on them on every side, the lord Dawbeney came into the field with
his company, and without long fightyng the Cornyshmen were overcome, but first
they took the lord Dawbeney prisoner, and whether it were for fear or for
hope of favor, they let him go at libre^y without any hurt or detriment. There
were slain of y^ rebels whicht fough and resisted.ii. thousand me^ and moo
and taken prisoners an infinite no^bre, and emo^gest them y^ black smyth and
chief capiteins which shortly after were put to death. This Mighell Joseph,
surnamed y^ black smyth one of ye capiteins of this donge hill and draffe
sacked ruffians, was of such stowte stomach and haute courage, y^ at the same
time y^ he was drawn on the herdle toward his death, he said (as men do
report) that for this myscheuous and facinorous act, he should have a name
perpetual and a fame permane^t and immortal. So (you may perceive) that desire
and ambicious cupidite of vain glory and fame, enflameth, and encourages
as well poor and mean persons, as y^ hearts of great lords and puyssaunt
princes to travail and aspire to the same. Some affirm y^ the king appoyncted
to fight with the rebels on the Monday, and anticipatyng the time by pollecie
set on them upon the Saturday before, being unprovided and in no arraye of
battle, and so by that pollecy obtained the field and victory.

When this battle was ended, the king wanted but.iii.C. of all his company
that were slain at that present conflicte. Also the capiteynes apprehended and
taken he pardoned, saving the chief capiteynes and first aucthors of that
mischief, to whom he would neither show mercy nor leuyty. For he caused the
lord Audeleigh to be drawn from Newgate to the Tower hill in a cote of his own
arms peinted upon paper, reuersed and al to torn, and there to be behedded
ye.xxviii. day of Iuyn. And Thomas Flamock and Myghell Joseph he commanded
after the fassyo^ of treytours to be drawn, hanged and quartred, and their
quarters to be pytched on stakes and set up in diverse places of Cornewale, yt
their sore punysheme^tes and terrible execucions for their treytorous attemptes
and foolish hardy entreprices, might be a warnyng for other herafter to
absteyne from committyng like crime and offense. But because he was certified
that their country men being at home in Cornewale were by this skourge little
mollefied or quieted, and were ready to move again and begin new commocions
and conspiracies, if any ungracious or evil minded person would either move or
prick them forward, he turned his purpose and caused them to be set up in
London and other places, least that by such means he should wrappe him self
in more trouble at that time when he went about with all his wit and council
to repress and assuage all domestical and civil sedicion, to thente^t that
he might the more seriously and intentifely set forward a puissaunt army
against the braggyng and vnfeithful Scotts, being content at that tune, that
fortune had so smyled on his side.

The xiii year.
WHile this business was thus handled in England, the king of Scotts being
certefied of it by his espialles, and that there was none army raised in
England either to withstand his power or destroy his country, and herynge
also that king Henry and his nobles were vexed and sore troubled with the
commocion of the Cornyshemen, and in a civil discord and d^ssencion amongst
them selfs: Wherefore he thought (...) necessary to anticipate the war
before hand. For well he knew that as soon as king Henry had subdued and
ouerturned his adversaries, that he would with his whole puissaunce invade his
realm and dominions: And therefore he invaded the frontiers of the realm of
England wasting the country, burning the tounes and murtheryng the people,
sparyng neither place nor person. And while his light horsemen were ridyng to
forage and destroy the byshoprick of Dutham and there burned all about, he
with another company went about to expugne and assaute the castle of Norham
standing on the river of Twede, which deuideth England and Scotland. The bishop
of Durham which at that time was Richard Fox, had well furnyshed it both with
men and municions, vigilantly forseyng and imagenyng that the Scottish king
(as soon as he knew that there was civil discord and unnatural war moved
wtin the realm of England,) would with all his power invade and harrythe
borders and cou^treyes adioynyng to his land, This Richard Fox was before
called bishop of Excetter, and for his singular virtues and great gravity was
after that made bishop of Bathe and Wells, and last of all promoted and
exalted to the bishopric of Durham.

The bishop from time to time advertised y^ king of all things that there
chanced (which then was at London) and sent in all pos^ have to the Earl of
Surrey to come to re^^ewe, which was then in Yorkshire and had collected a
great army and a warlike compaigny. When the earl heard of these news he
perceauyng that all things were not void of reopardy, made no long ta^iyng
but with all diligence marched forward and after him followed other noble me^ out
of all quarters of y^ North, every one bringyng as many as they could gather
for the defense of their natural country and region. Emo^gest whom the
chief rulers and leaders were these whose names ensue* Raufe earl of
Westmerland.
Thomas lord Dacres. Raufe lord Neuell. George lord Strange. Richard lord
Latyner. George lord Lumley. Ihon lord Scrope. Henry lord Clifford. George lord
Ogle. William lord Conyers. Thomas lord Darcy.
Of knights.
Thomas Baron of Hylton. Sir William Percy. Sir William Boulmer. Sir William
Gascoyne. Sir Raufe Bygod. Sir Raufe Bows. Sir Thomas a Parr. Sir Raufe
Elerker. Sir Ihon Constable. Sir Ihon Ratclyffe. Sir Ihon Sauell. Sir Thomas
Strangueys.
with many other well proved and warlike men, which although in degree they
were not peregall with these great lords and knights, yet in manhood and
pollecyes of war and valiaunte courage, they were to them in all feactes
equivalent. The no^bre was little less then.xx. thousand men, beside the navy,
whereof the lord Brook was Admyrall.

When the Scotts had diverse days assauted and beaten the Castle of Norham,
to the no little detryment and damage thereof, and could make no batrye to
enter into the same, they determined of their own mind to reyse their siege
and return, and that so much the sooner because they heard say that the Earl
of Surrey was within.ii. days journey of them with a great puissau^ce.
Wherefore king Iamy thought yt to small purpose to tarry any longer in besegyng
the castle, rcysed his siege and returned into his own realm: When the Earl
knew of the kings return, he followed after with all have possible, trustyng
surely to overtake him and to give him battle.

When the earl was entered Scotland, he prostrated and defaced the castle of
Cawdrestenes. The tower of Hetenhall, The tower of Edington, The tower of
Fulde^: and he sent Norrey king at arms to the capiteine of Hayton Castle,
which was one of the strongest places between Berwyke and Edynborough, to
deliver him the castle, which he denied to do, affirming that he was sure of
spedy succors and swift aid. The earl perceauyng the denial, laid his
ordinance to the castle, and contynually bet it from two of the clock till.v.
at night, in such wise that they within rendered up, the fortress, their lives
only saved. And when y^ earl had received the Scotts, he with his miners rased
and ouerthrewe the castle to the plain ground. The Scottishe king was
within a mile of the siege, and both knew yt and saw the smoke and yet would
not once set a foot forward to save or reskewe his castle. And while the Earl
lay at Hayton, the king of Scotts sent to him Marchemount and another
heraulde, desyryng him at his eleccion either to fight with whole puissaunce
against puissaunce, or else they.ii. to fight person to person and hand to
hand, requyring that if the victory should fall to y^ Scottish king, that then
the earl should deliver for his ransom the town of Berwyke, with the
Fyshegarthes of the same. The earl ioyously, like a courageous capiteyne
received this message and made answer, that he was ready in the plain field
to abide the battle with his whole army, praiyng him to come forward with his
puissaunce, and after that he thanked him heartily of the honor that he offered
him, for surely he thought him self much honored that so noble a prince would
vouchefaue to admit so poor an earl to fight with him body to body, asserteining
him ferther, yt y^ town of Berwyke was the king his masters and not his y^
which he neither ought nor would lay to pledge nor gagewithout y^ kings
assent, but he would put his body in pledge which was more precious to him then
al ye tounes of y^ world, promisyng on his honor that if he took the king
prisoner in ye singular combat, y^ he would release to him all his part of
his fine and ransom, and if it chanced the king to vanquishe and apprehende
him, he would pay gladly such a ransom as was mete and convenient for the
degree of an earl. And when he had rewarded and dismissed the herauldes, he set
his army in a redines abiding y^ coming of ye king of Scotts and so stood
all day. But the Scottysh king not regardyng his offres, nor performyng his
great crakes and boastes, being afraied to cope with the English nation,
shamefully and sodeinly fled in ye night ceason with all his power and company.
When y^ earl knew yt the king was reculed, and had been in Scotland.vi.
or.vii. days being daily and nightly vexed with continual wind and
unmeasurable teyne, could not cause his people to continue in that tempestious
vnfertile and barayne region, with good advise retreated again with his whole
army to the town of Berwyke, and there dispersed his army every man into his
country, tariyng there him self till he knew the pleasure of the king in
furtherynge or protractyng the wars of Scotland: But in y^ mean ceason one
Peter Hyalas, a man of no less learning then prudent wit and pregnant
pollecy, was sent Ambassador from Ferdinand king of Speyne unto the king of
Scotts to move and entreat a peace and an unity to be had between him and
the king of England. For of king Ferdinand and Elyzabeth his wife (to which
woman none other was comparable in her time) there was nothing more desired nor
wisshed then by the coniunccion of marriage between Arthure prince of Wales
heir apparaunt to king Henry, and lady Katheryn the daughter of king Ferdynand
and queen Elizabeth a new affinitee and aliaunce might be knyt and begone
between the realm of England and country of Speine. And also he favored
somewhat the king of Scotts, for which cause he offered him self as a mean
and mediator of a peace between both the princes, their territoires and
dominions.

This Peter Hyalas solicited and moved by all honest means and deuyces king
James to assent to a unity and concord, and when with long solicityng he
conceived some good hope to grow in his weighty busynes, he wrote unto the
king of England, that it would please him to send one of his nobility or
council to be associate with him in concludyng with the Scottysh king. The king
of England which ever (so yt were not to his dishonor, hurt or detriment) was
not only a lover of peace, but also a norisher and a furtherer of amity and
quietness, and specially at this time when he was vexed with the civil sedicion
of his own propre sheep and flock, committed the charge of this weighty
matter to Richard Fox Bishop of Durham, which lay on Thenglish borders in
his castle of Norham. The bishop according to the kings appoyntement went
honorably into Scotland, where he and Peter Hyalas at y^ town of Iedwoorth
reasoned with the Scottish commissioners as concerning this peace to be had.
Six hundred co^dicions were purposed on the one part and theother, but after
long protractyng of time and much debating and arguyng, not one was accepted
nor allowed, And one thing above all other dashed the whole treaty: For king
Henry instantly required to have Perkyn Warbeck the founteyne and chief cause
of all this tumult and unquietness the perturber of him and his whole realm:
But the king of Scotts fermely denied to consent to any article that might
sound to his reproach or dishonor. And also he now began to smell and
savor the iuggelyng and false countrefeatyng of his new gest Perkyn Warbeck.
Yet because that Perkyn was alied to him by the holy sacrament of matrimony, he
thought yt both dishonest, unreasonable and unnatural to betrey his alye and
deliver him to death and co^fusio^. Wherefore when they had reasoned y^ matter
and diverse other urgent and weighty causes by diverse days of metyng, and yt
for y^ contrariety of opinions, no ferme peace could be concluded. In stead
of peace, a truce was concluded for certain years upon condition y^ James king
of Scotts should convey Perkyn Warbeck out of his realm, seigniories and
dominions.

While these things were reasoned and at ye last concluded in the co^fines of
England and Scotland, king Henry caused y^ ambassadoures of y^ French king, to
be brought to his presence, and he them received with al benignitee which as ^t
is showed before were stopped at Dover of their journey until such time y^ the
insurreccion of the Cornish men were suppressed and extinguished. And with like
entreteinement he embraced at y^ very ceason y^ lord of Camphire and other
Orators of Philip archeduke of Austrich and duke of Burgoyne, coming to him
for y^ conclusion and co^tinuau^ce of an amity and to have the English
merchants to resort to their country again, which from thence before were
prohibited and forbydde^. Which request being very agreeable to y^ quietness and
tranquilitee of his realm, and especially at y^ time, he did favorably
grant and benyngly assent unto. And so being confederate and alied by treaty
and league with al his neighbors marchynge on every side of his realms and
regions, he gratefied with (...) most hearty thanks king Ferdinand and the
queen his wife, for y^ they were the mediators, organes and instruments by the
which the truce was concluded between the Scottishe king and him, and rewarded
Peter the ambassadoure most liberally and bountefully.

So the Englishmen resorted again into the Archedukes dominions and were
received into Andwarp with general procession, The English merchauntes (...)
into Andw^rp with general pro^^ssion.
so glad was the town of their returnyng, which was by their absence sore
hindered and empouerished at the time that this unity and concord was made,
which was ye year of our lord a thousand.iiii.C.lxxxxviii. and y^.xiii. year
of king Henryes reign.

James the king of Scotts seeing that he now perc^aued how he was by Perkyn
manifestly deluded, according as he had feithfully promised, so he now duly
performed it. For he calling to his presence theforsayde Perkyn Warbecke,
declaryng to him what benefits and commodities he had received of his princely
liberality and gentleness, gentely requiring him to depart out of y^ realm
into some other country where he might make his abode more surely and more
quietly, until such time as fortune would provide a more prosperous wind to
set forward y^ sails of his purpose and desire, declaryng unto him y^ he
compelled in manner by necessitee had concluded a league and co^corde with y^ king
of England, and by y^ treaty, the refuge that he should have had of him and
his country was not only to him prohibited and forbidden, but also it was
agreed and condiscended that neither the king of Scotts, nor any by his
procurement or in his name should make war on the king of England, which
war he gladly took in hand for Perkins sake, having sure confidence and
perfight trust to have been aided and assisted with Perkyns friends in England.
But when he perceived y^ al was in vain and yt all his words were but wynd,
he exhorted him not to be displeased to depart, least his ^ariyng might be to
him a detrime^t and a breakyng of ye treaty between him and king Henry lately
concluded, wherefore with many fair words he desired him to depart. This
Perkyn knowing the kings pleasure was very sore amassed, seeing there was no
help to be looked for herafter in Scotland. Alb^it reme^bryng the great
benefits which he had received hertofore of the Scottysh king, which he
thought him self never hable to requyte and deserve, that he might not seem to
him ingrate or not willing to follow his desire, he was content at his
intercession to depart. And shortly after sailed into Ireland with his wife
and family, there determynyng with him self either to sail into Flaunders to y^
duches of Burgoyne, or to join and take part with the Cornyshmen. But how so
ever it was, while he lay in Ireland doubtyng what to do, he had intelligence
by certain messengers that the Cornyshmen for all their disconfiture and plage
not to be appeased, but sore to grudge and murmoure against king Henry, and
that they were prone and ready to renew the war again the king and the
prince: Where he not entendyng to forsake so fair an occasion so manifestly
offered, he having with him.iiii. small ships and not above.vi. skore men,
sailed into Cornewale and there landed in the month of September and came to a
town called Bodman, and there did so solicit, provoke and stir the mutable
and wa^eryng people, what with fair words and large promises that he
gathered to him above three thousand persons which immediately called him
their capiteyne, and said that they would take his part and follow him to the
death, and in all things obey his precepts and commandments.

Then Perkyn was well encouraged and made proclamacions in the name of king
Richard the.iiii. as son to king Edward that last died. And by the advice of
his.iii. councellers. Ihon Heron mercer a banquerupt, Richard Scelton a tailor
and Ihon Asteley a Skreuener, men of more dishonestie then of honest
estimacion, determined first of all to assault and beat all walled and
strong towns and fortresses, and them to receive into his possession and
seignyorie for his farther securitee and defense: And that entreprice acheued,
then he would augme^t his host and march forward against all persons that
durst once offer them selfs to withstand him.

When he and his imprudent counsayll were fully resolved on this poincte and
conclusion, they in good order went straight to Excetrer, which was the next
city that he could approach to, and beseged yt, and because he lacked
ordinance to make a battrye to raze and deface y^ walls he studied all the
weyes possible how to break and infrynge the gates, and what with castyng of
stones, heuyng with iron bars and kyndeling of fire under the gates, he
omitted nothing yt could be devised for y^ furtheraunce of his ungracious
purpose. The cytezens perceiving their town to be ^nuyronned with enemies and
like to be enflamed, began at y^ first to be sore abashed, and let certain
messengers by cords down over the wall which should certefie y^ king of al
their necessitee and trouble. But after that, taking to them lusty hearts and
manly courages they determined to repulse fire by fire, and caused faggottes to
be brought to y^ inward part of the ports and posternes and set them all on
fire, to thentent y^ the fire being enflamed on both the sides of the gates,
might as well exclude their enemies from entryng, as include y^ citezens from
ronnyng or fliyng out, and y^ they in the mean ceason might make trenches and
ra^payres to defend their enemies instead of gates and Bulwerkes Thus all the
doings and attemptes of the rebellious people had evil success in their
first entreprice: And thus by fire the city was preserved from flame and
burning. Then Perkyn being of very necessitee compelled to leave the gates,
assaulted y^ town in diverse weak and vnfortefied places, and set up laders,
attempting to clime over the walls and to take the cytee, thinkyng suerly to
compel the cytezens either by fear or lack of succoure to render them
selfs and yield the town. But the cytezens nothing so minded, so courageously
like valau^t cha^pions defended y^ walls, that they slew above.ii.C. of his
sedicious soldiers at this assaute.

As Soon as the messengers of Excetter came to the kings presence and showed
their instruccions, he hasted with his host toward Excetter with as much have as
the gravity of the cause did require and expostulate. And sent the lord
Daw^eney with light horsemen before to certefie all men of his coming at hand*
But in the mean ceason lord Edward Corteney ^rle of deuou^hire and lord
William his son, a man of great force and valiantnes, accompanied with Sir
Edmond Carewe, sir Thomas Trenchard, sir William Courteney, sir Thomas
Fulforde, sir Ihon Halewel, sir Iho^ Croker, Water Courteney, Peter Egeco^be,
William Se^tuaure, with all speed came into the cytee of Excetter and help the
citezens, and at the last assaute the Earl was hurt in the arm with an arowe,
and so were many of his company, but very few slain.

When Perkyn with his lewd capiteyns saw y^ the city of Excetter was so well
fortefied both with men and municions, and of them in manner impregnable,
fearing the sequel of this matter, departed from Excetter with his lowsy army
to the next great town called Tawnton, and there the.xx. day of September he
mustered his men as though he were ready to fight, but his number was sore
minished. For when the ^ore and nedy people saw the great defense which was
made at Excetter, and that no men of honor nor yet of honesty drew to him,
contrary to the promise and assurance made by him and his cou^celers to them
at the beginning, they with drew them selfs by sundry secret compaignyes
from him, in prouidyng their own sauegarde. Which thing when Perkyn
perceived, he put small trust and less confidence in the remnant of his army,
as afterward did appear, because the most part of his souldioures were
harnessed on the right arm and naked all the body, and never exercised in
war nor marciall feats but only with the spade and shouell.

When the king heard he was gone to Tawnton, he hastened after him with all
speed. Thither came to the king Edward duke of Buckyngham, a young prince of a
great courage and of a synguler good wit, and him followed a great compaignie
of noble men, knights and Esquyers, prepared and ready with all things
necessary for the field and battle. Amongst which number was sir Alexander
Baynam, Sir Mawrice Berkeley, Sir Robert Tame, Sir Ihon Guyse, Sir Robert
Poyntz, sir Henry Uernon, Sir Ihon Mortimer, Sir Thomas Tremayle, Sir Edward
Sutton, Sir Amise Pawlett, Sir Ihon Byckenel, Sir Ihon Sapcotes, Sir Hugh
Lutterell, Sir Fraunces Cheyney and many other knights, esquyers and valyaunte
personages. When the king approached nere to the town of Tawnton, whether the
would not de^erre and put of the battle, or whether he doubting the turn
of fortunes whele, sent before him Robert lord Brook lord Stuarde of his
house, Gyles lord Dawbeney his chief chamberlayn, and Sir Rice app Thomas, to
set on his enemies and begin the battle, and he with his power followed, to
thentent that when the armies couped and joined together, he either should with
new succors refreshe his own army or else set on the back of his enemies
or they could epsy him. Albey^ the king had no great need to use such
pollecy if he had known what sequel had ensued. For as soon as Perkyn was
informed y^ his enemies were ready to give him battle, he that nothing less
minded then to fight in open field with the kings puissaunce, dissimuled all
y^ day time with his company* as though nothing could make him afeard, and
about mydnight being accompanied with.lx. horsemen departed from Tawnton in
post to a sanctuary town beside Southhampton called Beaud^ley, and there he
and Ihon Heron and other registered them selfs as persons priuileged. But
whether Perkyn did this for fear, least his men should forsake him, or for
the cowardenes of his own tymorous courage, it is as much uncertain, as it is
probable and sure that the king took by his flight great commoditee and
quietness, by reason y^ he was not enforced to fight with y^ Cornysh men, whose
hart^s and courages were so increased and inflamed by deadly desperacion that
they earnestly determined and were steadfastly bent either to win victory and
overcome their enemies or ^lles not one of them all to live any day or hour
longer

When king Henry knew y^ Perkyn was fled and departed he sent after him y^ lord
Dawbeney with.v.C. horsemen toward y^ see side to intercept him before he should
come there. But Perkin whom y^ matter touched at y^ quick, made such haste
with the swiftnes of his horse and sharpenes of his spurs that he was so
far passed on his way before, y^ no person could tell tidings of him, before
he regestred and disclosed him self in the sanc^uarye. But his chief
Capiteines which fled, could not so craftily escape, for the most part of
them were apprehended, and as capitues and wretches, miserably presented to
the king. When the resydewe of the common people could neither see Perkyn nor
yet the standards nor guyd^homes of their capiteynes, not knowing where he was
become, doubtyng whether he were fraudulently slain or fearfully fled, wist not
what council to ask or what way was most surest to follow and take. But
when they were asserteined of his most shameful flight, every person
oppressed with this common mischief, common fear, and common perell, castyng
away their armure, submitted them selfs to the king, holdyng up their hands
in askyng mercy, offering and promisynge him, faith, loyalty and obeysaunce.
To whom the king of most gentle heart and leuytee, not only granted perdon
but received them to his favor. And so the king b^ynge a conqueror
without manslaughter or effusion christen of blood road triumphantly into the
cytee of Excetter, and there not only lauded and preised the cyteze^s of
Excetter, but also re^dred to them his most hearty thanks, as well for their
duty done as for their valiauntnes. And there also he afflicted and put in
execusyo^ diverse Cornishmen which were the aucthoures and sturrers up of this
new insurreccion and false conspiracy.

The horsemen yt were sent, without any stop or obstacle in short space came to
saint Mighelles mount, and there (as chance was) found lady Katheryn Gorden
wife to Perkyn and brought her straight like a bondewoman and captyue to the
king. And the king wonderyng at her beauty and amyable countenance thought
her a pray more mete for the chief captain then for the mean souldioures,
began then a little to fantasy her person and sent her incontinently
accompanied with a goodly sort of sad ^atrones and gentlewome^ (because she was
but a you^ge woman) to London to the queen as a true and undoubted token of his
triumph and victory. And while he reposed him self at Excetter, he judged
that he had nothing won, nor yet plucked up by the root of this sedicious
rebellion, except he could get into his possession the chief h^d and type of
this pestiferous faccion and busynes. Wherefore he enuyroned the sanctuary
which Perkyn was in, round about with.ii. compaignies of light horsemen,
well wytted and vigelant persons, to thentent to bereue and pluck from Perkyn
all hope of flight and ^^capynge away. And after that, he attempted this
young foundelyng by trusty and polletique messengers, if he having perdon and
remission of all mischeuous and heinous offenses by him done against the king
and his realm, would gladly submyt him self to the king and be to him
feithfull true and obedient. Perkyn being now destitute of all hope, faylynge
of his dwelling place, and lacking comfort, aid and refuge considering that
he was now brought to the very poyncte and prick of extremytee that he wist
not whether nor how to fly into any country for succor, and also he was in
vttre despair to have herafter any prosperous chance or fortunate success in
his enterprice, because he had so often attempted and so many times had been
defoyled and vanquished, wherefore he having his perdon to him offered, and
trusting to the open promise of me^, of his own will franckly and freely
departed out of sanctuary and committed him self to the kings pleasure, and
of by this means this great heat was quenched and appeased.

Then was the king verey glad that this war was ended, and took his journey
imediatly toward London, not without a great concurse of people metynge him
out of every quarter to see this Perkyn as he were a Monstre, because he
being an alien of no abilitee by his poor parents (although yt was other
wise talked and dissimuled) durst once invade so noble a realm, and yt to
infecte with such lies and lesynges, and chiefly of all that he by his crafty
subornacions had persuaded diverse as well noble as ignoble (not without the
confusion and undoing of many of them) to believe and say that he was the same
verey person that he feigned and peynted him self to be. But when the king
was come to London, he appoyncted certain kepers to attend on him which
should not (the breadth of a nail) go from his person, to thentent that he
might neither conueigh him self out of the land, nor fly any whether, nor
yet provoked and procured by other should be hable to so we again no new
sedicion nor sedicious tumult within his realm and countries.

When these tidings came to the lady Margarete in Flanders that Perkin her
dear darlyng had no good luck but loss, both of his entreprice and her great
studious furtheraunce, and was brought into captiuitee, she was not well
pleased with them, but wept and lamented his unlucky speed, and cursed her
unfortunate chance.

When these things were brought to pass according to the kings mind, he
did not forget that there was no more a delectable and pleasant thing, nor a
larger reyne of mischief given to y^ vulgar people, then to have a sure hope
and trust that they may offend without any punishment or corr^ccion: Wherefore
to thente^t herafter to observe his people in a dew obeysaunce and filial
subieccion, he shortly caused inquyries to be made of diverse offenses.
Whereupon diverse persons as well in so merset shire as devonshire were accused
and presented y^ they had aided both with me^ and money y^ Cornysh treytours, not
only after their dis^o^fiture in returnyng homeward, but also in their marchyng
forward ente^dyng to make battle against y^ king being their sovereign and
liege lord. All which offe^ders he determined to plague and skourge according
to y^ qua^titee of their crime and offense with great fines and sore assesme^tes.
And therefore he committed this charge to Thomas lord Dar^y, to Amiss Paulet
knight and Robert Sherborne Deane of Paul's afte^ bishop of Chechester.

These commisioners like a whirlewynde tossed and perced y^ cofers and
substance of althe inhabitauntes of both the countres, to thentent y^ no
person being embrued or spotted with y^ ynk^ of y^ abominable crime, should
escape y^ pain which he worthly had deserved: but they were gentle and
remiss to a great no^bre, and specially to such as offended by cohercion and
fear, rather then of malicious heart or ^^uio^s mind. Yet were they to none
so favorable but they were thought for their defaultes worthy of some
punishment, so that equite therein was very well and ius^ly executed.

The.xiiii. year.
IN this year a sod^yne chance, ye a thing of no moment nor worthy to be
regarded had almost so kyndeled again y^ old displea^ure and grudge between
king Henry and king James of S^etla^d, y^ they could scace keep their hands
and bridle their courages from war and fighting. The first mocion of this
displeasure was thus: Certain young men of y^ Scotts came armed unto Norha^
castle and beheld it wo^derous circumspectly* as though they had been desirous
to know what was done there wtin: But when y^ kepers of y^ castle could not
perceive any hos^ilitee or damage toward him or his, and seeing them depart
of their own accord determined it not convenient to mo^e any question to
them nor once to stir out. But when they came again y^ next day and viewed
it likewise, the kepers of thesaide castle suspectynge some fraud to lurcke in
their lookynge, demanded of them what was their intent, and why they vewed
and advised so the castle. The Scotts even like them selfs, answered them
proudly and rustically with many disdeynfull words. Insomuch that after their
blusteryng and blowyng aunswers made, Thenglishmen being vexed and moved there
with all, replied to them with hard and manly strokes, and after many a sore
blow given and taken on both parts, and diverse Scotts wounded and some
slain, the Scotts oppressed with the multitude of Thenglish people, fled as
fast as their horses would carye them. When they came home and certified the
king of the same, he was therewith sore moved and and angry, and swear by sweet
saint Ninyan y^ there was nothing to him more inconstant and unsteadfast then
the obseruyng of the league by the king of England, and sent word there of to
king Henry in all have by Marchemount his heraulde.

The king of England which nothing more embraced and desired then quiet
tranquilitee and perfighte love and amity with all princes being his
neighbors and borderers, to thentent that he might live in his later days in
an honest and quiet life after so many labou^es and vexacions even from his
infancye drawn and exercised in, made him answer that it was not done
through his defaulte, neither by his council nor knowledge, but rather by the
temerarious folly of y^ kepers of the castle, requyrynge him for that cause
not to think the league infringed, promisyng in the word of a king to
enquyer of the truth and who were the malefactoures. And if y^ offense were
found to be bego^ne on the party of the kepers of the castle, he assured him
that they should for no mede or favor eskape pain and punishment. This
answer although it were more then reasonable, could not mittigate or assuage
the the Scotts anger and outrageousnes, for the which cause, Richard bishop
of Durham, which was more heavy then all other because that this discord was
renewed again between these two princes by occasion of Castle kepers, he
therefore thought yt best first to assuage and cool the furious rage of the
Skottyshe king, and wrote many letters to him, requyrynge him of peace and
unity. The king perceiving both the good will and constant grauytie of the
bishop, appeased his fury and answered gentely to the bishops letters by
writynge again to him, saying that because he had many secret and preuy
things in his mind which he would communicate only with him touching the
cause now in variaunce, he therefore required him to take pain to come into
his country, trustyng that he should think his labor well bestowed. The
bishop was very glad and sent word to the king his master, of king James
desire, who esteemed the request and cause both just and reasonable, and
therefore willed him to accomplish ye Scottish kings honest desire.

When he came into Scotland, he was received with all humanitee that could be
thought of the king him self at an Abbey called Mellrose. And there, after
that the king for a countenance had complained much of the cruelty and
s^aughter that was used toward his men late at Norham, he ^asely remitted the
offense and perdoned it, and began secretly to common without any witnesses or
arbitters nere hand with the bishop alone. And first declared to him what old
and ^uste causes have moved him before this, to seek al^au^ce and amity with
king Henry, which now he desired much more to have confirmed and cor^oborate
for the farther mayntenaunce of love and increase of friendship, which thing he
doubted not, but should sort to a ^ortunate effect and good conclusion, if ye
king of England would vouchsafe to give to him in matrimony his first begotten
daughter y^ lady Margaret, upon which point he determined not long agone to
send his Amba^sadors into England, which thing he would the sooner do if he
knew this bishops mind and intent ready to further his loving purpose. The
bishop au^swered but few words, saving y^ when he were returned to the king
his master, he would do the best in ye matter yt lay in his power. Which
words animated much the king, and put him in good hope to send his orators
to the king of England to sue for thesaide matrimony to be concluded.

When the bishop had taken his leave, and was come to the king* he declared to
him in order all the co^municacio^ between king James and him. This request
pleased the king very much, to whom peace was ever a souereygn cordial, and
determined su^ely to minister o^casio^ of war to no man, nor would have any
prince to provoke him to the same.

Now began the fatal day of the death of Perkyn Warbeck, and Edward earl of
Warwick to approach: For after this fact done and committed, one fierce and
strong wave devoured and swalowed both their lives not long asonder, as you
shall hear by ye co^tinuaci^ of this story. Perkyn, whether it grieved him to be
kept inward, or else that he was ins^igated and en^ised by some of his old
fre^des to stir more coals, and begin some new sedicious faccio^, or at the
least, because he would wilfully wast and cast away him self, studied how to
escape and fly away, having perfight hope y^ he should find occasion to bring
al things well to pass, if he could co^ueigh him self once out of the
Englishmens hands. And although he were not ignorant, that he neither could
do nor ymagyn any thing but the king would both hear of it and know it: Yet
he seduced with hope of evasion and skapyng, which was the chief comfort of
his captivity, had lever put all things in a proof and hasarde, rather then
le^ger to tolerate and suffer the present calamyte and daily misery. And so
deceauyng his kepers took him to his heels, by y^ which he brought him self
into a streyghter custody and prison, and wrapped him self into tortures and
punyshmentes: For when he came to the sea coasts, and had gone but a little
forward on his journey, when the rumor of his flight was spread abroad,
every byway and lane was set abroad with the kings guard, which had y^
custody of his body. Wherefore he being sore abashed wtthe clamor of them that
searched and made inquyrie for him, and being in manner destitute of wit and
counsel, altered of necessite from his pretensed journey, and came to the
house of Bethlem, called ye priory of Shene beside Rychemo^d in Southrey, and
committed him self to the pryor of ye monastery, requyring him for Godssake to
ask and desire his life and perdo^ of the kings majesty. The pryor, which
for his verteous qualities was had in great estimacion, moved with y^ calamytie
and unfortunate state of this man, came to the king and showed him of this
Perkyn, whose perdon he humbly craved, and franckely obtained it. Incontinent
after this, Perkyn was brought to the court again to Westmynster with many a
curse and reproach, and was one day set fettered in a pair of stocks, before
the door of Westmynster hall, and there stood an whole day, not without
innumerable reproaches mockes and skorninges. And y^ next day was carried
thorough London, and set upon a like skaffolde in Chepe by the sta^dard, with
like gynnes and stocks as he occupied the day before, and there stood al day
and red openly his own confession written with his own hand, the very copy
whereof hereafter ensues.

First it is to be known, that I was borne in the town of Turney in
Flaunders, and my fathers name is Ihon Os^eck, which said Ihon Osbeck was
co^ptroller of thesayde town of Turney, and my mothers name is Katheryn de
Faro. And one of my grauntsires upon my fathers side was named Diryck Osbeck
which dyed, after whose death my grauntmother was married unto the withinnamed
Peter fla^me, y^ was receauer of the forenamed town of Turney, and Deane of
the botemen y^ towe upon the water or River, called Leschelde. And my
grau^tsire upon my mothers side was Peter de Faro, which had in his keeping ye
keys of the gate of saint Ihons wtin the same town of Turney. Also I had an
uncle called master Ihon Stalyn, dwelling in y^ parish of saint Pyas within
the same town, which had married my fathers suster, whose name was Ione or Jane,
with whom I dwelled a certain ceaso^. And afterward I was led by my mother to
Andwerp for to learn Fle^mishe, in a house of a cousyn of mine, an officier of
thesaid town, called Iho^ Stie^ beck, with whom I was y^ space of half a year.
And after y^ I returned again to Turney, by reason of y^ wars y^ were in
Flanders. And wtin a year following I was sent with a merchau^t of y^ said town
of Turney named Berlo, and his Masters name Alexander, to the mart of Andwarpe
where I fell sick, which sickness continued upon five months.

And thesayde Barlo set me to boorde in a skynners house that dwelled beside
the house of the English nation. And by him I was from thence carried to Barowe
mart, and I lodged at the sign of the old man, where I abode the space of
two months. And after this the said Barlo set me with a merchaunt of
Middelboroughe too service, for to learn the language, whose name was Ihon
Strewe, with whom I dwelled from Christmas till Easter, and then I went into
Portyngale, in the company of Sir Edward Bramptones wife, in a ship which
was called the queen's ship. And when I was come thither, then I was put in
service to a knight that dwelled in Lushborne, which was called Peter Ua^z de
cogna, with whom I I dwelled an whole year, which said knight had but one
eye. And because I desired to see other countries, I took license of him, and
then I put my self in service with a Bryton, called Pregent Meno, y^ which
brought me with him into Ireland, and when we were there arrived in the town
of Cork, they of y^ town, because I was arrayed with some clothes of sylke of
my said maistres, came unto me and threped upon me y^ I should be ye duke of
Clare^ce son y^ was before time at Deuelyn. And forasmuch as I denied it,
there was brought unto me ye holy evangelist and the Cross by ye Mayre of the
town, which was called Ihon le Wellen, and there in ye presence of him and
other I took mine oath as ye truth was, y^ I was not the foresaid dukes son,
nor none of his blood. And after this came unto me an Englisheman, whose name
was Stephen Poytron, with one Ihon water, and laid to me in swearing great oaths
that they knew well y^ I was king Rychardes bastard son: To whom I au^swered
with like oaths y^ I was not. And then they aduysed me not to be a fearde, but
y^ I should take it upon me boldly, and if I would so do, they would aid and
assist me with all their power against the king of England, and not only they,
but they were assured well y^ the earls of Desmo^d and Kyldare should do
the same. For they forced not what party they took, so yt they might be reue^ged
upon the king of England, and so against my will made me to learn English, and
taught me what I should do and say. And after this they called me duke of
York, second son of king Edward y^.iiij. because king Rychardes bastard
son was in ye hands of the king of England. And upon this ye said Iho^
water, Stephyn Poytron, Ihon Tyler, Hughbert Burghe with many other, as the
foresaid Earls, entered into this false quarrel. And within short time after,
the French king sent an Ambassador into Ireland, whose name was loyte Lucas,
and master Stephyn Frya^, to advertise me to come into France. And thence I
went into France, and from thence into Flanders, and from Flanders into
Ireland, and from Ireland into Scotland, and so into England.

When night of the same day, which was the.xv. day of Iuyne was come (partly
because the king had perdoned him his life, and partly because he should no
more run away, and put the king in doubt of any mistrust or misfortune to
come) he was committed to the Tower of London, where his wickedness boylinge so
hoate within his cancarde stomach would not suffer him to escape the
punishment and vengeance of God, but shortly after was most justly and
worthily put to death, as hereafter shall be showed.

The xv. year.
EDward Plantagenet earl of Warwike, of whom ye have heard before, being kept
in the Tower almost from his tender age, that is to say, from his first year
of the king to this xv. year, out of al company of me^ and sight of beasts, i^
so much that he could not decerne a Goose from a Capon. And where as he by
common reason and open apparau^ce, could not by his own doings seek his death
and destruccio^, yet by y^ dryft and offense of another man, he was brought to
his end and co^fusio^. For a freer Augustyn on y^ border of Suffolk called
Patricke, to thentent to bring this earl into dis^ayn and hatred, had a certain
skoler called Raufe Wiltord, whom he greatly favored, and in whose head he
ever distilled and enfused this folishe and fa^tastical co^ceipte, y^ if he
would follow his cou^sail and advise, he would casely co^uey him to y^ kingdom
of England. The skoler like a good disciple, did not deny to follow his masters
discipline and cou^sail, but more and more desired and put his master in
remembrance to perform and accomplish with all speed, y^ thing which of his awn
liberalite, he before had to him both promised and assured, saying, what
Mecocke or dastard is so sore afearde of tra^sgressing ye law, or tymerous of
punishment, y^ which for to obtain a kingdom will not attempt to do, and suffer
all things y^ be possible to be assayed and tasted? So y^ when they between
the^ selfs secretly had taken a crafty deliberacio^ and cou^sailed of their
enterprice, and had devised in their folish wits, how it should be brought to
pass, they went both together in to Kent (which country in ancient time has
not been dull in settinge forth of new fantastical fantasyes) and there
began this young mawmet to tell preuely to many that he was the very earl of
Warwike, and lately gotten out of the Tower, by y^ help of this freer
Patricke. To the which sayings when the freer perceived hope to be given, he
declared it openly in the pulpet, and desired all men of help.

But the head of this sedicion was summer topped, that it could have no time
to spring any higher, the Master and the skoler being both apprehended and
cast into prison, and attaynted. Of the which two, the skoler was hanged on
Shrouetuesdaye, at sayncte Thomas waterynges, and the freer was condemned to
perpetual prison and captivity. For at that time here in England, so much
reverence was attributed to the holy orders, that to a priest, although he had
committed high treason against his souereygne lord and to all other,
offenders in murder, rape or theft, which had received any of the.iii. higher
holy orders, the life was given, and the punyshmente of death released. The
chief cause of this favor was this, because Bisshoppes of a long time and
ceason did not take knowledge, nor intermit them selves with the search and
punishment of such heinous and detestable offenses, by reason whereof they did
not disgrade and depryue from the holy orders such malefactors and wicked
persons, which without that ceremony, by the canonical law could not be
put to death. Furthermore, what should a man say, it was also used that he
that could but only read (ye although he understood not what he read) how
heinous or detestable a crime so ever he had committed (treason only except)
should likewise as affines and alyes to the holy orders be saved, and
committed to the Bishops prison.

And to thentent that if they should escape, and be again taken, committing
like offense, that their lives should be no more to them perdoned, it was
ordained that murderers should be brent on the brawne of the left hand with
an hot Iron signed with this lettre M, and thieves in the same place with this
lettre T, So yt if they, which were once signed with any of these marks or
tokens did reiterate like crime and offense again. should suffer the pains and
punishments, which they had both merited and deserved. Which devise was
enacted and established in ye Parliament kept in the.ii. year of this kings
reign, and taken as I conjecture of the French nacio^, which are wont, if
they take any such offender, to cut of one of his ears, as a sure token and
mark hereafter of his evil doing. And the charge of keeping such offenders,
that be only imprisoned by their offenses, because it sounds to spiritual
religion is committed to the bishops and rulers of the spirituality, with a
penalitee set upon the^ if any such prisoner do afterward escape. The which
act and privilege did norish and encreace abou^dantly the (...) and swarm of
thieves and murderers, for after y^ time there were an hundred ways practiced
and invented how at one time or another, to deliver or convey the^ out of
prison and captivity, by maki^g their purgacio^ (by what slight and means
they care not) of such offenses as before they were convinced and found
gyltye, if no man be present to lay excepcions to the same. For if the party
offended and hurt be absent at the day of the purgacio^ making, the thief or
murderer truly found gilty from the beginning, shall be both excused and set
at liberty. And oftentimes the sooner, because the bishop would not lose so
great a sum as an hundred pound, for the escape of a poor knave, skant
worth a dandyprat: But now to return to our matter again.

Perkyn (of whom rehersall was made before) being now in hold, could not
leave with the destruction of him self, and co^fusio^ of other that had
associate the^ selfs with him, but began now to study which wai to fly and
escape. For he by false persuasions and liberal promises, corrupted
Strangweyes, Blewet, Astwood and long Rogier his kepers, being servants to
sir Ihon Dygby lieutenaunt. In so much that they (as it was at their araynme^t
openly proved) ente^ded to have slain thesayde Master, and to have set Perkyn
and the earl of Warwyke at large, which earl was by them made preuy of this
enterprice, and thereunto (as all natural creatures love liberty) to his
destruction assented,

But this crafty device and subtle imaginacion, being opened and disclosed,
sorted to none effect, and so he being repulsed and put back from all hope and
good luck with all his accomplices and confederates, and Ihon Awater, sometime
Mayre of Corffe in Irelande, one of his fou^ders, and his son, were the
sixten day of Nouembre arreyned and condemned at Westmynster. And on the
three and twenty day of the same month, Perkyn and Ihon Awater were drawn to
Tyborne, and there Perkyn standing on a little skaffolde, read his confession,
which before you have heard, and took it on his death to be true, and so he
and Ihon Awater asked the king forgeuenes and dyed pacie^tly. (...)
This was the reward of the pernicius Alye and coment of Perkyn Warbeck,
which as in his life with false persuasions and untrue surmises had brought
many noble personages to death and utter perdicion so at his death he brought
with him other of the same sort to their not undeserved ponyshment. And
emo^gest other Edward earl of Warwick, which as the fame went, consented to
break prison, and to depart out of the realm with Perkyn (which in prisoners
is high treason) was the.xxi. day of thesayde month arreygned at Westmynster
before the earl of Oxforde, then high Constable of England, of thesaide
^reason* which whether it were by the enticeme^t of other or of his own
frewill (many men doubt, because of his innocence) confessed the fact and
submitted him self to the kings mercy. And upon his confession he had his
indgement* and according thereunto, the.xxviii. day of Nouembre.M.cccc.xcix.
was brought to the skaffolde on the Tower hill, and there behedded. The fame
after his death sprange abroad, y^ Ferdinand king of Spain would never make
full conclusion of the matrimony to be had between prince Arthur and the lady
Katheryn his daughter, nor send her into England aslonge as this earl lived.
For he imagened that as long as any earl of Warwick lived, that England
should never be cleansed or purged of Cyuyle war and preuy sedicion, so much
was the name of Warwyke in other regions, had in fear and gealousy.

The next year after there was a great plague, A great death
whereof men dyed in many places very sore, but specially and most of all in
the city of London, where dyed in that year thirty thousand. Also in this year
was burned a place of the kings called the manner of Shene Situate, and liynge
nygh the Thamys side, which he after builded again sumpteously and co^^ly* and
changed the name of Shene, and called it Rychemond, because his father and he
were earls of Richemonde. The king perceiving this plague and contagious
disease, rather to increase then diserease, whether it was to aduoyde the
occasion of the sickness, or to allure the archeduke Philip of Burgoyne to
comme^ with him, he personally took his ship at Dover, in the beginning of
May, and sailed to Caleys, to thentent to provide and see the watches, which
have been accustomed to be diligently kept and maynteyned against the
incursio^s of his adversaries, and there he made polletique ordinances and
streyte laws. While the king lay thus at Caleys, the archeduke Philip sent to
him diverse notable personages, not alonely to gratefie and welcome him into
those parts, but also to declare that thesayde Archeduke offered to repair
personally to his presence, with such a number as the king should appoint,
so that it were within no walled town or fortress. For he had before diverse
tynnes made denial to the French king to enter into any of his walled tounes,
and if he should as he gladly would come to the town of Caleys, it might be a
president to ye French king to desire like meting, what chance thereof might
fall, every man could not judge. The king gentely entreteyned the
Ambassadors, but more thankefully accepted the Archedukes offer, and so
appointed the place at saint Peter's church without Caleys. Upon the Tuesday
in Pentecost weke, the Archeduke came thither with a convenient company. The
king and the queen with many a lusty lord and lady rode thither to welcome
him. And when the king approached, the duke at his lightnynge offered to hold
his styrope, which the king in no wise would suffer to be done. When the king
was dissended from his horse he and the Archeduke embraced each other with
most princely familiarity, and then the queen and all the nobles saluted him.
What banquettynge, what myrthe and what pass time there was I pass over. But
to conclude, there was communicacion of marriages, treating of farther
corroboracion of leagues, requests of tolles in Flaunders to be mynished, with
many other things, touching thentreprice and traffic of both their
realms. And when all things were set in an order, the two princes lovingly,
took their leave and departed, the king to Caleys, and the Archeduke to saynct
Omers.

After this departing, the French king Jews the.xii. sent to visit the
king, the lord Gronthouse gouernoure of Picardy, and the lord Merneiliers,
bailey of Amyas, which declared to the king the getting of Millayn, and taking
of the duke, which lords were highly feasted and with great rewards departed.

The.xvi. year.
SOne after when this plague was slaked, the king returned again to England,
about the end of June: And being come into England, sone after there came to
him one Gasper Pous a Spanyard (both for learning and good behaueour very
excellent) sent from Alexander bishop of Rome, A year of Iubile.
which should show the Englishmen the right way to heaven. Therefore that
year was called the year of Iubile, which was the year of our Lord a thousand
five hundred. And to thente^t that the people of far countries might be cased
of their labor and traueyle in coming thither, the charitable father sent
his legates into every country to destribute the heavenly grace (as he called
it) to all Christen people, which either let by war, enemies, infirmity,
weakness or tediousnes of the long journey, were not hable to perform their
journey to y^ holy city of Rome. But this beneuolent liberlitie was not
francke and freely given: For the holy bishop Alexander, with helping and
lokynge to the health of men's souls, thought somewhat to do for his own
private commodity and singular wealth, and therefore he limited and set a
certain price of this his grace and pardon: and to the end that y^ king should
not hyndre nor let his purpose, he offered part of this his gayn unto the king.
And that the people might the sooner mynishe their purses, and enryche his
chestes, he promised that he would in the beginning of the year make war in
all the have against the great Turcke. By this means and pollecy, this
Alexander gat, accumulated and heaped up a great sum of money, and yet no
battle begone again the Turcke, which in the mean ceason had taken,
conquered and destroyed many regions, cities and tounes belonging to Christen
men, but God amend all that is amiss.

About this tune dyed.iii. Bishops in England, Ihon Morton bishop of
Caunterbury, Thomas Langto^ bishop of Winchester, and Thomas Rotheram bishop of
York. After him succeeded Thomas savage bishop of London, in whose place
succeeded doctor William Warham of whom we made mencio^ before. And Henry deane
bishop of Salisbury was made archbishop of Canterbury. Also Richard Fox
bishop of Durha^, was prefected to the bishoprike of Winchestre. Also this year
two notable marriages were concluded and agreed upon, but neither sole^pnised
now, nor co^summate as you shall here afterward. For king Henry granted his
daughter lady Margaret to James the.iiii. king of Scotts. And Ferdina^d king
of Spain gave his daughter lady Katheryn to Arthur prince of Wales, son and
heir apparaunt to y^ king of England. And it is to be considred y^ king Henry
did not join this affinity with the king of Scotts without cause: For he
desiringe nothing more, then to pass over the remanant of his life in peace,
rest and tranquilitee, ymagened in him self y^ by this coniunccion and
coupleme^t of matrimony, no war or hostilitee hereafter should be attempted
either against him or his dominions by the Scottishe king or his nation, having
sure trust that none other of his enemies or of his rebels should hereafter
be received or maynteyned in the dominions and territories of his son in
law. And amongst all other articles this was concluded and appointed, that no
Englishmen should enter into Scotland, without letters co^mendatorie of their
own souereign lord, or saueconduyte of his wardeyn of the marches, and that
prohibicion was in like manner given to the Scotts.

The.xvii. year.
YOu have heard before, how that the marriage was agreed between prince Arthur
of England, and the lady Katheryne of Spain, and how the king her father
promised to send her with great honor into England: He now this year
according to his promise conueyghed her with a puissaunt nauye toward England,
where she arrived in the port of Plymmoth the second day of October, then
being Saturday. When the king was certefied of her arryual, inco^tine^t he
sent both for prince Arthur his son into Wales to repair to London, and sent
diverse great lords and knights to co^uey her with triu^phe toward her spouse
and husband. And upon the.xii. day of Nouembre, she was conveyed from Lambeth
thorough London with all triu^phe and honor that could be devised or
ymagened, to the Bishops paleys, by the cathedral church of s. Paul's. And
because I will not be tedious to you, I pass over the wise devises, the
prudent speches, the costly works, the conninge portratures practiced and set
forth in.vii. goodly beutiful pageauntes erected and set up in diverse places
of the city. I leave also y^ goodly ballades, y^ sweet armony, the Musical
instruments, which sounded with heavenly noyes on every side of the street. I
omit farther, the costly apparel both of goldsmythes work and embraudery, the
rich iewelles, the massy cheynes, the s^^ ring horses, the beautiful bardes
and the glitteryng trappers, both with belles and spangles of gold. I
pretermit also the rich apparel of the pryncesse, the strange fasshion of
the Spanyshe nation, the beauty of the English ladies, the goodly demeanure
of of the young damsels, the amorous countenance of the lusty bachelors. I
pass over also the fine engrayned clothes, the costly furs of the citezens,
standing on skaffoldes, rayled from Gracechurche to Paul's. What should I
speak of the oderiferous skarlettes, the fine velvet, y^ pleasant, furs, the
massye chains, which the Mayre of London with the senate sitting on horseback
at the little conduyte in Chepe, ware on their bodies, and about their necks. I
will not molest you with rehersyng the rich arras, the costly tapestry, the fine
clothes both of gold and silver, the curious veluettes, the beautiful sattens,
nor the pleasant sylkes, which did hang in every street where she passed,
the wine yt ran continually out of the conduytes, the graueling and railing
of y^ streets needs not to be remembered.

While this princes soiorned for her recreacio^ in the Bishops paleys of
London, not without visitacio^ of the king, the queen and the kings mother,
there was erected in the body of saynct Paul's church, a long bridge made of
tymbre, extendynge from the West door of the church to the step at the
entering into the quere, which was six foot from the ground. On thesayde
bridge or staige, even directly before the consistory of the church was
eleuate a place like a mount, for eyghte persons to stand upon, compassed
round about with steps to assende and dissende, which was covered with fine
read worsted, and in likewise were all the rayles of thesayde staige. On the
Northside of this mount was a place furnished for the king and queen, and such
other as they appointed. On the Southside of the same mount stood the Mayre and
the Magistrates of London. When all preparacion was made, and al things set in
an order. Upon the day of saynct Erkenwalde, then being Sundaye, thesayde
lady was led to the same mount, and there prince Arthur openly espoused her,
both being cladde in white, both lusty and amorous, he of the age of fiftene
and more, and she of the age of.xviii. or there aboutes: The king and the
Queen, standing preuelye on their stayge. After the matrymonye celebrate, the
prince and his wife went up into the quere, and there herd a sole^pne mass
song by the Archbishop of Cauntourbury, associate with.xix. prelates mytred.
And after the mass fynished, the bryde was led homeward to to y^ Bishops
palace, by y^ duke of York, being then a goodly you^ge prince and the legate
of Spain. Next after followed the lady Cicile suster to y^ queen, supporting
the treyne of the spouse. After whom followed above an.C. ladies and
ge^tlewome^ gorgeously appareyled and richely adourned. There was kept that day
a sumpteous feast, and yet not so sumpteous as populous, nor yet so populous as
d^licate, nor so delicate as of all things abou^dau^t. For if I should rehearse
to you the value of.iiii. cupbordes that day showed and set forth beside the
plate that was occupied, or declare the riches of the hanginges, canapies or
clothe of estate, or set forth the number of disshes served at the.iiii.
courses and banquettes the deliver daunsinge and costly disguisinges, I assure
your y^ I should sooner fail then copye of mattre or haboundaunce of honor.
But every day ends, and night ensues, so when night was come, this lusty
prince and his beautiful bryde were brought and joined together in one bed
naked, and there did that act, which to the performaunce and full
consummacion of matrimony was most requysite and expedient. In so much that
his familier seruitours, which had then neither cause nor reward to lie or
feign, declared openly that in the morning h^ called for drink, which he
before times was not accustomed to do.

At which thing one of his chambrelaynes meruaylynge, required the cause of
his drouth. To whom he au^swered merely saying, I have this night been in the
midst of Spain, which is a hot region, and that journey makes me so dry,
and if thou had been under that hot clymate, thou would have been dryer
then I. Then shortly after the king and the queen with the new wedded spouses
went from Baynardes castle by water to Westmynster, on whom the Mayre and
comminaltye of London, in Barges garnished with standards, stremers and penons
of their device, gave their attendaunce. And there in the paleys were such
marciall feats, such valiant iustes, such vygorus turneys, such fierce
fight at the barreyers, and before that time was of no man had in remembrance.
Of this royal triumph lord Edward duke of Buckyngham was chief
chalengeour, and lord Thomas Gray Marquis dorcet was chief defendoure which
with their aids and compaygnions, bare them selfs so valyauntly that they
obtained great laud and honor, both of the Spanyardes and of their
countrymen.

During the time of these iustes and triumph, were received into London an
Earl, a Bishop, and diverse noble personages, sent from the king of Scotts
into England, for the conclusion of the marriage between the laqdy Margaret the
kings daughter and him. Which Earl by porxie in the name of king James his
master, affied and contracted the said fair lady. Which assurau^ce was
published at Paul's Cross, the day of the conversion of saynct Paul, in
reioysynge whereof Te deum was song, and great fyers made through the city of
London. Which things as you have heard, being ^ully fynished and
accomplished the Ambassadors as well of Spain as of Scotland, took their
leave of the king, and not without great rewards departed into their
countries and habitacions.

When the Ambassadors were departed, the king entendynge to auaunce the
honor and reputacion of the prince his son, furnisshed him with men and
money largely, and sent him again into Wales, where he was before, to keep
liberal hospitalitee, and to mynystre to the rude Welshemen indifferent
justice. And least by reason of lack of experience he might err, he appointed
to him wise and expert cou^saylers, as sir Rychard Poole his kynsman, which was
his chief cha^berlayne, with whom were associate sir Henry Uernon, Sir Rychard
Croftes, Sir Dauy Philip, Sir William Udale, Sir Thomas Englefelde, Sir Peter
Newton knights. Ihon Waleston, Henry Ma^yon, and docter William Smyth, was
President of his counsel, and docter Charles, both were with him associate,
the one was afterward Bishop of Lyncoln, and the other Bishop of Herford. But
as of one fountain comes often both joy and sorrow, so I leave here to
speak more of joy of this marriage, considering the chance that shortly
after su^^^ded.

A few months before the marriage of prince Arthur, Edmonde Poole Earl of
Southfolfe, son to Ihon duke of Southfolke, and lady Elizabeth suster to king
Edward the.iiii. being stout and bold of courage, and of wit rash and hedy,
was endited of homicide and murder, for sleyng of a mean person in his rage
and fury. And although the king perdoned him whom he might justly have
condemned for that offense, yet because he was brought to the kings Benche
bar and arrey^ed (which fact he reputed to be a great mayme and blemysh to
his honor) took it seriously, and shortly after for this displeasure sledde
to slanders, without any license or saueconduyte given him of the king, to
the lady Margaret his awnt on the mothers side. Nevertheless, whether he was
s^urred by his preuy friends thereunto moved by the king, or whether he
trusting on his unviolated truth feared no daungier nor penalty, he returned
again, and excused him self so to the king that he was thought to be
gylteles and inculpable in any crime that could be objected to him, and
therefore he was permytted too go frankely at his liberty and pleasure.

But when this marriage of prince Arthyr was kept at London with great pomp and
solempnitie, and that all the nobility were set on pleasure and solace, and
the King him self was pryncipally given too joy and reioysynge. This Edmond*
either for that he had been at great and excessyue charges at the same tryumphe
and solempnytie, and by reason thereof sore charged with debte. Either
solicited, allured and provoked by that old venomous serpent the duches of
Burgoyn, ever being the sower of Sedicion and begynner of rebellion against y^
king of England* or else stimulate and pricked with envy, which could not
patiently with open eyes se and behold king Henry, being o^ y^ adverse line
to his lignage, so long to reign in wealth and felicite, in conclusion with
his brother Richard fled again into Flaunders. This sad chance (I think)
happened emonge the great joys and solaces of king Henry, least that he
might not by ouermuche gladness sod^ynly forget him self: Which displeasure
at another time before to have chanced, it is manifest and well known to you.

When the king understood certainly that this earl was departed and returned
again, he was not a little vexed and vnquyeted, mistru^tynge that some new
tumulteous busynes should be begone again, and chiefly therefore blamed him
self of folishe folly that he had given him his pardon for his offense, lately
committed. Although it was manifest enough that he did it for this purpose,
that he might dissemble and wyncke at the matter so long until such time, he
had some sure token and perfight knowledge of his coniuracion, the which he
perceived now to be ^urely attempted and begone, as soon as Edmonde de la
poole earl of Suffolk was fled again into Flanders. Sir Robert Curson, whom
the king had promoted to the order of knyghthod, and made captain of ^ammes
castle, as valeaunt and a circumspect man, dissimulyng him self to be one of
that conspiracy went into Flanders, doubtless to espy what was done there by
the lady Margaret against king Henry. This opynion was setteled in every
man's head at the first brochynge of the matter, and so yet contynu^th,
groundyng upon this prynciple, that he neither vexed nor molested with any
point of displeasure or injury by his prince or any other fled to the kings
enemies. And after all things were known, opened, pacefied and suppressed, he
willyngely returned and was received into high favor with y^ king his master
and souereygne lord. Howebeit, the king like a wylye fox, knowing the
faythfyll intent of this sir Robert, and ente^dynge to put him out of all
gealousy and suspicio^ with the lady Margaret, and Edmond de la poole, caused
thesayde earl and thesayde Sir Roberte Curson, and five persons more to be
accursed at Paul's cross the first Sunday of November, as enemies and
rebels to him and his realm. But howsoever it chanced, whether it were for
the easing of his heart, or for some preuy pollecye, the king after the marriage
of his son prince Arthyr, was so vigilant, so circumspect and so intentyue,
that he espied and tried out such as he knew, partly to be the mu^nters of
mischief against him, and partly to bear no good will or sincere affeccion
toward his person, that he could redely name and rehearse their names and
surnames, whereof a great part were with in few days after apprehended and
taken. And ^monge them, lord William Courtney, son to Edward earl of
Deuonshyre, a man of great nobilite, estimacion and virtue, which married lady
Katheryne, daughter to king Edward, lord William brother to Edmond, earl of
Southfolke, Sir James Tyrrell, Sir Ihon Wyndham. Both these Williams before
rehearsed were rather taken of suspicion and gelousy, because they were nere of
blood to the coniurators, then for any proved offense or crime. Wherefore the
lord William son to the earl of Devonshire, after the death of king Henry
the.vii. was delivered and set abroad at liberty, by the noble and famous
prince king Henry y^ viii. son to thesayd king, with whom after he was in
great favor and estimacion, but shortly after, when he began to exercise
him self in marciali feats and warlike study, he syckened of a disease,
called Plur^sis, of which malady, because it was strange and rare to the
Phisicians of England, he at the kings manoure of Grenewiche desessed, leuynge
one son behind him, to continue his stirpe and family.

The lord William, brother to Edmonde the earl of Southfolke had also greater
favor showed in prison, then he had before. And sir James Tyrrell, and Ihon
Wyndham, because they were traitors, and so attaynted the.vi. day of May,
they were on the Tower hill behedded. But when the earl of Southfolke heard
that some of his friends were put to execution, and some other committed to
perpetual prison and captivity, he was in a great agony and fear of him
self. And so beig clearly desperate to have any fortunate success in his
prete^sed enterprice, wandered about all Germany and France for aid and
succoure, proving if he could find any aid or succoure at their hands. But
when he perceived no steadfast ground to catch a^chor hold upon (to thentent
that in conclusion he might understand that a shameful death dew to a man for
his offenses and crimes cannot by man's help or man's reason, be either
eschewed or diuerted from him) he submitted him self under the obeysau^ce and
defense of Philip Archeduke of Austricke and Burgoyn, and earl of Flanders.
But Rychard his brother being an expert and polletique man, so craftily
conveyed, and so wisely ordered him self in this stormy tempest, that he was
not attrapped either with net or snare.

The king, not yet being out of doubt of all domestical sedicion and civil
discord, studied busely how to restreyne and keep in a streyte closure
diverse malefactors, which being partakers of this co^spiracy fled to sundry
sanctuaries, tariyng there till a fair day came to auau^ce foorthward their
enterprice. Whereupon he devised to keep the gates of all sanctuaries and places
priuileged, shut and well locked, so that none should issue out from thence to
perturbe and unquiet him, his realm or people. And for that intent he both
wrote and sent Ambassadors to Alexander, then bishop of Rome, desiring him by
his authority to adiudge and decerne all Englishmen being fled to sanctuary
or other places for treason, as enemies to Christ's faith, and scismatiques too
Christen religion, and as commen perturbers of the quiet people, and capitaynes
and prouokers of traiterous rufflinges, intreditynge and prohibityng the refuge
and privilege of sanctuary to all such persons as once had enjoyed the
immunitie and liberte of the same, and after had fled out, and ef^sones returned
again. Which thing after that the Bishop had granted, it was greatly to the
quyetnes and comfort of king Henry, and many through the fear of that
reproach and ignomony, converted them selves to goodness and dew subieccio^ of
their prince: Other also that were in securite, and out of all perel and
danger, durst not hasard them selves for fear of galtroppes or slippynge into
y^ fire.

When the king by his high pollecy had compassed and framed his affairs thus
to his purpose, suddenly happened a lamentable chance and lachrimable loss to
the king, queen and all the people. For that noble prince Arthur, the kings
^yrst begotten son, after that he had been married to the lady Katheryn his
wife.v. months, departed out of this transitory life, in his castle of
Ludlowe, and with a great funeral obseq^y was buried in the cathedral church
of Worcettre. After whose death the name of prince belonged to his brother duke
of York, his brother disseasyng without issue, and so without any creacion
ought to be called, except some cause apparaunt were the let and obstacle of
the same. Howbeit, the said duke upon suspicion of his brothers wife to be with
child, and that doubtfully thought by the expert and sage men of the princes
counsayl, was by a month and more delayed from his title, name and
pre-eminence, in the which season the truth might to women easily apere. It is
reported that this lady Katheryn thought and feared such dolorous chance to
come: For when she had e^braced her father, and taken her leave of her noble
and prudent mother, and sailed toward England, she was continually so tossed
and trumbled hither and thither with boisterous wyndes, that what for the rage
of the water and contraritie of the wyndes, her ship was prohibited diverse
times to approach the shore and take land.

The.xviii. year.
THe next year after queen Elizabeth, liynge within the Tower of London, was
brought a bed of a ^ayre daughter on Candelmas day, whcihe was there
christened and named Katheryn, and the.xi. day of the same month, thesayde
most verteous princes and gracious queen there desessed, and was with all
funeral pomp carried thorough the city of London to Westmynster and there
intimulate, whose daughter also tarried but a small ceason after her mother.

After the death of this noble princes which for her great virtue was commenly
called good queen Elizabeth, departed sir Re^gnold Breye knight of y^ gartier,
a very father of his country, a sage and a grave person and a fervent lover of
justice. In so much that if any thing had been done against good law or
equity, he would after an humble fassio^ pla^^y reprehende the king, and give
him good advertisement how to re^orme that offense* and to be more circu^spect
in another like case. Of the same virtue and honest playnnes was Ihon Morto^
archbishop of Ca^^terbury, which bishop dyed (as it is showed above) two
years before. So these.ii. persons were ever cohibetors and refre^^ers of the
kings wilful skope and unbridled liberty, where as the rude and ignorant
people say and affirm, that the^e counsayll infected and corrupted the kings
clean and immaculate conscience, contrary to his pryncely disposicion and
natural inclinacion. Such is ever the error of the common people: but surely
as long as the king would here and obey such as warned him of his office
royal and kyngely duty, he could in no wise err or swar^e aside. About
this time also dyed Henry archbishop of Cauntourbury, whose rowme doctor
William Warram bishop of London supplied. And to the bishoptick of London was
elected William Barnes, after whose death succeeded Richard Fitziames, a man of
a good lignage and great learning and virtue. In which year the.xviii. day of
February, the king at his palace of Westmynster, with all sole^pnite created
his only son Henry prince of Wales, earl of Chestre.etc. which noble
yo^gling succeeded his father, not only in y^ inheritance and regalite, but
also was to him equypole^t in honor, fame, learning and pollecye.

Maximilian the Emperor, hearing that queen Elizabeth was deceased, sent into
England a solemn Ambassade, of the which lord Ca^imire, Marquis of
Brandenburgh his cosyn, acco^panyed with a bishop, an earl and a great number
of gentlemen well appareyled, was principal ambassador, which were
triu^phantly received into London* and was lodged at Crosbyes place. This
Ambassade was sent for.iii. causes, one to visit and comfort the king, being
sorrowful and sad for the death of so good a queen and spouse. The.ii. for the
renouacion of the old league and amity. The.iii. which was not apparaunt, was
to move the king to mary the Emperors daughter y^ lady Margaret, duches
dowager of Sauoye. The first.ii. took effect, for the king upon Passion sunday
road to Paul's in great triu^phe, the said Marquis ^iding on his lefthand. And
there the bishop made to the king an excellent co^solatorie oracio^, concerning
the death of ye queen. And there also ye king openly swear to keep the new
renouate league and amity, during their.ii. lives. But ye third request,
whether ye let was on the ma^s part or womans side* never sorted to any effect
or conclusion. And so these things done, the Ambassadors returned sumpteously
and honorably rewarded.

All this winter was preparacio^ made for the conueya^^ce of the lady Margaret,
affied to the king of Scotts into Scotland. And when all things were ready
and pressed, the king removed the last day of Iuyn from Rychemond, having in his
company his said daughter, and came to Colyweston, where the co^^tesse or
Rychemond his motherthen lay. And after certain days of solace ended, the
king gave her his blessing with a fatherly exhortacion, and committed the
co^ueighaunce of her to the king her husbands presence, to the earl of
Surrey: and the earl of Northumberland was appointed as Wardeyn of the marches
to deliver her at the confynes of both the marches. Thus this fair lady was
conueyghed with a great company of lords, ladies, knights, esquyers and
gentlemen, till she came to Berwicke, and from thence to a village called
Lambreton kyrke in Scotland, wherethe king with the flower of Scotland was
ready to receive her, to whom y^ earl of Northumberland, according to his
commission delivered her. The Scotts that day, I assure you were not behind,
but far above, both in apparel and rich Jewels and massy chains: But
above other the earl of Northumberland, what for the riches of his cote, being
Goldsmythes work, garnyshed with perle and stone, and what for the costly
apparel of his henxmen and galaunt trappers of their horses, besides iiii.
hundred tall men, well horssed and appareled in his coolers, that he was
esteemed both of the Scotts and Englishmen, more like a prince then a subject.
Then was this lady conveyed to the town of Edenboroughe, and there the day
after, king James the.iiii. in the presence of all his nobility espoused
thesayde fair princes, and feasted the English lords, and showed to them
Iustes and other pastymes, very honorably, after the fassion of his rude
country. When al things were done and finished, according to their
commission, the earl of Surrey with all the English lords and ladies returned
into their country. geuynge more praise to the manhood, then to the good
manner and nurture of Scotland.

The.xix. year.
IN this year the king kept his high court of Parliament, in the which
diverse acts were concluded, which were thought necessary and expedient for
the preseruacio^ of the public weal. And emonge other things, it was
determined that thieves and murderers duly co^uicted by the law to dye, should
be burned in the hand, and committed to the Bisshops custody as I have before
declared. After this, certain money was granted to the king, by the whole
Parliament, and the goods of men outlawed were forfeyted and confisqued. There
was also called (as the manner is) a congregation of the clergy, to thentent,
that they with their treasure and money might auau^ce and prefer the common
wealth of the realm.

Hitherto we have showed you rough and sharp battles, pernicious and
sedicious, strife, tumulte, and the death of many noble and mean persons: Now
therefore let us here rehearse, the contencion of familier things, the g^awynge
at the hearts, and the freating of minds and vows, promises and requests
made of diverse persons.

King Henry, now drawing to age, and before this time, ever punched,
stimulated and pricked with the scrupulous stynges of domestical sedicion and
civil commocion, in so much that he more detested and abhorred intestine and
private war, then death or any thing more terrible. Wherefore he determined
so pollitiquely to provide that all y^ causes of such unquietness and mischief
to come, should be eradicate and ext^rped: which ymaginacion and purpose he
doubted not to compass and bring to effect. If he made low and abated the
courage of his subjects and vassalles, and especially of the rychest sort,
remembrynge the old proverb, that men through abundance of riches wax
more insolent, hedstronge and robustius, and that nothing is more to men
acceptable or desirous, then abou^daunce of treasure and plentye of money,
which people either for fear of lo^ynge, or hope of gaynynge of worldly
riches* desire ever either peace or war. But to thentent that men might not
think nor report that he which is their king constituted of God to revenge
all injuries to them done and committed, should oppress and wrongfully polle
and exact money of his subjects, he devised with him self by what honest
mean he might perform it. And thus deuisyng with him self, it came into his
head that the Englishmen did little pass upon the obseruacion and keeping of
penal laws or pecuniall statutes, made and enacted for the preseruacion of
the commen vtilitee and wealth. And therefore, if inquisicion were had of
such penal statutes, there should be few noble men, merchauntes, fermers,
husbandemen, grasyers nor occupyers, but they should be found transgressors
and violators of the same statutes. After that he had taken this counsayll, he
sought out the penal laws, and put them in execucion, and they that were
found offenders, were easily at the beginnynge fined and scourged. After that
he appointed.ii. masters and surueyers of his forfaytes, y^ one sir Richard
Empson, and the other Edmond Dudley, both learned in the laws of the realm.
And these two persons contended, which of them by most bryngyng in might
most please and satisfye his mastres desire and appetide. Wherefore in the
beginnynge, they armed with a company of accusers (commonly called promoters)
which brought to them the names of the offenders, esteemed and regarded so
much the gain of money, that they clearly forgate and banyshed out of their
remembrance their duetye present, the peril that might ensue, and the thank
and good will that they might have obtained, and yet they had warning of
great and sage persons to close their hands from such uncharitable doings
and cruel extremity, according to the Adage, the extremity of justice, is
extreme injury.

The.xx. year*
THe king, after that he had gotten a large and ample su^me o^ money, having
pity of the people, which crye^ to ^od daily for an end of their pilf^ynge,
of his (...) and gracious goodness toward his end thought it (...), and thus
determined, that these two extreme (...) ^h^ul^e be depryued of that office,
and the money from whom it was vniu^^ly ^^acted and extorted to be wholly
restored and delivered again: which being prevented with death, commanded it
by his last will and testament to be duly and truly performed, but in the
mean ^eason many men's co^^ers were emptied.

The xxi. year*
IN this very ceason, and the year of our lord a. M.D. and.vi Elizabeth queen
of Cas^e^l, wife to Ferdinande king of Arragon dyed without any issue ma^e, by
reason whereof th^heritaunce of Castle (because that kingdoms be not partible)
descended to lady Jane her eldest daughter by (...) Ferdinando, the which was
married to Philip archeduke of Austrich and Burgoyne, and earl of Flaundres.
Which kingdom he obtained by his wife, and had the possession of the same, and
was named, reputed and taken as king of Castle and Lion. Wherefore the ye^e
following, about the.vi. day of January, having a great navy prepared, he
sailed out of Flaunders with his wife toward Spain, but he had sailed no great
way before that a vygorous tempe^t, by reason of contra^^ete of wyndes
suddenly arose, the whole navy was tossed and chased with the waves, and
sudden sourges. In so much the wind having the mastry dispersed and
separated the ships asondre into diverse places on the coast of England. The
kings ship with two other vessels were blown by tempest on the West part
of the realm to the port of Weymouth in Dorset shyre. Then king Philip which
was not expert* and had not frequented the seas before, being fatigate and
vnquyeted both in mind and body, entryng the ship boat to refreshe and
repose him self a little, came a land contrary to the mind of his counsayll
and capitaynes, which forsawe and knew well that the same landynge should be
the occasion of longer tariynge there. When it was known that strange ships
were arrived, there came thither a great number as well o^ noble men as of
rural persons that dwells about that coaste, to repulse and beat away him
if he were their enemy. But when they perceived he was their friend and lover
and driven thither by force of wether, Sir Thomas Trenchard knight, the chief
of that company went to Philip king of Castle with all humanytie and
lowlynes, inuytynge and desiring him (if he would so vouchesaufe) to vysyte
his manner and mancion, which was even nygh at hand, trustyng thereby to have
great thanks of the king his master, if he could protract and cause him to
tarry there, until such time as king Henry were certefied of his arryual, to
whom with all diligent celerite, he sent diverse posts too notefie to his
grace of king Philippes landynge. This rumor being farther blown abr^ade of
this strange princes coming, in a short space there assembled together a
great multitude of people all a long the sea coast. And emonge other there
came first sir Ihon Carew with a goodly band of picked men. Which sir Ihon and
sir Thomas Trenchard entreated the king of Castle, not to depart until such
time as he had spoken with king Henry his louinge and faithful friend and
allye, assuryng him y^ he would repair thither within.ii. or.iii. days at
the most. King Philip excused him self by the necessity of his weighty
enterprice and importunate cause, affermyng that long tariyng in matters of
grauytie and dubious, ought to be excluded: wherefore he alleged that
protractynge of time might turn him to great prejudice, denyenge at the first
to exspect and tarry the coming of the king of England. But yet being
persuaded by reason in him self, y^ he might be let and interrupted, if he
would proffre once to go aborde too his ships again, at their gentle desire
and louinge contemplacion, assented to their humble peticion and request.

When king Henry was informed of his landynge, he was replenyshed with an
exc^dynge gladness, partly for to renew the old familiarity and
acquayntaunce, which they used at their last metynge, and partly for that he
trusted that his landynge in England should turn to his proffite and
commodity. Therefore first he wrote many and diverse letters to sir Ihon Carew,
and sir Thomas Trenchard, wyllinge and warning them withal kyndenes of
humanity to enterteyne the king of Castle, till he in person approached in some
place mete and conuenyent ^or the entreuiewynge and entreteignynge of so noble
a personage. Beside this he sent the earl of Arundell with many lords and
knights to accompany and attend upon him. Which earl, according to the
kings letters received him with.iii.C. horses all by torche light to the
great admiracion of all the straungiers.

King Philip seeing no remedy, but that he must needs tarry and abide, would
no longer gase after king Henryes coming, but took his journey toward
Wynsore Castle where the king lay. And five mile from Wynsore, the prince of
Wales acco^panyed with five earls and diverse lords and knights, and other to
the number of five hundred persons, most gorgeously appareled and richely
mounted, received him after the most honorablest fassion of entreteinme^t. And
within half a mile of Wyndsore, the king accompanied with the duke of
Buckyngham, and a great part of the nobility of his realm, saluted and
welcomed him, and so conveyed him to the castle of Wynsore, where beside many
triumphs and pastymes showed, he was made co^paignion of the noble order of the
Gartier. After him came to Wynsore his wife queen Jane, suster to the princes
dowager, late wife to pryn^^ Arthur. And after they two had concluded and
renouate their old league, and made a perpetual peace and continual amity
together: King Henry desired him to have Edmond de la poole e^le of Suffolk
his rebel to be delivered into his hands and possession. To whom the king of
Castle answered a while, that he was not within his rule or dominion, and
therefore it lay not in his power to render or deliver him. Although he
considred it to be a heinous and great offense to be the occasion and author
of the death of his g^st, which came to him ^or succor, and was received under
his proteccion and defense, yet when he perceived that neither excuse, nor yet
reasonoble argument could be accepted or allowed of king Henry (which
promised faithfully of his own offer to pardon, Edmond de la poole, of all
pains and execucio^s o^ death) he promised and granted to do and accomplish
all king Henryes desire and request: And so incont^ent caused thesayde Edmond
secretly to be sent for. After this king Henry entending to protract the time
till he might possess his pray, which he sore desyr^d, conveyed the king of
Castle unto the city o^ London, that he might see the head city o^ his
realm, and there led him from Baynardes castle by Chepe to Barkynge, and so
returned by Watlynge street again, during which time there was shot a
wonderful peale of gunnes out of the Tower, into the which he would not
^ntre, because (as you have heard before) he had auowed not to ^ntre the
fortress of any for^yn prince, in y^ which a garrison was maynteyned: And there
tariynge a little space, returned back with him. Then from London the king
brought him to Richemond, where were many notable ^eates of arms proved both
at the tylt and at the tourney and at the barriers.

In the mean ceason, Edmond de la poole which ever feared and mis^ru^^ed,
that the arriuyng in England of king Philip should be his (...) and final*
de^^ruccion, perceauinge well that there was no fart^er hope to be had in
foreyn princes and potentates, and trusting that (...) his life to him once
granted, that king Henry would briefly set him at his liberty and ^redome was
in manner content to return again into his native country, casting in his
mind farther, that if his hope and trust were defrauded and refelled yet at
the last he was sure to end his li^e, and be buried in the country where he
first entered into this variable world.

When all pa^tes and couenauntes between the kings of England and Castle were
appointed, couenaunted and agreed: King Philip took his leave of king Henry,
rendryng to him most hearty thanks for his high chere and princely
entreteynme^t. And being accompanied with diverse lords of England, came to
the city of Excettre, and so to Fulmouth in Cornewale, and there took his
ship and sailed into Sp^yne* where he shortly being taken with a sodeyn
disease, departed out of this transitory life, being then but.xxx. years of
age. He had by his wife and queen Jane.vi. children, two men children Charles
and Ferdinand, and four daughters, Eleanor, Isabel, Mary and Katherin. He was
a man of stature convenient, of countenance amiable and lovely, The
descripcion of king Philip.
of body somewhat crasse and corpule^t, quycke wytted, bold and hardy stomaked.
This tempest that the king of Castle had, was wonderful strange to many men,
because the violencie of the wind had blown down an Egle of brass, being
set to show and manifest on which part y^ wynd blew, from a pynnacle or spire
of Paul's church. And in the falling, the same Egle brake, and batered another
Egle that was set up for a sign at a tavern door in Chepeside. And here upon,
me^ that were studious of strange tokens and monstreous wonders* did take an
opinion that the Emperor Maximilian, which at that time gave an Egle in his
arms, should have a great loss, which so happened in deed: For he lost his
only begotten son Philip, newly called to the kingdom of Castle.

Also, shortly after the departing of king Philip, the king of England
began to suspect Sir George Neuell lord of Burgeyny, and sir Thomas Grene,
of Grenes Norton knight, that they were con^edered fautours and partakers, in
the beginnynge with Edmond de la poole, and so upon this suspicion, they were
commanded to the Tower. But shortly after when they had been tried and purged
of that suspicio^ and crime, he commanded them both to be set at liberty.
But sir Thomas Grene fell sick before, and continued in the Tower in hope to
be restored as well to his health as he was to his liberty, and there dyed. The
lord of Burgeyny for his modesty, wit and probitie (because the king found
him like him self) always true, faithful and constant, was of his sovereign
lord more esteemed, favored and regarded then he was before.

The.xxii. year.
AFt^r this, the king having peace as well with foreyne pr^^ces* for the term
of.iij. years, as d^^burdened and purified of all domestical sedicion, began
to be disea^ed with a certain infirmity and wekenes of body, which thryse in
the year* but especially in the spring time sore vexed and tormented him. And
because for the most part, the harm and evil that chances to the prince,
is parted and communicat^ to his subjects and people, the old sweating
whereof you heard before amongst the commons of the realm, came again.
Howbeit by the reason of the remedy that was inverted by the death of many a
creature in the beginnynge, it did less hurt and displeasure to the people at
this time then it did before. But now the third plague egall with the
pestilence ensued by the woorkynge of the masters of the for^aytures by the
king appointed as I showed you before.

By whose means many a rich and welthy person, by the exstremyte of the laws
of the realm, were condemned and brought to misery.

The mattre is as wonderful to be heard, as pitefull and miserable to be done,
and yet it is called the law, where as it is rather perverse abuse and disordre
of a law, polletiquely at the beginning invented to cause the people, the
sooner to conform them selves to such as demand their right of them, but
craftily practiced to the utter confusion of many by untrue officiers. For if a
man put his adversary in suyte before y^ Judges, of which co^playnt or accio^
he neither thinks nor has knowledge if he appear not at the last calling of
the exigent, which is called in a shyre where he never came (for how can he
appear, if he be ignorant of the prosecucion of the cause, and dwell.ii.C.
miles from that place) then does he forfet all his substance and mouables,
and his body to captivity as an enemy, and rebel to the laws of his country.
And yet the prince shall enjoy the goods so confiscate* and the party
co^pleynau^t or playntife that is wronged recouereth not one myte, and yet
loses both his pain and costs. And all such persons that be so condemned
and adjudged, be called outlawes, that is depryued of all laws of the land to
the which he was by the custom of the country inheritable. These out^aries,
old recognisances of the peace and good aberig, escapes, ryottes and
innumerable statutes penal, were put in execucion and called upon by Empson and
Dudley, so that every man, both of the spirituality and temporaltie, having
either land or substance, was called to this pluckyng bancket, according to
the Psalmist saying* all declyned and fell together, and no man although he
were never to clear and gyltles, in conclusion durst adventure a trial, ^eynge
the experience o^ them that pass^d before. For these two (...) wolves had such
a guard of false perjured persons apperteig^ynge to them, which were by their
commandment empanyeled on eu^ry quest, that the king was sure to win
whosoever lost. Learned men in the law, when they were required of their
advice* would say, to agree is the best counsayll that I can give you. By this
vndewe^^anes, these covetous persons ^illed the kings cofers* and enryched
the^ selves. And at this unreasonable and extorte doing, noble men grudged,
mean men kycked, poor men lamented preachers openly at Paul's cross and
other pla^es exclamed, rebuked and detested, but yet they would never amend.
Howebeit the good king in his last days co^serued and pardoned his poor
subjects of such uncharitable yokes and ponderous burdens as they were laden
withal.

In this season Alexander bishop of Rome departed out of this world, and for
him was elected Frau^ces borne Senes, nephiewe to Pius the second, and was
called Pius the third whom king Henry had made a little before, proctoure for
his realm in the court of Rome. The king being glad of his high promocion and
dignity, sent sir Eylbert Talbot knight, Rychard Bear Abbot of Glalc^nbury,
and doctor Robert Sherborne d^ane of Paul's, to declare to him what gladness
^ntred into the kings heart, when he heard tell of his high pre^erment and
honor. But this bishop Pius did not espect and tarry the gratulacio^s of these
Ambassadors, for within a month after that he was (...) he rendered his debt
to nature, having small pleasure of his promo^io^. At this same time also dyed
Gyles, lord Dawbeney, the kings chief chamberleyn, whose office Charles
bastard son of Henry la^^ duke of Somerset occupied and enjoyed, a man of a
good wit and great experience.

The.xxiii. year.
SOne after, y^ king caused Guy Ubald duke of Urbyne to be elected, knight of
the order of the gartier, a noble warrior, and in the Greek and Latin tounges
excellently lea^ned. And this honor and high dignity, this duke desired
instantly to have, y^ he might be equyualent in all degrees of honor and
nobility with his father, duke Frederick a prince in his time of high renoune
and estimacion, which was received and chosen into that order by king Edward
the.iiii. And because it was noysed that July the second, a Ianuway borne, was
after the death of Pius, elected to be bishop of Rome. The king entendinge to
stop two gappes with one bushe, sent sir Gylbert Talbot and the other two
Ambassadors, principally to bishop July, and by them sent also to the duke of
Urbyne, the whole habit and collar of the noble order of the gar^ier. When
duke of Guy was reuested with the habit, and had taken his oath, according to
the statutes of the order: He sent sir Balthaser de Castellio knight a Mantuane
borne, his Orator to king Henry, which was for him enstalled, according to
the ordinances of that famous order.

While these things were in doing, Jews the French king mistrus^ing that
he should never have manchilde, married his eldest daughter lady Claude to
Frau^ces de Ualoys, dolphyn of Uyen and duke of Angulesme: Which lady was
promised a little before to Charles the king of Castle. When king Henry knew
of this, he thought best to mary his daughter lady Mary to this Charles king
of Castle, being almost both of one age, and therefore Ambassadors we^e sent
to and ^ro, and at the last, the marriage was concluded and confirmed by the
means of the bishop of Wynchester, chief Ambassadoure for the king at C^l^ys,
and so the lady Mary being of the age of.x. years, was promised to king
Charles. For conclusion of which marriage, the lord of Barow, and diverse great
Ambassadors were sent into England from the Emperor Maximilian, which had
great rewards and returned.

The.xxiiii. year.
Now approached the end and term of the.iii. years of peace that I spoke of
before, at which time king Henry thought his fatal day to be at hand: For his
sickness increased daily more and more, so that he might easily perceive that
death was not far of tariyng his pray: Therefore like a good prince, desiring
to exhibit some gratuitie to his people y^ he might be had in memory after his
disease, granted of his great liberalite a general pardon to all men, for all
offenses done, and perpetrate against his laws and statutes. But because
murderers and thieves were not only offenders to him, but also to other, he
excepted them and some other out of his pardon. He paid also the fees of all
prisoners in ye gayles in and about London, abiding their only for that duty.
He paid also the debtes of al such persons as lay in the counters of London,
or Ludgate for.xl. s and under, and some he releued that were condemned in.x.
l.

For this his goodness and pity showed to his people, being sore vexed with
inquysitors, pollers and promoters, general processio^ was had daily in every
city and parish to pray to almighty God, for the restorynge of his health,
with long contynuaunce of the same. Nevertheless, he was so consumed with his
long malady, that nature could no longer sustain his life, and so he
departed out of this world, the.xxii. day of April in his palace of
Rychemond, the which was the year of our lord.M.D.ix. his corpse was conveyed
with a funeral pomp to Westmynster, and there buried by the good queen his
wife in a sumpteous and solemn chapel* which he not long before had caused
to be builded: He reigned.xxiii. years and more then.vii. months, and lived
lii. years. He had by his queen Elizabeth.viii. children.iiii. men and iiii.
women children, of the which.iii. remained alive behind him. Henry prince of
Wales, which after him succeeded, and was king lady Margaret queen of Scotts,
and lady Mary promised to Charles king of Castle. He was a man of body but
lean and spare, albeyt mighty and strong therewith, The descripcion of king
Henry the.vii
of personage and stature, somewhat higher then the mean sort of men be, of
a wonderful beutye and fair complexion, of countenance merry and smylyng,
especially in his communicacion, his eyes graye, his teethe syngle, and hear
thynne, of wit in all things quycke and prompt, of a pryncely stomach and
haute courage. In great perels, doubtful aff^ires, and matters of weighty
importance* supernatural and in manner deuyne, for such things as he went
about* he did them advisedly, and not without great deliberacion and
breathynge, to thentent that amongst all men, his wit and prudence might be
noted and regarded and spoken of. For he was not ignorant that his acts and
doings were specially noted and marked with the eyes of many a person, and
therefore a prince ought as far^e to (...) and surmounte all mean personages
in wisdom and poll^^y* as he precell^th other in ^state and dignity.

For what man will give credit or regard to him, whom he has proved to be
light, wild and lastiuious of conditions? Besides this, he was sobre,
moderate, honest, affable, courteous, bounteous, so much abhorring pride and
arrogance, that he was ever sharp and quick to them which were noted or
spotted with y^ crime. And there was no man with him, being never so much in
his favor, or having never so much aucthorite, that either durst or could
do any thing as his own pha^tasye did serve him, without the consent and
agreement of other. What shall I say more? Although his mother were never so
wise (as she was both witty and wise) yet her will was brydled, and her
doings restrained. And this regiment he said he kept, to the^tent y^ he
worthily might be called a king* whose office is to rule and not to be ruled of
other. He was also in indifferent and sure Iustici^r* by the which one thing,
he allured to him the hearts of many people, because they lived quietly and in
rest out of al oppression and molestacio^ of the nobilite and rich persons.
Also to this seuerite of his was joined and annexed a certain merciful pity,
which he did often show to such as had offended, and by his laws were hindered
and mersed: for such of his subjects as were fined or amerced by his Justices
to their great empouerishing, he at one time or another did help, releue and
set forward: whereby it apered y^ he would have the same penalties for other
off^ces and crimes reuyued and stirred up again, which was a plain argument y^
he did use his rygour only (as he said him self) to bring low and abate y^
high hearts and stout stomachs of the wild people, norished and brought up
in sedicious faccio^s and civil rebellions, and not for the gredy desire of
riches or hunger of money, although such as were afflicted would cry out,
and say y^ it was done more for the love and desire of gain and profit, then
for any prudent, pollecy or pollitique provision.

Surely, this good and modest prince did not devour and consume y^ substance
and riches of his realm, for he by his high pollecy, meruelously enriched his
realm and him self, and yet left his subjects in high wealth and
prosperity. The proof whereof is manifestly apparau^t by y^ great abou^daunce
of gold and silver, yearly brought into this realm, both in plate, money and
bullio^ by merchau^tes passing and repassing out and i^to this realm with
merchau^dise. To whom he him self of his own goodness le^t money largely
without any gain or proffite, to thente^t that merchau^dise being of all
crafts the chief art, and to all men, both most profitable and necessary,
might be the more ple^tifuller used, hau^ted and employed in his realms and
dominions. And so this king living all his time in the favor of fortune in
high honor riches and glory, and for his noble acts and prudent pollecies,
worthy to be registered in the book of fame* gave up his ghost at ye last*
which undoubtedly is assended into the celestial mancion* where he has the
sure fruicion of the Godhead and the joy that is prepared for such as shall sit
on the right hand of our savior, ever world without end.

FINIS.
The triumphaunt reign of King Henry the.VIII.
NOW, The.^. year.
after the death of this noble Prince, Henry the.VIII. son to King Henry
the.VII. began his reign the.xxii. day of April, in the year of our
Lord.1509. and in the.xviii. year of his bodily age: Maximilian then being
Emperor, and Jews the.xii. reignyng in France. And Fernando being the King
of Arragon and Castle, and King James the fourth then rulyng over the
Scotts: Whose style was Proclaimed by the blast of a Trumpet, in the city of
London, the.xxiii. day of thesaied monethe, with much gladness and reioysyng
of the people.

And the same day, he departed from his manor of Richemond to the tower of
London, where he remained, closly and secret, with his counsel, till the
funeralles of his father, were finished and ended. The Same day also, Empson
and Dudley attached.
six Richard Empson knight, and Edmonde Dudley Esquier, great counsailers to
the late king, were attached and brought to the Tower, not to the little
reioysyng of many persons, which, by them were grieved, which: attachement was
thought to be procured by malice of them, that with their authority, in the
late kings days were offended, or else to shifte the noise, of the straight
execucion of penal statu^^^ in the late kings days, by punishment of those
persons, and other ^^moters, for to satisfy and appeace the people. The Same
day also wa^ attached, the lord Henry Stafford, brother to the duke of
Buckyngh^ and sent to the Tower, the cause was not thought to be great, because
he was so sone delivered, and the same year was created earl of Wilshire. And
the same day also, Doctor Ruthall was named Bushoppe of Dures^^^.

Sone after were apprehended diverse, called promoters, belongyng to Empson and
Dudley* as Canby* Page, Smith, and diverse other, as Derbie, Wright, Sympson,
and Stocton, of the which, the most part ware papers, and stood on the
Pillorie. How be it, the most craftiest knave of all, called Ihon Baptist
Brimald, escaped and came to Westminster, and there took Sanctuary.

The.xxv. day of April was Proclaimed, A general Pardon.
that the kings grace ratefied all the Pardones, granted by his father, and
also pardoned all such persons, as was then in suite, for any offense, what
soever it was, Treason, Murder, and ^^onie only except.

After that all things necessary, for the interment and funeral po^pe of the
late king, were sumpteously prepared and done: the corpse of the said defunct,
was brought out of his privy chamber, into the great chamber, where he rested
three days, and every day had there Dirige and Mass song by a Prelate
mitered: and from thence he was conueighed into the halle, where he was also
three days, and had like service there, and so three days in the Chapel, and
in every of these three places, was a hearce of wax, garnished with banners,
and.ix. mourners geuyng there attendance, all the service time: and every day
they offered, and every place changed with black clothe. Upon Wedinsdaie,
the.ix. day of May, the corpse was put into a Chariot, covered with black
clothe of gold drawn with.v. great Corsers, covered with black Ueluet,
garnished with cusshions of fine gold: and over the corpse, was an Image or a
representacion of the late king, laid on Cusshions of gold, and thesaied
image was appareled, in the kings rich robes of estate, with a croune on the
head, and ball and scepter in the hands: and the chariot was garnished with
banners, and Pe^celles of tharmes of his dominions, titles and geanealogies.
When the chariot was thusordered, the kings chapel, and a great nombre of
Prelates, set forward praiyng: then followed all the kings servants, in
black, then followed the Chariot: and after the Chariot.ix. mourners, and on
every side were carried long torches and short, to the nombre of.vi.C. and in
this order they came to saint Georges field, from Richemond. There met with
them, all the Priests and Clearkes, and religious men, within the city, and
without (which went formoste, before the kings Chapel) the Mayor and his
brethren, with many commoners, all clothed in black, met with the corpse at
London Bridge, and so gave their attendau^ce on the same, through the city: and
in good order, the compaignie passed through the city, whereof the streets on
every side, were set with long Torches, and on the stalles stood young children,
holdyng tapers, and so with great reverence, the Chariot was brought to the
Cathedral Church of saint Paul, where the body was taken out, and carried
into the Quire, and set under a goodly Herce of wax, garnished with Banners,
Pencelles, and Cusshions, where was soung a solemn Dirige, and a Mass, with
a Sermon, made by the Busshoppe of Rochester: during which time, the kings
household and the mourners, reposed them in the Busshoppes Paleis. The next
day, the corpse in like order was removed, toward Westminster, sir Edward
Haward, bearyng the kings banner, on a courser trapped, in the arms of the
defunct. In Westminster was a curious hearse, made of.ix. principalles, full of
lights, which, were lighted at the coming of the corpse, which, was taken
out of the Chariot, by six Lords, and set under the Hearse, the Image or the
representacion, liyng upon the Cusshyn on a large palle of gold. The hearse was
double railed: within the first railes, satte the mourners, and within the
second rail, stood knights (...) banners of saints, and without the same,
stood officers of arms. When the mourners were set, Gartier king at Arms,
cried, for the soul of the noble prince king Henry the.VII. late king of this
realm: then the quire began Placebo, and so song Dirige, which, being
finished, the mourners departed into the Palaice, where they had a void, and
so reposed for that night.

The next day, were three Masses solemply song, by Busshoppes, and at the last
Mass was offered, the kings banner and courser, his coat of arms, his
sword, his target, and his helm, and at the end of Mass the mourners offered
up, rich Paulles of cloth of gold and Baudekin, and when the quire sang,
Libera me, the body was put into the yearthe, and then the lord Treasorer,
lord Steward, lord Chamberlein, the Treasorer, and Comptroler of the kings
household, brake their staves and cast them into the grave. Then Gartier cried
with a loud voice, Viue le Roy Henry le hu^esme, Roy Dangliter, and de
France, sire Dirland. Then all the mourners, and all other that had given
their attendance, on this funeral Obsequie, departed to the Palaice, where
they had a great and a sumptuous feast.

Wonder it were to write, of the lamentacion that was made, for this Prince
amongst his servants, and other of the wisest sort, and the joy that was
made for his death, by such as were troubled, by ^igor of his law: yet the
toward hope, which, in all points appeared, in the young king did both
repair and comfort, the heuie hearts of them, which, had lost so wise and
sage a prince: and also did put out of the minds of such, as were releued by
thesaied kings death, all their old grudge and rancor, and confirmed their
new joy, by the new grant of his pardon.

When the funeralles of this late king, were thus honorably finished, great
preparacion was made, for the coronacio^ of this new king which was appointed
on Midsomer day next ensuyng: during which preparacion, the king was moved,
by some of his cou^sail, that it should be honorable* and profitable to his
realm, The Kings marriage doubtefull at the beginning.
to take to wife the lady Katherin, late wife to Prince Arthur his brother
disseased, least she having so great a dowry, might mary out of the realm,
which, should be unprofitable to him: by reason of which mocion, the king
being young, and not understanding the law of God, espous^d thesaied lady
Katherine, the third day of June, the which marriage, was dispensed with by
Pope July, at the request of her father, king Farnando, contrary to the opinion
of all the Cardinals of Rome, being divines. This marriage of the brothers wife,
was much murmured against, in the beginning, and ever more and more, searched
out by learning and scripture, so that at the last, by the determinacion, of
the best universities of Christendo^, it was adjudged detestable, and plain
contrary to Gods law, as you shall here, after.xx. years.

If I should declare, what pain, labor, and diligence, the Taylers,
Embrouderers, and Gold Smithes took, both to make and devise garments, for
Lords, Ladies, Knights, and Esquires, and also for deckyng, trappyng, and
adornyng of Coursers, Ienetes, and Palffreis, it were to long to rehersse, but
for a surety, more rich, nor more strange nor more curious works, has not
been seen, then were prepared against this coronacion.

On the.xxj. day of this month of June, the king came from Grenewiche to the
Tower, over London Bridge, and so by Grace Church, with whom, came many a well
appareled gentleman, but in especial the Duke of Buckyngham, which, had a
goune all of goldsmithes work, very costly, and there the king rested, till
Saterdaie next ensuyng.

Fridaie the twenty and two day of June, every thing being in a ^eadines,
for his Coronacion: his grace with the Queen, being in the Tower of London,
made there Knights of the Bathe, to the nombre of twenty and four, with all
the obseruaunces and Ceremonies, to the same belongyng.

And the morrow following, being Saterdaie, the.xxiii. day of thesaid monethe,
his grace, with the Queen, departed from the Tower, through the city of
London, against whose coming, the streates where his grace should pass, were
hanged with Tapistrie, and clothe of Arras. And the great part, of the Southe
side of Chepe, with clothe of gold, and some part of Cornehill also. And the
streates railed and barred, on the one side, from over against Grace Church,
unto Bredstreate, in Chepeside, where every occupacion stood, in their liueries
in order, beginning with base and mean occupacions, and so assendyng to the
worshipful crafts: highest and lastly stood the Mayor, with the Aldermen. The
Goldsmithes stalles, unto the end of the Old Change, being replenished with
Uirgins in white, with branches of white Wax: the priests and clerks, in
rich Copes* with Crosses and censers of silver, with censyng his grace, and
the Queen also, as they passed. The features of his body, his goodly personage,
his amiable visage, princely countenance, with the noble qualities of his
royal estate, to every man known, needs no rehersall, considering, that for
lack of cunnyng, I cannot express the gifts of grace and of nature, that God
has endowed him with all: yet partly, to discriue his apparel, it is to be
noted, his grace ware in his vpperst apparel, a robe of Crimosyn Ueluet,
furred with Armyns, his iacket or cote of raised gold, the placard embrowdered
with Diamo^des Rubies, Emeraudes, great Pearls, and other rich Stones, a
great Bauderike about his neck, of great Balasses. The Trapper of his
Horse* Damask gold, with a deep purfell of Armyns, his knights and Esquires
for his body, in Crimosyn Ueluet, and all the gentlemen, with other of his
chapel, and all his officers, and household servants, were appareled in
Skarlet. The Barons of the five Ports, bare the Canaby, or clothe of estate:
For to resite unto you, the great estates by name, the order of their going,
the nombre of the lords Spiritual and temporal* Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen, and of their costly and rich apparel, of several devises and
fashions, who took up his horse best, or who was richest besene, it would ask
long time, and yet I should omit many things, and fail of the nombre, for
they were very many: wherefore I pass over, but this I dare well say, there
was no lack or scarsitie of clothe of Tissue, clothe of Gold, clothe of
Silver, Broderie, or of Gold smithes works: but in more plenty and
abundaunce, then has been seen, or read of at any time before, and thereto
many and a great nombre of chains of Gold, and Bauderikes, both massy and
great. Also before the kings highness, rode two gentle men* richely
appareled, and about their bodies trauers, they did bear two Robes, the one
of the Duchy of Guyon, and the other for the Duchy of Normandy, with Hattes
on their heddes, poudered with Armyns, for the estate of the same. Next followed
two persons of good estate, the one bearyng his cloak, the other his hatte,
appareled both in Gold Smithes work, and Broudery, their horses Trapped, in
burned Silver, drawn over with Cords of Grene silk and Gold, the edges and
borders of their apparel, being fretted with Gold of Damask. After them came
six Thomas Brandon, Master of the kings Horse, clothed in tissue, Broudered
with Roses of fine Gold, and trauerse his body, a great Bauderike of Gold,
great and massy, his Horse trapped in Gold, leadyng by a rain of Silk, the
kings spare Horse, trapped barde wise, with harneis Broudered with Bullion
Gold, curiously wroughte by Gold Smithes. Then next followed, the nine
children of honor, upon great coursers, appareled on their bodies, in Blewe
Ueluet, poudered with Flower Delices of Gold, and chains of Gold Smithes
work, every one of their horses, trapped with a trapper of the kings title,
as of England, and France, Gascoyne, Guyan, Normandy, Angeow, Cornwall,
Wa^es, Irelande, etc. wrought upon Ueluettes, with Embrouderie, and Gold
Smithes work.

Then next following in order, came the Queen's retinew, as Lords, Knights,
Esquires, and gentle men in their degrees, well mounted, and richely
appareled in Tissues, clothe of Gold, of Silver, Tynsels, and Ueluettes
Embroudered, fresh and goodly to behold. The Queen then by name Katheryne,
sittyng in her Litter, borne by two White Palfreis, the Litter covered, and
richely appareled, and the Palfreis Trapped in White clothe of gold, her
person appareled in white Satyn Embrodered, her heir hangyng down to her
back, of a very great length, bewtefull and goodly to behold, and on her hedde
a Coronall, set with many rich orient stones. Next after, six honorable
personages on White Palfreis, all appareled in Clothe of Gold, and then a
Chariot covered, and the Ladies therein, all appareled in Clothe of Gold. And
another sort of Ladies, and then another Chariot, then the Ladies next the
Chariot, and so in order, every after their degrees, in clothe of Gold, Clothe
of Silver, Tynselles, and Ueluet, with Embrouderies, every couplement of
thesaied Chariotes, and the draught harness, were poudered with Armins, mixed
with clothe of Gold: and with much joy and honor, came to Westminster, where
was high preparacion made, as well for thesaied Coronacion, as also for the
solemn feast and Iustes, thereupon to be had and done.

The morrow following being sondaie, and also Midsomer day, this noble prince
with his Queen, at time convenient, under their Canabies borne by the Barons of
the five Ports, went from thesaied Palaice, to Westminster Abbey upon clothe,
called vulgarly cloth of Ray, the which clothe was cut and spoiled, by the
rude and common people, immediately after their repair into the Abbey, where,
according to the sacred obseruaunce, and ancient custom, his grace with the
Queen, were anointed and crouned, by the Archebusshop of Cantorbury, with
other prelates of the realm there present, and the nobility, with a great
^ultitude of Commons of the same. It was demanded of the people, whether they
would receive, obey, and take the same most noble Prince, for their king, who
with great reverence, love, and desire, said and cried, ye ye. After the
which solempnitie, and Coronacion finished, the lords spiritual and
te^porall, did to him homage, and returned to Westminster hall, with the Queen's
grace, every one under their canabies, where, by the lord Marshall, and his
tipped staves, was made rome* and every lord, and other noble men, according to
their tenures, before claimed and vewed, seen, and allowed by the lords, and
other of his graces cou^saill, entered into such rome and office that day, to
execute their services accordyngly. The kings estate on the right hand, and
the Queen's on the left hand, the cobard of.ix. stages, their noble personages
being set: first, at the bryngyng of the first course, the trump^ttes blew up.
And in came the Duke of Buckyngham, mounted upon a great courser, richely
trapped, and enbroudered, and the lord Steward, in likewise on an horse,
trapped in clothe of Gold, ^idyng before the service, which was sumpteous,
with many subtleties, strange devises, with several poses, and many deintie
dishes. At the kings fete, under the table, were certain gentlemen. And in
likewise with the queen, who there continued, during that long and royal
feast. What should I speak or write, of the su^pteous fine, and delicate
meats, prepared for this high and honorable coronacio^, provided for as well in
the parties beyond the sea, as in many and ^u^dery places, within this realm,
where God so abu^dantly has sent such plenty and foyson? Or of the honorable
order of the services, the clean handelyng and breakyng of meats, the ordryng
of the dishes, with the ple^tifull abundaunce. So that none of any estate
being there, did lack, nor no honorable or worshipful person, went
vnfeasted. The second course being served: in at the haule door entered a
knight, armed at all points* his bases rich tissue embroudered, a great plume
and as su^pteous of Oistriche feathers on his helmet, sittyng on a great
courser* trapped in tissue, and embroudered with tharmes of England, and of
France, and an herald of arms before him. And passing through the halle,
presented himself with humble reverence, before the kings majesty, to who^,
Garter king of herauldes, cried and said with a loud voice, sir knight from
whence come you, and what is your pretense? This knights name was sir Robert
Dimmocke, Champ^on to the king, by tenure of his enheritaunce, who answered
thesaied king of Arms, in effect after this manner: Sir, the place that I come
form, is not material, nor the cause of my repair hither, is not concerning
any matter, of any place or country, but only this. And there with all,
commanded his Heraulde to make an Oyes: then said the knight, to the king of
arms, now shall ye here, the cause of my coming and pretense. Then he
commanded his own Herald, by Proclamacion to say: if there be any person,
of what estate or degree: soever he be, that (...) say or prove, that king
Henry the eight, is not the rightful enheritor, and king of this realm, I sir
William Dimmoke here his Champion, offer my glove, to fight in his querell with
any person to thutteraunce, which Proclamacion was made in sundery places of
the halle: And at every time, his gaun^lette cast down, in the maintenance
thereof. After which several proclamacio^s done, and offers made, thesaid
knight or champion, eftsoon repaired to the kings presence, demaundyng
drink, to who^ the kings grace sent a cup of gold, with wine, whereof after
this knight had dronke* he demanded the cover of thesaied cup, which, to
him was also delivered: that done, he departed out of the halle, with thelaid
cup and cover, as his own

The manner of his tenure is this, that at the Coronacion of the king, he shall
go to the armarie, and there take the kings best harneis, save one, the best
and rich bases saving one, then of the plumes, or other things, for the
garnishyng of his creast or helm, and so to the stable* there taking the next
courser or horse, to the best, with like trapper* and so ^urnished, to enter vt
supra, and his office dooen, to have all these things, with the Cup of Gold
and cover, to his own use.

After the departure of thesaied Champion, the King of Arms, with all the
Herauldes, and other officers of Arms made Pl^clamacions in several places of
the halle, criyng largess. Briefly to pass over, this high and long
solempnitie, of this honorable Coronacio^ and feast, more honorable then of the
great Caesar, who^, many Historiographers, so high set out and magnified, if the
Latins of England, were not promoted or auaunsed, to dignities and promocions,
unless they first should (as other poor clerks, in the parties beyond the
sea, exalte and set furthe the ^estes and Chronicles, of their native
countries, with high laud and praise and in some part more then truth, for
small mede or reward do) put in writing, either in English or Latin tongue,
the noble triu^phes, chiualrous feats, valiant acts, victorious battles,
and other noble Iestes of this realm, and in especial of our time and
knowledge, of this most valiant and goodly prince, it should appear much more
honorable, then any other stories: But promocion and benefices, put away
labor and pain, albeit the great part of them will say, that the high
Cure and charge is to edify the people, with the word of God, taking cure of
the souls: there against I will not reply, but no displeasure* I perceive
that they take as great cure, for the profit of their pursses, with pleasure
of huntyng and haukyng, besides other their pastymes, after they come to the
best of their promocion, with small keeping of hospitality: as other which
were their predecessors, and much worse, so that part of their pastymes spent
in writing, and setting furthe the iestes, acts and deeds, of the nobility
of England, with the manyfold commodities of the same* should much ennoble the
princes thereof, seeing by daily experience, Busshoppes, Archebusshoppes,
Abbottes, and other clerks, in the parties beyond the sea, as well learned, as
of high knowledge, and better lineage, and as verteous as they, daily enforce
theimselfes, to auaunce their Princes, their Realms, and native Countries,
as well in Latin, as in their vulgar toungue. But to return to the end of this
honorable feast, the tables avoided, the wafers were brought. Then Sir Stephen
Ieny^s, that time Mayor of London, whom, the king before he satte down to
dynner, had dubbed knight, which, began the Earls Table that day, a rose
from the place where he satte, to serve the King with Ipocras, in a Cup of
Gold, which Cup, after his grace had dronken thereof, was with the cover,
given unto thesaid sir Stephen, like as other his predecessors, Majors o^
thesaied city, were wont to have at the Coronacion of the king. Then after the
Surnap laid, and that the kings grace, b^the Queen had washed, every of them
under their Clothes of estate, the tables being avoided, went unto their
cambers.

For the more honor* and ennoblyng of this triumphaunt Coronacio^, there were
prepared, both Iustes and Turneis, to be dooen in the Palaice of Westminster,
where, for the kings grace, and the Queen, was framed a fair house, covered
with Tapissarie, and hanged with rich clothes of Arrais, and in thesaied
Palaice, was made a curious Fountain, and over it a Castle: on the top
thereof, a great Croune Imperial, all the imbatellyng with Roses, and
Pomegranetes gilded: and under and about thesaied Castle, a curions Uine, the
leaves and grapes thereof, gilded with fine Gold, the walls of the same Castle
colored, White and Grene losengis. And in every losenge, either a Rose or a
Pomegranet, or a Sheffe of Arrows, or else.H. and.K. gilded with fine Gold with
certain Arches or Turrettes gilded, to support the same Castle. And the
targettes of the arms, of the defendauntes, appointed for thesaied Iustes*
there upon sumpteously set. And out at several places, of the same Castle*
as well the day of the coronacio^, as at thesaid days of the Iustes and
Turney, out of the mouths of certain beasts, or gargels, did run red,
white, and claret wine. Thenterprisers of these Iustes, was Thomas lord
Haward, heir apparaunt to the earl of Surrey, sir Edward Haward Admiral, his
brother, the lord Richard, brother to the Marquis Dorset* sir Edmond Haward,
sir Thomas Kneuet, and Charles Brando^ esquire. The tro^pettes blew to the
feld, the fresh yo^g gala^tes and noble men gorgeously appareled, with
curious devises, of cuttes and of embrouderies, as well in their coats, as in
trappers for their horses, some of gold, some in silver, some in Tynsels, and
diverse other in goldesmithes work, goodly to behold, first entered the feld,
in taking up and turnyng their Horses, netly and freshly. Then followed a
devise, (carried by strength of men, and other provision) framed like a
Castle, or a Turret, wrought with fine clothe of Gold: the roppe whereof, was
spread with Roses and Pomegranettes, hangyng down on every side, of thesaied
devise, wherein was a Lady, bearyng a shilde of Crystal named Pallas. After
whom, thesaied Lord Haward, with his compaignions followed, armed at all
points, their Basses, and Bardes, or Trappers, were of Grene Ueluet, beaten
with Roses, and Pomegranetes of Gold, brodered with fringes of Damask Gold.
Thesaied devise or Turret, being brought before the king, the Lady Pallas,
pre^ented thesaied persons, whom, she named her scholars, to the kings
highness, besechyng the same, to accept them as her scholars, who were desirous to
serve him, to the increase of their honors, which said scholars, had about
them on foot, to the nombre of an hundred persons, freshely appareled, in
Ueluettes of sundery colors, with Hose and Bonettes, according to the same.
And further, thesaied Lady desired the king, that it might please his grace,
that her said scholars, might be defendauntes to al comers which request was
granted.

Then came in an other bend of horse men, freshly and well appareled in clothe
of gold, in silver, in Goldsmithes work, and brouderie, to the number of
three score, with trappers accordyngly to their garments, with great
Bauderikes, Collers, and Cheines of Gold, about their necks, and trauerse
their bodies, every man with a coyfe of gold on his hedde, and a great plume
of f^thers thereupon, some of one color, and some of an other, enteryng
before into the field, with Dro^mes and Fifes a great nombre, every man taking
up his horse, in his best manner, as well for their Ladies, as also for laud or
praise to be given them. After whom, followed a good nombre of foot men, in
Ueluettes, and other silks, cut and embroudered, with hose to the same
accordyngly, and bonettes and other furniture, after a fresh and lusty
fashion. Next to them came on horse back, eight persons, whose names were,
sir Ihon Pechy, Sir Edward Neuell, Sir Edward Guildeforde, Sir Ihon Carre,
Sir Wyllyam Parre, Sir Gyles Capell, Sir Griffith Dun, and Sir Roulande, Armed
also at all points, with shyldes of their own arms, with rich Plumes, and
other devises on their hedde pieces their Bases and Trappers of Tissew, clothe
of Gold, Silver and velvet, and next before them, a gentle manne on
horseback, in a coat of Blewe Ueluet, embroudered with gold, and his horse
Trapped in the same suite, with a spear of Gold on his thigh, and the same
presented to the Queen: saying, that it was informed those knights of his
compaignie, how that Dame Pallas, had presented six of her scholars to the
King, but whether they came to learn, or to teach feactes of Arms, they
knew not. And further declared, that his knights were come, to do feactes of
arms, for the love of Ladies, wherefore, he besought her grace, to license
those Knights to prove them selfs, against Dame Pallas Scholars: and that
in case, her Scholars brake more speres, on thesaied knights, by the view of
the Judges, and the report of the Herauldes, then the same knights should do
on them, then thesaied Scholars of Pallas knights, to have the spear of Gold
for their prise. And if the knights brake more speres, then Dame Pallas
Scholars, thesaied knights to have the Crystal Shilde. The which request
to them granted, the Iustes began, where every manne did acquit himself,
well and valiauntly, but who had the price of other, I know not, the night
coming on, the Iustes ended.

The next day approached, the foresaied defenders, Scholars to Pallas on
Horseback, armed Cape a pie, the one side of their Bases, and Bardes of their
Horses white Ueluet, embroudered with Roses of gold and other embrouderies, the
other side Grene Ueluet, embroudered with Pomegranetes of Gold, every one of
them on his hedde piece, had an hear of flat Gold of Damask, presented
theimselfes, before the king ready to Tourney.

Then immediately on the other part came in, Dianas knights.
the fore named eighte knights ready armed, their Basses and Bardes of their
Horse, Grene Sattyn, embroudered with fresh devises, of Bramble branches, of
fine Gold curiously wroughte, poudered over all. And after them a great
nombre of horns blown, by men apparelled in Grene Clothe, with Cappes and
Hosen of like suite, as Forsters or kepers, and a Pagente made like a Park,
paled with pales of White and Grene, wherein were certain Fallowe Dear, and in
the same Park curious Trees made by craft, with Busshes, Fernes, and other
things in likewise wroughte, goodly to behold. The which Park or devise,
being brought before the Queen, had certain gates thereof opened, the Dear
ran out thereof into the Palaice, the greye hounds were let slip and
killed the Dear: the which Dear so killed, were presented to the Queen and the
Ladies, by the foresaied knights. Crocheman, which the day before brought
in the spear of gold, there declared, that the same knights were servants to
Diana, and being in their pastyme of huntyng, news were brought unto them,
that Dame Pallas knights, were come into those parties, to do deeds of
arms: wherefore, they had left their huntyng and chase, and repaired also
thither, to encounter with the knights of Pallas, and so to fight with the^,
for the love of ladies to thutterance: saying, that if Pallas knights
vanquished the other, or made them to leave the feld, then they to have the dear
killed, and the greye hou^des that slew them. And in case Dianas knights,
over came the other, they to have their swords, and none other thing more.
Whereupon the Queen and Ladies, sent to the king to have his advise and
pleasure in this behalf, his grace conceiuyng, that there was some grudge, and
displeasure between them, thynkyng if such request were to them granted,
some inconvenience might ensue, would not there unto agree, so that for the
appeasyng thereof, it was awarded that both parties, should tourney togethers,
geuyng but a certain strokes, which dooen they departed: And so these Iustes
brake up, and the prices given to every man after his deserts.

This year the king pardoned the lord Henry, brother to the Duke of
Buckyngham, being committed to the Tower* upon suspicion of treason laid unto
him, but not proved, and sone after at the Parliament, created him Earl of
Wylshire.

Also this year, the king ordained fifty Gentle men to be speres, every of
them to have an Archer, a Dimilaunce, and a Custrell, and every Spear to have
three great Horses, to be attendaunt on his person, of the which bend, the
Earl of Essex was Lieuetenaunt, and sir Ihon Pechie Capitain, who endured but a
while, the apparel and charges were so great, for there were none of them,
but they and their Horses, were appareled and trapped in Clothe of Gold,
Silver, and Gold Smithes work, and their servants richely appareled also.

This year also, was a great Pestilence in the town of Caleis, and much
people died, in so much that the king, at the request of his counsel of
Caleis, considering the weakness of the town, sent thither Sir Ihon Pechie,
with three hundred men to tarry there, who continued there unto such time,
that the plague was ceased, and new soldiers admitted, to such roumes as
then were vacant, and then returned into England. Furthermore, this year the
king somoned his Parliament, in the monethe of Nouembre, which, began in the
month of Ianuari^ ensuyng, whereof sir Thomas Inglefelde was chosen Speaker,
in the which session emonges other things there enacted, it was ordained by
authority of Parliament, that sir Thomas Empson knighte, and Edmund Dudeley
Esquire, late Counsailers to King Henry the seventh, should and were attainted
of hault treason.

The Same year the plague was great, and reigned in diverse parts of the
realm, the king kept his Christemas at Richemond. And the.xii day of
January, diverse gentlemen freshely appareled, prepared them self to Just,
unknown to the kings grace, whereof, he being secretly informed, caused
himself, and one of his privy chamber, called Willya^ Compton to be secretly
armed, in the little Park of Richemond: and so came into the Iustes, unknown
to all persons, and unlooked for: The king ran never openly before, and there
were broken many staves, and great praise given to the two strangers, but
specially to one, which was the king: howebeit, at a course by misfortune, sir
Edward Neuell Esquire, brother to the Lord of Burgainie, did run against
Master Cumpton, and hurt him sore, and was likely to dye. One person there
was, that knew the king, and cried, God save the king, with that, all the people
were astonished, and then the king discovered himself, to the great comfort of
all the people.

The king sone after, came to Westminster with the Queen, and all their train:
And on a time being there* his grace therles of Essex, Wilshire, and other
noble men, to the nombre of twelve, came suddenly in a morning, into the
Queen's Chamber, all appareled in short cotes, of Kentishe Kendal, with hodes
on their heddes, and hosen of the same, every one of them, his bow and arrows,
and a sword and a bucklar, like out laws, or Robyn Hodes men, whereof the
Queen, the Ladies, and al other there, were abashed, as well for the strange
fight, as also for their sudden coming* and after certain daunces, and pastime
made, they departed. On Shroue Sunday the same year, A banquet.
the king prepared a goodly banquet, in the Parliament Chamber at Westmin^ter,
for all the Ambassadors, which, then were here, out of diverse realm and
countries The banquet being ready, the King leadyng the Queen, entered into the
Chamber* then the Ladies, Ambassadors, and other noble men, followed in
order. The King caused the Queen, to keep the estate, and then satte the
Ambassadors and Ladies, as they were Marshalled by the king, who would not
sit, but walked from place to place, making chere to the Queen, and the
strangers: Suddenly the king was gone. And shortly after, his grace with the
Earl of Essex, came in appareled after Turkey fashion, in long robes of
Bawdkin* powdered with gold, hattes on their heddes of Crimosyn Ueluet, with
great rolls of Gold, girded with two swords, called C^^^teries* hangyng by
great bawderikes of gold. Next* came the lord Henry Earl of Wilshire, and the
lord Fitzwater* in two long gounes of yelowe satin, trauarsed with white
satin, and in every bend of white, was a bend of crimosen satin after the
fashion of Russia or Ruslande, with ^urred hattes of greye on their hedes*
either of them having an hatchet in their hands, and boots with pykes turned
up. And after them, came sir Edward Haward, than Admyral, and with him sir
Thomas Parre* in doblettes of Crimosin velvet, voyded low on the back, and
before to the cannell bone, lased on the breasts with chains of silver, and
over that short clokes of Crimosyn satyne, and on their heads hattes after
dauncers fashion, with feasauntes feathers in them: They were appareyled after
the fashion of Prusia or Spruce. The torchebearers were appareyled in Crymosyn
satyne and grene* like Moreskoes, their faces black: And the king brought in a
mommerye. After that the Queen* the lords* and ladies, such as would had
played, the said mommers departed, and put of the same apparel, and sone after
entered into the Chamber, in their vsuel apparel. And so the king made great
chere to the Queen, Ladies and Ambassadors: The Supper or Banquet ended* and
the tables avoided the king being in communicacion with the Ambassadors, the
Queen with the ladies took their places in their degrees. Then began the
dau^syng, and every man took much head to them that dau^sed. The king
perceiving that, withdrew him self suddenly out of the place, with certain
other persons appointed for that purpose. And within a little while after there
came in a drum and a fi^e appareiled in white Damask and grene bonettes, and
h^sen of the same sure, than certain gentelmen followed with torches, apparayled
in blew Damask purseled with Ames gray, facioned like an Awbe, and on their
heddes hodes with robbes and long tippettes to the same of blew Damask
visarde. Than after them came a certain number of gentelmen, whereof the king
was one, apparayled all in one sewte of short garments, little beneth the
points, o^ blew Ueluet and Crymosyne with long ^^eues, all cut and lyned with
clothe of gold. And the utter part of the garments were powdered with
cas^els, and shefes of arrows of fine doket gold. The upper parts of their
hosen of like sewte and facion, the nether parts were of Scarlet, poudred with
tymbrelles of fine gold, on their heads bonets of Damask, silver flat
wouen in the stole, and thereupon wrought with gold, and rich feathers in them,
all with visers. After them entered.vi. ladies, whereof two were appareyled in
Crymosyn satyne and purpull, enbrowdered with gold and by vynye^tes, ran
^^oure delices of gold, with maru^ylous rich and strange (...) on their
heads. Other two ladies in Crymosyne and purpull* made like long slops
enbroudered and fret with gold after antike fashion: and over that garment was
a short garment of clothe of gold scant to the knee facioned like a tabard all
over, with small double rolls, ^ll o^ flat gold o^ Damask, fret with
frysed gold, and on their heads skayus and wrappers of Damask gold with
flat pypes, y^ strange it was to behold. The other two ladies were in
kyrtels of Crymosyne and purpul satyn, enbroudered with a vynet of
Pomegraneltes of gold* all the garments cut compass wise, having but demi
sleues, and naked down from the elbowes, and over their garments were
vochettes of pleasantes, rouled with Crymsyne velvet, and set with letters of
gold like Carectes, their heads rouled in pleasauntes and typpe^s like the
Egipcians, enbroudered with gold. Their faces, necks, arms and hands,
covered in fine pleasaunce black: Some call it Lumberdynes, which is
marvelous thine, so that the same ladies seemed to be nyg^ost or black Mores.
Of these foresayed.vi. ladies, the lady Mary, sister unto the king was one, the
other I name not. After that the kings grace and the ladies had daunsed a
certain time they departed every one to his lodgyng.

In this year king Henry the.vii. his executours made restitucion of great
sums of money, to many persons taken against good consc^e^ce to the said
kings use, by the forenamed Empson and Dudley.

This year also came Ambassadors from the king of Arrago^ and Castle into
this Realm, who were hyghly entertained and royally received, and repaired
much to the Court. It happened on a day, that there were certain noble men
made a wager to run at the ring, and parties were taken, and which party
atteyned or took away the ringe oftenest with a certain courses, should win the wager. Whereof, the kings grace hearing offered to be on the one party
with.vi. companions: The Ambassadors hearing thereof, were much desirous to
se fhys wager tried, and specially the Ambassadors of Spaigne, who had never
seen the king in harneys. At the day appointed, the king was mounted on a godly
Courser* trapped in purpull velvet cut, the inner side whereof was wrought
with flat gold of Damask in the stool, and the velvet on the other side
cut in letters: So that y^ gold appeared as though it had been enbroudered with
certain reasons or poyses.

And on the Ueluet between the letters were fastyned, castles and shefes of
arrows of doket gold, with a garment the ^^eues compased over his harneys,
and his bases of the same work, with a great plume of feathers on his head
peace, that came down to the arion of his sadell, and a great company of
freshgentelmen, came in with his grace rychely armed and decked, with many
other right gorgeously appareyled, the tro^pettes before them, Goodly to
behold, whereof many strangers, but specially the Spagniardes much reioysed,
for they had never seen y^ king before that time armed.

On the other side came in an other bend of gentelmen, freshely appareyled,
and pleasant to behold, all appareyled in clothe of gold, chekered with
flat gold of Damask, and poudered with Roses: and so every man ran, but
to conclude, the price was given unto the king. every man did run.xii.
courses, the king did bear away the ring v. times, and atteyned it.iii: and
these courses thus fynished, y^ Spanish Ambassadors desired to have some of
the badges or devises, which were on the kings trapper: his grace thereof
knowing commanded Every of them to take thereof what it pleased them, who in
effect took all or the more part: for in the beginning they thought they had
been counterfeit, and not of gold.

In this year from diverse Realms and Countries came many Ambassadors, of
France, Denemarke, Scotland, and other Realms, which were hyghly enterteyned.

The.ii. year.
ON May day, than next following in the.ii. year of his reygne, his grace
being young, and willing not to be ^dell, rose in the morning very early to
fetch May or grene bows, him self fresh and rychely appareyled, and clothed
all his Knights, Squyers and Gentelmen in white Satyn, and all his guard and
yomen of the Croune in white sarcenet: And so went every man with his bow and
arrows shotyng to the wood, and so repaired again to the Court, every man
with a grene bough in his cappe, and at his returnyng many hearing of his
gooyng a Maiyng, were desirous to se him shote, for at that time his grace
shot as strong and as great a length as any of his guard. There came to his
grace a certain man with bow and arrows, and desired his grace to take the
^uster of him, and to se him shote, for at that time his grace was contented,
the man put his one foot in his bosom, and so did shote, and shote a very good
shote, and well toward his mark, whereof not only his grace but all other
greatly merueyled. So the king gave him a reward for his so doing, which
person afterward of the people and of them in the court was called, ^ote in
bosom.

The Same year in the feast of Pentecoste, holden at Grenewyche, that is to say
the Thursday in the same w^ke, his grace with two other with him challenged all
comers, to fight with them at the barriers with targot and casting y^ spear
of.viii. foot long, and that done his grace with the said two aids to fight
every of them.xii. strokes with twohanded swords, with and against all
comers, none except being a gentelma^, where the king behaved him self so
well, and delivered him self so valiauntly by his hardy prowes and great
strength that the praise and laud was given to his grace, and his aids:
notwithstanding that diverse valiant and strong persons had assailed him and
his aids.

From thence the whole Court removed to Wyndesore, than beginning his
progress, exercisyng him self daily in shotyng, singyng* dau^syng, wrastelyng,
casting of the bar* plaiyng at the recorders, flute, virginals, and in
setting of songs* making of balettes, and did set.ii. goodly masses, every of
them five parts, which were song o^tentymes in his chapel, and afterward
in diverse other places. And when he came to Okyng, there were kept both Iustes
and Turneys: the rest of this progress was spent in huntyng, hawkyng, and
shotyng.

The king being thus in his progress hard every day more and more
complayntes of Empson and Dudley, Empson and D^dl^y ^ehedded.
wherefore he sent wryttes to the Shyrifes of London, to put them in execucion,
and so the.xvii. day of August, they were both behedded at the Tower hyl, and
their bodies buried and their heads.

The said progress finished* his grace, y^ Queen, with all their whole train,
in the month of October following, removed to Grenewyche.

The king not minded to se young Gentelmen, inexpert in marcial ^eates* caused a
place to be prepared within the park of Grenewyche for the Queen and the
ladies to stand and se the ^ighte with battaill axes that should be done
there, where the king him self armed, fought with one Gyot a gentelman of
Almayne, a talle man, and a good man of arms. And than after they had done,
they marched always two and two togethers, and so did their feats and
enterprises every man very well: Albeit, it happened the said Gyot to fight
with sir Edward Haward, which Gyot was by him stryken to the ground.

The morrow after this enterprise done, the king with the Queen came to the
Tower of London. And to thentent that there should no displeasure nor malice be
borne by any of those Gentelmen, which fought with the axe against other. The
king gave unto the^ a certain sum in gold, valewed at.cc. mark, to make a
banquet amongst them selfs with all: The which banquet was made at the
Fishemongers Halle in Teames street, where they all met to the number
of.xxiiii, all appareyled in one suit or livery, after Almain fashion, that is
to say, their utter garments all of yealow Satyne, yealow hosen, yealow shoes
gyrdels scaberdes, and bonettes with yealow feathers, their garments and hosen
all cut and lyned with white Satyn, and their scaberdes wound a bought with
satyne: After their banquet ended, they went by torche light to the Tower,
presentinge them selfs before the king, who took pleasure to behold them.

From thence, the.viii. day of November, his grace removed to Rychemond, and
willed to be declared to all noble men and ge^telmen, that his grace with two
aides, that is to wit master Charles Brandon, and master Compton, during two
days would answer al comers with spear at the Tylt one day, and at turney
with swords, the other.

And to accomplish this enterprice the.xiii. day of November, his grace armed
at all pieces with his two aids entered the feelde, their bases and trappers
were of clothe of gold, set with red roses, ingreyled with gold o^ brouderye:
The counterparte came in freshly, appareyled every man after his devise. At
these Iustes the king brake more staves then any other, and therefore had the
price: At the Turney in likewise, the honor was his. The second night were
diverse strangers of Maximilian the Emperors court, and Ambassadors of
Spaygne with y^ ^yng at supper: when they had supped, the king willed them to
go into the Queen's chamber, who so did. And in the mean season, the king
with.xv. other, appareled in Almayne Iackettes of Crymosyne, and purple Satyne,
with long quar^ered sleues, with hosen of the same suit, their bonettes of white
velvet, wrapped in flat gold of Damask, with visers and white plumes, came in
with a mo^mery, and after a certain ^yme that they had played with the Queen
and the strangers, they departed. Then suddenly entered.vi. mynstrels, rychely
appareled, plaiyng on their instruments, and then followed.xiiii. persons
Gentelmen, all appareyled in yealow Satyne, cut like Almaynes, bearyng torches.

After the^ came.vi. disguised in white Satyne and grene, enbroudered and set
with letters and castles of fine gold in bullion, the garments were of
strange facion, with also strange cuttes, every cut knytte with points of
^yne gold and tassels of the same, their hosen cut and tied in likewise, their
bonettes of clothe of silver, wound with gold. First of these.vi. was the
king, the earl of Essex, Charles Brandon, sir Edward Hawarde, sir Thomas
Kneuet, and sir Henry Guylforde. Then part of the Ge^telmen bearing torches
departed* and shortly returned, after whom came in.vi. ladies, appareled in
garments of Crymosyn Satyn enbroudered and trauessed with cloth of gold, cut
in Pomegranettes and yokes, strynged after the facion of Spaygne. Then the
said.vi. men dau^ced with these.vi. ladies: and after that they had dau^ced a
season, the ladies took of the men's visa^s, whereby they were known: Whereof
the Queen and the strangers much praised the king, and ended the pas^ime.

It is to be noted that at this time the Queen was great with child, and
shortly after this pastyme, she took her chamber at Richemond, for the which
cause the king kept his Christmas there. And on Newyeres day, the first day
of January, the Queen was delivered of a Prince to the great gladness of the
Realm, for the honor of whom, fyers were made, and diverse vessels with wine,
set for such as would take thereof in certain streates in London, and
general processions thereupon to laud God. As touching the preparacion of
the Princes Christening, I ouerpasse, which was honorably done, whose
godfathers at the fout were the Archbishop of Caunterbury, and the earl of
Surrey. Godmother the lady Katheryne Countess of Devonshire, daughter to king
Edward the fourth.

Against the.xii. day or the day of the Epiphanie at night, before the
banquet in the Hal at Richemond, was a pageau^t devised like a mountain,
glisteringe by night, as though it had been all of gold and set with stones,
on the top of the which mountain was a tree of gold, the branches and bows
frysed with gold, spredynge on every side over the mountain, with Roses and
Pomegarnettes, the which mountain was with vices brought up toward the king,
and out of the same came a lady, appare^led in cloth of gold, and the children
of honor called the Henchemen, which were freshely disguised, and daunced a
Morice before the king. And that done, reentred the mountain and then it was
drawn back, and then was the wassaill or banquet brought in, and so brake up
Christmas.

Shortly after* and before the Queen's churchinge, the king rode to Walsingham.
The Queen being Churched or purified, the king and she removed from Rychemonde
to Westmynster, where was preparacion for a solemn Iustes in the honor of the
Queen, the king being one, and with him three aids: his grace being called Cure
lo^al, ye lord William earl of Devonshire, called Bon volo^re, Sir Thomas
Kneuet named Bon espoir, Sir Edward Neuile, called Valiant desire, whose
names were set upon a goodly table, and the table hanged in a tree, curious^y
wrought, and they were called Les quater Chiualers de la f^rrest saluigne,
these four to run at the tilte against all co^mers, with other certain
Articles comprised in the said table.

A place in the Pallayce was prepared for the king, and also the Queen,
rychely hanged, the inner part with cloth of gold, and the utter with rich
clothe of Arras. These Iustes began the.xiii. day of February. After that,
that the Queen with her train of ladies had taken their places, into the
Pallays was conveyed a pag^au^t of a great quantite, made like a forest with
rocks, hills and dales, with diverse sundry trees, flowers, hathornes, fer^e
and grass, with six forsters, sta^dynge within the same forest, garnyshed in
cotes and hodes of grene Ueluet, by whom lay a great number of speres, all the
trees, herbs, and flowers, of the same forest were made of grene Ueluet, grene
Damask, and silk of diverse colors, Satyn and Sercenet. In the mids of this
forest was a cas^ell standing, made of gold, and before the Castle gate sat a
gentelman freshly appare^led, making a garlande of Roses for the price. This
forest was drawn, as it were by strength of two great beasts, a Lion and an
Ant^lop, the Lion floryshed all over with Damask gold, The Antelop was
wrought all over with silver of Damask, his beams or horns and tuskes of
gold: these beasts were led with certain men appareiled like wild men, or
woodhouses, their bodies, heddes, faces, hands, and legs, covered with grene
Sylke flosshed: On either of the said Antelop and Lion, sat a lady richely
appareiled, the beasts were tied to the pageant with great chains of gold,
as horses be in the carte. When the pageant rested before the Queen, the
forenamed forsters blew their horns, then the devise or pageant opened on all
sides, and out issued the foresaid four knights, armed at all pieces, every
of them a spear in his hand on horseback with great plumes on their heddes,
their basses and trappers of clothe of gold, every of them his name enbroudered
on his basse and trapper: on the other part with great noise, as well of
Trompettes as of Dro^mes entered into the field, the earl of Essex, the lord
Thomas Hawarde with many other clean armed, their trappers and basses all of
Crymosyn Satyn enbroudered with branches of Pomegarnettes of gold, and posies
with many a fresh Gentelman, riding before them, their fotemen also well
appareiled: And so the Iustes began, and endured all that day.

The morrow being the.xiii. day of February after dynner, at time convenient,
the Queen with the ladies repaired to see the Iustes, the trompettes blew up,
and in came many a noble man and Gentelma^, rychely appareiled, taking up
their horses, after whom followed certain lords appareiled, they and their
horses in cloth of gold and ^usset tynsell: Knights in clothe of gold and
^usset Ueluet. And a great number of Gentelmen on foot, in russet satyn and
yealow, and yomen in russet damask and yealow, all the nether part of every
man's hosen Skarlet, and yealow cappes. Then came the king under a Pauilion of
clothe of gold, and purpul Ueluet enbroudered, and poudered with H. and K. of
fine gold, the compass of the Pauilion above, enbroudered rychely, and valenced
with flat gold, beten in wyre, with an Imperial croune in the top of fine
gold, his bases and trapper of clothe of gold, fretted with damask gold, the
trapper pe^dant to the tail. A crane and chafron of stele, in the frount of the
chafro^ was a goodly plume set full of musers or trimblyng spangles of gold.
After followed his three aids, every of them under a Pauilion of Crymosyn
damask and purple poudred with H. and K. of fine gold valenced and frynged
with gold of damask: on the top of every Pauilion a great K. of gold
smythes work, the number of the Gentelmen and yomen attendant a foot,
appareiled in russet and yealow was.C.lxviii. Then next these Pauilions
came.xii. children of honor, sitting every of them on a great courser, rychely
trapped and enbroudered in several devises and facions, where lacked neither
brouderie nor goldsmythes work, so that every child and horse in device and
facion was contrary to other, which was goodly to behold.

Then on the counter part, entered sir Charles Bra^don, first on horsbacke in a
long robe of Russet satyn, like a recluse or a religious person and his horse
trapped in the same sewte, without dromme or noise of mynstrelsye, puttinge a
byll of peticion to the Queen, the effect whereof was, that if it would please
her to license him to run in her presence, he would do it gladly, and if
not, then he would depart as he came. After that his request was granted,
then he put of his said habyte, and was armed at all pieces, with rich bases
and horse, also rychely trapped, and so did run his horse to the tylte end,
where diverse men on foot appareiled in Russet satyn awaited on him: next after
came in alone young Henry Guylford Esquier, him self and his horse in russet
cloth of gold* and clothe of silver, closed in a device, or a pageant made
like a Castle or a Turret, wrought of Russet sercenet florence, wrought, and
set out in gold with his word or posye, and al his men in Russet satyn and
white, with hosen to the same, and their bonettes of like colors, demanding
also license of the Queen to run, which to him granted took place at the end
of the tylte. Then came next the Marquis Dorset and sir Thomas Bulleyn, like
two pilgrems from saint James, in ^aberdes of black Ueluet, with palmers
hattes on their helmettes, with long Jacobs staves in their hands, their horse
trappers of black Ueluet, their taberdes, hattes, and trappers set with
scaloppe schelles of fine gold, and strippes of black Ueluet, every s^rip set
with a scalop shell, their servants all in black Satyn, with scalop shelles
of gold in their breasts. Sone after came in the lord Henry of Buckyngham Earl
of Wylshire, him self and his horse appareiled in cloth of silver, enbroudered
with a posye, or his word, and arrows of gold in a posye, called La ma^son
du refuge, made of Crymosyn damask, broudered with Roses and arrows of gold,
on the tope a greyhonde of silver, bearinge a tree of Pomegarnettes of gold,
the branches thereof were so large that it over sprede the pagent in all
parts. Then entered sir Gyles Capell, sir Roulande with many other knights,
rychely armed and appareiled. And thus began the Iustes, which was
valiauntly acheued by the king and his aids, emo^ges whom his grace atteyned
ye price. These Iustes fynished, every man with drew, the king was disarmed,
and at time convenient he and the Queen heard eue^song, and that night all the
Ambassadors supped with the king, and had a great banquet. After soupper, his
grace with the Queen, lords and ladies came into the white Hall, within the
said Pallays, which was hanged rychely, the Hall was sca^olded and ray^ed on
all parts. There was an interlude of the gentelmen of his chapel before his
grace, and diverse fresh songs: that done, his grace called to him a great
man, or a lord of Ireland called Odouell, whom in the presence of the said
Ambassadors, he made knight: then the mynstrels began to play, the lords
and ladies began to dance.

And in the most of this pastyme, when all persons were most atte^tyue to
behold the daunsyng, the king was suddenly gone unknown to the most part of
the people there, oneles it were of the Queen and of certain other. Within a
littell while after his departing, the trompettes at the end of the Hall began
to blow. Then was there a device or a pageau^t upon wheles brought in, out of
the which pageau^t issued out a ge^telman rychelye appareiled, that showed,
how in a garden of pleasure there was an arber of gold, wherein were lords
and ladies, much desirous to show pleasure and pastyme to the Queen and
ladies, if they might be licenced so to do, who was answered by the Queen, how
she and all other there were very desirous to se them and their pastyme: then
a great cloth of Arras that did hang before the same pageau^t was taken away,
and the pageaunt brought more nere, it was curiously made and pleasant to
behold, it was solemn and rich, for every post or pillar thereof, was
co^uered with frise gold, therein were trees of Hathorne, Eglantynes, Rosiers,
Uynes and other pleasant flowers of diverse colors, with Gillofers and other
herbs all made of Satyn, damask, silk, silver and gold, accordingly as the
natural trees, herbs, or flowers ought to be. In which arber were.vi. ladies,
all appareiled in white satyn and grene, set and enbroudered full of H. and K.
of gold, knytte together with laces of gold, of damask, and all their
garments were replenyshed with glytteringe spangles gylt over, on their heddes
were bonettes all opened at the.iiii. quarters, ouerfrysed with flat gold of
damask, ye or^ellettes were of rolls, wrethed on lampas douck holow, so y^
the gold showed through ye la^pas douck, ye fassis of their head set full of new
devised facions: in this garden, also was the king and.v. with him appareiled
in garments of purple satyn, all of cuttes with H. and K. every edge garnished
with frysed gold, and every garment full of poysees, made of letters of fine
gold in bullyo^ as thick as they might be, and every person had his name in
like letters of massy gold. The first Cuer loyal, The second Bone volure, in
the.iii. Bone espoier, The.iiii. Valyau^t desire, The fyst Bone foy, The.vi. A
moure loyal, their hose^, cappes, and cotes, were full of poyses and H. and K.
of fine gold in bullio^, so y^ the ground could s^ace apere and yet was in
every void place spa^gels of gold. Whe^time was come, y^ said pagea^t was
brought forth into presence, and then disce^ded a lord and a lady by coples,
and then the mynstrels, which were disguised also dau^ced, and the lord and
ladies daunced, that it was a pleasure to behold.

In the mean season the pagiaunt was conveyed to the end of the place, there
to tarry till the daunces were finished, and so to have received the lords and
ladies again, but sodanly the rude people ran to the pagent, and rent, tare,
and spoiled the pagent, so that the lord Stuard nor the head officers could not
cause them to abstain, except they should have foughten and drawn blood,
and so was this pagent broken.

After the king and his co^paignions had dau^ced, he appointed the ladies,
gentelwomen and the Ambassadors to take the letters of their garments, in
token of liberality, which thing the common people perceyuyng* ran to the
king, and stripped him into his hosen and dublet, and all his compaignions in
likewise. Sir Thomas Kneuet stood on a stage, and for all his defense he lost
his apparel. The ladies likewise were spoiled, wherefore the kings guard came
suddenly, and put the people back, or else as it was supposed more
inconvenience had ensued. So the king with the queen and the ladies returned to
his chamber, where they had a great banquet, and all these hurtes were turned to
laughyng and game, and thought that, all that was taken away was but for
honor, and larges: and so this triumph ended with myrthe and gladness. At this
banquet, a shipeman of London caught certain letters which he sold to a
goldsmyth for.iii. l.xiiii. s.viii. d. by reason whereof, it appeared that the
garments were of a great value.

After this great joy came sorrowful chance, for the young Prince, which was
borne upon Newyeres day last past, upon the.xxii. day of February, being then
the eue^ of saint Mathy, departed this world at Rychemonde, and from thense
was carried to Westmynster, and buried.

The king like a wise Prince, took this dolorous chance wondrous wisely, and
the more to comfort the Queen, he dissimuled the matter, and made no great
mourning outwardely: but the Queen like a natural woman, made much
lamentacion, how be it, by the kings good persuasion and behauior, her sorrow
was mytigated, but not shortly. This year also in the month of February,
came from king Ferdina^do, the kings father in law, and king of Arragon and
Castle certain Ambassadors, which made request to the king, on the behalf
of the king their master, to have aid of the king of.xv.C. Archers, with
valiant Capitaynes to govern and conduyte them: For his intent was to make
war on the Moors, being Infideles and enemies to Gods law. The king and his
counsayl hearing this request, thought it much honorable to aid a Christian
Prince, and in especial his friend and father in law, against the Infideles
enemies to Christ's law, wherefore the king gentely granted them their
request. When tydinges were spread in the court of this journey against the
infideles, the lord Thomas Darcye, knight of the order of the gartier, made
humble suyte to the king, to be captain general of that Crewe or army. The
king and his counsayll for his great valiantnes and approved wisdom granted
his request: many lords and knights made suyte to be in the same journey, but
the king answered them, y^ he retained them still for other greater
consideracions and purposes. There were appointed to go with the said lord
Darcie, lord Anthony Gray, brother to the Marquis Dorset, Henry Guyldeford,
Westo^, Broune, Wiliam Sydney, Esquyers of the kings house, sir Robert
constable, sir Roger Haystynges, and sir Raufe Elderkare, and diverse other
gentelme^ to be capitaynes. The lord Darcie and all the other capitaynes took
their leave of the king, and went into their countries to provide for all
things, mete and necessary for the voyage.

The king this time was much entysed to play at tennes and at dice, which
appetite, certain crafty persons about him perceiving, brought in Frenchmen
and Lombardes, to make wagers with him, and so he lost much money, but when he
perceived their craft, he exchuyd their compaignie, and let them go. The king
being lustye, young, and coragious, greatly delited in feats of chyualrie, in
so much that he made a challenge of Iustes, against all co^mers to be proclaimed
at his mannoure of Grenewyche, to be holden there the.iii. first days of May
then next ensuyng, which noble courage, all young persons highly praised, but
the ancient fathers much doubted, consideringe the tender youth of the king,
and diverse chances of horses and a^^^re: in so much that it was openly spoken,
that stele was not so strong, but it might be broken nor no horse could be so
sure of foot, but he may fall: Yet for all these doubts, the lusty prince
proceeded in his challenge.

The first day of May the king accompaignied with many lusty Batchelers, on
great and well doing horses rode to the wodde to fetch May, where a man might
have seen many a horse raised on high with galope, turn and stop,
meruaylous to behold: where he and.iii. other as sir Edward Haward, Charles
Brandon, and Edward Neuel, which were chalengers with the king, shyfted them
selfs into cotes of grene Satyn, guarded with Crymosyn Ueluet. On the other
part the Earls of Essex, of Deuenshyre, the Marquis Dorset, the lord Haward,
were all in Crymosyn Satyn, guarded with a pou^ced guard of grene Ueluet: and as
they were retornyng on the Hill* mete with them a ship under sail: The
master hayled the king and that noble compaignie, and said that he was a
Maryner, and was come from many a strange port, and came hither to se if any
deeds of arms were to be done in the country, of the which he might make
report thereof in other countries. An Heraulde demanded the name of his
ship, he answered she is called Fame, and is laden with good Renoune: Then
said the Heraulde, if you will bring your ship into the bay of Hard^nes, you
must double y^ point of Ge^^^^nes, and there you shall se a compaignie that
will meddle with your merchaundise. Then said the king, sythen Renown is their
merchaundyse, let us bye it and we can: Then the ship shot a pele of Ennys,
and sailed forth before the kings compaignie, full of flagges and banners,
till it came to the tylte year^e. At after nonne, the king and his three fellows
entered into the field, their bardes and bases of Crimosyn and blew Ueluet, cut
in quadra^t cuttes, embroudered full of Pomgranettes, and all the wayters, in
sylke of the same color. The other party were in Crymsyn Satyn and grene
Ueluet. Then began the trompettes to sound, and the horses to run that
many a spear was brast, and many a great strype given: and for a truth the
king exceded in number of staves all other, every day of the.iii. days.
Wherefore on y^ iii. day, the Queen made a great ba^ket to the king, and all
them that had Iusted: and after the ba^ket done, she gave ye chief price to the
king, the.ii. to the Earl of Essex, the.iiii. to y^ earl of Deuo^shyre, and
the.iii. to the lord Marquis Dorset. Then ye Herauldes cried, my lords, for
your noble feats in arms, God send you y^ love of your ladies ye you most
desire.

The iii year.
THe king ever desirous to serve Mars, began another Iustes ye xv. day of ye
said month: ye king and his bend were all in grene sylke* and ye earl of Essex
and his bend in blew, guarded with gold, and all y^ speres were painted of
the same colors. There was good running and many a spear brast, but for all y^
sport every man feared, lest some ill chance might happen to the king, and
feign would have had him a loker on, rather then a doer, and spoke thereof as
much as they durst: but his courage was so noble that he would ever be at the
one end.

In this pass time, the lord Darcy and other appointed to the vyage against
the Moors of Barbaria (at the instaunce of Do^peferna^do rather to the Queen)
made such diligence, that they and all their people were ready at Plymmouth by
the mids of May, and there mustered their soldiers before the lord Broke,
and other the kings commissioners. The said lord Darcie, as captain
general ordained for his Provost Marshal, Henry Guylford Esquier, a lusty
yongma^, and well beloved of the king. Then, when the wind served to their
purpose, and all the army were set aborde in their ships, which were
vytaled and pressed at all points, the Captain and other departed out of
Plymmouth haue^, the monday in the Rogacio^ weke with.iiii. ships Royal and
the wind was so favorable to them, that the first day of June, being the
even of the feast of Pentecost, he arrived at the port of Caleys in
Southspayne, and immediately by the advice of his counsayll, dispatched to the
king of Arragon two Gentilmen, called Ihon Barthelmew, and William Symonde,
with letters to certefie the king and his counsayll of their arrival, and what
pain they had taken to come to his country, in fulfilling the king their
masters commandment. The messingers did so much that they came to the king,
beside the city of Cyuill, where he then lay, and declared to him how the lord
Darcie by the king their masters apoyntement, was come thither with.xvi.C
archers mo, according to the said king of Arragons request, and lay still at
Caleys to know his pleasure. The king of Arragon answered them gentelly* that
the lord Darcie and all other that were come from his most best beloved son
were welcome* and heartily thanked them of their pains, and prayed the
messengers to return to their captain showing him that the king in all haste
would send his cou^sail to him, and so they departed from the king, and made
report to the lord Darcie, which kept his ship in great estate, and would
not land, but only suffered such as were sick and feeble, and few other to go
a land.

The Englismen which went a land, fell to drinking of hot wynes and were
scace masters of them selfs, some ran to the stews, some brake hegges,
and spoiled orchardes and vyneyardes, and orynges before they were ripe, and
did many other outrageous deeds: wherefore y^ che^e of the town of Caleys, came
to complain to the lord Darcie in his ship, which sent forth his Provost
Marshal, which scacelie with pain re^rayned the yomen archers, they were so
hot and wil^ull, yet by commandment and policy, they were all brought on
board on their ships.

Saterdaye the.viii. day of June, the Bishop of and other of the kings
counsayll, arrived at Caleys, and there abode till wednysdaye, being the even
of Corpus Christi, at which day the lord Captain took land, and was
honorably received of the king of Arragons counsayl* and on the morrow highly
fe^^ed at dynner and supper. And after supper, the bishop declared the king of
Arragons pleasure saying my lord Captain* the king my master in most humble
wys^ gives you thanks for your great pains and travel, as mo^he as though
he proceeded in this pretensed enterprice, but he with the advice of his
counsel circumspectly, considering the suertie of his own realms and
dominions has perfectie knowledge, that his aduersarye of France, prepares
to invade his countries in his absence: wher^ore he entending not to leave his
Realms, void of men and ships (which might be a great comfort to his
enemies to invade) and therefore he has taken an abstinence of war with the
Moors till another time. Well says the lord Darcie, sithe it is fully
concluded that we shall do no service to their master, we may not say
against his determinacion, considering we were sent to him, but surely it is
against my heart, which ever has desired to fight against Gods enemies, but
with your conclusion, I and all mine must be content. You do as you should do,
said the Bishop, and the king my master gives like thanks to the king his
son, and to you all, as though he had proceeded in his journey. And you shall
have wages for all your soldiers: and if it shall please you to come to the
court, you shall receive high thanks of the king, and such ^here as there can
be made you. That is not my desire said the lord Darcie, for my men shall not
say that I brought them out of their country, and now to do my self pleasure,
leave them without an hedde, as men of men forsaken: nay nay my lord, the
kings banquet is not my desire. So the lords departed for y^ night, and the
next day in the morning was sent wages, to conduict tharmie into England, with
diverse gifts given to the lord Darcie, and other gentle men: Yet ye
notwithstanding, he was highly displeased, how beit like a wise man he
dissimuled ye matter.

The Same day, being the.xiiii. day of June and Fridaie, an English manne
desired of a maid, that had been at the Bakers to bye bread for her maistres
store and not to sell, to have a lofe for his money, she answered, that she
had none to sell, he said he would have one, and followed her, and when she
perceived that, she cried, a force a force, the tounes men of Caleis, or Caleis
males, suddenly rong their common bell, and all the town went to harneis, and
the few Englishmen that were on land went to their bows. The Spaniardes cast
darts, and sore anoyed and hurt the Englishmen: and they likewise hurt and
slew diverse Spanyardes. Then the Capitaines of England for their part, and
the lords of the Counsel for their part, took such pain, that the fraie
was seized, and but one Englisheman slain, and of the Spanyardes diverse slain.

Then all English men were commanded to go aborde with their ships. The
lords of Spain came to the lord Darcie, saying: Sir, we pray you, sith you
know the kings pleasure and have your wages, that you with all your people
will go with your ships away, for we perceive you owe us some displeasure.
Then he boldly answered saying, that he would all the world knew, that he was
as able to condu^t his men homewarde, as he was to bring them out of their
country, without the king of Arrago^s wages, (saving his honor) and as for the
^raie, it was against his will and without his knowledge: and so that night he
and all his men, went aborde with their ships.

When this journey was come to this point, Henry Guilforde, Westo^, Brown, and
Willyam Sidney, young and lusty Esqutres, desired license to see the Court of
Spain, which was to them granted: and then they departed from Caleis, and
came to the Court of the king of Arragon, where they were highly entertained,
and he dubbed Henry Guildford, West^n, and Brown, knights, and gave to sir
Henry Guilforde, a Canton of Granado, and to sir Westo^, and Brown, and Egle
of Scicile on a cheffe to the augmentacion of their arms: William Sidney, so
excused himself, that he was not made knight, and when they had soiornied there
a while, they took their leave of the king and queen, and so returned through
France into England, where they demained themselves so, y^ they had the kings
favor, notwithstanding it was thought contrary.

During which season the lord Darcie, the.xvii. day of June made sail
toward England, and arrived at Plimmouthe, and came to the king at Wyndsore,
and in August thus ended this voyage.

During the time that the Lord Darcie was in Spain, the Lady Margaret Duches
of Sauoy, and daughter to Maximilian themperor, and governor of the countries
of Flaunders, Brabant, Holland, Zela^de and other the low countries
apperteinyng to Charles the young prince of Castle, then being of tender age,
sent in the end of Maij to the king of England to have.xv.c. archers, to aid
her against y^ duke of Geldres which sore trobled the countries aforsaid. The
king tendrely regardyng the request of so noble a lady, and also because there
was a communicacio^ hangyng at their time of marriage, to be had between the
young Prince Charles, and the lady Marie his sister, most iently granted her
request, and appointed sir Edward Pounynges knight of the garter, and
co^ptroller of his house, a valiant capitain and a noble warrior, to be the
lieuetenaunt and conducter of thesaid.xv.c. archers, which acco^paignied with
the lord Clynto^ his son in law, sir Matthew Broune, sir Ihon Dighby, Ihon
Werton, Richard Whethrill, Sherley Esquires and diverse tal gentlemen and
yomen, well known men and tried, to thesaid nombre of xv.c. took their
shippyng a mile beside Sa^dwiche, the.xviii. day of July, and landed at Armew
the.xix. day, not without some troble by reason of a little storm, and sent
Lancastre Herald to auertise the lady of their arrival, which sent to the^
lord Bresley knight of the Toyson, and diverse other to welcome the^, and so
conduited the^ to Barow, where the lord of the town made them great chere.
And the same day at after noone, came the lady Margaret to Barow, where y^
capitain with all his under capitaines received her at the gate, she welcomed
the^ heartily, and so she did all the soldiers which stood a long reinged in
the street. And on saterdaie being the.xxvi. day of July, she saw all the
co^paignie shote, and the same night the capitain and other took his leave of
her, and the morrow being sondaie departed to Rossindale, and so on thursday
the last day of July came to Buldike, and that day the lady Margaret came
thither. And the next day, the whole army of Almaines, Flemynges, and other
apperteinyng to thesaied lady, met with thenglishemen without Buldike, where
the^ set forth in order, the lady Margaret being present: which took her leave
of all the capitaines and departed to Buldike, whom sir Edward Pounynges
conduited to the town gate, and after returned to tharmie. Tharmie to the
nombre of.x.M. of the ladies part, and.xv.c. Englishmen passed through Brabant,
and came the.x. day of August being.s. Laure^ce day, before a little castle
sta^dyng on the higher side of the river of Mase called Brymuoyst strongly
bulwarked, in the which were.c. men belongyng to the bastard of Gelders, with
a capitain called Lankessell van Gelder, which robbed and spoiled all the
parties of Braba^t. They within shot fiercely at tharmy as it passed by, and
did them little hurt. The Same night Thomas Heart chief governor of the^glish
part, made his approach of his ordinance, and in the morning bet down as much
as might be beaten down for the bulwarks, and the next day being the.xi. of
August the castle was assaulted valiantly, and taken by force, and the capitain
and.lxxx. and odd men were slain and.xix. taken, of the which xi. were hanged,
Ihon Mor to^ capitain of.c. Englismen, and one Guiot an esquire of Burgoin
criyng Burgoyne. S. George: there was one Englisheman slain and no more.

On thursdaie the.xiiii. day, tharmie feried oeur the river of Mase in to the
land of Geldres, and their soiornied at a little church, of our lady day the
Assumpcion that night, and the next day they came to a town called Aiske,
belongyng to the Bastard Geldres, where all the people were fled, and there was
undermined and cast down, a little castle standing of thesaid river newly
edified.

The.xx. of August they brent the town of Aiske, and brent all the country
about, and came at last to a town called Straulle, a strong town double
diked and walled, and within it.iii.C.lx. good men of war beside the
inhabitauntes, which at the first coming shot Gonnes fiercely and hurt
many, and there they planted their siege.

Sir Edward Pounynges, which ever was in the forward with his archers, caused
fagottes to be made, and trenches to be dug and cast and his men were so
diligent, that his trenche, in the morning approached so nigh the town gate,
that they within were half dismayed: and desired to speak with the Lords, and
so they did. And on. S. Barthelmewes even, were six men sent out of the town
to treat, and six hostages delivered for them, and then it was agreed that
all men of war should depart with a white stick in their hands, and to
^orfet all other things, and all the town dwellers to be prisoners at the
will of the Prince of Castle. The next day, after the men of war were
departed, erly in the morning sir Ihon Dighby knight, and Ihon Norton Esquire,
took possession of the town with.CC. English men: and at after None the
Admiral of Flaunders, sir Edward Pounynges, and the lord Discilstain, chief
capitaines of tharmie, with all other noble men, with Tru^pettes, and Arthoys
and Lancastre, and Ostriche, officers at arms in their coats of arms before
them gorgeously appareied, entered the town, and in the town hall, took
thothe of thinhabitantes, and y^ night returned to their army.

The.xxvi. day of the same month, sir Ihon Dighby, and Ihon Norton, came out
of the town with all their Englishmen, and for them entered a capitain called
Yonker Otes, with.CC.l. Almaines, to keep there a garrison, the which day the
army went before Uenlow and sent Artoys with a trumpet to somon the town: but
they would not here them speak* but shot gunnes at them. The.xxviii. day, the
army removed unto the Northside of Uenlow, and part went over the water and
made trenches to the water. The capitain of the Englishemen made trenches even
to the town diche, and the artilerie bet down the towers of the walls, and
every day was some skirmishe. And the.xxix. day as certain Englishemen went a
foragyng, it happened.x. of sir Ihon Dighbes men to go.v. mile from the army,
and to mete with.xxiiii. horsemen of Geldres which set on them, but they
withdrew themselfes into a little garden, and shot at their enemies, and slew
two horsemen and.v. horses, gauled and hurt many of the^, discomfited the
remnant, and brought two great horses to tharmie, and every man was sore
hurt, but in no perell of death thanked be God. The siege thus continuyng, not
without skirmishes xxix. days sir Edward Pounynges, sir Ihon Dighby dined with
monsire de Rony and all other English capitaines, and petie Capitaines, dined
with an Almain called Clean Anderlyne, except sir Matthew Broune, and Ihon Fogge
which kept the field, and Richard Wethill which kept the trenche and was
sore besette: and in the dinner time, they of the town issued out on
thenglishemen, and hurt and took, one Sheldwiche of Canterbury prisoner, and
one Miles: and thenglishmen hurt and slew many of them, and compelled them
to return by force of Arrows, and so they reculed with one prisoner. For
Miles, which was led between two of the Gelders, perceiuyng rescue coming,
after as he came to an hill, thurst the two Gelders down the hill before him,
and so ran back to his compaignie, which thing the two Gelders that led him
perceiuyng ran to Sheldwiche and slew him. The Burgonions perceiuyng, that
sir Edward Pownynges was displeased with this chance, exhorted him with his
men to assault the town, which by thaduise of bastard Emery answered that
the cause was theirs, and not his Masters: and if he gatte the town by
assault, the king his Master should not have it, but if they would give the
assault, he would join with them, which thing they would not do, because
they had kinsemen and friends, within the town: saving one day a few
Almaines assaulted a Bulwerke, and were slain and taken.

The English capitaines perceiuyng that they lay there in vain, co^sideryng
the strength of the town, and also how their army was not in nombre to
enuiron the town, for ever they had one Gate open, wrote to the king* which
willed them with all speed to return, and so they did.

Sir Edward Pownynges went to the Court of Burgoyn, where he was highly
enterteined of the young prince, and the Lady Margaret his aunte, and received
great thanks and gifts for his pain. And other cacapitaines, as sir Ihon
Norton, sir Ihon Fogge, sir Ihon Scot, and sir Thomas Lind, were made knights
of the Prince. And the lady Margaret, perceiuyng the coats of the soldiers to
be foul with liyng on the ground, (for every man lay not in a tent) gave to
every yoman, a cote of woollen clothe of yelowe, red, white and grene colors,
not to her little laud and praise among thenglishmen. After that sir Edward
pounynges had been highly feasted, and more praised of all men for his
valiantnes, and good order of his people, he returned with his co^paignie into
England, and had lost by war and sickness, not fully an.C. persons.

When the Englishemen were departed, Geldres issued out daily, and made
skirmisshes and fraies with the Burgonions, and asked for their Archers, and
Winter began sharply to approach, and by abundance of rain the river of
the Mass roase so high, that the Trenches were drouned, and of force men
were compelled to remove. And when the Capitaynes considered the strength of
the Town, how it was fortified, victayled and manned, and how by the rysyng
of the River it was made stronger: they determined to raise the Siege, and too
burn and destroy all the Uillages and Towns about, of the which town of
Ue^low, should have succor in winter, and to mete again, at the Prime time of
the year. Thus was the siege raised, and the country wasted and spoiled, and
then every capitain returned home.

In June the king being at Leicester, tidings were brought to him, that Andrew
Barton a Scottishe manne, and a pirate of the sea, saying that the king of
Scotts, had war with the Portingales, did rob every nation, and so stopped
the kings stremes, that no merchauntes almost could pass, and when he took
thenglishemenes goods, he said they were Portyngales goods, and thus he
haunted and robbed at every haue^s mouth. The king moved greatly with this
crafty pirate, sent sir Edmond Haward lord Admiral of England, and lord
Thomas Haward son and heir to therle of Surrey, in all the have to the sea,
which, hastily made ready two ships, and without any more abode, took the
sea, and by chance of wether were severed. The lord Haward liyng in the
Dounes, perceived where Andrew was making toward Scotla^de, and so fast
thesaied lord chased him, that he over took him, and there was a sore
battaill: thenglishmen were fierce, and the Scotts defended them manfully, and
ever Andrew blewe his whistell to encorage his men, yet for all that, the lord
Haward and his men, by clean s^rength entered the main deck: then the
Englishemen entered on all sides, and the Scotts fought sore on the hatches,
but in conclusion, Andrewe was taken, which was so sore wounded, that he died
there: then all the remnaunte of the Scotts were taken, with their ship
called the Lion.

All this while, was the lord Admiral in chase of the Bark of Scotland,
called Ienny Pirwyn, which was wont to sail with the Lion in compaignie, and
so much did he with other, that he laid him on board, and fiercely assailed
him, and the Scotts as hardy and well stomaked men them defended, but the
lord Admiral so encoraged his men, that they entered the Bark and slew
many, and took all the other.

Thus were these two ships taken, and brought to Black Wall, the second day
of August, and all the Scotts were sent to the Bishops place of York, and
there remained at the kings charge, til other direccion was taken for them.

After this, the king sent the bishop of Winchester, and certain of his
counsel to tharchebishop of Yorkes place, where the Scotts were prisoners:
and there the bishop rehearsed to the^, where as peace was yet between England
and Scotland, that they contrary to that, as thieves and pirates, had robbed the
kings subjects within his stremes, wherefore, they had deserved to die by the
law, and to be hanged at the low water mark. Then said the Scotts, we
knowledge our oftence, and ask mercy and not the law. Then a priest, which
was also a prisoner said, my lords we appele from the kings justice to his
mercy. Then the bishop asked him, if he were aucthorised by the^ to say so, and
they cried al yea yea, then said he, you shall find y^ kings mercy, above his
justice. For where you were ded by ye law yet by his mercy he will revive you,
wherefore, you shall depart out of this realm within.xx. days, upon pain of
death, if you be found after the.xx. day, and pray for the king, and so
they passed into the Country.

The king of Scotts, hearing of the death of Andrewe of Barton, and taking of
his two ships, was wonderful wroth, and sent letters to the king,
requiryng restitucion, according to the league and amity. The king wrote with
brotherly salutacio^s, to the king of Scotts, of the robberies and evil
doings of Andrew Barton, and that it became not one Prince, to lay a breach
of a league, to another Prince, in doing Justice upon a pirate or thief, and
that all the other Scotts that were taken, had deserved to dye by Justice, if
he had not extended his mercy: and with this answer, the Scottishe Herald
departed home.

During this season, there began great war, between Pope July, and the
French king, Loys the.xii: the occasion began by one Ihon Bentiuoyle, a
great lord of Italy, which kept the city of Boloignele Grace, from the
Pope, which, by the aid of the French king, gatte thesaied city, from the
forenamed Ihon Bentiuoyle: but afterward because thesaid Pope July, took peace
with the Uenecians, the French king turned from the Pope, and made war on
him, in the behalf of Ihon Bentiuoyle, and took from him again, thesaid city
of Boloigne.

The king of England, wrote often to king Loys of France, to desist from the
persecutyng of the Pope, which was his friend and confederate: to which
writing he gave little regard, wherefore, the king sent him word, to deliver
him his lawful enheritaunce, both of the Duchy of Norma^die and Guyan, and
the countries of Aniow and Main and also of his Croune of France, else he
would come with such a power, that by fine force he would obtein his purpose.
For all these writings, the French king still made war in Italy, and the
king could of him, have no certain nor determinate answer. Wherefore, after
great deliberacion had, by the advice of his counsel, he determined to make
war on the French king, and his Countries, and called to him Maximilian the
Emperor, and Ferdinand king of Arragon, and diverse other princes, and made
preparacion, both by sea and by land, and fortified his frontiers against
France, and set forth ships to the sea, for defense of his merchauntes,
which were daily in ieoperdy, under a pretensed peace of the French king,
Jews the.xii.

The king this year, kep^ the reast of Christmas at Grenewiche, where was such
abundaunce of via^des served, to all comers of any honest behauor, as has been
few times seen. And against Newyeres night, was made in the halle a Castle,
gates, towers, and dungion, garnished with artilerie, and weapon after the
most warlike fashion: and on the frount of the castle, was written le
Fortress dangerus, and within the castle were vi. Ladies, clothed in Russet
Satin, laid all over with leaves of Gold, and every owde, knit with laces of
blewe silk and gold. On their heddes, coyfes, and cappes all of gold.

After this castle had been carried about the hal, and the queen had beheld it,
in came the king with five other, appareled in coats, the one half of russet
satyn, spangeld with spangels of fine gold, the other half rich clothe of
gold, on their heddes cappes of russet satin, embroudered with works of fine
gold bullio^. These vi. assaulted the castle, the ladies seeing them so lusty
and coragious, were content to solace with them, and upon farther communicacion,
to yield the castle, and so they came down and daunced a long space. And after
the ladies led the knights into the castle, and then the castle suddenly
vanished, out of their sightes.

On the day of the Epiphanie at night, the king with a.xi. other were
disguised, after the manner of Italy, called a mask, a thing not seen before in
England, they were appareled in garments long and broad, wrought all with
gold, with visers and cappes of gold, and after the banquet done, these Maskers
came in, with six gentlemen disguised in silk bearyng staff torches, and
desired the ladies to dance, some were content, and some that knew the
fashion of it refused, because it was not a thing commonly seen. And after they
daunced, and commoned together, as the fashion of the Mask is, they took
their leave and departed, and so did the Queen, and all the ladies.

The.xv. day of Ianuarij began the Parliament, where the Bishop of
Cantorburie, began his oracion with this verse, Iusticia and pax osculate sunt,
upon which, he declared how Justice should be ministered, and peace should
be nourished, and by what means, Justice was put by, and peace ^nrned into
war. And there upon he showed, how the French king would do no Justice, in
restoryng the king his right enhe^^^au^ce, wherefore, for lack of Justice,
peace of necessity must turn to war.

In this Parliament was granted, two fiftenes of the temporaltie, and of the
clergy two dismes: During which Parliament, one Newbolt yoman of the kings
Guard, whom, the king highly favored, slew wilfully a servant of my lord
Willoughbies, in the palaice at Westminster, wherefore, the king abhorryng that
deed, and setting a side al affeccion, caused him to be hanged, in the Palaice
of Westminster, where he hong two days, in example of other.

In this season, one Iherome Bonuise, which was borne in Luke, and was a
factor in London for Merchauntes of that nation, and had played Bankroute, and
was conueighed out of the realm for debt, was now in such favor with Pope
July, that he made him his Collector, and Proctor in England: and so he kept a
great port, and resorted to the king and his cou^saill, for the Popes
affairs, (which then was sore troubled by the French king) so that he knew,
both the Popes counsel, and the kings, and falsely and untruly, resorted by
night, to the French Ambassadors, liyng in London, and to them discovered,
what the king and the Pope intended, which was not so closly done, but the
king knew it: and so he was laid for, and was taken commonyng, with one of
thesaid Ambassadors, upon London wall at midnight, and brought to the Tower,
where he remained, till by the suite of his friends, he was delivered, and
shortly for shame, voyded the realm.

After that it was concluded, by the body of the Realm, in the high Court of
Parliament assembled, that war should be made on the French king and his
dominions, the king with all diligence caused new ships to be made and
repaired, and rigged the old, caused Gonnes, Bows, Arrows, and all other
artilery, and instruments of war to be made, in such nombre and quantitee,
that it was wonderful to se what things were done, both for sea and land in
so short space.

The king of Arragon, which also had war with the French king, and hearing
that his son the king of England would make war in France, did write to
him that the duchy of Euyan, was his true enheritaunce, which, adjoined to
his country of Biskey: wherefore, if the king of England would entende to
recover his Duchy first, and send an army of men to Biskaye, and so to begin
at Bayon, which is the keye of Guyan, he would aid them with ordinance,
horsemen, and beasts for cariages, with other necessaries apperteignyng to
the same.

The king and his counsel, puttyng their affiaunce in the promise of the king
of Arragon, prepared a noble army all of ^otemen, and small ordinance,
trustyng to the king of Arragon for aid of horsemen and great ordinance, and
of the same made capitain, the noble lord Thomas Gray Marquis of Dorset, to
whom, he assigned many other gentlemen, as you shall here after in the next
year.

The.iiii. year. The.iiii. year.

THE king greatly studiyng, to furnishe furthe his war, which he had begone
against the French king, caused sir Edward Hawarde his Admiral, with all
diligence to take the sea, which, with all speed possible made ready diverse
goodly and tall ships, as the sovereign and other to the nombre of.xviii.
beside little ships: and in his compaignie were Capitaines, sir Weston Brown,
Griffith Down, Edward Cobham, Thomas Wyndam, Thomas Lucie, Willyam Pirton,
Henry Shirborne, Stephen Bull, George Witwange, Ihon Hopton, Willyam Gimstone,
Thomas Draper, Edmond Coke, Iho^ Brodet, with diverse other. When all these
were shipped, they sailed to Dover, and skowred the seas, and so came before
Portesmouthe, about the mids of May.

The third day of May, a gentleman of Flaunders, called Guyot of Guy, came to
the king, with.v.C. Almaines all in white, which was cut so small, that it
could soace hold together. After they had mustered at Black Hethe, the king
made him knight, and gave him a great chain, and yearly pencion, and sent him
with his band to Southampton. About midde May, the lord Marquis and other
noble men, appointed by the king for the journey of Biskay, as the Lord
Hawarde, son and heir to the earl of Surrey, the Lord Broke, the Lord
Willoughby, the Lord Ferrers, the lord Ihon, the lord Anthony, and the the
lord Leonard Gray, all three brethren to the Marquis, sir Griffith App Rice,
sir Morreis Barkeley, sir Willyam Sands, the Baron of Burfford, sir Richard
Cornwall his brother, Willyam Huse, Iho^ Melton, Willyam Kyngston Esquires, sir
Henry Willoughby, and diverse other with soldiers, to the nombre of.x.M. men,
came to Southampton and there mustered. To se the lords and gentlemen, so well
armed and so richely appareled in clothes of gold, and of silver, and Ueluettes
of sundery colors, pounsed and enbr^udered, and all petie capitaines in Satin
and damask, of white and grene, and yomen in clothe of the same colors. The
Baners, Penons, Standerdes, and Gittons, fresh and newly painted, with sundery
beasts and devises, it was a pleasure to behold. And when sir Willyam Sands
knight, appointed Threasorer for the wars had paid all the wages, then every
man was commanded to his ship. Then you should have seen byndyng of males,
and fardelles, trussyng of coffers and trussers, that no man was idle: and so
on the.xvi. day, all the army were shipped in Spanishe ships, vitailed for
that journey, and passed the Nedles of Wight all the same day* and so did the
Lord Admiral, which lay abidyng the wind at Portesmouth, and took his
course to Britain, of who^ I will speak after.

The wind served the Marquis and his compaigne so well, that he with his whole
army arrived in Biskay, at a Port called Passagh, Southe West of Fountrabie.
The third day of June, the lord Marquis and all his fair compaignie landed,
and took the field, and him wisely embattailed for his sauegard. The Biskaynes
that brought vitaile to the army, said to the soldiers: Sirs you be
arrived her, in trust that the king of Arragon will help you with ordinance
and cariages, we here no preparacion that he makes, nor never sent us word to
prepare for your coming, of the which we marvel much. These words ran
daily through the host, which made many men sad and to muse: and the Biskanes
sore feared, least thenglishemen would destroy their country, because their
king kept not promise with them, but the Marquis made such straight
Proclamacion, that no soldier durst do any injury to them. Within three
days after that the army had lien in the feld, there came to him an earl, and
another noble man, to welcome him and his compaignie. Then the Lord capitain
removed his field, and took another place nerer Fountraby, more plenteous of
water and woodde, and there pitched his field, every day lookyng for aid of
the king of Arragon, but he hard of none. Then he called a Counsel, and
devised how they might have beasts to draw ordinance and cariages then one
sir Ihon Style an Englisheman, caused to be bought two.C. Mulettes an Asses,
of such price as the Spanyardes gained greatly, and when they were put to
carry, they would neither bear nor draw, for they were beasts which were not
exercised a fore. Then the Lord Marquis much lamented that chance, for if he
had had ready two hundred drawyng beasts, he might have run a great way in
Guian with his power, which then was not fortified, neither of men of war,
nor municions, nor artilarie.

The Frenchemen of Bayon, hearing of the Englishemennes camp, made a great
askry between the river of saint Maria and Bayon: the Englishmen perceiuyng
the same, passed ye river in good order of battle, all being on foot for lack
of the horsemen that the king of Arragon promised, and so with arrows chased
the Frenchemen on horsebackes that they fled, and many horses foundered, and
many a man was brosed or they came to Bayon: at the which thenglishmen laughed
and lamented. First, to se their cowardnes, second, to remember what they
might have done, if they had had horses mete for their purpose: yet all this
notwithstanding, they retired to their camp in such order, that the
Spanyardes wondered much, both at their fierce courage and sobre order.

The king of Nauar, hearing of the puissaunt army of the Englishemen liyng in
Biskey so nere to his country, was sore troubled, and wondered much what the
matter should mean: wherefore, he sent to the lord Marquis, a bishop and
diverse other, to show to him and all his cou^saill, that if it pleased them,
his country should send them victaill, and all things necessary for their
money, and to do any other pleasure that they could do, which might be to the
pleasure of him and all his army, so y^ his realm should be sure of any
inuacio^s to be made by his people

The Marquis being capitain general, with the advice of the other Lords and
counsel, much highly thanked the king of Nauer of his good will, aid, and
comfort, which things only they required: and if it pleased him, that his
people will and may victaill us, we shall not only pay them for it, but
also warraunt the passing and repassyng for us and ours in sauetie, and that
by us no prejudice shall be dooen to his realm, ^or by our concent. With which
answer the king of Nauer was joyous, and suffered his people to victaill, and
resort to the hoosie, with all things necessary and belongyng to the same, in
great winds and storms, for that time happened much wind and rain, which
sore encombered the soldiers, that lay nightly on the bare ground, for
every man had not a tent or pauilion, whereof some were lame, and some deffe,
with other diseases.

When the army had lien there.xxx. days, in the second camp there came from
the king of Arragon, a bishop and other nobles of his cou^saill: but when it
was known that it was the same bishop that made the answer to the lord
Darcle at Caleis Males; as you have hard the last year, then many said, he
came for no good but for delays: but he required the lord Marquis to take
patience, for shortly such prepare should be made, that he should see and
prove, that it should be to the honor of his Master, And his great renoume,
to whom the Marquis answered, that upon confidence of the king of Arragons
promise that they should lack no beasts mete for drawyng, and horsemen, the
king of England had sent him and his compaignions thither, whereof we have
trusted sith our first hither coming, which things if we had had, we had
dooen other enterprises then we have done: for now we have lien here in camp*
to the great charge of our Master the king of England, and to no profit, and
to our loss and great hurt. For at our arrival the country of Guyan for the
which we came, was unprovided of men of war, municions, and ordinance, by
reason whereof (if all things had been accomplished of the part of your Master
as we trusted) we might have had that which we came for, and if our commission
had not been to follow the king your Masters will, as to whom we be sent, I
assure you we would have dooen other wise or this: but now the Frenchemen have
fortefied, victailed, and manned their tounes, and we have spent time and
dooen nothing al all, lyngeryng for the king your Master, to the loss of us
and great blemishyng of our honors.

The bishop perceiuyng that the English capitaines were courageous and
discontent with their idle abode, flatteryngly desired them to tarry a while
for the best, for a back enemy said he, is to be regarded. Then said the
lord Marqu^s capitain general, if we knew the Kings intent, it would
suffice us. Then said the bishop, you shall know it shortly: and so he
departed from the army.

Tharmie this lyngeryng, ever desirous to be at the business that they came for,
their victaile was much part Garlike, and the Englishemen did eat of the
Garlike with all meats, and drank hot wynes in the hot wether, and did eat
all the hot fruits that they could get, which caused their bloudde so to
boil in their belies, that there fell sick three thousand of the flixe, and
thereof died.xviii. hundred men.

The lord Marquis and other capitaines perceiuyng this mischief, sent to the
king of Arragon certain Lords of the hooste to know his pleasure. The which
answered them with gentle fashion, that the counsel of England and his
counsel, had taken an order in all thing of late and how the duke Dalua a
great prince of Spain, should shortly with an army royal join with them,
and so to proceed in their enterprise. With which answer and small chere, the
lords of England departed, and made report to their capitain according,
which thought it very slight, but ever he regarded his Masters
commandment, and counseled all the lords to be content with the same.

The army liyng thus still, and the sickness not slaked, the people being
idle, some evil disposed persons said, that every capitain was
allowed.viii.d. for a common soldier, which was untrue, for they had allowed
only.vi.d, and so began together compaignies, the lords perceiuyng this, took
with them their trusty servants, and took the beginners of the mischief,
which were of the retinue of my lord Willoughby, and put them in ward. When
they were arrested, other of like evil disposicion began to crake and face,
which thing being perceived, the lord Marquis by the advice of other
capitaines caused search to be made, and so found out the beginner of the
mischief, which was delivered to Willyam Kyngston Esquire then Provost
Marshall, and so was put to death to the terror of all other.

During the time that the army lay thus lyngeryng, the Frenchmen diverse
times came to behold the Englishemen, and when they saw any part of the army
remove toward them, incontenent they fled: and so the English archers every
day went a forragyng on the borders of Guian almost to Bayon, and brent many
pretty vilages, but ever they desired to have tidings of the king of Arragon,
and to know what they should do, for they were commanded to be ruled by them.

The Englishemen thus liyng idly abidyng the aid of the king of Arragon,
tidings came daily into the host, how the Duke Dalua was coming with a great
puissaunce to join with the English army, and so to invade Guyan: the
English capitaines were joyful of these tidings, not so much for the aid
of the Spanyardes which they little regarded, but for the beasts for carriage
of great artilerie, which they brought not with them, in hope of the king of
Arragons promise: for if they had had beasts for their carriage, and great
ordinance according to the appoyntement, they would have done otherwise,
which thing sore grieved their hearts.

Now they thus lokyng for the Duke Dalua, hard every day how he marched
toward them, and was within a days journey or little more of them, of the
which the English men were merueilous joyful, but the Duke which
pretended another thing, suddenly removed his army in a night with such
diligence that he entered the realm of Nauer, and was before the city of
Pampilona the chief city of Nauer before the king wist of it, which nothing
suspected of that policy.

Thus the king was suddenly trapped, supposyng tharmie of Spain to have been
reised to invade Guyan, and having nothing defensable for the war, in the
night fled out at a posterne into France where he after died. The city of
Pampilona and all the country of Nauer, being unprovided of artilarie and
other defenses, yielded themselves to the Spanyardes, and thus was the realm of
Nauer won, which thing made the lord Marquis and his compaignie not a little
to marvel. So shortly after came to the lord capitain and the Englishemen,
diverse Lords sent from the King of Arragon, which said: The king our
sovereign lord, sends to you great gramercies, and highly tha^keth you for
your pain, and so it is that by Gods grace and your good abode, he with his
power has taken and conquered the realm of Nauer, and if that country had
not be taken, they might have intercepted all such ordinance and victail, as
the king of Arragon our master might have sent to you, but now you be in such
a surety and his puyssaunce with you, and youres with his, that ye may sauely
join, which you shall see shortly, ye and he himself in proper person to
join with you. Well said the lord Marquis capitain general, we have
soieourned long here abidyng his coming, and if the commission and express
commandment of the king my sovereign lord were not, that I should do nothing
without the assent of the king your master, I assure you that the Frenchmenne
should have known that Englishemen had been here, and not to have lien so long
in idleness as we have dooen: but if the king your master do as you report, it
shall be much to his honor and to our great comfort, and so the lords of
Spain departed.

As the army of Englishemen thus lay in camp, there was a village called
Sancta Maria, in which diverse of the Englishemen, and especially such as had
been sick, resorted and reposed theimself, not to the little advantage of the
town, so it fortuned that a Spanyard gave evil language to the Englisheman,
which gave him a buffet on the face, the town rose and set on the
Englisheman, and gathered in such a multitude, that the Englisheman which was
the first beginner was slain, because only three Englishemen came to his
rescue, which were all hurt. The Almaynes that lay at the tounes end, struck
Alarm which heatyng the camp, cried to harnes every man. The tidings were
brought to the camp, that they of the town had slain an Englishman, and would
bid battaill: the soldiers hearing this, in a rage ran to the town in such
manner, that the capitaines could not stay them, and slew and robbed the people
without mercy. The people fled over the water into Guyan. The Capitaines seeing
this, with their privy servants kept the straightes, by the which the
soldiers returned with village and naperie, brass, pewter, beds, plate, and
other household stuff, and apparel: which was commanded to be laid down by
the lords on a hepe. And after the lords went to the town to se what harm
the Englishmen had done, there they found many Biskaynes slain, and the town
robbed, and the people fled. Then they by sobre means and gentle exhortacion,
brought all the soldiers to the camp: then Proclamacion was made that every
man upon pain of death should bring in his pillage. Now there were.xxi men, of
who^ one was a gentleman, which had taken away.x. thousand Dukates, who fled
toward Gascoyne and were taken, and brought before the lord capitain and
other, and adjudged to dye: of the which.vii. were put in execucion, and the
other.xiiii. should have died the morrow after, if the lords of Spain had not
been there at their judgment which with great diligence and labor gat their
pardon: and so all the pillage almost was restored, and the country pacified..

Then one day the Frenchemen which hard of this riot and trouble in the
host, issued out of Bayon toward the English men's army, the Englishmen
hearing thereof, marched toward them, and when the Frenchemen perceived that
they were asskried, they suddenly returned. Thenglishemenne perceiuyng that the
Frenchemen would not tarry, went to a good town called saint Ihon de Luce, and
brent, robbed, and killed the inhabitauntes, and so from thence spoiled diverse
other villages, about the borders of Guyan. Thus the army lay till the
month of October, and winter began sore to increase, and the lord Marquis
capitain general fell sore sick, and then the lord Haward had under him the
whole governance of tharmie, to whom were sent diverse lords of the privy
cou^saill of Spain saying: the king our master sends you word, that he would
gladly come to you but the season is spent, the ground is so moist that
carriage cannot be conueighed, the feldes so barrain that beasts cannot feed,
and the wether so trobleous that people cannot well lie abroad in camp:
therefore he would desire you all these things considred, to break up your
field, and sever your self to the tounes and villages of his country, till the
spryng of the year, at which time there shall resort to you, fresh succors
out of England, and he himself will be with you with all ordinance necessary,
as becomes to such an army, and then shall proceed the first pretensed
enterprise, to the honor of the king your master and ours, and not to your
small fame and renoume. When this message was hard by the whole counsel, no man was contented, but the lord Haward which had the whole governance
under the Marquis said: what report of honor can we make of the king of
Arragon your master, for at his desire we be come hither, and here have lien in
camp a long space, ever tariyng for performaunce of his promise, and yet
nothing has he performed, our people be dedde of the flixe in great nombre:
we gentlemen euerychone does much lament this long idleness, by reason whereof
many a tall man having nothing to do, but abidyng your masters pleasure, has
fall to some mischief, or by sickness, or else for misdoyng executed by Justice.
What shall the king our master report of our slothfulnes, which has spent
him innumerable treasure and nothing gained? And yet we would make Winter
war, and the king of Arragon your master us denies of such things as he
promised, and wills us like cowardes to our dishonor, to reise our Camp
without any notable act done on the Frenchemen, for which cause we came.

The Spanyardes perceiuyng the grudge of the Englishemen, said that time
passed could not be revoked, and that they had not lien idly, for the
frontiers of Guyan had sustained such damage, as in many years they shall not
recover again, and all this while the Frenchmen durst not meddle with you, so
that you have lost no honor, and if you tarry here this Winter by your daily in
skirmishyng, they shall receive great damage: during which time, the king our
master has commanded, that things mete and necessary for you to be at your
commandment, and in the spryng of the year, he shall join with you, so that
your enemies and his shall well know your puissaunce, for he takes all
enemies to you, to be his, so with fair words the counsel of Spain
departed.

Then the lord Haward being chief, because the Marquis was sick counseled
with all the other lords and capitaines, and so in the end of October they
agreed to break up their Camp, and so they did, and the lord Marquis and his
people went to saint Sebastian, the lord Haward and his retinew to Render,
and the lord Willoughby to Garschang sir Willyam Sands and many other
capitaines to Fruntrabie, and so every capitain with his retinew were severed in
diverse villages.

The English soldiers, what for sickness, and what for misery of the
country, ever desired to return into England. The king of England advertised
by the king of Arragon of his intent, and how he would set forward the first
spryng, sent Wynsore his Herald of Arms to his army willing them there to
tarry, and that he would send them new aid, under the conduite of the lord
Harbert his Chamberlain: which letter when it was read, the soldiers began
to murmr and grudge after such a sort, saying: that they would not abide and
dye of the flixe in such a wretched country, to be defrauded and mocked of
the king of Arragon the next year, as they were this year, and spoke such
outrageous words, that the capitain could not stay them, in so much that
they in a fury had slain the lord Haward and diverse other, if they had not
followed their minds, and so they hired ships and put the lord Marquis in
one, which was so weak that he asked where he was: and then every manne
shipped, which was in Nouembre, and in the beginning of Decembre they landed
in England. The king of Arrogon was sore discontent with their departing, for
they spent much money and substance in his country, and said openly, that
if they had tarried he would have invaded Guyan, and the Englishemen were glad
that they were departed out of such a country, where they had little health,
less pleasure, and much loss of time: but by their liyng there, the King of
Arragon stale the realm of Nauer, and the Englishemen left as much money
there, as he sent into England with his daughter.

When the Marquis sailed into Spain in the month of Maij, the same time sir
Edward Hawarde Lord Admiral of England, as you have hard before sailed
toward Britain, and on Trinity Sundaie arrived at Bertram Bay in Britain,
with.xx. great ships, and suddenly set his men on land: then the Britaynes
made an askrie, and set their beacons on fire, and shot out of a bulwark
that they had fortified at the point of the Baye: but the English men which
were in the ship of Willyam Gonstone Grocer of London, took first land maugre
them all, and all other after, and so manfully they set on the bulwark that
they wan it, and the Britons fled and many slain. Then the Admiral set his men
in an order, and passed in the country seven miles, burning and wastyng tounes
and villages: and in his return he skirmished with diverse men of arms and
slew diverse of them, and notwithstanding the Britons fought valiauntly for
defense of their country, yet they lost and nothing wan: and so the lord
Admiral returned to his ship.

Upon mondaie the.xxiii. day of May he landed in the morning, and commanded
to burn the lord Piers Meguns place, and the town of Conket and diverse
other places, and chased the Britones to the Castle of Breast, and for all
assembles and shows that the Britons made, yet they fuffered the Englishmen
peaceably to return with their prays and gains. The Britons seeing the hurt
that the navy of England did to them, said: alas the king of England has
ever before this time succomed us, and now he intends to destroy us, shame
come to him that is the cause thereof.

The first day of June the Englishemen took land in Croyton Bay: then the
Lords of Britain sent word to the Lord Admiral, that if he would abide,
they would fight with him in plain field. The Admiral rewarded the messenger,
and said, go say to them that sent thee, that all this day they shall find me
here, tariyng their coming. Then he to encourage diverse gentlemen dubbed
them knights, as sir Edward Broke, brother to the lord Cobham, sir
Griffithe Down, sir Thomas Wynda^, sir Thomas Lucie, sir Willyam Pirton, sir
Henry Shirborne, sir Stephen Bull, sir Ihon Burdett: Then the lord Admiral
highly encouraged his men, when he saw the Britons come, which were.x.
thousand at the least, the Englishemen but only.xxv.C. or few above, biddyng
the^ remember the honor and renoume that should come to them, if they gained
the journey, and yet if they were slain, their valiauntnes was to be praised, and
their true diligence to do therr master service much to be allowed.

When the Britons saw the order of the Englishemen and their banners
displaied, they were suddenly astonnied: then a gentleman of Britain of much
experience, advised the other capitaines not to fight, but to return a little
and to take a strong ground, and to watch the Englishemen, when they returned
to their ships, and then to take thaunauntage. And so the capitaies began to
return: and when the commons saw them return, all they ran a way as fast
as they might, supposyng that their capitaines had seen or known some great
perell toward them, because they were not privy of their Capitaines counsel.
And when they came home to their houses, some said the battaill was great,
and some said that the Englishemen were.xl. thousand. The lord Admiral seeing
this chance, when night came departed to his ships: but yet they knew not
why they fled, till after he hard the truth. The gentlemen of Britain called a
great counsel, saying: that the Englishemen daily wasted the country on the
sea cost, and that there was no trust in the commonaltie, and that the
gentlemen alone could not defend the country, wherefore, they concluded to
send a messenger to the lord Admiral, desiryng him of a safe conduite for
diverse persons to speak with him, the which he gently granted. Then
certain lords of Britain took a boat, and came to the ship of the lord
Admiral, where he was set with all the counsel of the capitaines about him.
Then they desired him humbly to ^urcest of his rigorous and cruel war, and
especially of burning of tounes which to you is nor proffite, and if you will
have the Castle of Breast, it shall be at your commandment, so that you be
able to defend it, and we desire nothing so much as peace. Naie said the
Lord Admiral, we are sent hither to make war and not peace. Then they
humbely required him for Gods sake to grant them peace for six days, so
that they might send to the king their lord, to advertise him of their
trouble and calamity. Then the lord Admiral answered, that gentlemen ought
to defend their country by force, rather then to sue for peace: with the
which saying the Britons were ashamed: yet they heartily thanked him, and so he
made them a banker and they departed: and they sent a land for fresh water
and other fresh victailes, and then hearing that there were men of war upon
the sea, he coasted from them alongest all the coasts of Normandy, still
skowryng the seas, so that no enemy appeared: and at the last came and lay by
the Isle of Wight, to see if any enemies would appear on thenglishe coast:
during which time diverse ships kept the North seas, under the conduite of
sir Edward Ichyngham, Ihon Jews, Ihon Louedaie, which diligently skowred the
seas.

This year the King had a solemn Iustes at Grenewiche in June: first came in
ladies all in White and Red silk, set upon Coursers trapped in the same suite,
freated over with gold, after whom followed a fountain curiously made of Russet
Satin, with eight Gargilles spoutyng Water, within the Fountain sat a knight
armed at all pieces. After this Fountain followed a lady all in black silk
dropped with fine silver, on a courser trapped in the same. After followed a
knight in a horse litter, the Coursers and litter apparcled black with Silver
drops. When the Fountain came to the tilt, the Ladies rode round about, and
so did the Fountain and the knight within the litter. And after them were
brought two goodly Coursers appareled for the Iustes: and when they came to the
Tiltes end, the two knights mounted on the two Coursers abidyng all
comers. The king was in the fountain, and sir Charles Bra^don was in the
litter. Then suddenly with great noise of Trompettes, entered sir Thomas
Kneuet in a Castle of Cole black, and over the castle was written, The
dolorous Castle, and so he and the earl of Esex, the lord Haward and other
ra^ne their courses, with the King and sir Charles Brandon, and ever the king
brake most speres.

The King ever remembryng his wars, caused all his ships and Galies to be
rigged and prepared, with all manner of ordinance and artillery, mete for
ships of war. And amongst all other, he decked the Regent, a ship royal,
as chief ship of that navy, and then caused soldiers mete for the same
ships, to muste^ on black Hethe, and he appointed capitaines for that time,
sir Anthony Oughtred, sir Edward Ichyngham, Willyam Sidney, and diverse other
gentlemen, which shortly shipped and came before the Isle of Wight, but in
their passage a Galey was lost by negligence of the Master.

The King ever desiryng to see his navy together, road to Portesmouthe, and
there he appointed capitaines for the Regent, sir Thomas Kneuet Master of his
horse, and sir Ihon Carew of Devonshire. And to another ship royal called the
sovereign, he appointed sir Charles Bra^don, and sir Henry Guildforde, and
with them in the Sovereign were put.lx. of the tallest yomen of the kings
Guard, and many other gentlemen were made Capitaines. The king made a great
banquet to all the capitaines, and every one swear to another ever to defend,
aid, and comfort one another without failyng, and this they promised before
the King, which committed them to God, and so with great noise of
minstrelsie they took their ships, which were.xxv. in nombre of great
burden, and well furnished of all things.

The French king hearing what damage thenglishmen had done in Britain,
strongly furnished his Navy in the haven of Breast, to the nombre of.xxxix.
sail, and for chief ordained a Carike of Breast, apperteignyng to the Queen his
wife, which was Duches and heir of Britayne called Cordelier, which was a
strong ship furnished in all points, and so they set forward out of Breast
the.x. day of August, and came to Britayne Bay, in which place the self same
day, being the day of. S. Laurence, the English Navy was arrived.

When the English men perceived the French Navy to be out of Breast haven,
then the lord Admiral was very joyous, then every man prepared according to
his duty, the Archers to shote, the Gonners to lose, the men of Arms to
fight, the Pages went to the top Castle with darts: thus all things being
provided and set in order, the Englishemen approached toward the Frenchemen,
which came fiercely forward, some leuyng his Ancre, some with his foresaile
only to take the most advantage: and when they were in sight, they shote
ordinance so terrebly together, that all the sea coast sounded of it. The
Lord Admiral made with the great ship of Deep, and chased her still: sir
Henry Guilford and sir Charles Brandon, made with the great Caricke of Breast,
being in the Sovereign, and laid stem to stem to the Caricke, but by
negligence of the Master, or else by smoke of the ordinance or otherwise, the
Sovereign was cast at the stern of the Caricke, with which auau^tage the
French men showted for joy: but when sir Thomas Kneuet which was ready to
have borded the great ship of Deep, saw that the Sovereign had missed the
Caricke, which sir Anthony Oughtred chased hard at the starne, and bowged her
in diverse places, and set a fire her powder as some say, but suddenly the
Regent crappeled with her a long board and when they of the Carick perceived
that they could not depart, they let slip and Ancre, and so with the streme the
ships turned, and the Caricke was on the wetherside, and the Regent on the
lie side, the fight was very cruel, for the archers of the English part,
and the Crossebowes of the Freche part did their uttermost: but for all that
the English men entered the Caricke, which seeing a varlet Gonner being
desperate put fire in the Gonne powder as other say, and set the whole ship of
fire, the flame whereof, set fire in the Regent, and so these two noble ships
which were so crappeled together that they could not part, were consumed by fire.
The French navy perceiuyng this fled in all have, some to Breast, and some to
the Isles adioynyng. The Englishmen in manner dismayed, sent out boats to help
them in the Regent, but the fire was so great that in manner no man durst
approach, saving that by the James of Hull were certain Frenchmen that could
smymme saved. This burning of the Caricke was happy for the French navy, or
else they had been better assailed of thenglishemen, which were so amassed with
this chance, that they followed them not. The capitain of this Carick was sir
Piers Morgan and with him.ix.C. me^ slain and ded: and with sir Thomas Kneuet
and sir Ihon Carow were.vii.C. men drowned and brent, and that night all the
Englishemen lay in Bartrain Baye, for the French flete was sparkeled as you
have hard.

The lord Admiral called at the capitaines together, desiryng them not to be
abashed with this chance of war, for he thought now that this was the
worste fortune that could happen to them, therefore to study how to be
revenged, and so they concluded all to go to the sea, which they did, and on
the coast of Britain took many ships, and such as they could not carry away
they set on fire, small and great to a great nombre on all the coast of
Britain, Normandy and Picardy, and thus they kept the sea.

The King of England heryng of the loss of the Regent, caused a great ship
to be made, such another as was never seen before in England, and ^alled it,
Henry grace de dieu.

The French king heryng that his flete was thus divided, and of the loss of
his great Carick, he sent to a knight of the Rhodes called Prior Ihon, which
had three Galies of force, with diverse Foystes and Rowgalies so well
ordinau^ced and with such pieces as was not seen in ships before his coming:
for he lay on the coast of Barbary, to defend certain of the Religion of the
Rhodes coming to Tripoly, and at the French kings request came into Britain
and there tarried.

In Nouembre the king called his high Court of Parliament, and there was
concluded that the king himself in person, with an army royal would invade
his realm of France, with fire and Sword, which thing being known to his
subjects, and especial to such as should go with him, no man can doubt, but
that preparacion was made of harneis, weapon, artillery, banners and all other
things necessary for such an enterprice.

The king after this Parliament ended, kept a solemn Christemas at Grenewiche
to chere his nobles, and on the twelfe day at night came into the hall a
Mount, called the rich Mount. The Mount was set full of rich flowers of silk,
and especially full of Brom slippes full of coddes, the branches were grene
Satin, and the flowers flat Gold of Damask, which signified Plantagent. On
the top stood a goodly Bekon geuyng light, round about the Bekon sat the king
and ^iue other, al in coats and cappes of right Crimosin velvet, enbroudered
with flat gold of Da^maske, their coats set full of spangelles of gold, and
four woodhouses drew the Mount till it came before the queen, and then the
king and his compaignie descended and daunced: then suddenly the Mount opened,
and out came six ladies all in Crimosin satin and plunket, enbroudered with
Gold and perle, with French hoddes on their heddes, and they daunced alone.
Then the lords of the Mount took the ladies and daunced together: and the
Ladies reentred, and the Mount closed, and so was conueighed out of the hall.
Then the King shifted him and came to the Queen, and sat at the banqute which
was very sumpteous. And after the Purificacion of our Lady, the King created
sir Charles Brandon Uiscount Lisle. In March following, was the kings navy of
ships royal, and other mete for the war set forth to the nombre of xlii,
beside other Blangars, the lord Admiral was chief, and with him sir Water
Deueruex lord Ferr^is, sir Wolstan Brown, sir Edward Ichyngham, sir Antony
Poyntz, sir Ihon Wallop, sir Thomas Wyndam, sir Stephin Bull, Willyam Fitz
Willyam, Arthur Plantagenet, Willyam Sidney Esquires, and diverse other noble
and valiant Capitaines: they sailed to Portesmouthe, and there lay abidyng
Wind: during which time, the king sent into Flaunders for such things as he
neded, and caused them to be brought to Caleis against his coming.

When the wind served, the Navy royal of England wayed anchor and made sail
into Britain, and came into Bertram Bay, and there lay at Anchor in the sight of
the French Navy. Now you must understand, that all the great Navy which the
French king had prepared, lay in the haven of Breast, so well furnished in all
things, that no doubt it was a wonder to se: but when they were ready to set
furthe, and saw the English flete on the coast, they determined clearly to
save themselves in Breast haven. Then the Englishemen determined clearly to
set on them in the haven, and so in good order of battaill sailed forward,
but at the first entry, one ship, whereof Arthur Plantagenet was capitai^, fell
on a blind rock and brast asunder, by reason whereof, all the other stayed to
the great displeasure of all the remnaunt, and not to the little joy of the
Frenchmen which shot at them without dooyng any harm. So the English
capitai^es perceiuyng that the haven was dangerous to enter without an expert
lodesman, cast about and returned to their harborough at Bertram Baye again.

The Frenchmen perceiuyng that the Englishmen intended to assail them, moored
their ships as nigh to the Castle of Breast as they could, and set bulwarks on
the land on every side to shote at the Englishmen. Also they frapped
together.xxiiii. great Hulkes, that came to the Baye for salt, and set them
on a row, to the intent that if the English men would have assaulted them,
they would have set them on a fire, and let them drive with the streme
amongst the English Navy. Prior Ihon also lay still in Black Sable or
Whitesande Baye, and plucked his Galies to the shore, and set his Basiliskes
and other ordinance in the mouth of the Baye, which Baye was bulwarked on
every side, that by water it was not possible to be won.

The lord Admiral perceiuyng the Navy of France to lie this in fear, and
not willing nor daryng come abroad, but to lie as prisoners in a dongeon, wrote
to the King to come thither in person, and to have the honor of so high an
entreprise: which writing the Kings counsel nothing allowed, for puttyng
the king in ieoperdy upon the chance of the sea. Wherefore the king wrote
sharply to him, to accomplish that which apperteined to his duty: which
caused him to take courage and put things in adventure as after you shall here.

The.v. year. The.v. year.

AS you have hard before, the lord Admiral of England lay still on the coast
of Britain in the Baye, called Bartrames Baye, so that for fear of him and the
English Navy, neither the great ships in Breast haven durst once move to
the sea ward, nor yet Prior Ihon for all his strong Galeies would once set out
a sail: saving now and then send furthe his small Foystes, to make a show
before the English Navy, which chased them to their bay, but because the
English ships were so great they could not enter the baye, and so manned
out boats and took one of the best Foystes, and that with great daungier, for
the Galies and the bulwarks shot all at one time, that it was a wonder how the
Englishemen escaped.

The Admiral of England perceiuyng the French men's policy, called a
counsel, and there determined first to assail Prior Ihon and his Galies,
liyng in Whitsand baye, and after to set on the remnaunt in the haue^ of Breast.
Then first was appointed that Water lord Ferreis, sir Stephin Bull and other
capitaines, should go a land with a convenient compaignie, to assault the
bulwarks of Whitsand bay, while the Lord Admiral entered with row Barges
and little Galies into the bay, so that the Frenchmen should be assailed both
by water and land. Thus was it fully agreed by the whole counsel: but alas,
this noble capitain counseled by a Spanishe knight called sir Alphous Charant,
which said that he might enter the Baye wit^ little ieopardy, called to him
Wilyam Fitz Willyam, Willyam Cook, Ihon Colley, and sir Wolstan Brown as the
chief and his most trusty friends, and declared to them that the matter was
little, and the honor great, if they only took on them that enterprise, and
let none other know of it. They like men of haute courage and desiryng honor,
gladly assented: so on saint Marks day the.xxv. day of April, thesaid
Admiral put himself in a small row barge, with three other small rowyng
ships and his own ship boat, and so rowed suddenly into the Baye, where
Prior Ihon had moored his Galies just to the ground, which Galies with the
bulwarks on the land, shot so terribly that they that followed were a fraied:
but as soon as he came to the Galies, he entered and drove out the French men.
Willyam Fitiz Willyam within his ship was sore hurt with a quarrel. The day
was very shalowe, and the other ships could not enter, for the tide was
spent, which thing the Frenchmen perceiuyng, and that there could come no
succoure to the Admiral, with Morris pikes entered again the Galies, and
fought with the Englishemen in the Galies. And the Admiral perceiuyng their
approchyng, thought to have entered again into his row Barge, which by
violence of the tide was driven down the streme, and so with a pike was
thrown over the board and so drouned, and there the forenamed Alphous was
slain, and all the other boats and vessels escaped hardely, for if they had
tarried, the tide had failed them and then all had been lost. The lord Ferreis
and other capitaines much were dolent of this chance, and some said he did
it without counsel, and so he has sped. And therefore although that they
would have set on the Navy in Breast haven, yet having no Admiral nor
commission, they determined to do nothing farther till they knew the kings
pleasure, and so sailed into England. The French Navy perceiuyng that the
Englishemen made toward England, came out of their havens, and Prior Ihon set
furthe his Galies and Foystes, and coasted Britain and Normandy, and coasted
over to the coast of Sussex and al his compaignie, and landed on the sea coast,
and set fire on the poor cotages. The gentlemen that dwelte nere, shortly
reised the country, and came to the coast and drove Prior Ihon to his Galeis.
This was all the hurt that this stout capitain of so great fame did to England,
saving he robbed certain poor. Fisshermen of Whitynges. The king hearing of
the death of his Admiral was not a little sorry, considering both nobility of
his birthe, and the valiauntnes of his person, but all sorrow avails not
when the chance is past. Therefore the king heryng that the French Navy was
abroad, called to him the lord Thomas Haward, elder brother to sir Edward
Haward late Admiral, and son and heir apparent to the Earl of Surrey, and
made him Admiral, willing him to revenge his brothers death, which with
great reverence, thanked the king of the high trust that he had put him. And
then immediately went to the sea, and so nobly and valiauntly did skower the
sea, that the French men had no lust to keep the coast of England, for he
fought with them at their own ports.

The king which had all things necessary and mete for the war, entendyng to
pass the sea in propre person, appointed the valiau^t lord George Talbot Earl
of Shrewesbury, and high Steward of his household to be capitain general of his
forward, and in his compaignie were lord Thomas Stanley Earl of Derby, lord
Decowrey Prior of. S. Ihons, sir Rober Radcliffe Lord Fitzwater, the Lord
Hastynges, the Lord Cobham, sir Rice Ap Thomas, sir Thomas Blount, sir Richard
Sachiuerell sir Ihon Dighby, sir Ihon Askewe, sir Jews Bagot, sir Thomas
Cornwall, and many Knights and Esquiers and soldiers, to the nombre
of.viii.M. men, which all passed the sea, and to Caleis in the middle of
Maij.

The lord Herbert called sir Charles Somerset, chief Chamberlain to the king:
the end of the same monethe with.vi.M. men passed the sea in whose compaignie
were these Earls, of Northumberlande Percie, of Kent Graye, of Wilshire
Stafford, the lord Fitzwater, the lord Dudley, the lord Delawar, sir Thomas
West his son, sir Edward Husey, sir Robert Dimmocke, sir Dauie Owen, with
many other gentlemenne, some with speres on horseback, some with pikes on
foot, some with dimilaunces, and this was the rereward. Such good diligence
was made that these two capitaines with all their compaignie, furnished with
artilerie, powder, tents, cariages, and all things necessary for the wars
were landed at Caleis the last day of Maij.

After they had soiourned certain days in Caleis, and that al things
requisite were ready, they caused a Trompet to blow and made Proclamacion, that
every man should depart out of the town, and so to begin the camp. The earl
of Shrewesbury with his compaignie first took the field, after him followed the
lord Herbert with his compaignie, in manner of a rereward. And after him
followed the valiant sir Rice ap Thomas, with.v.C. light horse and Archers on
horseback, and joined him to the foreward. Then was there order taken what
persons should conduite the victalers that came from Caleis, and who should
conduite the victalers that came out of Flaunders, for without sufficient
conduite no creature durst bring any victaile to the army. These two lords
thus embattailed removed the.xvii. day of June to Sandisfelde, and on the
xviii. day they came to Margison, on y^ far side of the water, as though
they would have passed straightly to Bulleyn, but they thought otherwise, for
the next day they took another way, and coasted the country with such
diligence, that the.xxii. day of June they with all their people ordinance,
and habilimentes of war, were come before the strong city of Tirwin, and
pight their Tents a mile from the town, and for that night embattailed
themself: and as certain capitaines were in counsel, in the lord Herbertes
tent, suddenly out of the town was shot a gonne, the pellet whereof slew a
noble capitain called the Baron of Carew, sittyng there in counsel, which
sudden adventure dismayed much the assemble. But the lord Herbert valiauntly
comforted them, saying: this is the chance of war, if it had hit me you
must have been content, a noble heart in war is never a feared of death. All
the country of Arthois and Picardie, fortified their holds, and made shows
as the English army passed, but they durst not once assail them.

The city of Tirwin was strongly fortifed with wales, rampaires, bulwarks,
with diuese fortresses in the diches, which were so broad and so plume stepe y^
was wondre to behold. The lord Pountremy was capitain general, and with him
were within the city.vi.C. horsemen furnished, and two.M.v.C. Almaines beside
the inhabitauntes of the city, the walls and towers were full of ordinance,
which did oftentimes great displeasure to the Englishemen. The Earl of
Shrewesbury laid siege to the town, on the North West side, and the lord
Herbert on the East side or end ward, the Frenchmen issued out of the town
and skirmished with the Englishmenne, but the Archers shot so fast that they
drove the Frenchemen into the city, and slew and took diverse of them. The
lord Herbert which lay in the open sight of the town, having no hill or
other thing to succor or defend him, caused great trenches to be made, and
so inawger his enemies he approached very nere the cite: likewise therle of
Shrewesbury with the forward, gatte into an holowe ground or valey nere to the
city. Daily the Frenchmen shot at thenglishmen, and diverse times issued out
and skirmished, and ever they lost by skirmishyng, but by shotyng of ordinance
they hurt diverse Englishmen. Wherefore the lords commanded the pioners to
raise a great trenche, in which they laid the great ordinance, and daily
as they might they approached: sir Rise ap Thomas with the horsemen daily
skowered the country, and many times encountered with the Frenchemen, and
slew and took diverse prisoners, so that the Frenchmen drew not toward the
siege, but turned another way. Upon the Mundaie being the.xxvii. day of
June.xxiiii. Carts charged with victaill, were by the Garrison of Caleis
conduited to Guisnes, and there the Crewe of the castle and town of Guisnes
with three.C. foot men, under the conduite of sir Edward Belknappe, all being
in nombre.iiii.C.lx. men, set furthe to conduite thesaied victailes to tharmie
liyng before Tirwyn, and so they passed to Arde. And while the Carters passed
the town, the horsemen fell a drinkyng in the way, and the foot men were all
out of (...). The duke of Uandosme capitain general of Picardie, which la^^
in a bushement in the forest side of Guysnes with.viii.C. light horsemen, took
his advantage and set on the victailers, the Carters perceiuyng that, losed
their horses and fledd to the town, which was but a mile of and left their
Carts. Sir Nicholas Uaux capitain of Guysnes did al he could, to bring the
foot men in an order: but the Frenchemen set on so quickly that they could not
set them in order, the horsemen of Guysnes which were but only.xxiiii. took
their speres and joined with the Frenchemen: the Archers of England which
passed not.lx. shot manfully, and a noble capitain called Baltier Delien and
diverse other, but the Frenchemen were so many in nombre and in good order that
they flew viii. gentlemen of the Garrison of Guysnes, and.xxx. Archers slain
and many hurt, and so they distrussed the victailes, and caused sir Nicholas
Uaux, and sir Edward Belknappe to fly toward Guisnes. This misauenture fell
by tariyng of the horsemen and breakyng of array, for if tharchers had tarried
together it had happened otherwise, for the few Archers that held together,
flewe and hurt diverse Frenchemen: For on the field lay.lxxxvii. great horse
which never went thence, by the which it appeared that the Frenchemenne went
not quite away without loss. When tidings of this misauenture came to the
lords at the siege, they were not a little displeased: and sir Rise ap Thomas
caused his Trompet to blow to the stirroppe, and he with his horsemen sought
the Duke of Uandosme all the country, which hearing of the coming of sir
Rise, with great have retreted back to Bangey Abbey, where the French kings
great army lay. Sir Rise heryng y^ he was returned came the next day again
to y^ sege. The rumor of this skyrmish sprung all the English pale toward
Flaunders, wherefore the tounes fiered there bekons and rang alarm, diverse
honorable men ye had passed the sea with companies of soldiers and were in
Caleis, marched forward in order of battle, but heryng of y^ departi^g of
Mou^sire de va^dosme, they rested. Then was new provision made for vitaile and
sent daily from Caleys to Turwyn by such conduite, y^ the Frenchmen would no
more meddill, and the army also was well vitaled out of Flaunders and Henawde.

The army of England thus lay before the strong town of Turwin: y^ noble king
of England not forgettyng his entreprice prepared al thing ready to pass the sea in proper person, and caused sir Ihon Wilshire to puruey for.iii.C. hoyes
to carry over his artillery and habilime^ts of war and al his ships of
war were on the sea skowering every cost of his realm. And when al things
were pressed, he accompanied with many noble men and.vi.C. archers of his guard,
al in white gabberdines and cappes, departed from his manor royal of grenewich
the.xv. day of June and so he and the queen with small journeys came to Dover
castle and there rested, and made the queen gouerner of the realm, and
commanded William Warram then bishop of Cantorbury and sir Thomas Louell a
sage knight and diverse other, to give there attendaunce on the queen. And
commanded therle of Surrey to draw toward the north parts left the Scotts
would make any entreprice in his absence. Then the king took leave of the queen
and of the ladies which made such sorrow for the departing of their lords and
husbands, that it was great dolor to behold, and so he with all his army
took his ship the last day of June being the day of saint Paul.

In the morning when the king was shipped and made sail, al ye army followed,
to the number of.iiii.C. ships, and the wind was so, that they were brought
even on the cost of picardy open upon saint Ihons Road, and with the flud
they haled a long the cost of Whitsand with tru^pettes blowyng and gonnes
shotyng, to the great fear of them of Bolleyn which plainly might behold this
passage, and so came to Caleys haue^.

The king was received into a boat covered with arras, and so was set on land.
He was appareilled in almayne ryuet crested and his va^brace of the same, and on
his hedde a chapeau mo^tabyn with a rich coronal, y^ fold of the chapeau was
lined with crimsyn sate^, and on y^ a rich brooch with y^ image of saint
George, over his riuett he had a garment of white cloth of gold with a red
cross, and so he was received with procession and with his deputy of Caleys
called sir Gylbert Talbott, and all other nobles and gentlemen of the town and
country, and so entered in at the lanternegate and passed the streets till he
came to Saint Nycholas church, and there he alighted and offered, and from
thens he went to y^ stapleinne where he supped.

When the king entered Caleys, all the banished men entered with him and were
restored to y^ liberty of y^ town. To tell of y^ gonne shot of y^ town and
of the ships at the kings landing it was a great wonder, for m^ of good
estimacio^ reported that they hard it at Dover. The king lyeng thus in Caleys,
all his army except a few of his counsel and other that gave their attendaunce
on him lay encamped at Newnam bridge, in which camp about a.xi. of the clock
at night there rose an eskrye, so that the town of Caleys began alarm, with
that the king waked and came to the walls, and demanded what the matter meant,
the yoman of the te^tes, called Richard Gybson, showed him how that certain
horsemen and footme^ of France, proffered to come over the haue^, and the
archers that lay next the sea side entered into the water and defended y^
passage, with which defense the Frenchmen returned, and so y^ king was satisfied.
But after this a Fre^chma^ of Whitsa^d bay and one of Bullain were taken, y^
one called Charles de bone, the other Peter vernowne, which confessed y^ from
the town of Whitsand came.lx. horsemen and.ii.C. footmen of the garrison of
Bulle^^ and the country adioynyng entendyng to pass by Rice bank at the low
water mark, over yt haue^ of Caleis at a certain foord showed to the^ by a spy
which served the yoma^ of y^ te^tes of vitailes, and showed the^ that the
tents were piched under Caleis walls between the town and the ca^pe, so that
they might burn the^ quykly or the town could issue, or the ca^pe remove. But
the Englishmen kept so good watch as you have hard that their entreprice came
to none effect. The morrow after being the first day of July, y^ noble lord
Haward admiral of England landed at Whitsand Bay, and entered, spoiled and
brent the town, and returned to his ships for all y^ Bullonoys, and so
reco^pensed the imaginacio^ that the bailey of Whitsand and the Bullonoys had
entreprised for the burning of the kings tents.

On friday at night blew such a storm yt severed all the navy, and some were
drowned. Upon the.viii. day of July, the lord Marquis Dorsett, therle of Essex,
the lord Lisle rode into Flanders and there took y^ mousters of the lord Lynny,
the lord Walo^, son to the lord of Barow, and bastard Emery which with there
retinue were then admitted into the kings wages and the lord Linny With a.C.
and.l. speres was appoincted to go to y^ lord Herbert: and the lord Walon and
bastard Emery with there bonds were appointed to go to therle of Shrewsbury lie^g
before Tirwin: These strangers were warlycke persons on light horses. While the
siege lay thus before Tyrwyn as you have hard, the Frenchmen diverse times
issued out on horseback and many a staff was broken and many a proper feat of
arms done. Likewise the Almaynes on foot would diverse times issue out with
handgonnes, and morish pycks and assail the Englismen, but by force of the
archers they were ever driven home again, and every day the Englishmen shot at
the town and did them much displeasure.

The.xxi. day of July (when all things by counsel had been ordered concerning
the order of battle) the king passed out of y^ town of Caleis in goodly
array of battle and took the field: And notwithstanding ye the forward and
the rerewarde of the kings great army were before Tirwyn as you have hard:
Yet the king of his own battle made.iii. battailles after the fasshion of
the war, the lord Lisle marshall of the host was captain of the forward,
and under him.iii.M. men. Sir Richard Carew with.iii.C men was the right hand
wyng to the forward, and y^ lord Darcy with.iii.C. me^, wyng on y^ left hand, yt
skoure^s and forriders of this battle were y^ North^berland men on light
geldynges. Therle of Essex was Lieutenant general of the speres, and sir Ihon
P^^hy was vicegouernour of the horsemen: before y^ king went.viii.C. Almaynes al
in a plu^pe by them selfs: after the^ came the standard with the red Dragon,
next the banner of our lady, and next after the banner of ye trinity, under y^
same were all the kings household servants, then went y^ ba^^er of y^ arms of
England borne by sir Henry Guildford, under which ba^ner was the king him self,
with diverse noble men and other to the number of.iii.M. me^. The duke of
Buckyngha^ with.vi.C. me^ was on y^ kings left hand egall with ye Almaynes, in
likewise on ye right hand was sir Edward Pounynges with other.vi.C. men egall
with the Almaynes. The lord of Burgainie with viii.C. men, was wyng on y^ right
hand, sir William Co^pton with ye retinue of ye bishop of Wi^chester, and master
Wolsey y^ kings Almoner to ye number of.viii.C. was in manner of a rereward, sir
Anthony oughtred and sir Ihon Neuell with the kings speres y^ followed,
were.iiii.C. and so y^ hole army were xi.M. and.iii.C. men. The master of the
ordinance set forth the kings artilary, as fawcons, ^^ynges, bo^bardes,
carts with powder, stones, bows, arowes and such other things necessary for
the field, the hole number of the cariages were.xiii.C. the leders and driuers
of the same were.xix. C. men and all these were rekened in the battle, but of
good fighting men there were not full.ix.M.

Thus in order of battle y^ king rode to Seutrey^a and there lodged y^ first
night, on friday y^ garriso^ of Bulleyn mustered nigh to Fines Mill, and were
askryed by y^ Northumberland me^, which marched toward the^, but y^ Frenchmen
returned. On saterdaie the host removed to Hambwell and there rested. On
sunday, and on mondaie he entered into the French ground nigh to Arde, and there
every gentleman had on his coat of arms, and these tydyngs were brought to ye
king y^ ye French army approached, which ridinges pleased him well, for he
desired nothing but battle. Tewsday the xxvi. day of July the king passed
forward in order of battle and ever y^ Frenchmen costed a far of to take
the Englyshmen at some auantage, but they kept them so close in order, y^ they
could not find them out of array. Howbeit, by negligence of the carters yt
mystooke y^ way a great Curtall called the Ihon evangelist, was overthrown
in a deep ponde of water, and could not quickly be recovered.

The king heryng y^ his enemies approached, leuyng the gonne (because the master
carpenter said y^ he would shortly way it out of the water) set forward his
host, and in good order came to Dornahan where is a fair eastell standing in
a wodde country, the Frenchmen were ever lurkyng in the woddes viewing the
king co^duite and order as he passed, and so he left the town of Dornahan on
his right hand, and came to a village on a little river where y^ ordinance
pitched. And when y^ king came to the river he perceived y^ many gentlemen made
danger to enter into the river: The courage of the king.
Wherefore he a lighted down of his horse and without any more abode entered the
river, then all other entered and came over. Then was tidings brought to him,
that the Frenchmen were nere at hand and would fight that night: the king
still abode in order of battle, ever lokynge for the coming of the
Frenchmen, and at night word was brought that they were reculed, and then he
entered into his tente.

Wednesday the.xxvi. day of July the releffe of the speres brought in askry,
wherefore the king commanded to blow to the standarde, and auaunced his banner
and took a fair feld or bank abidyng the coming of the Frenchmen. The
capitaines general of the army of the French king were the lord dela Palice
and the lord of Piens, accompaignyed with the duke of Longuyle, therle of
saint Polle, the lord of Floringes, the lord Cleremounde, and Richard dela
Pole traitor of England son to y^ duke Ihon of Suffolk: with these
capitaines were coming.xi.M. footmen and.iiii.M. horsemen, all pressed in
battle and came with in.ii. miles of the king of England, and there the
footmen staled and came no farther: certain horsemen to the number of.iii.M.
and above marched forward and at the end of a wodde showed them selfs open in
the sight of the English army. The king perceiuyng there demeanure, commanded
al his footmen not to remove, but to stand still. The Frenchmen removed and
came sumwhat nerer to a place of execucion: then the master Go^ner lo^ed a piece
of artilery or two. As the king lay thus still abiding his enemies, and that
the horsemen stood still in sight, the great army of France approached,
which the Englishmen could not descrye by cause of an hill that was betwexte
them. The Northern men ran to y^ Frenchmen, which manly encontered with them
and struck some of them down and maugre all there power brought certain
prisoners to the king of England. Therle of Essex captain of the kings
speres with.ii.C. speres lay in a stale, if the Frenchmen had come nerer. Then
suddenly apered in sight a great comopany of horsemen and the king knew not
what they were: but at ye last it was perceived that it was the valiant knight
sir Rice app Thomas with his retinue which came to the king about none: which
gentilly received him and sent him to therle of Essex, which incontinentely
departed and compassed the hill and came to therle, and when they were joined,
they drew them about the hill accompaignyed with sir Thomas Gylforde captain
of.ii.C. archers on horsbacke, to thentent to have set on the Frenchmen, which
perceiuyng yt, and dowghtyng more number to come after, suddenly drew back and
joined them with there great battle. Then therle of Essex and thenglish horsemen
followed them till they came nere the great army of France and then staled,
and sent light horsemen to know y^ conduite of y^ French army. When y^
Frenchmen of arms were returned to there battle, both y^ footmen and horsemen
reculed in order of battle and went back a pace, the English styrrers
perceyuyng this, followed.iii. leages and returned to therle, making report of
that they had seen, and then he brake up his stale and came to y^ king,
declaryng to him how y^ Frenshmen were reculed. The dry Wednesday.
This day was called the dry wednesday, for the day was wonderful hot and
y^ king and his army were in order of battle from.vi. of y^ clock in y^
morning till.iii. of the clock at after noone, and some died for lack of
moisture and almost in general every man was burned about the mouth with hete
of the stomach, for drink lacked and water was not nere. After this, y^ king
removed toward Tyrwyn having his horsemen behind him, lest the Frenshmen
should suddenly set on him behind, and as the king was setting forward, the
lord Walowne of Flaunders came to the king with his horsemen which were in the
kings wages, and the king declared to him what had chanced. As the army
passed by negligence the same day in a lane, was overthrown one of the kings
great bo^bardes of Iron, called the red gonne, and there left: When the night
began to approach the king rested and took his camp.ii. miles from saint
Omers on the northsyde.

On the thursdaye being the.xxviii. day of July the master carpe^ter with an
hundred carpenters and labores without knowledge of y^ marshall went to way up
y^ great gonne that was in the ponde as you have hard, and by force of engynes
drew it up and laid it on a carte ready to carry: But suddenly out of a wodde
issued.viii.C. Frenchmen with speres, crosbowes and handgo^nes, and assailed
the poor laborers which valiantly defended them selfs: but oppressed with
multitude, the most part was flayne and the remnant taken, and they and y^
piece of ordinance carried to bulleyne. This misauenture fell, for the master
carpe^ter would work all of his own hedde without counsayll, with which
chance y^ king was sore displeased. The Frenchmen joyous of this chance,
assembled a great number, to take the other gonne y^ lay still in the high way.
Wherefore the lord barnes being capiteyne of the pioners and laborers heryng of
y^ misauenture, and considering that y^ other gonne was lye^g behynd* prepared
al manner of engines to recover the same. The morrow after, the king intended to
reyse his camp, but when he hard of ye great piece of ordinance that was left
behind, and that the Fre^shmen assembled together, he was in a great musyng
and so tarried and commanded the Almaynes to retreat back and to succor them
that went for y^ piece of ordinance. The Almaynes went forth and staled within
two mile, where the piece of ordinance lay, and farther they would not goo.
The earl of Essex with his company of speres, sir Rice ap Thomas, with his
compaignie, sir Ihon Neuell with the Northumberland men set forward to help
the lord Barnes for recovery of the gonne. And suddenly the northren horsemen
espied where all the great army of the Frenshemen were coming forward, and so
reported to therle of Essex, y^ to sir Ihon pechy Lieutenant of the horsemen
and speres and other capitaines, which were in the place where the said goune
was left with a hundred horsemen, which heryng thereof sent word to sir Rice,
which hering thereof desired the earl of Essex to come and to take ground in
that place where he was, which removed in great haste: In the mean season by
y^ diligent labor of ye lord Barnes, y^ piece of ordinance was raised and
carted, and furthe was it carried, by this time the French army apered in sight.

When therle of Essex saw the great number of the Frenchmen, in all have he
sent to the lord Walon, willing him with his company to come to there aid, the
lord Waloun said to y^ messenger, go tell your captain y^ I come hither to
serve the king of England more then one day, and therefore I would all
thenglishmen would return, for with ye great power of France they be not able
to fight, for I esteem them.ix. or.x.M. me^ at the lest: with his answer y^
messenger departed and made relacion to the earl of Essex and other capitaynes
which there with were sore discontent: by this time y^ scowrers of the French
part were come hard to y^ hands of the Englishmen: then began y^ light
horsemen to skyrmy she, there was following and reskuing on both parties, and in
open sight some of both parties slain. Then marched forward the hole battle
of the Frenchmen with sta^dards, peno^s and banners waueryng, and sumptuous
bardes, and rich harnys glyteryng, the men of arms in great number were in
ranges a long ready to chase and charge. Sir Rice ap Thomas being a man of great
experience, sagely perceived in what case ye matter stood, said to therle of
Essex, sir we be not.vii.C. horsemen, let us not be to folysh hardy, our
commission was to fette y^ gonne and none other, let us follow the same, therle
agreed thereto and so softely and not in flye^g manner retreted and followed y^
gonne. The Fre^chme^ perceiuyng y^, cried al is ours let us follow, then
pricked forward.ii.M. men of arms and came just to y^ backs of ye
Englishmen, then thenglishmen cried saint George and cast them self about and
made return to ye Frenchmen, sir William Tyler and sir Ihon sharp were y^
first y^ charged, and after all the other Englishemen, there was a dreadful
chase, for the men of arms of France flede so fast, that glad was he that
might be foremost, the hole host seeing there horsemen returnyng in flight,
suddenly in great have returned without any more doing. Then the earl of Essex
staled to an hill, and there caused his tro^pet to blow to the standard for
fear of subtle dealyng: and when they were gathered together unto array, he
returned.

The.xxix. day of July the king with his army came to Arkus, and there
embattailed him self in a strong ground, and to him came therle of Essex and
the other capitaines with the gonne, and made report of there adventure, which
thanked them hartly, and there he lay till Mo^day in which time came many noble
men of Flaunders to visit him, and many of the common people came to se him.

Mondaye the first day of Auguste, the king removed his camp to a village
myddell waly between Sayncte Omers and Tyrwyn, and there fell such a rain that
the ordinance could scace be removed the arable ground was so soft.

Thursday the.iiii. day of August, Tirwyn, (...).
the king in good order of battle came before the city of Tyrwyn and planted
his sege in most warlikewise, his camp was environed with artilerie, as
Fawcones, serpentynes, cast hagbushes, and tryde harow^s, spien trestyls, and
other warlike defense for the sauegarde of the camp. The king for him self
had a house of timber with a hymney of iron, and for his other lodgings he had
great and goodly tents of blewe water work garnyshed with yelowe and white,
diverse romes within the same for all offices necessary, on y^ topp of ye
pauilions stood ye kings bestes holdyng fanes, as y^ Lion, y^ Dragon, the
Greyhounde, the Antelope, the Do^ne kow: within all the lodging was poyncted
full of the suns risynge, the lodging was.C.xxv. foot in length.

The king lyeng before Tirwyn, his great ordinance sore bet y^ town walls,
and they within likewise shot out of the town ordinance, and slew diverse
Englyshmen in the trenches, among which shottes they had one gonne that every
day and night was ordinarely shot at certain hours without fail: this
gonne was of Thenglishmen called the whystelyng gonne, but it never did harm
in the kings feld. The siege thus lyeng before the city of Tyrwyn, sir
Alexander Baynam a captain of y^ ^^yners, caused a mine to be enterprised to
enter into the town, but the Frenchmen perceyuyng that, made a countermyne and
so destroyed the other mine, and diverse myners slain within the same. The
French army houed ever a far to take the Englishmen at auantage as they went
a forragyng, and many a skirmish was done, and many good feats of arms
acheued on both sides, and diverse prisoners taken. Among the Frenchmen were
certain light horsemen called Stradiotes with short styroppes, beuer hatts,
small speres, and swerdes like Semiteries of Turkay: diverse times the northre^
light horsemen under ye conduite of sir Iho^ Neuel skirmished with these
stradiottes and took diverse of them prisoners, and brought them to the king.

While the king lay thus before Tyrwyn, the captain of Bullen knowing by his
espialles that many of the garryson of Caleys were with the king at the siege,
and also that daily vitailes were brought out of England to Caleys to
succor the camp, imagened a great entreprice and sent for all the men of
war under his dominion and rule, and declared to them what honor they
should obtain if they hurted or spoiled the out parts of Caleis, the king of
England being on that side the sea. The men of war perceiuyng y^ good courage
of ye captain, assented to his purpose, and so with all diligence they to the
number of a.M. men in the euenyng set forward, and came to Newnam bridge
by.iii. of the clock in the morning, and found y^ watchme^ y^ kept the bridge
a sleep, and so entered ye bulwerke and slew y^ watchmen, and took y^
ordinance of ye bridge and then let ye bridge fall, so y^ al entered y^ would.
The capitayn of Bulleyn kept.vi.C. men for a stale at y^ bridge, and sent ye
other into the marrisshes and meadows where the Cattle fed, and some of the
Frenshmen came to Caleys gate, and were askryed of y^ watch and so rang alarm:
the English soldiers ran to the walls, and saw the Frenshmen without the
town walls: then they knew that Newnam bridge was lost, and would have
issued out, but Sir Gylbert Talbott deputy there, would not suffer any gate to
be opened. Now it happened that without Caleys gates were Richard Hunnyng and
Richard Brycks of the Caterie, and.iii. or.iiii. of the kings servants
which lay there to send provisions to the host: which heryng of this alarm,
called to them the kings barkers, and cowpers, and a few shippemen, which lay
in the haven, and coragiously followed the Frenchmen. Thenglishmen were not
past.vi. skore persons, and set on y^ Frenchmen as they were a forragyng or
they might assemble together, and slew them down right and took no prisoners
in manner, and so they came to Newnam bridge and took it and put the Frenchmen
back. But or Thenglishme^ had thus gathered them selfs together, the
Frenchmen had forraged all with in the river up to saint Peter's, and had
driven away the cattle and the ordinance of Newnam bridge and so passed till
they came where the stale lay, and there they tarried lokyng for there company
that were gone a forragyng to Caleys walls. About.v. of the clock in the
morenyng, y^ gate of Caleys called Bulleyn gate, was opened, and then issuyd
out one Culpiper the under marshall, with.ii.C. archers with the banner of
Saint George, and with great have came to Newnam bridge, where they found the
kings servants and the other that had won the bridge, and then they all
together marched toward the Frenchmen, which kept the stale. The Frenchmen
thought it had been there own company that had returned, till they saw the
banner of saint George, then they knew that their company were overthrown,
and that they must needs fight or die. Then thenglishmen though they were the
smaller number, valiantly set on the Frenchmen, which with great force them
defended, but at the last they were all discomfited and.xxiiii. slain and.xii.
skore taken prisoners and there ordinance and hole booty recovered. The folly of
a Cowper.
These prisoners were brought to Caleys, and there sold in open market: Among
all other a Cowper of the town of Caleys bought a prisoner of this booty y^
dwelt in Bulleyn, and had of the prisoner.C. crowns for his ransom, and when
the money was paid, the Frenchmen prayed the Cowper to se him save delivered
and to conduite him out of danger, the Cowper gently granted and without any
knowledge of his friends, all alone went with the Frenchman till he came beyond
the Cawsey and there would have departed: but the Frenchmen perceived, that the
Cowper was aged and that no reskewes was ny, by force took the Cowper prisoner
and carried him to Bulleyn, and made him pay.ii.C. crowns for his ransom,
thus through folly was the poor Cowper deceived.

The.xi. day of August being thursday, the king lyeng at the siege of Tyrwyn,
had knowledge that Maximilian the emperor was in y^ town of Air. The king
prepared al things necessary to mete with thempe^rour in triumph. The noble
men of the kings camp were gorgeously apparelled, there coursers barded of
cloth of gold, of damask and broderie, there apparel all tissue cloth of gold
and silver, and gold smithes work, great cheynes of balderickes of gold, and
belles of bullion, but in especial y^ duke of Buckingham, he was in purple
satin, his apparel and his barde full of Antelopes and swannes of fine gold
bullion and full of spangyls and littell belles of gold meruelus costly and
pleasant to behold. The king was in a garment of great riches in iuels as
perles and stone, he was armed in a light armure, the master of his horse
followed him with a spare horse, the henxmen followed beryng the kings pieces of
harnys every one mounted on a great courser, the one bare the helm, the
second his grau^garde, the third his spear, the fourth his axe and so every
one had ^ome thing belongyng to a man of arms: the apparel of the.ix. henxmen
were white clothe of gold and crymsyn cloth of gold, richely embrawdered with
goldesmythes work, the trappets of the corsers were mantell harneys
coulpened, and in every vent a long bell of fine gold, and on every pendant a
deep tassel of fine gold in bullion, which trappers were very rich. The king
and the emperor met between air and the camp, in the fowlest wether that
lightly has been seen. The Emperor gentely enterteined the king, and the king
likewise him, and after a littell communicacion had between them, by cause the
wether was foul, departed for that time. The Emperor and all his men were at
that day all in black cloth for the Empress his wife was lately disseased.
After that the king was this returned to his camp, with in a day or twain
there arrived in the army a king of arms of Scotland called Lion with his cote
of arms on his back, and desired to speak with the king, who with in short
time was by Garter cheffe king of arms brought to the kings presence, where
he being almost dismayed seeing the king so nobly accompanied, with few
words, and metely good reverence, delivered a letter to the king, which
received ye letter and read it him self and when he had read it, without any
more delay he him self answered after ths sort. Now we perceive the king
of Scotts our brother in law and your master to be y^ same person whom we
ever took him to be, for we never esteemed him to be of any truth and so now
we have found it, for notwithstanding his oath, his promise in y^ word of
king, and his own hand and seal, yet now he has broken his faith and
promise to his great dishonor and infamy for ever, and entendeth to invade
our realm in our absence which he dirst not ones attempt, our person being
present, but he shows him self not to be degenerate from the conditions of
his forefathers, whose faythes for the most part has ever been violated and
there promises never observed, farther then they list. Therefore tell thy
master, first that he shall never be comprised in any league where in I am a
confederate, and also that I suspectyng his treuth (as now the deed proves*
have left an earl in my realm at home which shall be able to defend him and
all his power, for we have provided so, that he shall not find our land
destitute of people as he thinks to do: but thus say to thy master, that I
am the very owner of Scotland, and y^ he holds it of me by homage, and in so
much as now contrary to his bounden duty he being my vassal, does rebel
against me, with Gods help I shall at my return expulse him his realm, and ^o
tell him: sir said the king of Arms, I am his natural subject, and he my
natural lord, and y^ he commands me to say, I may boldly say with favor,
but the commandments of other I may not, nor dare not say to my souer^igne
lord, but your letters may with your honor sent, declare your pleasure, for I
may not say such words of reproach to him whom I owe only my allegeaunce
and faith. Then said the king, wherefore came you hither, will you receive no
answer? yes said Lio^, your answer requires doing and no writynge, that
is, that immediately you should return home: well said the king I will return
to your damage at my pleasure, and not at thy masters somonyng. Then the king
commanded garter to take him to his tente and make him good chere, which so
did, and cherished him well for he was sore appalled: after he was departed, the
king sent for all the chief capitaynes, and before them and all his counsel
caused the letter to be read, the true tenor whereof follows word, by
word.

The Letter of the king of Scotts.
Right excellent, right high, and mighty Prince, our dearest brother and
Cousyng, we command us unto you in our may hearty manner, and received Fra
Raff heraulde your letters quharuntill, ye approve and allow the doings of
your commissioners lately being with ours, at the borders of bathe the realms
for making of redress, quylke is thought to you and your counsel should be
continnet and delaet to the.xv. day of October. Als ye write, slaars by see
aught not co^pere personally, but by their attorneis, And in your other letters
with our heraulde Ilay, ye ascertaine us ye will naught enter in the treux
taken betwext the mast Christian king and your father of Aragon because ye and
others of the have liege, nether should ne may take peace, treux nor abstine^ce
of war with your common enemy, without consent of all the confederates. And
that the Emperor king of Aragon, ye and every of you be bounden to make
actual war this instant summer against your common enemy. And that so to do
is concluded and openly sworn in Paul's kyrke at London upon saint Marks
day last by past. And ferther have denied saueconduyte upon our requests y^ a
seruitor of ours might have resorted your presence, as our herald Ilay
reports: Right excellent, right high and mighty Prince our derest brother and
Cousyng, thesayd metyng of our and your commissioners at the borders, was
peremptorily appoyncted betwyxt you and us eftir diverse dietes for reformacio^
before continued to the Commissioners metynge, to effect that due redress
should have been made at the said metynge, like as for our part our
Commissioners offered to have made that time: And for your part na malefactor
was then arrested to the said diet. And to gloss the same, ye now wright, that
slaars by see need not compere personally, but by their attourneys, quylk is
again law of GOD and man. And gef in crimenall accion, all slaars sulde
naught compere personally, na punicion sulde follow for slaughter, and than
vane it were to seek farther metynges or redress. And hereby apperes as the
deed shows, that ye will nouther keep good weyes of justice and equity nor
kyndnes with us, the great wrongs and unkindness done before to us and our
lyeges we ponderate quhilk we have suffered this long time in vpberyng,
maynsweryng nounredressyng of Attemptates, so as the byll of the taken of in
haldynge of bastard Heron with his accomplices in your cuntre quha slew our
wardan under traist of days of metyng for justice, and thereof was filat and
ordaynt to be delivered in s^aynge of our liege noble men under color by your
folks, in taking of vthers (...) of our realm, prisonet and cheinet by the
cragges in your co^tre, with halding of our wifes legacy promised in your
diverse letters for dispite of us, slaughter of Andrewe Barton by your own
command quha than had naught offended to you nor your lieges vnredressed, and
breaking of the amity in that behalf by your deed, and with haldynge of our
ships and artilarie to your use, quharupon eft our diverse requisitions at
your wardens, Commissioners, Ambassadors, and your self, ye wrate and als
show by vthers unto us, that full redress should be made at the said metynge of
commissioners, and sa were in hope of reformacion, or at the left ye for our
sake walde have desisted fra invasion of our friends and Cousynges with in
their own countries that have naught offended at you as we first required you
in favor of our tender Cousynge the duke of Geldre, quham to destroy and
disinherite ye send your folks and dudde that was in them. And right sa we
latly desired for our brother and Cousynge the mast Christen king of France,
quham ye have caused to tyne his country of Millaigne, and now inuades his
self quha is with us in secunde degree of blude, and hase ben unto you kind
witoute offense and more kyndar than to us: notwithstanding in defense of his
person we mon take part, and thereto ye because of vthers have given occasion
to us and to our lyeges in time by past, nouther doing justly nor kyndely
toward us, procedynge always to the utter destruction of our nerest friends,
quha mon do for us quhan it shall be necessary. In evil example that ye will
hereafter be better unto us quham ye lightlye favor, manifestly wranged your
sister for our sake inco^trary our writtes. And saying unto our herald that we
give you fair words and thinks the contrary, in deed such it is, we gave you
words as ye dudde us, trusting that ye should have emended to us or worthin
kyndar to our friends for our sakes, and sulde nougtight have stopped our
seruitors passage to labor peax, that they might as the papes halines
exherted us by his breuites to do. And therapon we were contented to have
ouersene our harms and to have remitted the same, though other informacion was
made to our haly father pape July by the Cardinal of York your Ambassador.

And sen ye have now put us fra all good believe through the premises, and
specially in denyenge of saueconduyte to our servants to resort to your
presence, as your ambassador doctor west instantly desired we sulde send one
of our counsayll unto you upon great matters, and appoynctyng of differentes
debatable betwyxt you and us, furtheryng of peax if we might betwyxte the most
Christen king and you, we never hard to this purpose saueconduite denied
betwixt infideles. Herefore we write to you this time at length playnes of our
mind, that we require and desire you to desiste fra farther invasion and utter
destruction of our brother and Cousyng the may Christen king, to whom by all
confederacion blood and alye and also by new band, quhilk ye have compelled
us lately to take through your injuries and harms without remedy done daily
unto us, our lieges and subdites, we are bounde^ and oblist for mutual defense
ilke of vthers, like as ye and your confederates be oblist for mutual
invasions and actual war: Certifieng you we will take part in defense of
our brother and Cousyng y^ may Christen king. And will do what thing we
trayest may crast cause you to desist fra persuite of him, and for denyt and
pospoynct justice to our lieges we mon give letters of Marque according to the
amity betwixt you and us, quharto ye have had little regard in time by
past, as we have ordaint our herald the bearer hereof to say, gife it like
you to here him and gyf him credence: right excellent, right high and mightly
Prince our derest brother and Cousyng, the Trinity have you in keeping.

Given under our signet at Edynborowe the.xxvi. day of July.

When the king read this letter, he sent it in all haste to the Earl of
Surrey into England, which then lay at Pomfrett, and caused an other letter to
be devised to the king of Scotts, the copy whereof follows.

Right excellent, right high, and mighty prince, etc. and have received your
writing, Dated at Edinburgh the.xxvi. day of July by your heraulde Lion this
bearer, wherein after rehersall and accumulacio^ of many surmised injuries
grefes and damages done by us and our subjects to you and your lieges, the
specialites whereof were superfluous to rehearse, remembryng that to them and
every of them in effect reasonable answer founded upon law and conscience
has tofore ben made to you and your counsel, ye not only require us to
desiste from farther invasion and utter destruction of your brother and Cousyng
the French king, but also certify us that you will take part in defense of
thesayd king, and that thing which ye trust may rahter cause us to desiste,
from persuite of him, with many contrived occasions and co^munications by you
causeles sought and imagened, sownynge to the breach to y^ perpetual peace,
passed, concluded and sworn, betwixt you and us, of which your immagened
querelles causeles devised to break with us contrary to your oath promised,
al honor and kyndnesse: We cannot maruayle, considering the ancient
accustomable manners of your progenitors, which never kept longer faith and
promise then pleased them. Howebeit, if the love and dread of God, nighnes of
blood, honor of the world, law and reason, had bound you, we suppose ye
would never have so far proceeded* specially in our absence. Wherein the Pope
and all princes Christened may well note in you, dishonorable demeanor when ye
lyeng in awayte seek the ways to do that in our said absence, which ye
would have been well advised to attempt, we being within our realm and
present: And for theuident approbation hereof, we need none other proves ne
witness but your own writings heretofore to us sent, we being within our
realm, wherein ye never made mention of taking part with our enemy the
French king* but pas^ed the time with us till after our departure from our
said realm. And now percase ye supposing us so far from our said realm
to be destitute of defense against your invasions, have uttered the old
rancour of your mind which in covert manner ye have long kept secret.
Nevertheless, we remembrynge the brytilnes of your promise and suspectynge
though not wholly beleuyng so much unsteadfastness, thought it right expedient and
necessary to put our said realm in a redynes for resistyng of your said
entreprises, having firm trust in our Lord GOD and the rightwysnes of our
cause with thassistence of our confederates and Alies we shall be able to
resyste the malice of all Scysmatyques and their adherentes being by the
general counsayll expressly excommunicate and interdycted, trusting also in
time conueniente to remember our friends, and requyte you and our enemies,
which by such unnatural demeanor have given sufficient cause to the
dys^erison of you and your posterite for ever from the possybilitie that ye
think to have to the royalme* which ye now attempt to invade. And if the
example of the king of Navarre being excluded from his royalme for assistence
given to the French king cannot restrain you from this unnatural dealing,
we suppose ye shall have like assistence of the syade French king as the king
of Navarre has now: Who is a king without a realm, and so the French
king peaceably suffers him to continue whereunto good regard would be
taken. And like as we heretofore touched in this our writing, we need not to
make any further answer to the manyfolde greues by you surmysed in your
letter: for as much as if any law or reason could have removed you from your
sensual opinions, ye have been many and often times sufficientely aun^swered to
the same: Except only to the pretended greues touching the denyeng of our
saufeconduyte to your Ambassadoure too be last sent unto us: Where unto we
make this answer, that we had granted thesayde saufeconduite, and if your
herald would have taken the same with him like as he has been accustomed to
sollicitee saufeconduytes for merchants and others hertofore, ye might as
sone have had that as any other, for we never denied saufeconduyte to any your
lieges to come unto us and no further to pass, but we see well like as your
said herald has heretofore made sinister report contrary to truth so has
he done now in this case as it is manifest and open. Finally as towchyng your
requisition to desiste from farther attemptyng against our enemy the French
king, we know you for no competent judge of so high authority to require us
in that behalf: wherefore God willing we purpose with the aid and assistence of
our confederates and Alies to persecute the same, and as ye do to us and our
realm, so it shall be remembered and acquitted hereafter by the help of our lord
and our Patron saint George. Who right excellent, right high and myghtie
Prince.etc. Yeuen under our signet in our camp before Tyrwyn the.xii. day of
August.


When this letter was written and sealed, the king sent for Lion the Scottysh
heraulde, and declared to him that he had well considered his mas^ets letter,
and thereto had made a reasonable answer, and gave to him in reward a hundred
angels, for which reward he humbly thanked the king and so raried with gartier
al might, and ever he said that he was sorry to think what damage should be
done in England by his Master or the king returned, and so the next day he
departed into Flaunders with his Letter to have taken ship to sail in to
Scotland, but or he could have ship and wind his master was slain.

After the defyaunce declared by the king of Scotts herald, y^ king of
England wrote to the queen and other which he had left behind of his
counsayll, to prepare in all have for the defense of thesayde king of Scotts,
which so did with great diligence as you shall here shortly after. While the king
lay thus at siege before Tirwyn, the Frenchmen studied all the ways possible
how to vitayle the town of Tirwyn* and imagened in a night by some way to
convey vitayle to the town: wherefore every day they sent there stradiates to
epsy by which way they might take their most auantage, and many times the
English horsemen met with the stradiates and of them slew part.

The French king would in any wise that the king of England should be
fought with all, wherefore he sent the duke of Uandosme, The duke of Longuyle
with diverse other valiant captains to Bla^goy. Then was there a conclusion
taken that the duke of a lanson should with v.M. men fight with the Earl of
Shrewsburye, or else to keep that another he another the lord Harbert should aid
or come to the kings battle, and with the king should skyrmish the duke of
Uandosme and Longuyle, while in the mean season the cariages with vitayle
might enter the town. For accomplyshyng of this entreprice, the Frenchmen made
great pur^^aunce and all on horseback, this was not so secretly concluded but
the king of England had an ynkelyng thereof, and sent word to the Emperor
which lay at Air and knew nothing of this deuyse and desyered him to come to
the camp to have his advise: which gladly answered that he would come the
morrow after. The king contynually sent forth his light horses to seek the
country and to se if any apparaunce were, and they ever brought tidings of
such thing as they saw, so that always it was forsene that the king nor his
people should be taken vnpuruyed, nor the Frenchemen should not come on them
suddenly vnaskryed.

While these things were thus in commonynge and immagenyng. The Emperor
Maximilian and all his servants which were retained with the king of England
in wages by the day, every person according to his degree, and The Emperor as
the kings soldioure ware a Cross of sayncte George with a Rose, and so he and
all his train came to the kings camp the.xiii. day of August being Frydaye,
and there was received eith great magnyficence and brought to a tente of cloth
of gold all ready apparelled according to his estate, for all the tente
within was syled with clothe of gold and blewe velvet, and all the blewe
velvet was embrowdered with.H.K. of fine gold, and his cupboorde was rychely
furnyshed and officers appoyncted to give on him attendaunce: and there he
tarried till Sunday, and from thence he went again to Air for his pleasure.
The king and his counsel were informed by their espialles, and also yt was
confessed by certain prisoners, how the French army which lay at Blangoy,
intended to vitayle the cytee of Tyrwyn. Wherefore on Frydaye at night,
the.xiii. day of August the Duke of Buckyngham, the Earl of Essex, the Marquis
Dorsett the Lord of Burgaynye, the Lord Willoghby, and diverse other gentlemen
with.vi. thousand men on foot and the Lord Walon and the Lord Ligny with
there horsemen were laid at Gyngate on the south side of Tyrwyn, where they
were all night in order of battle, awaytynge the reskewe of the cytee, but
the Englishmen were askryed, and so the Frenchmen brake there purpose for that
time: and so the Duke of Buckyngham and his compaygnions returned to the camp.
Monday the.xiii. day of August by infortune, with out any cause known, there
fell a great debate between the Almaynes of the kings field and
Thenglyshemen, in ^o much that they fell to fighting and many men slain, the
Almaynes sodaynely ran to the kings ordinance and took yt, and embattayled
them selfs, and bent the ordinance against the king and his camp.
Thenglisheme^ were greatly fumed with this matter: in so much the archers
set forward to have joined with the Almaynes, and they likewise prepared
there pykes, but the capytaynes took such payn^ that the fray was appesed and
al things done for that time* but as this co^mocion was in trouble, the
Emperor came from Air and saw all the demener of both parties and was glad to
se the discrete handelyng of the capitaynes. After The Emperor was come to the
kings field, the king called The Emperor and all the lords of his counsayll
together asserteynyng them that he was credybly informed that the Frenchmen
intended to reskewe the cytee of Tyrwyn, wherefore it was agreed that the
master of the ordinance should in haste make five bridges over the water for
the army to pass over, to thentent to besege the cytee on that side: the
carpenters did so there deuer that night, so that by day all the brydges were
made, so that all the horsemen passed over and askryed the country. On
Twesdaye the.xvi. day of August the king raised his camp and with great
ordinance and all other artilerye and carriage he passed the River, and to him
came Sir Ihon Neuell with his light horsemen and told him that behind the
tower of Gyngate was a great plumpe of horsemen. In the mean season, as Sir
Ihon Neuell told the king these tidings, by a another way was therle of
Essex Sir Ihon Peche and the kings speres passed and skyrmyshed with the
plumpe of speres that Sir Ihon spoke of, and there were many profets made on
both sides, but in conclusion the Frenchemen were compelled to leave their
stale, and one horseman taken and sent to the king which in hope of pardon of
his Ransom showed how that the French army with their full power and
strength were coming from Blangoy the number of fyften thowsande horsemen of
arms to aid Tyrwyn on that side of the water. And to thentente that the army
of the Lord Stuarde and the Lord Chamberlayne should not aid the king,
there were appoyncted.v. thousand of the.xv. thousand horsemen on the other
side of the water. As these tidings was told came one from Sir Ryce, and
said that a prisoner that he had that day taken confessed that the cytee
should be reskowed the same day, and that he had askryed a number of horsemen
to his judgment upon the poynct of syx thousand. Then sodaynely came the
Northren men which affirmed that they had seen the French army in order of
battle coming forward, but they judged them not past twelfe thowsande men.
Then the kings field was pytched and the ordinance set, but some counsaylled
the king to take down his tents but the king said I will this day that my
field be made and set in as royal wise as may be, and all my rich tents
set up, which was done. Then the King called the Lord Darcy, and
commanded him to keep his field, treasure ordinance and other stuff, which
was loathe too goo from his Master but by streyte commandment. Then every
man prepared him self to battle resorting to the standarde, the horsemen
marched before the footmen by the space of a mile, still came curroures berynge
tidings that the French army approached. The king had set forward and to
auaunce his banner in name of GOD and Saint George. The Almaynes seeing this
(to what purpose yt was not known) suddenly embatteled them selfs on the left
hand of the king and left the breast or front of the kings battle bare. As
the king was thus marchyng forward toward the battle, to him came the
Emperor Maximilian with.xxx. men of arms he and all his company armed in on
suit with read crosses: then by the counsayll of the Emperor the king caused
certain pieces of small ordinance to be laid on the top of a long hill or
bank for the out skowerers: Thus the kings horsemen and a few archers on
horsebakce marched forward. The king would feign have been before with the
horsemen, but his counsayll persuaded him the contrary, and so he tarried with
the footme^ accompanied with the emperor.

The Frenchmen came on in.iii. ranges.xxxvi. men's thickenes and well they
perceived the kings battle of footmen marchyng forward: the earl of Essex
captain of the horsemen, and sir Iho^ P^^he with the kings horsemen and the
Burgonyons to the number of a.xi.C. stood with banner displayed in a valey. The
lord Walonne and the lord Ligny with bastard Emery and there bend to the
number of.iiii.C. horsemen severed them selfs and stood a side from the
Englishmen: so then thenglishmen were but.vii.C. yet they with banner displayed
removed up to the top of the hill, and there they met with sir Ihon Gylforde
a.C. talle archers on horseback, which had askryed the Frenchemen. Now on
the topp of the hill was a fair plain of good ground, on the left hand a
low wodde, and on the right hand a ^alowe field. The lord Walonne and the
Burgomons kept them a loofe, then appeared in sight the Frenchmen with banners
and standards displaied. Then came to the capitaynes of Thenglishmen of arms,
an English officer of arms called Clarenseux and said, in Gods name set
forward, for the victory is yours for I see by them, they will not abide, and
I will goo with you in my coat of arms. Then the horsemen set forward, and
the archers a lighted and were set in order by an hedge all a long a village
side called Bomye: the Frenchmen came on with.xxxiii. standards displayed, and
the archers shot a pace and galled there horses, and the English speres set
on freshly, crye^g saint ^eorge, and fought valiantly with the Frenchmen and
threw down there standarde, the dust was great and the cry more, but suddenly
the Frenchmen shocked to there standarde and fled, and threw away there
speres, swerdes, and mases and cut of the bardes of there horses to run the
lighter, when the hinder part saw the former fly, they fled also, but the
sooner for one cause which was this. As y^ English horsemen mounted up the hill,
the stradiates were coming down wards on the one side of the hill before the
French host, which suddenly saw the banners of the English horsemen, and the
kings battle following upward, wenyng to them that all had been horsemen,
then they cast them self about and fled, the Frenchmen were so fast in array
that the stradiates could have not enter, and so they ran still by the^des of
y^ ranges of the French army: and when they behind saw the fall of their
standards and their stradiates in whom th^i had great confidence return,
they that were farthest of fled first, then up pranced the Burgonyons and
followed the chase: this battle was of horsemen to horsemen but not in eg^l
number, for the Frenchmen were.x. to one, which had not been seen before time,
that Thenglishe horsemen gatt the victory of the men of arms of France. The
journey of Spurs.
The Frenchmen call this battle the journey of Spurs by cause they ra^ne
away so fast on horsbacke. This battle was the.xvi. day of August, in the
which battle was taken the duke of Longuyle, loys brother to therle of
Dunoys which had married the Marquis of Rutilons heir, the lord Cleremounde
and many other noble men to the number of.xii. skore and all brought to the
kings presence, and likewise all the standards and banners were brought to
the king. The Burgonio^s kept there prisoners and brought them not to sight. The
fame went that Mou^sire dela Palayce was by them taken and let goo.
Thenglyshemen followed the chase.iii. mile long from the field to a water in a
valey, and there a Frenchman said to Sir Gyles capell that one day they
would have a day, which answered him again in French that it was a brag
of France: and so Thenglishemen returned to the king, which was coming
forward who gave them thanks with great praisynges for there valiantnes, and
there he made Sir Ihon Peche bannarett and made Ihon Car Knight which was sore
hurt, and sir Ihon Peche had his guyd home taken and diverse of his men hurt,
they followed so far. Then the king retreted to Gyngate, to whom came sir
Rise and showed him how hot the Frenchmen had skyrmyshed with him all day on
the other side of the river, and how therle of Shrewsbury with banner displaied
was al day pressed in order of battle to have fought with the duke of Alanson
and therle of saint Polle and the lord of Florenges which with.v. M. men as
you have hard were appoincted to reskewe the town on that side where the lord
of Shrewsburye lay, and to let him to come to aid the king, but how so ever
that it happened, they stood still and came not down but only skyrmyshed with
Sir Rice: The city of Tyrwyn was this day in hope of aid, and when they saw
there helpers coming n^re, therthesame day proudely issued out on the lord
Harbert and skirmyshed with his people very valiantly, and they within also
shot out ordinance of all parts. The lord Harbert and his capitaines
coragiously defended them, and so sore they set on the Frenchmen, that they
dra^e them by force to there gates for all there succors, and many of them were
slain: this night the king sent for the duke of Long^uyle and the lord
Cleremounde and diverse other noblemen, and the duke supped at y^ kings board
that night.

Then the Frenchmen after this discomfyture assembled together and returned to
Blangoy.xii. mile from the cost, and there talked of there losses, and because
they knew not who were taken and who were s^ayn, therefore they sent an
heraulde to the king to know the number of the prisoners, the kings counsayll
according to there desyer sent to them the names. The king being assertayned
that the French kings purpose was yet again to give him battle, commanded
the best of the prisoners should be conveyed to the town of Air in
Flaunders: but when Thenglyshmen had brought them thither, the captain denied
that Thenglishmen should enter the town with prisoners of France with whom
he and his country had peace: but if the Frenchemen would desire lodgyng for
there ease, they should be permytted to en^re. But thenglishmen in a fury
answered, that if you will not suffer us to keep our prisoners, we will slay
them: then the Frenchmen mekely prayed the captain to suffer the Englishemen
to enter, and swear to their kepers to be true prisoners, and so they entered,
and after were conveyed into England. The Lord Powntremy of the house of
Cresquy captain general of Tyrwyn perceived the discomfiture of the French
party, and perceived how the Earl of Shrewsburye and the Lord Harbert had
brought thither great ordinance so nere the town that nerer it could not be
brought, and that in the walls was such battery that it was not like to
continue, yet he manfully defended the cytee and shot gonnes every day as he
was accustomed and never was in despair, till the.xviii. day of thesayde
month he saw the king remove his camp from Gyngate and laid his camp on
the southe side of the town between there reskewe and the town: then when he
saw this and considered that his succour^s were put back and that the town
was sore febeled, and that the kings greatest ordinance was bent against the
town, he therefore by the advise of other capytaynes sent to therle of
Shrewsburye and the Lord Harb^rte a trumpett, desyerynge abstinence of war
for a day, they incon^ynente sent to the king to know his pleasure, the
king answered that he would not grant till he knew the consideracion:
then the captain sent word that with saufeconduyte he would come and speak
with the kings counsayll, which to him was granted, then he sent certain
commyssioners which offered to deliver the town with all the ordinance and
municions without any fraud, so that the towns men that would there dwell
might have life and goods safe, and that y^ men of war might depart with
horse and harneys, for goods they said they had none, and there horse and
harneys was of little valor to so great a prince. After that the king and his
counsayll had debated this matter, it was answered the commissioners that
allthough the king knew there penury of vitayle and the daily mortalite among
them and that the town by reason of great batteries was not able long to
resist, yet by cause they asked marcy he would not extend ^igor, and
granted there request: so that they delivered the town with all the
ordinance as they had promised, to the which all they were sworn, and so
returned. And the same night Therle of Shrewsburye entered the town and had the
walls and towers and the banner of saint George was set in the highest place
in sign of victory, and the lord Powtremy with all the garryson departed with
horse and harneys according to the appoinctemente. Then the lord George Talbott
earl of Shrewsburye, with.iii.C. men ser^hed the town for fere of treason or
that any inconvenience might be unto the king and his people: and after that he
saw all thing suer, he called all the towns men together, and swear them to be
true to the king of England. When all this was done, the king on the.xxiiii.
day of August entered into the city of Tyrwyn at.ix. of the clock before
noone with great triu^phe and honor, his person was apparelled in armure gylt
and graven, his garment and barde purple velvet full of borders, and in all
places trauersed with branches in ronnyng work of fine gold, the branches
were of hawthorne wrought by goldesmythes craft wound with a branch of
Roses, and every ^^ower, lefe and bury were enbossed: After whom followed his
henxmen with the pieces of armure accustomed. Thus with great glory this
goodly prince entered and took possession of the town of Tyrwyn and was
received at the Cathedral church with procession, and they hard mass and
dyned in the bi^^oppes palyce, and at after none returned to his camp, leuynge
in the town the Earl of Shrewsbury with his retinue. The xxvi. day of August
the king removed again to Gyngate, and there it was agreed that the walls,
gates, ^^rwyn bur^ed.
bulwarks and towers of Tyrwyn should be defaced, rased and cast down: of
which conclusion the Emperor sent word to saint Omers, and to Air, which
being Joyous of that tidings (for Tyrwyn was to them a scorge) sent thither
pyoners with all manner of instruments, and so they and thenglish pioners brake
down the walls, gates and towers of the foundation and filled the diche and
fyered the town, except the Cathedral church and the palayce, and all the
ordinance was by the king sent to Air, to be kept to his use. After this, it
was concluded that the king in person should ley his siege to the city or
town of Turney, wherefore he set forward three goodly battayles, the first was
conduyted by therle of Shrewsbury, the second battle led the king him
self with whom was The Emperor. The rereward was conduyted by the lord
Harbert: and so the first night theilaye in camp beside Air, which night
vitaile was skant, diverse Englishmen tarried in Tyrwyn when the king was past
for pillage and fyred certain howses, on whom came suddenly the French
stradiates, and some they slew and some they cast into the fire, they that
fled, escaped narrowly.

Wednesday the.xiiii. day of September the king and his army came to Beatwyn,
and there had plenty of all things, and on the morrow he with his army passed
forward and came to a strayt where was a foorde and all the carriages must
needs come down a stepe hill to the foorde and ^o to the streyt, where as one
wagon scace alone might pass, and the wether was hot and the beasts had not
drunk all day, wherefore at the foorde the horses would drink ma^gre there
leders, and so the carriages went not all hole together which was a dowtfull
case, but yet by wise order they passed the streyte and so did the army and
came to a place between Cauon and Camblyne and there lodged that night in a
plain barren ground, and the next day he removed his camp and the forward
passed a bridge called pount Auandien into Flaunders side and there lay, the
king lay at the other end of the bridge on Arthoys side, and the rereward lay
in a fair ground behind the king.

Saturday the.xvii. day of September tidinges came to y^ king how the Frenchmen
had assembled a great puissau^ce and would fight with the king, wherefore the
king caused his forward to remove farther and sent the Almaynes to kept the
passage the pount dassaus. Then the great ordinance passed the bridge of pount
auandien and the king was removed from thence and as his tents wre taking up,
an askrye was made that the enemies were in sight, which noise was suddenly
seized and sir William Sands with.vii.C. Englismen and strangers was
appoincted to keep y^ bridge and certain ordinance was to him appoincted.

When the king and all the carriages were passed, then the lord Harbert removed
over the bridge and encamped him behind the king by a fair mylle, when the
king was ^ncamped and all things in order, there came to him a noble man of
Flaunders called the lord Rauesten which after his humble reverence done,
showed the king that the young prince of castle Charles and the lady Margarete
gouernes of thesayde prince most heartily desired him for his pastime after his
long travail to come and repose in his town of Lysle and to see his brother
y^ prince and the ladies of the court of Burgoyne, saying that it became not
ladies to visit him in his marcyall camp which to them was terryble. The
king gentelly granted his request, and then he sent his officers thither to
make provision and appoyncted the duke of Buckyngham the Marquis Dorsett therle
of Essex and the lord Lysle and diverse other to give there attendaunce on him,
and committed his camp to his counsayll, Then he mounted on a courser, his
app^rell and barde were cloth of silver of small quadrant cuttes trauersed and
edged with cut clothe of gold, and the border set full of read roofes, his
armore fresh and set full of iuels, the Master of his horse Sir Henry
Guylforde and the henshmen followed as you have hard before, and the coursers
richely apparelled and so were many capitaynes that waited on the king: by the
way met the king the lord Rauesten with many noble men and a mile without
the town there met with him the Bourgesses of Lysle and presented to him the
keys of the town, saying, that The Emperor their sovereign lord and so
commanded them to do. The king praised there obedie^s to there sovereign, and
thanked y^ Emperor and the^ for so high a present as the keys of such a
town. Nevertheless he had such confidence in them, that he trusted them no
less then his own suby^ctes, and so delivered the keys to the provost of the
town which was well accompanied: then met the king a great number of nobles
of Flaunders, Brabant, Hollande, and Henawde, which nobly received him. After
the^ came the Cou^tye Palatine or Paulsgraue one of y^ electors of the empire
^ith.xxx. horses al his men gorgiously appareilled after the fasshion of his
country, and humbly saluted the king. At the gate of Lisle the capita^n of the
town stood with a garrison in armure well appoincte^ all the strets were set
on both sides with burning torches and diverse goo^ly pagiantes pleasant to
behold: thus he passed through the town with his sword and ma^es borne
before him, and alighted at the hall door with his sword borne, where met with
him the^p^rour, the prince of castle and the la^y Margaret and humbly saluted
him: then for reverence of the emperor, the king caused his sword to be put up
and his maces to be leyed down, then was the king and all other nobles lodged
and feasted according to their degrees.

In the town of Lisle was a noys that.iii. gonners with handgonnes should have
slain y^ king: For which rumor many were attached, but nothing proved, but
when this tidings came to the camp, they were never merry till they saw the
king again, grett was the chere with ba^k^ttes, plays, commodies, maskes and
other pastymes that was she^ed to the king in the court of Burgoyne, and so in
solace he soiorni^d there Sunday and Mondaye the.xix. day of September:
the.xx. d^ye he sent word that his army should remove toward Tournay, and
so they removed to a place convenient between Tournay and Lisle, and certain
capitaines were appoi^cted to keep y^ passage at the bridge of Auandien.

After that the king had tarried of Lisle.iii. days, and had well reposed (...)
self, he took his leave and thanked the Emperor and the young pry^ce and the
lady Margaret and all the ladies of all his high chere and solace an^ about.vi.
of the clock at night, he departed out of Lisle, and y^ noble men ^rou^ht the
king forth and so returned, and then the captain (...).

(...) the king was a mile and more out of the town, he asked were his camp
(...) no man there could tell the way, and guide had they non^, the night was
dark and mistie: thus the king tarried a long while and wist not whyther to go,
at last they met with a vitayler coming from the camp which was there guide
and brought them thither. The ma^ter of the ordinance shot diverse pieces of
ordinance but they were not hard, but in safety the king with all his
company returned.

The.xxi. day of September the king removed his camp toward Tournay and
lodged within.iii. miles of the city, on a corn ground by the river. The
which night came to the king The Emperor and the Paulsgraue which were lodged
in rich tents and nobly served of all vyandes and things necessary. The
people about Tournay were with there goods fled to the city, and yet the
city had no men of war to defend yt, but with multitude of inhabitauntes
the cytee was well replenished: the king commanded sir Rice and his horsemen
to vewe one quarter, and therle of Essex and his company another quarter, and
the lord Walowne and the lord Ligny the other quarters: so the.xxii. day of
september these.iiii. capitains at one time were sone openly with banners
displaied before the town, and there made a long stale and returned. The king
sent Gartier king of arms and a pursiuant of arms with a trompett to somon
the city, which declared that the king of England and of France commanded
them to yield to him his city and to receive him as there natural lord, or he
would put them and there city to sword, fire, and blood. To whom they
prowdely answered, y^ they took no city of him to keep nor none would they
render, with which answer he departed. Then they fortyfied there walls, and
made prouysion for vitaile, corn, wine, and artilerie, and for all
fortificacions that might be gotten. And the city of it self was strong, well
walled, and turryted with good Bulwarks and defenses: But when they saw the
king with such a puilau^ce draw nere there cytee, they were sore abas^hed and
called a general cou^sayll: then the prou^st said, brethern you know how y^
the king of England sent an heraulde to somon us to render to him this cytee,
or else he would put it and us to the sword, fire, and blood, we answered we
would be at defense: now he is come in our sight to fulfull the message sent
by his herald, and now is come the time of our defense, and in this matter
stands.iii. mischiefs, one is our bouden deuty and allegeau^ce that we owe
to our sovereign lord king Loys of France, the second the life's of us, our
wifes, children, and neighbors, the third how to defend the final
distructio^ of this ancient cytee which is lickely to fall, which cytee was
never conquired and now our cytee is hole (your lives in sauity, you^ goods
your own) determine whither you will have war or peace: then the common people
cried all war, war, war* then said the provost take co^passio^ of wifes and
children and of the old folk, consider if you have no quyck teskue you came
not continue against yo^der puisau^ce, al tho your corages were as good as
Hectors or A^hilles, this y^ wisest of the city and I hau^ considered. Then
suddenly was there in y^ counsel, a vauntparler, ^ botcher which heryng this,
called a great number of his affini^ie and went out of the counsayll, and so
out of the gates and set fi^r of the suborbes on all sides. When he counsel
saw the minds of the commons and that there ways might not be followed, then
they comfort^d the people and maynteyned them for there defense. The king Raised
his camp and cam^ in Array of battle before Tornay, the Earl of Shres^ury
with the forward was a littell space on the right hand breast with the kings
battle, and the lord Harbert with the rerewarde on the le^t hand in like
manner, the day was fayer and the harneys glistered and banners waued that
they of the cytee were sore af^^ayed: thus stood the kings battayles in Array
before Tourney. Then the king commanded his great ordinance to be carried in
the way passing toward the cytee and so every thing according to his
commandment was accomplished Then the king him self with a few persons
rode between his ordinance and the town, and rode in great adventure so ne^e
the walls, y^ he might vewe the walls and the towers very well: they shot
out of there towers pieces of ordinance and hurt such as came within there
level. Then they rong the alarm bell, which was hard well in the field. Then
the citezens issued out at the gate by the river and manfully proffered to
skyrmish* but they with archers were sone driven back to their gates. The
English carriers that came with the harbeshers to take ground ran to the
gates of Tornay, and took certain wagons with beer and vitayle and yet the
Turnoyes dyrst not resist, although they were in greater number then the men
of carriage. In this skyrmysh the horse of the lord Ihon ^ray brother to the
Marquis Dorsett which went to defend the Cariours was ^layne with a gonne, and
he not hurt. After that the king in person had thus in i^opardie aue^tured him
self and vewed the town, he caused immediately.xxi. pieces of great artilery to
be brought in a plain feld before the town, and when they were charged* they
were immediately shot, and the most part of the stones fell with in the
cytee, and so they shot diverse shottes one after another.

Then the king with all his battle planted his siege on the north part of
the city: Therle of Shrew^bury with his battle warded toward the south side
of the river and there lay that night. The Lord Harbert with the rerewarde
planted hts battall on the west side of the city* and with great ordinance
daily bett the walls and towers of the city. On the morrow being the.xxiii.
day: the Lord Talbott Earl of Shrewsbury accompanied with the noble men of
his battaill whose names you have hard at his first passing the sea, passed
over the river of Tornay and planted his siege on the southe side stretchyng to
the east end of the city, and bent his artilery against the walls of the
city. Thus was the city of Tornay beseged on all parts, and ever in hope of
reskue valiantly defended her self.

Now must I leave the king at the siege of Turnay, and diuerte to things done
in England in his absence, and declare how the king of Scotts invaded the
realm of England, and how he was defended and fought with all, and in
conclusion slain the.vii. day of this month of September.

When the king of England was determined in his high court of Parliament to
pass the sea, in proper person for the recovery of his realm of France, he
and his counsel forgatt not the old Prankes of the Scotts which is ever to
invade England when the king is out, or with in age: and also he had knowledge
that at Camphe^e in Zeeland the Scotts daily shipped long speres called
colleyne clowystes armure and artiler^e, which dealyng made his grace and his
counsel to dowt^: notwithstanding that the king of Scotts was sworn on the
sacrament to keep the peace, yet for voydynge of all dowtes, the king
appoincted the lord Thomas Haward earl of Surrey son to the lord Iho^ Haward
duke of Norffolke and high treasourer and marshall of England, to be his
lieut^naunt in the North parties against thesayde king of Scotts, if he
fortuned to invade (as he did in deed) according to the old traytorous
accustom of his progenitors, and that the said earl should reyse the powers
of the country of Chester, Lancaster, Duresme Northumberlande, Westmerlande,
and Comberland, beside other aids to be apoyncted by the queen. And when the
king should take ship at Dover, he took the earl by the hand, and said, my
lord I trust not the Scotts, therefore I pray you be not negligent, then said
the earl I shall so do my duty, that your grace shall find me diligent, and
to fulfill your will shall be my gladness: Therle could skantly speak when he
took his leave, for the departing from the noble prince his sovereign lord
and king, and from the flower of all the nobility of this realm, being ready
in such an honorable journey. And when he was somewhat settelled in his mode,
he said to some that were about him: Sorry may I se him or I dye, that is cause
of my abydinge behind, and if ever he and I mete, I shall do that in me lies
to make him as sorry if I can^ meaning the same by the king of Scotts. From
Dover he attendid on the queen to London, comfortynge her the best he might,
and shortly sent for his gentelmen and tenauntes, which were.v.C. able men,
which mustered before sir Thomas louel, knight, the.xxi. day of July, and
the.xxi. day he rode thorough London Northwarde, and came to Dancaster, and
there commanded sir William bulmer knight, to make haste to the marches of
Scotland, and to lie in the castles and fortresses on the frontiers with.ij.C.
archers and horseback: for the earl by open tokens daily perceived that y^
Scotts intended war. Then the said sir William with all speed departed and
came to the borders and the earl came to Pomfret, the first day of August, and
there tarried. After that sir William bulmer was come to the borders, one day
in August, the lord Chamberlayne and warden of Scotland with.vii. or viii. M.
men with banner displayed entered into England, and brent and haryed a great
pray in Northumberland: that hering sir William bulner, called to him the
gentelmen of the borders with his archers, and al they were not a thousand men.
And when they were nere assembled, they brought the^ selfs in to a brom
field, called Mylfeld, where the Scotts should pass. And as y^ Scotts
proudely returned with their pray, the Englishmen brake out, and the Scotts
on foot like men them defended, but the archers shot so holy together, that
they made y^ Scotts give place, and.v. or.vi. hundred of them were slain,
and.iiii. hundred and more taken prisoners, and the pray reskued beside a great
number of geldinges* that were taken in the country, and the lord Hume* lord
Chamberlayne fled, and his banner taken. This was the first open token of
war, showed by the Scotts, which call this journey the ill Road.

The earl of Surrey, being at Pomfred, called to him the most part of the
Gentelmen of the Counties to him appointed as is before rehearsed, declaringe to
them the kings high commandment, showing them, that he being there the
kings Lieutenaunt must needs have aid and counsayll. Wherefore he swear the
most wysest and expert gentelmen in such causes of the kings counsayll and
his for that time, for the better compassynge his charge and purpose, and for
too bring every thing in dew order: Fyr^t they took a determinacion with sir
Philippe Tylney knight, Treasurer of the wars, how the charges should be
paid, and secondarely with sir Nycholas applyarde, master of the ordinance*
for the conueyaunce of the kings royal ordinance, powder and artillery to
Newcas^ell, and so forward as the case should requyer, which sir Nycholas by
William Blacknall, clercke of the kings spycerie, sent the said ordinance
and artillery to Durham before, so that all things, concerning that office
were in a redynes. The earl forgot not to send too all lords Spiritual and
Temporal, Knights, Gentelmen, or other which had tenauntes, or were rulers
of tounes or liberties (able to make men) to certify what number of able men
horsed and haruesed, they were able to make within an hours warning and to
give there attendaunce on him, and also he laid Posts every way, which
Posts stretched to the marches of Wales to the counsayll there, by reason
whereof, he had knowledge what was done in every cost.

The earl was informed by the lord Dacres, of the numbrynge and preparynge of
men in Scotland, and Proclamacions soundinge to the breche or peace, and yet
though he considered that the Road made by the lord Chamberlayne of Scotland
into England, being distrussed by sir William Bulmer, as is a^ore rehearsed,
was an open breche of the perpetual peace: yet the said lord Dacres auysed
the the earl for many and great weyghty causes, not to reyse or stir the
powers of the country, to him appointed till he might perceive and openly
know the subtyle purpose and intent of the Scotts aforesaid, lest if the
Scotts had perceived the Englishemen ready to fight they would have desisted
of their purpose ^or that time, till the Englishemen were returned to their
countries, and then sodaynely too rise again.

Then the Earl knowing that the town of Barwycke was strong enough, sent to
the Captain of Norham, certefienge him, that if he thought the Castle in
any daungier or debylitie, he would put him self in a readynes to reskew it,
if it were beseged, the Capitayn wrote to the Earl, thanking him and prayed
GOD that the King of Scotts would come with his puyssaunce, for he would
keep him play till the time that the King of England came out of France to
reskew it, which answer reioysed the Earl much.

came out of France, to reskewe it, which answer reioysed the Earl much.

After the king of Scotts had sent his defyaunce to the king of England,
lyenge before Tyrwyn, as you have hard, he daily made his musters, and
assembled his people over all his realm, whereof the brute was that they were
two hundred thousand, but for a suertye they were an hundred thousand good
lightynge men at the lest, and with all his host and power entered into
England (and threw down pyles) the.xxii. day of August, and planted his
siege before the Castle of Norham, and sore abated the walls. The earl hard
tidings thereof the five and twenty day of August, being saynct Barthelmewes
day.

Then he wrote to all the gentelmen of the shyres aforesaid, to be with him at
Newcastell, the first day of September next with all there retynew according
to the certificat. On the morrow, he with his five hundred men came to York,
and the.xxvi. day he went toward Newcastell, and not withstandyng that he had
the fowlest day and night y^ could be, and the ways so deep, in so much that
his guide was almost drouned before him, yet he never ceased, but kept on his
journey to give example to them that should follow. He being at Durham was
advertised how the king of Scotts with his great ordinance had rased teh
walls of the Castle of Norham, and had made three great Assaults three days
together, and the Captain valyauntly defended him, but he spent vaynely so
much of his ordinance, bows and arrows and other municions that at the
last he lacked, and so was at the.vi. day compelled to yield him symply to
the kings mercy. This castle was thought impregnable, if it had been well
fu^nished, but the Scotts by the indiscreet spending of the Captain, took
it in six days: this chance was more sorrowful to the earl then to the
Bishop owner of the same. All that night the wind blewe corragiously,
wherefore the earl doubted least, the lord Hawarde his son great Admyrall of
England should perish that night on the sea, who promised to land at
Newcastell with a thousand men, to accompaynie his father, which promise he
accomplished.

The earl hard Mass, and appointed with the Prior for saint Cu^^erdes
banner, S. Cu^^erde^ banne.
and so that day being the thyrty day of August he came to Newcastell:
thither came the lord Dacres, sir William Bulmer, sir Marmaducke Constable,
and many other substanciall gentelmen, whom he retained with him as
counsayllers, and there determined that on Sundaye next ensuynge, he should
take the f^lde at Bolton in Glendale, and because many souldioures were
repayrynge to him, he left Newcastell to the intent that they that followed,
should have there more rome, and come to Alnewyke the third d^ye of
September, and because his souldi^rs were not come, by reason of the foul way
he was ^ayne to tarry there all the fourth day being Sundaye, which day
came to him the lord Admyrall his son, with a compaignye of valiant
Capitaynes and able souldiars and maryners, which all came from the sea, the
coming of him much rejoiced his father, for he was very wise, hardy, and of
great credence and experience. Then he Earl and his counsayll, with great
deliberacion appointed his battayles in order with wings and with ryders
necessary.

First of the forward was Captain the lord Hawarde, Admyrall of England,
with such as came from the sea, and with him sir Nycholas Applyarde, sir
Stephen Bull, sir Henry Shyreburne, sir William Sydney, sir Edward Echyngham,
the lord Clyfforde, the lord Co^yers, the lord Latymer, the lord Scrope of
Upsale, the lord Egle, the lord Lomley, sir William Bulmer with the power of
the Bishoprycke of Durham, sir William Gascoyne, sir Christopher Ward, sir
Ihon Eueryngham, sir Thomas Metham, sir Water Gryffith, and many other.

Of the wynge on the right hand of the forward, was Captain sir Edmonde
Hawarde knight, Marshall of the host, and with him Bryan Tunstall, Raufe
Br^arton, Ihon Laurence, Richard Bold Esquyers, and sir Ihon Both, sir
Thomas Butler Knights, Richard Done, Ihon Bygod, Thomas Fitzwilliam, Ihon
Claruys, Bryan Stapulton, Robert warcoppe, Richard Cholmeley, with the men of
Hull, and the Kings tenauntes of Hatfelde and other.

Of the the wyng of the left hand, was Capitayn sir Marmaduke Constable with
his sons and kynnesmen, sir william Percy, and of Lancashere, a thousand men.

Of the rerewarde was Captain the earl of Surrey him self, and with him the
lord Scrope of Bolton, sir Philippe Tylney, sir George Darcy, sir Thomas
Barkebey, sir Ihon Rocliffe, sir Christopher Pykeryng, Richard Tempest, sir
Ihon Stanley with the Bishop of Elyes servants, sir Bryan Stapulton, Lyonell
Percy, with the Abbot of Whitbyes tenauntes, Christopher Clapham, sir William
Gascoing the younger, sir Guy Dawney, Master Magnus, Master Dalbyes servants,
sir Ihon Normauyle, the citiezens of York, sir Nynyan Markanuyle, sir Ihon
Wylloghby with other.

Of the wyng on the right hand was captain the lord Dacres with his power.

On the leftehande wynge was sir Edward Stanley knight, with the residue of
the power of the countye Palantyne and of Lancaster.

And when all men were appointed and knew what too do. The earl and his
counsayll concluded and determined emonge other things to send Rouge cross,
pursiuaunt of arms with a trompet too the to send Rouge Cross pursiuaunt of
arms with a trompette too the king of Scotts, with certain instruccions,
signed by thesayde earl, containing word by word as follows.

First where there has been suy^e made to the king of Scotts by Elyzabeth
Heron, wife to William Heron of Forde, now prisoner in Scotland, for casting
down of the house or Castle of Forde, and as thesayde Elizabeth reports
upon communicacion had, thesayde king has promised and condiscended to
thesayde Elizabeth, that if she any time before none, the fifth day of
September, would bring and deliver unto him the lord Iohnstowne, and
Alexander Hume, then prisoners that time in England, he then is contented and
agreed that thesayde house or Castle shall stand without casting down,
brennynge or spoylynge the same: Whereunto thesayde earl is content with that,
upon this condition that if thesayde king will promytte the assurance of
thesayde Castle, in manner and form aforesaid under his s^ale, to deliver
thesayde lord of Iohnstowne and Alexander Hume, immediately upon the same
assurance. And in case thesayde king can and will be content to deliver
thesayde Heron out of Scotland, then thesayde earl shall cause to be
delivered to the said king the two gentelmen and two other, sir George Hume
and William Carre.

Farther thesayde earl woll that you Rouge Cross, show the said king, that
where he contrary to his oath and league, and unnaturally against all reason
and conscience, has entered and invaded this his brothers realm of England,
and done great hurt to the same, in casting down Castelles, Towers and
houses, brenninge, spoylynge and destroiynge of the same, and cruelly
murdering the king of England his brothers subjects. Wherefore thesayde
earl will be ready too try the rightfulnes of the matter with the king in
battaill by Frydaye next coming at the farthest, if he of his noble courage
will give him tarienge, and abode, within this the kings Realm so long time:
And the same thesayde earl promises, as he is true knight to God and the
King of England his master. And before Rouge Cross should depart with
thesayde instruccions, thesayde lord Admyrall gave him in credence too show
thesayde King of his coming, and part of his compaignye on the sea with
him: and that he had sought the Scottyshe Nauye, then being on the sea, but
he could not mete with them, because they were ^^edde into France, by the
cost of Irelande.

And in as much as thesayde king had diverse and many times caused thesayde
lord, too be called at days of true, too make redress for Andrew Barton, a
Pirate of the sea, long before that vanquyshed by the same lord Admyrall, he
was now come in his own proper person too be in the Uauntgarde of the field
to Ius^ifie the death of thesayde Andrewe, against him and all his people,
and would se what could be ^ayed to his charge thesayde day, and that he nor
none of his compaignye should take no Scottshe noble man prisoner, nor any
other, but they should dye if they came in his danger, oneles it were the
kings own person, for he said he t^usied too none other curtesye at the
hands of the Scotts.

And in this manner he should find him in the Uauntgarde of the field by the
grace of GOD and sayncte George as he was a true knight. Yet before the
departing of Rouge Cross with thesayde instruccions and credence, it was
thought by the E^le and his counsayll, that thesayde king would feign and
Imagen some other message, too send an Heraulde of his with the same, only to
Uiew, and over se the manner and order of the kings royal army, ordinance,
and artillery, then being with the Earl, whereby might have ensued great
daungier to the same, and for exchuynge thereof, he had in in commandment,
that if any such message were sent, not to bring any person, coming
therewith within three or two mile of the ^elde at the nyghest, where thesayde
Earl would come, and hear what he would say: And thus departed Rouge Cross
with his trumpet apparayled in his Cote of arms.

On Mondaye the (...) day of September, the Earl took his field at Bolton in
Glendall as he had appoyncted, where all the noble men and gentelmen met with
their re^ynewes too the number of of six and twenty thousand men, and about
mydnighte next ensuyng, came the trompette, which went with Rouge Cross, and
declared how the king of Scotts, after the message done to him by Rouge
Cross according too his instruccions, thesayde King detayned him, and sent
on Ilay a Harauld of his with him unto the Earl, to declare too him thesayde
Kings pleasure, too whom the Earl sent York Heraulde at arms, to
accompaignie thesayde Ilay, at a Uillage called Mylo, two miles from the
field, until the coming thither of thesayde Earl the next morrow.

The sixth day of September, early in the morning, the Earl accompaignied with
the most part of the lords, knights and gentelmen of the field, every man
having with him but one man too hold his horse, and so thesayde Heraulde met
with the earl, and with b^ou^t reverence declared him that he was come from his
master the King of Scotts, which would know, whither the Earl sent any
such message by Rouge Cross, the Earl justified the same, saiynge farther,
that Rouge Cross had the same message of him in writynge signed with his own
hand, whereunto thesayde Ilay said, as touching the saving from brennynge
or destroiynge, and casting down of the Castle of Forde, for the
deliverance of thesayde prisoners, The king his master would thereto make no
answer. But as too the abiding for battayll between that and Frydaye, then
next following, the king his master badde him show too the Earl, that he
was as welcome as any noble man of England unto the same king, and that if he
had been at home in his Town o^ Ede^borough, there receyuyng such a message
from thesayde Earl, he would gladlye have come and fulfilled thesayde Earls
desire: and the Heraulde assured the Earl on the king his masters behalf,
that the same king would abide him vattayll at the day prefixed, whereof
thesayde earl was right joyous and much praised the honorable agreement of
thesayde royal king and esteemed the same too proceed of an high and noble
courage, promising the Heraulde that he and good su^rtye with him should be
bound in ten thousand pound sterlynge too keep thesayde day appointed, so
that the king would find an Earl of his, and thereto a good suerty with him
to be bound in like sum, ^or the per^orma^s of the same: And farthermore the
Earl bad the Heraulde for to say to his master, that if he for his part kept
not his appoyntemente, then he was content, that the Scotts should Ba^^ull
him, which is a great reproach among the Scotts, and is used when a man is
openly perjured, and then they make of him and Image painted reuersed, with his
he^es upward, with his name, wonderyng, cryenge and blowing out of him with
horns, in the most dispitefull manner they can.

In token that he is worthy too be exi^ed the compaignie of all good Creatures.

Then Ilay delivered too the Earl a littell Cedule, written with the kings
Secretaries hand vnsigned, the tenor whereof follows.

As to the cause alleged of our coming into England again, our band and
promise (as is alleged) thereto we answer, ower brother was bound also far
to us as we to him. And when we swear last before his Ambassade, in presence
of our counsayll, we expressed specially in our oath, that we would keep to
our brother, if our brother kept to us, and not else, we swear our
brother brake first to us, and sithe his break, we have required diverse times
him too amend, and lately we warned our brother as he did not us or he brake
and this we take for our quarrel, and with Gods grace shall defend the same
at your affixed time, which with Gods grace we shall abide.

And for as much as thesayde King kept still Rouge Cross with him, who was
not yet returned, the same Earl caused thesayde Ilay too be in the keeping of
Sir Humfrey Lysle and York Heraulde, in the same Vyllage, until the time that
a servant of thesayde Ilay might ride in all haste too the royal King of
Scotts, for the deliuerynge of thesayde Rouge Cross. Then the earl Joyous of
the kings au^swer, returned to his camp, and fet forward five mile, too a
place called Woller Hawgh, in such order of battayll, as even then he should
have fought, and there lodged for that night, three littell miles from the
king of Scotts, and between the king and him was a goodly and large corn
field, called Mylfelde which was a convenient and fair ground for two
hosts too fight on, there every host might perceive other.

The morrow being Wednysdaye, the.vii. day of that month, the king of
Scotts caused his great ordinance too be shot at the English army, but
it hurt neither man nor beast. When the king of Scotts saw that Ilay was
deteyned, he sent away Rouge Cross to the earl, by whom, and other of the
borders he was advertised that the king lay upon the side of a high
mountain, called Floddon on the edge of Cheuyot, where was but one narow field
for any man to ascend up thesayde hill to him, and at the foot of the hill
lay all his ordinance. On the one side of his army was a great Marrishe,
and compassed with the hills of Cheuyot, so that he lay to strong too be
approached of any side: except the Englishmen would have temerariously run on
his ordinance, which matter well considered by the Earl and his son, and
other of the counsayll there, they called too them Rouge Cross, and sent him
the next day to the king of Scotts, willinge him too show the king, that
the said earl, with diverse of the kings nobles and subjects had avaunced
them selfs too give battayll too his grace, trusting that according too his
promise, he would auaunce him self and his army to join the battayll,
which as yet he has not done. Wherefore he desired the king that he might
have knowledge by noone that day, whether he of his noble courage would
discende the hill, where he lay and too give battayll or not: and if he say
that I shall not know his intent, or will say, that he will keep the ground:
then show him that he perceyueth well that that place is no indifferent
ground for two armies too fight, and therefore I will look for no mo of his
delays. The same day being our Lady day the Natiuite Rouge Cross
departed to the king of Scotts, which would not hear him speak, but sent
one of his seruitours to hear his message, Which seruitour after he had
disclosed the same to the king, made answer, that it besemed not an earl,
after that manner too handle a king, and that he would use no sorcery, nor had
no trust of any ground:

You have heard before, how Ilay the Scottishe Heraulde was returned for
Rouge Cross, and as s^ne as Rouge Gross was returned, he was discharged, but
he tarried with York an English Herald making good chere, and was not
returned that morning that Rouge Cross came on his message, wherefore Rouge
Cross and his tromp^t no trust of any ground.

You have hard before, how Ilay the Scottishe Heraulde was returned for Rouge
Cross, and as soon as Rouge Cross was returned, he was discharged, but he
tarried with York an English Heraulde making good chere, and was not returned
that morning that Rouge Cross came on his message, wherefore Rouge Cross and
his trompet were detayned by the servant of Ilay, which the day before went
for Rouge Cross, assuring them that if Ilay came not home before none, that
he was not living, and then they should have their heddes stryken of, then
Rouge Cross offered that his servant should go for Ilay, but it would not be
excepted, but as hap was Ilay came home before none, and showed of his gentell
enterteynynge, and then Rouge Cross was delivered, and came to the English
army, and made report as you have heard.

Then the Englishemen removed their field on the water of Till, and so forth
over many hills and streytes, marchynge toward the Scotts on another side,
and in their sight the Scotts burned certain poor Uyllages on the othersyde
of the Marishe.

The Englishemen, always leaving the Scottishe army on the left hand, took
their field under a wood side, called Barmer wood, two mile from the Scotts,
and between the two armies was the River of Till, and there was a littell hill
that saved the Engliishmen from the gonneshotte, on which hill the lord
Admyrall perfightly saw and discovered them all.

In the evening of the same day it was concluded between the earl and his
counsayll, and most part of the army thereto agreed, that the Uauntgarde with
the ordinance should pass over again the water of Till, at a bridge called
Twysel bridge the.ix. day of September, and the rerewarde to pass over at
Mylforde, puttinge them selfs as nigh as they could between the Scotts and
Scotland, and so to give battayll to the Scotts on the hill, called Floddon
hill. Frydaye the said nynth day, the lord Admyrall, like a valiaunte
knight, passed over Twysell bridge with the Uantgarde, marchyng toward his
enemies, like diligence was made by the Earl for passing over at Mylfforde
with the rerewarde, saiynge to his Capytaines, now good fellows, do like
Englishemen this day, take my part like men, which part is the kings part,
and I wyste you would not, I will in my own person fight with the king of
Scotts, rather to dye honorably by his crueltye, then to live in shame, or
that any reproach should be laid to me hereafter.

To whom they answered, that they would serve the king and him truly that
day. The English army that day had no vitayle and were fasting, and two
days before they had only drunk water, and could s^ace get any other
sustenaunce for money, and yet they kept array on horseback from five of the
clock in the morning till four of the clock at after none, and were always
in the sight of the Scotts.

The king of Scotts perceyuinge the Englishemen, marchinge toward Scotland,
thought that they would have entered into Scotland, and burn and fortay the
plentiful cou^tray, called the March, for so was he made believe by an
Englishema^ named Gyles Musgraue which was familiar with the king of Scotts,
and did it for a pollecie to cause him to come down from the hill: Wherefore
the said king caused his tents to be remo^^d to an other hill in great
haste, least ^he Englishemen should have taken the same hill: And at their
departinge they set fire on their litter and other fylthy ordure, according
to their custom, and of the fire and smolder did rise such a smooke so thick
and so dark, that the one host could not perceive the other, for the ^ynde
did drive the smoke between the two armies, the Sco^tes ever keeping the heygth
of the hill on the edge of the cheuyot* and the E^glishemen passed forward
still in the low ground, and ever in the (...) of the smoke, in so much that
both the hosts were ^ery ^ere together, within the space of a quarter of a
mile, before one of them (...) perceive another for the smoke. Then, when the
Englishemen had passed a little brook, called Sa^dyfforde, which is but a
ma^s step over, and that the smoke was passed, and the Air fair and clear,
each army might plainly see one an other at hand.

Th^n the lord Admyrall perceived four great battayles of the Scotts (...)
with long speres like moorishe pykes: which Scotts (...) them warlike, and
bent them to the forward, which was (...) by the lord Admiral, which
perceiving that, sent to his Fa^^er the earl of Surrey his Ag^us (...) that
h^nge at his breast that in all have he would join battayll, even with the
bro^t or breast of the ^antgarde: for the forward alone was not able to
encountre the whole battayll of the Scotts, the earl perceiving well the
saiynge of his son, and seeing the Scotts ready to discende ^he hill
a^aunsed him self and his people forward, and brought them egall in ground
with the forward on the left hand, even at the bro^t or breast of the same at
the foot of the hill called B^amston, the English army stretched East and
West, and their barks North, and the Scotts in the Southe before them on
the forsayde hill called Bramston.

Then out brast the ordinance on both sides with fire flamme and hydeous
noise, and the Master gonner of the English part ^lewe the Master gormer of
Scotland, and bet all his men from their ordinance, so that the Scottishe
ordinance did no harm too the Englishemen, but the Englishemens Artyllerie
shot into the mids of the Kings battayll, and slew many persons, which
seeing the king of Scotts and his noble men, made the more haste too come too
ioynyng, and so all the four battayles in man^r descended the hill at once.
And after that the shot was done, which they defended with Pauishes, they
came to handestrockes, and were encontred severally as you shall here.

First on the English side next the West, was Sir Edmonde

Secondely, Eastwarde from the said battle was the lord

Thirdely, Eastwarde from the lord Admyrall was the earl of to do such an high
enterprice him self in his person, that should surnount the enterprises of all
other princes: but how soever it happened God gave the stroke, and he was no
more regarded then a poor soldier, for all went one way. So that of his own
battaill none escaped, but sir William Scot knight his chauncelour, and sir
Ihon forman knight, his seriaunt Porter, which were taken prisoners, and with
great difficulty saved. This may be a great myrror to all princes, how that
they aduenter them selfs in such a battle.

Forthely, Eastward was sir Edward Stanley knight, capitayn of of the left wyng
with the said earl, which clame up to the top of the hill called Bramston,
or the Scotts wiste, and with him encontred the earls of Huntley, Le^noux and
Argile, with a great number of Scotts which were sore fought with all, which
perceyuinge the earl of Huntley took a horse and saved him self, if he had
tarried he had been likely to have go^e with his compaignie: such as fled, the
said sir Edward and his people followed the over the same ground, where the
earls battle first joined, and found there the Scotts, which were by the
earls battle slain before, and suddenly left the chase and fell a spoiling,
and spoiled the king of Scotts, and many that were slain in his battle, but
they knew him not, and found a Cross and certain things of his, by reason
whereof some said that he was slain by that wyng, which could not be true,
for the prisoners of Scotland testified that the kings battaill fought only
with the earls battles, but for a truth this wyng did very valiauntly:
wherefore it was thought that the said sir Edward might that day not have been
missed.

All these.iiii. battles, in manner fought at one time, and were determined in
effect, littell in distance of the beginning and ending of any of them one
before the other, saving that sir Edward Stanley, which was the last that
fought, for he came up to the top of the hill, and there fought with the
Scotts valiauntly, and chaced them down the hill over that place, where the
kings battle joined. Beside these.iiii. battayles of the Scotts were two
other battayls, which never came to hand strokes.

Thus thorough the power of God on Friday, being the.ix. day of September, in
the year of our lord.M.D.xiij. was James the.iiii. king of Scotts slain at
Bramstone (chiefly by the power of y^ earl of Surrey, lieutenaunt for king
Henry the, viii. king of England, which then lay at the sege before Tornay) and
with the said king were slain. The Archbishop of saynct Androwes, the kings
bastard son. The bishop of the Isles. The Abbot of I^chaffrey. The Abbot of
Kylwenny.
Earls.
The earl Mountroos The earl of Crafford The earl of Arguyle. The earl of
Lennoux. The earl of Glencarte. The earl of Katnes. The earl of Castelles. The
earl of Bothwell. The earl Arrell Constable of Scotland. The earl Addill. The
earl Athel. The earl Morton. (:)
Lords.
The lord Louet. The lord Forbos. The lord Elueston. The lord Roos The lord
Inderby. The lord Sentelere. The lord Maxwell. and his.iiii. brethren. The lord
Daunl^y The lord Seympyll. The lord Borthyck. The lord Bogony. The lord
Arskyll. The lord Blakkater. The lord Cowyn.
Knights and gentlemen.
Sir Ihon Dowglasse. Cutbert Home lord of Fastcastell. Sir Alexander Seton. Sir
Dauy Home. Master Ihon Grant. Sir Dunkyn Caufelde. Sir Saunder Louder. Sir
George Louder. Master Marshall. Master Keye. Master Ellot. Master Cawell clerck
of the chauncery. The Deane of Ellester. Mack, Kene. Mack, Clen^,
and many other gentlemen, which be unknown, because no officer of arms of
Scotland would come to make search for them: and if the day had been le^ger
by.iii. hours, (for it was.iiii. of the clock at after none or the battles
joined) or that the Englishmen had had vitayles, so that they might have bidden
still together, they had not alonely made the greatest distress of Scotts by
death and taking, that the like has not been seen in one day: but also within
a little while might have put the realm of Scotland in such a misery, and
troble, that for ever they should have been ware how to enter the realm of
England, and specially the king, being absent: for the Englysh men wanted no
good will, for of the Scotts they slew.xii.M. at the lest of the best
gentlemen and flower of Scotland and of the Englysh side were slain and taken
not.xv.C. men, as it appeared by the book of wages when the soldiers were
paid. Thus therle of Surrey accomplished the promise at his day prefixed with
the king of Scotts to his great fame and honor.

After that the feld was fought and the Scotts fled, many Englyshmen followed
them into Scotland, and were so far that they wist not which way to return
and so were taken prisoners of the Scotts that were in the.ii. battayles that
fled first and never faught. Also diverse were taken by the lord Chamberlayne
of Scotland which fought with the wyng of Sir Edmond Haward, and were carried
with him to the number of.lx. Of the Scotts that fled some passed over the
water of Twede at Ca^destr^me foorde, and other by the dry marches, during the
time of the fight, and the night after many men lost there horses and such
stoffe as they left in there tents and pauilyons by the robbars of Tyndale and
Ty^idale.

The lord D^cre with his company stood still all day vnfoughten with all.
When the feld was done and the skoute watch brought word that there was no more
apperaunce of the Scotts, but all were returned. Thearle thanked God with
humble heart, and called to him certain lords and other gentlemen and them
made knights as sir Edmond Haward his son and the Lord Scrope, Sir Wylliam
Percy and many other. Then therle and the Lord Admiral departed to Barmer
wodde and appoyncted Sir Phylippe Tylney knight with the compaignye of the
lord Admiral and the compaignye of the Lord Scrope of Bolton, the lord
Latymer, old Sir Marmaduke Constable Sir Wyllyam Percy, Sir Nycholas Applyard,
and their companyes, and a few other to keep the place where the field was for
saving of the English ordinance, and the ordinance that was taken from the
Scotts, which was.v. great Curtalles, two great Culuerynges, four Sacres,
and syx Serpentynes as fair ordinance as has been seen, bysyde other small
pieces. Well known it was by them that fought, and also reported by the
prisoners of Scotland, that their king was taken or ^^ayne, but his body was
not found till the next day, because all the mean people as well Scotts as
English were strypped out of their apparel as they lay on the field, yet at
the last he was found by the Lord Dacres, who knew him well by his pryuye
tookens in that same place where the battle of the Earl of Surrey and his,
first joined together.

This king had diverse deadely wounds and in especial one with an Arowe, and
an another with a byll as apered when he was naked. After that the body of the
King of Scotts was fownde and brought too Barwycke, the Earl showed yt too
Sir Wyllyam Scott his Chaunceller, and Sir Ihon Forman his seriante porter,
which knew him at the first sight and made great lamentacyon. Then was the
body bowelled, embawmed, and cered, and secretly amongst other stuff
conveyed to Newcastell, but the same day the Lord Admyrall, came to the field
and there some Scotts apered on an hyl: but Wyllyam Blackenall which was the
cheffe doa^ and ruler of all the ordinance shot such a peale, that the
Scotts fledd, or else the Lord Admyrall had been in great ieopardye: and then
all the ordinance was brought in sauetye to the Castle of Cytell, and there
remained for a time. After this noble vyctorye therle wrote first to the Queen
which had raised a great power to resist the said king of Scotts, of the
winning of the battle, for then the body of the king of Scotts was not
fownde, and she yet being at the town of Buckyngham had word the next day
after that the king of Scotts was slain and a part of his coat armure to
her sent, for which victory she thanked GOD, and so the Earl after that the
North part was set in a quietness, returned to the Queen with the dead body
of the Scottyshe king and brought it to Richemond.

Now let us return too the king of England lyenge before Tournaye which
the.xxv. day of September received the gauntelett and letters of the Earl of
Surrey, and knew all the dealing of both parties. Then he thanked GOD and
highly praised the Earl and the Lord Admyrall and his son, and all he
gentlemen and commons that were at that valiante entrepryce: Nowebeit, the
king had a secret letter that the Cheshyre men fled from Sir Edmond
Hawarde, which letter caused great heart burning and many words, but the
king thankefully accepted al thing, and would no man to be dispraysed. So, on
the Mondaye at night the.xxvi. day of September, the Lord Harbarte and the
Earl of Shrewsburye made great fyers in there armies in token of vyctorye and
triumph: and on Teusdaye the.xxvii. day, the tente of cloth of gold was set
up, and the kings Chapel sange mass, and after that Te D^um, and then the
Bishop of Rochester made a Sermond and showed the death of the king of
Scotts and much lamented the ill death and periurye of him.

The king of England lyenge thus before Tournay, caused his great ordinance
too be planted round about the Cytee, and diverse trenches were cast and
rampires made and the Lord Lysle, and the Lord Wyloghby were appoyncted to
maintain the ordinance, with there bendes, and therle of Kent was lodged
before the gate called port Ualencyen, so that the Cytizens could not issue
out, nor no aid could come in. The ordinance daily bett the gates, towers,
and walls, which made a great battery: and a few Englyshmen assaulted the
port coquerell, but they were to few in number, and if they had been more in
number, they had taken the town as the tournosyns confessed after. The
Cytyzens of Tournay considering their estate, came together to counsayll, and
there the Provost said, friends and brethren of this noble Cytee, I cannot to
much praise your treuth and fidelite to your sovereign Lord the king of
France considering how manfully you have defended this Cytee sithe the
beginnynge of this siege, but alas allthough it be written on the gates graven
in sto^^e Iammes ton ne a perdeu ton pucellage, that is to say thou haste
never lost thy maydenhed: yet if this Cytee had not ben well furnyshed and ever
at the day appoyncted suer of reskeue, it could not have continued: now you
se that reskeue fails, our gates be rased, our towers betyn down, our chief
towar like to fall, so that if this perilous siege continue, or else if our
ennenies assaute us, we be not able to defend us: wherefore now, all these
things considered, I would know whyther you will treat with the king of
England or adyde the chance. Then they which at the last counsayll cried
war, war, now cried peace, peace, yet all were not agreed: then one
wyseman said, Sirs if the town be assawted once again with a great number,
suerly it will be taken: you saw thexperience at the last as^aute, and then
consider if it be taken by force who is there that can say he is (...) of his
life: But by entretie, the king of England is so merciful that we may
fortune to save both life and goods. Then finally all agreed to treat. Then
the Provost sent to the king a trompett desyerynge a saufeconduyte for him,
and certain other to come and to speak with him, which request was to him
granted. Then the Provost of the cytee accompanied with eleven with him of the
best of the cytee, came to the army and spoke with the lords of the counsel
and after were brought to the kings presence, the Provost kneled down and
all his compaignye and said: Right high and mighty Prince although the Cytee
of Tournay is strong, well walled, well replenyshed with people, vytayles,
artylerie, ye and the people in fear and dread of nothing, yet we know that
against your great puyssaunce yt can not continue long, although yt were ten
times as strong, as it is, wherefore we knowing by report, your honor,
your wisdom, your justice, and noble heart, are content to become your
subjects and vassalles, so that we may have and enjoy our old laws,
customs, lyberties, and Franchesses, under you as we have before this done
under other Princes. Then the king answered, we have well hard your
petycyon, we will common with our counsayll and make you answer, and when he
had communed with his counsayll, he answered saying: Sirs he that asks
mercy of us shall not be denied, seeing you come to treat, we remytte you to
our counsayll. Then they went into the tente of counsayll, and there the
Tournasyns fell at a poyncte, and in conclusion, they yielded the Cytee and ten
thowsande pound sterlynge for the redempcyon of their lybertyes, and so
departed to the cytee, making relacion of the king and his noble courage. On
Thursdaye the.xxix. day of September, the king was in his rich tente of
cloth of gold under his clothe of estate, to whom came the Cytezens of the
Cytee and were sworn to him and became his subjects. Then the king
appoyncted the lord Lysle, the Lord of Burgayny the Lord Wylloghby to take
possession, which with six thousand men entered the Cytee and took the markett
place and the walls, and serched the howses for fear of treason and then
master Thomas Wolsey the kings almoner called before him all the citizens young
and old and swear them to the king of England, the number whereof was.iiii.
skore thousand. Thus the king of England by conquest came to the possession of
the cytee of Tournay: on Sondaie the.ii. day of October the king entered the
cytee of Tournay at port Fountain, and.iiii. of the chief of the cytee over
him bare a cannapye with all the arms of England, every person was in his best
apparel, y^ Ladies and gentlewomen lay in the wyndowes beholdynge the king
and his nobilite, every citizen had in his hand a stafe torche, the king him
self was rychely appereilled in rich armure on a barded courser, his henxme^
beryng his pieces of war, as axe, spear and other, there coursers were barded
with tharmes of England, France, Ireland, and other the kings dominions all
of rich embraudery, thus the king with his nobilite all richely apparelled
with his sword borne before him, his herauldes and seriantes of arms with
trumpettes and mynstralsy entered the cytee and came to our lady church, and
there te deum was song. Then the king called to his presence, Edward
Guldeforde, Wylliam Fitzwilliam, Ihon Dauncye, William Tiler, I hon Sharp,
William Huse, Ihon Savage, Cristopher Garnyshe, and diverse other valiant
esquyers and gave to them the order of knyghthode, and then went to his
lodging, and after none he came to the market place, where was prepared for
him a place: then he caus^d a proclamacion to be made in his name king of
England and of France that no man should grieve the citizens, during which
proclamacion the turnesyns scace looked up, nor showed o^s to him anny amiable
countenance which was much marked, the Cry ^myshed, the king departed to his
camp leuynge the cytee in save keeping. This weke the king rode to see the
castle of Morton, and there his grace took great pleasure. The king remembrynge
the great chere that the prince of castle and the lady Margarete had made him
at Lysle which was but.xii. mile English from Tornay, desired thesayd prince
and lady with diverse other to come to him to his cytee of Tornay and made
preparacion for the same, and appoincted a iustes whereof he him self would be
one, and caused a Tilt to be made in the market place. While these things were
preparyng, the king and his counsel ordered for the suer keeping of the cytee
of Tornay, and there ordained Sir Edward Pownynges knight of the order of the
gartier to be his Lieutenaunt with.iiii.C. archers, with capytaynes horsemen
and artilerie convenient, and to have aid of Henawde and other the kings
frindes adioynyng, and of his guard he left there.iiii.C. archers, and
ordinance was appoyncted for the defense of the same. Mondaye the.xi. day of
October the king without the town received the prince of castle, the lady
Margarete and diverse other nobles of their countries and them brought into
Tornay with great triumph. The Noys went that the lord Lysle made request of
marriage to the lady Margarete duches of Sauoy and daughter to The Emperor
Maximilian, which before that time was departed from the king with many rich
gifts and money borrowed, but whether he proffered marriage or not she favored
him highly: there the prince and duches soiorned with great solace by the space
of.x. ^ayes. A Iust^s.
During which time, the.xvii. day of October, began the ius^es, the king and
the lord Lysle answered all comers: upon the king attended.xxiiii. knights
on foot in coats of purple velvet and clothe of gold. A tent of cloth of gold
was set in the place for the armorie and releue, the king had a base and a
trapper of purple velvet both set full of. S. S. of fine bullio^ and the lord
Lisle in the same suyte, there were many speres broken and many a good buffet
given, the strangers as the lord Walon and lord Emery and other did right
well. When y^ iustes were done, the king and all the other vnhelmed them and rode
about the Tylt and did great reverence to the ladies, and then the herauldes
cried to lodgyng.

This night the king made a sumpteous banquet of a.C. dishes to the prince of
Castle and the lady Margarete and to all other lords and ladies, and after
the banquet, the ladies daunsed, and then came in the king and a xi. in a mask,
all richely appareled with bonettes of gold, and when they had passed the time at
their pleasure, the garments of the mask were cast of amongst the ladies
take who could take.

The.xx. day of October, the Prince of Castle and the lady Margarete with
many great gifts to them given returned to Lyle with all their train, After
that the king was informed that all direccions were taken and every thing put
in an order for the suer keeping of the city of Tornay, he took the same to sir
Edward Pownynges knight which valiantly kept it in good order and justice.

The king and his counsayll before this had considered that the Frenchmen
would give them no battle, and that winter aproched, which was no time to ly
at siege of other towns, concluded to keep Tournay sauely, and to break up
his camp for that winter, and to begin again war in the spryng of the year:
this was a full conclusion taken by the king and his counsayl, and so the
king and all his people (except such as were appoyncted to be with sir
Edward Pownynges) departed out of Tournay the.xx. day of September: and the
king and the noble men made such speed, that shortly they came to Caleys, and
thither came the Lord Admyrall whom the king heartily thanked of his pains
and there every man was paid of his wages and conduyte money, and ships
prepared for the passage, and so the.xxiiii. day of September the king with a
privy company took ship and the same day landed at Dover and shortly after
all his people followed, then he with a small company rode to Rychemonde in post
to the queen, where was such a loving metyng that every creature reioysed.
This season began a great mortalite in London and other places where much
people dyed: All this winter the kings navy kept the sees and robbed and
spoiled the Frenchemen on their costs.

When the king was thus returned he forgatt not the good service that many a
gentleman did at the battle of Bramston, wherefore he wrote to them his
loving letters with such thanks and favorable words that every man thought
him self well rewarded. And on the day of the purificacion of our lady at
Lambeth the king created the Earl of Surrey duke of Norffolke with an
augmentacion of the arms of Scotland, and Sir Charles Brandon Uiconte Lisle,
he created duke of Suffolk, and the Lord Haward high Admiral he created
Earl of Surrey, and Sir Charles Somersett Lord Harbert, his chief
Chamberlayne, he created Earl of Worcester: and after that at a another day he
made Sir Edward Stanley for his good service, lord Montaygle, and in march
following was master Thomas Wolsey the kings almoner consecrate bishop of
Lyncolne, which there to was named on Newers day before: This man was borne at
Ypswyche and was a good Philosopher, very eloquente and full of wit, but for
pride, covetous, and ambicion, he excelled all other as you shall here after.

In the time of king Henrye the seventh father to king Henrye the eight it
was concluded between the said king, The discripcio^ of Thomas Wolsey, which
afterward was made Cardinal.
and king Phylyppe of Castle son to Maxymilian The Emperor and king of
Castle and his wife, that Charles his eldeste son should marye the Lady
Mary daughter to the king of England with a dowrye to her appoyncted, at
which time they were both young: Now at the kings return from Tournay he
made preparacyon too send thesayde Lady his sister to the Prince of Castle.
But the counsayll of Flaunders answered that concerning her self they would
gladly receive to be espowsed too there Prince, for she was then on of the
fairest Ladies of the world: but as concerning the articles of her dowar,
they could not fulfill without thassente of the king of Arragon and the
realm of Castle (which as was said, minded to have him married in Spain.)
The king like a loving broother would not send his sister wyldely without
a dowar assured, took the first agremente between the king her father and
king Phylyppe his father too be of none effect, sith the Spanyardes would
not conferme the same, and there cause was, by reason that king Phylyppe was
not naturally borne too be there king, but was king in the right of his
wife, and so they were not bound too his agreementes made without their
consent. So thus the king of England retained still his sister and all the
preparacion that he had done for her conueyaunce, which was very costely.

This season the lady Margarete queen of Scotts late wife to king James
the.iiii. slain at Bramston, and sister to the king, wrote to the king to
have compassion of her and his two Nephews her sons, for she was in fear
left he would have invaded her realm. The king moved with brotherly
compassion, sent her word, that if the Scotts kept peace he would keep peace,
if they would have war he would likewise have war and so with that answer
the messenger departed. In the spri^g time of the year the king wrote his
letters to all noble men and gentilmen that he would shortly pass again into
France in his own person, wherefore every man prepared him self mete for that
iournay: the Fle^mynges heryng thereof, made puruiaunce for wagans, vitaile and
other things which turned them to great loss for that viage brake of as you
shall here.

All this season Sir Richard Whethill and sir Ihon Tremayle kept so Thenglishe
pale that the Frenchemen durst not medyl, and yet they spoiled to base bollen.

Before this time the towns about London as Islyngton, Hoxston, Shordysh and
other, had so enclosed the common feldes with hedges and diches, that another
the young men of the cytee might shote, nor the ancient persons might walk
for there pleasure in the feldes, except either there bows and arowes were
broken or taken a way, or the honest and sustanciall persons arrested or
indicted, saying that no Londoner should goo out of the cytee but in the high
ways. This saying sore grieved the Londoners, and suddenly this year a great
number of the city assembled them selfs in a morning, and a turnar in a
fools cotte came cryenge through the cytee, shouels and spades, and so many
people followed that it was wonder, and within a short space all the hedges
about the towns were cast down, and the diches filled, and every thing made
plain the woorkemen were so diligent. The kings counsayll heryng of this
assembly came to the Gray Frears, and sent for the mayre and the counsayll of
the cytee to know the cause, which de^lared to them the noysaunce done to the
Citezens, and there commodytees and liberties taken from them, though they would
not yet the commonaltie and young persons which were dampnified by the
noysau^ce would pluck up and remedy the same. And when the kings counsayl had
hard the answer, they dissimuled the matter, and commanded the mayer to see
that no other thing were attempted, and to call home the citezens, which when
they had done there entreprice, came home before the kings counsayll and the
Mayer departed without any more harm doing, and so after, the feldes were
never hedged.

The.vi year.
IN the month of May the king and the new Duke of Suffolk were defenders
at the Tilt against al comers, the king was in a scopelary mantel, and hatt
of clothe of silver and like a white armite, and the duke appareilled like a
black armible all of black velvet both there berdes were of Damask silver, and
when they had ridden about the Tylt and showed them selfs to the queen, then
they threw of there apparel and sent it to the ladies for a larges, then was
the king in black, and the Duke in white with black staves, on the staves was
written with white letters who can hold that will away: this poyse was judged
to be made for the duke of Suffolk and the duches of Sauoy, at these iustes
were the duke of Longeuyle and the lord Cleremond, and there the king and the
duke did so valiantely that they obtained the price, at these iustes were
broken.C.xiiii. speres in a short season.

The king at this season sent again into Flaunders for the performaunce of the
marriage of the young prince of castle and the fair lady Mary his sister, and
showed how he had prepared all things necessary and convenient for such an
high estate. The counsayll of Flaunders answered that they would not receive
her that year, with many subtyl arguments, by reason whereof the perfect love
between England and y^ low countries was much slaked.

The.xix. day of May was received into London a Capp of mayntenaunce The Capp
of mayntenau^ce*
and a sword sent from Pope July, with a great compaignye of nobles and
gentlemen, which was presented to the king on the Sunday then next ensuyng with
great solempnytie in the Cathedral church of saint Paul. About this time, the
wars yet contynewynge between England and France, prior Ihon (of whom you
have hard before in the.iiii. year) great captain of the French navy, with
his Galeys and Foystes charged with great dasylyskes and other great artilery
came on the border of Sussex and came a land in the night at a poor village in
Sussex called bright Helmston and or the watch could him escrye he set fire
on the town and took such poor goods as he, found: then the watch fyred
the bekyns and people began togather, which seeing prior Ihon Sowned his
trompett to call his men aborde, and by that time it was day: then.vi. archers
which kept the watch followed prior Ihon to the sea and shot so fast, that
they bett the galyme^ from the shore and prior Ihon him self waded to his
foyst, and Thenglishemen went into the water after, but they were put back with
pickes or else they had entered the foyst, but they shot so fast, that they
wounded many in y^ foyst and prior Ihon was shot in the face with an Arrow,
and was likely to have dyed, and therefore he offered his image of wax before
our lady at Bolleyn with the Englysh arrow in the face for a miracle.

When the lord Admiral of England had hard these news he was not content
and sent Sir Ihon Wallopp to the sea incontinente with diverse English ships,
which sailed to the cost of Normandy and there landed and brent.xxi. villages
and towns with great slaughter of people, and bre^t ships and boats in the
havens of Treaport, stapils and in every place. This sir Ihon Wallopp quyt him
self so, that men marueled of his entreprises, consyderyng he had at the most
but.viii.C. men and took land there so often.

In the month of June the lord Powntremy that was captain of Tyrwyn with
banner displayed and great ordinance, with a great army came into Pycardy nere
to Arde. Sir Nycholas Uaux captain of Guysnes co^syderyng that ye Frenchmen
had such ordinance thought ye they would have beseged Guysnes, and wrote
thereof to the king which incontinente provided a great army for the reskewe.
And when every thing was ready and the army forward, the lord Pountremy raised
his camp and departed without many more doing, but for all that y^ king sent
over sir Thomas Louell knight with.vi.C. men to Caleys for the more strength of
that town and other towns and castelles being with in the English pale and the
marches there.

The French king this year appoyncted to Richard dela Pole traitor of England
and danyshed the realm.xii.M. lanceknyghtes to keep Normandy, and also to
enter into England and to conquer the same, where they made such a Ryott that
many of them were slain and he was fayn to carye them to sent Malos in
Britaigne to take ship: for the Frenchmen would feign have been rydde of
them they cared not how, there conditions were so vile and shameful, but by
the reason that the French king suyd for peace, this iornay took no effect.

The French king by an heraulde wrote to the king of England, that he marueled
greatly why he made him so sore war, and brent and took his towns, slew and
robbed his people with out any cause given on his part, wherefore he required
the king to grant saufconduyte to his ambassadors, which should entreat
the cause: whereupon in June y^ French king sent a commission with the
president of Roan and the general boyer and certain other nobles of France
to entreat peace and allyaunce between both the princes: and farther by cause
that they knew that the marriage was broken between the prince of castle and
the lady Mary (as you have hard) they desyered thesayde lady to be espowsed to
the French king, affirmyng a great dower and suertes for the same, with great
treasures: so much was offered that the king moved by his cou^sayl, and
specially by the Bishop of Lyncolne Wolsey, consented, upon condition that if
thesayde French king Loys dyed, then she should if it pleased her return into
England again with all her dowar and riches: after such entretie, the
indentures were sealed and the peace proclaimed the.vii. day of August and the
king in presence of the French Ambassadors sworn to keep the same, and
likewise there was sent an Ambassadeou^ of England to see the French king swear
the same.

The Dutchmen heryng these news were sorry, and repented them that they
received not the lady, and spoke shamefully of this marriage, that a feeble old
and pocky man should mary so fair a lady, but the voys of people let not
princes purposes.

By the conclusion of this peace was the Duke of Longuyle and other prisoners
delivered, payeng there Raunson, and thesaid duke affied the lady Mary in the
name of king Jews his master. This Duke was highly interteyned in England of
many noble men and had great chere, but when they came into France with the
queen he would scace know them. Then when all things were ready for the
conueyaunce of this noble Lady, the king her brother in the month of
September with the queen his wife and his said sister and all the court came
to Dover and there tarried, for the wind was troblous and the wether foul, in
so much that a shipp of the kings called the libeck of.ix.C. tonne was driven
a shore before Sanga^e and there brast and of.vi.C. men s^antely escaped.iii.C.
and yet the most part of them were hurt with the wrecke. When the wether was
fair then all her wardrobe, stable, and riches was shypped, and such as were
appoyncted to give their attendaunce on her, as the duke of Norfolk, the
Marquis Dorsett, the Bishop of Durham, the Earl of Surrey, the lord Delawar,
the lord Barnes, the lord Mantaigle, the Marquis.iiii. brother, sir Morice
Barkeley, sir Ihon Peche, sir William Sands, sir Thomas Bulleyn, sir Iho^ Cart
and many other knights* Squyers, ge^tlemen and ladies* al these went to ship
and thesayde lady took her leave of the queen in the castle of Dover and the
king brought her to the sea, side and killed her and betoke her to GOD and the
fortune of the sea, and to the governance of the French king her husband.
Thus the.ii. day of October at the hour of four of the clock in the
morenynge this fair lady took her ship with all her noble compaignie: and
when they had ^ayled a quarter of the sea, the wind rose and severed some of
the ships to Caleys, and some in Flaunders and her ship with great
difficulty was brought to Bulleyn, and with great ieopardy at the entryng of
the haven for the master ran the ship hard on shore, but the botes were ready
and received this noble lady* and at the landyng Sir Christopher Garnyshe stood
in the water and took her in his arms, and so carried her to land, where the
Duke of Uandosme and a Cardynall with many estates received her, and her
ladies, and welcomed all the noble men into that country and so the Queen and
all her train came to Bulleyn, and there rested, and from thense she removed by
diverse lodgings till she came all most within.iii. mile of Abuyle beside the
forest of Arders, and there king Loyes upon a great co^^set met with her,
and she would have alyghted but he would not suffer her, and welcomed her to
his country, and when he had seen her beauty (which he so long desired) and
talked with her a little space, then he returned to Abuyle by a secret way, and
she was with great triu^phe, procession and pagiantes received into the town of
Abuyle the.viii. day of October by the Dolphin* which received her with great
honor, she was appareilled in cloth of silver, her horse was trapped in
goldsmythes work very rychly. After her followed.xxxvi. ladies, al there
pal^reys trapped with crymsyn vel^et, embraudered: after them followed one
charyott of clothe of tyssue, the second clothe of gold and the third
Crymsyn velvet embrawdered with the kings arms and hers, full of roses. After
them followed a great number of archers, and then wagons laden with the^r stuf.
Great was the riches in plate* iuels, money, apparel, and hangynges that this
lady brought into France. The Mo^day being the day of Saint Denyse, the same
king Jews married the lady Mary in the great church of Abuyle, both appareled
in goldesmyths work. After the mass was done, there was a great banquet and
fest and the ladies of England hyghly entreteyned.

The Tewesdaye being the.x. day of October all Thenglishmen except a few
that were officers with thesayde queen, were discharged which was a great
sorrow for them, for some had served her long in hope of prefermente, and
some that had honest romes left them to serve her, and now they were with out
service, which caused the^ to take thought in so much some dyed by the way
returnyng, and sone fell mad, but there was no remedy. After the English lords
had done there commission the French king wylled the^ to take no longer pain,
and so gave to them good rewards and they took there leave of the queen and
returned. Then the Dolphyn of France called lord Frauncys duke of Ualoys, and
by his wife duke of Brytaigne for the more honor of this marriage, before
Thenglishmen departed from Abuyle, caused a solemn iustes to be proclaimed
which should be kept at Paris in the month of Noue^ber next ensuyng, and that
he with his.ix. aids should answer, al comers being gentlemen of name and
of arms, First to run.v. courses at the Tylt with pieces of auantage, and
also.v. courses at Randon with sharp speres, and twelfe strokes with sharp
swords, and that done, he and his aids to ^ight at the barriers with all
gentlemen of name and of arms. First syx foynes with hand speres, and after
that eight strokes to the most auantage if the spear so long held, and after
that twelfe strokes with the sword, and if any man be unhorsed or be felled
with fighting on foot, then his horse and armoure to be rendered to the
officers of arms, and every man of this challenge must set up his arms and
name upon an arche triumphante, which shall be made at the place where the
iustes shall be, and farther shall write too what poynct he will answer to one
or to al. When this proclamacion was reported in England by the noble men that
returned from the marriage: the Duke of Suffolk the Marquis Dorsett and his
four brethrene, the Lord Clynton, Sir Edward Neuel, Sir Gyles Capell, Thomas
Cheney and other sued to the king to be at the challenge, which request, he
graciously granted. Then the Lords and knights prepared all thing
necessary for there entreprice, and shypped there horses and harness, and did
so much by iournay, that they came to Paris, at the end of the month of
October, which were heartily welcomed of the king and the Dolphyn: but most of
all, of the French queen which then lay at saint Denyse, and was not yet
crowned nor entered in to Paris.

The Dolphyn desired the duke of Suffolk and the lord Marquis Dorsett, whose
actiuite he knew well by report, to be two of his immediate aides, which thereto
assented. Therefore was erected an Arche of widnes at the tournelles beside the
street on saint Anthony, directly before ye Bastel, on the which were
set.iiii. targettes or scutchio^s, the one silver and he that set his name
under that shylde, run at the Tylt according to y^ articles: he that put his
name under the golden target should run with the sharp speres and fight with
sharp swerdes^: they that put there names to the black shilde, should fight a
foot with speres and swerdes for the one hand. And he that touched the tawney
sheld should cast a spear on foot with a targett on his arm, and after to
fight with a.ii. hand sword: on this arche above stood y^ arms of the king
and the queen, and benethe them stood the arms of the Dolphyn and his aids,
and underneath stood the.iiii. scochions that you have hard of, and under them
all the arms and names of such as set there names to any of thesayde.iiii.
scochions. While all these things were preparynge, the lady Mary of England
the.v. day of November then being Sunday, was with great solempnitee crowned
Queen of France in the monasterye of Sayncte Denyce, and the Dolphyn all the
season held the croune over her head, because it was of great weight to her
greuaunce, at which coronacyon were the lords of England, and according to
there degrees well enterteyned.

Mondaye the.vi. day of November thesayde Queen was received into the cytee of
Paris after the order that follows. First the guard of the Cytee met with her
with out Sayncte Denyce all in coats of goldesmythes work with ships
gylt, and after them met her all the prestes and relygious which were esteemed
to be.iii.M. The queen was in a chyre covered about (but not over her person)
in white cloth of gold, the horses that drew it covered in cloth of gold, on
her head a coronall all of great perles, her neck and breast full of Iuels,
before her went a guard of Almaynes after there fascion, and after them al
noblemen, as the Dolphyn, the Duke of Alanson, the Duke of Burbon, the Duke of
Uandosme, the Duke of Longeuyle, and the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquis
Dorsett.v. Cardynalles and a great number of estates, about her person rode
the kings guard which were Scotts. Thus was this queen received into Paris
and so conveyed to the cathedral church and there offered, and from thence to
the pallayce where she offered at the holy Chapel, and from thence she went to
her lodgyng for that night, for whom was provided a great supper and the
herauldes cried a larges and had to them given a ship of silver and gylt, and
other pla^e to the valewe of.ii.C. mark, and after supper began dau^syng and
pastyme. On the morrow began the iustes, and the Dolphin with his aids entered
the feld, the apparel and bardes were cloth of gold cloth of silver and
crymsyn velvet kanteled together all in one suit, they showed them selfs before
the king and queen who were in a goodly stage, and the queen stood so that all
men might see her and wondered at her beauty, and the king was feeble and lay
on a couche for weakness. Then entered y^ cou^ter part by a rail for combryng
the place. These iustes continued.iii. days, in the which were answered.iii.
hundred and.v. men of arms and every man ran.v. courses, and with sharp
speres, diverse were slain and not spoken of: the English lords and knights
did as well as the best of any the other. At the Randon and Tournay the Duke of
Suffolk hurt a gentleman that he was like to dye, the Marquis strok Mounsire
Grew an Albanoys with his spear and per^ed his head piece and put him in
ieopardy: the duke of Suffolk in the tornay ouerthrewe a man of arms horse
and man, and so did the lord Marquis another, and yet the Frenchmen would in
no wise praise them. At this tornay the Dolphyn was hurt in the hand, so that
he could not perform his challenge at the barriers and put one of his aid in
his rome, the next day after began the fight at the barriers and because the
Dolphin was not present, the duke of Suffolk and the lord Marquis Dorsett
that day began the feld, and took the barriers with speres in hand abydyng all
comers. The Dolphyn brought a man secretly, which in all the court of France
was the tallest and the strongest man, and he was an Almayne and put him in the
place of an other person to have had y^ duke of Suffolk rebuked. The same
great Almayne came to the bars fyersly with face hyd, because he would not be
known, and bare his spear to the duke of Suffolk with all his strength, and
the duke him received, and for all his strength put him by strong strokes from
the barriers, and with the but end of the spear struck the Almaine that he
staggared, but for all that the Almayne struck strongly and hardly at the duke,
and the judges suffered many mo strokes to be foughten then were appoincted,
but when they saw the Almayne rele and staggar, then they let fall the rail
between them. The lord Marquis Dorsett at the same time, even at the same bar
fought with a gentleman of France that he lost his spear, and in manner with
drew: When the rail was let fall, these two noble men put up their vysers and
took air, and then they took swerdes with poynct and edges abated, and came
to the barriers, and y^ Almayne fought sore with the duke, which imagened that
he was a person set on for the nonce but y^ duke by pure strength took him
about the neck, and pomeled so about the head that the blood issued out of his
nose, and then they were departed, and the Almayne was conveyed by the Dolphyn
le^t he should be known. These two noble men of England that day fought
valiantly diverse feats, and the Frenchmen likewise nobly them defended but it
happened the lord Marquis one time to put for his aid his you^gest brother
called the Lord Edward Gray of the age of.xix. year, and to him was put a
gentleman of France of great stature and strength to thentente to pluck him
over the bars, but yet the young Lord was of such strength, power and
pollecy, that he so stroke his adversary that he disarmed him, all the face
bare. Thus was these entrepryces fynished to the loud of al parties, and
Thenglyshmen received much honor and no spott of rebuke, yet they were
privily set at and in many ieopardies: for the declaracion of this triumph,
he that saw it can tell how goodly the coursers trotted bou^ded and quickly
turned: How valiantely the men of arms behaved them selfs and how the Duke
of Burbones bend was apparelled and bassed in tawny velvet, and clothe of
silver clowdy, the bend of therle of Sayncte Polle apparelled and barded in
purple velvet all to cut on purple satin, the enfante of Arragon son to
Frederycke last king of Naples, and his bend al in clothe of gold and silver
paled. This lord was but young but was very toward. The Duke of Uandosme and
his bend in clothe of gold, and pluncket velvet. The Dolphyn and his aids
were every day new apparelled at his cost, one day in silver and gold, a
another in Crymesyn velvet and yelowe velvet, and another day in white velvet
and grene, some day myxted with satyn, some day embrawdered, some day
pounced with gold, and so every day in change as the woorkers fantasye
could deuyse, but the Englishemen had ever on their apparel red crosses to be
known for love of there country: at this triumph the county Galeas came into
the place on a Ienett trapped in blewe satin and he him self likewise
apparelled and can a corse with a spear, which was at the head.v. inches on
every side square, that is.xx. inches about, and at the bur.ix. inches square,
that is xxxvi. inches, this spear was massy timber and yet for all that he ra^
clean with it a long course and slightely avoided it to his great honor.

Also there was another gentleman called Anthony Bownarme which came into the
feld all armed, and on his body brought in sight.x. speres that is to wit.iii.
speres set in every styroppe forward, and under every thygh.ii. speres upward,
and under his left arm was on spear backward, and the.x. in his hand, and
when he came before the Queen he let his horse run and never stopped till he
had taken every spear after other and broken it on the ground, and he never
stopped his horse till all were broken, this gentleman was highely praised and
so he was worthy: when all this great triumph was done, the lords of England
took there leave and were highly thanked of the king, queen, Dolphyn, and all
the lords, and so departed and came into England before Christmas. In November
the queen was delivered of a prince which lived not long after.

This year in December there was one Rychard Hun a marcha^t tayllor of London in
Lollers tower by the commandment of the Bishop of London, Richard Hun
committed to y^ lowers tower and murdered.
called Rychard Fytziames and doctoure Horsey his chaunceler, which was a man
more of wit to prefer the Bishops iurysdicion and the clergy, then the
truth of the Gospel* but so it was that the said Hun was fonnd dead ha^gyng
by ye neck in a gyrdle of silk, win y^ said tower. The begi^nyng of this
matter must be showed for y^ folowi^g of y^ co^seque^t: for this Hu^ had a
child yt dyed in his house being an infant, the Curate clamed y^ beryng shete
for a mortuary. Hun answered y^ the infant had no property in the shete,
whereupon the priest ascited him in the spiritual court, he taking to him
good counsayll, sued the Curate in a preminire, and when the prestes hard of
this, they did so much of malice that they accused him of heresy, and brought
him to the lollers tower and there was found deed as you have hard.

This man was counted of honest reputacion, no man to the sight of people more
virtuous, wherefore upon this matter a great matter followed, for the Bishop
and his Chaunceller doctor Horsey said that he hanged him self, and all the
temporaltie said that he was murdered, and there upon.xii. men were charged
before the Coronour which xii. were elected by great dyscrecion, and many
times they were with the kings counsayll and hard their opynions, but in the
mean season the Bishop of London brent the dead Carcass of thesayde Richard
Hun in smythfeld, to the abhominacion of the people: but after that the matter
had been hard by the judges, and after by the kings counsayll his grace being
present and heryng the cause openly debated and much borne by the spirituality,
yet at the last he remitted yt to the trial of the law* and so upon good
evidence doctor Horsey the Chaunceller and Belrynger with Charles Joseph the
somner, were endyted of the murder: but afterward by the means of the
spiritualty and money, Doctor Horsey caused the kings attorney to confess on
his arraynement him not to be gylty, and so he escaped and went to exetre, and
for very shame durst never come after to London. But yet for a further truth
to be declared in this abominable and detestable murder here shall follow the
whole inquyry and verdicte of thenquest word for word.

The.v. and the.vi. day of December in the.vi. year of the reign of our
sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. Wyllyam Barnewell ^rowner of London, The
inquity of the death of Richard Hun
the day and year above said within the ward of Castylbaynerd of London
assembled a quest, whose names afterward do appear, and has sworn them
truly to enquire of the death of one Rychard Hun, which lately was found
dead in the Lollers tower with in Paul's church of London, whereupon al we of the
inquest together went up into thesayd tower, where we found the body of thesayd
Hun ha^ging upon a staple of iron in a gyrdell of sylke, with fair
countenance his heed fair kemed, and his bonet right sittyng upon his heed,
with his ey^n and mouth fair closed without any staryng, gapyng, or frownyng.
Also without any dreuelyng or spurgyng in any place of his body, whereupon by
one assent all we agreed to take down the body of thesayde Hun, and as soon as
we began to heue at the body it was loose, whereby by good aduysement we
perceived that the gyrdel had no knot above the staple, but it was double cast
and the lynkes of an iron chain which did hang on the same staple were laid
upon the same gyrdle whereby he did hang: Also the knot of the gyrdell that went
about his neck stood under his left ear, which caused his head to lean toward
his right shoulder. Not wtstandyng there came out of his nostrels.ii. small
stremes of blood to the quantite of.iiii. dropes, save only these.iiii. dropes
of blood, the face lips chinne, doublet, coler, and shurt of thesayde Hun was
clean from any blood. Also we find y^ the skyn both of his neck and throat
beneth the gyrdell of sylk, was fret and fased away, with that thing which ye
murderers had broken his neck with all. Also she hands of thesayd Hun were
wrong in the wristes, whereby we perceived that his hands had been bound.

Moreover we find that within thesayde prison was no mean whereby any man might
hang him self, but only a stole, which stole stood upon a bolster of a bed,
so tyckle that any man or beast might not touch it so little but it was ready to
fall, whereby we perceived that yt was not possible that Hun might hang him
self the stole so standing. Also all the gyrdell from the staple to his
neck, as well as the part which went about his neck was to little for his heed
to come out thereat. Also it was not possible that the soft sylken gyrdell
should break his neck or skyn beneth the gyrdle. Also we find in a corner
somewhat beyond the place where he did hang a great persell of blood. Also we
find that upon the lift side of Huns Iacket from the breast downward.ii.
great stremes of blood. Also within the ^lappe of the lift side of his Iacket,
we find a great cluster of blood and the Iacket folden down thereupon,
which thing thesayde Hun could never fold nor do after he was hanged:
Whereby it appears plainly to us all, that the neck of Hun was broken, and
the great plenty of blude was shed before he was hanged. Wherefore all we
find by God and all our consciences that Rychard Hun was murdered: also we
acquyte thesayd Richard Hun of his aune death.

Also an end of a wax candell which as Ihon Belrynger says, he left in the
prison burning with Hun that same Sunday at night that Hun was murdered,
which wax candell we found styckynge upon the stocks fair put out,
about seven or eight foot from the place where Hun was hanged, which candell
after our opynion was never put out by him, for many lykelyhodes which we
have perceived. Also at the going up of Master Chaunceller into the Lollars
tower, we have good proof that there lay on the stocks a gown either of
murrey or crimosyn in grayn furred with shankes, whose goune yt was we could
never prove, neither who bare yt away. All we find that Master Wyllyam
Horsey Chaunceller to my lord of London has had at his commandment both
the rule and guydynge of thesayde prisoner. Moreover, all we find that
thesayde Master Norsey Chaunceller has put Charles Joseph out of his office,
as thesayde Charles has confessed, because he would not dele and use thesayde
prisoner so cruelly and do to him as the Chaunceller would have had him to do.
Notwithstanding the keys delyueraunce to the Chaunceller by Charles on the
Saturdaye at night before Huns death and Charles rydyng out of the town on
the Sunday in the morning ensuyng was but a conuencion made betwixt Charles
and the Chaunceller, for to color the murder, for the same So^day that Charles
rode forth, he came again to town the Sunday at night, and killed Rychard
Hun* as in the deposycions of Julian Littell, Thomas Chitcheley, Thomas
Symondes, and Peter Tur^er does appear.

After coloring of the murder betwixt Charles and the Chaunceller conspired,
the Chaunceller called to him one Ihon Spaldyng Belrynger of Poules and
delivered to the same Belrynger the keys of the Lollars tower, geuyng to
thesayde Belrynger a great charge, saying: I charge the to keep Hun more
straytely than he has been kept, and let him have but one meal a day.
Moreover I charge the, let no body come to him without my license, neither to
bring him shurt, cap, kercheffe, or any other thing, but that I see it before
yt come to him. Also before Hun was carried to Fulham, the Chaunceller
commanded too be put upon Huns neck a great collar of Iron with a great
chain which is to heavy for any man or beast to were and long to endure.

Moreover it is well proved that before Huns death thesayd Chaunceller came up
into thesayde Lollers tower, and kneled down before Hun, holdyng up his hands
to him, prayenge him of forgiveness of all that he had done to him and must
do to him. And on the Sunday following the Chaunceller commanded the
Penytensary of Poules, too goo up to him and say a Gospel, and make for him
holy water and holy bread, and give yt to him, which so did and also the
Ch^unceller commanded that Hun should have his diner. And the same dinner time
Charles boy was shute in prison with Hun, which was never so before, and
after dinner when the Belrynger fet out the doye, the Belrynger said to
the same boy, come no more hither with mete for him until to morrow at noone,
for my master Chaunceller has commanded that he shall have but one meal a
day: and the same night ^olowynge Rychard Hun was murdered, which murder
could not have been done without consent and license of the Chaunceller, and
also by the wittynge and knowelege of Ihon Spaldynge Belrynger, for there
could no man come in to the prysone but by the keys being in Ihon Belryngers
keeping. Also as by my Lord of Londons book does appear, Ihon Belrynger is a
poor innocente man, wherefore all we do perceive that this murder could
not be done, but by the commandment of the Chaunceller, and by the wittyng
and knowing of Ihon Belrynger.

Charles Joseph within the tower of London of his own free will and
vnconstreyned said, that Master Chaunceller devised and wrote with his own
hand, all such heresies as were laid to Hu^s charge, record Ihon God, Ihon
Truy, Ihon Pasmar, Richard Gybson with many other.

Also Charles Joseph says, that when Rychard Hun was slain Ihon Belrynger
bare up the steyre into Lollars tower a wax candell, having the keys of the
doors hanging on his arm, and I Charles went next to him, and master
Chaunceller came up last, and when all we came up, we found Hun lyenge on his
bed, and than Master Chaunceller said, lay hands on the thief and so all
we murdered Hun, and than I Charles put the gyrdell about Huns neck, and
than Ihon Belrynger and I Charles did heue up Hun and Master Chaunceller pulled
the gyrdell over the staple, and so Hun was hanged.

The deposycion of I^lian littell Late servant to Charles Joseph by her fre
will vnconstrayned the vi. year of our sovereign lord king Henry the.viii.
within the Chapel of our lady of Bethlehem shevved to thynquest.
First Julian says, that the Wednesdaye at night after the death of Rychard
Hun, that Charles Joseph her master came home to his supper: than Julian said
to him, master yt was told me that ye were in prison, Charles answered* it is
merye to turn the penye, and after supper Charles trussed persell of his
goods, and with help of Iulyan bare them into Master Porters house to keep,
and that done Charles said to Julian. Julian, if thou will be sworn to keep
my counsayll I will show the my mind. Julian answered ye, if it be neither
felony or treason: than Charles took a book out of his purse, and Julian
swear to him thereupon, than said Charles to Julian, I have distroyed Richard
Hun. Alas Master said Julian, how he was called an honest man? Charles
answered, I put a wyre in his nose. Alas said Iulyan now be ye cast a way
and undone, than said Charles Iulyan I trust in the that thou wylt keep my
counsayll, and Iulyan answered ye, but for Gods sake master shifte for your
self, and than Charles said I had lever than hundred pound yt were not done,
but that is done can not be undone* Moreover Charles said than to Iulyan, upon
Sunday when I rode to my cousyn Baryngtons house* I tarried there and made good
chere all day till yt was night, and yet before it was mydnyghte I was in
London, and had killed Hun, and upon the next day I rode ye there again and was
there at dinner, and sent for neighbors and made good chere. Than ^ulian asked
Charles, where set you your horse that night you came to town, and wherefore
came ye not home, Charles answered, I came not home for fear of bewraiynge,
and than Julian asked Charles, who was with you at the killing of Hun. Charles
answered, I will not tell the: and Iulyan says that upon the Thursdaye
following Charles tarried all day in his house with great fere and upon Frydaye
following erly in the morning before day, Charles went forth (as he said) he
went to Poules, and at his coming in again he was in great fere saying.
Hastily get me my horse and with great fear and have made him redye to ride,
and bad Master Porters lad led his horse into the field by the backsyde, and
than Charles put into his sleue his mase or masor with other plate, and borrowed
of Masteres Porter both gold and silver, but how much I am not sure, and
Charles went into the field after his horse, and Iulyan brought his booget
after him. Also upon Friday in Christmas weke following* Charles came home late
in the night and brought with him.iii. bakers and a Smyth of Stratforde, and
the same night they carried out of Charles house all his goods by the feld side
to the Bell at Shordyche and erly in the morenynge conveyed yt with carts to
Stratford.

Moreover Iulyan says that the Saturdaye at night before the death of Hun,
Charles ^ame home and brought with him a Gurnard, saying, yt was for Hun, and
Charles boy telled to Julian, that there was also ordained a piece of fresh
Salmon, which Ihon Belrynger had.

Also Charles said to thesayde Iulyan, were not this ungracious trouble, and
could bring my Lord of London to the doors of heretyques in London both of
men and women that been worth a thousand pound: But I am aferd that the
vngracions mydwyfe shall bewraye us all.

Also Charles said unto maistres Porter in likewise and more larger saying of
the best in London, where to maistres porter answered, the best in London is my
lord Mayer, than Charles said, I will not skuse him quyte for he takes this
matter whote.

Where as Charles Joseph says he lay at neck hill with a harlott a man's
wife in Baryngtons house the same night, and there abode until the morrow
at.xi. of the clock that Richard Hun was murdered whereupon he brought
before the kings counsayll for his purgacion the ^orsayde baude Baryngtons
wife, and also the foresaid harlott, which purgacion we have proved all
vntreue as right largely may appear as well by the deposicion of Julian
Littell, as of Thomas Chytcheley Tailor and of Ihon Symons Stacioner, with
other, as of Robert Ihonson and Peter Turner.

The deposycion of Thomas Chitcheley Tailor.
Thesayd Thomas says, the same Monday that Richard Hun was found dead, within
a quarter of an hour after.vii. a clock in the morning, he met with Charles
Joseph coming out of Pouls at ye nether north door, going toward Pater noster
row, say^g good morrow master Charles, and thesayd Charles answered, good morrow,
and turned his back when he was without the church door, and looked upon
thesayde Chitchelay.

The deposicion of Thomas Symondes Stacioner.
He says, the same morning that Hun was found deed* ye with in a quarter of
an hour after.vii. a clock in the morning, Charles Joseph came before him at
his s^all and said good morrow gossyp Symons, and the same Symons said good
morrow to him again, and the wife of the same Symons was by him, and because of
the dedly co^tenaunce and hasty going of Charles thesayd Thomas bad his wife
look whither Charles gothe, and as she could perceive, Charles went into an
ale house standing in Pater noster row by the Aley ledyng into the rode of
Northern, or into the Aley whither she could not well tell.

The deposicion of Roberte Ihonson and his wife dvvellyng at the bell in
Shord^^che, where Charles Joseph set his horse that night that he came to
town to murder Richard Hun.
Thesayde Robert says that Charles Joseph sent his horse to his house upon a
holydaye at night about.iii. wekes before Christmas by a boy, which horse was
albeswet, and albe myred: and thesayd boy said let my fathers horse stand
sadelled, for I can not tell whether my father will ride again to night or
not, and thesayde horse stood sadell^d all night and in the morenynge following
Charles came be^ed and spurred about.viii. of the clock, and asked if his
horse was sadelled and the servant answered: ye, and thesayde Charles lepte
upon his horse and prayed the host to let him out of his back gate that he
might ride out by the feld side, which host so did. And because he was
uncertain of the day, we asked him if he hard speak of the death of Hun at
that time or not, and he answered nay: but shortly after he did. Nevertheless
Peter Turner Charles son in law which brought the horse be night into the
Bell Robert Ihonsons house, confessed it was the ^ame night before that Hun was
found dead in the morning. Moreover the Frydaye before Huns death Peter Turner
said to an honest woman a wax chaundelers wife dwelling before saint Mary's
spitel gate, that before this day seven night Hun should have a mischeuouse
death. And the same day at after none this Hun was found dead, thesayde Peter
came to the same wife and told her that Hun was hanged, saying what told I you.

Also James the Chauncelers cook, the Frydaye before Huns death, said to.v.
honest men, y^ Hun should dye or Christmas, or else he would dye for him, and on
the Mondaye that Hun was found dead thesayde James came to the same men: and
said, what told I you, is he not now hanged.

And we of thynquest asked both of Peter Turner and of James cook where they
had knowledge that Hun should so shortly dye, and they said in master
Chauncellers place by every man.

The deposicion of Ihon Spaldyng Belrynger
First thesayde deponent says, that on Saturdaye the second day of
December. Anno. M.D.Xiiii. he took the charge of the prison at four of the
clock at after none, by the commandment of master Chaunceller, and so took
the keys, whereupon he gave commandment to the deponent, that he should let
no manner of person speak with the prisoner except he had knowledge of them, and
so at.v. of the clock the same day thesayde deponent went to the prisoner
him self alone, and saw him and cheryshed him, where he gave thesayde
deponente a piece of fresh Salmon for his wife. And after that thesayde deponent
says that he went to master commissaries to supper with his fellow, where he
remembered that he had left his knyfe with thesayde prisoner, whereupon by the
counsayll of master Commissary he went to the prisoner and fetched his knyfe,
where he found the prisoner saying of his beads, and so thesayde deponent
required his knyfe of thesayde prisoner, and thesaide prisoner delivered the
knyfe to thesayd deponent gladly, and so de parted for that night.

And after that on the Sunday next following thesayd deponent came to the
prisoner at.ix. of the clock, and asked him what mete he would have to his
diner, and he answered but a morsel, and so thesaide depone^t departed and
went to the Chaunceller into the quere, and he commanded, that he should take
the penytensary up to the prisoner with him to make him holy water and holy
bread, and made thesaide deponent to depart the prison house for a while, and
after that he brought him his dinner, and locked Charles boy with him all dinner
while, unto the hour of.i. of y^ clock, and so let the lad out again and
asked him what he would have to his supper, and he answered that he had meat
enough, and so departed until.vi. of the clock, and than thesayde deponente
brought him a quart^ of al^, and at that time one Wyllyam Sampson went with
thesayde deponent to see the prisoner where he was, and saw him and spoke
together, and so from the hour of.vi. a foresaid unto twelfe a clock on the
morrow thesaide deponent came not there and when he came there he met the
Chaunceller with other doctoures going to se the prisoner where he hanged.

The deposicion of Peter Turner, son in law of Charles Joseph.
First he says that his father in law rode out of the town upon Sunday
the.iii. day of December. Anno.xv.C. and.xiiii. at.vi. of the clock in the
morning, weryng a cote of orange tawny, on a horse cooler grysell, trottyng.

He says the Sunday next before that one Buttons wife gave knowledge to
thesayde deponente that his father should be arested by diverse sergeantes
as soon as he could be taken, and thereupon thesayd deponente gave knowledge to
thesayde father in law at the black Friars at the water side. Whereupon he
avoided, and the same night master chaunceller gave the keys to Ihon
Belrynger, and gave him charge of the prisoner and on thesayde Sunday thesayde
deponente with Ihon Belrynger served thesayde prisoner of his diner at.xii. of
ye clock and than Ihon Belrynger said to the depone^t, that he would not come
to him unto the morrow for my lord had commanded him that the prisoner should
have but one meals mete of the day. Notwiths^a^dyng that thesayde Ihon
Belrynger after that he had shut Poules church doors, went to the foresaid
prisoner, with another with him at.vii. of the clock at night thesayde Sonday^.

And the said deponent says, that he came on the Monday at the hour of
eyghte of the clock in the morenynge to seek Ihon Belrynger, and could not
find him, and tarried until the hye Ma^^e of Poules was done, and yet he
could not find Ihon Belrynger, and than Ihon Belryngers fellow, one Wyllyam,
delivered the keys to thesayde deponent, and so thesayd deponent with two
officers of my lords being somners went to serve thesayd prison^t, and when
the^ came the prisoner (they said) was hanged, his face to the wall ward, and
upon that thesayde deponent immediately gave knowelege to the chaun^e^ler,
whereupon the chaunceller went up with the master of the rolls, and master
S^bdeane with other doctoures unknown, to the number of a do^en and their
servants.

The deposicion of Ihon Enderby Barber.
The said Ihon Enderby says, the Frydaye before the death of Richard Hun,
betwixt.viii. and.ix. of the clock in the morning, he met with ^ho^ Belrynger in
est^hepe, and asked of him how master Hun fared, thesayd Belrynger answered,
saying: There is ordained for him so greuouse penance that when men here of
it, they shall have great marvel thereof: witnesses that hard Ihon Belrynger
say these words Ihon Rutte^ Skreuener, and William Segar armourer.

Also thesayd Ihon E^derby says the same Mondaye that Rychard Hun was found
dedd, he met with thesayd Ihon Belrynge^ at ye co^dyth in gracious street
about.ix. of the clock in the morning* askyng the^ayd Belrynger, how master Hun
fared, thesayde Belrynger aun^wered, ^ayeng, he fared well this day in the
morning betwixt.v. and.vi. ^^the clock. Howbeit, I am sorry for him, for there
can no body, come to him until I come, for I have the keys of the dorees here
by my Gyrdel, and showed keys to the said Enderby.

The deposicion of Alen Cresvvell wax Chaundeler.
Thesayde Alen says, that Ihon Grandger servant with my lord of London, in my
lord of Londo^s kechyn, at such time as thesayd Alen was seryng of Huns coffen
that Grandger told to him that he was present with Ihon Belrynger the same
Sunday at night y^ Richard was ^ou^deded of the morrow when his keeper set him
in the stocks, in so much thesayde Hun desired to borow the kepers knyfe, and
the keeper asked him what he would do with his knyfe, and answered, I had lever
kill my self than to be thus entreted. This deposicion thesayde Alen will prove
as farforth as any christen man may, saying that Erandger showed to him these
words of his own frewyll and mind, without any question or enquiry to him
made by thesayd Alen. Moreover thesayd Alen says, y^ ^ll that euenyng Grandger
was in great fear.

The depos^cion of Richard Horsnayle Bailyfe of the sanctuary town called
Good Esture in Essex.
Thesaide Richard says* the Friday before Christmas day last past, y^ one
Charles Joseph, somner to my lord of London, became a sanctuary man, and
theaforsayde Frydaye he regestred his name, the said Charles saying yt was
for the sauegarde of his body, for there be certain men in London so extreme
against him for the death of Richard Hun, that he dare not abide in London:
Howbeit the said Charles says, he knowlegeth him self gyltles of Huns
death, for he delivered the keys to the Chaunceller hy Huns life, also the
said Balife says, that Charles paid y^ deuty of thesayde regestryng, both to
him and sir Ihon Studely Uicar.

The copye of my lord of Londons Letter sent to my lord Cardinal.
I beseech your good lordshipp to stand so good lord unto my poor chaunceller
now inward, and endited by an untrue quest for ye death of Richard Hun, upon
the only accusacion of Charles Joseph made by pain and duraunce, that by your
intercession it may please the kings grace to have the matter duly and
sufficiently examined by indifferente persons of his discrete counsayll in the
presence of the parties, or there be any more done in that cause, and that upon
the innocence of my said Chaunceller declared, it may further please the
kings grace, to a ward a plackard unto his Attnoray to confess the said
enditement to be untrue when the time shall require it, for assured am I if my
Chau^celler be tried by any.xii. men in London, they be so maliciously set. In
fauorem heretice pra^^tatis, that they will cast and condemn any clerk,
though he were as innocent as Abell. ^uare sipotes beat pater adiuua
infirmitares nostras and tibi in perpetuum deuincti erimus. Over this in most
humble wise I beseech you that I may have the kings gracious favor, whom I
never offended willyngly, and that by your good means I might sp^ke with his
grace and you, and I with all mine, shall pray for your prosperouse estate long
to continue.

Your most humble Orator. R. L.
The words that my lord of London spoke before the lords in the parliament
chamber.
Memorandum, that the Bishop of London said in the parliament chamber, that
there was a byll brought to the parliamente to make the jury that was charged
upon the death of Hun true men, and said and took upon his conscience that
they were false periuried catyfes, and said further more too all the Lords
there than being, for the love of GOD, look upon this matter, for if ye do not
I dare not keep mine own house for heretics: and said that thesaide Rychard
Hun hanged him self, and that yt was his own deed and no man's else. And
further more said, that there came a man to his house (whose wife was appeched
of heresye) to speak with him, and he said that he had no mind to speak with
the same man, which man spoke and reported to the servants of the same
Bishop, that if his wife would not hold still her opinion, he would cut
her throat with his own hands, with other words.

The sentence of the quest, subscribed by the crouner.
The inquisicion intendid and taken at the city of London, in the Parish of
saint Gregory, in the ward of Baynard castle in London the.vi. day of
December, in the year and reign of king Henry the viij. the.vi. year, before
Thomas Barnewell ^rouner of our sovereign lord the king, within the city of
London aforesaid. Also before James Yarford, and Ihon Mondey Sheriffs of
thesayde city, upon the sight of the body of Rychard Hun late of London
Taylour, which was found hanged in y^ Lollars Tower, and by the oath and proof
of lawful men of the same ward, and of other.iii. wards next adjoining as it
ought to be after the custom in the ci^ie aforesaid, to inquire, how, and in
what manner wise, thesayde Richard Hun came unto his death, and upon the oath
of Ihon Bernard, Thomas Sterte, William Warren, Henry Abraham, Ihon aborow,
Ihon Turner, Robert Alen, William Marler, Ihon Burton, James Page, Thomas
Pickehyll, William Burton, Robert Brigewater, Thomas Busted, Gilbert Howell,
Rychard Gibson, Christopher Crofton, Ihon Eod, Rychard Holte, Ihon Pasmere,
Edmonde Hudson, Ihon Aunsell, Richard Couper, Ihon Tynie, the which said upon
their oaths, that where the said Rychard Hun, by the commandment of Richard,
bishop of London, was enprisoned and brought to hold in a prison of the said
bishops, called Lollars Tower lyeng in the cathedral church of saint Paul
in London, in the paryshe of saint Gregory, in the ward of Baynerd castle
aforesaid, William Horseley of London clercke, otherwise called William
Heresy, Chauncelour to Richard bishop of London, and one Charles Joseph late
of London somner, and Ihon Spaldyng of London, otherwise called Ihon belrynger,
felonyousely as felo^s to our lord the king, with force and arms against the
peace of our sovereign lord the king, and dignity of his croune, the,
iiii. day of December, the year of the reygne of our sovereign lord the.vi.
aforesaid, of their great malice, at the parish of saint Gregory
aforesaid, upon the said Richard Hun made a fraye, and the same Richard Hun
felonyously strangeled and smodered, and also the neck they did break of
thesayde Rychard Hun, and there felo^yously slew him and murdered him: and
also the body of the said Richard Hun afterward the same.iiii. day, year,
place, parish and ward aforesaid, with the proper gyrdell of the same Rychard
Hun of sylke, black of color, of the value of.xii. d, after his death upon a
hoke driven into a piece of timber in the wall of the prison aforesaid made
fast, and so hanged him against the peace of our sovereign lord the king,
and the dignity of his croune, and so thesayd Jury has sworn upon the holy
Evangelist, y^ the said William Horsey clercke, Charles Joseph, and Ihon
Sp^ldynge of their set malice then, and their, felonyously killed and murdered
thesayde Rychard Hun, in manner and form abouesayde, against the peace of our
sovereign lord the king his croune and dignity.

Subscribed in this manner. Thomas Barnewell, crouner of the city of London.
This Chri^temas on Newyeres night, y^ king, y^ duke of Suffolk and.ii. other
in mantels of clothe of silver, and lyned with blew velvet, the silver was
pounsed in letters, so that velvet might be seen through, the mantels had great
capes like to the Portingal ^opys, and all their hosen, dublettes and cotes
were of the same fasshio^ cut and of the same stuff, with the^ were.iiii. ladies
in gounes, after the fashion of Sauoy, of blew velvet, lyned with clothe of
gold, the velvet all to cut, and mantels like typpettes knytte together al
of silver and on there heddes bonettes of burned gold, the.iiii. torche
b^arers were in satin white and blewe. This strange apparel pleased much
every person, and in especial the Queen, and thus these.iiii. lords and.iiii.
ladies came into the Queen's chamber with great light of torches, and daunsed a
great season, and then put of their visers, and then they were well known,
and the Queen hartelye thanked the kings grace for her goodly pastyme, and
kyssed him.

Likewise on the twelfe night, the king and the Queen came into the hall of
Grenewyche, and sodainlye entered a tent of clothe of gold and before the tent
stood.iiii. men of arms, armed at all poinctes and swerdes in their hands,
and suddenly with noyes of trompettes entered.iiii. other persons all armed,
and ran to the other four, and there was a great and a fear^e fight, and
suddenly came out of a place like a wood.viii. wyldemen, all apparayled in
grene moss, made with slyued sylke, with Uggly weapons and terrible visages,
and there fought with the knights.viii. to.viii, and after long fighting, the
armed knights drove the wild men out of their places, and followed the chase
out of the hall: and when they were departed, the tent opened, and there came
out vi. lords and.vi. ladies rychely apparayled, and daunsed a great time:
when they had daunsed their pleasure* they entered the tent again and so was
conveyed out of y^ hal, and then the king and the queen were served with a
right sumpteous banquet.

The.iii. day of February, the king made a solemn Iustes, and he and the
Marquis Dorset would answer all comers, their apparel and bardes were of
blewe velvet, and clothe of silver, all too cut in suttell knottes, rychely
embraudered, all the seruitours in white and blew sylke. The counterparte,
which were.xiiii. in number, richely apparailed in velvet, clothe of gold,
and brouderie, every man after his own device. The king was that day highly
to be praised, for he brake.xxiii. speres beside attayntes* and bare down to
ground a man of arms and his horse: the lord Marquis and all other did
valiauntly, and had much praise* for every man did passinge well, which is
seldom seen in such a case, but the king for a suertie exceded all other.

The.iiii. day of October, the king removed to Lambeth, and on the morrow
began the high court of Parliament, sir Thomas Neuel was then speaker, in
this Parliament was diverse acts made, but in especial two, which were much
spoken of, the one was the act of apparayll, and the other the act of
laborers, of these.ii. acts was much co^monynge and much busynes arose, for
the laborers would in no wise labor by the day, but all by task and in
grette, and therefore much trouble fell in the court, and in especial in
Harvest time, for then husband men could scace get workmen to help in their
Harvest. This Parliament continued till Easter, in the which diverse subsidies
were granted to the king toward his great costs and charges, that he had
been at in his vyage Royal in France, and after Easter the xix. day of the
month of April, the king delitynge to set forth you^ge Gentelmen, called
Nycholas Carew, and Fraunces Bryan, and caused diverse other young Gentelmen,
to be on the counter part, and lent to them horse and harnes to encourage all
youth too seek deeds of arms. This year dyed at Rome by poison as was
reported the Archbishop of York and Cardinal, Cardinal Be^brick poysened at
Rome.
called doctor Benbrycke, which was the kings Ambassador there: this was a
wise man and of a ioly courage. The king then gave thesayd Archebishoprike to
Thomas Wolsey, then bishop of Lyncoln, which at that time bare all the rule
about y^ king, and what he said was obeyed in all places. And when he was once
Archbishop, he studied day and night how to be a Cardinal, and caused y^ king
and the French king to write to Rome for him, and at their requests he
obtained his purpose as you shall here afterward.

At this time was much co^moning, and verily as it appeared it was intended,
that the king in person would pass the sea to Caleys, and there on the
marches of the same, the French king and queen to come and se the king their
brother, and for the same iornay many costely works were wrought, and much
rich apparel provided ^or, and much preparacio^ made against the next spring:
but death, which is the last end of all things let this iornay, for before
the next spring the French king dyed at the city of Paris, the first day of
January, when he had been married.lxxxii. days. And when the king was advertised
of the death of the French king, he caused a sole^pne obsequie to be song for
him in the cathedral church of s. Poule with a costly hearse, and many noble men
being present.

And after he sent a letter to comfort the Queen his sister, requyrynge too
know her pleasure whither she would continue still in France or return into
England again. And when he was advertised of her purpose, which was to
return into England. He sent the duke of Suffolk, sir Rychard Wyngfeld, and
doctor West with a goodl^ ba^de of yomen, all in black to Paris, which were
well received of the new French king Frau^ces y^ first of y^ name, and
declared to him, that according to the couenauntes made at the time of the
marriage between king Loyes and the lady Marie, sister to the king of
England, they demanded to have thesayde queen delivered to the^ with her
^ower, and showed their commission for the receite of her. Then the cou^saill
of France, according to the apointmentes assigned her a dower, and the duke
of Suffolk put in officers, and then she was by endenture delivered to the
duke, which behaved him self so to her, that he obtained her good will to be
her husband, and thereupon he wrote to the king her brother, mekely besechynge
him of pardon of his request and hu^blye requyringe him of his will and consent,
at which thing the king a while stayed, and at the last by y^ mean of the
French queen her self, and other great friends on the dukes part, After long
suyte it was agreed that y^ duke of Suffolk should bring her into England
unmarried, and at his return to mary her in England: but for doubt of change
he married her secretly in Paris as was said.

The.vii. year.
AFter that the duke of Suffolk had received the French queen with her dower
appointed, and all her apparel, iuels and household stuff delivered, he with
y^ queen took their leave of the French king, leaving doctor West, nominate
bishop of Ely, for the conclusion of the new league to be made between the
king of England, and the new French king called Fraunces the first, and so
passed thorough France to Caleys, where she was honorably enterteined. And
after with great honor married to lord Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk
openly: howbeit, some said he was married privily before at Paris, in the house
of Cluigny. Against this marriage many men grudged and said that it was a great
loss to the realm that she was not married to the prince of Castle: but the
wisest sort was co^te^t, co^sideryng that if she had been married again out of
the realm, she should have carried much riches with her, and now she brought
every year into the realm.ix. or.x.M. marks: but whatsoever the rude people
said, ye duke behaved him self so, that he had both the favor of the king and
of the people, his wit and demeanor was such.

The king and the queen acco^panyed with many lords and ladies road to the
high ground of shoters hill to take the open air, and as they passed by the
way, they espied a company of tall yomen, clothed all in grene with grene
whodes and bows and arrows, ^ m^iynge.
to the number of.ii.C. Then one of them, which called him self Robyn hood,
came to the king, desyring him to se his men shoot, and the king was content.
Then he whisteled, and all the.ii.C. archers shot and losed at once, and then he
whisteled again, and they likewise shot again, their arrows whisteled by
craft of the head, so that the noyes was strange and great, and much pleased
the king the queen and all the company. All these archers were of the kings
guard and had thus appareled them selves to make solace to the king.

Then Robyn hood desired the king and queen to come into the grene wood, and
to s^ how the outlawes live. The king demanded of y^ queen and her ladies, if
they durst adventure to go into the wood with so many outlawes. Then the queen
said, that if it pleased him, she was content, then the horns blewe till they
came to the wood under shoters hill, and there was an Arber made of boowes with
a hal, and a great chamber and an inner chamber very well made and covered with
(...) and sweet herbs, which the king much praised. Then said Robyn hood,
Sir Outlawes brekefastes is venyson, and therefore you must be content with
such fare as we use. Then the king and queen sat down, and were served with
venyson and wine by Robyn hood and his men, too their great contentacion. Then
the king departed and his company, and Robyn hood and his men them condu^cted,
and as they were returning, there met with them.ii. ladies in a rich chariot
drawn with.v. horses and every horse had his name on his head, and on every
horse sat a lady with her name written. On the fir^^ cours^r called Cawde, sat
humidite, or humide. On the.ii. courser called Meme^n, road lady vert. On the
iii. called pheron sat lady veg^taue. On the.iiii. called Rimphon sat lady
pleasaunce. On the.v. called lampace, sat sweet odor, and in the Chair sat
the lady May, acco^panyed with lady Flora, rychely appareled* and they saluted
the king with diverse goodly songs, and so brought him to Grenewyche. At this
Maiyng was a great nu^bre of people to behold to their great solace and
confort.

The Same after none, the king, y^ duke of Suffolk, y^ Marquis dorset, and the
earl of Essex, their bardes and bases of grene velvet and cloth of gold, came
into the field on great coursers, on whom waited diverse ge^tleme^ in sylke of
the same color. On the other side entered.xvi. lords and ge^tleme^, al
appareyled richely after their devises, and so (...) they ra^ne their courses
appointed: and after y^ they rane vola^t one as (...) as he might overtake
another, which was a goodly ^^ght to se: and when al was done they departed,
and went to a goodly banquet.

This So^mer the king took his progress Westward, and visited his tounes and
castles there, and hard the c^play^tes of his poor co^minaltie, and ever as
he road, he hu^ted and liberally departed with veny^on: and in the mids of
September he came to his manner o^ Okyng, and thither came to him the Archbishop
of York, whom he heartily welco^med and showed him great pleasures: And while
he soiourned there, a letter was brought to ye Archbishop from Rome certefiyng
him how he was elected to be a Cardinal, which inco^tine^t showed the same to
the king, disablinge him self in words, though his intent was otherwise, and
so the king did encourage him, and willed him to take ye order on him, and so
called him my lord Cardinal, but his hat^ bull nor other ceremonies were not
yet come.

In the month of November, the king assembled his high court of Parliament at
Westmynster, and diverse acts made in the P^rliame^t the.vi. year, amended and
altered, and especially the act of apparel, and the act of laborers, as by
the book of statutes more plainly apereth. And at the end of this Parliament,
the Archbishop of Cau^tourbury perc^auing that the Archbishop of York meddled
more in his office of Chaunc^lourship then it became him to suffer, except he
would aue^ture the kings displeasure, and seeing also that thesayd bishop of
York counted to bear all the rule, and to have all the whole authority,
consideringe also his own great age, gave up into the kings hands his rowme
of Chauncelour, and delivered to the king the great seal, which delivered
the same to the Archbishop of York, and made him Chauncelour. And as soon as he
was Chau^celour, he directed co^missio^s into al Shires, for to put the statute
of apparel and the statute of laborers in execucion. And he him self one
day called a gentelma^ named Simon fyzRichard, and took from him an old
Iacket of Crymosyn velvet and diverse brooches, which exstreme doing caused
him greatly to be hated, and by his exsample many cruel officiers for malice,
evil entreated diverse of the kings subjects, in so much that one Shynnynge
Mayre of Rochester, set a young man on the Pillory for wering of a ryuen shert.

In the end of this month was sent into England the Cardinals hat, The
Cardinals ha^ recea^^d.
and received by gentelmen of Kent, and brought to London with such triumph
as though the greatest prince of Christendo^ had been come into the realm. And
on a Sunday at s. Peter's church at Westmynster he received the habit, hat, and
pillar, and other vaynglorious tryfles, apperteygnyng to the order of a
Cardinal. And when he was once a perfect Cardinal, he looked then above all
estates, so that all me^ almost hated him, and disdayned him.

Then after the Parliament sir Edward pouninges labored to be discharged of ye
keeping of the city of Torney, for there he was ever sickly, and so he was
discharged, and sir William blunt lord Mou^tioye was sent thither. And for
Marshal there was appointed sir Sa^pson Norto^. And when the lord Mountioye was
come thither, and sir Sampson Norton, there happened such a riot that the city
was in great ieopardy, ye very cause was unknown, but all the soldiers,
except such as were of the kings guard rebelled, and put the lord Mou^tioye in
ieopardy of his life. And in conclusion to appease the people, sir Sa^pson
Norto^ was banisshed the town for ever. And after the city was appeased, and
every thing thought to be forgotten, diverse were executed, and diverse
banished y^ town and some fled and were banyshed both England and the town.

After the Parliament was ended, the king kept a sole^pne Christmas at his
manner of Eltha^, and on the.xii. night in the hal was made a goodly castle,
wo^derously set out, and in it certain ladies and knights, and when the king
and queen were set, in came other knights, and assailed the castle where many a
good strype was given, and at the last, the assaylantes were beaten away. And
then issued out knights and ladies out of the castle, which ladies were rich
and straungely disguysed, for all their apparel was in braydes of gold, fret
with moving spangels, silver and gilt, set on Crymosyn satin lose and not
fastened: the men's apparel of the same suyte made like Iulys of Hungary, and
the ladies heddes and bodies were after the fassion of Amsterdam. And when the
daunsing was done* the banquet was served in of.ii.C. dyshes, with great plenty
to every body.

This year was the new league between the king and the French king openly
Proclaimed thorough the city of London with a tro^pet. This year also,
Margaret queen of the Scotts, wife to James the.iiii. slain at Bramston the.v.
year of the king, and elder sister to the king, after the death of her late
husband married Archibald Douglas earl of Angus, without the king her brothers
assent, or the cou^sail of Scotland, for the which he was not well content. But
after that, there fell such a strife between the lords of Scotland, that she
and her husband like banished persons came into England, and wrote to the king
for mercy and comfort. The king ever enclyned to mercy, sent them apparel,
vessel and all things necessary, willing them to lie still in Northumberland,
till they knew farther of his pleasure: And so they lay still at Harbotell,
and the queen was there delivered of a fair lady called Margaret, and all the
country were commanded by the king to do them pleasour.

This year the.xviii. of February, at Grenewyche was borne a fair princes and
christened with great solempnitie, and named Mary.

This year dyed the king of Arragon father to the queen, for whom was kept a
solemn obsequy in the Cathedral church of Paul's.

The.viii. year.
YE have hard the last year how the queen of Scotts with her husband was come
for succor into England, and lay at Harbottell in Northumberland, till the
kings pleasure was to send for the^. So he, like a natural brother sent for
her and her husband to come to his court for their solace. For the which
kyndnes the earl Humbly thanked the king, and promised to give his attendau^ce
on the queen his wife to the Court: whereupon the king sent William blacknall
esquyer, clerck of his Spycery with silver vessel, plate and other things
necessary for the conueyau^ce of her, and sent to her all manner of officiers
for her estate co^uenyent. And when she was ready to depart, she asked for her
husband, but he was departed into Scotland, and left her alone, no thing
remembringe his promise, which sodeyn departing much made her to muse: Howbeit,
the lords of England greatly encoraged her to keep her promise with the king
her brother: and so after she was somewhat appeased* she set forward, and in
every town she was well received, and so on the.iii. day of May she made her
entry into London, riding on a white palfreye (which ye queen of England had
sent to her) behind sir Thomas par richely besene, and with great company of
lords and ladies, she road thoroughe the city to Baynardes Castle, and from
thence she was co^ueyghed to Grenewiche, and there received ioyously of the
king, the queen, the French queen her sister, and highly was she feasted. And
when the king heard that the earl of Angus her husband was departed, he said,
it was done like a Scot. This queen sometime was at the court, and sometime at
Baynardes castle, and so she continued in England all this year.

The king for the honor of his sister, the.xix. and.xx. day of May
prepared.ii. sole^pne days of Iustes, and the king him self, and the duke of
Suffolke^ the earl of Essex, and Nicholas Carew esquyer, took on them to
answer all co^mers. The apparel of the^ and their horses was black velu^t,
covered all over with branches of honey suckels of ^yne flat gold of da^maske,
of lose work, every let of the brau^che moving, the embroudery was very
co^ning and sumpteous. On the king was atte^ding in one ^uyte on horseback, the
lord Marquis dorset, the earl of Surrey, ye lord Burga^^y, the lord Hastinges,
sir Ihon pechy, ye lord Ferreys, sir William Fitzwillia^, and.xii. other
knights, all these were in frockes of blewe veluet^ ga^ded with rich cloth of
gold, and their horse trappers of blew velvet, ^rynged with gold: And on
foot were.xl. persons all in blewe sattyn, guarded with clothe of gold. And so
they entered the field with ^rompettes, dro^siades and other myns^relsey.

Then in came the cou^treparte, richely appareled, to the number of.xii. and on
that day every man did well, but the king did best, and so was adjudged, and so
at night they ceased, and came to supper.

The king, the next day and his company were appareyled horse and all in purple
velvet, set full of leaves of cloth of gold, engrayled with fine flat gold of
da^maske, embroudered like to Rose leaves, and every lefe fastened to other with
points of da^maske gold, and on all their borders were letters of gold,
bullion. And on the king waited.v. lords.xiiii. knights in frockes of yelow
velvet, guarded and bound with rich clothe of gold, and xxx. gentelme^ were
in like apparel on foot, and.xl. officiers in yelow satyn ^dged with cloth of
gold: Thus with great triu^phe they entered ye field. Then the cou^trepartie
entered, al clothed and barded in white sattyn, trauersed with cloth of gold
richely. This dai was many a great stripe given. The king and sir William
kyngsto^ ra^ne together, which sir William was a strong and a tall knight, and
yet ye king by strength overthrew him to ye ground. And after that ye king and
his aides had performed their courses, they ra^ne vola^t at al co^mers, which
was a pleasant sight to se. And when night approached, they all disarmed the^,
and went to the queen's chamber, where was a great banquet for the welcome of the
queen of Scotts.

This month of May were sent out of England.xii.C. masons and Carpenters,
and.iii.C. laborers to the city of Torney: for the king and his cou^sail,
considering y^ the garrison that was kept there, was chargeable, and therefore
it was determined that there should be builded a Castle to chastise the city
if they rebelled, and to minyshe the garrison. And therefore these workmen were
sent thither, which this year began a strong Castle, and wrought still on it.

This year, by the Cardinal, were all men called to account that had the
occupiyng of the kings money in the wars or else where, not to every man's
contentacion, for some were ^ound in arrerages, and some saved them selfs by
pollecy and brybory, and waxed rich, and some Innocents were punyshed. And
for a truth he so punyshed periurye with open punishment and open papers
werynge, that in his time it was less used. He punyshed also lords, knights,
and men of all sorts for ryottes, beryng and mayntenaunce in their countries,
that the poor me^ lived quyetly, so that no man durst bear for fear of
imprisonement: but he him self and his servants, which were well punyshed
therefore. The poor people perceived that he punished the rich, then they
complained without number, and brought many an honest man to trouble and
vexacion. And when the Cardinal at the last had perceived their untrue
surmyses and feigned co^plaintes for the most part, he then wexed weary of
heryng their causes, and ordained by the kings co^missio^, diverse under
courts to here co^plaintes by byll of poor people. The one was kept in the
white hall, the other before the kings Almoner doctor Stokes^ey, a man y^ had
more learning, then discrecio^ to be a judge. The third was kept in lord
treasourers chamber beside the star chamber, and y^.iiii at the rolls at
after noone. These courts were greatly haunted for a time, but at y^ last y^
people perceived y^ much delay was used in these courts, and few matters
ended, and when they were ended, they bound no man by the law, then every man
was weary of the^ and resorted to the common law.

In the month of October came into England Matthew bishop of Sedono^ and
Cardinal, called commonly the Cardinal of Swyshes, from the Emperor
Maximilia^. This Cardinal was a wise man and of great boldenes, and was well
entreteyned in the court and of ye king. And at his co^te^placion and for old
love, ye king le^t to ye Emperor Maximilia^ a great su^me of money: whereof ye
company of Friscobalde, and Antony Caueler Geneuoy undertook thexcha^ge, but
they paid not ye Emperor at his day, not wtsta^ding they had received ye
money of ye king. This Friscobald and Anthony Caueler by means of rewards,
given to great lords of the cou^saill borrowed of y^ king.xxx.M.^. and had long
days for the payment: but Friscobald was shortly consumed, and Anthony
Caueler could not be seen, and so y^ king was not paid at his days, and many
English merchau^tes were by these me^ undone, for they spent liberally of every
man's goods.

This year the king kept his Christmas at his manner of Grenewiche, and on
the.xii. night, according to the old custom, he and the queen came into the
hall, and when they were set, and the queen of Scotts also, there entered into
the hall a Gardeyn artificial, called the Gardeyn of Espera^ce. This Gardeyn
was towred at every corner, and rayled with rayles gilt, al y^ ba^kes were set with
flowers artificial of silk and gold, y^ leaves cut of grene sattyn, so y^ they
seemed very flowers. In y^ midst of this Gardeyn was a pillar of antique
work, al gold set with perle and stone, and on the top of the pillar, which
was.vi. square, was a lover or an arche embowed, crouned with gold: within
which stood a bushe of Roses red and white, all of sylke and golden and a
bushe of Pomegranates of like stuf. In this gardey^ walked.vi. knights and.vi.
ladies richely appareyled, and then they descended and daunsed many goodly
daunses, and so ascended ye gardeyn again and were conueighed out of the hall,
and then the king was served of a great banquet. After this Christmas, the king
exercised him self much in hawkynge.

In this ceason, the Genowayes, Frenchemen and other straungiers say^e and
boasted them selfs to be in such favor with the king and his counsayll, that
they set naught by the rulers of the city: and the multitude of ^^raungers
was so great about London, that the poor English artificers could skace get
any living: And most of all the strangers were so proud, that they
dis^ayned, mocked and oppressed the Englishemen, which was the beginnynge of
the grudge. For among all other things, there was a Carpenter in London
called Willyan^ son, which bought two stockdoues in Chepe, and as he was
abou^e to pay for them, a Frencheman took them out of his hand, and said
they were not meat for a carpenter: well said the Englishman I have bought
them and now paid for them, and therefore I will have them, nay said the
Frencheman I will have them for my lord the Ambassador, and so for better or
worse, the Frencheman called the Englisheman knave, and went away with the
stockdoues. The straungiers came to the French Ambassador, and surmysed a
co^playnt against the poor carpenter, and the Ambassador came to my lord
Mayre, and said so much, that the carpenter was sent to prison: and yet not
contented with this, so complained to the kings counsel, that the kings
command ement was laid on him. And when sir Ihon Baker knight and other
worshipful persons sued too the Ambassador for him, The pr^de of Frenchem^n,
he au^swered, by the body of God that the English knave should lose his life,
for he said no Englisheman should deny that the Frenchemen required, and
other answer had they none.

Also a Frencheman that had slain a man, should abjure the realm and had a
cross in his hand, and then sodeinly came a great sort of Frenchmen about
him, and one of them said to the Constable that led him, sir is this cross
the price to kill an Englishman. The Constable was somewhat astonyed and
answered not. Then said another Frencheman, on that price we would be
banyshed all by the mass, this saying was noted to be spoken spitefully.
Howebeit, the Frenchemen were not alonely oppressors of the Englishmen, for a
Lombarde called Fraunces de bard, entised a man's wife in Lombarde street to
come to his chamber with her husbands plate, which thing she did. After when
her husband knew it, he demanded his wife, but answer was made he should
not have her, then he demanded his plate, and in like manner answer was made
that he should neither have plate nor wife. And when he had sewed an accion
against the stranger in the Guylde hall, the stranger so faced the
Englisheman, that he faynted in his suit.

And then the Lombarde arrested the poor man for his wyfes boorde, while he
kept her from her husband in his chamber. This mock was much noted, and for
these and many other oppressions done by them, there increased such a malice
in the English men's hearts, that at the last it brast out. For amongst
other that sore grudged at these matters, there was a broker in London called
Ihon Lyncoln, which wrote a bill before Easter, desyring doctor Standyche at
his sermon at saint Marye Spyttell the Mondaye in Easter weke, too move the
Mayre and Aldermen, to take part with the comminaltie against the straungiers:
The doctor answered that it became not him too move any such thing in a
sermon. From him he departed, and came to a Chanon in sayncte Mary spittell, a
doctor in Deuinitie, called doctor Bele, and lamentably declared to him, how
miserably the common artificers lived, and skase could get any work to find
them, their wyfes and children, for there were such a number of artificers
strangers, that took away all the living in manner. And also how the
English merchauntes could have no vtteraunce, for the merchaunt s^raungers
bring in all Sylkes, clothe of Gold, Wine, Oil, Iron and such other
merchaundise, that no man almoost byeth of an Englisheman.

And also outward, they carye so much English Wolle, Tynne, and Lead, that
Englishmen that adventure outward can have no living: Which things said
Lyncoln has been showed to the counsayll* and cannot be heard. And farther
said he, the straungiers compass the city round about, in Southwarke, in
Westmynster, Temple bar, Holborne, Sayncte Martynes, Sayncte Ihons^ street,
Algate, Tower hill, and sayncte Katherynes, and forstall the market* so that no
good thing for them comes to the market: which is the cause that
Englishemen want and sterue, and they live haboundantly in great pleasoure.
Wherefore said Lyncolne master doctor, sith you were borne in London, and se
the oppression of the strangers, and the great misery of your own natyue
countray, exhort all the cytiezens to join in one against these strangers,
raueners and destroyers of your country. Master doctor hearing this, said he
much lamented the case if it were as Lyncoln had declared, yes said
Lyncolne, that it is and much more, for the Dutcheme^ bring over Iron, Timber,
lether and Weynskot ready wrought, as Nails, Locks, Baskettes, Cupbordes,
Stools, Tables, Ches^es, gy^dels, with points, sadel^es and painted clothes
so that if it were wrought here, Englishmen might have some work and living
by it. And beside this, they grow into such a multitude that it is to be
looked upon, for I saw on a Sunday this Lent.vi.C. strau^giers shotyng at y^
Popyngaye with Crosoowes, and they keep such assemblyes and fraternities
together, and make such a gathering to their common box, that every botcher
will hold plee with the city of London: well said the doctor, I will do for a
reformacion of this matter as much as a priest may do, and so received
Lincolnes byl and studied for his purpose. Then Lyncoln very joyous of his
enterprice went from man to man, saying that shortly they should hear news,
and daily excited young people and artificers to bear malice to the
s^raungiers. When Ester came and doctor Bele should preach the Twesdaye in
Ester weke, he came into the pulpit, and there declared that to him was brought
a pitiful bill, and red it in this wise. To al you the worshipful lords and
masters of this city, that will take compassion over the poor people your
neighbors, and also of the great importable hurtes, losses, and hynderaunces,
whereof proceeds the extreme poverty too all the kings subjects that
inhabit within this city and suburbs of the same, for so it is that the
alyens and strau^giers eat the bread from the poor fatherles children, and
take the living from all the artificers, and the intercourse from all
merchauntes, whereby poverty is so much increased that every man bewaileth the
misery of other, for crafts me^ be brought to beggary and merchauntes to
nedynes: wherefore the premises considred, the redress must be of the
commons, knyt and unity to one part, and as the hurt and damage greueth all
men, so must all men set to their willing power for remedy, and not to suffer
thesayd alyens so highly in their wealth, and the natural borne men of his
region too come to confusion. Of this letter was more, but the doctor red no
farther, and then he began Coelum coeli domino, terram autem dedit fil^s
hominum, and upon this text he entreated, that this land was given too
Englishemen, and as birds would defend their nest, so ought Englishemen to
cheryshe and defend them selfs, and to hurt and grieve aliens for the common
weal. And upon this text pugna pro patria, he brought in, how by Gods law
it was lawful to fight for their country, and ever he subtellye moved the
people to rebel against the strau^giers, and break the kings peace, nothing
regarding the league between princes and the kings honor. Of this Sermon
many a light person took courage, and openly spoke against straungiers.

And as the deuell would, the Sundaye after at Grenewiche in y^ kings gallery
was Fraunces de bard, which as you hard kept an English man's wife and his
goods, and yet he could have no remedy, and with him were Domyngo, Anthony
Caueler, and many mo strangers, and there they talking with sir Thomas Palmer
knight, Iested and laughed how that Fraunces kept the Englishemans wife,
saiynge y^ if they had the Mayres wife of London, they would keep her: sir
Thomas said, Sirs you have to much favor in England. There were diverse
English merchauntes by, and hard them laugh and were not content, in somuche
as one William bolt a Marcer said, well you who^eson Lombardes, you rejoice and
laugh, by the mass we will one day have a day at you, come when it will, and
that saiynge the other merchauntes affirmed. This tale was reported about
London, and the young and evil disposed people said, they would be revenged
on the merchaunt straungiers, as well as on the artificers straungiers.

On Monday the morrow after, the king removed to his manner of Rychemonde.

The.ix. year.
Upon this rumor the.xxviii. day of April, diverse you^ge men of the city
assauted the Alyens as they passed by the streets, and some were strike^, and
some buffeted, and some thrown in the canel. Wherefore the Mayre sent diverse
persons to ward, as Stephyn Studley skynner, and Bettes and Stephenson and
diverse other, some to one cou^ter, and some to another, and some to Newgate.
Then suddenly was a common secret rumor, and no man could tell how it began,
that on May day next, the city would rebel and slaye all Aliens, in somuche
as diverse strangers fled out of the city. This brute ran so far that it
came to the kings cou^sayl, insomuch as the Cardinal being lord Chau^celour,
sent for Ihon Rest Mayre of the city, and other of the counsel of the city,
and demanded of the Mayre in what case the city stood, to whom he answered
that it was well and in good quiet: Nay said the Cardinal, it is informed us
that your young and ryotous people will rise and distress the straungiers,
hear ye of no such thing? No surely said the Mayre, and I trust so to govern
the^ that the kings peace shall be observed, and that I dare undertake if I and
my brethren the Aldermen may be suffered. Well said ye Cardi^al, go ho^e and
wisely forsee this matter, for and if any such thing be* (...) prevent it. The
Mayre came from the Cardinals at (...) after none on May even, and demanded of
the officiers what they (...)* diverse of the^ answered that the voice of the
people was so, and had been so.ii. or.iii. days before. This heryng the Mayre
^ent for all his brethren to the Guylde hall in great have, and almost.vii. of
the clock or the assemble wasset. Then was declared to the^ by Master brook
y^ recorder how that the kings cou^sail had reported to the^ y^ the
co^minaltie that night would rise, and distress all the Alie^s and strangers
yt inhabited in the city of London: the Alderme^ au^swered they hard say so,
but they mistrusted not the matter, but yet they said that it was well done to
forsee it. Then said the recorder, it were best that a substa^cial watch were
set of honest persons, householders, which might withstand the evil doers. An
Alderman said, that it was evil to raise men in harneys, for if such a
thing were intended, they could not tell who would take their part. Another
Alderman said, that it were best to keep the young men asonder, and every man
to shut in his doors, and to keep his servants within. Then with these
opinions was the Recorder sent to ye Cardinal before.viii. of the clock, and
then he with such as were of the kings counsel at his place, commanded
that in no wise watch should be kept, but that every man should repair to
his own house, and there to keep him and his servants till.vii. of the clock
of the morning: with which commandment, the said Richard brook serge^unt
at the law and recorder, and lyr Thomas Moore, late vndershrife of London, and
then of the kings cou^saill, came to the Guy^de hall half hour and
before.ix. of the clock, and there showed the commandment of the kings
counsayl. Then in all have, every Alderman sent to his ward that no man should
stir after.ix. of the clock out of his house, (...) may day
but to keep his doors shut, and his servants within till.vii. of the clock
in the morning. After this commandment, sir Ihon Mondy Alderman came from
his ward, and found two young men in Chepe plaiynge at Buckelers, and a great
company of young men lokynge on the^ for the commandment was then skace
known, for then it was but.ix of the clock. Master Mo^dy seeing that, bade
them leave, and the one young man asked him why? and then he said thou shall
know, and took him by the arm to have had him to the counter. Then all the
young me^ resisted the Alderman, and took him from master Mondy, and cried
prentyses and clubbes. Then out at every door came clubbes and weapons and the
Alderman fled, and was in great daung^er. Then more people arose out of every
quarter, and out came serving men, and water men and Courtiers, and by a.xi,
of the clock there were in Chepe.vi. or.vii. hundredth. And out of Paul's
churcheyarde came.iii. hundredth, which wist not of the other, and so out of all
places they gathered, and brake up the counters, and took out the prisoners,
that the Mayre had thither committed for hurtynge of the strangers, and came
to Newgate and took out Studley and Petyr, committed thither for that cause.
The Mayre and Shrifes were there present, and made Proclamacio^ in the kings
name, but nothing was obeyed. Thus they ran a plump through saint Nycholas
Sha^bles, and at saynct Martyns gate, there met with them sir Thomas Moore and
other, desiring them to go to their lodgings: And as they were intreatyng,
and had almost brought them to a stay. The people of ^aynct Martynes threw
out stones and battes, and hurt diverse honest persons, that were
persuadynge the ryotous people to cease, and they bade them hold their
hands, but still they threw out bryckes and hoate water. Then a sergeaunt of
Arms called Nycholas dounes, which was there with master Moore, entreatynge
them, being sore hurt, in a fury cried down with them. Then all the misruled
persons ran to the doors and wyndowes of saynct Martyn, and spoiled all that
they found, and cast it into the street, and left few houses unspoiled. And
after that they ran hedlynge into Cornehill by Leaden hal, to the house of
one Mutuas a Frencheman or Pycarde borne, which was a great bearer of
Frenchemen, were they pyckpursses, or how evil disposicion soever they were
of, and within his gate, called Grenegate, dwelled diverse Frenchmen that
kalendred Worsted, contrary to the kings laws: and all they were so borne out
by the same Mutuas, yt no man durst meddle with them, wherefore he was sore hated,
and if the people had found him in their fury, they would have stricken of his
head: but when they found him not, the water men, and certain young priests
that were there fell to rif^ynge: some ran to Bla^chechapelton, and brake the
strangers houses, and threw shoes and boots into the street: This from.x.
or.xi. of the clock, continued these ryotous people, during, which cyme a
knight called sir Thomas parr, in great have went to the Cardinal and told
him of this riot, which incontinent strengthened his house with men and
ordinance. And after, this knight road to the king to Richemo^d, and made ye
report much more then it was: Wherefore the king hastily sent to London, and was
truly advertised of the matter, and how that the riot was ceased, and many of
the doers apprehended. But while this ruffling continued, sir Richard Cholmeley
knight, Lieutenau^t of the Tower, no great friend co the city, in a frantyke
fury losed certain pieces of ordinance, and shot into y^ city, which did
little harm, howbeit his good will apered. About.iii. of the clock, these
ryotous persons severed and went to their places of resort, and by the way
they were taken by the Mayre and the heddes of y^ city, and some sent to the
Tower, and some to Newgate, and some to the Counters, to the number of.iii.C.
some fled, and specially the watermen and priests, and seruyng men, but the
poor prentises were taken. About five of the clock, the earls of Shrewesbury
and Surrey, which had hard of this riot, came to London with such strength
as they had, so did the Innes of court, and diverse noble men: but or they
came, all the riot was ceased, and many taken as you have heard.

Then were the prisoners examined, and the sermon of docter Bele called to
remembrance, and he taken and sent to the Tower, and so was Ihon Lyncoln: but
with this riot the Cardinal was sore displeased. Then y^ iiii. day of May was
an Oyer and determiner at London before y^ Mayre, the duke of Norffolke, the
earl of Surrey and other. The city thought that the duke bare them grudge for
a lewd priest of his, which the year before was slain in Chepe, in so much the
duke then in his fury said, I pray God I may once have the citeze^s in my
daungier: and the duke also thought that they bare him no good will, wherefore he
came into the city wtith.xiii.C. men in harneys to keep the Oyer and
determiner. And upon examinacio^ it could never be proved of any metyng,
gathering, talking or conuenticle at any day or time before y^ day, but that
the chance so happened without any matter prepensed of any creature saving
Lyncoln and never an honest person in manner was taken but only he. Then
Proclamacions were made that no women should come together to babble and talk,
but all men should keep their wives in their houses. All the streets y^ were
notable stood full of harnessed men, which spoke many opprobrious words to the
citezens, which grieved them sore: and if they would have been revenged, the
other had had the worsse, for the citeze^s were.ii.C. to one: but like true
subjects they suffered patiently.

When the lords were set, the prisoners were brought in thorough y^ streets
tied in ropes, some men, some laddes, some children of.xiii. year. There was a
great mourning of fathers and friends for their children and kyn^^olke. Among
the prisoners many were not of the city, some were priests, and some
husbandmen and laborers, the whole some of the prisoners were^ (...).C.lxxviii.
persons. The cause of the treason was, because the king had amity with all
Christen princes, that they had broken the tru^^ and league, contrary to the
statute of king Henry the.v. Of this treason diverse were endited, and so for
yt time, the lords departed. And the next day the duke came again, and the
earl of Surrey with.ii.M. armed men, which kept the streets. When the Mayre,
the duke, and y^ earl of Shrewsbury and Surrey were set, the prisoners were
arreigned, and.xiii. found giltye of high treason, and adjudged to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, and for execucion whereof, were set up.xi. pair of
galowes in diverse places where the offenses were done, as at Algate, at
Bla^chechapel^o^, Gracious street, Leade^ hal, and before every cou^ter one,
and at Newgate, at s. Marteus, at Aldrisgate, at Bishopsgate. This sight sore
grieved the people to se galowes set in the kings chamber. Then were ye
prisoners y^ were judged brought to the places of execucio^, and executed in
most rygorous manner, for the lord Edmond haward son to the duke of
Northfolke, and knight Mershal showed no mercy, but extreme cruelty to the
poor yo^gelinges in their execucio^, and likewise the dukes servants spoke
many opprobrious words, some bad ha^ge, some bad draw, some bad set the city
on fy^^, but all was suffered.

On Thursday the.vii. day of May was Lyncoln, Shyrwyn, and two brethren called
Bets, and diverse other adjudged to dye. Then Lyncoln said* my lords, I meant
well, for and you knew the mischief that is ensued in this realm by strangers,
you would remedy it, and many times I have co^playned, and then I was called a
busy fellow: now our lord have mercy on me. Then all thesayd persons were laid
on the hardels, and drawn to the standarde in Chepe, and first was Ihon
Lyncoln executed, and as the other had the rope about their necks, there came
a commau^deme^t from the king to respite execucion. Then the people cried, God
save ye king. Then was the Oyer and determiner deferred till another day, and
the prisoners sent again to ward, and the harnessed men departed out of
London, and all things quiet.

The.xi. day of May the king came to his manner of Grenewiche, where the
recorder of London and diverse Aldermen came to speak with his grace, and al
ware gounes of black color. And when they percea^ed the king coming out of
his privy chamber into his chamber of presence, they kneled down, and ye
recorder said: Our most natural, beninge and sovereign lord, we know well
that your grace is displeased with us of your city of London for the great
riot late done: we assertein your grace that none of us, nor no honest person
were condesendynge to that enormitie, and yet we, our wyfes and children every
hour lament that your favor should be taken from us, and forasmuch as light
and idle persons were the doers of the same, we most humbly beseech your grace
to have mercy of us for our negligence, and compassion of the offenders for
their offense and trespass.

Truly said the king, you have highly displeased and offended us, and ye ought
to wayle and be sorry for the same, and where ye say that you the substanciall
persons were not concentyng to the same, it appears to the contrary, for you
never moved to let them, nor sturred once to fight with them, which you say
were so small a number of light persons, wherefore we must think, and you
cannot deny, but you did wyncke at the matter, but at this time we will grant
to you neither our favor nor good will, nor to thoffenders mercy, but resort to
the Cardinal our lord Chau^celour, and he shall make you an answer and declare
our pleasure, and with this answer ye lo^doners departed and made relacio^ to
y^ Mayor*

The.xviii. day of this month the queen of Scotts, which had been at the
Court and at Baynardes Castle, a whole year at the kings charge, and was
richely appointed of all things mete to her estate, both of Jewels, plate,
tapissry, Arras, Coin, Horses, and all other things of the kings gift and
liberality, departed out of London toward Scotland with great riches, albeit
she came into England with much poverty, and she entered into Scotland
the.xiii. day of Iuyn, whom her husband received at Berwick: but the
Englishmen smally him regarded. All her charges within the realm, coming to
the court and returning, were of the kings pursse.

Thursdaye the.xxii. day of May the king came into Westmynster hall, for whom
at the upper end was set a clothe of estate, and the place hanged with Arras,
with him was the Cardinal, the dukes of Northfolke and Suffolk, ye earls of
Shrewsbury, fo Essex and Wilshyre, of Surrey, with many lords and other of the
kings cou^sail. The Mayre and Alderme^, and all the chief of the city were
there in their best livery (according as the Cardinal had the^ appointed) by.ix.
of the clock. Then the king commanded y^ all the prisoners should be brought
forth. Then came in the poor you^glinges and old false knaves bound in
ropes all along, one after another in their shertes, and every one a halter
about his neck, to the number of.iiii.C. me^ and.xi. women. And when all were
come before y^ kings presence, the Cardinal sore laid to the Mayre and
co^minaltie their negligence, and to the prisoners he declared y^ they had
deserved death for their offense: Then all the prisoners together cried mercy
gracious lord, mercy. Then the lords altogether besought his grace or mercy,
at whose request the king pardoned the^ al. And then the Cardinal gave unto
the^ a good exhortacion to the great gladness of the herers. And when the
general pardon was pronounced, all ye prisoners shouted atonce, and altogether
cast up their halters into y^ hall roffe, so y^ the king might perceive they
were none of the discretest sort. Here is to be noted y^ diverse offenders
which were not taken, hering y^ king was inclined to mercy, came well appareled
to Westmynster, and suddenly stryped the^ into their shertes with halters, and
came in among the prisoners willingly, to be partakers of the kings pardon, by
the which doing, it was well known that one Iho^ Gelson yoman of the Croune,
was the first that began to spoil, and exhorted other to do the same, and
because he fled and was not taken, he came in the rope with the other
prisoners, and so had his pardon. This compaignie was after called the black
Wagon. Then were all the galowes within the city taken down, and many a good
prayer said ^or the king, and the citezens took more head to their servants.

In I^ne the king had with him diverse Ambassadors, for solace of whom he
prepared a costly Iustes, he himself and.xii. against the duke of Suffolk and
other.xii. his base and bard was the one half clothe of silver, and the other
half black Tinsell. On the silver was a curious lose work of white velvet
embraudered with Gold, cut on the Silver and every cut engrailed with gold,
so that that side was gold, Silver and velvet. On the black tynsell side was
black velvet embraudered with gold and cut and every cut was engrayled with
flat gold of Damask. The base and barde were broudered with great letters of
massy gold Bullion, full of pearls and stones, merueilous rich: al his
compaignie were in like suite, saving that they had no iuelles. The king had on
his head a ladies sleue full of Diamondes. On the king attended ge^tlemen,
Armourers, and other officiers to the number of.Cxxv. persons all in white
Ueluet and white Sattyn, horse and harneis for horsemen, Cappes and Hosen for
footmen, all white at the kings cost. This royally the king and his
compaignie with his waiters came to the tiltes end

Then entered the Duke of Suffolk with the Marquis Dorcet, the Earls of Essex
and Surrey, and.viii. other of his band, in bardes and bases of white Ueluet
and crimosin satin losenged, set full of letters of. C. M. of gold, ^or
Charles and Mary, and they took the other end of the tilt. Then the Trompettes
blewe, and the King and the Duke ran fiercely together, and brake many
speres, and so did all the other, that it was hard to say who did best: but
when the courses were run, they ran volant one at another, so that both by
the report of sir Edward Gylforde Master of the Armury, and also of the
Judges and Heraldes, at these Iustes were broken five hundred and six speres:
and then the king the same night made to the Ambassadors a sumpteous banquet,
with many ridelles and much pastyme.

After this great triumph, the king appointed his gestes for his pastyme this
Summer, but sodeinly there came a plague of sickness, called the Swetyng
sickness, that turned all his purpose. This malady was so cruel that it killed
some within three hours, some within two hours, some merry at diner and dedde
at supper. Many died in the kings Court, the Lord Clinton, the Lord Gray of
Wilton, and many knights, Gentlemen and officiers. For this plague Mighelmas
term was adiourned and because that this malady continued from July to the
mids of December, the king kept himself ever with a small compaignie, and
kept no solemn Christmas, willing to have no resort for fear of infeccion:
but much lamented the number of his people, for in some one town half the
people died, and in some other town the third part, the Sweat was so
fervent and infeccious.

The.x. year.
IN the beginning of this year, The.ix. year.
Trinite term was begone at Oxenford, where it continued but one day, and was
again adiourned to Westminster. This year came to Calice from Pope Leo, a
legate de latere, called Laurence Campeius, commonly called the Cardinal
Campeius, for to exhort the king to make war on the Turk. And likewise
thesaied Leo sent iii. other legates forth, at that time for thesaid purpose,
one into France another into Spain, and the third into Germany.

When the Cardinal of York knew, that there was coming a legate into
England, which should have a greater pre-eminence then a Cardinal, he whose
ambicion was never satisfied, caused a Bisshoppe and certain Docters to pass
the Sea to Calice to welcome him, and to show him that if he would have the
Popes purpose, to take any effect in England, he should in any wise send in
post to Rome, to have thesaied Cardinal of York to be legate also, and to be
joined in commission with him, which thing was done, (not without good
rewards) so that in thirty and five days, the bull was brought to Calice.
During which time the Cardinal of York sent to the Legate to Calice, read
cloth to clothe his servants, which at their coming to Calice, were but
meanly appareled. And when all things were ready, he passed the sea and
landed at Dover, and so kept furthe his journey toward London. At every town as
they passed* he was received with Procession, and accompaignied with all the
Lords and gentlemen of Kent. And when he came to Black heth, there met him the
Duke of Norffolke, with a great number of prelates, knights and gentlemen, all
richely appareled. And in the way he was brought into a rich tente of clothe
of gold, where he shifted himself into a robe of a Cardinal, edged with
Ermyns, and so took his Moyle ridyng toward London.

The night before he came to London, the Cardinal of York, to furnishe the
carriages of the Cardinal Campeius, sent to him twelve mulettes with empty
Cofers covered with read, which twelve Mulettes were led through London,
amongst the Mulettes of Campeius, which were but eight and so these.xx.
Mulettes passed through the streets, as though they had been full of treasures,
apparel, and other necessaries. And when they came into Chepe, one of the
Mulettes brake from her keeper, and ouerthrewe the Chestes, and ouerturned two
or three other Mulettes cariages, which fell with such a violence, that
diverse of them unlocked, and out of some fell old Hosen, broken Shoen, and
roasted Flesh, pieces of Bread, Eggs and much vile baggage: at which sight^
the Boys cried, see, see my Lord Legates threasure, and so the Muleters were
ashamed, and took up all their stuff and passed forth. And about three of the
clock at after none on the.xxix. day of July thesaid legate entered the cite,
and in Sothwarke met him all the clergy of London, with crosses sensers and
copes and sensed him with great reverence. The Mayor and Aldermen, and all the
occupacions of the city in their best liueries stood in the streets, and him
highly honored: to who^ sir Thomas More made a brief oracio^ in the name of the
city. And when he came to Paul's, there he was received by bishops mitred, and
under a canapy entered the church: which canapy his servants took for their
fees. And when he had offered, he gave his benediccion to all the people, and
took again his mule, and so was with all his train aforsaid, conueighed to Bathe
place* and there rested: where he was welcomed of the Cardinal of York. And
on Sondaie next ensuyng these two Cardinals as legates, took their barges
and came to ^renewiche, each of them had beside their crosses two pillars of
silver, two little axes gilte, and two cloak bags embroudered, and the
Cardinals hattes borne before the^. And when they came to the kings hall,
the Cardinal of York went on the right hand: and there the king royally
appareled and accompaignied, met them ^uen as though both had come from Rome,
and so brought them both up into his chamber of presence, and there was a
solemn oracion made by an Italian, declaryng the cause of the legacy to be in
two articles, one for aid against Gods enemies, and the second for
reformacion of the Clergy. And when Mass was done, they were had to a
chamber, and served with lords and knights, with much solempnitie: and after
dinner they took their leave of the king and came to London, and rode through
the city together, in great pomp and glory, to their lodgings.

When the Cardinal of York was thus a legate, he set up a court, and called
it the court of the legate, and proved testame^tes, and hard causes to the
great hinderaunce of all the bishops of the realm. He visited bisshopes and
all the Clergy, exempt and not exempt, and under color of reformacion he gat
much treasure, and nothing was reformed, but came to more mis^hie^: for by
example of his pride, priests and all spiritual persons wexed so proud* that
they ware velvet, and silk, both in gounes, iackettes* doblettes, and shoes,
kept open lechery, and so highly bare themselves by reason of his aucthorities
and faculties, that no man durst once reprove any thing in the^, for fear to
be called heretic, and then they would make him smoke or bear a faggot. And
the Cardinal himself was so elated that he thought himself ^gall with the
king: and when he had said Mass he made dukes and erl^s to ^^rue him of wine
with a say taken, and to hold the ba^o^ at the lauatories. Thus the pride and
ambicion of the Cardinal and clergy was so high, y^ in manner al good persons
abhorred and disde^^ed it.

This year the French king wrote to the king of England* y^ if it were his
pleasure, he would send an ambassade into England, to common with the king and
his counsel for the redemyng of the city of Turney and other things: which
answered the messenger, y^ the ambassade of the French kings should be right
heartily welcome to him. And so the French king sent into England the lord
Boneuet, high Admyral of France, and the bishop of Paris as chief
Ambassadors, accompanied with many noble men, and young fresh gala^tes of the
court of France, to the nu^bre of lxxx. and more, and with them came a great
nu^bre of rascal and pedlers, and Iuellers, and brought over hattes and cappes,
and diverse merchau^dise uncustomed, all under the color of the trussery of
the Ambassadors.

After that these noble men were landed at Dover, they were received by the
nobles and gentlemen of the country, and so conu^igh^d from lodgyng to
lodging till they came to Blackheth, and before them went their cariages and
people in great number, to the sum of.xii.C one and other, which was thought
to be to many for an Ambassade. The^e ge^tlemen of France were very fresh.

Monday the.xxvii. day of September, the earl of Surrey high Admyrall of
England, in a coat of rich tyssue cut on cloth of silver, on a great courser
richely trapped, and a great whistell of gold, set with stones and perle,
han^yng at a great and massy chain baudryck wise, accompanied with an.C.lx.
gentlemen, rychely appareled, on goodly horses came to blackheth, and there
amiably received y^ Ambassadors of France. The young gala^^es of France had
coats guarded with one color, cut in.x. or.xii. parts very richely to
behold: and so all the Englismen accoupled the^ selves with the Frenchmen,
lovingly together, and so road to London. After the.ii. Admyrals
followed.xxiiii. of the French kings guard whom accompanied.xxiiii. of the
kings guard. And after the^ a great number of archers, to the nu^bre
of.iiii.C. And in this order they passed thorough the city to Taylers hal, and
there the chief Ambassadors were lodged, and the re^naunt in merchants
houses about. When these lords were in their lodgings, then the French harder
me^ opened their wares, and made the Taylers hal like to the paunde of a mart.
At this doing many an Englishma^ grudged, but it auailed not. The last day of
September, the French Ambassadors took their barge, and came to Grenewiche. The
Admyrall was in a goune of cloth of silver raised, furred with rich Sables,
and al his company almost were in a new fassio^ garment, called a Shemew, which
was in effect a goune, cut in the middle. The ge^tleme^ of France were brought
to the kings presence, where the bishop of Paris made a sole^pne oracio^: which
being ended, and au^swer made thereto, y^ king highly entreteyned the Admiral
and his company, and so did all the English lords and gentlemen. The
Ambassadors being daily in counsel at Grenewiche, the other gentlemen daunced
and passed the time in the queen's chamber with ladies and gentlewomen. After
long cou^sailing and much desyring of the French king and his counsayll, it
was agreed that the city of Tourney should be delivered to the French king,
he payenge.vi. hundred thousand crounes for the city and.iiii. hundred
thousand crounes for the Castle, the which ye king had builded, but it was not
fully performed: and also he should pay.xxiii.M. l. Tourneys, y^ which sum
the citezens of the city of Turney ought to the king of England for their
liberties and fraunchises.

Upon these agreme^tes to be performed, it was concluded that y^ city of
Tourney should be delivered to the French king. The Frenchmen y^ sooner to come
to their purpose, made a pretense of marriage to be had between the Dolphyn,
son and heir to the French king and the lady Mary the kings daughter,
which was agreed upon this condition, that if they both consented at lawful
age, then to be ferme and stable, or else not: for the^ they were both very
young. And so all matters were concluded, and the earl of Worcester and the
bishop of Ely appointed to go into France for the delivery of the city of
Tourney, and performyng of the other agrementes. And for the sure payment of
the sums of money to be paid to the king of England, upon thesayd
agrementes, there were.iiii. gentelmen of the realm of France, left in
England for hostages: whose names were Mounsire Memorancy, Mou^sire Monpesart,
Mounsire Moy, Mounsire Morret. Of the which.iiii. the.ii. first named were of
noble blood, but the.ii. last were but of mean houses. And because they were
young, there was ancient gentlemen, appointed governors to the^.

When all things were concluded and sealed, the king and all the Ambassadors
richely appareled and the.ii. legates, road sole^ply to y^ church of saynct
Paul from the bishop of Durha^s place: and there was made from the West door
to the quere door of the church egall with the highest step, a hautepace of
timber of.xii. foot broad, that the king and the Ambassadors might be seen.
And there the Cardinal of York sange high mass, and had his cloth of estate
of Tyssue: his Cupboord set with baso^s all gilt covered: his place was.v.
steps high. At the first lauatory, iii. Earls served him, and at the
second.ii. dukes and a Marquis, and with the say taken, they gave him wine,
and after water. And when mass was done, y^ Cardinal Campeius and he gave to
the people (as they said) clean remission. And after that done, docter Pace
the kings secretory, a man very eloquent, made a goodly Oracion in praise of
peace: and that done, the king and all his nobles and Ambassadors went to the
Bishops palace to dynner, where they were highly feasted. And after dynner, the
king road again to the bishop of Durhams place.

That night the Cardinal of York made to the Ambassadors a solemn ba^ket,
and them acco^panyed many lords and ladies of England. And when the banquet
was done, in came.vi. mynstrels, richely disguysed, and after them followed.iii.
gentelmen in wide and long gounes of Crymosyn sattyn, every one having a cup of
gold in their hands, the first cup was full of Angels and royals, the second
had diverse bales of dyce, and the.iii. had certain payres of Cards. These
ge^tleme^ offered to play at mo^chaunce, and when they had played y^ length of
the first boorde, then the mynstrels blew up, and then entered into the
chamber.xii. ladies disguysed, the first was the king him self and the French
queen, the second the duke of Suffolk, the lady Dawbeney, y^ lord Admiral and
the lady Guyldford sir Edward Neuel, and the lady Sentliger, sir Henry
Guyldford and mastres Walden, Capitayn Emery, and mastres Anne Carew, (...)
Capel, and lady Elizabeth Carew, Nycholas Carew, and Anne broune, Fraunces
Brian and Elizabeth blont, Henry Norrys and Anne wotton, Fraunces poyntz and
Mary fyenes, Arthure poole and Margaret Bruges. On this company attended.xii.
knights disguysed* bearing ^orches all these.xxxvi. persons disguysed were in
one suyte of fine grene satyn all ouercouered with clothe of gold, under tied
together with laces of gold, and maskyng whoodes on their heddes: the ladies
had tyers made of braydes of da^maske gold with long here is of white gold. All
these maskers dau^ced at one time, and after they had daunced, they put of
their vizers, and then they were all known. The Admyral and lords of France
heartily thanked the king that it pleased him to viset the^ with such disport
and then the king and his company were banketed, and had high chere, and then
they departed every man to his lodging.

The.viii. day of October at Grenewiche was song a sole^pne mass by the bishop
of Durha^, and after mass docter Tu^stal master of the Rolls, which after was
bishop of London, made an ^loquet preposicio^ in praise of y^ matrimony to be
had between the Dolphyn and the lady Mary: and all that day were ye strangers
feasted, and at night they were brought into the hall, A pageaunt.
where was a rock full of al manner of stones, very artificially made, and on y^
top stood.v. trees, y^ first an Olive tree, on which hanged a shild of ye arms
of the church of Rome: the.ii. a Pyneaple tree, with the arms of the Emperor:
the.iii. a Rosyer with the arms of England: the.iiii. a brau^che of Lylies,
bearing y^ arms of France: and the.v. a Pomegranet tree, bearing ye arms of
Spayn: in toke^ y^ all these.v. pote^tates were joined together in one league
against y^ enemies of Christ's faith. In, and upon y^ mids of y^ Rock sat a
fair lady, richely appareyled with a Dolphin in her lap. In this Rock were
ladies and ge^telme^, appareled in Crimosyn sattyn, covered over with flowers of
purple satyn, embroudered on with wre these of gold, knyt together with golden
laces, and on every flower a heart of gold moving. The ladies tyer was after y^
fassio^ of Inde, with kerchiefes of pleasau^ce, ha^h^d with fine gold, and set with
letters of Greek in gold of bullio^: and the edges of their kerchiefes were
garnished with ha^ging perle. These ge^tleme^ and ladies sat on ye neither part
of the Rock, and out of a cave in thesaid Rock came.x. knights, armed at all
points, and faughte together a fair tournay. And when they were severed and
departed* y^ disguysers dissended from y^ rock and dau^ced a great space: and
suddenly y^ rock moved and received ye disguysers, and ymediatly closed again.
The^ entered a person called Reaport, appareled in Crymosyn satyn full of to^ges
sitting on a flye^g horse with wings and fete of gold called, Pegasus. This
person in French declared y^ meaning of ye rock and ye trees and ye Tournay.

After this pastyme ended, the king and the Ambassadors were served at a
bancket A banquet.
with.ii.C. and.lx. dyshes: and after that a voydee of spyces with.lx. spice
plates of silver and gilt, as great as me^ with ease might bear. This night
the Cupboord in the hall was of.xii. stages all of place of (...) pla^e. When
that every man had been plenteou^y (...) were taken up, and the king and the
queen and all the (...) departed to their lodginges. After diverse Iustes and
(...) Ambassadors by the king and lords: Sir Thomas (...) of London, made to
them a costly dynner at the (...) which dynner they highly praised, it was so
well ordered.

And when time came, they took their leave of the king, the queen and the
kings counsel, and delivered into the kings possession their.iiii. hostages
as you have hard before: at which departing the king gau^ to the Admyral of
France a garnishe of gilt vessel, a pair of covered basins gilt* xii. great
gilt bowls, iiii. pair of great gilt pottes, a standing cup of gold,
garnished with great perle: and to some other also, he gave (...) to some Cheynes
of gold, to some rich apparel* and to some great h^rses with rich bardes, so
y^ every gentleman was well rewarded: which (...) the strau^giers much praised:
and after y^ al their trusses were (...) they departed toward the sea* and took
ship and laded at Boleyn.

Sone after their departing, the earl of Worcester, being the ky^ges
cha^berlayn. The bishop of Ely, the lord of s. Iho^s, sir (...), sir Ihon
p^^hy, sir Thomas bulleyn as Ambassadour^ (...) the king of ^nglande,
accompanied with.lxx. knights and Ge^tlemen and yome^, to the number
of.iiii.C. and above, passed the sea with some storms, and came to Calys, and
passed thorough Picardy with great and kind entreteynme^t in all places, till
they came to Paris, where they were nobly received, every man matched with a like
pere: and after they were brought to y^ French kings presence, where y^
bishop of Ely made a sole^pne oracio^, as concerning the marriage and the peace:
he did it with such a bold spirit that the Frenchemen much praised his
audacitie.

The co^clusio^ of this peace was this, y^ Henry king of England, Frau^ces king
of Frenchemen, and Charles king of Castle had sworn a perpetual peace, during
their lives. And if it should happen any of the.iii. to violate the league in
any point and to move war: then the other.ii. should join together, and make
war against the violater or breaker of the peace.

After all things concluded, the French king made a banquet house in y^ bas^^il
of Paris between.iiii. old walls: this house was covered with coardes
strayned by craft, and every coarde was wou^d about with box, and so laid
cross wise one over another in fret, and at the metynges a great knop gilt
with gold foil: Over their coardes was streyned woollen clothes of light blew:
this roof was.lxxx. foot high, and on every side.iii. s^ages high: all the
pillars of the stages were covered with antique works, and the breasts of the
stages curiously wrought with arms, fynettes and branches: the roof was set
full of stars gilt furnished with glasses between the fretes: and in this
house was.ii.C.xii. branches gilt hanged, and on every branch a great number
of lights of white wax: and on every and diverse sorts of maskes were showed
that night: and also there was showed at every side of the palace a great
Cupboord of massiue pla^e of much greatness, and ever the French king
welco^med the lords and Ambassadors with good countenance. After diverse
feasts, iustes and bankettes made to the English Ambassadors, the bishop of
Ely with sir Thomas Bulleyn and sir Richard Weston were sent by the French
king to Konyack to see the dolphyn, where they were well received, and to them
was showed a fair young child: and when they had seen him, they departed. The
fame went that the French king at that time had no son, but that this was
but a color of the French king, howbeit it was proved other wise after.

In this ceason the Earl of Worcettre, and with him sir Nicholas Uaux, sir
Iho^ Pechy* sir Edward Belknap with many other knights took their leave of
the French king, and road to Tourney, where they were well received. Then
began the capitaines and the soldiers to mourn, knowing that the town
should be yielded to the French king, and many a young gentleman, and many a
tall yoman wished that they had not spent their time there. And the next day
after, the said earl discharged sir Richard Iernyngham of his office of
captain and commanded every man to be obedient to the kings pleasure and to
prepare to return into England. The.viii. day of February y^ lord Chatileon
came nere to the city of Tournay with.xxi. hundredth men in harneys. The earl
of Worcettre sent sir Edward Belknap to know his commission, and there he
showed him his commission, which was to receive the city of Tourney. Then sir
Edward Belknap desired him to send his commission to the earl of Worcettre,
which he refused to do, saying it was sufficient to show it: well said sir
Edward Belknap you must understand that we have a commission from the king our
Master to deliver you the city at a day appointed: wherefore we must show the
king of England both your commission that you had authority to receive it
from the French king, and also that you by your indenture sealed with your
seal of arms shall confess that you receive the city as a gift, and not
rendered as a right to the king your Master, or else be you sure that the city
shall not be delivered. Themaner of the delyuery of Tourn^y.
Then the lord Chastileon was wondrous wroth that he was no better believed:
And so daily were great messages sent to the city from him to the earl of
Worcettre, and answers were sent of the English part. But when the day
approached he had full answer that he must deliver his commission and also seal
the indenture, or else the Englishmen would nto put him in possession of the
town, for their commission was otherwise. The French capytaines perceauyng
that if they disagreed at the day, that doubts might follow, wherefore they
sent their commission and sealed their indenture and sent it likewise in the
morning, and came forward with their banners displayed: whereof hering the
earl, he sent word that the city was neither yielded nor gotten, but
delivered for co^federacion of marriage, and therefore they should not enter with
banners displaied. Then were the Frenchemen angry, but there was no remedy but
to roll up their standerdes and banners. And when they came to the gates,
there their commission and Indenture were solemply red openly: and then the
Frenchemen entered with drumslades and minstrelsy without any banner: and then
to Monsire Castileon was delivered the Castle, and there he ordained watch and
ward in every part. Thus was the city of Turnay delivered the eight day of
February in the.x. year of the reign of the king, and many a tall yoman that
lacked living fell to robbyng, which would not labor after their return

During this time remained in the French court Nicholas Carew Fraunces Brian,
and diverse other of the young gentlemen of England and they with the French
king road daily disguysed through Paris, throwyng Eggs, stones and other
foolish trifles at the people, which light demeanoure of a king was much
discommended and gested at. And when these young gentlemen came again into
England, ^hei were al French, in eating, drynkyng and apparel, yea, and in
French vices and bragges, so that all the estates of England were by them
laughed at: the ladies and gentlewomen were dispraised, so that nothing by them
was praised, but if it were after the French turn, which after turned them
to displeasure as you shall here.

After the kings Ambassadors were returned, and Tournay delivered to the
Frenchemen upon the conditions aforesaid, the hostages that were here left for
the payment of the great somes and performaunce of the conditions comprised in
the league (of the which one was that if the marriage took none effect, then the
city of Turnay should be redeliuered upon repaiment of the same some) thesaied
hostages knew not in what case they stood, but when they knew it, they were
very heavy and sorrowful: howbeit, they dissimuled the matter in the best wise
they could. The king used familiarly these four hostages, and on the.vii. day
of March prepared a disguysyng, and caused his great chamber at Grenewiche to
be staged, and great ^ightes to be set on pillars that were gilt, with basins
gilt, and the rofe was covered with blewe satin set full of presses of fine
gold and flowers: and under was written, Iammes, the meaning whereof was, that
the flower of youth could not be oppressed. Into this chamber came the king and
the queen with the hostages, and there was a goodly commedy of Plautus played,
and that done, there entered into the chamber eight ladies in black velvet
bordred about with gold, with hoopes from the wast douneward, and sleues ruffed
and plited at the elbowe and plain in the mids, full of cuttes, plucked out
at every cut with fine Camericke, and tired like to the Egipcians very
richely. And when these ladies had passed about the place, in came eight noble
personages in long gounes of taffe^a set with flowers of gold bullion, and
under that apparel cotes of black velvet embroudered with gold all to cut,
and plucked out with cu^tes of white sarcenet, and every man had buskins of
black velvet full of agglettes of gold. Then the eight men daunced with the
eight ladies all being viserd, and sodeinly the men cast of their large gounes,
and then their under apparel was seen. And when al was dooen, every lord and
lady put of their visers, and then it was known that the king and the duke of
Suffolk and the French queen were there which were present at the play time.

The.viii. day of March was a solemn Iustes, A iuste^.
the king himself and eight young gentlemen based and barded in black velvet
embraudered with gold, against the duke of Suffolk and eight of his band all
in white satin with drops of gold. And that day they all ran exceadyng
well, which the straungiers highly commended.

In the end of March the king sent for all the yomen of guard that were come
from Tourney* and after many good words given to the, he granted to
the^.iiii.d. the day without attendaunce, except they were specially commanded:
and yet for all this the co^minaltie said that the king was evil counseled to
give away the city of Tourney, because the mainteining of a garrison there
should have norished and brought up me^ and yo^ger brethren in feats of war to
the great strength and defense of y^ realm

This year the.xii. day of February died the Emperor Maximilian for whom the
king caused a solemn Obsequy to be dooen at Paul's church, all the nobles of
the realm and knights of the Gartier being present, of which order thesaied
Emperor was one.

The.xi. year.
IN the beginning of this year, The.xi. year.
the king with all the knights of his order being in England, road on double
horses, with the henxmen following the king, from Colbroke to Winsore in
gorgious apparel, and there he kept with great solempnitee the feast of.s.
George, and dined in the hall. And the bishop of Wynchester prelate of the
order sat at the boordes end alone. The king was solempnly served and the
surnap cast like the feast of a coronacion. All things were plenteous to
straungiers that resorted thither. At the Mass of Requiem was offered the
banner and other hachementes of honor belongyng to Maximilian the Emperor late
deceased. After this feast ended, the king came to Richemond, and so to
Grenewiche, and there lay all May.

In which month the kings counsel secretly communed together of the kings
gentleness and liberalitee to all persons: by the which they perceived that
certain young men in his privy chamber, not regardyng his estate nor degree,
were so familier and homely with him, and played such light touches with him
that they forgot themselfes: Which things although the king of his gentle
nature suffered and not rebuked nor reproved it: yet the kings counsel thought
it not mete to be suffered for the kings honor, and therefore they altogether
came to the king, beseching him al these enormities and lightness to redress.
To whom the king answered, that he had chosen the^ of his counsel, both for
the maintenau^ce of his honor, and for the defense of all thing that might
blemishe the same: wherefore if they saw any about him misuse theimselfes, he
committed it to their reformacion. Then the kings counsel caused the lord
chamberlein to call before them Carew (and another who yet lives, and therefore
shall not at this time be named) with diverse other also of the privy chamber,
which had been in the French court, and banished them the court for diverse
consideracions, laiyng nothing perticulerly to their charges And they that had
offices were commanded to go to their offices: which discharge out of the
court grieved sore the hearts of these young men which were called the
kings minions. Then was there four sad and ancient knights, put into the
kings privy chamber, whose names were sir Richard Wingfeld, sir Richard
Iernyngha^, sir Richard Westo^ and sir Willian Kyngston: and diverse officers
were changed in all places.

Then sir Ihon Pe^hy was made deputy of Calis, and sir Richard Wingfeld
thereof discharged, and Nicholas Carew made capitain of Rice bank and
commanded to go thither, which was sore to him displeasant. These young
minio^s which was thus severed from the king, had been in France, and so
highly praised the French king and his court, that in a manner they thought
little of the king and his court, in comparison of the other, they were so high
in love with the French court, wherefore their fall was little mo^ed among
wise men.

This year in the month of June was elected to be Emperor Charles king of
Castle, and nephew to the queen, by the whole asse^t of the electors of
thempire: Although the French king sent his great Master to cause him to be
elected to the high majesty of the Empire: yet his Ambassador and great Master
of his household called Gonffier lord of Boisy, and brother to Willyam, Gonffier
lord Boneuet Admiral of France, which was ambassador in England the last
year as you have hard, did not so his message that it took any effect. The king
which had sent docter Pace his secretory for the auauncement of his nephewe
the king of Castle to the dignite imperial, because he had the duchy of
Ostrik and many other seigniories in Almain, was very joyous of this eleccion,
and caused a sole^pne Mass to be song at Paul's the.vii. day of July: at
which Mass was present the Cardinal Campeius, the Cardinal of York, the
Duke of Buckyngha^, of Norffolk and Suffolk, with the Ambassadors of Spain,
France, Uenice and Scotland. And after Mass was done, the quier sang Te
deum, and then all the lords departed to Baynardes Castle to dinner, and that
night were solemn fires made through London, and great plenty of wine given
by Italie^s, duchmen and Spaniardes for these news.

This summer the queen desired the king to bring to her manor of Haueryng in
the Bowe^ in Essex, the gentlemen of France being hostages. And for their
welco^myng she purueyed all things in the most liberallest manner: and
especially she made to the king such a sumpteous banquet that the king thanked
her heartily, and the strangers gave it great praise. The king liyng there did
shote, hunte, and run daily with the hostages to their great joy.

This year in September the king lay at his Manor of Newhal in Essex,
otherwise called Beaulieu, where the king had newly builded a costly mancion,
and there to welcome the queen and the Lords, and the French gentlemen, he
made to them a sumpteous banquet, and all a long the chamber sat a Lady and a
Lord, or a knight, which were plenteously served. And after the banquet ended,
with noise of mins^relles entered into the chamber eight Maskers with white
berdes, and long and large garments of Blewe satin pauned with Sipres,
poudered with spangles of Bullion Gold, and they daunsed with Ladies sadly,
and co^muned not with the ladies after the fassion of Maskers, but behaved
theimselfes sadly. Wherefore the queen plucked of their visours, and then
appeared the duke of Suffolk, the earl of Essex, the Marquis Dorset, the lord
Burgainy, sir Richard Wyngfeld, sir Robert Wyngfelde, sir Richard Weston, sir
Willyam Kyngston: all these were so^what aged, the youngest man was fi^tie at
the least. The Ladies had good sport to se these ancient persons Maskers.
When they were departed, the king and the four hostages of France, and the
earl of Devonshire with.vi. other young gentlemen entered the chamber, of the
which six were al in yelowe satin, hosen, shoen, and cappes, and six other
were in like manner in Grene: the yelowe satin was freted with silver of
Damask, and so was the grene very richely to behold: and then every Masker
took a lady and daunsed: and when they had daunsed and commoned a great while
their visers were taken of, and then the ladies knew the^, and there the king
gave many brooches and proper gifts to the ladies. And after this done, the
queen made a banquet to the king and his lords and the other strangers.

In the month of November, the king came from Lambith to Westminster hall, and
so to the star chamber, and there were before him the the Lord Ogle, the
Lord Haward, sir Matthew Broune, sir Willyam Bulmer, and Ihon Skot of
Camerwell, for diverse riottes, misdemeanors and offenses, and especially the
king rebuked sir William Bulmer knight, because he being the kings servant
sworn, refused the kings service, and became servant to the duke of
Buckingham, saying: that he would none of his servants should hang on another
man's ^ sleue, and that he was as well able to maintein him as the duke of
Buckyngha^, and that what might be thought by his departing, and what might be
supposed by y^ dukes retainyng, he would not then declare. The knight kneled
still on his knees criyng the king mercy, and never a noble man there durst
entreat for him, y^ king was so highly displeased with him Yet at the last
when other matters were hard, the king moved with pity forgave thesaid sir
Willyam his offense, saying, that we will that none of our servants shall be
long to any other person, but to us, nor we will not that our subjects repine
or grudge at such as we favor, for our pleasure we will have in that ca^e as
us likes, for one we will favor now and another at such time as us shall like:
and therefore sir Willyam if you serve us heartily, you shall not be forgotten,
and for this time we pardon you. Likewise he pardoned the lord Edmond Haward,
and sir Matthew Brown their offenses, which were indicted of riottes, and
mainteinaunce of bearynges of diverse misdoers within the county of Surrey:
but the lord Ogle humbly beseched the king of his mercy to whom he answered.
Sir your matter concerns murder of our subject, which great offense is not
only to us but to God, and therefore we remit you to the common law. And then
he rose and went to his barge, and by the way he made James Yarfford Mayor of
the City of London knight, and so he with all his counsel came to Lambeth.

The.iiii. gentlemen hostages of France, daily resorted to the court and had
great chere, and were well enterteined, and every time they moved, stirr^d and
required the king to pass the sea, and to mete with the French king their
Master, whom they preised highly, affirmyng that if the king and he might once
familierly common together, that there should such a constant love rise and
encreace between them, which afterward should never fail. This request was
often times hard and little regarded, but yet by the means of the Cardinal at
the last, in the end of February it was agreed that the king in person, should
pass the sea to his castle and lord^^ip of Guisnes, and there in May next
coming between Guisnes and Arde, the king and the French king should mete.
When this was fully concluded, the king wrote letters to all such lords,
ladies, gentlemen and Gentlewomen as should give their attendaunce on him and
the queen: which in continent put theimselfes in a redines after the most
costliest fashion, for the furniture of the same metyng.

Then were sent to Guysnes under the rule of sir Edward Belknay three.M.
artificers, which builded out of the earth on the plain before the castle of
Guysnes, y^ most goodlyest palaice of timber that ever was wrought in the same
place, and so curiously garnished without and within Beside this, provisions
were made within the realm of England and in Flaunders for vitaill, wine and
all other things necessary for the same. And yet beside all this Orleaunce king
of arms of France came into the court of England and made proclamacion, that
the king of England and the French king, in a camp between Arde and Guysnes
with.xviii. a^des in June next ensuyng, should abide al comers being
gentlemen, at the tilt, at torney, and at barriers, and like proclamacion was
made by Clarenseaux king of Arms of England, in the Court of France, and in
the court of Burgoyn, and in diverse other courts and places in Almain, and
Italy. For furnishyng of Iustes, there was devised a tilte and all things
necessary for that enterprice, in a goodly plain between Guysnes and Arde.

During the time of these preparacions, news were brought to the king that
Charles his nephew elected Emperor of Almain would shortly ^epart out of Spain
by sea, and come by England to go into Germany to receive his first Croune at
Acon. Wherefore the king caused great provisions to be made at every haue^, for
the receiuyng of his well-beloved nephew and friend, and daily provisions were made
on all sides, for these noble metynges of so high princes: and especially the
queen of England, and the Lady dowager of France, made great cost on the
apparel of their ladies and gentlewomen.

The first day of February being Candelmas even, as the king and queen were
come from Euensong at their manor of Grenewiche, before the queen's chamber
there blewe a trompet suddenly, and then entered into the Queen's Chamber four
gentlemen appareled in long and large garments of blewe damask bordred with
gold, and brought with the^ a trick wagon, in the which sat a lady richely
appareled with a canapy over her head, and on the.iiii. corners of the wagon,
were.iiii. head pieces called Armites, every p^ce being of a sundery device:
thesaied lady put up a bill to the king, the effects whereof was that the.iiii.
gentlemen present would for the love of their ladies answer al comers at the
tilt at a day by the king to be appointed: which day was appointed at
shrofetide next ensuyng. At which day y^ forsaid gentlemen valiantly
accomplished their entreprice, with great lauds of the king, the queen and
ladies.

In this year the king being infourmed, that his realm of Irelande was out of
order, discharged the earl of Kildare of his office of deputy, and thereunto
(by the means of the Cardinal as men thought) was appointed therle of Surrey
lord Admiral, to who^ the Cardinal did not owe the best favor. Wherefore
thesaied earl of Surrey in the beginning of April, took leave of the king,
and the duke of Norffolke his father, and passed into Irelande, and had with
him diverse gentlemen, that had been in the garrison of Tourney, and one
hundred yomen of the kings guard, and other to the number of a thousand
men. Where he by his manhod and wisdom, brought the earl of Desmonde and
diverse other rebels, to good conformity and order: and there he continued
in great hardness two year and more, in which space he had many battles and
skirmishes with the wild Irishe.

When it was concluded that the kings of England and France should mete, as
you have hard, then both the kings committed the order and manner of their
metyng, and how many days they should mete, and what pre-eminence each should
give to other, to the Cardinal of York, which to set all things in a
certainty, made an instrument, the very true tenor whereof ensues.

Thomas Archbishop of York and Cardinal. etc. Albeit that by the treaty and
metyng of the right high and right puyssaunt princes, Henry by the grace of
God, king of England, and of France, lord of Irelande my sovereign Lord:
And Fraunces by the same grace king of France right Christened, made and
concluded at London the eight day of October, the year of our Lord a
thousand five hundred and.xviii be amongst other things concluded and
accorded, that the same metyng shall be in place indifferent, and not subject to
any of thesaied princes. Nevertheless, we considering the honor, profit, and
utility, that shall redound by the enteruieu of thesaid two princes, and not
only to the said two princes, their realms and subjects, but also to all
christendom: after declaracion thereupon had with thesaied princes. Also
considering that thesaied illustre king of England my sovereign lord, in
passing the sea with his retinue, shall sustein great costs and expenses, and
dispose hymse^ to great labors and dangers, leuyng his realm and puyssaunce
for certain time, we have thought and esteemed that he should not be wholly
satisfied to thonor and dignity of the same, right illustre king of England my
sovereign lord, and should not have in rega^d condign of his labors and
dangiers, if thesaied enteruew or metyng after the first treaty, should be in
place indifferent wherefore it is that we desiryng to weye egally thonor and
dignity of thesaid two kings by virtue and power o^ the commissions to us
given* of whom the tenors shall be hereafter declared: we have made, declared,
and ordained certain articles accepted and approved, by y^ same princes
respectively, which they will observe, and by this presents we make, declare
and ordein as follows.

And first we declare and ordein, that before the end of the monethe of May
next coming, thesaid illustre king of England shall come personally to the
castle of Guysnes, with his bed^elowe the queen, and his sister the dowar^s of
France: and semblaby the right Christened king of France, shall come in
person to his Cas^le of Arde* with the Queen and his mother: and some day*
hour, and time, within.iiii. days at the most, after the end of May, that
shall be assigned by the commissioners o^ the one and the other party. The^aid
king of England s^all issue out of his castle of Guysnes half a mile long
without that that he shall issue out of the limit^s of his demain of Guisnes
and shall come toward thesaid castle of Arde: and there within the territory
of thesaied castle of ^uisnes, he ^^al rest in some place not fortified nor
walled, and nere the l^^ites of France, that thesaied commis^ion^rs s^all
assign (as above said) and thesaid right christened king, partyng from his
cas^le of Arde s^^ll ^ome toward thesaid king of England the same day, place,
time and hour, that s^all tarry him within the demain of Guisnes as is said. In
the which shall not be set nor dres^ed any pauilions or tents, and there
thesaid two kings being on horseback, with their retinue shall the one
the other* and salute each other, and speak together familiarly, and common in
that sort and manner, and so long as shall seem to them good. And after
thesaied salu^acion and co^municacion finished for that time, the^aied illust^e
king of England shall return to his castle of Gui^nes, and thesaid right
christened king to his castle of Arde.

^tem, ^or as much that we think to be satisfied touching the labores
dangiers and honor of thesaied king of England my sovereign Lord o^ so
mu^he, that thesaied right Christened king at the first speaking he shall come
forward unto and within his territory of Guysnes we will keep the honor of
thesaied kings, and therefore declare and ordeine, that on the morrow after the
first enteruew, the same kings shall mete together in some place indifferent
between Arde and Guysnes, that shall be assigned by thesaied Commissioners, and
after the salutacion made on the one and the other party, thesaied right
illustre king of England shall go to the Castle of Arde, to se, salute, and
visit the queen of France, and also the sister of thesaid christened king,
with whom he shall dine privily. And likewise thesaid right christened king
shall go to the Castle of Guysnes, to visit and salute the queen of England,
and the dowares of France, with whom he shall dine. In the which places
thesaied princes shall be received familiarly and amiably, unto mutual love, and
also to the honor of thesaied princes.

Item, as thesaied serene princes of England and France, be like in force
corporal, beauty, and gift of nature, right expert and having knowledge in
the art militant, right cheualrous in arms, and in the flower and vigor of
youth, whereby seemed to us a right assembly, that for to decore and illustre
the same assembly, and to show their forces in arms, they shall take counsel
and dispose themselfes to do some fair feate of arms, as well on foot as on
horseback, against all comers. We declare and ordein, that the place where
shall be thesaied fight and feate of arms, shall be chosen between Guysnes and
Arde, and assigned by the commissioners, of the one and the other party. And
for a suertie of the persons of thesaied kings and their compaignie, thesaid
place shall be apparreled, diched, fortified and kept of the one and the other
party, by equal number of men of arms, respectively committed and deputed
that to do. And during the time of thesaied Iustes and feats of war, the same
kings and queen's with their retinue, shall se each other familiarly, and
converse and speak together: And every day toward the euenyng, after the
Iustes, triumphs, bankettes, and familiar communicacions dooen, thesaied
kings with their retinue shall return into their Castles, that is to say,
the king of England into his castle of Guysnes, thesaid right christened king
into his Castle of Arde, and thus they shall do daily, during thesaied fight and
feate of arms.

Item, we declare and ordein, that when the same king of England and the Queen
his bedfelowe, and the Dowares of France his sister, with their retinue, shall
go to the territory and entry of thesaied right christened king, the
superiority and pre-eminence shall be given to thesaied king of England, to the
queen his bedfelowe, and to their retinue respectively, during the time that
they shall tarry and be there: and semblaby when thesaied right Christened king,
and the queen his bedfelow and his right illustre Lady and mother, with their
retinue shall come to the territory and entry of thesaid illustre king of
England, the superiority and pre-eminence shall be given to thesaied right
Christened king, to the queen his bedfelowe, and to his mother, and to their
retinue during the time that they shall continue and abide there.

Item, for so much as the Castles and places where thesaied entervewe shall be,
be so little and narowe that if entree and license to come thither be given to
all them that would go thither, diverse anoyances, troubles and impechementes
should follow, wherefore it is so that we Cardinal abouesaied, by these
presents declare and ordein, that none of the retynue of thesaied Kings,
Queen's, or other lords and nobles, of what estate quality or condition that
he or they be, shall not come to thesaid assemble with more greater number of
persons or horse, then shall be written by letters, subscribed by thesaied
kings, the which shall conteigne the estates and conditions of the persons,
as well men as women, and nombre of servants and horse, except by the common
consent and license of thesaied kings.

Item, forasmuch as perauenture it shall come that thesaid Princes lords,
gentlemen, and household servants, shall se and converse together familiarly,
to the end that it may engender between them an amity more firm and stable,
for that cause and that more surely and agreably they may be together, as well
by day as by night, without any danger or fear, which we desire to provide:
we declare and ordein that two gentlemen with sufficient compaignie of equal
and like nombre, be committed and depute, respectively by thesaied kings for
the keeping and surety of the ways and watches, that shall be made continually
during the assembly of thesaied kings.

The which gentlemen with their compaignies shall ordein and depute
explorators and spies in the valeis, forestes, wooddes, tounes, borowes
villages, castles, passages and ways, and other places dangerous and suspect:
from time to time, and hour, to hour, as well toward Flaunders, as
Picardie, Artoys and England, to exployte and watch there. And if any be
found suspect, them to repulse and take away, to the end that not only
thesaied princes, their gentlemen and household servants, may surely and
without fea^e visit the one the other as said is, but also those that shall
bring vitailes necessary to thesaied assembly, may without danger, trouble,
impechement or noysaunce go and come: the which explorators shall be bounden
every day in the morning and euenyng* to make report to thesaied princes or
to their said counsailors respectively, of that which they have found, and in
what estate the ways be. We declare further and ordein, that all men of arms
and of war, of the one and the other party, shall not approach nerer then
two iorneyes, to the place where thesaid enteruewe shall be, except the retinewe
and men of war that be committed and deputed to keep Bullein and Caleis, and
that the same men of war nor none other during the assembly of thesaid
princes, shall not presume to come nerer, unless by the consent, accord, and
license of thesaied princes.

Item, we Cardinal above said, by express authority and power to us given,
by these presents* bind thesaied princes to do, fulfill, and accomplish, all
and every the things above said here in contained.

Item, we declare and ordein that each of thesaied kings on his party, shall
ratify, confirm, and approve all and every the Chapiters and Articles above
said, by their Letters Patentes Sealed with their hands. And by the same
lettres of ratificacion they shall be bounde^ to accomplish with good faith and
in word of a king, all and every the things above said: the which letters
made, subscribed and sealed, as is said, they shall give the one the other, and
shall change in the city of London, within one month next after the day of
these presents. Made the twelfe of March, the year of our lord a.M.CCCCC.xix.

The.xii. year.
THE most noble and puisant king, The.xii. yer^.
king Henry the.viii. king of England and of France, the year of our Lord
a.M. ^iue hundred and.xx. and of his bodily age.xxix. year, and the.xxii. day
of April began the.xii. year of his reign over the realm of England, and
hallowed the day of saint George at the manner royal of Grenewiche with the
noble knights of the Garter in robes of the order

The king intendyng and perseueryng in purpose to mete with Frances the French
king, great and rich provisions were made, wherefore the noble King and the
Queen with all the noble court, removed the twenty and one day of Man being
on Mundaie, from their manner of Grenewyche, toward the Sea side, and so on
the Fridaie being the twenty and five day of Maij, arrived at the city of
Cantorbury, intendyng there to keep his Pentecoste.

Sone after which cominyng to Cantorbury, tidings were brought that Charles
Emperor elect, was on the sea, in sight of the coast of England, wherefore
officers of the king were sent with great diligence to the Castle and town of
Dover, to be there in a redines against the arrival of the Emperor.

The reverent father in God my lord Cardinal, came to the town of Dover in
have with a noble repair, abidyng the coming of the Emperor, which
Emperor, the Saterdaie being the.xxvi. day of Ma^^ arrived with all his navy
of ships royal on the coast of Kent, direct to the town or port of Hieth
thesaied day by noone, where he was hailed by the noble knight sir Willyam
Fitzwillyam, vice admiral of England, with six of the kings ships well
furnished, which lay for the safegarde of passage between Dover and Caleis,
at the costs and charges of the king of England. Calmenes of the wether and
lack of wind, caused that the Emperor might not so sone take land at the
port of Dover, as he would have dooen. Notwithstanding toward the even he
departed from his ships, and entered into his boat coming toward the
land, where in his coming to the land* on the sea the reverent father lord
Wolsay Cardinal and Legate, met and received him with such reverence, as to
so noble a Prince apperteigned. Thus landed the Emperor Charles, under the
clothe of his estate of the black Egle all splaied on rich clothe of gold.
In his retinue with him, were many noble men, and many fair Ladies of his
blood as princes and princesses, and one lady as chief to be noted, was the
princes Auinion with many other nobles which landed with him in high and
sumptuous manner and great riches in their apparel: great joy made the people
of England to see the Emperor, and more to see the benyng manner and mekenes of
so high a prince.

Then when the Emperor thus had taken land, the reuerente father lord
Cardynall was as conducte to the same noble Emperor from the shore of Dover
unto the castle there: then were all persons chered, the best that there in
the town might be.

After the departing of The Emperor to the land from his navy, the apparel of
every ship then showed, as flagges, banners, stremers, and targetes, then the
mighty ordinance of every of them brake out by force of fire as though the sea had burnt, marvelous was the noise of the gonnes.

The Emperor being thus in the castle of Dover, with have tidings came to
the king where as he was at Cantorbury, who hasted him toward the noble
Emperor. And so came riding early in the morning to the castle of Dover,
within which castle the king alighted: the Emperor heryng the king to be
come, came out of his chamber to mete with the king, and so met with him on the
stayres or he could come up, whereche embraced other right lovingly: then y^
king brought the Emperor to his chamber, where as there communyng was of
gladness.

Sone after these two noble princes on the Whitsonday early in the morenynge
took their horse and rode to the Cytee of Cantorbury, the more to solemn the
feast of Pentecost, but specially to see the queen of England his aunte was the
intent of the Emperor.

The noble personages of the realm of England and the queen with her beautiful
train of ladies received and welcomed the same Charles elect Emperor, whose
person was by the king co^ueighed to a fair and pleasant chamber where
thesayde Emperor apparelled him right richely. Then the noble retynue of
thesayde Emperor as well of lords as ladies were lodged, as well as there might
be, with joy and much gladness, and there in Cantorbury soiorned the Emperor
and all his train with the king, until the Thursdaye in the same weke.

The last day of May being Thursday, the Emperor took leave of the king and
of all the ladies, and gave great thanks, and so rode to Sa^dewiche, and there
took his ships, the wynd to him was likyng, whereby he sailed into Flaunders.

Then the same day, the king of England made sail from the port of Dover and
with noble apparaile londed at Calys at the hour of.xi. of the clock, and with
him the queen and ladies and many nobles of y^ realm. And so was the king
received into the Checker and there rested: great repair of noble men came to
the town of Caleys from y^ French court, to se the king and to salute him,
which were of his grace, princely entretayned.

Mondaye the.iiii. day of June the kings grace with all the nobles as well the
queen with her train of ladies as other, with all the whole number of nobles
removed from Calis to his lordship royal of Guisnes into the most noble and
royal lodgyng before seen, for it was a palace, the palace was quadrant, and
every quadrant of the same palace was iii.C.xxviii. foot long of a syse, which
was in compass.xiii.C. and.xii. foot about. This palayce was set on stages
by great conning and sumpteous work. At the enteryng into the palace before
the ^ate, on the plain grene was builded a fountain of enbowed work, gylte
with fine gold, and bice, ingrayled with anticke works, the old God of wine
called Baccus birlyng the wine, which by the conduyctes in therth ran to all
people plenteously with red, white, and claret wine, over whose hedde was
written in letters of Romayn in gold, fa^cte bonne chere quy vouldra.

On the other hand or side of the gate, was set a pyller with was of ancient
Romayne work borne with.iiii. Lions of gold, the pyllers wrapped in a wrethe
of gold curiously wroughte and intrayled, and on the sommet of thesayde pyller
stood an image of the blind God Cupide with his bow and arrows of love ready
by his semyng, to Stryke the young people to love.

The forgate of the same palace or place with great and mighty masonry by sight
was arched, with a tower on every side of the same port r^red by great craft,
and inbattayled was the gate and tower, and in y^ fenestres and wyndowes were
images resembling men of war ready to cast great stones: Also the same gate
or tower was set with compassed images of ancient Princes, as Hercules,
Alexander and other by entrayled work, rychely lymned with gold and Albyn
colors, and well and warly was made over the gate loups, and enforced with
battaylementes and in the same gate a lodge for the porter: which there apered
and other, sumpteously apparayled like unto kings officers.

By the same gate, all people passed into a large court fair and beautiful,
for in this court appeared much of the outward beutie of this place for from the
first water table to the raysyng or resun pieces, was bay wyndowes on every
side myxed with clear Stories, curiously glased, y^ posts or monyelles of
every wyndow was gylte. Thus the outward part of the place lumyned the eyes
of the beholders, by reason of y^ sumptuous work. Also the tower of the gate
as seemed, was builded by great maso^ry, and by great engyne of man's wit* for
the sundry countenau^ces of every image that their appeared, some shotyng, sum
castyng, sum ready to strike, and firyng of gonnes which showed very
honorably. Also all thesayd quadrantes, bays and edifices, were roially
entrayled, as far as unto the same court appartayned. And dyr^^te against the
gate was devised a hallpas, and at thentry of the staier was images of sore and
terrible cou^tenaunces, all armed in curious work of argentyne. The bay of
the same halpas pendant by craft of trimmer and under ye trimmer, anticke
images of gold enuyroned with verdour of Oliffes cast in compass, mounsteryng
their countenaunces toward the enteryng of the palaice. The staier of
thesaied halpas was cast of passage by the w^ntes of broad steps, so that
from the first foot or lowest step, a person might without pain goo unto
the highest place of the same halpas.

On every hand was there chamber doors and enterynges into the chambers of
the same palais, which were long and large and well proporcioned, to receive
light and air at pleasure: the roofes of them from place to place, and
chamber to chamber were siled and covered with cloth of Silk, of the most
fair and quick inuencion that before that time was seen, for the ground was
white ingrailed, Inbowed and batoned with rich clothes of silks knitte, and
tret with cuttes and braides and sundery new castes, that the same clothes of
silk showed like bullions of fine burned gold and the roses in lossenges: that
in the same rofe, were in kyndly course, furnished so to man's sight that no
living creature might but joy, in the beholding thereof, for from the iawe
piece of thesaied selyng: which piece was guilte with fine Gold, were works
in paan paled, all the walls to the crest encounteryng the clear stories, the
same creste which was of large depenes, the work was antique knottes with
bosses cast and wrought with more cunnyng then I can write, all which works
and ouerages were gilte: and to set it the more to the glory the florishyng
Bise was comparable to the rich Ammell.

Also at the foot of the same palaice was another ^rest all of fine set gold,
whereon hanged rich and maru^ilous clothes of Arras wrought of gold and
silk* compassed of many ancient stories, with which clothes of Arras, every
wall and chamber were hanged, and all wyndowes so richely covered, that it
passed all other sightes before seen. In every chamber in place convenient were
clothes of estate, great and large of clothe of gold, of Tissue, and rich
embroudery, with Chaiers covered with like clothe, with pomelles of fine gold:
and great Cushyns of rich work of the Turkey making, nothing lacked of
honorable furnishement.

Also to the same palais was rered a Chapel with two closettes, the quire of
thesaied Chapel siled with clothe of gold, and thereon frete ingrailed bent
clothes of Silk, all was then silk and gold. The aultars of this Chapel
were hanged with rich reuesture of clothe of gold of Tissue embroudered with
pearls. Over the high aultare was hanged a rich Canaby of merucilous
greatness, the aultare was appareled with five pair of Candelstickes of gold,
and on the aultare an halpas and thereon stood a Corpus domini^all ^i^e gold,
and on the same halpas stood twelfe Images of the bigness of a child of four
years of age all gold: And all the Coopes and Uestementes so rich as might be
prepared or bought i^ the city of Florens, for all the copes and U^stementes
were but of one p^ce, so wouen for the purpose, cloth of Ti^^ue and poudered
with red Roses purled with fine gold: the Orfrys set with pearls and
precious stones. And all the walls and deskes of this Chapel was hanged with
right Clothe of gold, and three rich great Crosses were there ready to be
borne at festival times, and basyns and Sensers, Gospellers, Paxes, Crewetes,
holy Water vessels, and other ornaments all of gold.

Also in the first Closet was a trauerse for the kings person of cloth of
gold: And within that the kings place and Chair, with Cusshins of clothe of
gold: before the trauerse was an altar of presence, which Aultare was
adourned with clothe of brouderie, and rich Pearls and precious stones, set
in goldesmithes work of fine gold. On the aultare was a deske or halpace,
whereon stood a patible of the Cruci^ix of fine gold, with an Image of the
Trinitee, an Image of our Lady, and twelve other Images all fine gold and
precious stones, two pair of Candelstickes of fine gold, with Basens,
Crewettes, Paxes, and other Ornaments, ^hesaied Closet was hanged with
Tappettes embraudered with rich work fret with pearls and stones, the rooffe
of the same Closet was siled with work of Inmouled, gylte with fine Gold and
S^napar and Bice.

The second Closette was for the Queen's person, in which was a trauerse of
rich clothe of gold, the aultare so richely appareled, that there lacked
neither Pearls nor Stones of riches: on the aultare were twelve g^eate Images
of gold, the Closet hanged with clothe of gold all other iewelles Missall, I
suppose never such like were seen, and the rooffe of the same closet was siled
with like work that the kings closet was, as is before rehearsed.

And from this palaice or place into the mighty and strong fotresse and Castle
royal of ^uisnes, was a galery for the secret passage of the kings person
into a secret lodgyng within the same Castle the more for the kings ease.

Also to this palaice was all houses of offices, that to such an honorable
Court should apperteigne, that is to wete, the lord Chamberlain, lord
Steward* lord Thresourer of the household, for the Comptroller and office of
grene Clothe, Wardroppes, Iuell house, and office of household service, as
Ewery, Pantrie, Seller, Buttery, Spicery, pitcher house, Larder and Poultrie,
and all other offices so large and fair that the officers might and did
marueiles, as in the craft of viandes, by Ouens, harthes, reredorses,
Chimnayes, Ranges, and such instruments that there was ordained. In this
Palaice as ye have heard, was the kings grace lodged and all the nobles after
their degrees. And for that the town of Guysnes was little, and that all the
noble men might not there be lodged, they set up tents in the field, to
the number of twenty and eight hundred sundery lodgings, which was a goodly
sight. Thus was the king in his Palais royal at Guysnes.

FRAVNCES the French king was with all his nobles of the realm of France,
come to the town of Arde, which was prepared for his coming many tents,
hales and pauilions, were set and pight in the field. On the French party
also, there was at the same town of Arde builded the French kings lodgyng
full well, but not finished, much was the provisions in Picardy on every part
through all. The French king commanded his lodgyng to be made, a little out of
the town of Arde in the territory of an old castle, which by the war of old
time had been beaten. On the same place was edified a house of solas and sport,
of large and mighty compass, which was chiefly sustained by a great mighty
maste, whereby the great ropes and takell strained, the same maste was stayed.
All the roffe of the same house hong on the same Maste, and with takell was
strained and borne, by the supporters of the same Maste or tree, the colors of
the same was all blewe, set with stars of gold foil, and the Orbs of the
heavens by the craft of colors in the roffe, were curiosly wrought in manner
like the sky, or firmament, and a cresant strained sumdell toward the town
of Arde, this cresant was covered with frettes and knottes made of Iue busshes,
and box branches, and other things that longest would be grene for pleasure.

In this time the reverent father lord Thomas Wolsay Cardinal and legate a
Latere as the kings high ambassador rode with noble repair or lords,
gentlemen and prelates to the town of Arde, to the French court where of the
French king, the same lord Cardinal was highly enterteined. Of the noblenes
of this Cardinal, the Frenchemen made books, showing the triumphant doings
of the Cardinals royalty. The number of the gentlemen, knights and lords
all in crimosyn velvet, with the marvelous number of chames of gold, the
great Horse, Mules, Coursers, and cariages, that there were, which went
before the Cardinals coming into Arde with sumters and cofers. Of his great
Crosses and Pillars borne, the pillowe bear or case broudered, the two
mantelles, with other the Ceremonial Offices, with great and honorable
number of bishops geuyng their attendaunce, the mighty and great number of
servants, as yomen, gromes, all clothed in Scarlet who so redeth of the
French book, shall find wonderfully set furthe.

The king of England being at the Castle of Guysnes in the new palais, many
noble men of the French court resorted to his grace, to se the king of
England and the queen, and to salute the^: who of the king of England were
well entertained.

When the lord Cardinal had soiourned at Arde in the French court by the
space of two days, and the high and urgent princely causes in counsel
declared, the lord Cardinal took his leave of the French king and of all the
French court, and repaired unto the Castle of Guysnes, where he found the
king of England his sovereign Lord. And the same king by his letters
patentes, had given full power and authority to the same lord Cardinal,
concerning all matters to be debated, touching the king and the realm, and
also gave unto the same Cardinal, full strength, power, and authority, to
affirm and confirm, bynd and unbind, whatsoever should be in question,
between him and the French king, as though the king in proper person had been
there presently.

When the lords of the French counsel, saw the high and great authority
that the Cardinal had, they showed it unto the French king, who incontinent
commanded his commission to be made, of like power and authority, that the
king of England had given unto thesaid lord Cardinal: the same power and
authority had the same reverent father, given to him by Fraunces the French
king, and affirmed by the counsel royal of France: Then hastily was sent to
the king of England the French kings patent, for the lord Cardinal said
humbly to the French king, that he would no such power receive, without the
consent of the king of England his sovereign Lord: but when the king of
England and his counsel, had seen and vewed the French kings Patent, and
it well considered, then he sent the same Patent of power to the lord Cardinal
with full assent: then the lord Cardinal the power received with much
gladness. It was highly esteemed and taken for great love that the French King
had given so great power to the King of Englandes subject.

Thursdaie the seventh day of June, in the vale of Andren, within the lordeship
royal of Guysnes, before day was set and pight a royal rich tent, all or
clothe of gold, and rich embroudery of the king of Englandes, and diverse
other hales and pauilions: the same rich tente of gold, was within hanged of
the richest Arras, newly co^triued and made, that ever before was seen, and a
presence of the kings estate, with two chayers and rich cusshyns therein: the
ground was spread with Carpettes, of new Turkey making, all full of beauty.

But here is to be noted, that in this mean season in all the feldes about,
both nigh and far, were many of the French guard, ridyng and beholding the
manner of the English part, some of the kings guard, and some of the duke of
Burbons guard, and some of the Admiral of Frau^ces Guard, which slily marked
the conueighaunce of the people of England. At the hour of metyng appointed,
the Lords of England set their people and servants in good arraie of
battaill, in a plain field directly before the castle of Guysnes. The king of
England commanded that his Guard should be set in the breast of the
battaill, or bend of footmen, and so it was done. This battaill of footmen
conducted themselves so in order, that from the first to the last, never a
person of the footmen brake his place or arraie, but kept theimselfes so
well, that never seruyng men theimselfes better demeaned. The seruyng men
thus set in order in the field, on the left hand of the king of England,
somewhat toward the Marres, long while thus abidyng, in which time the Castle
of Guysnes shot a warnyng piece to the town of Arde, and in likewise the Town
of Arde gave warnyng to the Castle of Guysnes.

Now was gathered the French Kings repair, and by the Lord Marshall and
Constable of France, the Lords and gentlemen were set in order: thus both
these two high and mighty princes, intendyng to mete and assemble many
words and tales, and suspect demeanynges arose in the English party, for
the great love that we the Englishemen had to our Prince, caused the ignorant
people that were not worthy to know the pretense of princes, to suspecte the
French party, and the more because that Monsire Chatelion a Lord of France,
in rigorous and cruel manner, threw down four pennons of white and grene
which were set by Richard Gibson, by commandment from the king for the suer
mark or metyng place of the two kings in what ground they should encounter,
words rose between Monsire Chatelion and Richard Gibson, as far as became
for that deed, but at the commandment of the earl Marshall for that time,
which was the noble earl of Essex, the king of Englandes cosyn, that wrong by
us Englishemenne was patiently suffered, thus from time to time, and watch to
watch, and vewe to vewe, the hour drew nere, that was by both the Princes
appointed, of metyng or encountre.

Wherefore the king of England our sovereign Lord, with all the Court of
nobles of England mounted on horseback, and marched toward the valey of
Andern in honorable order, all Gentle men, Squiers, Knights, and Barons,
road before the king and bishops also, the dukes, Marquis and Earls, gave
attendaunce next the king. He were much wise that could have told or showed
of the riches of apparel that was amongst the Lords and Gentlemenne of
England, Clothe of Gold, Clothe of Silver, Ueluettes, Tinsins, Sattins
embroudered, and Crymosyn Sattens: The marvelous threasor of gold that was
worn in Chains and Bauderickes, so great, so weighty, some so manifold,
some in Colers of. S. great, that the Gold was innumerable to my demyng to
be summed, of all noble men, Gentlemenne, Squiers, Knights, and every
honest Officer of the King was richely appareled, and had Chains of Gold,
great and marvelous weighty: what should be said? surely among the
Englishemenne lacked no riches, nor beautiful apparel or array, and always as
the king of England and his horsemen marched, so pace for pace marched the
most goodly battaill or bend of foot men (out of defensable apparel) that
ever I trow before was seen.

The French king on his party marched toward the encountre with all the
ruffelers and gallantes of the French Court. In which time came to the
French king some report, that caused him to tarry, and a light from his
Horse, then the French men were very doubtful, and in a stay so still
rested, until a Lord of France called Monsire Morret, thesaied Morret came
to the French King, and showed him the very fidelity of the King of England,
whereby the French king mounted on horseback, and the better couraged,
marched toward the place appointed of encountre.

Thus in marchyng the one king to the other, to the king of England came lord
George Neuell lord Aburgheny, and openly said, sir ye be my king and
sovereign, wherefore above all I am bounden to show you truth, and not to
let for none, I have been in the French party, and they be mo in number,
double so many, as ye be: with that was the Earl of Shrewesbery Lord Steward
ready and said, sir, whatsoever my Lord of Burgheny says, I my self have
been there, and the Frenchemenne be more in fear of you and your subjects,
then your subjects be of them, wherefore said the Earl, if I were worthy to
give counsel, your grace should march forward, so we intend my Lord said
the king: then the Officers of Arms cried on before, then in short while was
the king on the bank of Andern: then every gentleman as they road took his
place, and stood still side by side, their regard or face toward the vale of
Andern.

Then the king of England showed himself somedele forward in beauty and
personage, the most goodlicit Prince that ever reigned over the Realm of
England: his grace was apparelled in a garment of Clothe of Silver, of
Damask, ribbed with Clothe of Gold, so thick as might be, the garment was
large, and plited very thick, and canteled of very good intaile, of such
shape and making, that it was marucilous to behold. The Courser which his
grace road on, was Trapped in a marvelous vesture of a new devised fashion,
the Trapper was of fine Gold in Bullion, curiously wroughte, pounced and set
with anticke work of Romayne Figures. Attendyng on the kings grace of
England, was the Master of his horse, by name Sir Henry Guylford, leadyng the
kings spare horse, the which horse was Trapped in a Mantellet bront and back
place, all of fine gold in Scifers, of device with Tasselles on Cordelles
pendaunt, the Sadell was of the same suit and work, so was the hedde stall and
raynes. After followed nine henxce men, ridyng on Coursers of Naples, the same
young Gentlemen were appareled in rich Clothe of Tissue, the Coursers in
Harneis of marvelous fashion, scaled in fine Gold in Bullion, and works
subtle more then my sight could contriue, and all the same horse Harneis were
set full of tremblyng spanges that were large and fair. The lord Marquis
Dorset bare the kings sweard of estate before the kings grace, the reverent
father Lord Cardinal did his attendaunce.

Thus in little time, abidyng the coming of the French king and his, the
which in short time came with great number of horsemenne, freshely
appareled, the French King and his retain, put themselfes in place appointed,
direct against the English party, beholding every other of both nations, the
French men mused much of the battaill of the foot men, and every of the
French men to other spoke of the multitude of the English men which
seemed great, yet were not they so many as the French party.

When the French king had a little beholden the English men, he put himself
somewhat before his people, that were there on him attendaunt, the Duke of
Burbon bearyng a naked Swearde upright, the Lord Admiral of France, and the
County Cosmen Galias, Master of the French kings horse, and no mo persons
gave their attendance in passing with the French king: when it was perceived
that the French kings swearde was borne naked, then the king of England
commanded the lord Marquis Dorset to draw out the swearde of estate, and
bear it up naked in presence, which was so done.

Then up blewe the Trumpettes, Sagbuttes, Clarions, and all other Minstrelles
on both sides, and the kings descended down toward the bottom of the valey
of Andern, in sight of both the nations and on horseback met and embrased the
two kings each other: then the two kings alighted, and after embrased with
benyng and courteous manner each to other, with sweet and goodly words of
gretyng: and after sewe words, these two noble kings went together into the
rich tente of clothe of gold, that there was set on the ground for such
purpose, thus arm in arm went the French king Fraunces the first of
France, and Henry the eight king of England and of France, together passing
with communicacion.

When the two princes were in the tente, before rehearsed, the French King
said, my dear brother and Cosyn, thus far to my pain have I travailed to se
you personally, I think verily that you esteem me as I am. And that I mai^ to
you be your aid, the realms and seigniories show the might of my person:
Sir said the king of England, neither your realms nor other the places of
your power, is the matter of my regard, but the stedfastnes and loyal keeping
of promise, comprised in Charters between you and me: that observed and kept,
I never saw Prince with my iyen, that might of my heart be more loved. And
for your love I have passed the seas, into the fardest frontier of my realm to
se you presently, the which dooyng now gladdeth me. And then were the two
Kings served with a banquet, and after mirthe, had communicacion in the Banquet
time, and there showed the one the other their pleasure.

The English officers went and ran with great pottes of Wine, and Bolles to
the French men, and them chered the best that might be, all this season
stood still the noble men of the English party, and all other, and from
their places moved nothing that they were appointed unto. And the seruyng men
in likewise, not once moved from their ground or standing, but the Frenchemen
suddenly brake, and many of them came into the English party, speaking fair,
but for all that, the court of England and the lords, kept still their
arraie.

After the two kings had ended the banquet, and spice and wine given to the
Frenchemen, Ipocras was chief drink of plenty, to all that would drink. In
open sight then came the two kings, that is to were: the French king, and he
king of England, out of their tent, by which I then well perceived thabiliment
royal of the French king, his garment was a chemew, of clothe of silver,
culpond with clothe of gold, of damask cantell wise, and guarded on the
bordours with the Burgon bendes, and over that a cloak of broched satin, with
gold of purple color, wrapped about his body trauerse, beded from the
shulder to the waste, fastened in the lope of the first fold: this said cloak
was richely set with pearls and precious stones: this French king had on his
head a koyfe of damask gold set with diamondes, and his courser that he rode on
was covered with a trapper of Tissue, broudered with devise, cut in fashion
ma^tell wise, the skirtes were embowed and fret with frised work, and knit
with Cordelles, and buttons tasseled of Turkey making, Raines and hedstall,
answeryng of like work: and verily of his person the same Fraunces the
French king, a goodly Prince, stately of countenance, merry of chere, broune
colored, great iyes, high nosed, big lipped, fair brested and shoulders,
small legs, and long fete.

All the nobles of the French court, were in garments of many colors, so
that they were not known from the braggery: thus as the two kings were in
communicacion, diverse noble men of England were called to presence. And then
the two kings departed with their compaignie, the king of England to
Guysnes, the French king to Arde.

Saterdaie the.ix. day of June in a place within the English pale, were set
and pight in a field, called the camp, two trees of much honor the one called
the Aub^spine, and the other called the Framboister, which is in English the
Hathorne, which was Henry, and the Raspis berry for Fraunces, after the
significacion of the French: these two trees were mixed one with the other
together on a high mountaigne, covered with grene Damask, the same Trees were
artificially wrought, resemblyng the nature of the same as nigh as could be, the
leaves were grene Damask, the branches, bows, and withered leaves of clothe
of gold, and all the bodies and arms of the same clothe of gold, laid on
timber, they were in height from the foot to the top.xxxiiii. foot of
assise* in compass about an hundred twenty and nine foot, and from bough to
bough, forty and three foot: on these trees were flowers and fruits,
wrought in kyndly wise with silver and Uenice gold, their beauty showed far:
on the mountaigne was a place ha^ber wise, where the Herrauldes were, the
mountaigne was rayled about, and the railes covered with grene Damask.

The Same day the two noble kings came to the same trees of honor with great
triumph, accompaignied with diverse nobles and young valiauntes, before whom
were their shildes carried, and after borne about the listes, and set on the
highest place, showing into the feldes, the king of Englandes arms within a
Gartier, and the French kings within a Collar of his order of saint Michael,
with a close Croune, with a Flower delice in the top. The Camp was in length
nine hundred foot, and in breadth three hundred and twenty foot, ditched
round about, saving at the entrees with broad and deep diches, diverse
skaffoldes were tered about this Camp, for the ease of the nobles: on the
rightside of the field stood the queen of England, and the queen of France
with many ladies. The Same Camp was railed and bard on every end strongly,
there was two lodgings in the entery of the same field, for the two kings
richely adourned, which were unto them very necessary, for therein they
armed theimselfes and took their ease: also in the same compass was two
great Sellers couched full of wine, which was to all men as larges^e as the
fountain.

The cause of the setting up of the two great shieldes with arms Royal, was
for joy of the honorable metyng, there to pass the time from idleness, with
the exercise of noble feactes of Arms in honor, articles of Iustes,
Turnayes, battles on foot at the Bars, and such victorious feactes were
^arre in Realms Proclaimed, which caused much people of noble courage
thither to resort: the two kings as brethren in arms, undertook to deliver
all personages of the same feactes, and to the same two kings by the order of
arms were ^ociate, the Duke of Uendosme, the duke of Suffolk, the county
saint Paul the Marquis Dorset, Monsire de Roche, sir Willyam Kyngston,
Mo^sire Brian, sir Richard Garnyngham, Monsire Cauaan, sir Giles Capell,
Monsire Bukkall, Master Nicholas Carewe, Monsire Mountafilion, and Master
Anthony Kneuet, the shieldes of all these nobles were hanged on the trees, with
three tables of the Chalenges, to the which all noble men that would answer,
brought in their shieldes to the same trees, and them presented to the kings
of Arms, and to the Articles wrote with their hands.

Mondaie the.xi. day of June, the two Queen's of England and of France came
to the camp, where either saluted other right honorably, and went into a stage
for them prepared, right curiously hanged, and specially there was for the
queen of England, a Tapet all of pearl called Huges Dike, which was much
looked at for the costlynes of the same.

At the hour assigned, the two kings armed at all pieces mounted on
horseback, on them attendyng the noble persons, parteners of the challenge:
the French king set himself on a Courser barded, covered with Purple satin,
broched with gold, and embraudered with Corbyns feathers round and buckeled,
the fether was black and hached with gold. Corbyn is a Raven, and the first
silable of Corbyn is Cor, which is a heart, a pen in English, is a fether in
French, and signifies pain, and so it stood, this fether round was endless,
the buckels wherewith the feathers were fastened, betokens sothfastnes, thus was
the devise, heart fastened in pain endless, or pain in heart fastened endless: on
his head piece he bare a sleue, all the partenars of the French kings challenge
were in like apparel, every thing correspondent in clothe of silk
embroudered, on his person were attendant on horseback noble persons, and on
foot four persons all appareled in purple satin.

The king of England mounted on a fresh courser, the trapper of clothe of
gold, of Tissue, the Arson mantell wise: And the brunt of the trapper bard
fashion, cut in waves of water work, and every wave raw wrought and frised
with Damask gold, this work was laid lose on russet velvet, and knitte
together with points of gold, which waves signified the Lordeshippe of the
narowe sea. All the parteners of the kings challenge were in the same suit, their
horses as well as their persons, attendyng on the king on horseback were sir
Henry Guilford Master of the kings horse, sir Ihon Pechie deputy of Caleis,
sir Edward Guilford Master of the kings army, and Monsire Moret of the French
court appareled al four in the kings, livery, which was white on the right
side, and the left side gold and russet both hose and garment And on him were
atte^dant on foot six honorable knights.xx. esquiers and officers to the
nombre of an.C. and.xii, persons, of the which number all the knights and
gentlemen had coats, the one half silver, and the other clothe of gold and
russet velvet, and the other officers cotes were of right Satin of the same
color, and all their hosen were of the same suite very costly. Thus with
honor and noble courage these two noble kings with their compaignies entered
into the feld, and them presented unto the Queen's, and after reverence dooen
to them, they road round about the tilte, and so took their places
appointed, abidyng the answerers, which was for the first the duke Dallencon
and ten men of arms on his be^d, on coursers barded, the bardes covered with
white and black Ueluet, fastened the one within the other, guarded with Burgon
bendes of Tynsell satin, as well their garments as their bardes. Then entered
on coursers barded twelfe gentlemen of the bend of the lord Admiral of
France, their garments and bardes were russet satin, broched with gold and
white and purple Satin, after the devise of their pleasure with great plumes.
When these bendes were entered the feld, they showed themselfes about the
tilte, and did reverence to the queen's, the bend of the Duke Dallencon took
first place, they made them pressed on both sides, the French king was the
first that ran, he did valiauntly and brake speres mightily.

Then ran the king of England to Monsire Graundeuile with great vigor, so
that the speres brake in the kings hand to the vantplate all to sheuers. And
at the second course he gave thesaied Monsire Gra^^deuile such a stroke that
the charnell of his hedde piece, although the same was very strong, was broken in
suchewise that he might run no more whereby the king wanted three courses.

Then ran the Duke de Vandon and met his counter part right nobely, and
brake speres right valiauntly.

The noble duke of Suffolk charged his course and met right valia^tly his
counter part and furnished the.v. courses right nobly together like good men
of arms.

And when all parties of the challenge had right valiauntly furnished they^
courses, then ran again the.ii. noble kings, who did so valiantly that the
beholders had great joy, after which courses the herauldes cried the disarmy
and the trompettes sounded to lodgyng.

Tewsday the.xii. day of June at hour convenient the.ii. queen's took their
stages and the bend of challenge in the feld pressed to answer and deliver all
comers, to whom came.x. gentlemen armed on barded horses of the bend of
Mounsire de Svvyes there bardes and apparel cloth of velvet full of friars
knottes silver, after that they had presented them unto ye queen's, then they
took the end of the tilte, and then course after course they run to the
chalengers right egerly, and the chalengers of the party of the two kings
delivered to the end of their articles of Iustes.

Then entered a.xi. men of arms of the bend of Mounsire de Tremoyell, on
horses barded with yelowe velvet, losenged with Friars knottes of black
velvet, and after they had saluted ye queen's, they likewise took the end of the
tilt, and course after course, ran till they were delivered of their chalenges
of Iustes: valiauntly this day was finished.

Wednesdaie the.xiii. day of June, the two hardy kings armed at all pieces
entered into the feld right nobly appareled, the French king and all his
parteners of challenge were arraied in purple satin, broched with gold and
purple velvet, embrodered with little rolls of white satin, wherein was
written, quando, all bardes and garments were set full of the same, and all the
residue where was no rolls, were poudered and set with the letter ell as
thus.L. which in French is she, which was interpreted to be quando elle,
when she, and ensuyng the devise of the first day it signifies together,
heart fastened in pain endless, when she.

The king of England with all the bend parteners of his challenge were likewise
on horseback, appareled in trappers of lose^ges russet velvet and clothe of
silver of damask, enbroudered and set in every lose^ge a branch of Eglantine
of gold, the apparel of the persons were of the same correspondent to the
trapper, this Eglantine tree is sweet, pleasant and grene, and if it be kyndely
and friendly handeled, and if it be rudely dealt with, it will prick, and he
that will pull up the whole tree by the top his hands will be hurt: The two
kings with their compaignies thus appareled, presented themselfes to the
queen's, and so took the end of the tilte then entered into the feld Monsire
Leskevv called lord Liskyn, with him came a.xi. men of arms, himself the.xii.
on horses barded and richely appareled, and so rode about the tilte and
saluted the queen's, and took the end of the tilte.

Mons^re de Leskevv and his.xi. compaignions had their bases and bardes, all
black clothe of gold of damask all to cut on black satin, their garments
had mantell sleues on the left arm, to the wast behind just to the shulder,
which was praised for the strangenes.

The French king ra^ne to Mou^sire Bewsy Damboyes, one of the bend of Mounsire
Liskew, and the king of England charged his course and ra^ne to Mounsire
Liskew, and so furnished their courses (as they lay) right nobly and
valiauntly in breakyng speres that were strong, thus course after course each
with other, his counter party did right valiantly, but the two Kings
surmounted all the rest in prowess and valiantnes. This bend thus furnished
entered the Marquis de Salons and his bend.xii. persons all ridyng on coursers
barded and apparelled in white Satin and black, broched with gold and silver,
with cuttes and culpynes much after tawny and black Satin billottes: and
atter reverence done to the Queen's, took the end of the tilte. To the Marquis de
Salons ran the king of England, and the king of France to another of the
same bend, still course alter course ran all the noble men til the Marquis de
Salons and his bend were delivered, who bare them right valiantly: then blew
the trumpettes the retraicte and the two kings them unarmed and after
departed, the French king to Arde, and the king of England to his castle of
Guysnes.

Thursday the.xiii. day of June by the noonetyde the two Queen's met in the
camp and took their places, the people were come to behold the honor, and to
see the two kings, who all ready armed entered the feld to receive and deliver
all men of answer of Iustes. Then entered the earl of Deuonshyre nere cosyn to
the king of England, on his bend the lord Mountague also cosyn to the king,
lord Harbert, lord Leonard Gray, Master Arthur Poole, Master Fraunces Brian,
Master Henry Norres, and.iiii. other all richely apparelled, the one side blew
Ueluet enbrodred with a man's hartburnyng in a ladies hand holdyng a garden pot
stillyng with water on the heart, the other side was white Satin enbrodered
with letters of gold, This compaignie rode about the tilte and did reverence
to the Queen's and so abode at the end of the same. The earl of Deuonshyre charged
his spear, and the French king likewise charged his course to mete the same
earl and ra^ne so hard together that both their speres brake, and so
maintained their courses nobly.

Then ran the king of England to Mounsire Memora^cie and him encountered and
both bare together and gave great strokes, the kings most noble grace never
disuisered nor breathed till he ran the five courses and delivered his
counter party.

Dukes, Marqueses, Knights, Esquiers and other ran as fast as ever they
might, there was none abode when the courses came, till the earl of Deuonshyre
and his bend were delivered of demaundes.

Then entered the lord Hawarde son to the Duke of Northfolke and.xi,
compaignions apparelled and barded in crimosyn Satin full of flames of gold,
the borders ribbed with crimosyn Ueluet, and with much honor after due
reverence done to the queen's were brought with Heraldes of arms about the
tiltes, and so took the place to them appointed, right rich was their
apparel. Then ran the French king and encountered the same lord Edmond,
they brake both their staves valiantly course after course, the encounter
ceased not til they had furnished their five courses, so was the lord Edmond
delivered by the French king.

Then ran the king of England to a strong gentleman named Raffe Broke and
brake his spear, and ran course after course till he had finished his courses
right nobly and like a prince of most valiance. The residue ceased not til
they had each delivered other of their challenge.

Friday the.xv. day of June the king of England mounted on a courser roial, his
person armed at all pieces, his apparel and trapper was the one side rich
cloth of gold, of tissue, the other side clothe of Tissue of silver, and clothe
of gold of Tissue entered ounde the one with ye other, the ounde is warke
wauyng up and down, and all the borders as well trapper as other was guarded
with letters of fine gold, and on the other side that was ounde was set with
signs called cifers of finegold, the which were set with great and oriental
perles, the cifers signified letters knit together in a knot, which was to
wete, God my friend, my realm and I may. This was the devise and reason
thereof, all the kings bend were apparelled in like apparel.

The French king likewise armed at al pointesmounted on a courser royal, all
his apparel as well bardes as garments were purple velvet entered the one with
the other, enbrodred full of little books of white Satin, and in the books were
written a me, about the borders of the bardes and the borders of the
garments, a chain of blewe, like Iron resemblyng the chain of a well or
prison chain, which was enterpreted to be Liber, a book, within this book
was written as is said, a me, put these two together and it makes libera me,
the chain betokens prison or bonds, and so makes together in English
deliver me of bo^des, put to y^ reason, the first day, second day, and.iii.
day, of change for he changed but the second day, and it is, heart fastened in
pain endless, when she delivers me not of bonds, thus was thinterpretacion
made, but whether it were so in all things or not I may not say. Now is ready
the two kings and princes and all their retain abidyng the answers, and
after salutacions made to the Queen's being by their stages, they took the end of
the tilte.

Ready was Mounsire Florengis and with him, xii. men of arms we coursers
barded: the bardes and apparel was Crimosyn velvet, tawny velvet, and Plunket
velvet embrodered border wise with shepcherdes hokes of cloth of silver. When
they with honor had passed about the tilte, the reverence to the Queen's and
ladies done, the two kings had their speres ready, then began the rushyng of
speres: the king of England this day ra^ne so freshly and so many courses that
one of his best coursers was dead that night, this band was delivered man after
man of their pretense of Iustes.

Then entered bendes of Mounsire de Rambeurs and Mounsire de Pyns each
having.xi. persons in number, the one band all white Satin enbrodered with
black, and the other all black, dropped with silver drops and after reverence
done to the queen's, at the end of the tilte took their places, Then began a new
encounter hard and sore, many of them bare great strokes of the kings, to
their honor: when these bendes were delivered, the Heraldes cried a lostel and
the princes them disarmed and went to lodgyng.

Saturday, the.xvii. day of June the French king with a small no^bre came to
ye castle of Guisnes about the hour of viii. in the morning: the king being in
his privy chamber, had thereof knowledge, who with glad have went to receive
the same French king, and him met and welcomed in friendly and honorable manner,
and after co^municacion between them had, the king of England departed, leauyng
y^ French king there in ye sumptuous place before named. Then was busy the
lord Cha^berlain, the lord Steward and all other officers to make ready feast
and chere, It were to long to rehearse all, for such a feast and banquet was
then made, that of long time before he like had not been seen.

The king of England thus departed, he took his horse and with co^paignie of
noblemen rode to Arde, where the French queen and other noblemen him received
with much honor. After which receiuyng, he was by the said queen and lords
brought into a chamber hanged with blewe velvet enbrodered with flowers delice
of cloth of gold, wherein was a great bed of like work, from whence he was
conueighed into another chamber, in the which was a kings state: this chamber
was hanged and siled with clothe of gold, enbrodered with great cordelles or
friars knottes of cloth of silver. In the same chamber were two cupbordes on
either side one, furnished with great and goodly plate gilte. Noble feastyng
and there was there made. After dinner the ladies dressed them to dance, the
king the more to glad the queen and the said ladies, departed secretly and put
himself with.xxix. persons more in Maskers apparel, first.x. young honorable
lords apparelled after the manner of Ry and Revel in Ruseland or far Estland.
First their hosen of rich goldsatten called Aureate satin, ouerrouled to ye
kne with Skarlet, and on their fete, shoen with little pykes of white nails
after the Estland guise, their doublettes of rich crimosyn velvet and cloth of
gold with wide sleues lined with cloth of gold, over this they had clokes of
crimosyn velvet short, lined with cloth of gold, on eueryside of the clokes
ringes of silver with laces of Uenice gold, and on their heads they had hattes
made in ye town of Danske and Purses of Seals skynnes, and girdles of
the same: all these young lord had visers on their faces and their hattes were
drawn like hatbondes full of Damask gold.

Other.x. lords were apparelled in long gounes of blew Satin of the ancient
fashion enbrodred with reasons of gold that said, adieu Iunesse, farewell
youth: they had typpettes of black velvet and hattes hangyng thereby, and on
their heads, high violette standing cappes and girdelles of silk, and Purses
of clothe of gold after the ancient manner, with visers, their faces of like
auncientie.

Then was there another compaignie of.x. lords in which maskery the king was
himself, apparelled all in long garments of estate all pale rich clothe of
gold, all these had rich gounes which were lined with grene Taffata, and
knit with points of Uenice silver wherewith the rich clothe together was
fastened on their faces visers, and all the berdes were fine wire of Ducket
gold, the Drunslad plaiers and other minstrels arrayed in white, yelowe, and
russet Damask, these minstrels blew and played and so passed through the
street of Arde, all these noble reuelers into the French court and put them in
presence of the French Queen and ladies: and when the Queen had them beholden,
these reuelers took ladies and daunsed, in passing the time right honorably.
Then at thinstance of the French queen and her ladies these maskers and
reuelers them disuisered, showing them what persons they were. Then spices,
fruits, ielies, and banquet viandes were brought, that done and ended, ye king
took leave of the French queen and ladies, and in secret places every one
visered himself, so that they were unknown, and so passed through the French
court, to whom were brought.xxx. horses trapped in Damask, white and yelowe,
and so in maskeler passed the town of Arde, into the field or camp.

But now to tell of the feast and riches royal that was in the presence of the
French king in the new palaice royal. This day the queen of England received
the French king with all honor that was according. In presence larked neither
clothes of estate nor other riches, for to show the multitude of silver and
gold in plate and vessel there that day, it were impossible: for all noble
men were served in gilte vessel, and all other in silver vessel. When the
French king had washed and in his estate was set, he was right honorably
served in all things needful, for Forestes, Parkes, field, salt seas,
Rivers, Moates, and Pondes, were serched and sought through countries for the
delicacie of via^des: well was that man rewarded that could bring any thing of
likyng or pleasure: Right honorably was the French king entertained, and all
other after their degree and state. When the French king had washed, then the
ladies came and proffered themselves to dance, and so did in the French kings
presence, which done the French king took leave of the Queen and ladies of
the court, The reverend father lord Cardinal accompanied with the duke of
Buckyngham and other great Lords conducted forward the French king, and in
their way they encountered and met the king of England and his company right
in the valy of Anderne apparelled in their Maskyng apparel, which gladded the
French king. After reverence done, the said two kings departed for that night.

Mondaie the.xviii. day of June, there blew such storms of wynd and wether
that meruail was to hear, for which hideous tempest some said it was a very
pronosticacion of trouble and hatred to come between princes.

Tewsoay the.xix. day of June, the.ii. valiant chalengers kings at hour
convenient entered into the field armed at all pieces abidyng the comers. Then
entered Mounsire Bonyual and his bend.xiiii. persons in number well armed ridyng
on barded horses, their apparel was black velvet and cloth of gold bylet wise
and fair plumes on their heads, and after reverence done to the queen's all
ready being on their stages, they took their places at the end of the tilte.

Ready were the spears, the French king charged and ran course after course
and did nobly. Also the king of England ran surely and lost no course till
Mounsire Bonyual and his bend was delivered, the kings and their retain did
not cease.

Then entered.xvii. persons royally armed, the bend of the duke of Burbon
ridyng on barded coursers, their apparel was white velvet, tawny and black
velvet, entered together and all bordered with clothe of gold garnished with
plumes of the same colors on their heads, they saluted the queen's and ladies
and took the end of the tilte as they that came to furnishe the end of the
challenge of Iustes.

The king of England was ready and struck his horse with the spurs and so
fiersly ra^ne to the country party that his graund grave guard was lose with
the great stroke that the king gave him: course after course ye king lost none,
but evermore he brake his spear and so nobly ended his Iustes royal, for this
day ended the kings great challenge, and of the king our sovereign lords
doings, all men there that him beheld reported his doings (so valiant were his
factes) evermore in honor to be renoumed. The French king on his part ran
valiantly breakyng spears egrely and so well ended his challenge of Iustes,
that he ought ever to be spoken of. When the bend of the Duke of Burbon was of
their pretense of challenge delivered, they took leave and departed.

Wednisday the.xx. day of June, the two kings began to hold Turneyes with all
the parteners of their challenge, armed at all pieces, The French king and his
bend were apparelled, their bard covered with purple satin, broched with gold
and purple velvet, over all brodered with garlondes of friars knottes of white
satin, and in every garlond.liii. paunse flowers, which signified, think on
Fraunces, to who^ he spoke was not known, goodly and rich was their apparel.

The king of England mounted on a courser of Naples barded, and after him all
the fair bend of his retain on coursers barded, the bardes and apparel was
the one side rich clothe of Tyssue enbrodered, and lined with rich cloth of
silver, all ye outward part was cut, the otherside was russet velvet poudered
with gold or purpled with gold, enbrodered with a great rock or mountain, and
a picture of an armed knight on a courser barded, vauncyng himself upon that
hill: then was on the same in rich enbrodery a picture of a lady coming out
of a cloud strikyng the knight into the body with an arow a deadly wound, and
beneth on the borders were written in letters enbrodered that said, Inloue
whoso mounteth, passes (...) peril, this was the devise, so was the king of
England apparelled and all his parteners of challenge.

The queen of France and the queen of England were in the places appointed for
their honors. The Judges were on stages to mark with ye king of Heraldes that
was for France named Roy Mon Joy, and for England king of arms Garter, to
mark and write the deeds of noblemen: every person took a naked sword in his
hand, the trumpettes blewe all waityng to ride and run, the French king and
the king of England together entered, and their bendes, and reuere^ced the
queen's, and rode about the place, and then took the end of the field in their
abode.

Now again souned the tru^pettes, ye Heraldes brought in the be^des of diverse
noble and well armed men on horses barded, that is to wete, First the duke of
Alanson and.x. men of arms on his bend, the lord Admyrals bend.xii. men of
arms, and Mounsire Gywer and.ix. in number of men of arms all gentlemen,
Mounsire Trenoyll with.xi. men of arms mounsire Liskew and with him.xi. men of
arms on his bend, the Marquis de Salons and.xii. men of arms on his bend, al
on horses barded, and naked swords in their hands.

Then the two kings put down their visers and rode to the encou^tre
valiantly, and for troth struck and received great strokes, but verily the two
kings bet their country parties to disarmyng, and then were they departed and
that battle ceased: then went other, evermore two for two till it came to the
kings again, at which it neded not to put them in remembrance: for
coragiously the two kings newely fought with great randon and force, they
showed their vigors and strengthes and did so nobly that their cou^ter parties
had none aduau^tage. When they had thus each of them fought.iiii. battles,
then came Mounsire Liskew with whom the king of England had fought one battle,
and presented the king with his horse, which the king gently received and for
love incontinent mounted on him and there fought the.v. battle right
valiantly. Thus was the turney delivered honorably for that day.

Thursday the.xx. day of June, the queen of England and the French queen were
come to the camp in royalty like unto their estates, the.ii. kings were in
the field armed and apparelled, the French king and his bend on coursers
barded, their bardes covered with purple broched satin and purple velvet right
roially, without any more enbroderyng. The king of England was mounted on a
horse of force and courage, royally and nobly apparelled he and his retain in
suit like. The apparel was of clothe of silver of damask bordered with
letters of cloth of gold of damask all the borders, on the bardes and
apparel were little mountains and springyng branches of Basile, wrought al of
fine gold, and every branch, lefe, and stalk, was lose and waueryng, all
thick and full of leaves and branches, that uneath was the clothe of silver
seen, ye reasons written on the borders was thus, Break not these svvere
herbs of the rich mount, doubt for damage. This apparel was marvelous
fresh and fair: thus the two kings and their retain took the field. Then
entered therle of Devonshire cosyn to the king of England and.xvi. honorable
persons in his bend all armed.

Then came mounsire Florenges and.xii. persoues on his bend, then came Mounsire
de Rambeurs Mounsire de Pyns and.ix. men of arms on his bend, then came the
bend of Mounsire de Bonyual himself and.xiii. men of arms on his bend, then
came the bend of Mounsire de Burbon and.xvii. men of arms, al well and warlike
horsed and armed and every of these bendes after their devises apparelled right
richely.

The.ii. noble kings were ready and either of them encountered one man of
arms, the French king to the earl of Devonshire, the king of England to
Mounsire Florenges. The king of England bare back Mounsire Florenges and brake
his Poldron and him disarmed, when ye strokes were stricken, this battle was
departed, it was much praised. Then on went swords and down went visers,
there was little abidyng. Sir John Neuell, Master Fraunces Bryan, sir Rouland,
and master Robart Garnyngham were this day as aids sor ye hurt persons that
before were of the entertain, and fought fervently battle after battle and
none ceased till they all that would enter were delivered of their pretense in
challenge royal pretenced. This day was the challenge of Turnays after the
articles ended, and all noble men delivered and so departed the field: then the
kings rode about the field as honor of arms required, and the Herauldes cried
la fine des Turnayes, by the said two noble princes the.xxi. day of June.

Friday the.xxii. day of June in the camp was set a barrier for to fight on
foot, also an Hale of the kings of England was set in the same place,
enbrodered with clouds of blewe, and out of the clouds the Sun risyng, the
valence of the same was written in letters of blewe enbrodered, dieu er men
droit, in which Hale the Lords and other of the entertain of the challenge
armed theimselfes.

Now was the noble Kings ready to do battle on foot at the Barriers, the
Queen's on their stages: then entered bend after bend on foot and preased to
the Barriers, every one in his hand a Punchion spear, wherewith without any
abode foyned and lashed always one at another, two for two as the lotte fell.
When the speres were, spent, then swords to them were given. Then preased to
the Barriers the two valiant kings, and other, then was no tariyng but fought
with such force that the fire sprang out of their armure. Thus bend after bend
they were all delivered by the two noble kings and their aids of retain.

Then in came a bend with two hand swords and castyng darts to answer to
that challenge,.xii. men well armed which presed to the barriers and mightily
threw their spears the one to the other, ready or not ready, none favored
other more then two enemies or at utterance, and ever still two for two, till
all were delivered concerning the challenge, so this same two kings safe in
body and lymmes ended the batbattail for that day at the barriers with great
honor.

All men of arms passed and departed for that time, much preparacion was made
there, as setting up tents, hales, and other places for furnishyng of houses
of offices and cha^bers of estates for the kings and queen's, and also the same
night was in the camp rered a large frame of timber work for a chapel place,
which was syled with rich clothes enbrodered, wherein was made a stage of two
degrees, with the chair and cloth of state for the lord Cardynall, the alter
apparelled with all Iuelles myssall of great riches, the same chapel thus
finished the.xxiii. day of June being satterday, at hour convenient, the said
lord Cardinal sang an high and solemn mass by note before the two kings
and queen's, the same done, Indulgence was given to all hearers, the two kings
together associate took their chamber. Of this mass in Flaunders arose much
communicacion, in so much that the common voice went, how the.ii. kings were
sworn together on the sacrament, which was contrary, for the mass was for
none other intent then to give Indulgence to the kings.

When time was, the two kings washed and satte to meat under their clothes of
estate where they were richely served, the royalty of the fare and the riches
of vessel, plate and Iuelles surmounteth the wit of man to express: the
queen's in another Chamber were served with no less honor, the dinner ended, the
said strangers royally apparelled, presented themselves in places of estate.

To tell you the apparel of the ladies, their rich attyres, their sumptuous
Iuelles, their diversities of beauties, and the goodly behauior from day to day
sith the first metyng, I assure you ten men's wits can scace declare it.

The two noble kings put themselfes in arms with their bend and entered the
field on foot, before the barriers, then entered the bendes of men of arms in
armur right richely, then all was ready and the.ii. kings at the barriers
ready to fight right nobly. This day was delivered at barriers by battle a C.
and vi. persons, the.ii. last battles did the kings. The king of England
with few strokes disarmed his counter party, the French king likewise bare
himself right valiantly. Thus the said saturday was fully ended, and all men
delivered of articles of Iustes and all Turneys and battles on foot by the
said two noble kings.

After this challenge honorably performed, the kings prepared diverse maskers
and especially the king of England had.iiii. companies, and in every company,
x. persons apparelled as you shall hear.

The first person of the first.x. was apparelled like Hercules in a shirte of
silver of damask written in letters of purple about y^ border, en femes et
infauntes cy petit assurance, which in English is as much to say: In women
and children is little assurance: he had on his head a whode with a garlond of
grene damask cut into leaves like Uyne leaves and Hawthorne leaves, in his
hand a club covered with grene damask full of pricks: the Lions skyn about
his back was of cloth gold of damask, wrought and frysed with flat gold of
damask for the heeres, and buskyns of gold on his legs. Other three were
apparelled for Hector, Alexandre and Julius Caesar, in Turkay Iubbes of grene
cloth of gold wrought like Cha^let very richely, and on their heads bonettes
of Turkay fashion, of cloth of gold of Tyssue, and clothe of silver rolled in
Cypres, kercheffes after the Panyns fashion, and girdles of cloth of gold with
pendantes of the same cut in great flames, and every one buskyns of grene
damask, and three other like princes of Jury for David, Iosue, and Judas
Machabeus: these three were in long gounes of russet Tynsell satin with great
wide sleues lyned with clothe of gold pendant and great tippettes of the same
cloth of gold baudericke wise and whodes of the same, buskyns of grene damask,
their visers had berdes of fine gold: the other three were for Christen princes,
as Charlemaine, Arthur, and Godfry de Bulloigne. These three were apparelled in
long vestures of calendred cloth of gold and purple clothe of gold broched
together, with whoddes and cappes of the same, visers and buskyns of grene
damask.

Other.x. were apparelled in cotes of crimosyn Satin al over covered with
quaterfoyles of clothe of gold, of tissue, and clothe of silver raised, the
gold was fringed with silver, and the silver with gold and laid lose on the
Crimosyn Satin, and every quaterfoyle was knit to other with laces of gold.
Over that y^ said.x. persons had every one a large mantle or Robe of crimosyn
satin enbrodered full of figures of gold, and on their heads bonettes of
stool work of gold of damask, and every one had on his viser a berde of
gold wire with whoddes and buskyns of crimosyn Satin.

Ten of the ladies were apparelled after the Genowayes fashion, the ground of
their gounes was white satin, over diapred with right crimosyn satin and gold
of damask, and on their heads square bonettes of damask gold, rolled with
lose gold that did hang down at their backs, with kerchiefes or cleres of
fine Cypres.

The other.x. ladies were attired after the fashion of Myllayne, in rich
Tyssue and cloth of silver raised, parted, trauers and ruffed sleues with
foresleues pendant, knit with points of gold and caules or coyfes of gold piped,
and Myllaine bonettes of crimosyn satin drawn through with clothe of gold.
Thus the king of England and.xix. noblemen with him and his sister Queen Marye
dowager of France and.xix. ladies with her like maskers apparelled as you have
heard, all mounted on horses trapped in velvet white and yelow, and evermore a
lord and a lady ridyng together, with mynstrelsye departed out of Guysnes on
sunday the.xxiiii. day of June and took their way toward Arde, and in the way
on the bank of Anderne these Maskers met with the French king, being in a
chariot with.xxxviii. persons richely apparelled in Maskyng apparel, and each
compaigny passed by other without any countenance making or disuiseryng.

The French king and his compaignie went to Guysnes, the king of England to
Arde, where his majesty was received into the French court, and brought into
the chamber of rich apparel, where at the instance of the French Queen the
king and all his, them disuisered and showed their faces, and all the ladies of
England likewise, then began feast and chere to arise, the king of England was
set, and after al ye ladies and Maskers of England and were nobly served of
many strange meats: After dinner began the daunces in passing the time
ioyously.

The French Maskers apparel was not al of one suite, but of several fashions,
of diverse silks, some cut, some broched, some had plumes that were very fair,
but very beautiful was the sight.

The French king and his compaignie was then at guisnes where the queen of
England met and welcomed them, Then the French king and his Maskers showed
themselfes bare faced, and when the Queen them saw she did then the more
reverence. Great was the chere that then was there. After dinner and daunces
done, the French king drew himself into a secret chamber and put from him
his apparel of maskery and took to him his apparel of vsaunce, in the which
were many fair Emeraudes, this done he took his leave of the queen, and on the
court he looked with a high countenance and so departed, the lord Cardinal and
the duke of Buckyngham him conductyng, the king of England, this time during,
was at Arde, where he passed the time with much solas: At time conuement he
took leave of the Frenchemen and all other of the French court, and after they
had visered themselfes they rode nobly thus apparelled through ye town of
Arde, and so passed till they came to the camp whereas all the chalenges were
finished, and there the French king perceiuyng the coming of the English
maskers, stood still beholding them. Then the king of England put of his viser
and preased unto the French king: then the two kings enbrased and amiably
together communed, after which communicacion either of other by kyngly
salutyng took leave, and for remembrance either to other gave gifts. The
king of England gave to the French king a collor of Jewels of precious stones
called Balastes the Sanker furnished with great Diamantes and Perles. The
French king gave to the king of England a Bracelet of precious stones, rich
Jewels and fair, and so departed the said two noble kings, the said.xxiiii.
day of June, which was sunday and Midsomerday.

During this triumph so much people of Picardie and west Flanders drew to
Guysnes to se ye king of England and his honor, to who^ vitailes of the court
were in plenty, the conduicte of the gate ran wine always, there were
vacaboundes, plowmen, laborers and of the bragery, wagoners and beggars that
for drunkenness lay in routes and heaps, so great resort thither came, that
both knights and ladies that were come to see the noblenes, were feign to lie
in hay and straw, and held them thereof highly pleased. From the court of
the Emperor, nor of the Lady Margaretes court, nor of Flanders, Braba^t nor
Burgoyn came never a person to answer to the challenge: By that it seemed that
there was small love between the Emperor and the French king: Moreover,
Mounsire Fayot captain of Boleyn with Mounsire Chattelon did their deuoier to
have taken the town of saint Omer, of which doing was thought no goodness to
the Emperor.

Monday the.xxv. day of June, the king of England and the Queen and all the
court removed from Guysnes to the town of Caleys and there made the king his
abode, where was concluded the metyng of the Emperor with the king, wherefore
was made new and great provisions.

In the time of the triumph there was a mutteryng that the town of Caleys
should be re^dred into the French kings hands, and for truth the Frenchmen
so spoke and said, wherewith many Englishmen were grieved.

While the king lay thus in Caleys he considered the charge of his nobles, and
thought that less nombre of servants would now serve them for the time of
his abode, and so caused the Cardynal to call all ye gentlemen before him,
which in the kings name gave to them thanks with much commendacions, and
for eschewyng of cost, because the king tarried but the Emperors coming, he
lice^sed them to send home the half nombre of their servants and bad them
after their long charges to live warely, this term warely was amongst the
most part taken for barely, at which saying the gentlemen sore disdained.

Thus in Caleys rested the king and the queen until the.x. day of July. Then y^
kings grace with goodly repair rode to the town of Grauelyng in Flaunders
there that night to rest and se the Emperor, on ye king were waityng the lord
Cardinal, Dukes, Marquises, Earls, bishops, Barons, knights, and gentlemen.
The noble Emperor passed the water of Grauelyng, and at a place called Waell,
there he met and received the king of England, the Emperor made such semblant
of love to all the court of England that he wan ye love of Thenglishmen, and so
passed the Emperor and the king of England to Grauelyng where the king lodged
the best that might be, all lords, gentlemen, yomen and all sorts of
Englishmen from the highest to the lowest were so chered and feasted, with so
loving manner that much they praised Themperors court. In Grauelyng was the
Emperors Aunte Margarete, she welcomed the king and other noble men of the
realm.

When the French king and his lords had knowledge of ye metyng of the Emperor
and the king of England in the town of Grauelynge, they were therewith greatly
grieved, as by many things appeared, for after the Englishmen were in France
disdained, and in their suites there greatly deferred and had little right and
much less favor, so from day to day still more and more began hartbrennyng,
and in conclusion open war did arise between the two realms.

Wednisday the.xi. day of July, the Emperor and the lady Margarete came with
the king of England to the town of Caleys, the Emperor and the lady Margaret
were lodged in Staple hall, and al gentlemen and other lodged in other places
right well prepared of all necessaries for their coming: and for solas was
builded a banquetyng house, 80. foot round, after a goodly devise, builded
upon Mastes of ships in such manner as I think was never seen, for in it was
the whole spear portrated, which by reason of the great wind that blewe,
could not be acheued, the same day at night, the king and.xv. persons were
apparelled all in black Ueluet covered with cloth of gold, cut on the velvet,
fastened with knottes of gold, on the which knottes honge spangels of gold like
tuftes, and bonettes of the same and clokes of crimosyn Satin and cloth of gold
wrapped trauers, and their buskyns of the same clothe of gold. All these lusty
maskers went to the Emperors lodgyng and were received and in the chamber of
presens dau^ced and reuelled, the which at the Emperors request, the king and
other theimselues disuisered, whereby the king was known: then the king took
his leave and departed for that night.

Tewsday the.xii. day of Iulye, because the banquet house could not be
finished, the Emperor and the lady Margaret supped with the king and the queen
at the Checker, where the same night after supper reuelled lxxxxvi. Maskers:
after the reuelles was a banquet: After which banquet the king brought the
Emperor and the lady Margaret to the Staple, and after withdrewe him.

This night was.viii. compaignies of maskers, and in every compaignie.xii.
persons all in gold, silver and velvet richely apparelled, but because the
rome was small, the show was the less.

In these reuelles were put in maskers apparel diverse gentlemen of the French
court vnwetyng to ye king or any other that bare rule, for diverse young
gentlemen of the French court favored more the French party, then the
Emperors party, through which means they saw and much more heard then they
should have done.

Friday, the.xiii. day of July, the Emperor did intend to have departed from
Caleys, but the counsel was such that he departed not that night. The
charters before time concluded, there were read, and to the Emperor declared
all the whole articles of high peace and league tripertite, to which the
French king had assented and fully contented, and for the more exemplificacion
of the same, he sent thelorde de Roche with letters of crede^ce to signify to
the Emperors Majesty that to the same articles he the French king promised in
the word of a king as prince faithful, to observe and keep for him and his
realm and subjects. Thus by the lord de Roche in the Emperors presence and
before the king of England in the name of his master there showed the French
kings will in the town of Caleys with many high and urgent causes concerning
the princes, whereby the Emperor went not out of Calays that night, by which
abode the Emperors servants were much in doubt of the Emperors person.

Saturday the.xiiii. day of July, about none the Emperor took leave of the
queen of England his aunte and of her train of ladies, the king with all his
nobles conducted the Emperor on hisway to a village toward Flanders called
Wael, where the Emperor enbrased the king, and him betoke to almighty God, and
the king gave to him a courser of Naples richely apparelled.

The king took leave of the Duches of Sauoye great aunte to the Emperor and of
all nobles of the Emperors court, and so departed, small time in Calayce the
king made abode, but in goodly have shipped and with the queen and all other
nobles in safety took land. And after passed the time of Summer with huntyng
and other sportes honorably and made no great iestes this year.

This year the king kept his Christmas at his Manner of Grenewiche with much
noblenes and open court. And the.x. day of February in his own person Iusted
to all comers, and the.xii. day his grace and therle of Deuonshyre with.iiii.
aids answered at the Turnay all comers which were.xvi. persons, noble and
rich was their apparel, but in feats of arms the king excelled the rest.

In this time was Edward Duke of Buckyngham accused to the king of high
treason, The duke of Buckingham accused,
wherefore the kings grace by the advice of his cou^sail, sent and directed his
letters to the said duke, being at his manner of Thornbury in the county of
Gloucester, that incontinent he should come to his presence all excuses laid
aside. Also the king gave commandment to sir Willyam Cumpton, sir Richard
Weston, and sir Willyam Kyngston knights for the kings body, to take with
them secret power and also seriauntes at arms, and that they should wisely
take heed that when the duke had received the kings letters, he should not
convey himself, which they wisely accomplished.

The said Duke upon the sight of the kings letters removed, and so iornied
till he came to Wyndsore, and there offered at S. George, and always not far
from him awaityng his demeanor, were the same knights liyng. The duke lodged in
Wyndsore for that night, and as it was well proved, he meruailously feared,
insomuche that he called unto him a servant of the kings named Thomas Ward,
the same Thomas Ward was gentleman Herbenger for the king, and demanded of him
what he made there, who answered, saying that there lay his office, there the
duke perceived that he could not escape. And so much was he in spirit troubled
that as he was at breakefast his meat would not down, yet he made good
countenance, and shortly took his horse, and so rode till he came to Tothill
besides Westminster where he took his barge: before this time was the dukes
chancellor taken and as a prisoner kept in the tower, which had confessed
matter of high treason concerning the kings person.

When the Duke was in his barge, he commanded to land at my lord Cardinals
bridge, where he landed with four or five of his servants, desiryng to see
the same lord Cardinal, but to him was answered how the same lord was
diseased, well said the duke yet will I drink of my lords wine or I pass,
then a gentleman of my lords brought the Duke with much reverence into the
Seller, where the duke drank.

When he saw and perceived no chere to him was made, he changed color and so
departed to his barge, saying to his servants, I meruail where my chauncellor
is, that he comes not to me, not knowing that he was in prison.

The duke thus in his barge coming toward London, sir Henry Marney captain
of the Kings Guard, on him attendyng C. yomen of the Kings guard in a barge
on the river of Thames met the same duke, and without abode borded the dukes
barge and him in the Kings name attached. And then from him were put his
servants, and the duke was brought to the Haie wharfe and there landed, the
dukes servants were commanded to go to the Manner of the Rose in saint
Larence Pountnay, and there to abide till the Kings pleasure were further
known.

Sir Henry Marnay brought the duke through the Thames street to the Tower of
London, the people much mused what the cause might he, and for troth till it
was known, among them was much speaking. There was also attached a Monk of
a Charter house besides Bristow called Henton, also Master Ihon Delaker the
Dukes Confessor, and the dukes Chauncellor before mentioned, al were in the
Tower prisoners. The.xvi. day of April was the same Duke brought to the Tower.
Alas the while that ever ambicion should be the loss of so noble a man, and so
much in the kings favor, by him all lords and other may beware how they give
credence to false prophesies or false hypocrites. For a Monk of the Charter
house showed the duke that he should be king of England, which to the kings
person could be no higher treason. Alas that ever he gave credence to such a
false traitor.

The.xiii. year.
IN this time inquiries were made in diverse shyres of Edward duke of Buckyngham
being prisoner in the tower of London, where, by the knights and gentlemen,
there he was endited of high treason for certain words spoken by the same duke
in Blechy^gly to the lord Aburgenye, the same Lord was attached for
consailement, and the Lord Mountague the kings Cosyn and both led to the
Tower. And sir Edward Neuel knight, brother to the said lord Aburgeney
forbidden the kings presence.

The Duke of Northfolke was made by the kings letters patentes high Steward of
England, to accomplish the high cause of appele of the Piere or Pieres of the
realm, and to decerne and judge the causes of the piers. etc.

Wherefore shortly after was made in Westmynster hall a scaffolde for the lords
and a presence for a Judge railed and counter railed about, and barred with
degrees. The Duke of Northfolke was chief Judge, and many Pieres of the
realm, as the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquis Dorcet, the Earls of Worcester,
Deuonshyre, Essex, Shrewisbury, Kent, Oxford, and Darby, the lord of S. Ihons,
lord Delaware, lord Fitz Warren, lord Wylloughby, lord Broke, lord Cobham,
lord Harbert, and the lord Morley, satte as Peers and judges upon the same duke
of Buckyngham.

When the lords had taken their places, sir Thomas Louel and sir Richard
Chomley knights, brought the duke to the bar with thaxe of the Tower before
him, who humbly bareheaded reuere^ced the duke of Northfolke, and after all the
lords and the kings learned counsel, Then the Clarke of ye counsel said, sir
Edward Duke of Buckyngha^ hold up thy hand, thou art endited of high treason,
for that thou traitorously have conspired and ymagined as farte as in thee lay
to shorten the life of our sovereign lord the king: of this treason how will thou acquit thee, the Duke answered by my Peers.

And when thenditement was openly read, the Duke said it is false and untrue,
and conspired and forged to bring me to my death, and that will I prove,
allegyng many reasons to falsefy the indictment, and against his reasons the
kings Atturnay alleged the examinacions, co^fessions and proves of witnesses.

The Duke desired the witnesses to be brought forth, then was brought before
him sir Gylbert Perke priest his Chauncellor, first accusor of the same Duke,
Master Ihon Delacourt priest, the Dukes Confessor and his own hand writing
laid before him to the accusement of the duke. Charles Kneuet Esquyer Cosyn to
the Duke, and a Monk, Prior of the Charterhouse besides Bathe, which like a
false ypocrite had enduced the Duke to the treason, and had diverse times said
to the duke that he should be king of England, but the duke said that in
himself he never consented to it. Diverse presumpcions and accusementes were
laid to him by Charles Kneuet, which he would fain have covered. The
deposicions were read, and the deponentes were delivered as prisoners to the
officers of the Tower.

Then spoke the Duke of Northfolke, and said my lord, the king our sovereign
Lord has commanded, that you shall have his laws ministered with favor and
right to you. Wherefore if you have any other thing to say for your self you
shallbe hard. Then he was commanded to withdraw him, and so was led into
Paradise a house so named. The lords went to counsel a great while and after
took their places. Then said the Duke of Northfolke to the Duke of Suffolk,
what say you of sir Edward Duke of Buckyngham touching the high treasons? the
Duke of Suffolk answered, he is guilty, and so said the Marquis and all the
other Earls and lords: Thus was this prince duke of Buckyngham found guilty
of high treason by a Duke, a Marquis, vii. Earls, and.xii. Barons.

The Duke was brought to the bar sore chafyng and swette meruailously, after
he had made his reverence, he paused a while. The duke of Northfolke as a Judge
said, sir Edward, you have heard how you be indicted of high treason, you
pleaded thereto not guilty, puttyng your self to the Peers of the realm, the
which have found you guilty: then the Duke of Northfolke wept and said, you
shall be l^dde to the kings prison and there laid on a Herdill and so drawn to
the place of execucion, The duke of Bu^kyngha^s judgment.
and there to be hanged, cut down a live, your members to be cut of and
cast into the fire, your bowels brent before you, your head smytten of, and
your body quartered and divided at the kings will, and God have mercy on your
soul. Amen.

The Duke of Buckingham said, my lord of Northfolke, you have said as a
traitor should be said unto, but I was never none, but my lords I nothing
malign for that you have done to me, but the eternal God forgive you my death
and I do: I shall never sue to the king for life, howbeit he is gracious prince,
and more grace may come from him then I desire. I desire you my lords and all
my fellows to pray for me.

Then was the edge of the axe turned toward him, and so led into a barge, sir
Thomas Louell desired him to sytte on the cusshyns and carpet ordained for him,
he said nay, for when I went to Westminster I was duke of Buckyngham, now I am
but Edward Bowhen the most caitiffe of the world. Thus they landed at the
Temple, where received him sir Nicholas Uawse and sir Willyam Sands Baronetes
and led him through the city, who desired ever the people to pray for him, of
whom some wept and lamented, and said, this is the end of evil life. God forgive
him, he was a proud prince, It is pity that he behaved him so against his
king and liege lord, who^ God preserve. Thus about.iiii. of the clock he was
brought as a cast man to the Tower.

Frydaie the.xvii. day of May, about.xi. of the clock. This duke we a great
power was delivered to Ihon Kyeme and Ihon Skeuyngton shyriffes, who led him to
the skaffolde on Tower hill, where he said he had offended the kings grace
through negligence and lack of grace, and desired al noblemen to beware by
him, and al men to pray for him, and that he trusted to dye the kings true
man. Thus mekely with an a^e he took his death, on whose soul Jesus have mercy.
Then the Augustine friars took the body and head and buried them. Alas that
ever the grace of truth was wtdrawen from so noble a man, that he was not to
his king in alegeaunce as he ought to have been, such is the end of ambicion,
the end of false prophesies, the end of evil life and evil counsel.

About this time Fraunces the French king made open war against the Emperor
Charles both by land and sea. The Provinces of Aragon, Castle, and all Spain,
Germany, Brabant, Flaunders and the steades maintained the party of the
Emperor. The kings highness co^sideryng ye murder and effusion of Christen
blood, and the trouble that might ensue to all the princes of Christendom, by
invasion of the great Turk, sent the Cardinal of York his Chau^cellor by name
lord Thomas Wols^y to his town of Calayce to entreat an amity and peace
between those two mighty princes. For this voyage great preparacion was made,
not only for him but also for the Earl of Worcestre then lord Chamberlayn,
the lord of saint John's, the lord Ferryes, the lord Harbert, the bishop of
Duresme, the bishop of Ely, the Primate of Armicane, sir Thomas Boleyn, sir
Ihon Peche, sir John Hussy, sir Richard Wyngfelde, sir Henry Gildforde, and
many other knights, Esquiers, gentlemen, Doctors, and learned men. And thus
honorably accompanied he rode through London the.xxv. day of July, and at
Thomas Beckettes house the Maier and Aldermen took leave of him, praiyng God to
send him good speed, Thus passed he to Ca^torbury where tharchebishop, and the
bishop of Ca^torbury and other places received him in pontificalibus and
brought him to his lodgyng under Canape to the bishops palayce: the.viii. day
of Iulye he came to Dover: the xx. day he and the other lords with their
retinues took passage, and arrived at Calayce in safety, where the lord Deputy
and counsel received them with much honor, and lodged the Cardinal in the
Staple hall.

Shortly after whose ariuall, came thither ye Chauncelor of France, and the
County de Palace with.iiii.C. horse, as ambassadors from the French king. And
likewise from the Emperor came great Ambassadors, and when they satte in
counsel, the Emperors Ambassade showed their Commission and power. And even so
did the French kings Ambassade, which was more larger then the Emperors
commission.

Thus when the grudges were declared on both sides, when the Emperors
Ambassadors consented to peace, the French kings would not. And when the
French Ambassadors consented to peace, the Emperors would not. The Cardinal
then would have knitted the Emperor, the king our sovereign lord, the French
king, and the bishop of Rome in a league and amity together: the other
Ambassadors had no such Commission, especially the bishop of Romes, whereupon
letters were sent to Rome in all have and the Frenchmen tarried in Calayce till
he returned, and beheld the town, with which the counsel of Calaice were not
contented. Hereupon the Cardinal rode to the Emperor accompanied with his
Ambassadors (and left the French ambassadors in Calaice to abide his return)
and passed by Grauelyng, Du^kirke, Newport, Owdenborow, and sundry times in the
way he was encou^tred and received with noble men. And without Bruges he was
received with many noble men, and many lords and other of the Emperors court,
and a mile without Bruges the Emperor his own person met him, and showed to
him and to the other lords and gentlemen of England gracious countenance, and
so accompanied y^ Cardinal into the town, where great multitude of people
beheld them, and so rode to the Emperors palayce where he lighted, and first
embrased the Cardinal and after all the lords, knights, and gentlemen of
England. It is to suppose the Emperor knew of the Commission given to the
said Cardinal, which had the kings power as if his grace had been present,
and also had the great seal with him, which had not been seen before, or else
the Emperor would not have done him so high honor and reverence.

The English lords, knights, esquiers, yomen of the kings guard and other
being to the number of.iiii.C.lx. horse, were well lodged every man after his
degree, and every lodgyng furnished with fuel, bread, bear, wine, Beues,
Muttons, Ueles, Lambs, Uenison, and all manner deintie viand as well in fish as
flesh, with no lack of spices and bankettyng dishes.

The next day after the great chere made to ye lord Cardinal and to all his
lords, knights, gentlemen, and all other lords and knights of England (in
whose presence) the Cardinal made his proposicion concerning peace to be had
between the said Emperor and the French king declaryng the calamities, misery,
and wretchedness that came by war: and the commodities, benefit, and wealth
that came by peace, concord and tra^qulitie, which proposicion continued a
great while: and when the Cardinal had made an end, the Emperor himself
answered and said: The law God byndeth every man to claim and ask his right,
and that the same law byndeth no man to hold, keep, and withstand another
man's right. Our cosyn of France does withholde our rightes and patrimonies
which we have princely desired, and eftsoon will, and if he will render to us
our said rightes and patrimonies, we are contented to have peace with him and
his subjects, if not we trust in God and our right that the troubles by your
fatherhed rehearsed, shall come upon him and his adherentes. And for the titles
of our regalitie, to put that to the bishop of Rome, we do consider that king
Edward of England the third of that name of noble memory, warred by just
title to recover the realm of France from Philip de Ualois, which title by
intercession was put to the bishop of Rome and his court, to discuss and
expended there by y^ space of.xxiii. years undetermined, notwithstanding great
pursuit and labor was made to have it ended: Such like time should be to us
tedious, wherefore we entende by the aid of God to follow our title.

The Cardinal replied and declared the league that was between the three
mightyest princes of the world, that is to say, the Emperor, the king our
sovereign lord Henry the.viii. and the French king, and how that to the
prince that first moved war, the other two should be enemies unto him, and
said, behold the mighty power and puissaunt realm, riches, ships,
vitailes, and ordinance, lords, chiualry, horsemen, archers and comminaltie,
this is in the high and mighty king of England my sovereign lord, and he that
first war begins, by the said league my said sovereign lord to his honor
may lefully spr^d his baner and make war in defense of his friend. For this
and other things my sovereign lord desires of your highness and Maiesrie the
consent of peace.

My lord Cardinal said the Emperor, I esteem most the honor of my dear uncle
the king of England and trust in his assurance, that neither his royal
person, his realm, his power, Nauye, nor ordinance shall be but to our aid in
assistyng our tried title, nor will consent to any thing in dishonoryng us or
our Empire: God defend but we should humble our self to his request, our high
honor reserved. Lord God who may esteem more higher injuries and wrongs then
we in our person, our predecessors, and our loving subjects have endured by
the house of France. My lord Cardinal said the Emperor, their pride with our
honor we may and must apprehende and overthrow by the help of God: With these
words the counsel brake up.

All the lords and men of honor of England that day dyned in the Emperors
court.

When they were set and served, it came so to pass that an honorable man of
the Emperors as he sat at dinner said thus. It is thought that the kings
Majesty of England entendeth to make a peace. Alas that ever he should ymagyn
a thing so much to the dishonor of the Emperor. The king is his uncle, is it
not come to his hearing that all the world hears? It was so that by assent
of the bishop of Rome and other princes to make peace with us, the French
party after the battle of Gyngate obtained by Maximilian then archeduke of
Osteriche, where every noble manne of us fought with the Frenchmen quarter
naked, and slew of them a marvelous number. They desired the daughter of
Maximilian named Margarete to wife, which lady is Duches of Sauoy and yet
living, and she being like an Emperors child was delivered into their hands
as queen of the realm, with diverse tounes in Picardie re^dred with her and
party of high Burgonie, and treasure marvelous. Now^ sithen the same
Maximilian had spoused Jane daughter and heir of Fraunces duke of Britaigne,
which land the Frenchemen over ra^ne and spoiled, and she constrained to sue
unto Charles king of France for a safe conduict to pass through his realm to
Maximilian her spouse, and upon the same safe conduict granted, the said lady
Jane passing through France with a small company, was by y^ same Charles taken
at Ambois and there married her against her will, whereupon he forsook the lady
Margarete and sent her again to her father themperor without redyliuer or
rendryng again the tounes that were delivered with her. And where as the duke
of Geldre is subject to the Emperor, is he not yet at this day by the
procurement of the French king, rebel? And where also by just title the
realm of Naples ought to be united to the croune of Castle, did not the
French king feign a journey into the holy land pretending title by Ieniamy
brother to the great Turk being then captive in Rome, and by a crafty treaty
obtained the said Ieniamy, and so passed into Naples without peril, and seized
all the land into his hands, and then prisoned he the same Ieniamy? Thus to
the great damage of Castle, he made claim to Naples by Margaret queen of
England late wife to Henry the vi.

The king of Nauerne is evermore vassal to the house of Aragon and Castle, yet
the French king caused him to rebel, hopyng thereby to subdue the said
countries.

Of late days the French king by false treason caused sir Robert de la March
to submit himself to the Emperors Majesty, who received him upon his oath
and fidelity, pardonyng all offenses past. Is not this false traitor returned,
and is of the French party? How may that court, that counsel, that king,
that realm that consents to treason and perjury by maintenance of traitors
be called honorable? Has not the French king sworn, and is bounden never to
retain the Switchers in wages to make war against the Emperor? and yet does
at this day, And albeit that his Majesty speaks not of these things, yet he
well considers them. I trust verily said this noble man that God says, v^^e
Burgoigne, every man that heard this rehersall, knew that it was true, howbeit
he was not answered, but some English knights said, sir you have said well,
and as God will all must be. Thus was this narracion ended.

In this season the Emperor gatte the town of Mewzon: Also of the Emperors
party a great army arrived in the Duchy of Mylan and also the Emperors power
besieged the noble city of Messiers, but the captain called Franciscus was
suspected of treason, for he removed with the host from the seage without
knowledge of the Emperor.

The Emperor made a seage volant about the city of Turnay, for the reskue
whereof and also of Messiers the French king made a great army and him self in
person.

During this seage the Frenchemen took a Spaniardes ship laden with
Englishemens goods at Margate within the kings streams, not without great
slaughter on both parties, yet the Frenchemen were C.lx. men, and of Spaniardes
and Englishemen only.xxv.

The king of Denmark Cristianus came to se themperor his brother in law being
a stately prince, yet means was made that the lord Cardinal and he spoke
together without great sign of amity.

The lord Cardinal after he had soiorned in Bruges by the space of xiii. days
and concluded diverse matters with the Emperor and accomplished his commission:
he took leave of his Majesty, and likewise did all the noblemen of England,
and after convenient iornies arrived with all his company at Calyce, where
thembassadors of France tarried him, and immediately after his ariuyng he
treated with the^ of peace, yet not so ernestly as he did before and that
perceived well the said Ambassadors and wrote thereof to the French king, yet
the wealth and prosperity of both ye realms and their subjects were highly
reasoned between the Cardinal and the said Ambassadors, especially for
fishyng, whereupon was concluded that the subjects of both the princes might
freely fish on the sea, and repair to any port of the one or the other prince
without robbyng, spoylyng, or taking unto the second day of February next.

The French king with a mighty army and himself in person repaired to the
country of Cambray, mindyng to pass the streites, but they were wtstanded by
the Emperors power, yet he continued there from October unto Nouembre without any
thing doing, to the great displeasure of the French king. The duke Daleson
hearing that, made preparacions with the Almaynes to pass the marrys by the
point Dassans and there the Almaynes had made bridges of Pypes and vessels, and
brought thither their great ordinance. The Emperor being in the town of
Uale^cian and thereof advertised, caused strong watch to be made, and as they
would have passed, the bastard Emery, and the captain of Gaunt with xii.C.
men met with them, where was a great conflicte and many men slain, and at
the last the Almaines were put to flight and their bridges and other provisions
broken: Of the French party were slain in this conflicte.xiiii.C. men, and of
the Burgonians were slain the bastard Emery, the captain of Gaunte and
iiii.C. men.

The lord Cardinal after he had long treated with the Ambassadors of France
and could not bring them to no conformity of peace, he sent to the Emperor
the lord of saint Ihons and sir Thomas Boleyn knight to advertise his Majesty
thereof.

Likewise the said lord Cardinal sent to the French king the Earl of
Worcester and the bishop of Ely to exhort his grace to peace, he hard them,
but he gave them but few words to answer, and after they had been.xix.
or.xx. days in his host, they took leave and returned to Calyce.

During the continuance of the Cardinal in Calayce all writtes and patentes
were there by him sealed and no shyriffes chosen for lack of his presence.

The king of Hungary sent an Ambassador to the kings highness for aid against
the Turk, whom the Cardinal honorably entertained during his abode in
Calayce. His coming was for aid as men said against the French king.

The lord Cardinal after the return of the English Ambassadors from the
Emperor and from the French king, took shippyng and landed at the port of
Dover, the.xxvii. day of November, and there took his journey to Blechyngly,
where the kings grace welcomed him, geuyng him also thanks for his great
pains and trauail.

This time the French king laid seage to the town and Castle of Hedyng, the
Burgonions perceiuyng they were not furnished for the defense thereof, forsook
the said town and castle and fled into Flaunders to no little reioysyng of
the said Frenchemen.

The Admyrall of France named Mounsire Bonyfet with a puissaunt army made
sign as though he would pass into Nauerne, howbeit suddenly he reculed with
his host and beseaged the town of Fontraby in Biskay, and brake the first,
second, and third wall thereof with his ordinance meruailously: And after gave
a fresh assault to the same. The Spaniardes (notwithstanding that the
ordinance was carried into Nauerne for defense thereof) defended theimselfes
manfully and slew of the Frenchemen.vi. hundredth and moo, and of the
Spaniardes.lx. slain. Then the captain of Fontraby made search what vitailes
was in the town, and found that there was but for two meles, he called the
inhabitauntes and men of war together declaryng their great necessity, and
said the battery of the walls discorages us not, but the great necessity of
victalles, wherefore we must do like the Wolf that runs from the wood for
hunger to his death, and considering the great scarcity of vitailes in Byskay,
by means whereof we cannot be vitailed we must needs render the town.
Nevertheless they kept the town seven days after that they had neither
bread, flesh fruit nor oils in the same, but only herbs and water, yet at
last herbs fail^d also, by means whereof they rendered the town by
composicion, and or the Frenchemen entered, they delivered the Englishemen all
their goods out of the town.

The French king liyng enbattailed in the country of Cambray suddenly brake
his camp, not much to his honor. Great wars was this time in Italye, in so
much that the Emperors host wanne the city and country of Mylan to the
high displeasure of the French king, for he lost there many of his nobles and
other capitaines and men of war.

Thus the French king returned into his country without reskuyng the city of
Turnay, nevertheless he sent them a letter which was taken by the people of
the Countye of Nasson, the tenor whereof follows.

Trusty and well-beloved we great you well, lettyng you to we^e that daily
before us appears your true faithful services, by that you abode within our
city of Turnay with great ieopardie, to the much honor of us and our realm,
and to your praise and manly fame for ever, and us to be your good lord for
the deme^ites of your so high services. And where as we intended the relief and
reskue of you and our said subjects and city of Turnay, we considering the
weal of our person and realm, have removed us from that purpose. Wherefore
we may no more say unto you but God and Mounsire saint Denis be your succors.

When the County of Nasson knew that no reskew should come, he then sent for
more people and ordinance and planted siege on all parties of the city. Then
the captain of the Castle and Provost of the city after they knew of the
French kings retreite, and after long consultacion amongst them had, rendered
the City and Castle by appointment, that is to say, that the Burgeises should
have.xv. days to depart with bag and baggage, leuyng behynd them all the
ordinances as well of the Castle as of the City. Thus was the Castle and City
of Turnay rendered into the Emperors hands the last day of November, the year
of our lord God M.D.xxi.

This year many goodly and gorgious Mo^meries were made in the court to the
great rejoicing of the Queen and ladies and other nobles being there.

The last day of December the Cardinal accompaignied the Emperors Ambassadors
to the court where they were honorably received and highly feasted during their
abode there, and many sumptuous and gorgious disguisynges, enterludes and
bankettes made in the same season.

Pope Leo dyed and Adryan chosen.
This year was a great pestilence and death in London and other places of the
realm, and many noble capitaines died, as the lord Broke, sir Weston Brown,
sir Ihon Heron, sir Edward, sir Ihon Peche and much other people.

The bishop of London Doctor Fitz James likewise deceased this year, and Doctor
Tunstall was preferred to the same benefice.

The lord Thomas Hawarde earl of Surrey, came out of Ireland to the court
the.xxv. day of January, when he had been there the space of.xx. months in
great trauail and pain, and often times sore troubled by the wild Irishe,
howbeit by his noblenes and manhod he brought the lords of Ireland to the
kings due obeysaunce, and had of them many victories to his perpetual laud
and praise.

The Frenchemen this time spoiled and shamefully robbed the kings subjects on
every coast of the sea, so that wheresoever the king road his poor subjects
came with lamentacions and cries showing his grace of the cruelty of the
Frenchemen and of their inhumaine dealyng with them, but ever the French
Ambassadors promised restitucion of every thing but none was restored.

In this month of January, the king commanded all his ships of war to be
made in a readynes, which was done with all diligence.

About this time the duke of Albany arrived in Scotland, notwithstanding that
the French king swear unto the Cardinal that he should never come into
Scotland without the king our sovereign lords consent, but for all that he
had commission from the French king although the French king wrote to y^ king
that he was entered Scotland without his assent.

The second day of February, the king being at Grenewiche, came thither the
Cardinal with a Legacion from Leo bishop of Rome, and also his ambassador, on
who^ waited many a nobleman, the king met them at his chamber door welco^myng
them as though they had both come from Rome. Then said the Cardinal, high and
victorious king it has pleased our lord God to indue your grace with a great
multitude of manifold graces as a king elect in favor of the high heaven, and
so appears presently by your noble person, so formed and figured in shape
and stature with force and pulchritude, which signifies the present pleasure
of our lord God wrought in your noble grace. And further he praised his
wisdom, prudence, and learning, with many other goodly words in the praise
of his most noble grace. And finally the Cardinal declared how the said bishop
of Rome had sent his highness an Act in Bull under lead, declaryng therein his
grace to be the defendor of the Christian faith, Defender of the faith.
and his successors for evermore.

And when his grace had received the said Bull and caused it to be read and
published, he went to his chapel to hear Mass accompanied with many nobles
of his realm and also with Ambassadors of sundry princes, the Cardinal being
reuested to sing Mass, the Earl of Essex brought the Basin with water, the
duke of Suffolk gave thassay, the duke of Northfolke held the towell, and so
proceeded to Mass. And that done gave unto all them that heard the Mass clean
remission and blessed the king and the Queen and all the people: then was the
Bull eftsoon declared, and trumpettes blew, the shalmes and saggebuttes played
in honor of the kings new style. Thus his highness went to dinuer. In the
mids whereof, the king of Heraldes and his compaignie began the larges,
criyng. Henricus dei graria rex. Anglie, and Francie, defensor fide^, and
dominus H^^ernie, thus ended the dinner, with much habundance of vitaill and
wine, to all manner of people.

The.x. day of February, the Lord Hoote chief Baron of the kings Eschequer
gave over his office, and for him was admitted by the Cardinal, master Ihon
Fitz James, a right honorable man and well learned.

In this time was much business between themperor and the French king,
wherefore the king sent to the sea six good ships, well manned and vitailed
for the war: the Admiral was called Christopher Coo^a man expert on the sea,
for saffegarde of the Merchauntes, and other the kings subjects, that were
grievously spoiled and robbed on the sea, by Frenchemen, Scotts and other
rouers.

This time the.viii. day of February, the lord Dacres Wardein of the Marches
of Scotland, entered into Scotland with.v.C. men, by the Kings
commandment, and there Proclaimed that the Scotts should come into the kings
peace, by the first day of March following, or else to stand at their
perilles, the Duke of Albany being then within five miles, with a mighty
power of Scotts.

The.xi. day of February, sir George Neuell lord a Burgayny, being then
prisoner in the Tower was brought to Westminster, and there in the kings Be^che
con^essed his enditement of imprision, in the cause of Edward late Duke of
Buckyngham to be true, and after the open confession thereof, led again to the
Tower.

The lord Montacute the kings cosyn, was about this time reconciled to his
graces favor, which had been prisoner in the Tower, with sir Edward Neuell
knight, this sir Edward Neuell was forbidden the kings presence, for bearyng
favor to the Duke of Buckyngham.

This year the second of March* certain noble men of the Empire arrived in
England to pass into Spain, who were honorably received, and in honor of them
great Iustes and triumphs were made, and that finished and done, they took
their leave and departed on their journey.

Also this time commission was given throughout the realm, for general
musters to be had, to know what power might be made within the same, and also
men sworn of what substance and lands they were of, And the Cardinal
advertised of the same: not without grudgyng of the people, and marueilyng why
they should be sworn for their own goods.

The city of London was this month advertised of the coming of the Emperor,
wherefore was made great preparacion: and the citezens sent the kings grace
one hundred tall men well harnissed, to furnishe his navy, appointed to keep
the narowe seas.

The French king certified the kings highness, by his letters dated in March,
how the Graunde capitain of France, the County de Palais, Monsire de Lescue*
and other noble men of France, had won the town of Milain, which was not
true, for within five or six days after, it was evidently known that the
Frenchemen were beaten back, and had won nothing, to their great shame and
reproach.

Moreover the same season the French king wrote his lettters to the Seignory
and commonaltie of Gean, to send him three Carectes, and six Galeis furnished
for the wars, unto his port of Breast, to maintein his wars against the
foresaied Emperor, who made him by their letters such a reasonable excuse,
that he was contented to spare them for that time.

The kings highness kept this year his Easter at his manor of Richemont, and
caused his amner to make enquire, eight miles round about thesaid manor, what
poor people was in every parish. And for the eschuyng of murder, that most
commonly fortuned every goodfridaie, by reason of the great resort of poor
people, his grace caused them to be refre^hed with his almose at home at their
houses.

About this time a rouer or theif of Scotland, called Duncan Camel, was
after long fight taken on the sea, by a Squier of Cornwall called master Ihon
Arondell, and presented to the kings highness, who committed him to the Tower
of London, where he remaigned prisoner a long season after.

In the month of March, as you have hard before, came certain noble men from
the Emperor to the king, which the more to solace them enterprised a Iustes,
he himself was chief on the one side, his courser was barded in clothe of
silver, of Denmark embrodered with.L.L.L. of Gold, and under the letters a
heart of a man wounded, and great rolls of gold with black letters, in
which was written, mon nauera, put together it is, ell mon ceur a nauera, she
has vvounded my heart, and the same suite was his base.

Then followed sir Nicholas Carewe, his base and barde was white Damask, on
which was embraudered with Clothe of gold: a prison an^ a man lokyng out at a
grate, and over the prison came from the prisoner a roll, in which was
written in French, in prison I am at liberty, and at liberty I am in prison,
and all his apparel was guarded with shakelles of silver.

Then followed therle of Devonshire, the lord Roos in one suite, their apparel
was white velvet, embraudered with clothe of gold, wrought in device an heart,
trauersed cross wise with a chain, the which divided the bard in four
quarters, in two quarters was a hand of gold holdyng a spear of the world,
on the other two quarters was two hands holdyng two plumes of feathers, and
on the borders were written my heart is between joy and pein.

Then followed Anthony Kyngston, and Anthony Kneuet, their apparel was a heart
bound in a blewe lace, embroudered on Crimosyn satin* and written about with
letters of gold, my heart is bound.

Nicholas Darrel had a bard and base of black satin, embraudered full of
hearts, turned or broken of gold, and written in letters of silver. my heart
is broken.

Last of that bend was Anthony Broune, which had a bard of silver full of
speeres of the world broken, set on hearts broken al of gold written about in
letters of b^a^ke (...) remedy, without remedy.

Then entered the Duke of Suffolk and his bend, all in bardes and bases of
russet velvet and clothe of silver, embraudered with branches of paunces of
gold, at these Iustes were many speres broken, which the straungiers highly
commended.

The third day of March* the Cardinal made to the king and the Ambassadors,
a great and a co^^ly banquet, and after that, a play and a Mask, their
garments were rui^et satin and yelowe, all the one side was yelowe, face and
leg, and all the other side was russet.

On shrouetewes^aie at night, thesaid Cardinal to the king and amba^sadors,
made another supper, and after supper they came into a great chamber hanged
with Arras, and there was a clothe of estate, and many br^^unches, and on every
branch.xxxii. forchettes of wax, and in the nether end of the same chamber
was a castle, in which was a principal Tower, in which was a Cresset
burning: and two other less Towers stood on every side, warded and
embattailed, and on every Tower was a banner, one banner was of in rent hearts,
the other was a ladies hand g^^yng a man's heart, the third banner was a
ladies hand turnyng a man's heart: this castle was kept with ladies of
strange names the first beauty, the second Honor, the third Perseueraunce,
the ^ourth Kyndn^s, the fifth Constance, the sixte ^^unrie, the seuenthe
Mercy, and the ^ight Pity: these eight ladies had Millian gounes of white
satin, every Lady had her name embraudered with gold, on their heddes calls,
and Millein bonettes of gold, with Iwelles. Under nethe the basse fortress of
the castle were other eight ladies, whose names were, Dangier, Disdain,
Gelousie, Unkindness, Scorn, Malebouche, Straungenes, these ladies were tired
like to women of Inde. Then entered eight Lords in clothe of gold cappes and
all, and great mantell clokes of blewe satin, these lords were named, A
morus, Noblenes, Youth, Attendaunce L^yaltie, Pleasure, Gentleness, and
Liberty, the king was chief of this compaignie, this compaignie was led by one
all in crimosin satin with burning flames of gold, called Ardent Desire,
which so moved the Ladies to give over the Castle, but Scorn and Disdain
said they would hold the place, then Desire said the ladies should be won*
and came and encoraged the knights, then the lords ran to the c^stle, (at
which time without was shot a great peale of gunnes) and the ladies defended
the castle with Rose water and Comfirtes, and the lords threw in Dates and
Orenges, and other fruits made for pleasure, but at the last the place was
won, but Lady Scorn and her compaignie stubb^^nely defended them with boows
and ba^les, till they were driven out of the place and ded. Then the lords
took the ladies of honor as prisoners by the hands, and brought them down,
and daunced together very pleasauntly, which much pleased the strangers, and
when they had daunced their fill, then all these disuisered themselfes and were
known: and then was there a costly banquet, and when all was done, the
straungiers took their leave of the king and the Cardinal, and so departed
into Flaunders, geuyng to the king much commendacion.

The king like a prince which forseeth all things, saw what war was likely
to ensue, caused the earl of Surtey his high Admiral, to put in readiness his
navy, both for the conduictyng of the Emperor into England, and also for
the defense of his subjects, which were daily robbed and spoiled on the sea,
which lord Admiral took such diligence with the help of sir Willyam Fitz
Willyam his Uice Admiral, that all the ships by the beginning of April, were
rigged and trimmed, and in especial the Henry grace of due, the kings great
ship, was brought out of the river of Thamis into the Dounes, ready to sail
whether God and the king would.

In this year at the Assise, kept at the castle of Cambridge in Lent, the
Justices, and all the gentlemen, Bailiffes and other, resortyng thither, took
such an infeccion, whether it were of the savor of the prisoners, or of the
filthe of the house, that many gentlemen, as sir Ihon Cut, sir Giles Alyngton
knights, and many other honest yomen thereof died, and all most all which
were there present, were sore sick and narrowly escaped with their lives. And
this year also died Sir Edward Pownynges, knight of the Gartier, sir Ihon
Pechy, and sir Edward Belknap, valiant capitaines, which were suspected to be
poisoned, at a banquet made at Arde, when the two kings met last.

This year also, was not without Pestilence nor Derthe of Corn, for Where was
sold this year in the city of London, for.xx.s. a quarter, and in other
places, for.xxvi.s.viii.d. And in the same year in Dece^ber, died Leo bishop of
Rome, for whom was chosen, one Adria^ borne at Utrike the Emperors school
master. And in the same month Gawan Doglas bishop of Dunkell in Scotland,
fled out of Scotland into England because the Duke of Albany was arrived into
Scotland, and had taken upon him to be governor of the king and the realm to
whom the king assigned an honest pencion to live on. But when the king was
advertised, that the Duke of Albany was arrived into Scotland, and had taken
the rule of the young king, his realm, and he much doubted the sequel of the
matter, considering the Duke to be heir apparent to the Croune of Scotland:
wherefore he sent Clare^seaux king of Arms into Scotland, and with
commandment, that he should declare to the Duke of Albany, that his pleasure
was, that he should depart ye realm of Scotland for two causes, the one,
because it was promised by the French king, at the last metyng, that he
should not come into Scotland, the second was, that the king of England was
uncle to the king of Scotts, and by the very bond of nature, ought to defend
his nephew. Wherefore his nephew being young, and in the custody of him, to
whom, if the should dye, the realm of Scotland should discende, he doubted
lest he might be brought out of the way, as other dukes of Albany before had
served the heirs of Scotland: and if he would not avoid Scotland, then
Clarenseaux was commanded to defy him, which accordyngly did defy him, at
holy Rode house in Edenbrough, to whom he answered, that niether ye French
king, nor the king of England, should let him to come into his natural
country, by their agreement: also as touching the young king, he said, that he
loved him as his sovereign lord, and him would keep and protest, against al
other.

When Clarenseaux had reported his answer to the king, then he knew well that
all this was the French kings dooyng wherefore he provided in all things
accordyngly. The earl of Anguishe of Scotland that had married lady Margaret,
the king our sovereign lords sister, late wife unto king James of Scotland,
that was slain at Floddon field, was by the Duke of Albany, sent by a colored
Ambassade into France, where shortly after his arriuyng, he was by the
French king committed to prison, and his brother likewise, which escaped
after as you shall hear.

Also the.vi. day of March, the French king commanded all Englisheme^nes
goods being in Bordeaux to be attached and put under a rest: and likewise
detained the kings tribute, which he should have out of France, and also the
French queen's dowry, and when the king sent to him for it, he ever gave fair
words, and made delays, but none was paid, and ever the Ambassador promised
fair.

The.xiiii. year.
THe king this year kept the day of The.xiiii. year.
S. George with great solempnitie, at his manor of Richemond where were elect
to the order of the Gartier, Done Ferdinando brother to the Emperor, and
Archduke of Oy^trike, and sir Richard Wyngfeld knight by the Emperors means,
to the which the Emperor had given two hundred pound pencion, out of the house
of Burgoyn, which sir Edward Pounynges before had of the Emperors gift.
During this war between the Emperor and the French king, and the king of
England liyng still an entreator between them, the Englishemen were robbed on
both sides, and when their wines were laden at Bordeaux, and ready to depart,
it was attached, and the Merchauntes put in prison: the poor fishermen on the
coast of England, sometime met with the Frenchemen and them spoiled, but to no
recompense of that they had taken. The Merchauntes of England, that had
factors at Burdeau^, complained to the king of England, and showed him how the
French king, contrary to his league and his safeconduit under his seal, by
his people, had taken their goods, and emprisoned their factors and friends,
and can have no remedy. Likewise complained all the Merchauntes, how their
ships were restrained, in every port of France, and their goods rifeled,
and could have no redress, The king and his counsel, were sorry to here the
co^plaintes of the merchauntes, and so concluded to send for the French
Ambassadors, to whom the Cardinal said: sir how is this chance happened?
you have promised ever in the name of the king your Master, that all leagues,
promises, and couenauntes should be kept, and that full restitucion should be
made of every hurt and damage* and that ferme peace and amity should be
kept: but contrary to your saying our Merchauntes be robbed and spoiled, yea,
although he has granted his safeconduite, yet they be robbed, and stayed at
Bur^eaux, is this the peace that you and your Master has promised to be
kept? is this the amity that he was sworn to keep? Is this the word of a
king? Is this the strength of a prince, to break his safconduite? And where
you advised our merchantes to sue in France for re^itucion, and did warrant
them to be restored, you have put them to come and loss, for they have sued
there long and* pent their goods, without any redress, and now you have
emprisoned them, and kept both them and their goods, is this justice? is this
restitucion? And all this was your procurement, and now see what is come of
your promise, surely this may not be suffered, and beside this the king is
informed, that the king your Master has spoken by him, foul and opprobrious
words yea, in the hearing of the Englishemen which were sore grieved to hear
such words, and were not able to be revenged.

The Ambassador of France said, that it was not so as it was reported: well
said the Cardinal, if you note the counsel of England so light as to tell
fables you be misauised, but I pray you how often times has the king written
to your Master, for restitucion of such robertes as has been dooen, and yet
can have no redress? Wherefore he granted letters of mark, which may s^and
with the league, but Monsire Chas^ilion has taken Merchauntes of England
prisoners, and has lent certain hither for their rau^some, this is open war
and no peace. Master president Polliot or Pulteyne the French Ambassador,
answered* that surely the matters which were alleged against his Master the
French king, were but forged matters and not true: but he said that for a
fruthe* daily in the Court of France, were complaints made against the
Englishemen, for great robberies dooen by them, as well on land as sea,
affirmyng it to be done in the Emperors querell* and yet the French king for
the love he bears to England, lets his subjects to be unhard, although
he daily lament the great injury, done to him and his subjects by
Englishemen: and ther^^ore my lord I pray you, believe no such tales, till I
have told you the truth.

Then the Cardinal called the ^^ure hostages, that lay here for the payment
of money for Turney and they four were delivered, to my lord of saint Ihones
to sir Thomas Louell, to sir Andrew Wyndsore, and to sir Thomas Neuell, every
knight one to keep safe, and none of their country to speak with them
privily, and the Ambassador was commanded to keep his house in silence, and
not to come in presence, till he was sent for, which order sore abashed the
French hostages, and thambassador, but there was no remedy, and commandment
was given to the Mayor of London, to attache all the Frenchmen body and goods,
and them to keep in prison, till he hard farther of the kings pleasure: then
were all the Frenchemen in London and about, arrested and brought to prison,
so that all the prisons in and about London, were full of them, some of them
escaped by speaking Dutche, and said they were Flemynges borne, which was not
tried.

The king for safeguard of his Merchau^tes, sent.xxviii. goodly ships to the
sea, well manned and trimmed for the wars, and seven other ships he sent
toward Scotland, which entered the Frithe* and proferred to enter into the
Scottishe ships that lay in the haven* but the Scotts ran their ships on
land, and the Englishemen followed with boats and landed, and set the ships
on ^ire, and at Lithe took certain prisoners, which they brought into
England, and still the kings great name kept the narrow seas, for then was
neither peace between England and France, nor open war* as you you have
hard.

The king had perfect knowledge, that Charles the Emperor would be at the
kings town of Calice the.xxiii. day of May, to pass through England into
Spain, wherefore the king sent the Marquis Dor^et, accompaignied with diverse
knights and gentlemen, to receive him at Calice, which in all have sped him
thither. Likewise the Cardinal took his journey toward Dover the.xx. day of
May, and rode through London, accompaignied with two Earls.xxxvi. Knights,
and a hundred Gentlemen, eight Bishops, ten Abbottes, thirty Chapelleines,
all in velvet and Satin, and yomen seven.C, and so by iorneiyng he came to
Dover the.xxvi. day being Monday. In the mean season tidings were brought to
the king, that the French king had sent a great army toward Calice, and the
men of war lay at Abuile, Munstrell, Bullein and about* nere the English
pale. Wherefore the king like a Prince that forsawe all, and entendyng not to
be disceiued, wrote to his nobles, and citees, and tounes, to prepare certain
men of war in a readiness, which was shortly dooen, and so they were sent
to the navy, so tha^ they might shortly be at Calice if need required.

On Sundaie the.xxv. day of May, the lord Marquis Dorset, the bishop of
Chichester, and the lord de Lawarr, with other noble men, at the water of
Grauelyng, received the Emperor in the name of the king of England, and so the
Emperor embraced them, and he having in his compaignie many noble men, came
toward Calice, where at the Turnepike in the lordeship of Mark, he was
received of sir Edward Guylford Marshall of Calice, with fifty men of arms
richely beleen, and also a hundred archers on horseback, then in passing
forward toward Calice, the ordinance shot terribly, and into Calice he was
received with procession, and then by the lord Barn deputy there, and the
cou^saill of the town: then was he received by the Mayor and Aldermen of the
town, and then of the Mayor and merchauntes of the Staple, and so conueighed
to the Checker, and there lodged.

On the Mondaie, he and all the nobles of Spain, Flaunders, and Germany, took
ship at Calice and landed at Dover, at four of the Clock at after noone, and
with him the duke Daluoy, the Prince of Orange, the County Nas^aw, the County
Uascord, the lord Ogmond, and the Marquis of Brandebrough, all in one ship
bote. The Cardinal received him on the Sands, accompaignied with three
hundred Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of England: themperor embrased the
Cardinal, and took him by the arm, and so passed forward and took horses and
rode together to Dover Castle, where they were lodged. Thenglishe Harbingers
di^igently lodged the Emperors train, every man according of his degree. The
king of England was come to Cantorbury, the.xxvii. day of May, and received
by the Archbishopp: and hearing o^ the Emperors arrival, with a small
compaignie on the Wednesdaie, ^eyng the Assension even, he rode to Dover, and
with much joy and gla^nes the Emperor and he met, and there tarried the
Assension day, and on Fridaie, the king brought the Emperor aborde on his
new ship, called the Henry grace a dieu, a ship of.xv.C. and rowed about to
all his great ships, which then lay in Dover rode, the Emperor and his
lords, much praised the making of the ships, and especially the artilerie,
they said, they never saw ships so armed.

The Same day at after none, the two noble princes marched forward to
Cantorbury, where the Mayor and Aldermen received them, without the town, with
a solemn oracion, to whom the Emperors Secretary answered ornatly. Then the
Princes with their sweardes borne naked before them, and the Emperor on the
right hand, entered the city of Cantorbury, and so with procession were
brought to Christ's Church, where the Archbishop and twelve prelates mitered,
received them under a Canapy, and so they offered to the Sacrament, and the
Emperor was brought to the Bishops palace, where he lay for that night, and
the king lodged at saint Augustines. The morrow after, these princes removed
to Sityngbor^e, and the next day to Rochester, where the Bis^op received them
with the whole Covent, and on Mondaie they came to Grauerse^de by one of the
Clock, where they took their Barges, and there were thirty Barges appointed,
for the strau^giers, and so by.vi. of the clock they landed at Grenew^che,
the same Mondaie the.ii. day of June, where the Emperor was of the king newly
welco^med, and al his nobility, and at the halle door the Queen and the
Princes, and all the Ladies received and welcomed him: and he asked the Queen
blessyng, (for that is the fashion of Spain, between the Aunte and Nephewe) the
Emperor had great joy to se the Queen his Aunte, and in especial his young
cosyn germain the Lady Mary. The Emperor was lodged in the kings lodgyng,
which was so richely hanged, that the Spanyardes wo^dered at it, and specially
at the rich cloth of estate: nothing lacked that might begotten, to chere the
Emperor and his Lords, and all that came in his compaignie, were highly
feasted.

The Wednesdaie, the more to do the Emperor pleasure, was prepared a Iustes
royal: on the one part was the king, the Earl of Devonshire and.x. more
compaignions, al mounted on horseback, their apparel and bardes, were of
rich Clothe of gold, embroudered with silver letters, very rich, with great
plumes on their heddes. This compaignie took the field, and rode about the
tilte: then entered the Duke of Suffolk, and the Marquis Dorset, and.x. with
them barded, and their apparel was russet velvet, embroudered with sundery
knottes, and culpyns of gold. The Emperor and the Queen, with all the nobles
stood in the galery, to behold the doing. The king ran at the duke of
Suffolk.viii. courses, and at every course brake his spear. Then every man ran
his courses, and then done, all ran together volant, as fast as they could
discharge, and when the speres appointed were broken, then they disarmed and
went to supper. After supper, the Emperor beheld the ladies daunces, and
suddenly came to the chamber, six noble me^, appareled in Crimosin velvet and
clothe of gold, and a mantell of taffeta, rolled about their bodies, and
hooddes and bonettes of clothe of gold, on their heddes, and velvet buskyns on
their legs: these Maskers entered and daunced a great while with the ladies,
and suddenly entered six other Maskers with drumslades, appareled in long
gounes, and hoddes of clothe of gold, of which number was the king, the duke
of Suffolk the prince of Orange, the County of Nassow, the Cou^tie of Naueray,
and Monsire Egremond. When these maskers were entered, the other avoided and then
they took ladies and daunsed, so that the strangers much praised them, and
when the time came, every person departed to their lodgyng.

Thursdaie, they that Iusted the other day, appointed theimselfes to Tornay,
and as the king was armyng him, there came to him one George Luffkin and showed
him, that there was one come from his Ambassador in France, the king called
for the messenger, and delivered his letters, which the king red, and said to
sir William Compton, tell the Emperor that I have news, if it pleases him to
come hither: sir Willyam Compton went and told this to the Emperor, which
without delay came to the king, which showed him the letters from sir Thomas
Cheney his Ambassador, wherein was contained the definitive answer, made as well
to sir Thomas Cheney, as to Clarenseaux king of arms of England, by the
French king, to the kings requests: for you shall understand, that the king
of England by his Ambassador, had often times demanded, both his tribute and
his lawful debte, and also restitucion to be made to his subjects grieved,
and farther also the league was broken, by making war on themperor, so that
now by the league the king of England should be enemy, to him that first
brake, and did take part with the other, yet he had so much compassion, on
shedyng of Christen blood, that he would not enter war, but show himself a
mediator and an entreator between them. And upon this sir Thomas Cheney had
often moved the French king* and also moved him to take peace with the Emperor
for two years, so that some mediacion of peace might be ^ntreated, in the mean
season: to all this the French king answered, we have well considered your
Masters desire, to the which we nothing agree, nor hold us content with his
request. Sir said thambassador, the king my Master shall be advertised of your
answer by me, wherefore I beseech your grace of safeconduite, to return into
England: then said the king, there is an officer of arms comehether out of
England, let him come and he shall be hard, and have an answer, to which
thing sir Thomas Chency answered not, but with reverence departed, and so on
the.xxi. day of May, thesaid officer called Clarenseaux king of arms, came
to the French kings chamber at Lions, which was accompaignied with many noble
men and gentlemen, and then Clarenseux put on his cote of arms, and desired
license to speak, and liberty according to the law of arms, which was to
him granted: then he declared that where the French king was bound by league
tripertite, to keep peace with the Emperor, and with the king of England, and
whosoever first brake, the other two to be enemies to him, to the which
league the French king was sworn, which league he apparauntly had broken, by
making war on themperor, by sir Robert de la March and by himself in
person. Wherefore the king by that league must be his enemy, and take part
against him.

Also he declared, the French king kept away the kings re^tes, and debtes*
dew to him. Also that he detained the dower of the French queen. Also that
contrary to his promise, he had sent the Duke of Albany into Scot^and: Also
that contrary to Justice he had emprisoned Merchantes, having his safeconduite,
where they should have gone in saftie, seeing there was no war proclaimed,
between him and the king his master: all these articles with many mo, y^ king
my master is ready to prove. Naie said the French king, I began not the war,
nor sent Robert de Lamarche to make war, but commanded him to the contrary,
and or I made war in proper person, his war was open, and he had our town
of Cournay strong^y besieged, and as touching the duke of Albany, it has cost
me.xl.M. Frankes, to keep him out of Scotland but I could not let him to go
into his own country. This the French king excused his untruth. Sir I am
farther charged to tell you, said Clare^seaux that the king my sovereign
lord, holds you for his mortal enemy, from this d^ie forth and al your
adherentes: well said the French king, I looked for this a great while agone*
for since the Cardinal was at Bridges, I looked for no another, but you have done
your message: then ye French king rose and departed, and Clare^seaux was
conueighed to his lodgyng, and shortly after, sir Thomas Cheney and he, by
safeconduite, departed and came to Bullein, and there Monsire Fayett capitain
there, them both stayed till the Ambassador of France, which had lien in
England, were clearly delivered out of Calice. The whole circumstaunce of the
demau^des and deffiaune, and the French kings answer, was contained in the
letter, which was brought to the king, which showed it to the Emperor (as you
have hard) but while the king and the Emperor looked on the letter, a sodein
noise rose amongst both their subjects, that it was a letter of defiance,
sent to tem both by the French king, which was nothing so. Thus now was the
war open of all parties, between England and France, and Spain. When the
two princes had of this matter commoned their fill, themperor called for a
horse, and the king himself was armed, an^ both the bendes that should Tornay
mounted on horseback, and themperor in rich apparel of tissew and richely
trapped brought the king into the field, and took up his horse, that all men
had great pleasure to behold him. The men of arms fell to Turnay, and brake
sweardes and were severed, and after came together again, and fought very
valiauntly, and when time was, the Herauldes cried the disarme, and as soon as
ht king was unarmed the Emperor and he went to supper, and after supper, the
king brought the Emperor into the hall where was a Cupperd of.xii. stages, all
set with great mighty plate al of gold, at the upper end hong three clothes
of estate, and the hall was full of great lights, set on gylte branches.

When the two Prines were set, and the Queen also, then entered in eight noble
men, in Maskers apparel with visers, their garments black Ueluet, guarded
and embroudered with gold in cut works and over that double Lumberdy
Mantelles of Sattyn, folded up on every shulder, curiously embroudered, these
Maskers were half English Lords, and the other ^traungiers. They took Ladies
and daunsed, and suddenly entered eight other Maskers, apparelled in rich
tynsell, matched with clothe of gold, and on that Turkey Clokes, rebanded with
Nets of Silver, and between the knittynges Flowers of Gold, and the
Mantelles were Crimosyn Sattyn, both the Maskers had hoddes of Crimosyn
Sattyn, these lusty Maskers entered, and reveled lustely, and when they had
done, then were there spices brought and wine, and then all persons began to
draw to rest.

On Fridaie, the six day of June, the King and the Emperor, with all their
compaignies marched toward London, where in the way, a Mile from Saint
Georges bar, was set a rich Tente of Clothe of gold, in which Tente were
two lodgings, one for the Emperor, and another for the King, where these
two Princes shifted them. And when the Herauldes had appointed every manne
their room, then every manne set forward in order, richely apparelled in
Clothe of gold, Tissew* Silver, Tynsell, and Ueluettes of all colors. There
lacked no massye Cheynes, nor curious Collers: an Englishemanne and a
straung^er road ever together, matched according to their degrees, before the
Emperor and the King, were borne two swords naked, then the two Princes
followed in Coats of Clothe of Gold, embraudered with Silver, both of one
suite: after them followed the Kings Henxinenne, in Coats of Purple Ueluet,
pieled and paned with rich Clothe of Silver, and with them were matched the
Emperors Henxe men, in equal number, in Coats of Crimosyn Uelue, with two
gardes, the one Gold, and the other Silver: then followed the Capitaines of the
Gardes, then the Emperors Guard on the right hand, and the English Guard on
the left hand, and so in this order they went forward, and in the way the
Mayor Ihon Milborne and his brethren, in tine Skarlet and well horssed, met
with the Emperor and the king where one sir Thomas More knight, and well
learned, made to them an eloquent Oracion in the praise of the two princes,
and of the peace and love between them, and what comfort it was to their
subjects, to se them in such smitie, and how that the Mayor and Citezens,
offered any pleasure or leruice that in them lay, next their sovereign lord.

When this was dooen, they came into Southwarke, where the Clergy received
them, in Copes, with Crosses, and Sensers, and to kept the one side of the
street, all the city through. When they came by the Marshalsie and the Kings
Benche, the Emperor desired pardon of the king, for the prison^rs, and he at
the Emperors request, pardoned agreate number of them. When they were almost
at the Bridge foot, there was a stay, the King demanded the cause, and it
was told him, that the Herauldes had appointed, two gentlemen to ride
together, one was the Ambassador from the Marquis of Mantua, to the Emperor,
and the other from the City of Seines, to the Emperor also, and the City and
the Marquis were not friends, the Emperor incontinent sent his Lord
Chamberlain to them, saying: that if they would that day do him honor, he
would thank them, and if they would not ride as they were appointed, he
prayed them to depart. When the Lord Chamberlain had told this message,
they rode forth and made no more courtesy.

When they were come to the Draw Bridge, there were set Targettes, of the
Arms of the Emperor and his Dominions, richely paincted, and on the other
side, stood one great Giaunte, representyng Hercules, with a mighty Clubbe
in his hand, and on the other side stood another Giaunte, representyng
Sampson, with the Iawe bone of an Ass in his hand. These two Gyauntes held
a great Table, in the which was written in Golden letters, all the Emperors
Style. From the Draw Bridge these two Princes passed, to the mids of the
Bridge, where was raised a fair edisice, with Towers embattayled and gates,
all like Masonrie, of White and Black, like Touch and White Merbell: above
this buyldyng was a fair pagiaunt, in the which stood Jason all in harnes,
having before him a golden Flece, and on the one side of him stood a fiery
Dragon, and on the other side stood two Bulls which beasts cast out fire
continually, and in a towe^ on the one side stood a fair maid representyng
the lady Medea which was very straungely and richely apparelled, and above
this Pagiant were written these verses.

Letici^ quantum mimijs prebebat, Jason
Aurea Phrixee vellera nactus ouis
Leticie quantum tulerat Pompeius et Vrbi
Host tr^umphato Scipio Romulidum
Tantum tu nobis C^sar mitissime Princeps
Intrans Henrici Principis hospicium
When they had beholden this Pagiant they came to the Conduste at Gracious
street where was made a Bastyle with two great gates, one on the one side of
the way and the other on the other side, and over these gates and between these
gates were made iii. great towers embattailed and vauted with lopes Lucanes
like Masonry, curiously wrought, and in the middle tower was a clothe of
estate, under which sat one representyng the Emperor, and in the third tower
represe^tyng the king. And Charlemayne having ii. swords gave to the Emperor
the sword of Justice, and to the king the sword of triumphant victory, and
before him sat the Pope to whom he gave the croune of thorn and three nails.
About this pagiant were set all the arms of the electors of thempyre and
these verses in a table.

Carole Christigenum decus et quem scripta loquntur
A magno duc^um Carolo habere genus
Tuque Henrice pia virtutis laud refulgens
Doctrina ingenio religione fide
Vospretor consul sanctus cum plebe senatus
Vectos huc fausto sydere gestit ouans
This Pagiant was made by the Esterlynges.
From Gracious street where the Esterlinges stood in good order, the two
princes came to Leden halle where overthwart the great street that leads to
Bishops gate was erected a goodly Pagiant wonderful curiously wrought, it
was xxxviii. foot broad and lxxx. of length, at the foot of the pagiant sat
Ihon duke of Lancastre called Ihon of Gaunte son to king Edward the third.
This duke sat in a rote and out of the rote sprang many branches curiously
wrought with leaves which by policy dropped sweet water, and on every
branch satte a king and a queen or some other noble parsonage descended of
the said duke, to the number of lv. images, and on the top stood the Emperor,
the king of England and the Queen, as three in the vi. degree from the said
Duke. This pagiant was made at the cost of the Italyans and was much praised.
From thence they passed y^ Conduite in Cornehill where the street was enclosed
from side to side with ii. gates to open and shitte, and over the gates were
arches with towers embattailed set with vanes and scutchions of the arms of
the Emperor and the king, and over the arches were two towers, the one full of
Trompettes and the other full of Shalmes and shagbuttes which played
continually: Between these two towers was a palice, under the rich clothe of
estate sat king Arthur at a round table and was served with x. kings, Dukes
and earls all beryng Targettes of their arms, and when the Emperor and the
king were coming thither a Poet said.

Laudat magnanimos vrbs inclita Roma Catone^
Cantant Ha^ibalem punica regna suum
Gentis erat Solime rex ingens gloria David.
Gentis Alexander gloria prima sue.
^llustrat fortes Arthurifama Britannos
Illustras gentem C^sar and ipse tuam
Cui deus imperium victo precor host secundet
Regnet vt ^n terris pacis amica qu^es
When this was said, they came tot he Stocks where was a quadrant stage where
on was an Herber full of Roses, Lyllies and all other flowers curiously
wrought, and birds, beasts and all other things of pleasure. And about the
Herber was made the water full of Fyshe, and about it was the Elements, the
Planettes and Stars in their places and every thing moved, and in a type in
the top was made the Trinity with the Angels singyng, and the Trinity
blessed the king and the Emperor, and under his feet was written, behold the
lover of peace and concord. And so they passed through the Poultry to the
great Co^duite in Chepe, where was made on the right hand of the said Conduite
(as they passed) in manner quadrant with four towers, a every corner one with
goodly types, between every tower was a gallery, which galeries were hanged
with clothes of gold and silver within, and so covered over. The forefrontes
of every gallery were hanged with white and grene Sarcenet wrethed and with
great knottes of gold, let down in manner of a valence before the gallery, and
under the said galleries were Targettes and schutchions of the Emperors and
kings arms and devises. In the four towers were four fair ladies for the
cardinal virtues so richely besene that it was great pleasure to behold, every
virtue having a sign and token of her property. In the galleries sat children
mixed with men and women singyng and plaiyng on instruments melodiously, of
the which sort one child said these verses following.

Quinto amplexetur populus te C^sar amore
Testantur varijs gaudia mixta sonis
Era, tube, Litui, cantus cithare calamisque
Consona te resonant organa disparibus
Vnum te celebrant, te vnum sic cuncta salutant
O decus, O rerum gloria C^sar aue.
When they came to the sta^dard there was made a mighty buildyng to timber with
towers set in carbles forced with arches butta^d and al abilimentes embossed,
and the lynterelles inhaunsed with pillars quadrant and the vautes in orbs
with crobbes depe^dyng and mo^sters bearyng up the pillars and in the roffe was
a lover swellyng, in y^ top whereof was a ba^ner of the arms of Spain and
England and all the pagiant full of scutchions of arms of the ii. princes. At
the foot of this pagia^t sat Alphons king of Spain richely apparelled, and out
of his breast a branch of which sprang many kings, queen's and princes which
satte and were lively persons richely apparelled every one with a scutchion of
arms showing their marriages, and in the highest branch satte the Emperor,
the king and just v. and vii. degrees from the said king of Spain, to who^ he
said king Alphons said these verses.

Carole qu fulges sceptro and diademate sacro
Tuque Henrice fimul stemmata iuncta gerens
Alter germa^is, lux alter clara britannis
Miscens Hispano sanguine vterque genus
Viuite felices quod vixit secula Nestor
Viuite cumane tempora fatidice
After this pagiant seen and the verses said, they came to the little Conduite
in Chepe where was builded a place like heaven curiously painted with clouds,
erbes, stars and the Ierarchies of angels, in the top of this pagiant was a
great type and out of this type suddenly issued out of a cloud a fair Lady
richely apparelled, and then all the minstrels which were in the pagiant played
and the angels sang, and suddenly again she was assumted into the cloud which
was very curiously done, and about this pagiant stood the Apostles whereof one
said these verses.

Ob quorum aduentum tocies gens ipsa britanua
Supplex dijs superis vota pr^terque dedit
Quos ^tas omnis, pueri, iuuenesque, senesque
Optarunt oculis sepe videre suis
Venistis tandem auspicio Christi Marieque
Pacis coniuncti f^dere perpetuo.
Heroes saluete pij, saluete bea^i
Exhilarant nostros minima vestra lares
Yet you must not forget for all the pagiantes how the Citezens well apparelled
stood within railes set on the left side of the streets and the clergy on
the right side in rich copes, which sensed the princes as they passed and all
the streets were richely hanged with clothes of gold, silver, velvet and
Arras, and in every house almooste Mynstrelsy, and in every street were these
two verses written in letters of gold.

Carolus, Henricus, viuant defensor vterque
Henricus fidei, Carolus Eccleste
Which verses er also written in other tables in golden letters as ensues.

Long prosperity To Charles and Henry The one of faith The other of the
Church Pricnes most puissaunt. Chosen defendant.
When they were past the little Conduite they came to the West end of Poules
church and there they alighted, and there was a Canapie ready under which they
two stood and were received by the Archbishop of Cau^torbury and xxi.
prelates in pontificalles and so they offered at the high altar and returned
to horseback and came to the Black Friars where the Emperor was lodged in
great royalty: All his nobles were lodged in his new palace of Brydewell, out
of the which was made a Gallery to the Emperors lodgyng, which gallery was
very long, and that gallery and all other galleries there were hanged with
Arras. The kings palayce was so richely adorned of all things that my wit
is to dull to deser^ue them or the riches of the hangynges or the sumptuous
buildyng and giltyng of chambers.

On saturday the king and the Emperor played at tennice at the Bayne against the
princes of Orange and the Marquis of Brandenborow, and on the Princes side
stopped the Earl of Deuonshyre and the lord Edmond on the other side, and they
departed even hands on both sides after xi. games fully played.

On Whitsonday the viii. day of June themperor and the king with great honor
both apparelled in cloth of silver ^eysed, gounes and cotes and all their
apparel white except their bonettes, road to the Church of saint Paul and
there heard high Mass which was song by the Cardinal which had his trauers
and cupborde, and before Mass ii. Barons gave him water and after the Gospel
ii. Earls, and at the last lauatory ii. Dukes which pride the Spanyardes sore
disdayned. When Mass was done they returned to Brydewell where the Emperor was
highly feasted. The Same sunday at after noone the two princes went by water to
Westminster and road to the church, and in ridyng all the sanctuary men
cried mercy and pardon, they were so hastye and presed so nere that the
sergeaunts at arms could scase keep them from touching the Emperor and the
king: The Cardinal gave them a gentle answer which contented them for a
time. They were received with Procession into the Abbey and heard euensong and
beheld king Henry the seuenthes chapel and then went into Westminster halle, at
the largeness whereof the Emperor much meruailed, then they turned to
Brydewell and there supped.

On Mo^day they dyned in Southwarke with the duke of Suffolk and hunted there
in the Park, and road to the Manor of Richemond to their lodgyng and the next
day to Hampton court, where they had great chere and from thence on thursday to
Wyndsore where he hunted Friday and Saturday and on Sunday at night in the
great halle was a disguisyng or play, theffect of it was ye there was a proud
horse which would not be tamed nor brideled, but amity sent prudence and
policy which tamed him, and force and puissaunce brideled him. This horse was
meant by ye French king, and amity by the king of England and themperor, and
other prisoners were their counsel and power, after this play ended was a
sumptuous Mask of.xii. men and.xii. women, the men had in garments of clothes
of gold and silver lose laid on crimosyn Satin, knit with points of gold,
bonettes, whoddes, buskyns, were al of gold, The ladies were of the same suite
which was very rich to behold, and when they had daunced, then came in a
costly ba^ket and a voidy of spices, and so departed to their lodgyng.

Monday, tewsday, and wednesday the princes and their counsel sat most part
in counsel, and on Corpus Christi day, they with great triumph rode to the
collage of Wyndsore where the Emperor ware his Mantle of the Garter and satte
in his own stall, and gave to the Herauldes CC. crounes: that day both the
princes received the Sacrament, and after Mass both swear to keep the
promises and league each to other, for the which amity great joy was made on
both parties, and after y^ Mass was ended they went to dinner, where was great
feastyng.

On Friday they departed out of Wyndsore, and by easy journeys came to
Wynchester the.xxii. day of June, and in the way thither, the Emperor hunted
the Heart. Before the Emperor was come to Wynchester, therle of Surray Admyrall
of England with all y^ kings Navy was come to Hampton, and with him the lord
Fitz Water, the Baron Curson, sir Gyles Capell, sir Nicholas Carew, sir Richard
Wyngfeld, sir Richard Iernyngham, Fraunces Bryan, Anthony Brown, John Russell,
of which many were of the kings preuy chamber: These with many mo departed
from Hampton with.xxx. ships well manned and ordinau^ced in the end of June,
noisyng that they should only skoure the seas for safeguard of the Emperor and
his Nauye: But they had privy instruccions to go to another place as you shall
hear after.

All this while was the war on the parties of Picardy hot, and the
captain of Bullain called Fayet wrote ever mockyng letters to the garrison of
Calaice, and said: if the garrison of Calayce would issue out, he would mete
with them half way with iiii.M. men. Whereupon sir Edward Guildforde Marshall
of Calayce, whom the captain of Bullain called the fyrebrand, because it was
his badge, set forth out of Calayce the.xi. day of June with.xii.C. men, and
went out of Calayce and sent a pursiuant to the capitain of Bullain certifiyng
him that he was coming with his fyerbrand, and bad him keep promise. This
officer declared the message to him, but he came not: Forth marched sir Edward
til he came to Marguison and tarried to see whether the capitain of Bullayne
would come or no, and when he saw he came not, he set fire in the town, and
the light horsemen forrayed the beasts and pillage, and brent villages all
about, which was well perceived in the country a far of, and toward night
all the crew came home with good pillage, and on the morrow sir Edward Gyldford
delivered a prisoner frank and free, on condition he should tell the captain
of Bullain that he had him at Marguison with his fyerbrand, which truly did
his message, for the which the captain brake his head: all the castles and
fortresses in the English pale were well manned and vitailed and lacked no
artillery, so that the Frenchemen could do them no harm.

When the Emperor and the king lay at Bishops Waltham they jointly sent
letters of defiaunce to the Duke of Lorraine, as alye and confederate with the
French king. The first day of July the Emperors navy sailed before Hampton,
which were C.lxxx. goodly ships. When the Emperors ships were come, he took
leave of the king and had great gifts given him and much money lent to him,
and so the vi. day of July he took his ship, so with all his Navy he made
sail toward Spain where he arrived in safety the.x. day after.

The king about this very time sent to the city of London to borow xx.M.
pou^des, which sore chafed the citizens, but the sum was promised, and for
the payment the Mayer sent for none but for men of substance. Howbeit the
crafts sold much of their plate. This sum was paid, and the king sent his
letter promisyng payment of the same and so did the Cardinal. The poor men
were content with this payment and said, let the rich churles pay, for they
may well. Like loan was practiced through all the realm, and privy seals
delivered for the repayment of the same.

This season the.xxi. day of May was the city of Geane gotten by the Emperors
capitain called Octauiano de Columna, which had with him.iiii.M. and, iiii.C.
Spaniardes.v.M. Italyans, and.iiii.M. Lanceknightes: and in the city was taken
Porter de Nauarro the French kings familiar captain and all the lords of
Geane which favored the French king were taken prisoners or slain, and
especially one Octa^iano Faragoso, which ruled there for the French king, was
evil punished: The spoil of the city that the soldiers had, was.iiii.M.
dukates beside the pillage, which was a great thing.

Now let us return to the lord Admyrall of England which departed from
Hampton as you have heard, and so with his Navy sailed and skoured the seas,
and at last came on the costs of Britaigne, and commanded the wysest Masters
and Mariners to boy the haven of Morles, which was done, an so the next night
all the flete came to the haven of Morles in safety and moored their ships
together. Then all men were commanded to harnes and to auaunce their
standards, and all soldiers to give their attendance on their capitaines, and
then the lord Admyral appointed and caused.xiiii. pieces of ordinance called
Faucons to be brought to land and drawn forth with strength of men. Then when
all men that should go forward were landed, the lord Amyrall with banner
displayed took land on the Estside of the haven the first day of Iulye, and
with him a fair band of soldiers, as the lord Fitz Water, the Baron Curson,
sir Richard Wyngfelde, sir Richard Iernyngham, sir Wyllyam Barantine, sir
Adrian Foskew, sir Edward Done, sir Edward Chamberlayne, Fraunces Bryan,
Richard Cornwall, sir Anthony poynes, sir Henry Sherborne, and the vice
Admyrall, sir Willyam Fitzwillyam, sir Edmond Bray, sir Gyles Capel, sir
Willyam Pyrton, sir Ihon Cornewalles, sir Ihon Wallop, sir Edward Echyngham,
sir Willyam Sidnay, Anthony Broune, Gyles Huse, Thomas More, Ihon Russell,
Edward Bray, Henry Owen, George Cobham, Thomas Owdayle, Thomas Louell, Robert
Iernyngham, Anthony Kneuit, sir Ihon Tremaile, and the Master of the kings
ordinance, sir Willyam Skeuyngton, and Ihon Fabian serieant at arms, by whom
this enterprise was chiefly moved as was reported, with many other gentlemen
and soldiers, to the nombre of vii.M. The lord Admyral and sir Richard
Wyngfeld brought these men in good order of battle, and caused Christopher
Morres the master gunner to see all things ready prepared, and then about.viii.
of the clock the said first day they marched toward Morles in good order of
battle with banners displaied. The alarm rose in the country and came to the
town of Morles whereby the gentlemen of the country showed theimselfes
prickyng, but when they heard the Gunnes they fled as though they never used
war. They of Morles armed theimselfes and went to the walls and shut the
gates and laid ordinance where was most ieopardie. The Englishemen had gone
five long mile and were now come to the subberbes of the town: then the
Englishemen archers shot, and the Brytons them defended: then the Admyrall
commanded the town to be assauted, then the lord Fitz Water and the Baron
Curson quartered the town on all sides: The Englishemen shot with long bows,
and the Brytons with cross bows, which defended themsel^es manfully. Before
the port Moruet where is a Meason de dieu, At this gate gave the assaut sir
Richard Wyngfelde, Nycholas Carew, Frau^ces Bryan, sir Ihon Wallop and all
their bendes having with them three pieces of ordinaune called Faucons, which
the master Gunner often times shot, but the Britons had set the gate full of
hacbushes, then the gunner said, have at the wicket, and in the smoke of the
gunnes let us enter the gate, the gentlemen assented, then the said sir
Christopher Gunner struck the lock of the wicket, Mo^les ass^uted and gotten.
so that it flew open, then in the smoke ran to the gate the said Christopher
and the other forenamed gentlemen, and when Christopher came to the gate he
found the wicket open and entered, and the gentlemen followed, the Brytons
defended them selfs, but they were put back or slain, then was the great
gate opened and then entered the soldiers that were on the other side of the
town. When the Brytons on the walls saw the town gotten, some fled at the
posterne and some by another way, the best way that they could.

Therle of Surray with ba^ner displayed took the market place. Then the
soldiers fell to pillage and rifled the chestes and ware houses of
merchants, for the town of Morles was very rich, and specially of lynnen
clothe, the gentlemen suffered the soldiers to do what they would. When the
soldiers had taken their pleasure of the town as much for a truth or more
then they could bear away.

The lord Admiral commanded the trumpettes to blow, and commanded all men to
set fire in all places of the town (the holy places only except) the fair
market place was set on fire, and the subburbes brent arda^tly. Wherefore all
men were commanded to their standards, and about vi. of the clock the army
retreted, and as they passed they brent the villages and places. And when night
approached they drew together and and all that night lay on land abidyng their
enemies. And the next day with honor they took their ships, and when all
men were shipped and few or none missed. The lord Admyrall commanded.xvi.
or.xvii. ships small and great liyng in the haven to be brent. Then they
sailed forth and came to anchor before saint Polle de Lion, then he commanded
that the foyst and other small ships and great botes should be manned to enter
into an harborow for ships called pympoll or pympole, which was sone done,
the boats entered ye place and some la^ded, but then the Brytons were to strong
and so they took their boats and bet the Britons on the shore, and the
Brytons shot great ordinance at the Englishemen, but it did them no harm,
and yet the Englishmen brent a ship of.CC. and many small vessels. When time
came the whole flete sailed into the haven of Breast and with barks and row
barges entered the haven and took land, and some Englishemen did so much that
they set ^yer in hou^es nere the castle. And even as thenglishemen sailed by
the cost, the Brytons them askryed and fortefied the la^dyng places* yet daily
the Englishemen skyrmished with the Brytons and came safely to their ships
again: with this watre was all the duchy of Brytaigne sore troubled.

When the lord Admiral had won the town of Morles as you have heard. He
called to him certain squyers whom for their hardynes and noble courage he
made knights, ^yrst sir Fraunces Bryan, sir Anthony Broune, sir Richard
Cornwall, sir Thomas More, sir Eyles Huse, sir Ihon Russel, sir Ihon Raynsford,
sir George Cobham, sir Iho^ Cornwalles, sir Edward Rigley and diverse other, And
after he wrote letters to the king of his good speed: In the which he much
praised and all gentlemen and soldiers for their hardynes. When he had sailed
a while on the seas, he had letters sent from the king that he should retreyte,
and so he came withal his flete under the Isle of Wight to a place called the
Kow, and then he departed from his ship and came to Estamstede the.xxi. day
of Iulye to the king, of whom he was well welcomed you may be sure. And so on
mounday the.xxiii. day of July the king and he came to London to the Cardynals
place and there sat in counsel to determine what should be done. After this
the king dyned with the Cardinal the.xxiii. day of Iulye, where he rehearsed
that he had knowledge that the Amyrall of Britaigne was in Morles with a C.
horsemen and a C. crosbowes, and yet he fled, and the king much commended
the lord Admyral for his paind and hardynes, and praised them of his guard,
and specially fifty, which left pylferyng and never went from the lord
captain.

On the third day of July while this enterprise was done at Morles, certain
Frenchemen to the number of CCC. horsemen came nere to the castle of Guysnes
and kept them self in a close covert and so appeared viii. or x. horsemen and
came nere Guysnes: out of the Castle came viii. English archers and issued out
of the gate and fell with the French horsemen in skyrmished: to the
Frenchemennes, reskue came iiii. men of arms and skyrmished with the archers
which were a foot. Then out of Guysnes issued xii. dimilances all Welshemen
and ra^ne boldly to ye Frenchemen in reskue of the fotemen, Then the whole
bend of Frenchemen issued out and set on the Welshemen, the fotemen shot
while arrows lasted and were feign to fight with swords, the Welshmen kept
themselfes together and entered into the bend of Frenchemen and brake their
speres and then fought so with swords that they made away, so that they
escaped from the bend of CCC. horsemen, and of the Frenchemen were slain iii.
men and v. horse, the fotemen were ouerpressed and sold their lives dear, for
the Frenchemen slew them all and would take none prisoner, they were so angry
with the kyllyng of their horse.

Also the xxv. day of July sir Wylly am Sands treasorer of Caleys and sir
Edward Guilforde Marshall, with banners spread, issued out of Caleys with
xiiii.C. men and went into the French pale lokyng for Mounsire Foyat which
was a great mocker and a coward: But when he appeared not they went to Whitsand
baye and set it on fire, and the people fled to the church which was
fortified and stood at defense, the body of the church was won and then they
took the steple and some yielded themselfes, but the remnant by counsel of a
priest maintained so long that the Steple was fyred and then the priest cried
succor, but it was to late and so the French people was feign to lepe the
Steple and diverse perished, and they that were saved were led to Caleys as
prisoners. Farther the xxiii. day of the same month Thwaites a captain of an
English ship took land beside Bullein, and went up three mile into the
country to a town called New Castle and forryed all the country and in his
return set fire on the town and brent a great part thereof maugre the
Bullenoys, and with his bows and men which only was vi. score, he put back
lxxx. Hagbushes and CCC. men of war of the country and so came to their
ship with all the botie and lost no man, notwithstanding they were sore
followed to their ship.

On the vi. day of July the Cardynall satte in the star chamber at
Westminster where he said, my Lords it is reason that you should know the
honorable enterprise done by the lord Admiral and his compaigny in Brytaigne
which has dispoyled and destroyed the great town of Morles in Brytaigne with
all the villages and country adioynyng to the same, which is in the French
dominion, which mischief had never risen if Fraunces the French king had
kept his oath and promise. For he is bound that he should never retain the
Swyches from the Emperor, nor that he shall not invade any of the Emperors
lands or dominions, which he has done, for he has invaded the country of
Henaude and Cambrises and taken Hedyng and Fountraby with many other iniuryes.
For when the king sent me and other to his great costs the last year to Caleys
to treat a unity and peace between them, all our sayings were by the
French king turned into a mocquery. Also contrary to his promise he has
suffered Duke Ihon of Albany to enter the realm of Scotland to the great
peril of the young king, Nephieu to our sovereign lord, and also entendeth to
mary the the Queen of Scotts contrary to the kings honor. The said French
king also witholdeth the kings duties and his systers dower: wherefore of
necessity the king is entered into war, for no prince will suffer the wrong
that the French king offers him as an untrue and forsworn prince, wherefore
for your own wealth you must now aid your prince, trustyng to punish and
chastise him to your great honor and fame.

Then by commandment were all Frechemen and Scotts imprisoned and the goods
seized, and all such as were denizens were commanded to show their letters
patentes, and such as were allowed had all their goods and the other not, and
all Frenchemen and Scotts that had married Englishewomen, the wifes and
children had half the goods delivered unto them, and every denizen to find
suertie for his good abearyng, and all the other if they would be bayled to
find suerties for their truth and allegeaunce or else to be kept in prison,
for the ports were so kept that they could not fly.

The king now being entered into the wars thought not to sleep and let the
French king alone, wherefore by his letters he commanded certain persons with
their powers to come to London in August. They that were appointed came
accordyngly, every man with such a number as to him was appointed, and when
they had mustered at London before the kings Commissioners they were nere
xii.M. men with the Pyoners, and they were sent to the lord Admyral which
lay at Dover with iiii.M. me^, but because harvest was not done, ye vitaile at
Caleys was to little for so great an army, wherefore they lay in Kent at tounes
there a good space, which made vitaile dear there.

In this summer the lord Rosse and the lord Dacres of the North which were
appointed to keep the borders against Scotland did so valiantly that they
burned the good town of Kelsy and lxxx. villages and overthrew xviii. towers
of stone with all their Barnkyns or Bulwerkes.

The king also in this month was credibly informed that the duke of Albany
prepared an army royal of Scotts and Frenchemen to invade England* Wherefore
the king appointed the Earl of Shrewsbury his lord Steward to be his
Lieutenaunt general against the said Duke and his invasions, which directed
his letters to the shyres of York, Darby, Stafford, Shropshyre and al other
beyond Trent that all men should be in a readynes.

The xx. day of August the Cardynall sent for the Mayor, Aldermen and the most
substanciallest comminers of the City of London, where he declared to them
that the king had appointed commissioners through the whole realem for England
for to swear every manne of what value he is in mouables, the more to be in
readynes for the defense of this realm. And the king for the love he bears
you would have sit with you himself, but for certain other affairs in his
wars to be done he is let, and so has appointed me your Commissioner.
Wherefore in convenient time certifye me the number of all such as be worth
one hundredth pounds and upward, to the intent I may swear them of their
values: for first the king asks of you your loving hearts and due
obeysaunce, the which shall appear by your conformity to his requests, and
when the value is taken the desires only the tenth part of goods and lands
which is the least reasonable thing that you can aid your prince with. I
think every one of you will offer no less, as for the spirituality every
manne is in the shyres sworn and shall and will gladly pay the fowerth part to
the king and live on the iii. parts. Now to your part I am sure you will not
grudge, therefore name me the men of substance and for the meanet sort,
meaner Commissioners shall be appointed. Sir said a merchant if it may please
you, how shall this tenth part to the king be delivered? in money plate or Iuels
said the Cardinal at a value. O my lord said the Aldermen it is not yet two
months sith the king had of the City xx. thousand pound in ready money in
loan, whereby the City is very bare of money, for Gods sake remember this
that rich merchants in ware be bare of money: Well said the Cardynall, this
must be done and therefore go about it. So the Aldermen resorted to their
Wards and named such as they judged to be of that value, which came before
the Cardynall and most humbly besought him that they might not be sworn for
the true value of their substance for the true valuacion to them was unknown
and many honest men's credence was better then his substance, and therefore
they doubted the paril of perjury. Well said the Cardinal sithe you dread the
crime of periurye, it is a sign of grace, and therefore I will for you borowe
of the king a lytie. Make you your bylles of your own value likely to report
your fame and then more busynes needs not for you see what two costly armies
the king has ready against both France and Scotland, therefore now show
your selfs like loving subjects, for you be able enough. And I dare swear
the substance of London is no less worth then two Myllions of gold. Then said
the citezens we would to God that it were so, and the city is sore appaired by
the great occupiyng of strangers. Well said the Cardinal it shall be redressed
if I live: But on Saturday next I shall appoint one to receive your bylles, and
he that is of credence more then of substance let him resort to me and I will
be secret and good to him. Thus the Citezens departed in great agony saying,
that at the last loan some lent the fifth part and now to have the tenth part
was to much. And here note well that the x. thousand pounds that was lent was
not taken as the xx. of every man's substance, but it should be allowed as
part of the x. part, and this valuacion should perform up the whole x. part.
Great was the mournyng of the common people as it is ever in such cases of
paymentes. But in the end one doctor Tonnys a secretary to the Cardinal came
to the Chapter house of Poules, and to him the citezens brought in their
bylles and on their honesty they were received, which values afterward
turned them to displeasure.

The spirituality made suite to the lord Cardinal that no temporal men should
sit to examyne them, to be made privy to their possessions and goods: wherefore
bishops and Abbottes were appointed commissioners to take the value of their
snbstaunce.

In this season was great plenty of vitaile sent to Caleys, and to the lord
Admyral were sent Tents and Pauilions some of lxx. lodgings for him and other
noblemen.

The Friday being the xxii. day of August certain Welshemen were lodged at a
poor village named Cause, because in Caleys was very narow lodgyng, and
the same night CCCC. Frenchmen passed by Caleys haue^ for lack of good watch
and came into the same village and set fire in the house where the Welshemen
lay, which ran away naked into the Marishe and saved themselfes, but their
horses were taken. This chance happened for lack of good watch.

When the lord Admyrall had brought all his men out of the ships and that
all the soldiers were come out of England and the ordinance set on land,
then came into Caleys haven xiiii. ships out of Spain from the Emperor
which set on land CCC. Spanyardes which were sent to serve the lord Admyrall
and under him they were put. When all things were ready, the lord Admyral set
in order his battles and for the forewarde he appointed sir Robert Ratcleffe,
lord Fitzwater for Captain, and with him diverse knights and gentlemen
which captain kept his men in very good order.

After that battle followed the ordinance, artilerie and other trusses with
vitail and all necessaries, and for the captain of the horsemen was appoined
sir Edward Gyldford, by whom the currers and vewers of the country were
appointed. The myddle ward led the lord Admyrall himself, and in his
compaignie the lord Edmond Hawarde his brother, with many worshipful
knights, squiers and tall yomen: The last battle was led by two valiant
knights of the Garter sir Wyllyam Sands and sir Richard Wyngfelde, and with
them was sir Richard Iernyngham with many other. In good order of battle they
passed over Newnam bridge the.xxx. day of August to a place called Calkewell
and there lodged between ye Wyndmyl and the marrishe.

The Same day came to the lord Admyrall a certain nombe of wild persons, as
men out of service and apprentises that ran from their Masters and other
idle persons, and him desired that they might be retained in the kings wages,
to whom he answered, that the king had appointed the no^bre of such as should
have wages, which was fully complete and advised them to return into England
and not to loyter there. Then said a tall yoman, my lord here be many good
fellows that with your favor would ieopard to get or lose, for their mind is
to be revenged on the Frenchemen enemies to the king and his realm.

Good fellow said the lord Admyrall, their minds be good, but if for lack of
conduite they should be cast away, it were a loss to the king and a great
courage to the Frenchemen. Then all the compaignie cried, let us go in the name
of God and saint George: Then after counsel taken he gave them a Penon of
saint George and bad them adventure (of which they were called adventurers)
and farther bad them that if they got any botie they should ever bring it to
tharmy, and they should be paid to the uttermost, and then he gave them money
and commanded them weapons and so the said.xxxi. day the said
adventurers.iiii.C. in nombre and mo, set forward before the host, but how
they did, you shall hear afterward.

Monday the first day of September the army removed toward Guisnes, which day
was very hot and drink lacked, and water was not nere, so that some died for
faintnes, and this night they lay at Guysnes.

Tewsday the second day of September the army passed toward Arde: And in the
golden Ualay where the king of England and the Frenchekyng met two years
before, there met with tharmy of England two capitaines of the Burgonions, the
one called the earl of Egemond the Seneschal of Henaude, and the lord for
Bauers Admyral of Flanders with v.C. horsemen, like men of war. The lord
Admyral in gentle manner received these two capitaines and their compaignie and
so they joined theimselfes to the English army, and the same day they took
lodgyng at Arde south from the town, where they were well vitailed, and there
lay wednisday all day, and the Burgonyons lay under the castle of Mountorrey.
The next day they removed to the vale of Lyekes, and there enca^ped themselfes.
Sir George Cobham the same day with.ii.M. men, by the Admyralles commandment
came to the town of Selloys and set fire in the town, and when the town was
on fire he assauted the castle. They within made resistance, but it auayled
not, for the walls were entered and the soldiers taken, and the castle set on
fire, and with gunpouder overthrew the walls: then with have he removed to a
town called Brune bridge and set it on fire, and also brent a town called
Senekerke, and also the tounes of Botyngham and Manstier and so returned to the
lord Admyrall which gave him great thanks, The Frenchemen appeared in
plumpes, but yet they durst not reskue their tounes.

On saturday the lord Admyrall removed with the whole army to a ground beside
saint Nerbyns and there lay all sunday being the.vii. day of September, where
he sent diverse companies out, which forraged the countries and brent many
villages as far as they might trauail: the lord Admyrall caused the town of
Narbyn to be brent, and took the castle and rased it and utterly destroyed it.

On Monday the.viii. day, he removed to Dauerne and brent all the tounes as he
passed, and liyng there, he brent the town of Dauerne and cast down the
castle of Columberge and the castle Rue, but the churches of Dauerne and a
house of Nonnes were saved by his commandment.

The Same day was brent saint Marie de Boys and all the country twelve mile
about was of light fire, the people fled and left tounes and Castelles full
of wine, corn, and all other necessaries, so that in Dauerne the Englishmen
found great plenty, which or they went away they set a fire.

The ix. day of Septembre the whole army came before the town of Boyardes in
which was a Church more liker a castle then a Church, for it was deep dyched
with draw brydges and with Bulwarks fortefied and lopes very warlike, The
Admyrall beholding it said, this is like no house of prayer. Then he commanded
his people to enter the dyches and pluck down the draw bridges and set fire
in ye Church, and with gunpouder overthrew it, and brent the town and all the
villages adjacent to the same, the people cried and fled, well was he that
might save himself.

The.x. day, they came to the town of Uaus, which was nigh the town called
Foucamberge and there a company of Frenchmen were askried, for out of a wod
they showed themselfes, but they tarried not long, but without profer of
encountre they departed. Wherefore the whole army took their camp and there lay
till the.xiii. day which was saturday, every day s^ndyng plu^pes out to set
fire in the country, and on that day they took the ^ay to Frynge of F^ynges,
and there brent the town and destroyed the castle which was very strong.

The Sunday being the.xiiii. day, the lord Admyral with his compaigny in great
rain and ill wether passed by hills and valeys very painefully, and with
great labor came to a town called Blaniow, and there tarried monday all day,
and there all day counseled the capitaines both of England, and Flanders or
Burgon what was best to be done.

On tewsday in the morning came a trumpet from the Castle of Hedyng and desired
to speak with the captain, Message from Hedyng.
which incontinent sent for him: my lord captain said the trumpet, the
captain of Hedyng desires you to come thither and see the place, and on the
walls he will bring you good luck, and he prays you not to hurt the dear in
his park, and for any other hurt you can do him he cares not: well said the
lord Admyrall, I will send him answer by my trumpet. The answ^r
Incontinent he called a trumpet and bad him go to Hedyng to Mounsire de Bees
and to say to him that he would come to the castle of Hedyng, and if he slay
any of my men with his artillery, let him trust me, that if I get the
castle I shall save neither man, woman, nor child. So with that message the
trumpet departed and declared it to Mounsire de Bees, which said that it was
spoken of noble courage, and so the trumpet returned, and the same day the camp
was removed and the whole army came about the castle of Hedyng, Hedyng (...).
at which time the town of Hedyng was sore infecte with pestilence, wherefore
a general commandment was given that no man should ones come into the town,
howbeit some of the Burgonyans did and set fire in the houses.

When the siege was planted, the ordinance was very light for the ways were
so deep and the ground so wet that the great ordinance could not be carried.
This thing was well debated by the lord Admiral and the capitaines. After they
had been there.xi. days, first they considered that the castle could not be
obtained without great ordinance, which in no wise could then be carried, and
also if they with the light ordinance shotyng should spend all their powder
and not get the castle than in them might be reckened great folly, and also
they should be in great ieopardie to pass without ordinance, and further the
plage began sore in the army, wherefore they determined to leave the siege and
return. But while they lay at y^ town they bet down roffes, galleries,
chymnies, and such other things as the light ordinance would beat down,
which sore defaced the beauty of the castle. They also destroyed all the dear
in the Park, which were falowe dear and left none for the captain. The
Englishemen were clearly determined to have assauted the castle if the
Burgonions would have done the same: The cause why the castle was not assa^^ted.
but they refused, which seeing the Englishmen left the assaut alone: For
though the Englishemen had gotten it, it should have been delivered to the
Emperors use by the treaty, fbr he claymed it as his inheritance, which
caused the Englishemen to leave the assaut.

And so the.xxii. day of September they rered the siege and set them selfs in
good order of battle and passed still onwarde til they came to Dorlans and
brent the town, The siege raised.
and rased the castle, and from thence came to the good town of Darrier and
brent and spoiled the same. Thus he brent all the way as he passed: and ever the
wether was worse, and men fell sick, wherefore the Burgonions and the
Spaniardes returned into Flaunders about Betwyn.

Then the lord Admyrall saw that it was no time to keep the field, turned
bacward in good order of battle and came to Calaice the.xvi. day of October.
And while he lay at Calayce he sent out sir Willya^ Sands, sir Morice
Barkeley, sir Willyam Fitzwillyam with.iii.M. men, which brent Marguyson
which was newly edified and fortefied, they brent also the town of saint
Iohnes Rhode and Temple town, and many villages. At this voyage were taken many
prisoners.xiiii.M. sheep, xiiii. C. great cattal as Oxe^ and Kyen, and xiii.C.
hogs, and.vi.C. Mares and Horses, with this great botie this crew returned to
Calayce in safety.

Then y^ lord Admyral sent sir Ihon Walop with.ix.C. men to saint Omers to lie
there and at Guysnes, Hammes, and at Mark, and at Oy he left another nombre
and left capitaines to ouerse them, and all the soudiers had a months wages
paid them and to returned into England.

The adventurers tarried still and gat many good prays, and brought to the
garrisons, and lacked nothing: they were much drad of all the common people,
for of them they had great prays, and daily learned feats of war which
made them the bolder.

When the lord Admiral had set all things in an order on that side the sea,
he took ship and with the Navy came into the river of Thames and so to the
king, of whom he was well welcomed and not unworthy.

In this season were banished out of Southwarke xii. Scotts which had dwelt
there a long season and were conveyed from parish to parish by the constable
like men y^ hadabiured the realm, and on their uttermost garment a white
cross before and another behynd them. Thus were they conucyed through London
Northwarde till they came to Scotland.

While the lord Admyral was this in France destroiyng the country, the noble
Earl of Shrewsbury lord George Talbot and Steward of the kings household
prepared by the kings commandment a great army toward Scotland: for the king
was informed that Duke Ihon of Albany (which in ye Parliament of Scotland was
made lord governor of the realm and of the young king during his nonage) had
raised a mighty and puissaunt host of Scotts to the number of, lxxx.M. men as
after was well known, which were warlike appointed, and that he with.v.C.
Frenchemen with handgunnes and other great artillery was coming forward to
invade the west Marches of England adioynyng toward Scotland. Wherefore the
king sent word to therle of Shrewsbury, which with all diligence like a noble
capitain set forward toward York, and wrote to therles of Northumberland,
Westmerland and Darby, to the lord Dacres, Lumley, Clyfford, Scrope, Latemer,
Ogle, Darcy, Conyers, and to all other gentlemen to be ready wtin.viii. hours
warnyng with all their powers, and so in iorniyng, he with his power which was
great, came to the city of York abidyng the ordinance, and the lords and
all other things necessary in such a case.

In the mean season the Scotts were come nigh to the city of Carleyle and
lodged them nigh the water of Eske not far from Sulway sands, and there made
their abode. Therle of Westmerland, ye lord Dacres, the lord Roos, the lord
Mountaigle, with the knights of Lancashere, Westmerland and Cumberland were
ready with.xxviii.M. men to have given them battle.

When the Scotts saw that they could not come into England with out battle,
the lords of Scotland drew to counsel, and amongst all one wyseman said, my
lords, hither be we come by the commandment of my lord Governor the duke of
Albany, The saiyngor a Scottishe Earl.
but for what ause the war is we should know: you al remember that the last
war was to ye realm of Scotland much prejudicial: For king James the.iiii.
brought the realm of Scotland to the best that ever it was: and by his war
it was brought to ye worst almost that may be, for by that war was he and his
nobility slain, which Scotland sore lame^teth: Wherefore by mine advice let
us go to ye duke and know of him the cause. The^ they al came to y^ dukes
court, and therle of Arrayn an ancient man spoke for the^ al and said, my lord
Governor, by your will and commandment here is assembled almost all ye
nobility of Scotland with their power upon a pretense to enter into England, my
lords here would know ye cause and quarrel why this war is begone, if it might
please your goodness, it should well satisfy their mi^des

The duke studied a good while and said: this question would have been
demanded or now: The answer of the duke of Albany.
For well you know yt I for the very love that I bear to ye realm of Scotland,
of the which I have my name, honor and lineage. I have passed ye seas out of ye
noble realm of France into this realm of Scotland. One great cause to bring
you to a unity when you were in division: By reason of which division your
realm was likely to be conquered and destroyed. Also ye French king by my
suites and interessio^ will join with you in aid against thenglishe nation: and
when this war was determined in ye parliament, you made me capitain,
authorisyng me to invade England with ba^ner displaied: then was no question
demanded of y^ right or quarrel, and that that I have is by your assent and
agreement, and that I will justify: But to answer your demand, my think you
have just cause to invade England with fire, sword, and blood, if you be not
to for getfull, and without you will bear dishonor and reproach for ever: For
you know that this realm of Scotland is our inheritance as a portion of y^
world allotted to our nation and au^cetors who^ we succeed: Then where may be
better war then to maintain this our natural inheritance, is not daily seen
the great invasions y^ thenglishmen on us make, ye great ma^slaughters and
murders with robberies and spoils that they do daily? Is not this a cause of
war? To defend the country is y^ office of a king, the honor of noble men
and the very service of chiualry, and the duty natural of ye cominaltie. For I
think it a just quarrel if we might co^quere the realm of England and annex it
to our realm and make a Monarchy: For since ye beginning of our habitacion in
this Isle of Britaigne, that nacio^ and we have been enemies, and us they have
ever hated, and yet we have ever withstode the^ til at ye last battle of
Branxston where we by chance lost our sovereign lord and many noble men, but
that was by treason of his lord cha^berlain, and yet I think we wan ye field:
which murder I think all we noble men ought to revenge. Therefore I would that
you should coragiously auau^ce your self in this quarrel to get honor and to be
reue^ged

Then a sad man called the president of the cou^sail said, my lord: Fortune of
war is led by him that all ledeth, and he strikes the stroke, we can work no
miracles, and here are y^ lords of England ready to encountre us, and surely
they will fight, for their power shall encreace daily and ours is at the highest.
And if God give us ye victory as I trust he will, yet have we not won the feld.
For ready coming is ye lord Talbot earl of Shrewsbury so much drad in France
as you know well, with a great puissau^t army, and there is no doubt but the
king of England will send or bring another army, if we should chance to get
the ^yrst battle: if we get the ii. feld, that will not be without loss of many
nobles, by reason whereof the realm shall be weaker. And if we be overcome, how
many shall be slain god knows: They y^ fle be worthy to be reputed as traitors
to ye king and so by wilfulnes and folishe hardynes y^ realm shall be in
ieopardie to be undone, and I say, while the king is wtin age, we ought to move
no war, since by war we may bring him to distruccion. Alas said y^ duke, here is
al ye puissau^ce of Scotland: if we return, we shall encorage our enemies, and
the realm of Scotland shall ever be rebuked and defamed. All this communicacion
in cou^sail was written ^y one sir Lother priest and Scot and secretary to ye
queen of Scotts, which was a secretary there in y^ host at that time, to a
Scottishe priest y^ dwelt in London: and farther he wrote that the Scottishe
king did much for the French kings pleasure to draw the lords of England with
their powers toward that party and to put the king of England to charges, so
that he should not invade France.

After this co^municacion the queen of Scotts which doubted the sequel of
this matter, sent word to the duke and him required to common of a peace with the
warden of thenglishe Marches, which sent an Herald to the lord Daker then
warden of y^ west Marches, y^ lord Daker agreed, and upon hostages went to the
duke of Albany into his ca^pe, where y^ queen of Scotts by that time was come,
and so there was an abstinence of war taken for a season: and in the mean time
the duke and the queen promised to send Ambassa^ors to the king of England to
co^lude a peace: And thus y^ Scotts returned into their houses. This truce was
taken the xi. day of September between England and Scotland this xiiii. year of
y^ king. Therle of Shrewsbury hearing of the truce by the lord Dacres letters
returned with all his company, sorry that he had not gone forward on the Scotts.
In this season the commisioners sat for the loan of the x. part of every man's
substance in every shyre, the people were sworn and some auaunsed them selfs
more then they were worth of pride, not remembryng what was coming, and the
commissioners did what they could to set the people to the vttermoste, which
afterward turned the people to much heaviness, and by reason of this, great
sums of money were levied, but the most part were not content, because the
loan was so suddenly paid. But under the value of.v. pound no man lent a
penny. The.vii. day of October was.iiii.M. pound paid to the city of London
which was lent for a private cause about the loan of the.x. part.

In this year the bakers of London came and told the Mayre that corn would be
dear, whereupon he and thaldermen made provision for xv.C. quarters, and when it
was come they would bye none, and made the common people believe that it was
musty, because they would utter their own, so that the lord Cardynal was
feign to prove it, and found the bakers false and commanded them to bye it.

The xvi. day of October the king lay at Hitchyn in Hartford shyre to see this
Hawks ^lye, and by chance, there the kings lodgyng was on fire and he is
great fear, but in no i^opardie, and so the king came shortly to London and
sent for the Mayre and diverse comyners and to them gave thanks for many
kyndnes which they thought they had well deserved.

The war thus co^tinuyng between the French king and the king of England,
there was a valiant capitane Constable of the castle of Hammes under the lord
Mount^oy called sir Richard Whethyll, the Fre^chemen him somuche hated that
they devised a policy to take him, and so on Christmasday at night there
issued out of Bullain CC. horsemen and CCC. fotemen, and somuche they travailed
that all together were come to a place where Hoppes grew, nere Hammes castle
called Catte Hall. When they were come thither, they kept theimselfes covert,
and in the morning they brake up the Turn pyke by saint Gertrudes: Then sent
they into Hammes Marshe.ix. or.x. fotemen to take cattle. In the castle the
alarm rang, but the embushment kept them still close: The constable perceived
what the alarm meant, and armed him, and so did his archers, and took his
horse, and three ge^tlemen went on foot by him. The Frenchmen of purpose driued
the cattle here and there as though it would not be driven, sir Richard
Whethyll pursued them. When the driuers saw him, they drove the cattle into a
great field: then were the bushment of horsemen and fotemen between him and
saint Gertrudes, and they suddenly brake out on him, and the three gentlemen on
foot fought valiantly but they were slain, the knight alighted and fought on
foot manfully, but he was borne down with pykes, and sore wounded and so was
compelled to yield himself prisoner: by that time were xxx. archers come out of
the castle, and when they saw the great number of the Frenchemen, then they
knew that their captain was betrayed and so returned.

In this Christmas which was kept at Eltham, the Cardinal made diverse
reformacions for the kings household, and all they that had no masters were
commanded to avoid.

The.xxvii. day of February sir Ihon Walop knight sent.lx. auenturers from
Guysnes to seek auentures, and they met with a gentlemanne called Thomas
Palmer which went with them. And out of a castle between Bullaine and
Marguyson called Hadyngham came out.lxxx. Frenchemen with Pykes and Crosbowes,
and set on the same Palmer which him defended.

Al his company saving, xxiii. persons were gone about to seek their pray.
These.xxiii. persons him manfully succored and after the Frenchemen had
slain his horse and wounded him, his company slew.iii. Frenchemen and took
xxv. and live which were all hurt and so were thenglishmen, for the Frenchemen
fought sore. All these prisoners were brought to Guisnes, and the remnant of
thaduenturers returned with much cattle.

The last day of February.lx. Englishmen archers and bilmen came to a place
called saint Anthonies nere to Marguison and entered ye houses and fell a
spoilyng: The Frenchmen were thereof advertised by a spy, and came on and set on
a few Englishmen which were together: then with noise other of thenglishmen
approached, so they were.xl. persons. Then came out a fresh embushment of
Frenchmen and set on thenglishmen and so slew.xi. and took xx. prisoners and
the other escaped. The duke of Albany returned.
About this time ye duke of Albany sailed out of Scotland into France, and the
French king somuche favored him, yt as it was showed to the king of England for
truth, that when ye French king rode through Paris he rode on y^ one hand and
Richard de la Pole a traitor to England and by parliament attainted on y^ other
hand, and that the duke had asked of the French king v.M. horsemen and.x.M.
Almaines, and that he had promised ye French king if he had those.xv.M. men, he
would do one of these.iii. things, either sley y^ king of England in battle,
or else take him prisoner, or else drive him out of his realm. These were
shameful bragges of a noble man and very folishe.

Ye have hard before how truce was taken by ye duke of Albany and the lord
Da^res for a season between England and Scotland and that Ambassadors should be
sent to ye king of England, so it was y^ in October according to their
accustomed doublenes they sent.iii. personages of small behauor as it seemed* as
Ambassadors from Scotland: they were smally regarded and shortly departed. Their
Commission was to know whether the same time or abstine^ce of war was by ye
king asse^ted to or not, Ambassade from S^otla^d.
and other commission had they none. Thus they meant craftily as you may
perceive, for in such troublous time they may steal unpunished, which they
may not do in time of peace. Wherefore the king to be sure of them sent for
Henry the.v. earl of Northumberland and him made warden of the whole Marches
which tha^kefully accepted the same, and so departed lord Warden. But how soever
it happened he made suite to y^ king and his cou^sail and never left, till he
was discharged of the same, and then therle of Surray lord Admyral of England
was made general warden, and the lord Marquis Dorset was made Warden of thest
Marches and Myddil, and the lord Dacres of the west Marches: which.iii.
lords sped them thither the vi. day of March for y^ defense of the borders.
For refusyng of this office th^rle of Northumberland was not regarded of his
own tenau^tes which disdained him and his blod and much lamented his folly,
and all men esteemed him without heart or love of honor and chivalry.

The king out of hand sent co^missions to gather ye loan, this was called the
practisyng of the loan, The ^oane gathered.
which sore emptied men's purses. In the same month were musters taken through
the realm and every ma commanded to be ready within a days warnyng to do the
king service in harnes, which caused every man of honesty to bye harnes and
weapon.

The lord Marquis Dorset warden of the East Marches between England and
Scotland accompanied with sir Willyam Bulmer and sir Arthur Darcy and many
other noble men, the second day of April then being shere thursday entered into
Tyuedale and so.x. mile into Galoway and brent on every side towns and
villages, and the Scotts in great number showed themselfes on the hills and
did not approach, and so he all that night tarried in the Scottishe ground and
on good Friday returned with their botie which was.iiii.M. head of nete into
England, when they had brent Grymslay, Mowhouse, Dufforde mylles, Ackeforthe,
Crowlyng, Nowes manner, Midder Crowling, Marbottel, Low Bog, Sefforth Manner,
Myddyl rigge, Primsed, Broket, Shawes Haruel, wide open Haught and other tounes
and villages, and yet lost not many men.

The.xv. day of April began a Parliament at the black Friars in London, and
that day the Mass of the holy ghost was song, all the lords being present in
their Parliament robes. And when Mass was finished the king came into the
Parliament chamber and there satte down in the seat royal or throne, and at
his fete on the right side satte the Cardynal of York and the Archbishop of
Cantorbury, and at the rail behind stood doctor Tu^stal bishop of London,
which made to the whole Parliament an eloquent Oracion, declaryng to the people
the office of a king. First he must be a man of judgment according to the
saying of the Prophet David Deus iudicium tuum regi da, etc. The Oracion of
Doctor Tu^stal bishop of London.
Also he must be a man of great learning according to the saying of the
Prophet, Erudimini qui iudicatis ^erram. According to which sayings he said
that God had sent us a prince of great judgment, of great lernyng, and great
experience, which according to his princely duty forgot not to study to
set forward all things which might be profitable to his people and realm,
least might be laid to his charge the saying of Seneca Es rex and non habes
tempus esse rex? Art thou a king and have no time to be a king? which is as much
to say, as art thou a king and do nothing profitable to thy people? Art thou
a king and see the people have an insufficient law? Art thou a king and wilt
not provide remedy for the mischief of thy people? These things have moved
the kings highness to call this his high court of Parliament both for the
remedy of mischiefs which be in the common law, as recoueries, forain vouchers
and corrupt trials. And for making and orderyng of new estatutes which may be
to the high auauncement of the common wealth, wherefore he wylleth he commons to
repare to the common house and there to elect them a speaker, or their common
mouth, and to certify the lord Chancellor of the same, which should
thereof make report to the kings most noble grace, which should declare his
pleasure when he would have him presented before his person. This was the
cause of the Parlyament he said, but surely of these things no word was
spoken in the whole Parlyament, and in effect no good act made except the
grant of a great subsidy were one, but according to this instruccion the
commons departed to the common house and chose for their speaker sir Thomas
Moore knight and presented him the saturday after in the Parliament chamber,
where he according to the old usage disabled himself both in wit, The Oracion
of sir Thomas More.
learning, and discrecion, to speak before the king, and brought in for his
purpose how one Phormio desired Hanniball to come to his readyng, which
thereto assented, and when Hannyball was come he began to read, de re
militari, that is of Chivalry, when Hannyball perceived him, he called him
arrogant fool, because he would presume to teach him which was master of
Chivalry, in the feats of war. So the speaker said, if he should speak
before the king of learning and orderyng of a common wealth and such other like
the king being so well learned and of such prudence and experience might say
to him as Hannyball said to Phormio. Wherefore he desired his grace that the
commons might chose another speaker: The Cardinal answered, that the king
knew his wit, learning and discrecion by long experience in his service:
wherefore he thought that the commons had chosen him as the most metest of all,
and so he did admit him. Than sir Th^mas Moore gave to the king his most
humble thanks, and desired of him two peticions: The one, if he should de sent
from the commons to the king on message and mistake their intent, that he might
with the kings pleasure resort again to the commons for the knowledge of their
true meaning: The other was, if in communicacion and reasonyng any man in the
common house should speak more largely then of duty he ought to do, that all
such offenses should be pardoned, and that to be entered of record, which two
peticions were granted, and so thus began the Parlyament and continued as you
shall hear.

Because an evil chance happened to the great rebuke of all christen princes,
The Rhodes besieged.
I entend briefly to declare the same miserable chance. In the beginning of
this year Sultan Solomon Pac called ye great Turk which was but the viii. of
ye ligne of Ottoman, the first that took upon him to be a great capitain or
ruler. And to whom Sultan Selyme his father had lost thempyres of
Constantinoble, Trapesonde, Alexandry, and Babylon, with many diverse kingdoms
and realms: which Sultan Solymon the year before had gotten the town of
Belgrado being the key of Hungary. Because the saw all ye great princes in
Christendom now at discord, Why ye turk counted the Rhodes.
thought it most for his honor and profit to make war on the Isle of ye
Rodes and to take the same, which Isle had been kept by the space of.CC.xiiii.
years by the brethren or knights of the order of saint Iohnes of Jerusalem.
Diverse things moved him to take this enterprice, One was because this Isle
stood so that the religious of the same oftentimes took and destroyed his
ships as they came with gold and other riches from Egypt, Sirie and other
Estparties to Constantinoble, so that by them of that Isle he sustained more
hurt then by all Christendom, because the said Isle stood in the entry toward
Constantinople. Another mocion was because his father when he died charged him
to assay to take the Rhodes for to be revenged of the shame that they had done
to his graundfather Mahomet the great Turk which was with dishonor beten from
the siege of the Rhodes. But the greatest occasion of all was the exhortacion
of a great counsailer of the religion called Andrewe Amyral borne in
Portyngale, which knew the whole estate and in what case the town stood in:
The cause why this Andrew Amyral bare malice to his religion, was because after
the death of Friar Fabrica de Laretto lord master of their religion, he was
not elected to that honor, but one Philip de Uyllyers de Lisle Adam of France
was named to be lord Master, wherefore the said Andrew provoked the Turk to
come to the Rhodes.

The great Turk seeing so great an occasion offered and desiryng honor, and
also knowing the fortress of y^ Rhodes to lack municions (for surely the
brethren of the said order were both of such wealth and pride, and also lived
after such an ungracious and godly fashion, that they took neither heed of
their vow and solemn profession, nor also did for^se the thing to come, so
that the great wealth of them, and their evil living blinded them, so that they
thought ye Turk durst not ones attempt to set on their garrison, and so they
being eleuate in this point of pride, left their town unfurnished and so were
suddenly surprised as you shall hear) wherefore ye said Turk couerty provided
for.iii.C. sail, in y^ which he al his carried artilery and all other things
necessary: in ye which army were.lx.M. myners and pyoners prepared for the
only intent to dig and mine: all the rest of the army of y^ Turk came by
la^d to a place called Fysco, which stands so directly against y^ Rhodes that
a fire many be seen from the one side to the other, from which place the Turk
sent letters to ye abouenamed Philip de Uylliers lord Master of the said
religion signifiyng to him that he would have y^ said Isle for y^ great damage
y^ they had done to him and his people, The Turke^ letter.
and if they would yield to him the said Isle, he promised on his faith and by
Mahomet his first prophet, they should have no damage nor hurt by him, and that
they that would depart should go in safety, and they that would tarry and serve
him should have good wages, and if they refused this to do, he swear that he
would subvert the walls of their fortress and destroy them al and make them
slaves, which letter was dated at Constantinople the first day of June. The
said Lord Master and his compaignie were greatly abashed of this letter, but
yet like hardy gentlemen they intended to defend them, and made all the
preparacions that they could do in so short a space, and wrote to all princes
christen of their need and distres. But the Turk like a wyly serpent knowing
the great division amongst y^ christen princes, so that he knew that they
could send no succors to the Rhodes, sent CC.M. Turks which arrived in the
Isle of the Rhodes on Mydsomerday, which was y^ feastful day of y^ Rhodians in
honor of S. Ihon baptist which sudden coming sore abashed the Rhodyans being
but.vi.C. knights and v.M. other mete to bear arms: yet of noble courage and
trusting in God, they determined to defend the enemies of God, and the xxviii.
day of July the Turk arrived there in his own person, which much encoraged
his people.

When the Turk was arrived, he bent his ordinance toward the town and did
no great harm, when he saw that the walls were of that defense that
ordinance did little harm, he caused all his Pyoners to cast yerth one bank
over another still till they came within a bowshot of the wall, The mou^tes.
and although that many of the pyoners were slain with ordinance of the town,
they never ceased till they had made a bank of earth higher by.x. foot then
the wall of the town, and they there laid their ordinance, so that no
person durst stir on the walls or Bulworkes, and thus with mountains of
yerth was the town environed and behynd the mountains lay the Basheaux and
chief capitaines of the Turk which were ever ready to take their advantage,
and daily they shot into the toune^ and bet down houses and slew the people
in the streates, for they upon this mount might easily see into the town.
Beside this, The Mines.
the Turk caused so many mines mines to be made in diverse places, that they
within were not able to make countermynes for lack of people, insomuche as
women were set a work to dygge and carry, by reason whereof a great part of the
walls were overthrown, and if they within had not made countermines the town
had been gotten within a short space.

Also the Turks in September gave to the Rhodyans four great assautes like
valiant warriers, The assautes
but the Christen men within, so valiantly defended them, that at every assaut
they lost at the lest.ii.M. men, and at the fourth assaut they lost.x.M. Turks
and more.

The great Turk seeing the loss of his men at the assautes, sent for Mo^staffa
Basshaw, through whose counsel he took on him this enterprice and much blamed
him that he had made him believe that he might have the town within.xii. days
or in a month at ye most wherefore in y^ fury he would hue put him to death,
if the other Bass^awes had not entreated for him: but in conclusion ye Turk
determined clearly to raise his siege and to depart, and so had done if that
same night sir Andrew Amyrall that you heard of before and a Jew being within
the Rhodes had not written letters and shot them out on quarelles into the
Turks army. By which letters the Turk knew the necessity of the town and
feebleness of the people, which caused him to change his purpose. Treason
espied.
But this treason was espied, and the traitors taken and put to terrible
execucion, And the Turk caused so many Mines to be made, that although some
took none effect, yet by some he overthrew both Bulwarks, walls and
towers, so that he might enter into the town: and so on saint Andrews even
he caused a great assaut to be given, which was very fierce, but yet the
Christen men so valiauntly defended them, that they slew three thousand Turks
and mo, and kept them from enteryng that day, but the Citezens of the Rhodes
after this assault, came to the lord Master, and prayed him to have
compassion of them, their wives and children, and showed him that if the town
were taken by assault, (as it was like to be) that they al should be cruelly
murdered, the Lord Master much regarded his honor, and comforted the people
with fair words, but by chance about the same time, the great Turk sent a
letter into the Rhodes, willing them to deliver the town, and they all should
have their lives and goods, and they that would tarry, should tarry in quiet,
and they that would depart, should sauely depart.

When this letter was known, then the people cried out on the lord Master, to
take the offer, wherefore he calling all his counsel together seeing that it
was not possible to keep the town long, both for lack of artilary and
vitaile, and also because his number was so minished, that scace he had
soldiers to keep the walls: wherefore he by great advice determined to take
the Turks offer, and so sent to him two of his religion, for the farther
conclusion and assurance of the same, The yeldyng up of the Rhodes.
which well entertained them, and had writings sealed of al things that they
desired, to which two knights. Aymeche Bassaw swear by his faith that there
was slain at the siege.lxiiii. thousand Turks, and.xl. thousand dedde of
mortality and mo.

And so on Christmas day, the great Turk himself entered into the Rhodes,
and took possession thereof, and the lord Master and all his religion, the
first day of January took ship and sailed to Candy, and s^ in conclusion came
to Rome, and there declared his chance and adventure. Thus was the town and
the isle of the Rhodes, taken by the great Turk, which was a great succor to
all Christian men, resortyng into the Este parts of the world, which chance
was much lamented through all Christendom, and much blame put in all Princes,
because they sent no succor nor aid to the Isle.

And this year the bishop of Duresme died, and the king gave the bishoprike
to the Cardinal, and he resigned the bishoprike of Bathe, to doctor Ihon
Clerk master of the Rolls, and he made sir Henry Marney his vicechamberleyn
lord Privy Seal, and after created him lord Marney. In the end of this year,
doctor Blithe bishopp of Chester, was attached for treason, but he acquit
himself. And about this season, the Cardinal of York being Legate, proved
testamentes, and did call before him, all the executors and administrators, of
every Dioces within the realm, so that the bishops and ordinaries, did prove
no great wills in their Dioces, except he were compounded with, not to their
little disauauntage. Also by his power Legantine he gave by prouencions, all
benefices belongyng to spiritual persons, by the which doing, he not only
had the hatred of the spirituality, but also he ran into the danger of the
Praemunire, which he sore after repented, as it shall appear in the xxi. year
of this king.

The.xv. year.
THe Parliament being begone, The.xv* year.
as you have hard before rehearsed, the Cardinal accompaignied with diverse
lords, The Cardinall^s oracio^.
as well of the Spirituality, as of the temporaltie, came the xxix. day of
April into the Common house, where he cloquently declared to the commons, how
the French King Fraunces the first, called the most Christened king, had so
often times broken promise with the king of England, and his well-beloved nephew
Charles the Emperor, that the king of his honor, could not longer suffer. For
first he declared, that the metyng of thesaied two princes at Guysnes, thesaid
French king was sworn, to keep all the articles contained in the tripartie
league, made between him, the Emperor, and the king of England, sith the
which time, he has made war on themperors dominions by Robert de la March
his capitain. He also has with holden the tributes and other paimentes, which
he should pay to the king of England, for redemption of Tornay and Tirwin,
and not with this content, has not alonely robbed and spoiled the kings
subjects, but also has sent Ihon duke of Albany into Scotland, to make war
and to invade this realm, wherefore the King of necessity was driven to war
and defense, which in no wise could be maintained, without great somes of
money, The dema^de
and he thought no less then.viii.C.M.^. to be re^^ed of the fifth part of
every man's goods and lands, that is to say.iiii.s. of every pound, for he
said that the year following, the King and the Emperor should make such war
in France, as has not been seen.

After that he had declared his matter at length, exhortyng the Commons to aid
their prince, in time of necessity, he departed out of the common house. The
morrow after, sir Thomas More being speker, declared all the Cardinals
oracion again to the commons, and enforced his demand strongly, saying: that
of duty men ought not to deny to pay iiii.^. of the pound. But for all
that, it was denied and proved manifestly, that if the fifth part of
substance of the Realm, were but.viii.C. M.^. and if men should pay to the
king, the fifth part of their goods, in money or plate, it was proved, that
there was not so much money out of the kings hands, in all the realm, for
the fifth part of every man's goods, is not in money nor plate: For although
five men were well monyed, five thousand were not so, the gentleman of lands,
has not the fifth part of the value in coin: the Merchaunt that is rich of
Silk, Wolle, Tynne, Clothe, and such Merchaundise, has not the fifth part in
money, the husband man is rich in Corn and cattle, yet he lacks of that
some. Likewise viteilers and all other artificers, be rich in household
stuff, and not in money: and then consequently, if all the moeny were brought
to the kings hands, then men must barter clothe for vitaile, and bread for
chief, and so one thing for another: then consider that after this valuacion,
the king has had by the way of loan.ii.^. of the pound, which
is.iiii.C.M.^. and now to have.iiii.^. of the.^. which amounts in the
whole.xii.C.M.^. which first and last is.vi.^. of the.^. which is almost the
third part of every man's good, which in coin cannot be had within this
Realm, for the proof whereof was alleged, that if there were in England,
but.xv.M. parishes, and every parish should give a.C. mark, that were
but.xv.C.M. mark, which is but x.C.M.^. and how many parishes be in England
on with another able to spare a.C. marks, out of citees and tounes: and where
it is written, that in England there be.xl. M. Parish Churches, it was
proved that there were not.xiii. M. parish churches at this vaie. Then account
the whole some cannot amounte above.x.C.M.^. and the king demau^deth.viii.C.M.
and he according to this valuacion* has had.iiii.C.M pound, therefore it was
thought, the some was impossible to be levied, and if all the coin were in the
kings hands, how should men live: Also the king had of the spiritual men the
last year, iiii.s. of the pound.

After long reasonyng, there were certain appointed, to declare the
impossibilite of this demand to the Cardinal, which according to their
commission, declared to him substancially the poverty and skarcenes of the
realm: all which reasons and demonstracions, he little regarded, and then
thesaid persons, most m^kely beseched his grace, to move the kings highness,
to be content with a more easier some, to the which he currishly answered,
that he would rather have his tongue, plucked out of his hedde with a pair of
pinsons, then to move the king, to take any less some: with which answer,
they almost dismayed, came and made report to the common house, where every
day was reasonyng, but nothing concluded.

Wherefore the Cardinal came again to the common house, and desired to be
reasoned withal, to whom it was answered, that the fashion of the nether house
was, to hear and not to reason, but among themselfes. Then he showed the
realm to be of great riches, first, because the kings customs were greater
now, then they were before time: also he alleged sumpteous buildings, plate,
rich apparel, of men, women, children, and servants, fat feasts, and
dilicate dishes, which things were all tokens of great abundance: with
which repetyng of men's substance, as though he had repined or disdained,
that any man should fare well, or be well clothed, but himself, the commons
greatly grudged. And when he was departed out of the house, it was proved, that
honest apparel of the commodities of this Realm, abundance of plate, and
honest viandes, were profitable to the realm, and not prodigal.

After long debatyng, the Commons concluded to grant.ii. s. of the pound, of
every man's lands or goods, that was worth.xx. pound, or might dispende.xx.
pound, to be taken for the king, and so upward of every.xx. s. two. s. and
from.xl. s. to.xx. pound, of every.xx. s.xii. d. and under.xl. s. of every
head, xvi. years and upward.iiii. d. to be paid in two years. This grant was
reported to the Cardinal, which therewith was sore discontent, and said, that
the lords had granted.iii. s. of the pound, which was proved untrue, for in
deed they had granted nothing, but harkened all upon the commons.

Then a knight called sir Ihon Huse of Lincolneshire, said, to please the
Cardinal somewhat, let us gentlemen of fifty pound land and vpwardes, give to
the king of our lands.xii. d. of the pound, to be paid in three year: with
which mocion diverse gentlemen were sore discontent. And when the question was
asked, ten or.xii. of the gentlemen said yea, and when the naie should be
asked, the commons said nothing, for they would not condemn, nor let the
ge^tlemen to charge themselfes, and so by.x. or.xii. persons the gentlemen were
burdened, with.xii. d. more then other, for the which grant, sir Ihon Huse
and much evil will.

After this grant made the.xxi. day of May, because of Whitsontide the
Parliament was proroged to the tenth day of June: During which prorogacion,
the common people said to the Burgesses, sirs, we hear say you will
grant.iiii. s. of the pound, we advise you to do so that you may go home,
with many evil words and threatenynges.

And in this season, the Cardinal by his power lega^tine, dissolved the
Conuocacion at Paul's, called by the Archbishop of Cantorbury, and called him
and all the clergy, to his conuocacio^ to Westminster, which was never seen
before in England, whereof master Skelto^ a merry Poet wrote. Gentle Paul lay
down thy sweard: For Peter of westminster has shaven thy beard.

When the parliament was begone again, the landed men of fifty pound and
upward, seeing that they were charged, with.xii. d. of every pound of their
lands, moved, that all such as were worth fifty pound in goods and upward,
should pay also.xii. d. of the pound, in the.iiii. year. At the which mocion
was much reasonyng, and at the last the.xxvii. day of June, the question was
asked, and doubtful it was, whether the yea or nay were most, then was the
house divided, and all the commons severed theimselfes, from the knights of the
sheres, so that one yea part remained only the knights of the shire, and the
commons stiffly affirmed that the mocioners of this demand, were enemies to the
realm. At the last the Speaker called them all together, and after long
perswadyng, and privy laboryng of friends, it was agreed that.xii. d. of the
pound should be paid the fourth year, of fifty pound in goods.

After this the parliament the *xxxi. day of July, was adiorned to
Westminster, and there continued till the.xiii. day of August, and that day
at ix. o^ the clock in the night dissolved. During the time of this Parliament
the.xxvii. day of April, was Sir Arthur Plantagenet, bastard son to king
Edward the fourth, at Bridewell created viscount Lisle, in the right of his
wife, which was wife to Edmond Dudley behedded.

In this season was true word brought, that on Christmas day last past, the
strong town of the Rhodes was delivered, to the great Turk called Sultan
Soliman, with the whole Islande, to the great hurt of all Christian nations:
the causes of the loss, was the ^uill living of the brethren or knights, and
negligence of provision for the defense, and the envy and treason amongst
themselfes, as it is written and reported.

This year Cristierne King of Denmark with his wife, which was sister to the
Emperor Charles, and his three children, with.xviii. ships arrived in
Flaunders, clean banished out of his realms and dominions, by his uncle
Frederick Duke of Ho^st, and his own subjects, for his cruelty as is
written. Which Cristierne with his wife, was well entertained of the Duches of
Sauoy, and a pencion assigned to him to live on, in Brabant and Hollande.
During the time of his there soiornyng, he made much suite to come into
England, to see and speak with the king, which request was to him granted,
and so he and his Queen, with four gentlewomen, The King of Denmarkes coming
into England^.
and a train of forty persons, poor and evil appareled, landed at Dover
the.xv. day of June, where he was nobely received, by the earl of Devonshire,
and the bishops of Excester, and Rochester, and diverse Knights and
Esquiers, and so brought to Grenewiche: where the King and the Queen, standing
under their clothes of estate, received in the great hall of Grenewiche, king
Cristerne and Queen Isabell his wife. And he dined with the king, and she with
the queen, both set under the clothe of estate, and were sumpteously served,
of all dilicate viandes.

And when he had soiorned there a season, every day feasted at the Court, he
was conueighed to London, and lodged at Bathe place, where he hearing of the
watch in London, on saint Peter's even, desired to se it, and so was
accompainied with the duke of Suffolk, the Earls of Oxford, Es^ex, and Kent,
and diverse other lords and ladies, and brought into the Kings head in Chepe,
where the city of London made to him and his wife a costly banquet. And when he
had seen the watch, he said, I would to God I had so many Archers, Pikes, and
halberders, as I saw this night, then I trust I would ponishe such, as have
wrongfully dispossessed me, of my realm and country. And after he had solaced
himself in London, he resorted to the king, of whom he had many great gifts,
and likewise had his wife of the queen her aunte* and so took their leave, and
were conueighed to Dover. And when he had been in England.xii. days, he took
shippyng, and sailed again into Flaunders, preisyng much the king of England
and his Court.

During all this season, and session of the parliament, the war was fierce,
both between England and France, and England and Scotland, in so much that
each part, did as much as in them lay, to hurt the other. For on the
borders of Scotland, lay the valiant Earl of Surrey, great Admiral of
England, and the Marquis Dorset, and his three brethren, sir Willyam Co^^ton,
and sir Willyam Kyngston, with diverse other knights and Esquiers, sent to
them by the king, which daily invaded the Realm of Scotland, and threw
down the Castle of We^orberne, the castle of West Nesgate, the Castle of
B^akkater, the tower of Mackewalles, the Tower of Est Nesgate, and many other,
and brent to the number of.xxxvii. villages, and haried the country from the
Este Marches to the West, and never had skirmishe: but they ofte^tymes showed
themselfes in plumpes, waityng their auantage how be it in all this journey,
were few Englishemen lost. Wherefore the Lords perceiuyng, that the Scotts
intended not to make any army into England, fortified the frontiers on every
part, with men and all things necessary for defense, for stealyng or other
small rodes* After al which things set in a perfectnes, they returned toward
the king, and came to the end of the Parliament.

In this season, A ship sonken with stone in ^alice haven*
the Frenchemen having a great desire, to have the kings town of Calice,
devised first to destroy the haven, by the which they supposed, that Calice
might have been lightly gotten, for fault of reskewe. Whereupon they laded an
old ship of.iiii.C. tonne, with great Cane stone, in the port of Deep, which
ship had no mast, but came with a forsaile, as though the mast had been cut,
and cast over the board in the sea in a tempest. And when she came before
Calice, every man that saw her, thought she had been wether driven, and lost
her mast by tempest, and so about.x. of the clock at night the.xxiiii. day
of May, thesaid ship came before Calice haue^, as though she would enter for
harborow, and so was enteryng and missed the channel, and turned to the sands,
toward Rise bank, and the Fre^chemen supposyng, that they had been in the
very channel, launched out their boat, and suddenly set the ship on fire,
and lepte into their boat, and so skaped by the shore. When they of Calice
saw the fire, they were sore troubled, and at the last when the water was
gone, they perceived the ship consumed, and the goodly Cane stone liyng whole.

Wherefore the lord Barnes deputy of Calice, the lord Barkley leuetenaunt of
the castle, the lord Sands thresorer of Calice, and other commanded all the
laborers that might be gotten, to break the remnaunt of the ship, and to carry
away the stone, and so thesaied stone was brought to Calice: whereupon thesaied
capitaines sent a letter, to the capitain of Bull^ine, by Calice pursiuant at
arms, desiryng him to give thanks, to Monsire Lodowyke capitain of Deep, for
the sendyng of for fair a ship, and goodly stone to Calice, which stone
thesaied lords sent word, they had received into the town of Calice, and
that it did the^ much profit, for the fortificacion of thesaied Town,
desiryng him to send more, and they would receive it on the same price. To the
which letter, the capitain of Bulleine answered, I have nothing lost, nor they
have nothing gotten of me, tell him that has lost, with which answer the
pursiuant departed. Whereupon thenglishemen being grieved, there issued out of
Calice an.C. light men of war, called auenturers, and came nere Bulleine,
and obtained a great botie, whereof the garrison of Bullein being advertised,
issued out and followed the Englishmen, and sharply them encountered. The
Englishemen shot so, that the French men which were five hundred, lighted and
fought sore, so that as it appeared evidently, that there were dedde on the
ground.xlvi. Frenchemen, and.xxii. Englishemen, and the Frenchemen took.xx.
Englishemen prisoners, the residue of the Englishemen kept them to gether, and
so came to Calice, the capitain of this enterprise was on Lathebery.

The lord Sands thresorer of Calice, entendyng to be revenged on the
Frenchemen, called the counsel of Calice to him, and declared to them how
that the Frenchemen, and in especial Monsire de Bees capitain of Bullein,
daily imagened to destroy the English pale, and that they on the English
part, had nothing done yet against them: wherefore he advised them all to do
some act, and he himself would be present, and formoste man, and their leder
and capitain. Whereupon it was concluded and commanded, that every manne
should be in a readiness, at the foundyng of a trompet, upon which warnyng,
thesaied lord Sands the.ix day of July early in the morning, sent forth two
hundred light horses, through the English pale, to stop the people from
going, the one toward the other, least his enterprise should be askried, and
so the people were kept in all that day, and in the euenyng about seven of the
clock, he himself with a capitain called Guiot, Thomas Palmer, Ripton. Raufe
Broke and other, set forward with light ordinance and vitaile, and embattailed
themselfes in good arraie, and marched toward Sandifelde by a.xi. of the
clock, and there refreshed themselfes, and in good order, they came to the
Water of Sclaukes, not far from Bullein, which was the tenth day of July.

When they were askried Alarm was rong all the country, and the capitain of
Bullein sent forth.lxx. men of Arms, and four hundred footmen with morice
pikes, crosebowes, and hand gunnes, wherefore capitain Guyot was sent with his
bend of horsemen, to aid thenglishe footmen, which were far behind, and
Capitain Ripton, was appointed to fight with the Frenchemen, and sir Thomas
Palmer, and Raufe Broke, with the remnau^t of the horsemen, stood for a stale.
Then capitain Ripton proffered forward with the Speres of Calice, and the
Frenchmen came on valiauntly, then began a sore skirmishe, the Fre^chemen both
horsemen and footmen, defended the passage at the water of Sclaukes, which is
but a gut made by force of land water, but after long fight, the Englishemen
gat over the water by pure force, and took the Frenchemens standerd, and a
gentleman, which was a man of Arms of Bullein, called Charles be Maruiel, and
ever sir Thomas Palmer and Raufe Broke, stood and aided where necessity was
most. Thus this skirmishe continued, from four of the Clock in the morning,
till ix. of the clock, before None, and ever the Frenchemen increased, but at
the last they retreited themselfes toward Bullein, in which return diverse of
the^ were slain. Or the skirmishe was ended, came the lord Sands with the
fotemen, with his spear on his thigh, and this helm on his head, and greatly
encoraged his compaignie: during which conflict, diverse of Picardy had
gathered them together, and had taken the church of Odirsaell, which was well
fortefied, and a strong place: whereof the Lord Sands being advertised, he
marched thither ward, and in the way burned all that might be brent, and sent
an officer of Arms, to the^ that kept the church of Odirsaell, to yield the
church to him; which to him answered* that they would stand at defense: then
he commanded an assault, which quickly was done, and the Frenchemen defended
the^ selfs, with hand gonnes, crosebowes, and pikes, so that the Englismen
could not enter. Then the lord Sands commanded a curtal, which he had with
him, to be shot to the church, and perced it through: then they within saw
that their defense could not hold, yielded themselves be by and goods. Out of
the Church came.lxxii. Frenchemen, which were taken as prisoners, and all the
goods which they had carried into the church were taken for a botie. Thus by
one of the cl^cke, thesaid tenth day of July, was the church of Odirsaell
taken.

In this while also, had the Frenchemen manned the steple of Odyngham, which
was a very strong tower, much like a castle, to whom the lord Sands sent an
officer of arms, to command them to yield the fortress, to whom they
answered, that they were Frenchemen, and to him they would none yield, and if he
came thither, they would withstand him: whereupon he and his army marched
thither ward, and about four of the clock at after none, he assaulted the
steple, and the Frenchmen them selfs valiauntly defended, but suddenly by a
chance unknown, the s^eple was a sire, and the Frenchemen fled down to the
quire, then the Englishemen lightly entered the body of the church, and
assaulted the French men, which cried mercy and yielded theimselfes, and at
twelve of the Clock at midnight the assault ended, and there were yielded out
of the church forty prisoners.

After which time, the Lord Sands encamped himself, and made good watch for
fear of enemies, and in the morning called to him all the priests, which were
in both the churches, and stood at defense, and said to the^, that they ought
not to be men of war, and notwithstanding he had them as prisoners, yet for
Gods sake he released the^, admonishyng the^, that if ever after they were taken
at defense, they should be hanged on the next galowes: after which monicion
done, he delivered them freely.

About.viii. of the clock in the morning, he marched forward in good order of
battaill, and came to the Castle of Hardyngham, the which he brent and
spoiled, and so the.xi. day of July, he and his co^paignie which passed
not.xii.C. men, of which he had lost but only.xii. returned to Calice with
great store of bestiall and pillage.

This* same season, the French king sent an army of.xviii.M. men, toward
the parties of Flaunders, which secretly enterprised to take a place called
Newdike, which is a strong passage, between France and Flaunders, kept by the
Flemynges, whereof they being advertised, a^^eised a great power of.xiii.M.
and came to the passage, and slew of the Frenchemen.vi.C: then the Frenchemen
reculed, and severed theimselfes: some went to Mount Orry, and some to saint
Omers and some brent the subbarbes, they within Mount Orry defended themselfes,
and hurt the capitain of Bulleine, called Monsire de Bees, and slew his
horse: wherefore the Frenchemen went thence, and brent a village called Arkus:
thus was all the ^rountiers full of Frenchemen, in somuche that in the monethe
of August, they bette into the town of Guisnes, the scourers and the scoute
watch, whereof began Alarm, and the Frenchmen which were many in no^bre, a
lighted as though they would give assaut maintenant, and fiersly proffered
toward the diches, but when the ordinance began once to shote, it was no
need to bid them go. Then the Englishemen coragiously followed the chase, but
suddenly out came an embushement of Frenchemen, and took two Englishemen, and
thus all the army of France, removed to Gyngate beside Tyrwyn.

The French king seeing the king of England, daily more and more encoraged to
make war on him and his dominions, and that the Scotts did nothing to his
pleasure, for lack of the Duke Ihon of Albany, whom the Scotts called their
governor. He therefore caused great preparacio^ to be made, on all parties for
men, ships, harnes, and artilery for the sendyng of the Duke Ihon of Albany
into Scotland, which Duke of a great presumpcion promised to the French
king, to drive the king of England out of his realm, which promise was not
kept.

The King of England, hearing that the Duke of Albany, should pass into
England, to make war on his realm, thought to have him met on the seas, and
therefore he prepared, a flete of tal and strong ships mete to encounter with
thesaied Duke and his power, and made Admiral of that journey, sir Willyam Fitz
willyam, and with him sir Fraunces Brian, sir Antony Pounez, Seriant Rot, Ihon
Hopton, Willyam Goustone, Anthony Kniuet, Thomas West and other which with
great diligence, lay in wait to mete with thesaid duke of Albany, and as they
sailed on the French cost, they determined to land, to do some harm to
Tray Port, and as they houered there, they were espied: then the capitain of
the town fired the beake^s, sent for aid of all the for^resses about and
strengthed and manned the town very warlike. This notwithstanding, sir William
Fitz William and other capitaines, left not their enterprice, and so the.xxiii.
day of August being Sondaie, at seven of the clock in the morning, they took
land in the haven of Treyport, at who^ the Frenchemen shot out ordinance,
quarelles and stones, the English men in the botes shot likewise, and encoraged
by their capitaines, assauted the Frenchemen in their bulwerkes, the Frenchemen
them valiantly defended, and thenglishe capitaines as men without fere, them
assailed and yet the number was nothing egall, for the Englishemen were but
vii.C. men, and the Frenchmen.vi.M. For the well fightyng of the French men,
their bulwerkes were taken, and their ordinance sezed, and all that were about,
fled to the town of Treiport, and ever thenglishmen followed shotyng arowes at
them, and sleyng them, in which skirmishe Seriant Rotte had his bow in his
hand stricken with a Gonne. Then the capitaines ^ried saint George, to the
gates of Treyport, then every manne a^^unced forward, and as they were going,
Cristopher Morres master Gon^er, espied a piece of a Maste, which he caused to
be taken up, and then Anthony K^euet, and Fraunces Neudigate with their men,
ran with thesaid maste to the gate, but the gate was so strong, that it could
not be broken: and also at every loupe late a piece of ordinance, which
continually shot at the Englishemen, which caused them to leave the gate, and
then they s^tte fire in the subbarbes, which was a fair str^te, and all was
brent* and while the subbarbes brent, the Englishemen went to the haven, and
would have had out the ships, but water lacked, wherefore they set fire on
them, and brent there seven fair ships bestoe other. All this while was
there skirmishyng at the gates, and much murder on both sides, for the
Frenchemen in fityng from their bulwerkes to the town, lost.lxxx. per^ones,
and many were hurt with arrows. The men of the country came thither still, in
somuche as the number became very great, which sir Willyam Fitz Willyam
pe^ceiuyng, caused his trompet to blow a retrete, and with such prisoners,
pillage, and ordinance as they had gotten, they returned to their boats, and
the capitaines sent their soldiers before, the Frenchemen perceiuyng the
Englishemen returned, issued out and found on land, Fraunces Neudigate,
Thomas Wagham, Seriant Rotte, and other Capitaines to the number of twelve, and
ran hastily toward them in great number, which perceiuyng that, bended
themselfes to fell their lives dear Sir Willyam Fitz Willya^ perceiuyng the
great ieoperdy that they were in, turned his boat toward the land, and
discharged his ordinance, and with much pain saved these gentlemen, and them
took into boats, notwithstanding a great number of Frenchemen, which were in
the water to let him: and thus the whole army returned to their ships, after
they had been v^houres on land, and brought with them.xxvii. pe^es of fair
ordinance, which were in the bulwarks, and lost of their men not fully.xx.
persons, and then every capitain took his own ship, and coasted the seas,
ever lokyng for the duke of Albany, but they hard no tidings of him.

In the Parliament (as you have hard) it was concluded, I^^^ney of the (...),
of Su^^^l^^e.
that the king of necessity, must needs make strong war on the realm of
France, wherefore the noble Charles duke of Suffolk, was appointed as Capitain
general, to pass with an army royal into France, in the end of August,
which with all diligence, prepared all things necessary, for such a royal
enterprice: and for the furniture of this army, there were appointed to give
their attendaunce on him, the lord Montacute, and sir Arthur Po^e his brother,
the lord Herbert son to the earl of Worcester, the lord Ferreis, he lord
Marney, the lord Sands, the lord Barkeley, the lord Powes, and Baron
Curson, and of knights, sir Richard Wyngfelde, Chaunceller of the Duchy of
Lancaster, sir Ihon Ueer, sir Edward Neuell, sir Willyam Kyngston, sir Richard
Welson, sir Andrew Wynsore, sir Robert Wyngfeld, sir Anthony Wyngfeld, sir
Edward Guyldford, sir Edward Gryuell, sir Edward Chamberlein, sir Thomas Luce,
sir Euerard Dighby, sir Adrian Foscew, sir Willyam Skeuyngto^ Master of the
ordinance, sir Thomas Cheiney, sir Richard Cornwall, sir William Cortney, sir
Willyam Sidney, sir Henry Owen all these lords and knights, with many other
knights and coragious E^quiers, and active gentlemen, came according to the
kings commaun deme^t at last, with all their people and retinue to Dover,
where they mustered at several times* as they passed to the sea, and so the
nombre taken, that is to say, of dimy Lances.vi.C. of archers on horseback
two.C. of Archers on foot three.M. of bill men five.M. of pioners and
laborers.ii.M.vi.C, and when the view was taken on the other side of the sea,
there were adjoined to this number.xvii.C. which might be spared out of the
fortresses, and krewes of Hams, Guysnes, and Calice, so that all the army
were.xiii.M. and an.C. well harnesed, and appareled for the war, the pioners
only except: but the duke himself arrived at Calice the.xxiiii. of August,
with his retinue and counsel, abidyng the army, and caused all things, as
vitaill and other, to be prepared for the same.

Much commonyng was in England, whether this army should go because that no
man, except a few, knew the secretnes: some said to Bull^^n, some to Paris,
and so every man judged, according to his own opinion, as the common use is.

In this season, because the mortality was great in Calice, the duke of
Suffolk caused his army to be lodged in tents and pauilions, upon the fair
grene beside saint Peter's Church, for their more health, and he
accompaignied with diverse noble men, the.viii. day of September ^od^ to
Grau^lyng, and thither came to him Cristerne king of Denmark and the lord
I^il^ten, capitain general of Flaunders, which amiably enterteigned thesaied
duke, and after they had secretly commoned of diverse matters, concerning
diverse armies to invade France, in sundry places, the duke took leave of the
king and other, and came to Calice.

While the army lay without Calice, they daily came into the town, and so it
happened that a simple fellow cut a purse, Ariot at ^alice.
as he made to bye apples, which incontinent was taken, and brought to the
Majors house to ward, which thing diverse Welshemen perceiuyng, and not knowing
what apperteigned to Justice, ran in great compaignies to the Majors house,
and would have broken the house, the Officers of the town entreated, and
Welshemen more and more approached, the nombre of the Welshemen were so great,
that the watch of Calice struck Alarm. Then the Lord deputy and the Lord
Sands, did all that in them lay, to bring them to conformity, but they were
so rude that they nothing them regarded, The Sacrament.
the priests brought furthe the blessed Sacrament, which also was not
regarded. Wherefore the Lord Ferreis was straightly commanded to appese their
rage, for with him they came thither, which with great pain and entreatie
them appesed: and then all the Welshemen were commanded to the field, and to
depart the town and so were al other capitaines, and after diverse of y^ head
rioters were appreh^ded and sore punished for example. And when al things
necessary were prepared the duke issued out of Calice and took the feld, and
ordained his Marshal, and capitain of the vantgard the lord Sands, capitain of
his right wyng sir William kyngston, and capitain of his left wyng, sir
Eueraid Dighby, sir Edward Guyldford Marshal of Calice, was capitain of all the
horsemen, sir Richard Wingfeld, capitain of ye rereward: then the duke with all
his army, as capitain of ye middle ward, with standerdes, baners and penons,
displaied, marched forward in good order of battle, and came to a place called
Kalkewell, and there lodged the.xix. day of September In which place diverse
soldiers, of Carters and up land men, which were unmeet for the war, (for
every thing to them was pain) fell sick and disseased, wherefore the duke gave
them leave by pasport to return.

And on the.xxii. day of September, he took up his camp and came to
Hamswell, and there pitched his field, he thus liyng in abode for the army of
Flaunders, which promised to join with him, which as then were not come to.s.
Omers. He entendyng not to lie still idly, s^nt Clare^seux king of Arms, to
somon the castle called Bell castle, to yield to him, or else he would destroy
it with fire and sword, the officer of arms did his message accordyngly, to
whom the Capitain answered, that he would deliver no castle to the duke, and if
the duke came thither, he should nothing get, for he said he was sure of such
rescues, y^ should not be to the dukes auantage: which with this answer
returned toward the duke and in the way he met the lord Sands, and the lord
Ferreis, in array of battle, with.v.C. horsemen, and.i.M. footmen, to who^ he
rehearsed the answer, then said y^ lords we must co^pel him, if otherwise he
will not. Then the master of thordinance was commanded to prepare for a batrie,
which was done, and thither came.v.c. horsemen of Burgonio^s, and.v.C. fotemen,
then thordinance with great difficulty was brought nere the castle, and al
though it were night, the gonnescesed not and bet the place sore, they within
defended the best that they might, and when the day began to spryng, the lords
caused to blow to thassault, which hearing the capitain of the castle said to
his companions, y^ they were not able to abide thassault, and that their succors
failed them, wherefore of necessity they must deliver the castle, whereto
they agreed, and so he yielded the castle, his life only saved, and all other
at the mercy of the duke, which pardoned them, and took the^ as prisoners,
and delivered the castle to sir Willyam Skeuyngto^, which was shortly rased
down to the ground, the.xxvii. day of September.

Mondaie being the.xxviii. day of September, there was a proclamacion made in
tharmy, how that Fraunces duke of Burbon, and Constable of France, was become
friend to the king of England, and enemy to the French king* and was sworn to
the king of England, and had in his wages for the king of England.x.M. Almaines
to invade France, or to let the French kings purposes, and for this intent to
him was sent money in no little some, but the common people said, y^ never was
Frenchman true to England, how be it he was true as long as he lived.

To make this proclamacion more apparent, you must understand that in this
season the French king was ruled by his mother the Countess of Angulesme and
the Admyrall of France called lord Bonyu^t which as was reported and said,
loved the said lady as his paramor, of which all the court of France spoke
much. These two persons so ruled the king, that what they said was done, and
no judgment nor sentence passed in the Parliament at Paris without their
assent, so that nothing was done without them, at which thing the nobles of
France sore disdained and especially the lord Fraunces duke of Burbon and
Constable of France which having a suite for therledome of Montpelyer could
not be heard speak nor his counsel neither. At the l^st he being sore
displeased with this unkind and unjust handlyng, came to the French king
besechyng him of justice and favor, which flateryng him said, that all that was
in his power to do he would gladly accomplish, and other answer had he none,
and to encreace his grudge ye more, the French kings mother made a title to
the whole Duchy of Burbon and Auerne, and the Admyral and she so entised the
king that he said openly that the Duke of Burbon shortly should be as poor as
the meanest gentleman in France, which words reported to him caused him to
hate mortally the French king and his mother, and so in displeasure departed
into his own country. The king of England being he^eof advertised, sent to
the duke of Burbon a knight of his Chamber called sir Ihon Russell a man well
languaged, which wisely and covertly so behaved himself, that he came to the
duke to Molyns and knew al his intent how he would forsake his king, and serve
the king of England and the Emperor against the French king, and thereupon
took his other The French king not mistrusting the allegiance of the duke of
Burbon sent to the Duke to prepare him to go into Italye, for he had prepared a
great army to pass the mountains against the duke of Myllaine, in which army
he had.vi.M. men of arms, and.xxv.M. fotemen The duke hearing hereof fained
himself sick, and the French king passing by Molyns visited and comforted
him: to who^ the duke promised to come shortly after to Lions with all his
power, and caused an horselitter to be carried empty, iii. days amongst a
certain of his soldiers as though he were ^here, but he himself fled secretly
into the Countye of Burgoyne pertainyng to the Emperor, where he retained.x.M.
Almaines to invade France as soon as the French king was passed the mountains.

When the French king heard of this, he sent the Admyrall into Italy with his
army, and sent his great Master to seize all the dukes lands. Of all these
doings sir Ihon Russell brought true word, for he was present with the Duke,
and also saw the French army, and returned unespied, wherefore he deserved
and had of the king and his cou^sail great thanks. Whereupon the king caused
the proclamacion to be made in the army, that they might know that all the
power of France should not trouble them. For what with the wars of Italy and
for the duke of Burbons power they might do what they lust and be unfought
withal which so proved after. Which tidings much encoraged thenglishe
soldiers.

After this proclacion, there were tidings brought to the army for a truth,
that one Hierome Uicount, a great familiar friend with the duke of Myllayne
entised by the French king, had almost slain Frau^ces duke of Myllaine with a
dagger behynd at his back, with the which doing the French king above all
persons fained himself to be most displeased. The morrow being the.xxix. day
of September the duke with his whole army removed to Arde and there lodged, and
the last day of September he removed to a village called Alrke, and from thence
the first day October he came to a village between Tyrwyn and saint Omers
called Esqwerdes or Cords, where the duke lay and enca^ped himself abidyng
his enemies.

Now must I return to tell you what was done between England and Scotland
this same season. While the Duke of Suffolk was thus inuadyng the realm of
France. The Scotts thinkyng the war turned into France, and that nothing
should be attempted against them, began to rob and spoil on the Marches of
England, whereof the king hearing sent again thither the valiant earl of
Surray treasorer and Admyrall of England, which in all have sped him to the
west Marches and sent for an army of vi.M. men, and with banner displayed
entered by the dry Marches betyng down castles and fortresses on every side.
And alth^ugh the Scotts be men of high courage, yet they seeing the wise
conduict of the noble earl of Surray and his chosen company, durst not ones
enco^^ter with hi^, and so he passed quietly through the dales, till he came to
the strong town of Iedworthe, in which lay a great garrison of Scottishmen
which did all the hurt they could to the Englishmen, and hardely in great
number skyrmished with thenglishmen, so that on both parts diverse were slain,
but in the end the Abbay, Castle, and town of Iedworth were brent and all
rased a sonder in the open sight of the Scotts. And after this he would not
return but encamped himself in the Scottishe ground abidyng battle, and lay
there from the.xxii. day of September to the.xxv. day. D^ryng which time time
he sent y^ lord Daker of Gyldersland to a strong hold of Doncar called
Fernhurst, the which castle stood very evil to come to, for the ways were
hylly, stony, and full of marshes, and the Scotts had bent their ordinance
that way: yet for all that the Englishmen so fiersly set on that they gat the
castle, notwithstanding that the Scotts fought valiauntly, and many of them
were taken, as Dan Car the lord, the lord of Gradon and diverse other which
was there taken, and so the lord Daker returned with his prisoners, and then
he was ordained to keep the watch that night which set his watches and his
wards surely. In the night suddenly.CCC. good geldynges brake out of a
pasture, which were in custody of the said lord Dacres camp, and as beasts
wodde and savage ran enraged, and notwithstanding that men did as much as
they might to stop them, yet they ran as though they were in array of
battle, whereof the noise in the night was so great, that the army souned
alar me, the horse still in array ran to the ca^pe, where the earl lay and
bare down many persons in their way, and so suddenly ran away whether it
was unknown: the lord Dacres men said that the devil was seen amongst them:
and after the third day the Earl returned into England,

When the Earl of Surray departed from the borders in August as you have heard
heretofore: The Scotts wrote to the duke of Albany of all their affairs,
which was coming into Scotland. But when he heard that the Navy of England
lay in wait to fight with him, he durst not adventure, but sat still: And when
he heard there was no capitaines of name on the borders of England toward
Scotland, he devised by policy that all his ships should be removed to the
haven of Breast, and said himself and caused it to be noysed that he would not
sail into Scotland that year. So ra^ne the voice all the coasts of Normandy
and Britaigne, and so passed till the end of Septembre.

The king of England was informed by such as knew none other, that the Duke of
Albany had broken his journey, and would not pass that year into Scotland.
Wherefore the king of England in the midst of September caused his ships to
be laid up in havens till the next spryng: The duke of Albany being thereof
advertised boldly then took his ships and shipped his people, and
with.lxxii. sail in sight passed by the West parts of England and coasted
Wales, and so with great labor landed at Kyrcowbre in the West part of
Scotland with all his people the.xxi. day of September which were in
number.iii.M. or there about, and with him was the traitor Richard Delapole.

When it was known in Scotland that the lord Governor was landed, much
gladness there was amongst the people. Then the duke was highly received and
his people well cherished, and then began a Parlyament. The king of England
hearing that the duke of Albany was landed in Scotland and was unfought
withal, was not a little displeased, and suspected that such as informed him
that the Duke would not pass that year, had deceived him, but there was no
remedy: Wherefore he made provisions and put all things in a readynes, if he
would attempt any thing against him and his realm.

The Duke of Albany Governor of Scotland being in the Parliament of the realm,
with great eloquence declared to them the love and favor that Frau^ces the
French king bare to the realm of Scotland, insomuch that he being advertised
of the great murders, slaughters, and burnynges done by the Englishemen,
thought that he suffered no less hurt and damage then they did, accomptyng him
self one of their members, and them likewise the members of him and his realm,
and for the revenging of the same, he to be partener as their member, and for
the more credit he showed the French kings favorable letter, affirmyng his
d^^laracion. When the letters were red, there start up a Baron of Scotland
called the lord Forbos, which said: the realm of Scotland for the love of
France suffers great pain as daily does appear, for our nobles be slain or
taken, our cominaltie murdered, our lands ouerru^ne, our houses and fortresses
brent and rased, the profits of our own lands we lose: which mischief we
need not to have had, but for the love of France, and what helps France? A
far friend is not sone fet? A mighty nieghbor may be a cruel enemy. I affirm
this, if we would keep amity with the realm of England we were out of all
these dangers. God forbid said the duke of Albany that Scotland ever should
seek a new friend or pro^er their amity, to the destroyers of their country
and nation, but you my lords of Scotland are sufficient of your self to
maintain your lands, liberty, and fredome against your common enemies
thenglishemen. And therefore now let us together revenge the hurtes done to us
and our country: And I on mine honor shall go with you, and therefore I have
brought with me both treasure, men, and artillery into this realm. I think
not but we shall so do that all Christendom shall speak of our noble
conquest. To the dukes request all ye court of Parliament agreed and then were
co^missions sent through Scotland and cries made that all men should assemble at
Doglas dale with vitaile for xxviii. days. The Scotes in all have prepared, so
that the lords were come to the place appointed the xviii. day of October, with
vitaile, gunnes, and all other artillery, and so came by easy journeys to the
river of Twede on a ground beside Hume castle, and from thence came to
Cawdestrene and there lodged.

All this doing the king of England knew well, wherefore with all diligence he
caused to be assembled the people of the North part beyond Trent, whero^ there
were.iii.M. beryng cotes of arms with their power and strength, which al were
commanded to resort to the earl of Surray with speed. The noble Marquis Dorset
Thomas was appointed to keep Berwicke with vi.M. men, lest ye Scotts thereto
would lay siege.

The duke of Albany which lay on the frontiers hearing of the Earl of Surreyes
preparyng* sent to him an Herald promisyng him of his honor to give him
battle, and if he took him in battle he would put him to courteous ransom
and his body to be safe: To whom the earl answered, that much he thanked the
duke of his offer, and that he would abide battle, ^msyng him that he would
give him battle if he durst abide: and if that ye said duke were taken
prisoner by him or his men he would strike of his head and send it to the
king of England his Master, and bad that he should trust to none other, at
which answer the duke of Albany and the Scotts took great dispite.

The earl of Surray being at Alnwyke, to him came therles of Northumberland and
Westmerland, the lord Clyfford, the lord Dacres, the lord Lumley, the lord
Ogle, the lord Darcy, and many noble Knights* Squiers and yomen, to the
number of.xl.M. And from the kings court was sent to be at the batail sir
Nicholas Carew Master of the horse, sir Fraunces Bryan, sir Edward Baynton and
diverse other. All this army lay on the borders abidyng the Scotts coming
into England, which lay still in Scotland and did nothing till the last day
of October being Saturday. The night before the Scotts had sent over the water
into England.iii. or.iiii.M. men, to lay siege to a little castle called ye
Castle of Warke, which stands nere the border: the great ordinance of
Scotland sore bet the castle, and Dan Car and the Frenchemen which came out of
France with the duke of Albany gave to the castle a strong assaut: within the
castle was sir William Lyle with a C. persons, but the Scotts were so many in
number, that they got the vttermoste ward called the Barnkyns where the
beasts and barnes were, which seeing, the captain sent in all have to the
Earl of Surrey aduertisyng him of their distres, which in all have assembled
his capitaines to reskue the castle, thereby hopyng that Duke Ihon of Albany
would enter into England. The Frenchmen and Scotts lay still about the castle
continually shotyng ordinance Sunday and Monday the first and second day of
November, and then the Scotts thinkyng the place assautable, coragiously set
on the castle and by strength entered the second ward. Sir Willya^ Lyle
perceiuyng that ye Scotts had gotten the false brayes and that nothing
remained but only the inner ward or do^geon, said to his company, sirs for our
honor and ma^hod let us issue and fight with the proud Scotts and stately
Frenchmen, for more shall our honor be to dye in fight, then to be murdered
with gunnes, to the which his company that were left agreed: for of his.C. men
he had lost almost.xl. at the other assautes. Then they issued out boldly and
shot coragiously as men that shot for a vauntage, and with shotyng and fightyng
they drove their enemies clean out of the place and slew of them and chiefly of
the Frenchmen CCC. which lay there dead in sight when the Earl came thither,
beside such as dyed of wounds and were drouned. Then the Scotts removed
their ordinance, in great have over the water, and by that time was the Earl
of Surrey come with v.M. men on horsbacke and all his great army followed and was
very sorry that his enemies were gone, and much praised sir Willyam Lyle for
his valiauntnes.

When the duke of Albany and the lords of Scotland knew that the earl of
Surrey approached with his puissant army, they thought it not convenient to
ieoparde all the nobility of Scotland in one field, considering their chance
x. years before, and therefore they concluded to return, and so on the said
second day of November in the night the duke with all his army retreated more
for his suertie then honor.

The horsemen of Scotland kept the fordes that no man should pass to grieve the
fotemen as they returned, and when all the baggages were gone they cast them
selfs in a plumpe and returned.

When the day appeared, then the Englishmen might plainly see the Scotts how
they fled fifty men's thickenes, many a lusty Englishman would feign have
followed them on horsbacke, and so would therle of Surray with all his heart,
but his commission was only to defend the realm and not to invade Scotland,
which thing him sore displeased. Thus brake up the great army of Scotland to
the great rebuke of the duke of Albany and the nobles of Scotland which.ii.
year together had made bragges and assembles and durst not abide battle. The
Scotts made much bragges that they had beaten down the walls of Warke
castle, but they spoke nothing of their men that they left there, nor how
cowardly they returned and would not abide. After this return queen Margaret
of Scotland and mother to the young king, sent to her brother the king of
England for an abstinence of war to be taken between y^ realm of England and
Scotland to thentent that some way might be taken, that an amity might be had
between them: which request to her was granted, and so the great army of
England was dissolved and the Earl of Surrey returned to the coast.

In this season the Emperor Charles sent to the king of England.ii. Mules
trapped in crimosyn velvet curiously enbrodered, A pre^ent sent b^ the Empe^or
to y^ king.
al y^ bukcles, stiroppes and all such other garnishynges were silver and gilt
of marvelous co^nyng work. He sent also.xl. G^nettes full goodly to behold
trapped with russet velvet richely wrought, and.iiii. speres, and.ii. Iauelynes
of strange timber and work richely garnished, and.v. brace of greyhou^des:
and to the queen he sent two Mules with rich trappers and high chayers after
the Spanishe fashion, all these prese^tes wet thankefully received both of the
king and queen.

Now let us return to the Duke of Suffolk which lay at Cords or Esqwerdes
the.xx. day of September and thither came to him y^ army of Flaunders, whereof
was captain the lord of I^il^teyne which had with him of Spaniardes,
Almaines, Cleues and other.iii.M. fotemen and.v.C. horsemen well apparelled for
the wars in all points.

The duke of Suffolk being thus furnished passed forward in wete wether making
bridges and ways, ever lokyng for battle, and on the.xvii. day of October he
sent the lord Sands Marshall of his army, and with him.iii.M. men to a good
town called Anchor which accompanied with diverse knights and gentlemen in
good order of battle marched toward the town. The Frenchmen perceiuyng the
Englishmen coming toward their town, fled out as fast as they might, and left
the town desolate: then entered the Englishmen and had there a great botie and
took the cas^le called Bone guard* and therein put a garrison of Englishemen,
whereof was captain the lord Leonard Gray brother to the Marquis Dorset to
conduict vitailers to the army, which now was far from any succors of the
English part. In this town was an abbay of Monks which received humbly the
lords and nobles of England, which to them did no hurt nor damage, and then
they returned to the duke.

After this, the.xix. day, the Duke with his army passed to a village called
Qwede: and there, after long cou^sailyng it was determined that the whole army
should pass to a s^rong town and well fortefied called Bray, which town was
well ordinaunced and had in it.xvi.C. men of war, the captain thereof was
called Adrian, and for succors to the town were come Mounsire Po^tdormy, the
Vicount Larnerdam, the Vicount Turraine, Mou^sire Applyngcort, and Mounsire
Da^pney, with v.C. horsemen, so that in the town beside the inhabitauntes
were.ii.M. good men. This town stands on the river of Some.xxiiii. English
mile from Arras, and xiiii. miles above Amyas: This town was well diched and
strengthened on every side.

The.xx. day of this month the Duke commanded al his great ordinance to be
brought by.iiii. of the clock in the morning before y^ town of Bray, they
that had the charge thereof so manfully acquitted the^ that notwithstanding all
ye damage that their enemies could do, brought the ordinance before the town
at y^ hour appointed. Then each part shot dredfully at other, but the English
gu^ners shot so well, that the walls of the town were beaten down and rased
with the ordinance, insomuche that by.ix. of the clock the town was made
assautable. Then the duke caused to blow to thassaut. Then the Englishmen and
Flemynges and Burgonions lept forth quickly, and notwithstanding that the
diches were deep, yet they so coragiously entered by the good comfort of the
lord Sa^des and other noble men that they gat y^ di^hes. The Frenchmen
perceiuyng that the town should be gotten, hastily made traynes of gunpouder
from street to street and house to house, saying that the Englishmen after
their entry into ye town would fall to pillage, and then suddenly sudden fire
should destroy them. This was the provision of the Frenchmen: by this time the
Englishmen were enteryng on the walls, and the Frenchmen stood yet at defense
with pikes, cros^owes, handgunnes, and halberdes, but they were to weke, for on
all parts entered thenglishmen and suddenly the Frenchmen fled and the
Englishemen followed and killed and slew in every part.

Now you must understand that this town of Bray stands on the river of Some
which is there divided in diverse branches and between every brau^che is a
marishe ground, where on the farside of yetoune was fortefied a Bulwark full of
ordinance to keep the passage over ye water, and the Frenchmen had losed the
plankes of the bridge nere a mile above Bray, and the horsemen of France passed
by a mile which was to the Fre^chfotemen a great aid, for they stood and kept
the passage til ye foteme^ were come over the bridge, and then they plucked away
the pla^ckes of the bridge, so that noma^ should follow, but ever thenglishmen
followed and cast pla^kes on the bridge and passed over the bridge, in which
passing diverse were drouned, but with great trauail all men passed, horsemen and
fotemen, and fiersly assauted the Bulwark and took it with all the ordinance,
and in it was taken captain Adrian and captain Ulterlew. The English
horsemen followed the Frenchmen and diverse of them were slain and taken, sir
Robert Iernyngham brake a spear on the lord Pountdormy. The lord Leonard Gray
did valiau^tly that day. You must remember that when the Frenchmen issued out
of the town, they forgatte not to lay a match to the train of gunnepouder
which they had made, which in short space set the town al on fire, so that
when thenglishmen returned again, al was on fire, so that there they ha^ little
profit but wine, which to them did great pleasure. This was the town of Bray
taken and destroyed the xx. day of October.

The duke considering that little succors were for him and his soldiers in the
town of Bray because the said town was consumed with fire, he therefore
commanded the bridges to be well repaired for to pass over the great river of
Some into the realm of France: and when the passage was sure, the lord Sands
the.xxi. day of October in the morning was pressed to pass over with the vaward.
Then some gentlemen said that they would pass no farther forward, and diverse
soldiers were on the same opinion. It was asked why they should fear, and they
answered that if they were past over the river* they were past all succors and
vitail, none could be brought to them. By reason of this noise the soldiers
stayed, which ye lord Sa^des perceiuyng, said to the Welshmen which were evil
willing to pass ye river: sirs said he, behold what I do, and with that he
took a banner of saint George and said, as many as love the king of England
and be true to him and to the croune, follow me* and then he and sir Wylliam
Kyngston set forward and passed the water, which there tunneth in three
streams, then all other persons coragiously followed, and the ordinance and
vitailes.

After the foreward followed the duke and al his battle: At this time the army
was sore minished by reason many were diseased and from the host departed, so
the host was not of that strength that it was at the setting out of Calayce.
When thenglishemen were passed, then followed the Burgonions in good order, and
so that night this army came to a town called Kappe and there encamped
theimselfes, all the inhabitauntes were fled both out of the town and Castle:
there thenglishemen found C. tonne of wine, and other good pillage. The
garrison that lay at Anchor knowing that y^ duke was passed the river of Some,
rased the town and castle, and came and joined with y^ dukes army at Kappe.

There the duke caused proclamacions to be made in the army that all the
people of France that would vitaile the army of England should be well
entreated and have their vitailes well paid for, and safe going and coming,
by the which proclamacion the host was well vitailed, for the people of y^
country resorted with all things necessary.

The Duke thus liyng at Cap sent to the town of Roy to yield them to the king
of England. The town perceiuyng that their power was not able to withstand the
great army of the Duke, assented to deliver the town to the Duke. This was a
strong town well walled, dyched and ordinaunced but not manned, the Duke sent
thither sir Richard Cornwall and other with.iiii.C. men to receive the town,
which went thither in good array and had the town to them delivered and then
they set the banner of saint George in the highest part of the town, and
full well this garrison kept the town of Roy til the duke came thither with
his whole army.

The Duke and his army the.xxv. day of the said month removed to a village
called Lyhome, and had there great pillage: for this town was much haunted of
merchants and there kept great markettes. The next day he removed to
Dauenker, and the *xxvii. day he removed and came before y^ strong town of
Mountdedier, where for defense of war lacked neither diches, walls, nor
bulwarks: The horsemen of the English army rode about the town to view it, at
who^ the capitaines caused diverse pieces to be losed which showed well their
strength. The duke sent an officer of arms to somon the capitain to deliver ye
town: the officer departed, and with him a trumpet which blew before the
gate, but no person would answer, because they would have no Sommons made to
them: the officer of arms returned and made report. Then the Dukes skyrers
made profer before the town, out of the which issued a great compaignie of
horsemen and skyrmished with the Dukes horsemen and fought valiantly, but at
the last.xl. of the horsemen were taken, with which the lord Roche Baron
captain of the town was sore displeased, yet he thought him able to
maintain the town against the whole army. Then the Duke of Suffolk pytched
his field and laid his siege round about the town of Mountdedier and kept
good watch and ward on every side: which thing the lord Roche Baron
perceiuyng comforted his men of war and bad them not be afraid but to be of
good courage, and said that the Duke there should get ^othyng. When the Duke had
thus planted his siege, he considered that he was far from reskew, and that
liyng still and nothing ^ oyng was not profitable, he knew also by report of
the prisoners that in the town of Moundedier were two thousand footmen, and
one thousand horsemen, wherefore he sent for all the lords and capitaines of
his a^my and much praised their hardynes and said that the noble corrage that
he saw in them did much auaunce him to set forward in all things, the
praise whereof should be to them and not to him, and therefore now he encoraged
them again to continue still in their valiant doing, for with Gods grace he
intended to bend his ordinance the next morning before the town, to the
which all the lords agreed and praised much the dukes courage and forwardnes.

Then was sir Willyam Skeuyngton knight, Master of the ordinance commanded
to prepare for the battery, which with all diligence made trenches, and
prepared all things mete for the purpose. In this season sir Ihon Walop knight
had with him almost a M. proper men and hardy, having little wages or none
which lived alonely on their adventure, wherefore of some they were called
adventurers, of some they were called kreekars. These men were light, hardy, and
politic, and by their manhod and hardines had robbed many tounes, taken many
prisoners, with great boties, and daily brought to the army Horses, Mares,
vitaile, cloth, corn, and other necessaries which might not be misled. Of
this company the Frenchemen and especially they of villages and passegers were
sore afraid, for they were never idle but doing some thing in one part or
other. The lord Pountdormy, or Pountreny hearing Mountdedyer was besieged,
called to him diverse great lords and capitaines to the number of.v.C. men of
arms and dimy lances, and a great number of fotemen, entendyng to bring
gunnepouder and other necessaries to the town of Mou^tdedier: and as they were
thither coming by night, Thomas Palmer, capitain of the skout watch of
thenglishe army them askried and skyrmished with them although they were more in
number: manfully fought the Frenchemen, but for all that they were compelled to
flee back, and then Englishmen them ^olowed and slew diverse, and two speres
were broken on the brother of the lord Pountdorny, but by the swyftnes of his
horse he saved himself, and in this chase were C. prisoners taken which much
reioysed the Englishmen.

When the Master of the ordinance had all things ready, at the hour of.iiii.
of the clock in the morning he discharged the ordinance continually in such
fashion, that by viii. of the clock the.xxviii. day of October the walls were
made low and the town assautable. All which while, the great ordinance shot
still out of the town till the walls and town were beaten down. The
captain of the town perceiuyng this, called to him all the capitaines,
declaryng to them that their town was in.iiii. hours made assautable, and
that surely the Englishmen would assaute the town which should be to their
confusion, wherefore he asked their advise what was best to be done, al they
answered, do as you will: Then he went into a tower and caused a trompet to
blow and set forth a banner of truce. Then the duke commanded the ordinance
to cease. Then sir Willya^ Skeuyngton came to the walls and demanded what
they would, and the lord Roche Baron said, that if it pleased the duke for the
love of the king of England and his honor, to grant to him and the other
gentlemen that were there, license to depart with life, bag and baggage, they
would deliver the town of Mountdedier. Then sir Willya^ Skeuyngton made report
to the duke, which thereto consented, saying: they be men of war, their
riches is not great. Then the lord Sands and diverse other weee appointed to
receive the town, and so they entered and set their sta^dardes on the top of
the gates, and took the keys of all the strong houses, towers, and Bulwarks.
The Frenchemen were ready to depart with trussages and cariages, with
Crosbowes, Pykes, and Handgunnes, with which doing the lord Sands and the
Englishemen which were within the town were not content, and said that the
Frenchmen should pass without weapon: on this point was much alteracio^ and
the Frenchemen were stayed, but the lord Roche Baron gave many fair words
and passed forward with a red standard, with a white cross before him, that
seeing sir Thomas Palmer, ran to the sta^dard and plucked it in pieces. Then
said the Lord Roche Baron that it was ungently done: To whom he answered that
he should bear no standard there like a conqueror. Then after long disputacion
the Frenchemen said, that it was promised them that they should have their
weapons and baggage, and so upon that they were suffered to depart. The fotemen
likewise had a standard before them which was rent by sir Robert Iernyngham.
The number which departed truly accounted, were two thousand footmen, five
hundredth horsemen and odd well and warlike appointed, and they left much
baggage behynd them, because they saw the Englishemen so fast come into the
town, they were in fear of loss of all.

When the Frenchmen were departed, the duke with his whole army entered the town
and there the Englishemen found fine f^the^beddes, napery, coueringes, and
much household stuff, and especially of wine great plenty, and there the
army tested till the last day of October, and then were all the gates of the
town rased and thrown down, and all the Bulwarks likewise. Then the duke
caused all the ordinance to be taken and so removed to the town of Roye,
where ^e and all his army rested for a while: whereof they were glad, for they
had travailed sore, and the wether was wette and cold. On the feast of all
saints called Alhalon day, the Duke in the chief Church of R^y made
knights the lord Harbert, the lord Powes, Olyuer Manners, Arthur Pole,
Richard Sands, Robert Iernyngham, Robert Sailsbury, Edmond Benyngfelde,
Richard Corbet, Thomas Wentworthe, Wyllyam Storton, Water Mantell, George
warran, Edward Seymour after earl of Hartford, and now Duke of Sommerset, and
most worthy Governor of the kings majesty's person and Protector of al his
realms, dominions and subjects.

The morrow after, the army removed to a place called Neele, there the
Burgonions began to wax weary, and so did the Englishemen, for every day was
foul wether and rain both day and night. Wherefore diverse companies fell to
grudgyng saying, now you may see that by our remouyng we shall be led from
place to place all this winter, which is to the utter loss of our lives: for
daily we see that of our company dies no small number (and truth it was that
some dyed but not many) they said farther, the Burgonions have the great gain
and do lest for it, for they have wagons and carye their boties to their
country, which is nere hand, and we go before and ^ight, and we have no
means to convey any thing into our cou^t^ey for lack of carryage, and so we
beat the bushe and they take the birds. This grudge was seassed by gentle
words for a time.

In these journeys was commonly spoken that the duke of Burbon with his.x.M.
Almaynes would have invaded France and so joined with this army, but y^ truth
was contrary, for he turned his host another way and went into province and
laid siege to Marcelles, whereof the duke b^yng advertised, not a little mused,
and also seeing his men daily fall s^cke, was sorry, and yet he so comforted
them that every man was glad to follow his will and intent.

On the.vi. day of November the lord Sands being captain of the foreward,
and the duke of the middle ward, and sir Richard Wyngfeld captain of the
rereward came in order of battle pressed to fight, to a village called Ueane and
there rested for that night, and the morrow after the whole army returned again
over the water of Some, and came to a place called Beaufford: At this passage
the duke made knights Ihon Dudley, and Robert Utreyght esquiers.

The viii. day ye duke removed to a place called Mount saint Martyne a very
mete place for an army, and then was the dukes iustruccions looked upon by the
capitaines, and they perceiuyng that they hard nothing of the duke of Burbons
coming, aid nor counsel, all they thought and determined to send the lord
Sands in post to the king, to declare all the case as it stood and their
necessity according as he him self knew and saw in all points: which lord
Sands took great pain and made good diligence toward the king, and while he
was ridyng, the duke removed his army to a place called Permount and there
lodged for a time to rest, and the army was well vitailed, but ever the
W^^shemen muttered and grudged more and more.

After the great raynes and wyndes that had fallen, came a fervent frost, A
great frost.
so sore that many a soldier dyed for cold, some lost fyngers and some toes,
but many lost their nails of their hands, which was to the^ a great grefe.
The duke all this notwithstanding remembryng that he came not thither to lie
still, the.xiii. day removed to a place two mile from the castle of Bowhen and
still it frised, insomuche that the master of the Ordinance was compelled of
necessity to set the wheles of his ordinance on hardels for sinkyng. In the
morning the Welshemen set out a shout and cried, home* home, the krekers
hearing that, cried hang, hang. For which matter division was like to have
fallen, but by policy it was ceased. Sir Edward Gyldfod captain of the
horsemen vewed the castle of Bowhen or Boghan, which ever was thought to be
impregnable, but he judged it might be won, for the castle was environed with
Marryses, so that to no man's judgment it was possible to win it: But now he
perceived that the frost was so great and strong that it might be beseaged, and
all that night it fresed again: wherefore he desired the Duke to give him leave
to assaute it which thereto agreed. Then he caused the ordinance to be set
forth over the marrish. When they within the castle perceived that the marrishe
failed them, they were sore dismayed. Then sir Edward Guildeford shot three
great pieces at the castle, and the castilian shot three pieces again. Then as
the English gunners were preparing to the battery, the capitain seeing his
castle could not hold, by reason that the ma^ishe failed, and that he could
defend none assault, deliver the castle to him to the behofe of the Emperor
and the king of England, and after a small communicacion had between the said
sir Edward Guyldforde and the captain, the captain with all his retinue
departed leuyng behynd the ordinance of bombardes, curtawes, and deiny
curtaux, slinges, canons, volgers, and other ordinance, there were lxxvi.
pieces, plenty of pellettes and powder. The duke of Suffolk perceiuyng that
this castle stood on the border of Henaude: Wherefore the more to please the
Henawers he made captain of the same castle of Boghan the Seneshal of Henaude,
to the behofe of the Emperor and the king of England. In this place the army
was evil vitailed, because the Frenchemen had stopped the water of Some, that
no vitaile should pass over the river: wherefore the Duke sent to them of
Henaude and specially to them of Ualencien to have aid of vitaile, which of
their little sent to the army a little, but yet it did them some service, and all
this while the fervent frost with bitter winds continued, which caused many
people to dye: yet still lay the army abidyng the answer of the lord Sands,
which as you have heard rode in post and somuche travailed that he came to the
king of England to his castle of Wyndsore and there declared to the king his
message, which was that his people which were in the French ground abode much
misery, for the wether was wet, the ways deep, long nights and short days,
great journeys and little vitaile, which caused the soldiers daily to dye. Also
they trusted when they passed the seas according to their instruccions to have
had aid of the Duke of Burbon (of whom since their departing they never heard
word) wherefore the Duke of Suffolk and other nobles of your army have sent me
to your highness to declare their state and condition, their good will to tarry,
and the evil chances which daily happens to them by God and not by their
enemies. Well said the king all this we knew before your coming: wherefore we
have appointed the lord Mountioy with.vi.M. men to pass the seas for the
relefe of our army, which lord Mountioy is almost in a redynes: For we will
in nowise that the army shall break.

Then the king came to Westminster to the Cardinals place and there received
letters from the duke of Suffolk by sir Robert Iernyngham of the gettyng of
the castle of Boghan or Bowen: wherefore incontinent it was by the king and his
counsel determined that the lord Mou^ioy should make speed, which did such
diligence that many of his soldiers were come to London well harnissed and
weponed ready to pass the seas. Wherefore the king sent in all have sir Robert
Iernyngham again to declare to the duke the kings pleasure and what aid was
coming toward him. But or sir Robert Iernyngham could come to the duke the
army was removed from Bohan and brent the town, and so came to the city of
Ualencine in Henaude, and there laid up their ordinance and from thence came
to the city of Turnay (which then was under the Emperor and out of the
French kings hands) and so took their iornay homewarde through Flaunders and
the army there broken and dispatched. But when the duke met with sir Robert
Iernyngham at Bridges in Flaunders and knew the kings mind and intent, he
did what he might to retreat the soldiers, which could not be, for many
Englishemen shipped at Andwarpe, and many at Sluyes, and at Newport and other
havens, and they that were at Calayce were steyed for a time, but when the Duke
saw that he could not bring all his army together scacely the.iiii. part, he
then licensed the remnaunt to depart. Of this breakyngvp of the army were
letters sent to the king, which incontinent stopped the lord Mountioy and
sent his men into the country again. The Duke and other capitaines hearing of
the Kings displeasure, were sore abashed, and did write to their friends that
they had perfect knowledge that the Duke of Burbon had broken up his camp for
the extremity of the Winter, and also showed that their soldiers dyed, and
vita^l failid, which caused them to break the army, for of truth the
soldiers would not abide: with which reasons the king was somewhat appeased
and so on good hope the duke came to Calayce the.xii. day of December, and
there abode long, till their friends had sued to the king for their return.
And when it was granted and that they were returned, the Duke and the
capitaines came not to the kings presence in a long season, to their great
heauynes and displeasure: But at the last all things were taken in good part
and they well received and in great love, favor, and familiarity with the king.

While the Duke of Suffolk was in France and the Earl of Surrey on the
Marches of Scotland, the Cardinal sent out co^missions in the month of
October through the realm, that every man that was worth.xl. l. should pay the
whole subsidy before granted out of hand and before the days of payment.
This payment was called an Anticipacion, An Anticipacion.
which is to say a thing taken or a thing coming before his time or season:
This term was new to y^ commaltie, but they paid well for their learning, for
their money was paid out of hand without delay.

The king this year kept his Christmas solempnely at his castle of Wyndsore and
thither came to him the third day of Ianuarye the earl Pountiuer of the royal
blood of Brytaigne and prete^dyng to be duke of the same, which was nere cosyn
to the duke of Burbon and bannished France. This earl came hastily from the
duke of Burbon and was well entertained and feasted of the king, and after
answer made to him by the king, he went to the Cardinal to Hampton court, and
so with great speed returned to the said duke into the country of Province.

In the same season was brought to the court a gentleman of Scotland called
Andrew Stewart taken on the sea with diverse letters by one Water Iago a yoman
of the kings, with diverse letters from the duke of Albany to the French king,
by reason whereof the king knew much of their counsel. This gentleman paid
ransom and was very sone redeemed.

The.xix. day of January vi. fair ships of France well appointed, met
with a ship of the kings of England called the Kateryne Galley a ship
of.xl. tonne, the capitain whereof was one Ihon Mariner, with a small company,
for many of his company were a land: But he so encoraged his men that all
fear was set aside, and ever as the Frenchemen approached, they bet them of
with arrows pykes, and fightyng, and still this continued from.iiii. of the
clock in the morning till.ix. of the clock, and ever on the cost of England,
and the Englishmen did the best they could to save themselfes: For by that time
she had spent her powder, arrows with shotyng, and her bylles with hewyng, and
her pykes with keeping them of from coming aborde, and all the company almost
sore hurt, and the captain wounded to the death, so that they had no other
remedy but to sail. This chase was perceived by one called capitain Markam,
capitain of the bark of Sandwyche, which ma^fully called his men together out
of Sandwyche haven and with good wind came to reskue the Kateryne Galley.
The.vi. ships perceiuyng that, left their chase and made with the Bark of
Sandwyche. The captain coragiously comforted his men and made the quarters of
his ship defensable. The Frenchmen set on fiersly, and their tops were
higher then the top of the English ship. Out went the ordinance, quarrels
and darts of the French ships: the Englishmen shot fiersly again and when
the Frenchemen proffered to enter, the Englishmen bet them of with bylles. The
Frenchemen at last with a great gunne bet down the top of the bark and
slew the men in the same, and lastly they struck down his Mast. This conflict
continued from.x. of the clock till two at after noone. Then he could make no
shift, but to sail: and ever the Englishmen shot arrows, and while
thenglishmen had any arrows the Frenchemen durst not enter: But when their
arrows were spent, the Frenchemen came aborde all at ones and entered the
bark. In this fight were slain of Frenchmen out of hand.xxvii. and.lxxx. sore
hurt, and of the English were slain.xxiii. What should I say, the Englishemen
fought valiauntly, but they were to weak for.vi. tall ships. Wherefore they
were taken and brought to Deep for a prise, but the Frenchmen said they never
bought prise so dear. After this Ihon Maryner captain of the Kateryne galey
dyed, and many Frenchemen that were hurt dyed at Deep, so that neither part
wanne greatly.

In the last month called December were taken certain traitors in the city of
Couentry, An insurre^cion moved at Couentry.
one called Fraunces Philippe scholemaster to the kings Henxmen, and one
Christopher Pykeryng clerk of y^ Larder, and one Antony Maynuile gentleman,
which by the persuasion of the said Fraunces Philip, intended to have taken the
kings treasure of his subsidy as the Collectors of the same came toward
London, and then to have araised men and taken the castle of Kylingworth, and
then to have made battle against the king: wherefore the said Fraunces,
Christopher and Anthony were hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyborne the xi.
day of Februarye, the residue that were taken, were sent to the city of
Couentry and there were executed. One of the kings Henxmen called Dygby which
was one of the conspirators fled the realm, and after had his pardon.

The.xvii. day of January there was a Fayer or market at the town of Marguyson
in the French kings dominions beside Calayce, and for defense of the people
and their marchaundise, there were appointed CC. men in harnes well weaponed:
The soldiers of Guysnes hearing of this, departed in the night and came nere
to the town of Marguyson and closly kept themselfes till the Market was fair
and at the best, then the Englishmen which were.lxx. archers and bylles, set
suddenly on the Market, that seeing the Frenchemen stood manfully at their
defense with handgunnes and pykes, but the Englishmen shot so wholly together
that they drove the Frenchmen out of the town, and would for succors have
taken the Church, but the Englishemen were between them and the Church, so
that they had none other remedy but to flee and many Frenchemen were slain.
Capitain Ihon de Pound, and capitain Iho^ de Babage and diverse other were taken
prisoners, and diverse merchants that were there to sell their goods were
also taken, and all their goods brought in Frenchemennes wagons to Guysnes and
no Englishman slain but diverse were sore hurt.

The first day of Februay the valiant knight sir Robert Iernyngha^ and with him
fifty demylau^ces of the garrison of Calayce skoured the country to Odirsaell
and there took a C. hedde of beasts, by that doing an ask^y rose through the
country, whereby the Frenchemen gathered together to the number of.xii. score,
and or sir Robert and his company came to Houndyngbrige they were beset round
about, so that of necessity they must fight, the Frenchmen set on with
ha^dgunnes, crosbowes and pykes, and for a while there was a strong encountre,
but the Englishmen as m^nne desperate (because of the number) fought so fiersly
that they caused the Frenchmen to give back and slew many of them and
took.xiii. prisoners, and in the chase they took vii. more which made up.xxi.
Then the said sir Robert returned with his botie and prisoners and lost noman,
but almost all were hurt.

The.x. day of March the king having a new harnes made of his own devise and
fashion, sucheas no armorer before that time had seen, thought to assaye
the same at the tilte, and appointed a Iustes to serve him. On foot were
appointed the lord Marquis Dorset and the Earl of Surrey, the king came to the
one end of the tylt, and the Duke of Suffolk to the other: then a gentleman
said to the Duke, sir the king is come to the tyltes end. (...)
I see him not said the Duke on my faith, for my head piece takes from me my
sight: with these words God knows by what chance, the king had his spear
delivered him by the lord Marquis, the vi^er of his headpece being up and not
down nor fas^ened, so that his face was clean naked. Then the gentleman said
to the duke, sir the king comes, then the duke set forward and charged his
spear, and the king likewise unadvisedly set toward ye duke: the people
perceiuyng the kings face bare, cried hold, hold, the duke neither saw nor
heard, and whether the king remembered that his viser was up or no few could
tell: Alas what sorrow was it to the people when they saw the spleters of the
dukes spear strike on the kings hedpiece: For of a suertie the duke struck the
king on the brow right under the de^e^ce of y^ hedpece on the very coyffe
s^u^l or bas^enetpece whereunto the barbet for power and defense is charneld,
to which coyffe or bassenet never armorer takes head, for it is evermore
covered with the viser, barbet and volant piece, and so that piece is so defended
that it forseth of no charge: But when y^ spear on that place lighted, it was
great ieopardy of death insomuche that the face was bare, for the Dukes spear
brake all to shyuers, and bare the kings viser or barbet so far back by the
country buffe that all the kings headpece was full of spleters. The Armorers
for this matter were much blamed, and so was the lord Marquis for the
deliueryng of the spear when his face was open, but the king said that none was
to blame but himself, for he intended to have said him self and his sight.
The duke incontinently unarmed him, and came to the king, showing him the
closenes of his sight, and swear that he would never run against the king
more: But if the king had been a little hurt, the kings servants would have
put the Duke in ieopardy.

Then the king called his Armorers and put all his pieces together and then took
a spear and ran vi. courses very well, by the which all men might perceive
that he had no hurt, which was great joy and comfort to all his subjects
there present.

In the end of Februarye four French ships chased the Fysher botes of Rye
to the very shore, and when the fludde was gone, would have taken the botes
and came a land with pikes, but the fishers threw stones, and one archer shot
and slew a Frencheman which held up a basket and bad shote Englisheman
shote, and the Englisheman shot through the basket and slew him, and so they
saved their botes, and when the fludde came, the Frenchemen set up their
sails, and as they were passing, the Englishemen of war met with them and
took two of the said ships, and the other two fled.

In this year the king sent the lord Morlay sir Wyllyam Hosy knight and doctor
Lee his Almoner to Done Ferdinando archduke of Austrice and brother to the
Emperor Charles with the order of the Garter which in the town of
Norryngberge received the same, where then were all the princes of Germanye
assembled at a counsel or Diet, against the bishop of Rome, against whom the
Germaynes put a C. greues.

The xiii. day of April one Capitain Breerton one of the capitaines of the
auenturers at Guysnes with.xvi. tall men came to village called Waste and there
took a booty of beasts, by which taking an askry rose, and by chance
certain of the garrison of Bulleyn were then abroad and by the cry of the
people came where the Englishemen were, the Frenchemen were CC. horsemen and
with great cries enuiro^ed the Englishemen about, so that the Englishemen could
make no defense. Then capitain Brearton called to the capitain of the
Frenchemen and said, sir I am a ge^tleman and this enterprice was mine, I have
brought these good fellows to this ieopardy, wherefore we yield us al prisoners
to you, and so they delivered their weapons, the capitain was a gentleman and
gently them received, then to the men of war drew all the pe^santz or
chorles of the country nigh hand to the number of vii. or viii. score, which
desired to bye y^ Englishmen that were taken, the Frenchmen were content and
took money, then the Englishmen were delivered to the vplandishe people, and
the men of war rode away.

When the men of war were departed the rybaudes with pykes, iauelyns,
Captain Brearton murdered.
and knyues, fell on the Englishemen which had no weapon and them slew all
xvii. and cut them in pieces the most shamefully that ever was seen.

When knowledge hereof was brought to the capitain of Guisnes sir Ihon Gage, he
sent for the auenturers willing them to revenge their capitaines death. So all
the adventurers the xiiii. day gathered together to the number of.xl. archers
and pykes, and by good guide the next day in the morning they came to the same
village of Wast and there took xxxvii. prisoners and most part were at the
murder of Brearton and his company, The murder ^euenged.
and of the xxxvii. they slew xxxvi. and so they left one and carried him with
them, but or they departed they set the town on fire and spared nothing, their
ire was so great: the men of war of France costed the Englishmen, but they
would not meddle with them in that rage.

When they came to Guysnes they swear the Frencheman that was left on live to
declare their message to the captain of Bullein, which was that after that
day they would save neither man, woman nor child that came to their hands for
the great cruelty that the peysantz had done to captain Brearton and his
company, with which message the Frenchmen were discontent and said that the
villaynes deserved to have vengeance for their cruelty.

In this year through books of Emphimerydes and Pronosticacions made and
calculate by Astronomers, the people were sore affrayde for the said writers
declared that this year should be such Eclipses in watery signs, and such
conjunctions that by waters and fluddes many people should perish, Insomuche
that many persons vitailed them selfs and went to high grounds for fear of
drounyng, and specially one Bolton which was Prior of saint Bartholomewes in
Smythfeld builded him an house upon Harow of the hill, only for fear of this
flud, Bolton prior of saint Bartholomewes.
and thither he went and made provision for all things necessary within him,
for the space of two months: But the faithful people put their trust and
confidence only in God. And this rain was by the writers pronosticate to be
in February, wherefore when it began to rain in February the people were much
afraid, and some said now it begins, but many wisemen which thought that
the world could not be drouned again, contrary to Gods promise, put their
trust in him only, but because they thought that some great raines might fall
by enclinacions of the stars, and that water milles might stand still and
not grind, they provided for meal, and yet God be thanked there was not a
fairer season in many years, and at the last the Astronomers for their excuse
said that in their computacion they had mistaken and miscounted in their number
an hundredth years.

The Emperor charles which also was enemy to the French king, seeing the great
army that the king of England his confederate had in France, thought it was to
him honorable to make war also on that part of France that joins to Spain,
and in especially he imagined how to recover the town of Fountraby, which the
Frenchemen before that time had gotten: wherefore he assembled a great
puissaunce and made capitain the lord Barnardine de Belasco Constable of
Castyle, which with great diligence came before the town of Fountraby which
was strongly fortefied and the capitain thereof was a Naueroys: but when the
captain and his compaigny saw the town besieged with such a puissaunce,
and also that the sea was so narowly kept that they could not have vitail nor
succor, they determined to give up the town: but yet the captain of a high
stomach shot out his ordinance and sent his trompet to the capitain of the
Spanyardes to know what prisoners he had of his, and for the communicacion
thereof he desired abstinence of war till he had communed with the counsel of
the Spanish host, which to him was granted. Then was communicacion for five
days and nothing ended, for the Spanyardes were haute on the one side, and the
Frenchemen proud on the other side, but on the vi. day it was concluded that
the town should be delivered with ordinance and artillery and all the men of
war to depart with bag and baggage and so the xxvii. day of February was ye
town of Fountraby brought again to the hands of the Emperor, and he that was
capitain of Fountraby was afterward restored to his lands in Nauer by the
Emperor and became his man.

The bishop of Rome called Pope Clement seeing the great wars that were this
year on all parties and in especial between the Emperor and the king of England
on the one party against Fraunces the French king and his alyes, sent an
archbishop of the realm of Naples first to the French king, and after to the
Emperor, which declared to the French king the manyfolde mischiefs that rise
by war, the great stroke of vengeance that God will strike for unjust war
and specially for the death of innocents and effusion of christen blood, and
showed farther that the said French king made daily war on the Emperor and
the king of England without cause, but only because he himself would do no
right to them nor to their subjects.

The French king after counsel taken answered, my lord Legate we assure you
that we make no war, but war is made on us, and we stand at the defense,
notwithstanding our right is kept from us both the duchy of Myllain and realm
of Naples by the Emperor and the usurped duke, to the which we have good
title, and the king of England warreth on us without cause, notwithstanding
that we have given him and many lords o^ his cou^sail diverse fair pencions,
not because we be afraid of him, but because we would have his love and
amity, and when we perceived that he took part with the Emperor our mortal
enemy, we withdrewe our pencions as with right we might, and now with all his
power he would conquer our good will, which is against reason, and we claim
nothing of him. Well said the ambassador, I will speak first with the Emperor
and after with the king of England, and then I will declare to you their
rightes and demaundes, with which the French king seemed to be content.

Then the said ambassador took his leave and in post came to the Emperor in
Spain, and there exhorted him to peace with many goodly reasons, affirmyng
that the war was unjust and without reasonable cause made on the French king
as the said king affirmed. Then the Emperor like a noble prince answered, that
the wars were never of his beginning: For the French king or he wist had
taken the town of Fountraby, and also had sent an army to co^quere the realm
of Nauer^e, and not with this contented, retained the Swyches which be the
Emperors subjects and caused them to be enemies to thempyre, and he also
withhelde the duchy of haut Burgoyne, and the county of Arthoys with diverse
other countries and seignories belongyng to him: Wherefore his quarrel was always
just, and because the college of Rome should perceive the whole cause of his
wars, he delivered to the said ambassador a seedule, with which he departed,
refusyng all gifts which the Emperor offered him, and came again to the
French king and rehearsed to him all the Emperors saying, but the French king
him self highly excused and said that he might not lose that that his
predecessors left him, and so the bishop of Romes ambassador took his leave and
came into England.

After this Legate was departed from the Emperors court, there came thither an
Ambassador from Portyngale, which highly behaved him self, and when he came
to the Emperors speech, he proudly said: The proposicion of a Portyngale.
Sir you that are the greatest prince of Christendom ought above all men to do
justice and right, and to do wrong to no man, and where it is well known that
by the labor, study, and learning in Cosmography and Astronomy of us only
Portyngales, the trade to the parties of Inde or Indias were first sought and
found, and the first labor in that behalf was ours and the great innumerable
riches which was spent for the searchyng and findyng of the same, was employed
and spent by the king of Portyngale and his progenitors, by which trauail we
have won straung lands, whereby all Christendom is greatly enriched with
Iuels, stones, and perles and other straung commodities. How can it then be
thought just or righteous that any other person should take from us that
commodity that we have so derely bought? Yet most puissant lord and mighty
Emperor, your subjects daily trauail thither and wrong fully take away our
gain, which never labored nor took pain for the findyng or serching of
the same, wherefore of justice you must command your subjects not alonely to
leave their trade thitherwarde, but also to make to us Portyngales a sufficient
recompense for the harms that we have sustained.

When the Ambassador had said, The Emperors answer*
after a little deliberacion the Emperor answered. The very poverty of your
country of Portyngale is such, that of your selfs you be not able to live,
wherefore of necessity you were driven to seek living, for lands of princes
you were not able to purchase, and land of lords you were not able to
conquer. Wherefore on the sea you were compelled to seek that which was not
found: And where you say that you have found lands, I say those lands found
you by shipwrekes of the sea being cast thereon before you thought of any such
ground, and so sought farther for succors in necessity, yet they say not that
you have them wo^ne, but they have wo^ne you. And where you would that our
subjects should not repare thither, we ascertaine you that no man shall
prohibit our subictes to sail where they list for their advantage. For our
subjects may be warned no place by them with whom I have peace and amity: for
he is mine enemy and no friend that lets my liberty: Well said the
Ambassador, and we will let your subjects to pass thither. Nay said the
Emperor, we will not try so far, for I am able to disturb your doings nerer
hand. But for a suertie you Portyngales be enemies to all Christendom, for to
the Indyans you carry nothing but coin, which is hurt to all countries,
wherefore at this time you may depart, till you be better advised. After this
answer given to the Portyngales, they offered great sums of money to the
Emperor to leave his trade into the Indyans, but he thereto in nowyse would
agree.

The.xvi. year.
IN the beginning of this xvi. year the king lay at his manner of Newhall in
Essex, and there kept the feast of saint George and hearing that the bishop of
Romes Ambassador was coming into England removed to his Manor of Grenewyche
where the said Archbishop and legate came to him and was highly entertained,
which declared wisely and eloquently the message and intent of his master,
which was to make a peace and concord between y^ princes of Christendom, and
especially between the Emperor, the king of England and the French king, and
for that cause he had been with the Emperor and also with the French king,
which as he said affirmed that without cause the king of England made on him
war, considering that he to thentent to have y^ more amity and favor of you
and your nobles has liberally given to you and them honorable pencions,
which by no duty as he affirms you can nor may claim, but of his
beniuolence and bounty. Also he says that you claim his croune, realm, and
possessions, which touches him highly, and of yours he claymeth nothing, and
therefore he thinks of right you ought not to make him war. Wherefore may it
please your highness to tell me your mind and I shall it declare to the whole
court of Rome God willing and forget nothing.

Then the king called to him his cou^sail and after diverse co^sultacions had,
the Ambassador was sent for, and there was showed to him many records, prouyng
the king of England to be inheritor to the realm of France by blood and also
so confirmed by diverse Charters in the time of king Charles the vii. And as
concerning ye pencion, to him was showed diverse Charters, that it was no
Pencion of friendship but due rent for the duches of Normandy and Guyan and the
countries of Aniew and Maine which are the king of Englandes very
enheritaunce. Farthermore there were showed to him diverse bonds of the said
French kings for the payment for the city of Turnay and other duties which
he ought to the king of England, all which articles to fulfill, the French
king has oftentimes been required by Ambassadors, and yet he ever disse^bled
and would not conform himself to reason: of all these things were notes
written and delivered to the bishop of Romes ambassador, which took his leave of
the king and returned in post accompanied but with.iii. persons. By reason of
y^ coming of this Ambassador men hoped y^ peace should ensue, but it succeeded
not this year: for the third day of May the garrison of Bullein with diverse
other in the most secret wise that could be came to a place within the
English pale called Sentricas and suddenly struck up a dro^me or drounslade:
the people hearing this in the night were sore abashed, some fled naked and some
clothed, the most part fled to the Church, and the Frenchemen them followed
and took..xxi. prisoners and then set fire on the Church: By this time was all
the pale raised which thing the Frenchemen perceiuyng left their botie and
returned in all have with their prisoners to Bullein.

In this season the lords of Flaunders lay at the siege before Tyrwyn and were
likely to have taken it by famyne, whereof the French king being advertised
assembled an army of.xxii.M. horsemen and fotemen under the conduicte of the
Duke of Uandosme and the lord Pountdormy, and the French king himself came
down to Amyas and there caused it to be noysed that he would besege the town
of Ualencyen in Henaude, where the Duke of Suffolk the last year had left the
king of Englandes ordinance. The king of England hearing of this, said, that
if the French king beseged Ualencyen, he in person would go thither for to
reskue his ordinance. The lord Fynes and other lords of Fl^unders which lay
before Tyrwyn with ix.M. men were advertised of the French army, but
because of the fame that the host should go to Ualencyen, they sent for no more
succors.

When the Frenchemen had all things ready, they left the way to Ualencyen
and took the way directly to Tyrwyn. When the lords of Flaunders perceived
that they were sore abashed and then they knew that they were disceiued, and
that they were not able to abide the puissaunce of the French army. Wherefore
they raised their siege, and put themselves in order of battle on ye Southest
side of Tyrwyn: the French army passed forward the vi. day of May toward
Tyrwyn and made no semblaunce to fight: Howbeit some of them skyrmished with
the horsemen of Flaunders, but they at the last entered the town, whereunto
they were welcome, and the lords of Flaunders departed sore displeased but
there was no remedy. Then ran a brute that the French army would lay sege to
Guysnes: wherefore the king caused men and all other things to be put in a
readynes for the spedye reskue thereof if it had so chaunsed. But the
Frenchemen took a better advice.

In this month of May sir Robert Iernyngham capitain of Newnam bridge co^muned
with Christopher Coo, a captain of diverse English ships that kept the sea,
which then was in Calayce haven for vitaile and said, capitain Coo you know
how the Bulleners have visited nere to Calayce the English pale and have
burned Sentrycas. If you will promise to set many of your men a land at the
haven of Bullein the.xix. day of May, I with as many as I can furnishe will
mete with you there in basse Bulleine at the time and hour between us
appointed, to the which the said Christopher agreed and faithfully promised,
and so prepared accordyngly every thing necessary and so sailed toward
Bulleyn, sir Robert Iernyngham sent word of this enterprise to sir Willyam
Fitzwillyam captain of Guysnes to know if he would aid any part toward this
journey, which sent word that he would be at the same adventure himself: then
all the gentlemen desired him to be captain of that enterprise, which he
tha^kefully and weth heart received: then all the men of war and the
adventurers and the Bailey Mark assembled together, so that when all were come
together they were.CCC. horsemen, and of the country and Mark.iii.C. and of
the auenturers.C.lx. and so one and other they were vii.C. men. All these
persons met at an hour appointed at Sandyngfelde: the night was short so
that it was day or they came nere Bullein all set in good order of battle, but
they were askried before they came nere Bullein, and so it chaunsed that
Christopher Coo with his ships which had wind at will was come with
his.iiii. ships before Bullein somewhat before day, the Bulleners that kept
the watch him espied, and then he manned his boats and with men and
ordinance stretched toward the land, by that time was all basse Bullein in
harnes ready to defend the Englishmen from londyng, but captain Coo did what
he might, and almost all the people of Basse Bullein were on the shore, that
seeing the garrison made them ready and bent their ordinance. Sir Willya^
Fitzwillyam hearing the gunnes toward the hauenside knew well that Cristopher
Coo was in his business, and so encoraged every man to do well and marched
forward with as much speed as might be, insomuche that all the Englishemen were
on the hills before Bullein in sundry plumpes, then i^^ued out the horsemen of
Bullein between the castle and Cardons tower, the light horsemen of the English
part them encountered, there was a good fight, the Frenchemen shot with
Crosbowes, and the Englishemen with long bows, and the great ordinance shot
terri^ly, the Englishemen approached the town walls, this skyrmishe was ^^erse
and ever the archers aided the horsemen. While the horsemen were thus
skyrmishyng, the viii. score auenturers which were hardy and valiant men cast
themselfes about and came to basse Bullein, and there they were hardely
received of the Frenchmen, yet notwithstanding they lost their barriers and the
Englishmen entered, there was shotyng on al sides and a strong fight. The
Frenchmen cried Bullein, and thenglishmen saint George Calayce: but at the
last the Frenchmen were driven back and many slain, and xliiii. taken
prisoners, and so they returned to their captain sir Willyam Fitzwillyam. All
this while was Christopher Coo on land on the sea cost and bet ye Frenchmen up
to the town, and when the tide turned he with all his came again in safety
to their ships. The English horsemen after long fightyng took three of the
Frenchemen of arms and the other reculed to the town. By this time by reason
of the Alarm was all the country of Pycardye raised and much people resorted
to Bullein on all sides, which doing sir Willyam Fitzwillyam wisely
perceiuyng, by the sound of a trumpette brought all his men together in a
plumpe, and then sent them hither and thither to fette his driftes of beasts
that were nere in the country on every side, which was quickly done, for the
adventurers brought Oxen, Kyne, Horses, and many other pillages, and brent the
granges and villages, and so met together, and with their botie returned in
sauetie.

The tewesdaie following, being the last day of May, sir Willyam Fitz
Willyam, with a.C. and fifty horsemen, and the auenturers, and a hundred other
persons mo, came to a place called Samer de Boys, the said capitain wisely
considered, that in that place the Frenchemen had diverse times lurked, and
taken at auantage the Englishmen, wherefore he laid his horsemen, and his
archers on horseback in a woodde, in a wait if the Frenchemen followed the
stale: then he sent forth the auenturers, which passed farther then y^
capitain would that they should have done, and suddenly they were askried: then
on came the Frenchemen, the auenturers swear, that they would not flee, but
bent theimselfes to defend their enemies, which were.iii.C. horsemen. The
Frenchmen knew well their hardines, but yet they called them Crakers, which
by missoundyng, was commonly called Krekers, for a surety these men were hardy,
and full of policy, and very far^e would ieoperd, the Frenchemen sent about
a valey.i.C. of the best horsemen, and.ii.C. footmen, then were the Krekers
between two bendes of the Frenchmen: sir Willyam Fitz Willya^, being assured
of the conduite of the Frenchemen, much doubted the chance of the auenturers,
wherefore in great have sent for his stale of horsemen, that he had left
covered: and the Frenchmen that were before the Krekers, came and set on very
fast, in hope of their horsemen, that were gone about an hill in the valey. The
Englishemen them valiantly defended, then as the horsemen had compassed the
hill, the auenturers were come on a plain: then the horsemen that were come to
sir William Fitz Willyam, set on the French horsemen, there was a hard and a
ferce encounter, for the Frenchmen fought sore, but at length they fled, and in
the chase were taken.lvi. horsemen, and.xliiii. slain one and other, and many
Englishemen sore hurt and diverse slain, thus the Krekers escaped a narowe
hasarde.

In the same season on the second day of May, sir Thomas Palmer one of the
Capitaines of the frontiers, was ridyng to his friend, master Jerome of Burgon,
capitain of Turnahan, and with him.xx. English men on light horse, and as he
road, he suddenly espied.xxx. horsemen, of the garrison of Tirwyn and Bullein,
they were nere together or the Englishemen espied them: then there was no
remedy, but to encounter, sir Thomas Palmer well comforted his compaignie, and
then the French men set on with great force, and truly they fought long,
without one having any advantage of the other, but at last the Frenchemen began
to faint, and alitle to withdraw themselfes, that perceiuyng the English men,
set to them coragiously, and so they slew three out of hand, and.vi men of
arms taken prisoners, and eight dimy lances, with which prisoners the
Englishemen returned to Guysnes, and kept not their purpose to Turnahan, for
all were hurt or wounded.

In June, sir Willyam Fitz Willyam, capitain of Guysnes, sir Ihon Walop, and
sir Ihon Gage, secretly called to them.ix.C. men of war such as they
trusted, and on Midsomer day, passed the low country of Picardy, unto the
castle of Hardyngha^, or Rigsam and they carried with them but one piece of
ordinance called a Curtall, this gonne they bente against the Castle, which
was well furnished with harnes, ordinance, and all other artilerie, and
things needful, and the capitain also was a valiant and hardy gentleman. The
Englishemen ever shot that piece and removed it from place to place with great
pain, and in conclusion made a batery of the walls, so that they might assault
it, then the trompet blewe to assault, and the capitain with his compaignie
stood at defense: then sir Ihon Wallop, and sir Ihon Gage with the auenturers
or krekers entered the diche, and the archers shot at every loupe arrows and
the Frenchemen likewise shot quarelles: the Englishmen set up laders to the
walls, but the Frenchemen threw the^ down, at this assault was slain a
gentleman called Butler, and.xv. other Englishmen, but for all that, the
assault was not left, for some clymed by pikes, and some amended the ladders,
and cried again to the assault: but sir William Fitz William chief capitain of
this enterprise, perceived that they lacked engynes and other things, ^or the
spedy assault of the castle, and not willing to lose his men without cause,
caused them to stay, while he and other capitaines counseled together, and as
they were concluded once again to attempt the assault, they hard news that
two thousand horse men, and two thousand footmen, were at hand to fight
with the^, they then perceiuyng that.ix.C. men being weary, were no power to
encounter with four thousand Frenchemen, they in good order returned to the
English fortresses.

Monsire de Bees Capiiain of Bullein, well considered all the enterprices, that
the Englishmen had done in Picardy and France, now of late: he determined to
requite them, to his honor and fame, and for that purpose, sent for the earl
of Dammartyne, the lord Pontremie, and the lord Chastillion, which
concluded, to enter into the English pale, and to show themselfes before
Calice. Wherefore they assembled all the men of arms and soldiers, of the
garrisons about, and so they were.viii.C. good horsemen, and with pikes,
gonnes, and crossebowes.viii.C. footmen: and when all this compaignie was
assembled, Monsire de Bees as capitain of this journey, with the other lords,
the fourth day of August with banner displaied, came toward Calice in the
euenyng: and the next day in the morning by six of the Clock, they came to a
village within the English pale, called Bonynges. Then the Alarm rose through
all the English pale, and so came to Calice. These lords of France sent out
their foreriders, to search and over se the country, and then they laid an
embushement of.iii.C. horsemen, at thesaid town of Bonynges, and with that
bend abode Monsire Pontremie, and Monsire de Bees rode to Kalkewell with.iiiC.
horsemen, and there tarried with them, the earl of Dammartine with.iii.C. fresh
horsemen, and all the footmen with ba^ner displaied, road and forraged all
the Country, of which three hundred speres, they let one.C. go at large, and
kept the residue with them.

When the Alarm came to Calice, every man made to horse and harnes. Then sir
Robert Iernyngham with.lxxx. horsemen with all speed, rode out of Calice to
behold the compaignie of the Frenchemen. And he sent forth his light horsemen,
which met with the skourers of the French men, and because the Frenchemen
seemed a few in nombre, the English for^riders proffered toward them, which
fled toward Sandiffeld, and the Englishemen chased after, not being of
knowledge of the ^mbushementes, that lay at Bonynges and Kalkewell.

When sir Robert Iernyngham saw his light horsemen chase, he followed after
softly, to keep his horse in brethe. Then suddenly the French men that were in
chase returned, for some of their aid was nere them. When the Englishemen
which passed not.xvi. horse, saw the Frenchemen return, they encountered
with them manfully, but to the Frenchemen came still mo and mo, so that the
Englishemen were constrained to fly another way, to the hye land in great
ieoperdy, for the Frenchmen them pursued, but by the help of the light
geldynges, the Englishemen gat the sea side, or sea sands beyond Skales: then
were the Englishmen glad and returned, and fought with the Frenchmen hand to
hand, for the Frenchemen behind followed not the chase, but only twenty
horse men, and with pure fightyng the Englishemen took one of the French
horsemen, and came with him to Calice, and so were saved.

When sir Robert Iernyngham saw his men in chase (as you have hard) and saw
that they were in great ieoperdy, he auaunsed for their rescue all that he
might, which was the saving of the light horsemen, for the Frenhemen left
them, to encounter with sir Robert Iernyngham, and so it was that he went so
far forward, that the Frenchemen were between him and Calice. And when he
saw all the bendes, and embushmentes break out, he said to his compaignie:
sers, saint George to borowe, let these French galantes know what we
Englishemen be: Sir said his compaignie, they shall bye us dear. Then he
marched toward the high land: Then approached a great nombre of horsemen of
France, the Englishemen them valiauntly received, and manfully defended, but
ever the Frenchmen came fresh and fresh, so that the Englishemen being weary,
and oppressed with multitude, were feign to fly: and in this chase was taken
Thomas Cheiney an Archer, whose horse was tiered, and two other archers on
horsbacke, one called George Kar and the other Rowlande Atkynson, and three
other of the English pale, sir Robert and the remnaunt, saved themselfes the
best that they could.

When sir Robert was returned, the Frenchemen souned their trompet, and re^uled
to Bullein, and sent word to Calice, that they would visit the^ oftener. Sir
Robert Iernyngham remembryng this chance, thought to be revenged of the same,
and so aduisyng himself, to what place he should repare, he remembered that
whenever the Englishmen made any journey to Margyson, the Frenchemen would
fly over the water or creke* to a high ground by boats, and there as it were
in an island, save themselves, because on that side they might ever have
succors, for the creke or water, is beyond the town from Calice. Therefore
thesaied sir Robert caused five great boats to be carried in wagons, and so
he with other capitaines, of Calice and Guysnes, to the nombre of.iii.C.
fotemen with the Krekers* and.lx. horsemen the.xii. day of August, with
banners displayed, took their way to the town of Margison, and in the night
the light horsemen gave Alarm to the town of Bullein, and took two soldiers
prisoners, and brought with them certain cattaill to their compaignie. Then
thenglishemen marched forward, toward Margyson, that seeing the Frenchemen, took
their boats in trust of the water, and passed over, the Englishemen perceived
that, and lanched their Boats, and so like auenturers entered, and by force
passed* and so mo and mo, till.C.lx. were passed over: the country began to
gather, so that the Frenchemen were three hundred, which fought with the
Englishmen, and would have let the boats to land, but the archers on the
other side drove the^ back, and the Englishemen slew at the first
encounter.lx. men, and took forty prisoners, yet the Frenchemen that fled met
with new succors, and then began a new battle, and the Frenchmen fought
hardely, but at the end they fled, the most porest of the people, on the other
side of the water, fled to the Church, and abode at their defense, then was
there fire set in the church, then the Frenchemen lept out of the church, to
their destruction, for of three hundred there was saved but sixty on live.

The whole power of Bullein was come down, nere to the place: but when they
perceived that it was to late, and that the Englishemen were returned they came
no farther. This was sir Robert Iarnyngham even with the Frenchemen, and
brought a good botie, and many prisoners to Calice, which sore grieved the
capitain of Bullein.

The Frenchemen perceiuyng, that they gat little at the Englishemennes hands,
thought to take their advantage of the Flemmynges, where fore they assembled of
the garrisons, of Bullein and Tirwyn, v.C. fotemen, and three hundred horsemen,
and so in good order marched toward saint Omers, and they sent to go
aforragyng.i.C. footmen, and as many horsemen, and the rest kept themselfes in
a stale. These Frenchemen came by Arkus, nigh to saint Omers, and forraged all the country, the Alarm sprang all the country to Turnahan, the capitain of
Turnaha^ sent word to sir Willyam Fitzwillyan, Capitain of Guysnes, that the
Frenchemen were abroad, which made answer, that if the Frenchemen came nere
to him, surely he would speak with them, with which answer the capitain of
Turnahan being encoraged, sent forth.CC. Fle^mynges on foot, still the
Frenchemen marched toward Turnaha^, the Flemmynges that were sent from Turnahan,
marched toward the way, where the Frenchemen should come, thynkyng that when
the capitain of Guysnes had set on them, that then they would have lien in the
chase at the receipt

Thesaied capitain of Guisnes valiantly marched forward, with a.C horsemen,
and.iiii.C. footmen, entendyng to mete with the Frenchmen, and suddenly as he
was passing forward, word was brought him that the earl of Damarten, with the
garrisons of Mustrel and Abuile, to the number of.vi.C. horsemen, were coming
forward toward Guysnes. This hearing sir Willyam Fitzwillyam, swear that the
earl should not take pain to come to Guisnes, for he would mete him on the way:
by this mean he left his first enterprice, and marched toward therle of
Damartin

The Frenchemen of Tirwyn, being thereof advertised by a spy, called all the
people together, and with their botie came on forward toward Turnahan, and
suddenly they askried the poor Flemynges, which were sent out of the castle of
Turnahan, and when they perceived the French men, coming toward the^, they
turned their backs, and fled like sheep: the Frenchemen followed apace, and
slew the most part of them, for few escaped.

The capitain of Guysnes came to a fair grene, five mile from Guisnes, and
there in good order of battaill, tarried for the Earls coming, which hearing
that the capitain of Guysnes, was ready to receive him, made his return
backward, without any thing doing: when the capitain knew the truth of the
earls return, he then with all have, sped him to mete with the Frenchemen,
that were coming to Turnahan, and in the mean way, he hard tidings of the
chance of the Flemynges, and how the Frenchmen were re^uled toward Tirwyn,
which adventure sore him displeased, but there was no remedy, wherefore he
returned to Guisnes again, very sorry that the Frenchemen, went away unfought
withal: The Frenchemen little meddled after this time, wherefore let us now
return, and show what wars were kept on the frontiers, between England and
Scotland, in this ceason.

The.xxi. day of May being Trinite Sondaie, v.C. Scotts in the morning by
several fordes, entered into England, and lay covertly by the high way, to
distress merchauntes and merket men, that should pass to Berwike, that day
to the fair: for every Trinite Sondaie, there is kept a great fair, which
the Scotts knew well, and as they lay thus lurkyng, they robbed many
merchauntes, and took rich prisoners, but at the last they were perceived, then
the Alarm rose, and people began to gather, the Scotts drew together toward
Branxston, and thenglishmen them assailed, which so manfully them defended,
that if the young lord of Fulbery, had not come with one.C. light horsemen, the
Scotts had gone away with their botie, but then began a sore fight, many were
hurt on both sides, and some slain, and at the last the Scotts fled, and in
the chase there were two hundred Scotts taken prisoners, and the residue fled
and saved themselfes.

After this the.v. day of July, sir Ihon a Fenwicke, Leonard Musgraue, and
bastard Heron, and diverse other, gathered together.ix.C. me^ and entered into
Scotland, in the country called the March, and robbed and spoiled all the
country, and by chance the same season, the Scotts had assembled two
thousand men, to invade England, and none of these knew of other, till they
by adventure met together. Then began a strong medley, for the Scotts fought
valiauntly a great while, and the Englishemen them hardeli assailed, and at
the last by fine force, caused them to leave the ground and fly, and in the
flight were taken.CC. Scotts, and many slain, of the which prisoners diverse
were gentlemen sir Raufe of Fanwicke, Leonard Musgraue, and bastard Heron, with
xxx. other Englishemen well horssed, followed so far the chase, that they were
paste rescues of their compaignie, which perceiuyng the Scotts suddenly
returned, and set on the Englishemen, which oppressed with multitude, were
sone overcome, and there was taken sir Raufe a Fanwicke, Leonard Musgraue, and
six other, and bastard Heron, and seven other slain, the remnant by chance
eskaped: the other Englishmen with their two hundred prisoners, returned
sauely into England: the slaying of the Bastard Heron, was more pleasure to
the Scotts, then the taking of the two hundred was displeasure, they hated him
so.

The.vii. day of July, the lord Maxwell of Scotland, and sir Alexander
Jorden, with banners displayed, and Scotts to the nombre of four thousand,
entered into England at the West Marches by Carleile, and began to burn on
every side: then the Englishemen assembled on every side, and so they were in
nombre.ii.M. men, and fiercely set on the Scotts, there was a great fight,
for the space of an hour, at the last the Englishemen brake the arraie of the
Scotts, and them discomfited, and took.CCC. Scotts prisoners, the Englishemen
that had taken prisoners, went away with their prisoners: For sir Alexander
Jorden and his son and diverse other were taken prisoners, and by their
departing, the compaignie of the Englishemen was much minished. The lord
Maxwell being a politic man, perceived that, and suddenly called his people
together, and them encoraged, and began a new skirmishe, and recovered all the
prisoners almost, and took diverse English men prisoners, this was the chance
of war.

After this journey, in the Court of Parliament of Scotland, was much
commonyng of the wars, which were between England and Scotland: some of
the nobles said, that France never did so much good to Scotland in.xx.
years, as Scotland had lost by England, i^ one year, for y^ love and cause of
France: wherefore they thought it co^uenie^tto make a perpetual league of
amity, with y^ king of England, and to leave the French kings part. Other
nobles which had pencions in France, declared the old amity between France
and Scotland, and how the French king, brought up many gentlemen of Scotland
in his Court, geuyng them great livings, which the king of England would
not do: they also alleged the franches, and privileges that the Scotts have in
France, and specially they showed, that if the king of Scotts should break
with France, and then if it happened the king of England, to invade
Scotland, which being without aid of any friend, might well by the power of
England be conquered. After many long reasons it was thought expedient, to sue
to the king of England for a truce, which was done, and a truce granted til.
S. Andrews day.

This year the first day of September, was docter Thomas Hanibal Master of the
Rolls, received into London, with earls, and bishops, and diverse other
nobles and gentlemen, A Rose brought from Rome.
as Ambassador from Clement bishop of Rome, which brought with him a rose of
gold, for a token to the king: the people as he passed* thought to have seen
the Rose, but it was not showed, till he came to the king to Wynsore, on the
day of the Nativity of our Lady, on which day, after a solemn Mass song
by the Cardinal of York, thesaid present was delivered to the king, which
was a tree forged of fine gold, and wrought with branches, leaves and flowers,
resemblyng Roses: this tree was set in a pot of gold, which pot had three fete
of antike fashion: the pot was of measure half a pint, in the uppermost Rose,
was a fair Saphier loupe perced, the bigness of an Acorne, the tree was of
height half an English yard, and in breadth it was a foot. Thesaied
Ambassador in deliueryng the same rose, made an oracion, declaryng the good
mind, love, and favor, that the bishop of Rome bare to the king, in token
whereof he sent him that present, which the king thankefully received, and
delivered it to him again, and so he bare it open before the king, from the
College to the great chamber, and there delivered it to the Master of the
Iuell house, and so there ended his Legacion.

Before this time in the month of July, Lord Archebalde Douglas earl of
Anguishe, which had married the Queen of Scotts, sister to the king of
England, and was sent into France by the Duke of Albany, and there kept,
contrary to his will and pleasure, and from thence hardely escaped, and came to
the king of England, to his manner of Grenewiche, and there besought him of his
aid and comfort, to whom the king made a gentle answer. This Earl was not in
the favor of his wife the Queen of Scotts, wherefore she caused him to be
sent into France: some said that she loved the duke of Albany, better then
him, but what soever the matter was, she wrote to the French king, that if
therle ever came again into Scotland, that the French king should have no
pleasure in Scotland, that she might let, so that the earl being in France,
was in ieoperdie of his life. Wherefore secretly he fled and came into England,
as you have hard, and one day at the Castle of Wynsore he declared, that in
the counsel of France, when he was there, they happened in communicacion, to
talk of y^ wars that were then, between the Emperor and the French king,
and between the king of England and the French king: there was a Lord of the
counsel, that stood up and said, it were better that one person suffered,
rather then all the Realm should be daily in this mischief. Then was it
asked, what he meante by that one person, he answered, that if the French
Queen, which was lame and ugly were dedde, that then ways might be found,
that the French king should mary themperors sister, and to have with her the
Duchy of Millain, and then with the money of her marriage, the king of England
should be paid, and so a peace might be concluded: to this no answer was
made, but whether this were true or false, for a truth the French queen was
ded the.xxvi. day of July, and was buried at.s. De^ise

The duke of Burbon this Summer, made sharp war on the French kings
dominions, and did high enterprises: wherefore the king of England sent his
letters, to diverse lords and gentlemen in this season the tenor whereof
ensues. Trusty. etc. For as much as (our Lord God be thanked) our army,
under the leadyng of our cosyn the duke of Burbon, has not only entered the
realm of France, gainyng and attaynyng many tounes, citees, Castles, and
places, with the whole country of Province, without any resistance, of our
ancient enemy the French king, but also goes daily marchyng, and
continually does chase, and drive before them such men of war, as our said
enemy has prepared for his defense, in resistance of our cosyn the Duke of
Burbon, and our said army. In such wise that it is thought undoubtedly, now
to be most convenient time and season, either in our person (although the
year be somewhat past) or by a leuetenaunt, with a puissant army to invade
France, on the other side, both for the recoueryng of the Croune and to
compel our said enemy, to knowledge his obstinate, wilful, and cronious
demeanure, wherefore we will and command you, to be ready with such power as
you be able to make, upon the next Proclamacion to be made, dated the tenth
day of September.

After which letters sent furthe, every man made preparacion accordyngly, and
the people murmured and said, that it were much better, that the king should
maintein his wars, with his own subjects, and spend his treasure on them,
then to trust the Duke of Burbon, being a straungier to spend his money.

The king being at Wynsore, to him came sir Anthony Fitz Herbert one of the
Justices of the Common place, a man of excellent lernyng in the law, as
appears by his works, sir Raufe Egerton knight, doctor De^ton Deane of
Lichfeld, which in the beginning of this year, were sent as Commissioners into
Irelande, which so wisely endeavored theimselfes, that they reformed many
injuries done in the country, and brought diverse of the wild Irishe, by
fair means to a submission, and made by the Kings authority, the Earl of
Kildare deputy of the land, before whom the great Oneele bare the sword:
and the Lord Piers Butler, called Earl of Ormound, which was deputy of
Irelande, was by thesaied Commissioners, made high threasorer of Irelande. And
when they had set all things in good order, in the month of September they
took shippyng, and in the same monethe came to the king, which gave them his
hearty thanks, for their good doings.

In this monethe the king sent Master Ihon Magnus Priest, and Roger Ratcliffe
Esquier into Scotland, for the surety of his nephew the king of Scotts, for
diverse lords of Scotland, wrote to the king that they doubted the surety of
their king, because the duke of Albany, which was heir apparent to the realm
of Scotland, had the king in governance, and also they thought, he being a
Frencheman borne, should not rule their realm: wherefore they amongst
themselves, murmured sore in this matter. The Duke hearing, that the Lords of
Scotland, had written to the king of England, and also that they repined and
grudged at his doings, suddenly with all the threasure that he could make,
departed from Scotland, and sailed into France, with which departing the
commons were nothing sorry, and sone after his departing, the Ambassador of
England, were ioyously received into Scotland, and there thesaied Ambassadors
tarried, till March twelve monethe* in which time, there were many conclusions
driven, between the two realms: now let us return to France.

The.xxiiii. day of September, three horsemen of the garrison of Bullein,
which well knew the haven of Calice, came at a nepe tide, and passed over
Calice haven, by Rise bank in the night, and went behynd the Est Wyndmill, and
then took land, and went to a little village called Middilwaie, and passed the
Turn Pikes, and entered into a Whelers house, and took the man and the wife,
and.xx. l. in money sterlyng, and went a way clear without askrie of
perceiuyng of the watch of Calice, and no man wist where they were become,
till the Trompet of Bullein brought word, and demanded the ransom.

The last day of September, fifty light horsemen of Calice, apperteignyng to
sir Rober Iernyngham, rode toward Bullein, and passed the water of Margyso^,
and came to the water of Sclakes nere Bullein where suddenly they
encountered.lx. Frenchmen, of the garrison of Bullein, there was shotyng with
long bows and crosebowes, on every side strong was the fight, but at the last
the Frenchemen fled, the Englishemen followed, and took three light horsemen, and
when they perceived the Alarm on every side, they put themselfes in arraie,
and with their botie came to Calice.

The Same day sir Thomas Palmer, with.lx. horsemen of Guysnes, encountered with
the capitain Bertram, leader of the horsemen of therle Dammartyn, with.lx.
horsemen, there was a strong fight two hours together, but in the end the
Frenchemen fled, and the Englishemen followed, and took.xviii. prisoners,
and.xvi. good horse, and with this bot^e they returned to Guysnes.

In this busy season, the auenturers hearing what the horsemen, on their
parties had done* and inespeciall perceiuyng that thenglishe horsemen had taken
good prisoners, commoned amongst theimselfes, what was to be done, then one of
their capitaines said openly: sirs you se how long we have been here, and
wages we have none, our living rises on the gain of our enemies, and sith our
beginning, we have had good chance in all our enterprises, God be thanked:
now the Winter draws nere, let us now adventure to get some good botie* to
make us merry with, in the cold wether, and if you will, we shall enterprise a
thing, that I trust to us shall be profitable. Then all the compaignie cried
turthe turth. Then with a banner of saint George, they marched toward a
village, liyng toward Mustrell, having only.xxv. light horsemen, to be their
skou^e^s, and they were not fully two hundred men. This compaignie following
their skourers, went far on, and had gotten a fair botie, of Oxen, Kyne, and
other beastiall, and were nere at their return, and by chance the same day,
was the earl of Dammartyn, and the capitain of Mustrell, with the power of the
Duke of Uandosme, going toward saint Omers, to burn and destroy that
country, and for that purpose they had gathered together.xv.C. horsemen,
and.viii.C. footmen, howbeit the footmen were a large mile behynd the horsemen.

The Frenchmen on horseback, espied the English horsemen, which perceiuyng
the great nombre fled, and as thesaid Frenchmen marched forward, they espied
the auenturers on foot, and made toward them: thenglishemen seeing the great
nombre of the horsemen, studied to get some hedge, or strong place to fortify
them, but there was no such place in sight, and also they had no such time
so to do, wherefore the Capitain said: Good fellows and brethren, we have of
long time been called auenturers, now is the time come of our adventure, the
Frenchemen will not rau^some us for nothing, we be amongst the^ so feared: if
any thing save our lives, it must be God and our hardines, and therefore said
he, if you se me begin to fly, slaie me out of hand. Then every manne cried
God mercy, and kneled done and kissed the earth, and struck hands each with
other, in token not to depart, and then made theimselfes pressed to the defense.

The Frenchmen came on, on every side, thenglishmen shot their arrows, and
defended them as well as they could: the Frenchmen perceiuyng that the
Englishemen, kept themselves so close, caused diverse of the horse men to light
a foot, and so they did, and fought with their speres against the pikes, and
shot with Crosebowes on every side. Alas the while, for while the Englishemen
had arrows to shote, they were not broken, but close without peril, but when
their arrows were spent, the Englishmen fought valiauntly, and slew many
Frenchemen that lighted on foot, but in the conclusion the horsemen entered,
and killed them al in manner because there were so many of their compaignie
s^ain, and took few of them prisoners. The end of the aue^turers
This was thend of these compaignions, called the krekers or auenturers, which
were as hardy men, as ever served prince or capitain.

The Duke of Burbon, with the Marquis of Picardy, in the month of October,
with a great puyssaunce, laid siege to the strong town of Marcell in
Province, and lay there a great space. The French king reised a great
army, and swear that he would reise the siege, whereof hearing the Duke of
Burbon, sent for the Marquis of Piscare, and his other capitains, and declared
to them that his intent was, to give the French King battaill: the Marquis of
Piscare said that the French kings puyssaunce was great, and theirs small,
and said: although the duke of Burbon, which was a banished man from his
country, had no other remeady to revenge him, but by battaill, yet he said he
would not put all the Emperors men, of the which he had the guide, in such a
hasard till the remnant of the Emperors power were come. Well said the duke of
Burbon, then you do not as you have written, both to the Emperor and to the
king of England, which shall be a reproach to your honor: Naie said the
Marquis, I will keep me from reproach. Then said docter Richard Pace,
Ambassador for the king of England: my lord you have had the King my Masters
wages, I would be glad to hear what way you would take: I woll tell you said
the Marquis, the French king has a great army gone into Italy, and he himself
follows with another, not to come to fight with us. I dare assure you: but
only to take the Duchy of Millain unprovided, which shall do him more
pleasure then he had slain all us. Also the Emperor shall lose, more then.x.
Marceles be worth, and the French kings power shall be more elated, that he
will not set by the Emperor, nor the king of England. Therefore my advise is,
to break up this siege, and with all speed to prevent him in Italy, and if we
be entered the tounes, and put municions in the same, he shall lie a cold in
the feldes, and then you shall se what shall become of him, when his beasts
dye, and his vitaill spent. To this counsel the duke and all the Capitaines
agreed, and so brake up the siege, and with all have departed into Italy, and
fortified all the tounes in the Duchy of Millain, with men and other
necessaries.

The French king hearing of this, with all his army passed the Mountaignes,
and Camped nere to Millain. It chanced in this monethe of November the.xiii.
day, about the town of Calice, there fell a great mist, in which mist the
Frenchmen came to a village called Kause beside Newna^ bridge, and took.xl.
beasts, then the Alarm was brought to Calice, which hearing the Marshall of
Calice, called to him sir Robert Iernyngham, and they had with them.i.C.xx.
horsemen, and sent sir Anthony Broune to tell the capitain of Guysnes, what
they intended to do, but they ^aried not for the compaignie of Guynes, but
marched so far forward, that they came to the water of Sclaukes, which is nere
Bullein, and there they set their stale. And in the morning betyme, they sent
forth a gentleman called Richard Lamberd, with.xx. light horsemen on swifte
geldynges, and they came by Moon light nere Bullein, and then they saw the
men of Bullein and other there about, put out there be^tes into the feld. Then
the Englishemen with great diligence, brought all the beasts together, and so
began to drive them together, toward their embushement. Then the Alarm began
at Bullein, and the men of war issued out of the town, and fought with
thenglishemen, their horses were fresh: wherefore they had a great auantage, but
inco^clusion three French men were slain, and their horses taken, and so the
light horsemen came with their cattaill, nere to the embushement, and the
Frenchemen followed, that seeing the Englishemen that kept the stale, came in all
have and rescued their light horsemen, and drove the Frenchemen back, and then
made return with their beasts, and as they were returnyng, they had word
brought to them, how that sir Willyam Fitzwillyam, capitain of Guysnes with his
retinue, were besiegyng a pile called the castle of Capell, wherefore they sped
them thither in all have, and when they were come thither, the capitain of
Guysnes them heartily welcomed, and then they concluded to give an assault to
the Castle, and so with good courage set on, the Frenchemen defended it very
valiantly a great while, but at the last the Englishmen gat over the diches,
and scaled the walls, but the Frenchemen still them defended, till the
Englishemen had gotten to the highest of the dongion, and then was there
slaiyng a pace* For there were liii. persons slain out of hand, in reuengyng
the great obstinacy of the Frenchemen, and the castle was rased and brent.
Then sir Willyam Fitzwillyam with his botie, and sir Ihon Wallop Marshall of
Calice and sir Ihon Iernyngham returned, he to Guysnes, and they to Calice.
The Same day.xiiii. Burgonions, and.xiiii. Spaniardes, all horsemen of Guysnes,
came to the Church of Falske, not far from Durnam at high Mass time, and
there drew their swords, and so much did, that all the men in the church,
to the number of fifty, yielded theimselfes prisoners, of the which number
they took eight persons with them, which should be gages for the remnant, and
with these.viii. they came to Guisnes

The.xix. day of December were received into London, lord Gilbert Keuet Earl
of Castelles, sir Robert Cockeburne bishop of Dunkel, and the Abbot of
Campskenell, Ambassadors from James the fifth king of Scotts, by the bishop of
Lyncolne, the lord of saint Ihones, and diverse other noble men, and were
conueighed to their lodgings at Taylers Haule.

The.xxiii. day of December, thesaied Ambassadors were conueighed to
Grenewiche, accompaignied with thesaied lords by water, and when they came to
the utter gate, they were received of the officers of the house, and so passed
through the haule, which was well furnished with people, and so through the
uttermost chamber, into the great chamber of presence, where they were received
and welcomed, of all the princes and nobles of the realm, and within a short
space the king came forth, and set him self in a throne of three steps high,
under his Clothe of estate, which was very rich, but his apparel was excedi^g
rich, both of goldsmithes work and perle, and stone, which the Scotts well
auised, and then they wisely and humbly made their obeisance, and the bishop in
good plain latin made a solemn Oracion, in the which he declared, that
although the realm of Scotland and he, had often times hard the renoune and
fame of him and his Court, both for the gifts of grace and nature, which
were in his person, yet he said that his princely countenance, his lovely
favor, which he himself did se, did much surmount the fame and name, which
he has hard of report. He declared further, that although fortune had him
favored, in conqueryng of regions, and vanquishyng of battles, yet that thing
was not so honorable to him, nor profitable to his realm, as was a good peace,
which pleases both God and man, and for that cause he showed, that king
James the fifth his nephew, and fellow to the king of England, had sent them
his Ambassadors, to entreat a peace, so that a convenient marriage might be
made, between him and the lady Mary, daughter to the king, which should be a
lincke necessary, to knit together the realm of Scotland and England, in
perpetual love and amity.

To which Oracion, the bishop of London docter Tunstal answered and said:
that the king was at their desire, content to have peace upon reasonable
conditions, and as touchy^g marriage of his daughter, he would so answer them,
that they should be contented. Then the king rose from his place and welcomed
them, and all the honest persons of the train, and after communicacion had,
they took their leave for that time, and so took their barge and came to
London.

Before the feast of Christmas, the lord Leonard Gray, and the lord Ihon
Gray, brethren to the Marquis Dorcet, sir George Cobham son to the lord
Cobham, Willyam Carry, sir Ihon Dudley, Thomas Wiat, Frances Pointz, Frances
Sidney, sir Anthony Broune, sir Edward Seimour, Oliver Manners, Perciuall
Heart, Sebastian Nudigate, and Thomas Calen Esquires of the Kings household,
enterprised a challenge of feactes of arms, against the feast of Christmas,
wherefore they sent Wyndsore herault, on saint Th^mas day before Christmas,
into the Queen's great chamber, the king being present, which herault had a
coat of arms of red silk, beaten with a goodly Castle, of four Turrettes
silver, and in every turret a fair lady, standing gorgiously appareled: the
herault after that the Trumpet had blown, said, where the king our sovereign
Lord, of his bountiful goodness, has given to four maidens of his Court, the
castle of Loyalty, to dispose at their pleasure, thesaied maidens have given
the custody thereof, to a capitain and fiftene gentlemen with him, which
capitain sent furthe me his Herault called Chasteau Blanch, to declare to all
kings and princes, and other gentlemen of noble courage, that thesaied capitain
will nere to his Castle ^aise a Mount, on which shall stand an Unicorne,
supportyng four fair shildes.

The first shilde shall be White, and whosoever touches that shield shall be
answered six courses at the Tilt, by them of the Castle, with hostyng harnes
and double pieces.

The second shilde, Red, betokenyng the Turnay, and whosoever touches that
shild, shall be answered ten strokes at the Turnay, with the sword, edge and
point abated.

The third shild yelow, signifiyng the Barriers, and he that touches that
shilde shall be answered twelve strokes at the Barriers, with the sword, edge
and point abated.

The fourth shilde blewe, betokenyng the assault, with such wepons as the
capitain of the Castle shall occupy, that is, Morris pike, sword, target, the
point and edge abated.

Also thesaied capitain and his compaignie promise, to defend thesaid Castle
against all comers, being gentlemen of name and arms, and the assaulters to
devise, all manner of engynes for the assaultyng, edge tole to break the house
and ground, only except, and also that no other weapon shall be used, but such
as the patron shall be set up, by thesaied Unicorne, and that no man meddle
with fire within or without, but the matches for gonnes, and every prisoner
taken on either party, to pay for his raunsom.iiii yardes of right satin,
and every capitain.xiii* yardes.

According to this Proclamacion was the Mount, and all things devised
sumpteously, with a great craggy branch, on which were hanged the shildes of
the arms of the capitain, and all other of the Castle. For this enterprise
there was set up, in the Tilte yard at Grenewiche a castle square every
way.xx. foot, and fifty foot on heigh, very strong and of great timber,
well fastened with iron, the embatelinentes, loupes and every place where men
should enter, were set with great rolls, and turned as soon as they were
touched, so that to semyng no man could enter the towers, nor embatilmentes. On
the North and Southe sides, were two great diches.xv. foot deep, from the
brynke to the botome, and they were very stepe, and between the diche and
Castle, was set a pale, which was rampaired with earth so stepe and thick,
that it was not likely to be gotten. On these diches were two draw bridges,
on the Weste side was a great rampire or bank, very stepe without and within,
and like to a vamure of a fortress, by the vamure the diches were.xxiiii. foot
deep When the strength of this castle was well beholden, many made dangerous to
assault it, and some said it could not be won by sport, but by ernest. The
king minded to have it assaulted, and devised engines therefore, but the
Carpenters were so dull, that they understood not his intent, and wrought all
thing contrary, and so for that time the assault was prolonged, and all the
other points of the challenge held, for the morrow after saint Ihon the
Evangelists day in Christmas, came out of the castle* six men of arms of
the castle, on horseback armed at al points with their speres ready to
discharge, and so came to the end of the Tilt, abidyng all comers. Then
suddenly entered into the feld, two ladies on two palfreis, in great robes
of purple damask, leadyng two ancient knights, with beardes of silver, in
the same apparel, and when they came before the Queen, they put up a bill to
her, the effect whereof was, that although youth had left them, and age was
come, and would let them to do feactes of arms: Yet courage, desire, and
good will abode with them, and bad them to take upon them to break speres,
which they would gladly do, if it pleased her to give them license. When the
Queen and the Ladies had seen the bill, they praised their courage, and gave
them license.

Then the knights threw away their robes, and then it was known that it was
the King, and the Duke of Suffolk, whose bardes and bases were gold,
embraudered with purple, silver, and Black, very curiously. After them followed
the Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Montacute, the Lord Roos, sir Nicholas
Carewe, sir Frances Brian, Henry Norreis, Anthony Kneuet, and five other, every
man ran eight courses, in which courses the king brake seven speres. Every man
that day did well, so that the Scotts much preised the men of arms of
England* but most of all they preised and marueiled at the kings strength,
for they saw his speres were broken with more force, then the other speres were

When all the courses were roune, the king and all the other disarmed them, and
went to supper, and after supper the king having with him, the Ambassadors of
Scotland, came into the Queen's chamber, where after that the Lords, and
diverse Ladies had daunced, there came in a Mask of.xvi. all appareled in
clothe of Gold, rich tynsell and crimosyn velvet, cut, slit, and tied very
curiously, their buskins and shoen were gold, cappes and whoddes all gold,
rich and not counterfeted: of this number the King and the Duke of Suffolk
were two, then the Ma^kers took ladies, and daunsed a great season, and that
done was brought in wine and spices, and the straungiers well cherished, and
after that conueighed toward their lodgyng. And as they went they asked a
gentleman which accompaignied them, if all the war time the king and the
lords were so merry, or had had such joyous pastyme, or kept such royal
household, or were so well appareled: for in their country they said, in time
of war, was nothing but wailyng and mournyng, and also they thought that the
realm of France, is not a realm to sport with, nor to Mask with. The
gentleman answered, that the king and his court, used them still all the
war time, as they do now, for they set not by the French king one been.
For the king of England may sit in his chair and damage the French king,
for the Lords and cominaltie of England, pray for the continuance of war,
for by the wars of France they win, and lose not, at which saying the
Scotts much mused.

Fridaie the.xxx. day of December, therle of Castles one of the Scottishe
Ambassadors took his leave, and departed toward Scotland: for to common with
the Counsel of Scotland, for things which were not in their commission,
and left behynd him the Bishop of Dunkell, and the Abbot of Campskenell: some
said tharticle was, that the Scotts should forsake the French king, and that
the king of Scotts should come into England, but whatsoever it was, every man
knew it not.

The second day of January, there was much talkyng of the assault of the
Castle, and so after long debate, sir Frances Brian, and Frances Point;,
enterprised to defend the Weste braie of the Castle, with Pike Target, and
Sword, point and edge abated, against sir George Cobham George Harbert, Ihon
Poyntz, and Willyam Kneuet, and when they were all armed, the Trumpettes blewe,
then toward the braie marched the four gentlemen, with pikes and swords, and
cried harr, harr, there was foynyng, lasshyng, and strikyng, they within fought
mightily and when any without clymed up the bank, they within bet them down
they within were sometime beten down almo^^e: but surely they fought
valiantly, and then they seized for a while.

Then began the assault again, and George Harbert and Willyam Kneuet, hel^e
them two within so hard, that they could scant put their heddes over the
braye, or bulwerke. While they two thus still fought, their two fellows, sir
George Cobham, and Ihon Poyntz, with their swords dug holes in the bank to
clyme up, but or they had dooen, their two compaignions were fought out of
brethe, then sir Frances Brian and Frances Poyntz fought with the other two
that dug, and then on came the other two, that had brethed themselfes, then
^ierce was the fight, and Ihon Poyntz gat footyng in the bancke above, and took
hold of the pa^e, and fought hand to hand, with Frances Poyntz his brother,
and ever George Harbert sustained him, at the bank with his pike, sir Edward
Cobham gat the bank, and fought hardely, but at the la^^ he was overthrown,
but up he gat again, and coragiously gat the pale* they two within fought
valiauntly, but they were over matched, for t^ei that fought at the pale
without, by aid of their fellows gatte over the pale, and then was the battle
ended. I think that there was never battaill of pleasure* better fought then
this was.

The next day after was another fight, of four and eight, which was sore
^oughten, and at last the braye taken, and when the combats were disarmed,
suddenly all the young persons without, threw stones at the^ within the
ca^^le, and they at them, and many honest men which threw not were hurt, and
with much pein they without were apeised, and no man knew how nor why, this
hurlyng began.

The fifth day of January, all the knights of the castle, came to the
ba^^^ers to abide al men, thither came the king and many other lords and
gentlemen, and that day by them of the castle, were delivered.lviii.
gentlemen, and.lviii. battles fought valiantly, the king himself fought
coragiou^^y, and so did all the other. The eight day of February, the
ge^tlemen of the castle following their challenge, came into the feld, ^eady to
an^were all comers. To this turnay came the king his base and bard were cloth
or silver, and black velvet ruffed and not plain, and over that was a work of
purple velvet, embraudered richely with gold, cut in knottes or ^ol^es
fas^ened, so that it bossed out and frounced very stately to behold, after the
King came.xix. other richely appareled, the King and Sir Anthony Broune
Turnaied together, and the King with his sword, point and edge abated, had
almost cut his poldron, his strokes were so great. Then every man turnaied as
his course came, and many a sword was broken, and many a good stripe given,
and when every man had stricken the full number of twelve strokes, they were
severed and then they disarmed.

In this monethe the Cardinal was Legate, by his power Legantyne, would have
visited the Friars Obseruauntes, The Obseruaunt Frie^s would not obey the
Cardinal.
but they in nowise would therein condiscende, wherefore.xix. of the same
religion, were accursed at Paul's Cross, by one of the same religion, called
Friar Forest. Of this Friar Forest ye shall here more here after, in the
thirty year of this King.

In this season the French king was in Italy, with all his nobility, and to
him was Millain yielded, but because of pestilence he would not enter, but
departed and laid siege to the strong town of Pauia, whereof was capitain a
valiant Spanyard, called Anthony de Leua. The French kings mother being
Regent of France, perceiuyng that the king her soonne, with all his good
Capitaines were in Italy, doubted that the king of England, in the next
Spryng time would invade France. Wherefore she by the auice of the counsel of
France, did so much with the king of England, that her Stuard of household
called Ihon Iokin, had a saueconduit to come into England, which was kept
close in the house of docter Lark, a Prebendary of saint Steuens, and every
day privily spoke with the Cardinal, and so secretly he remained, til
the.xxiiii. day of January, at which day came to London, the president of
Roan called Monsire Brynyon, as an Ambassador from Frances the French king, and
was lodged with Ihon Iokyn: this Ihon Iokyn was kept privy, because that no
man should know, that there was any manne of France, here to solicit any
cause for the French King, which after grew to great trouble. For he showed
himself to straungiers, which favored the French party, and so at last it
was openly known, to the kings counsel, and almost to all men: but when
the Emperors Ambassador knew this dark dealyng, he mused not a little and
said, that the Cardinal did drive privy driftes, and that by his means
onley, Ihon Iokyn was come into England, to entreat a peace in secret manner,
or the kings friends might know it, and al people said, that Ihon Iokyn was
but a cast away of Ieane, and had no living to live on, but of the lady
Regent, and marueiled why he should be kept close, and so much cherished of
the Cardinal. For this keeping close of this Iokyn, Englishemen were rebuked at
the Mart in Flaunders, and Brabant. The Emperors Ambassador and the bishop of
Romes Ambassador also sore murmured, why this Ihon Iokyn should be kept as a
spirit in close, considering that there was open war between the two
kings, and feared that the kings counsel should be corrupt. This Ihon Iokyn
was much with the Cardinal, but never was seen with the King nor his
counsel, but for all the secretnes, Monsire Pratt themperors Ambassador,
knew all the offers that he made for peace (which in deed were very great)
and how he had offered pencions, to diverse young me^ about the king, of the
which some were very glad, and so the noise be reason of such offers ran, that
a peace was likely to ensue in short space.

Monsire Pratt wrote of this matter, in all have to the Emperor, in the which
letters he highly commended the king of England, for his stedfastnes: but he
said some of the kings counsel, loved neither the Emperor nor the king of
England, and wrote to him farther, all the manner of ye secret keeping of Iho^
Iokyn. These letters at last were brought to the Cardinal, by what chance it
was not openly known, and so he sent for Monsire Pratt, and declared to him
the matter, which answered him, that he was counsailer and Ambassador to the
Emperor, and that it was his part, to assertein the Emperor of every thing,
that was or might sound prejudicial to his majesty, but howsoever that his
answer was taken, he was not favored with the Cardinal, but he said openly,
that it was not well meant to the Emperor, to stop his packet with letters and
to open them, and the Spanyardes said, that the Emperor sent them not into
England to sleep, but to do him service. The bishop of Romes Ambassador wrote
to his master, that peace was likely to be concluded, between England and
France, and willed him to be the first friend to the French king, rather
then the second. Of which writing came harm after, as you shall hear.

In this month tidings came to the King, how the Marquis of Piscaire in
Italy, had gotten from the French king, a castle called the castle. S. Angel,
which was a great fortificacion, of his siege at Pauie.

There was in this monethe a Flemyng in Heddyng Castle, which came often times
to saint Omers, and promised them if they would come to Heddyng, he would
deliver the Castle: upon his word they of saint Omers, Treason at Heddyng
cas^le.
gathered together seven hundred footmen, and five hundred horsemen, and
poynted with the spy, that the fourth day of February, they would come
thither, and when the false knave knew the day, he told Monsire Pontdormie,
Capitain of Heddyng, which incontment filled the castle with men of war, and
laid busshementes on every side, and had laid the ordinance, all on the one
side of the Castle, that way that the Flemynges should come. The men of war
of saint Omers, were conueighed by their spy, mistrustyng nothing, to a
posterne, which was little used, and when there were as many in, as the
Frenchemen thought sufficient, they let fall the Portcolis: Then Monsire
Pontdromie, cried, slaie, slaie, then the Flemynges wist that they were
betrayed, and put them selfs to fight for their lives, that seeing Monsire
Pontdromie, commanded to fire the ordinance in such haste and fury, that the
flame was so great and fierce, that it brent thesaied Lord Pontdromie,
and.xxvii. of his compaignions all gentlemen, the train was so hastily fiered,
that they had no leisure to avoid. In the fight ten of the Flemynges we^
slain, and thirty kept themselves so hardely together, that their lives were
granted them, and so was taken as prisoners, the remnant that entered lept over
the castle wall, and so saved themselfes, and told news to their horsemen,
which were without, which hearing the mischaunce, returned toward saint Omers.

Sundaie the fifth day of March, Ambassadors of, Flanders.
were received into London, Monsire de Beuer lord of Camphere, Admiral of
Flaunders, and the President of Malynes, called Master Ihon de la Coos, and
Master Ihon de la Gache, as Ambassadors from the lady Margaret, in the name of
the Emperor, for causes of the low countries, of Brabant, Flaunders, and
Zelande: and on Tewesdaie they were brought to the king to Bridewell, which
nobely them enterteined, and then they showed how themperors majesty, had
commanded them to obey the king of England, as protertor and governor,
wherefore they and all theirs, were at his commandment, and if they had done
other wise, and not obeyed him as their governor, they asked him mercy, then
the king and they talked together secretly, and then they departed. These
Ambassadors demanded three things.

First, they demanded the lady Mary the kings only daughter, to

Also that all such sommes of money, as the King should give with

Thirdly, that the king of England himself, should pass the sea and

Thursday the.ix. day of March, at.vii. of the clock in the morning there
came a gentleman in post, from the lady Margaret gouernesse of Flanders, and
brought letters, showing how that the.xxiiii. day of February, the siege of
Pauia, where the French king had lien long, was raised by force of battaill,
and the French king himself taken prisoner, and how by the Duke of Burbon, the
Uiceroy of Naples called Myngnouale, and the Marquis of Piscaire, and other of
the Emperors capitaines, the whole power of France was discomfited, and how
the duke of Albany with seven thousand men, was going to Naples, and how the
bishop of Rome was become French, against the Emperor, and had sent his cosyn
in aid of the French king, with a great power. The Same day the president of
Roan and Ihon Iokyn, were going to the Court (for they had not yet spoken with
the king) and in Holburne in their way was tidings brought them, of the taking
of the king their Master, and of the loss of the feld, which hearing this
misauenture, returned to their lodgyng sorrowful, and within short space,
returned to the Regent of France. It was thought surely that the king of
England, would have had peace with the French king, if this chance had not
happened, for all the people of England, grudged against Flaunders, for their
evil entreatyng, in the time of war, and also the king was displeased with
them, for enhaunsyng his coin there, which was a cause that money was daily
conueighed out of the Realm, and many other causes there were of grudge.

(...) the.xi. day of March, A triumph for the taking o^ the French King.
in the (...) of London for these tidings, were made great ^iers and triumph,
and the Mayor and Aldermen road about the city with Trumpettes, and (...) ^yne
was laid in diverse places of the city, that every man might (...), and on
Tower hill the Ambassadors of Rome, of Flaunders, and (...), had a great
ba^ket made in a goodly ^ent, which pleased them (...), and as they returned
homewarde, all the streets were full of harnessed men and Cressettes, attendyng
on the Constables, which they preised much.

Sondaie the.xii. of March, the king accompaignied with the Ambassadors, of
Rome, of the Emperor, of Scotland, of Uenice, of Millain and Florence, road in
his estate to Paul's church, and there the Cardinal sang Mass, and a.xi.
prelates waited on him in pontificalles, and after Mass was done, the quere
sang Te deum, and the mynstrelles played on every side, and when all was done,
the king returned to Bride well, and there kept a solemn dinner. The bishop
of Scotland was much marked this day, for whenever he came to the Court,
before this time his apparel was sumpteous, his whodde was ever velvet or
crimosyn Satyn: but after the taking of the French king, he ware only black
Chamlet, by which token men judged his French heart.

From the.ix. day of March to the.xvi. day, the king had no mo letters, of
the manner of battaill of Pauie, and that day he received a letter from the
Duke of Burbon, by a gentleman called Gropayne: when the king had read the
letter, The true report of the taking of the Fr^che king.
he came into the Queen's Chamber, and there thesaied Gropayne declared the
manner of the siege, and how well it was planted, and how themperors men entered
the French camp by force, and threw down their bastiles, and fought with
the Frenchmen, within their Camp, and took their king prisoner in the same,
and many other which was marvel. For when the French king entered Italy, he
had in his guard.xi.C. men, and of speres furnished two M.ii.C.l. and of light
horsemen eight hundred and.xx. and of footmen.lvii.M. and of these the Duke of
Albany had but eight thousand, so that there remained with the French
king.xlix.M.ix.C. and fifty men, whereof was taken.xiiii.M. and mo, beside the
great riches, and the goodly ordinance which were.xii. great Bombardes of
brass, and.xxiiii. great Canon pieces.xxiiii. double Curtalles, four double
Canon pieces, two middle Canon pieces, and eight other pieces. After the feld was
done, the French king was put in the custody of the Uiceroy of Naples, which
much comforted him, and preised his valiauntnes, and prayed him to be content,
for he should have a gentle end, then he desired to write to his mother,
which was to him granted, the very words were these.

To advertise you of my unfortunate chance: Nothing is left but the honor, and
the life that is saved, and because some other news shall recomforte you, I
have desired to write to you this letter* the which liberally has been
granted to me: besechyng you to regard the extremity of your self, in ensuyng
your accustomed wisdom. For I hope that at length God will not forget me, to
you recommendyng your little en^antes and mine, suppliyng you to give
saueconduite, to pass and return from Spain, to this berar that goes toward
the Emperor, to know in what wise I shall be entreated, and thus right humbly to
your good grace, I have me recommended: This subscribed by your humble and
obedient son Frances.

This season the Cardinal being in the kings favor, The Cardinal f^rst began
to suppress ^bbeies.
obtained license to make a College at Oxford, and another at Ipswyche, and
because he would give no lands to thesaid Colleges, he obtained of the bishop
of Rome, lice^se to suppress and put down diverse Abbayes, Priories, and
Monasteries, to the number of wherefore suddenly he entered by his
Commisioners, into thesaied houses, and put out the Religious, and took all
their goods, moueables, and scarcely gave ton the poor wretches any thing,
except it were to the heddes of the house, and then he caused thexcheter to sit,
and to find the houses void, as relynquished, and found the king founder,
where other men were founders, and with these lands he endewed with all his
Colleges, which he began so sumpteous and the scholars were so proud, that
every person judged, that the end would not be good, as you shall hear, five
years hereafter.

The Earl of Castelles which was sent into Scotland, The Scotte^ returned
into Scotland.
returned into England, the.xix. day of March, but because the French king
was taken, his commission for the most part was determined, and so he and al
his compaignie took their leave of the king, and without any reward returned
into Scotland, the fourth day of April.

In this monethe of March, the King sent Cutberd Tunstall Bishop of London,
and sir Richard Wyngfeld, Chanceller of the Duchy of Lancastre, and Knight of
the Gartier, into Spain to the Emperor, for great causes concerning the
taking of the French king, and in especial for wars to be made on France,
on every side. For so the king of England and his counsel, were agreed and
determined: and the same month the Ambassadors, departed again into Flaunders.

The counsel remembryng that it was determined, that the king in proper
person should pass the sea, they considered that above all things, great
threasure and plenty of money, must needs be had in a readiness: wherefore by
the Cardinal were devised strange Commissions, Commissio^s*
and sent in the end of March to every shire, and Commissioners appointed,
which were the greatest men of every shire: and privy instruccions sent to
them, to say and order the people, and the tenor was, that the sixth part of
every man's substance, should without delaie be paid in money or plate, to
the king, for the furniture of his war: wherefore the Cardinal^, as chief
Commissioner for London, sent for sir Willyam Bailey knight, The proposicio^ of
the Cardinal.
then Mayor of the city, and the Aldermen, and diverse hedde Comminers, and
said to them in manner following. You the kings well-beloved friends and
subjects, of the city of London, I must declare to you, how the king contrary
to his own mind and will* but compelled of ve^ie force, is determined to enter
into a new war, and for the more explanacion of the truth, you shall
understand, that after that Frances the French king that now is, had
obteigned the Croune and scepter o^ the realm of France, he most humbly sued
to the king our Master for peace, love, and amity, promisyng upon the
Euange^^^^es, to keep the league then concluded, and also to pay to lady Mary
queen dowager of France, her due pencion and doware, to her granted by king
Jews her husband. After this he by his Ambassadors, humbly desired the city
of Turnay, which king Jews before time had lost: the king which would that
the city of Turnay, should be no cause of grudge, between him and the French
king, consented that for certain sommes of money, it should be delivered. And
farther the more to bynd amity between them, the king was content, that a
communicacion of marriage should be had* between the Dolphyn of France, and the
lady Marie Princes of England, yet for to entreat more love, familiarity,
and acquaintance, the king to his great cost and charge passed the sea, and
met in person with the French king, thynkyng that by reason of personal
sight and actual communicacion, that more stable and ferme love, should grow
between them, then by writing, at which time it was undoubtedly thought, that
there could be no more love be knit, between two persons. There were
couenauntes amde and sworn, and the king our Master said to the French king:
The saying of the King of England.
Brother, now that you and I be this knit, I require you to keep ferme peace,
and amity, with my nephewe themperor: and also suffer not Duke Ihon of Albany*
to go into Scotland, for puttyng the young king my nephewe, in ieoperdie of
his person, wherefore if you love men, in especial keep these two articles:
if you observe these articles, and all other couenauntes between us agreed, I
assure you there had never prince a surer friend, then you shall have of me.
The oath of the French^ King.
Then the French king ^aied his hand in ^ine (said the Cardinal) and swear by
the oath of a king, he would observe and keep fermely, these points with many
mo, and after the Kings were departed, and that the Emperor was come to the
king to Calice: the French king sent Monsire de la Roche ba^on with letters,
declaryng that he was in perfect league and amity with the Emperor, and this
not withstandyng, he within less space then half a year, sent Robert de la
March, to invade the emperors land, and made war in Neuert and other
places. The king over Master hearing this, of his mere charity sent me, and
other nobles with a great train to Calice, to know by whom the war began,
for he promised to be enemy to him that brake first. To which place came
from the French king, his Chanceller, and Monsire de la Palice, and many other
noble men. And from the Emperor came his Chanceller, and the lord Cheuers,
and there in open counsel, the Emperors Ambassadors, did show the French
kings letters, signed and sealed, by the which he enforced and began the
war: to which point the French Ambassadors could not answer. What should
I say, the war was open on both parties, I sent to the French king
Ambassadors, to entreat peace, but in nowise he would conce^t: wherefore I with
my compaignie returned. In the mean season (although I doubted nothing, the
French kings faith toward our Master) yet, or a more suertie, I obteigned a
saueconduit for the English Merchauntes, that they should go to Bordeaux, and
upon suertie of that our Merchantes passed, yet he contrary to his saucconduit,
took the Merchantes goods, and put their bodies in prison, which the Turk
would not have done. The king sent gentely to him, his herault Clarenseux,
desiryng him to redress all these enormities, and to pay him his sommes, of
money, due to him and to the Queen his sister, for her dower, which to do he
refused and denied, which things you know, the king of his honor might not
suffer. Wherefore mightily he has these three years, kept war continually
both on land and sea, and invaded France with two armies royal, and bet
their tounes, castles, and fortresses, destroyed the people, and passed the
water of Sum, and proffered battaill to the Frenchemen, in their own
country, and has brought the country, in such penury and wretchedness, that
in many years it will not be recovered.

And the more to hurt and damage the French king, the king has in wages the
Duke of Burbon, which was the greatest strength on the French part: by whose
power and aid of other, which had great sommes of money, of the king our
Master, the French king in person is now taken, and all his nobles in effect,
before Pauia, and kept as prisoner to the Emperor and the king our Master, and
that for great reason: for our Master sent sir Gregory de Cassado his
Ambassador to the Uiceioy of Naples, and to the Duke of Burbon, and the Marquis
of Piscaire, with a hundred thousand Crounes, so that they would fight with the
French king: For the which money they assented, and so gave b^ttaill, in the
which they slew xii. thousand men, and drouned.vii. thousand, and.xiii.
thousand taken prisoners, and now sith God has given us victory, the king
remembryng the saying of the Poet that says: It is more mastery to use
victory gotten, then to get it, thinks it necessary now in all have, to
make an army royal, and he in person to pass the seas, and to recover his
right inheritance, both of the Croune of France as of Normandy, Guyen,
Gascone, Aniowe and Main, the writings whereof comprehendyng the very title,
you may se here present if ye list, but I doubt not but you know them well
enough. And now I ask you this question, whether that you think it
convenient, that the king should pass with an army or not, for the king will
do by thauise of his subieetes: to the which many said yea, yea.

Well said the Cardinal, The Cardinals demand.
then must he be made able to go like a prince, which cannot be without your
aides, and for to show you what the Archbishop of Cantorbury and I, which
be primates of the realm have done, we have given of our lands, and all
lands apperteignyng to the church the third part, and the temporal lords,
have given of lands and goods, the sixth part, and to ^^opa^d their bodies in
pain and trauaill, and now sith they which shall (...) their life's, does
profer the sixth part, what should they geu^ which abide at home? For soth I
think that half your subs^aunce were (...) little, not meaning that the King
so asks. For he demands only no more, of fi^^ie.^. the sixth part, and so
upon every.l. above fifty.l. to what some soever it amounte to, the sixth part
that is.iii. d.iiii. s^. of the.l. and from.xx..l. to fifty pound, and so
upward.ii. s^. and.viii. d of the pound, and from.xx. pound to.xx. s^.xii. d
of the pound, and this to be levied according to the first valuacion, as
appears by your own valuacion, which is out a small matter, to the thing
that is meant. Then they being astonished, at last y^ one said, my lord sith the
last valuacion, diverse Merchantes be decayed, by the seas, and suertiship, and
other ways, so that valuacion cannot be had. Then answered the Cardinal,
sers, speak not to break that thing that is concluded, for some shall not pay
the tenth part, and some more, it were better that some should suffer
^^digence, then the king at this time should lack, and therefore beware and
re^ist not, nor ruffill not in this case, for it may fortune to cost some
their heddes: The Cardinals ^^^ea^^nynges.
But I will speak to the king, to be good to you, so that if he go not over
the sea in person, then you shall have your money redeliuered, but first let
the money be gathered and lay it where you will, and if the king need it not,
you may take it again.

When the Cardinal had thus persuaded the Mayor, and his brethe^ and other
hedde Cominers, they took their leave, and every day after by the space o^
fortenight, he sent for a certain number of Comyners, and told them like tale,
but some spoke such words to him, and some going from him, that they were
sent to ward.

Now were Commissioners sent to the clergy, The saying of the clergy.
for the fourth part of their lands and moueables, and in every alsembly the
priests answered, that they would pay nothing, except it were granted by
Conuocacion, other wise not: for they said that never king of England, did
ask any man's goods, but by an order of the law, and this Commission is not
by the order of the law: wherefore they said, that the Cardinal and all the
doers thereof, were enemies to the king, and to the common wealth. This
infamy was spoken in preachynges, and every where.

When this matter was opened through England, The grudoe of the common people.
how the great men took it it was marvel, the poor curssed, y^ rich
repugned, the light wits railed, but in conclusion, all people curssed the
Cardinal, and his coadherentes as subuersor of the Laws and liberty of
England. For they said, if men should give their goods by a Commission, then
were it worse then the taxes of France, and so England should be bond and not
free.

It happened at Redyng in Barkeshire, that the Commissioners satte for this
money to be granted, and the people in no wise would consent to the sixth
part: but of their own mere mind, for the love they bare to the king, they
granted the twe^neth part, that is.xx. d. of the pound, the Commissioners
hearing this, said they would send to the Cardinal, desiryng him to be content
with this offer, and so the Lord Li^e wrote the letter, so that six Richard
Weston would bear it, the which letter at the request of the gentlemen of the
country, thesaid sir Richard took upon him to carry, and road to the Cardinal:
which therewith was sore grieved, and said, but because that the lord Live
wrote, that the matter was but communed of, and not concluded, it should cost
the lord Lille his hedde and his lands should be sold to pay the king the
values, that by him and you fo^ishe commissioners he had lost, and all your
lives at the kings will: these words sore astonished sir Richard Westo^, but he
said little.

Then the Cardinal wrote letters, to ^l Commissioners of the realm that they
should keep their first ins^ru^cio^, and in no wise to swerve one jot, upon
pain of their lives and every man to be valued, according to the valuacion
taken in the.xiiii. year. This la^^e point sore touched the city of London,
for the Cardinal in the.xiiii. year, sent one Docter Tunes his secret
Chapelein, to the Chapter house of Paul's, pron. ^^yng to the Londoners, that
whatsoever they valued themselfes at, that no man should know it, but the
king, the Cardinal, and he, upon which promise, many persons for their more
credit, and to be the higher esteemed valued theimselfes at a greater
substance then they were worth* thynkyng never to lend or pay by that
confession, for the loan and the subsidy were paid, according as men were
sessed, and not by Mas^er Tunes book, when men valued themselves, not knowing
what should ^uccede.

Now in this time was that subtle valuacion, laid to their charge, which
when they perceived, they murmured much and said, they would pay nothing,
except the kings laws, under which they were borne, so determined it: But
this notwithstanding, Commissioners went out to every shire, for the levy of
thesaied money, but for all that could be persuaded, said, lied, and flatered,
the d^maunde could not be assented to, saying, The (...) o^ the people.
that they that sent furthe such Commissioners, were subuerters of the law,
and worthy to be punished as traitors. So that in all the realm were bills
set up, in all places: Some bills sai^d, that the king had not paid that he
borrowed: Some said that the Subsedy amounted treble, more then he had
bestowed: other said whatsoever was granted, no good came of it: and other
said that the Cardinal sent all the money to Rome, thus was the mutteryng
through all the realm, with curses and wepynges that pity it was to behold.

During this season that the Commissioners sat, and that the bishop of London,
and other the kings Ambassadors, were abidyng wind to sail into Spain to the
Emperor (as you have hard rehearsed) Mon^ire Pratt, the Emperors Ambassador,
which was sore angry for Ihon Iokyns coming into England, as you have hard
before, departed privily out of the Realm of England, the.ix. day of April,
without speaking with the king, or the Cardinal, and so much did by
saueconduite, that he passed through France in post, and came to the Emperor
before the Ambassadors of England came thither, and whether it was by his
report or otherwise, the accustomed favor that themperor and his counsel
showed to the Englishemen, began then to decaie, and to show theimselfes
unkind to the English nation, without cause, as you shall here after perceive.

In this year the king following of his hawk, The ieoperdy the liyng was (...)
lept over a diche beside Hychyn, with a polle and the polle brake, so that if
one Edmond Mody, a foteman, had not lept into the water, and lift up his head,
which was fast in the clay, he had been drouned: but God of his goodness
preserved him

This year at Whitsontyde, died Thomas Duke of Norffolke, and honorably buried
at The^ford in Suffolk.

The.xvii. year.
IN the beginning of this.xvii. year, The.xvii. year
the Commissioners in all shires satte, for the levy of the sixth part of
every man's goods, but the burden was so grievous, that it was de^ied, and the
commo^s in every place were so moved, that it was like to have grown to a
rebellion. When this mischief was showed to the king, he said that he never
knew of that demand, and therefore with great diligence, he sent his
letters to the city of London, and to all other places, in the which the king
gentely wrote, that he would demand no some certain, but such as his loving
subjects would grant to him of their good minds, toward the maintenance of
his wars: wherefore the Cardinal, the twenty and six day of April, sent
for the Mayor of London, the Aldermen and counsel of the same, with the most
subs^anciall persons, of the common counsel, and when they were come to his
place at Westminster, he said: the king our louereigne lord, most graciously
considers the great love, zeal, and obe^ience, which you bear unto him,
and where like loving subjects, without any grudge or againsaie, of your
loving minds you have granted the sixth part, of all your goods and
substance, freely to be p^^ed, according to the first valuacion, the which
loving grant and good mind, he so kyndly accepted, that it was marvel to le.
But I my sel^ do consider the great losses, and other charges that daily has,
and does to you grow, and that notwithstanding, any loss or charge that
happens to you, yet you never withstoode nor againsai^d, any of the kings
demaundes or Commissions, as it appears now of late, of which doings, The
saying of the Cardinal to the Lo^doners.
I have highly the king informed, for y^ which he gave you hearty thanks.
Then I kneled down to his grace, showing him both your good minds toward
him, and also the charges, that you continuelly sustein, the which at my
desire and peticion, was content to call in, and abrogate the same commission,
and where he by reason of your own grau^tes, might have demanded thesaied
sum as a very debte, yet he is content to release and pardon the same, and
will nothing take of you, but of your benevolence: wherefore take here with you
the kings letter, and let it be read to the commons, and I doubt not but you
will gladly do, as loving subjects should do.

Here note, that if the Cardinal had not said, that the king had released and
pardoned the first demand, the citezens would have answered the Cardinal,
that they never made no such grant, and for a surety no more they did not:
and so they held their peace, and departed toward London, sore grudgyng at the
liyng of the Cardinal, and openly saying that he was the very cause, and
occasion of this demand, and would pluck the peoples hearts from the king.

The.xxviii. day of April, The common counsel*
in the Common counsel of the city, was read the kings letter, according
to the effect above rehearsed, wherefore the citizens sent four Aldermen,
and.xii. Cominers to Hampton court to give thanks to the lord Cardinal,
which for business as was said could not speak with him, wherefore they
returned not content. Then every Alderman assembled his ward, in their places
accustomed, and gentely moved them of a benevolence, to be granted to the
king, the which they openly denied, saying: that they had paid enough before,
with many evil words.

The.viii. day of May, the Cardinal again sent for the Mayor and his
brethren, which showed the^ what they had done: then said the Cardinal, you
have no such commission to examyn any man, I am your Commissioner, I will
examyne you one by one my self, and then I shall know the good will that you
bear to your prince, for I will ask of you a benevolence in his name. Then
was it answered to the Cardinal, by a counsailer of the city, that by the
law there might no such beneuole^ce be asked, nor men so examined, for it was
contrary to the statute made the first year of king Richard the third, also
some persons coming before your grace, may for fear grant that, that all
days of their life they shall repent, and some to win your favor, will
grant more then they be able to pay of their own, and so run in other
men's debtes, so that by dreadful gladness, and fearful boldness, men shall
not be masters of themselfes, but as men dismayed, shall grant that that
their wifes and children shall sore rewe. The Cardinal hard this saying very
patiently, and answered: Sir I marvel that you speak of Richard the third,
which was a usurper and a murderer of his own nephews: then of so evil a
man, how can the acts be good, make no such allegacions, his acts be not
honorable. And it please your grace said the cou^sailer, although he did evil,
yet in his time were many good acts made not by him only, but by the consent
of the body of the whole realm, which is the parliament. Then sir Willyam
Bailey lord Mayor, kneled down and besought his grace, that sith it was
enacted, by the common Counsel of London, that every Alderman should sit in
his own ward, for a benevolence to be granted, which he perceived to be
against the law, that the same act by the same common counsall, might be
revoked and no otherwise: well said the Cardinal, I am content. But now will
I enter into the kings Commission: You Mayor, and you Master Aldermen, what
will you give? my lord said the Mayor* I pray you pardon me, for if I should
enter i^to any grant, it might fortune to cost me my life: your life said the
Cardinal, that is a marvelous word, for your will toward the king, will the
citezens put you in ieoperdy of your life, that were strange: For if they
would that way, then must the king come with ^^ro^g power them to oppress,
wherefore speak no more such words, The flatteryng of the Cardinal.
and with that he studied a little and said: My lord Mayor, let you and your
citezens, if you be grieved with any thing, in this demand, humbly and after a
good fashion come to me, and I shall so entreat you that you shall be content,
and no displeasure arise, and so I pray pou show your neighbors, and so the
Mayor for that day departed.

The Mayor did wisely not to assent to grant to any thing, for although he and
the Aldermen had assented, the common counsel would never have assented. So
on the next morrow* it was declared to the common cou^saill, that their act
that was made that every Alderman should sit for a benevolence to be granted,
was against a statute law: whereupon thesaid act was anulled: and then was it
declared, that every man should come to the Cardinal, and to grant privily
what he would, with this saying the citezens were sore grieved, then the Mayor
gentely showed them, how he durst warrant, that they should be entreated
gentely, and exhorted them to go thither when they were sent for, which
saying nothing pleased them: and then in a fury they would have had Richard
Gresham, and Ihon Hewster Mercers, and Richard Gibson Seriant at arms and
Merchant Tailor, banished out of the common counsel, and so without answer
made, what they would do, they departed home.

In the same season through all the realm, this demand was utterly de^^ed, so
that the Commissioners could bring nothing to pass, and yet they assaied both
by fair ways and ^ou^e: ^ome spoke fair and flatered, other spoke cruel and
threatened, and yet could not bring their purpose about. For in Kent the lord
Cobham was commissioner, and han^led men roughly, and by reason one Iho^
S^udder, answered him ^^ubbishly, he sent him to the tower of London: For
which dooyng the people muttered, and grudged against the lord Cobham, and
said expre^^y that they would pay no money, and then they began to account
the loanes and sub^edies granted, so that they reken^d the kings Tresure
innumerable, for they accounted that the king had taken of this realm, twenty
fiftenes, sith the.xiiii. year of his reign, and in this grudge, they evil
entreated sir Thomas Bullein at Maidestone.

In Essex the people would not assemble before the commissioners in no houses,
but in open places: and in Huntyngdon shire, diverse resisted the commissioners
to sit, Insu^^^^eccion in Suffolk.
which were apprehended, and sent to the Fl^te.

The Duke of Suffolk, sat in Suffolk this season in like commission, and by
gentle handlyng, he caused the rich Clothiers to assent, and grant to give
the sixth part, and when they came home to their houses, they called to them
their Spinners, Carders, Fullers, Weuers, and other a^tificers, which were
wont to be set a work and have their livings by cloth making, and said,
sirs we be not able to set you a work, our goods be taken from us, wherefore
trust to your selfs, and not to us, for otherwise it will not be. Then began
women to weep, and young folks to cry, and men that had no work, began to
rage, and assemble theimselfes in compaignies. The Duke of Suffolk hearing of
this, commanded the Constables, that every man's harnes, should be taken from
them, but when that was known, then the rumor waxed more greater, and the
people railed openly on the Duke of Suffolk, and sir Robert Dru^ie, and
threatened them with death, and the Cardinal also, and so of Lanam, Sudbery,
Hadley, and other ^ounes about, there rebelled four thousand men, and put
theimselfes in harnes, and ^ang the belles Alarm and began togather still
more: then the duke of Suffolk perceiuyng this, began to reise men, but he
could get but a small nombre, and they that came to him said, that they
would defend him from all pe^illes, if he hurt not their neighbors, but
against their neighbors they would not fight: Yet the gentlemen that were with
the duke did so much, that all the bridges were broken, so that their assemble
was some what let.

The duke of Norffolke, high Threasorer and Admiral of England hearing of
this, gathered a great power in Norffolke, and came toward the commons, and
of his noblenes he sent to the commons, to know their intent, which answered:
that they would live and dye in the kings causes, and to the king to be
obedient: When the duke wist that, he came to the^, and then al spoke at once,
so that he wist not what they meant. Then he asked who was their Capitain, and
bad that he should speak: then a well aged manne of fifty years and above,
asked license of the Duke to speak, which granted with good will. My lord
said this man, whose name was Ihon Grene, si^he you ask who is our capitain,
for soth his name is Poverty, for he and his cosyn Necessity, has brought us
to this dooyng, for all these persons and many mo, which I would were not
here, live not of our selfs, but all we live, by the substanciall occupiers
of this country, and yet they give us so little wages, for our workma^ship,
that scacely we be able to live, and thus in penury we pass the time, we, our
wifes and children, and if they by whom we live, be brought in that case, that
they of their little, cannot help us to earne our living, then must we perish,
and dye miserably. I speak this my lord, the cloth makers have put all these
people, and a far greater number from work the husband men have put away
their servants, and given up household, they say, the king asks so much,
that they be not able to do as they have done before this time, and then of
necessity, must we dye wretchedly: wherefore my lord, now according to your
wisdom, consider our necessity. The Duke was sorry to hear their complaint,
and well he knew that it was true: then he said, neighbors, sever your selfs
a sonder, let every man depart to his home, and chose furthe four, that shall
answer for the remnant, and on my honor I will send to the king, and make
humble intercession for your pardon, which I trust to obtein, so that you
will depart, then al they answered they would, and so they departed home.

At the two dukes requests, commissioners of great authority were sent to
them, then the Duke of Norffolke, and the Duke of Suffolk came to Bery, and
thither came many people of the country, in their shirtes, and halters about
their necks, mekely desiryng pardon for their offenses: the Dukes so wisely
handeled themselfes, that the commons were ^ppeised, and in especial one Master
Iermyn, took much pain in ridyng and going, between the lords and commons:
then the demand of money seized in all the realm, for well it was perceived,
that the commons would none pay.

After this, the two dukes came to London, and brought with them the chief
capitaines of the rebellion, which were put in the Flete, and then the king
came to Westminster* to the Cardinals place: Whereupon this matter, The sore
wodes of y^ king
he assembled a great counsel, and openly he said, that his mind was never,
to ask any thing of his commons, which might sound to his dishonor, or to
the breche of his laws, wherefore he would know of whom it was long, that the
commissions were so straight, ^o demand the sixth part of every man's
substance: The (...) of the Cardinal.
the Cardinal excused himself and said, that when it was moved in counsel,
how to make the king ^^^he, the Kings Counsel, and especially the Judges
^aied, he might lawfully demand any some by Commission, and that by the
assent of the whole counsel it was dooen, and took God to witness, that he
never maligned nor desired, the hynderance of the Commons, but like a true
counsailer, devised to enriche the king: And the spiritual men say, that it
stands with Gods law, for Joseph caused the king of Egip^e, ^o take the
fifth part of every man's goods, but because every manne lays the burden
from him, I am content to take it on me, and to endure the same and noyes of
the people, for my good will toward the king, and comfort of you my lords, and
other the kings counsailers, but the eternal God knows all. Well said the
king, some have informed me that my realm was never so rich, and that there
should never trouble have risen of that demand, and that men would pay at the
first request, but now I find all contrary, then every man held his peace.

The king was sore moved, The King sore moved.
that his subjects were (...) stirred, and also he was informed of the
denial, that the spiritual men had made and of their sayings, wherefore he
thought it touched his honor that his counsel should attempt, such a
doubtful matter in his name* and to be denied both of the spirituality and
temporaltie, for although some granted for fear, before the commissioners,
yet when they were departed, they denied it again. Then the king said, I will
no more of this trouble: Let letters be sent to all shires, that this matter
may no more be spoken of, The Pardon of the great demand.
I will pardon all them, that have denied the demand, openly or secretly:
Then all the lords kn^l^d down, and heartily thanked the king. Then letters
were sent to all commissioners to cease, with instruccions how to declare the
kings pardon. In which declaracion, was showed, that the Cardinal never
assented, to the first demand, and in the instruccions was comprehended, that
the lords and the Judges, and other of the kings counsel, divised the same
demand, and that the Cardinal followed the mind of the whole counsel, these
two poyn^es were contrary one to another, which were well marked. And farther
the instruccions were, that at the humble peticion, and suppli^acion of the
Cardinal, thesaied great sommes, which were demanded, by the kings
auchoritie royal, were clearly pardoned and remitted, wherefore the
Commissioners willed the people to pray for the Cardinal: but the people took
all this for a mock, and said God save the King, for the Cardinal is known
well enough, the commons would hear no praise spoken of the Cardinal, they
hated him so much.

The.xix. day of May, The saying to the Maio^ of London.
the Cardinal sent for the Mayor and his brethren, and certain comminers, and
made the Mayor to ^it down by him and then declared, that where the king was
determined, in proper person to pass the sea into France, for which cause he
asked of the citezens of London, and his other subjects, an aid toward his
charges, to which request (he said) that the Londoners were at all times
conformable, like loving subjects, but sith the king considers, the great
fall of the French King, which is yet prisoner, and that daily he has suite
made to him for peace, greatly to his honor and profit, for I trust that all
his right and title, shall be to him delivered, which thing once agreed I trust
you shall have peace, and therefore at my (...) request, the king has pardoned
you, of all the ^^^mes of money, that of you were demanded: and if his grace
had not passed the seas, although the money* had been gathered, surely it
should have been restored again, and consequently the king thanketh you as
ha^tely, as any prince may thank his subjects: and for as much as peace* is
not yet concluded, I counsel you to show your selfs, enemies to the
Frenchmen, and so say that you be the kings, The prea^^e fea^e of the
Cardinal.
body and goods at his will and pleasure, so that your loving minds
toward him, may to the Frenchmen appear, you wot well what I mean said the
Cardinal. Then the Mayor and his compaignie kneled doun^, and most hattely
thanked the king and him, and so departed. The next day, all this was rehearsed
to the common counsel, which humbly thanked the king for the pardon: but two
things the^ sore displeased, one was that the Cardinal bad them say, they
were the kings body and goods, they said that they used no dissimulacion,
for they would not say they were the kings, but they thought and were the
kings in deed, and not in saying: the second was, that the Cardinal excused
himself, that he was ignorant of the first commission: For all they knew and
were present, when he himself made to them the first mo^ion, and whatsoever was
said by the Recorder, in his excuse, was taken as a cloak for the rain, and a
d^ssimulacion or a mock. For wisemen perceived all the handelyng of the
matter: after the king had pardoned every offendour.

The.xxix. day of May the lords sat in the Star chamber, and the ^her were
brought one Deuereux, a gentleman of Huntyngdo^ shire (which would not suffer
the commissioners to sit, as you have hard) and Ihon Scudder of Kent, these
two were brought from the Tower, bare footed in their shirtes through London,
to the Star Chamber, and there the Cardinal showed them their offenses,
with terrible words: and after that he showed the kings mercy, extended to
the^ and declared their pardon and so they were delivered.

The morrow after being the.xxx. day, were the chief of the rebels of
Suffolk, brought to the Star chamber bar, and there the Kings counsel
learned, laid sore to them their offense, but the Cardinal declared for the^
the kings pardon: then the kings Attorney, asked suertie for their good
aberyng, they answered that they could find none, then said the Cardinal I
will be one, because you be my country men, and my lord of Norffolke will be
another, and so they were discharged, and had money to bring them home: Now
here is an end of this commission, but not an end of inward grudge and
hatered, that the commons bare to the Cardinal, and to all gentlemen, which
vehemently set forth that Commission and demand.

In this troubelous season, the vplandishe men of Germany, called the bowres,
^ose in a great number, almost an hundred thousand, and rebelled against the
princes of Germany, of which a great number were slain and destroyed.

In April last past, the Tyndale men, with the aid of the Scotts, to the
number of eight hundred, did daily great robe^ies in England. For to repress
this nest of thieves were sent, sir Richard Bulmer, and sir Cristopher Da^res,
with a great compaignie of Englishmen, and to them diverse men came, and
submitted themselfes, but the great thieves kept them in the mou^taignes of
Cheuiot, and daily sk^rmished with the Englishemen, and could not sone be
taken: but after long liyng abroad, they severed and many of them were taken.

In this very season the Frenchemen, kept a great number of men of war, at
Bullein and there about, and the.v. day of May four hundred horsemen,
embushed theimselfes in the Forest of Guysnes, and the same day.lxxx. horsemen
of the Crewe of Guysnes, road furthe sekyng auentures, the Frenchemen let
them pass, till they had them at advantage, then they issued out and cried,
kill, kill, then Englishemen them valiauntly defended* almost two hours, but
at the last the Frenchemen* oppressed them with multitude, and brake their
arraye, and slew fifty of them, the remnant saved themselfes: this chance
was nothing pleasant to the English capitaines. But the Frenchemen were of
su^mounted by this journey, that the.xx. day of May, the men of war of all
the garrisons in Picardy, assembled together, and came within the English pale
to Aunderne, and so to Calice: the Frenchemen were of such nombre that all the
English pale was spread over: At Baiyngham the Frenchemen drove away the
cattle: the Englishemen thought themselves to weke to encounter with them,
which were the whole strength of all Picardy. And so on the Assension day,
there came to Newnam bridge, thr^e hundred horsemen, and there set a stale, but
with ordinance they were made to go back. Then came four hundred French^^en
to the Turn pike, and they had gotten all the cattle together. The bend of
sir Robert Iernyngham, seeing the Frenchemen so nere Calice, set forward not
past.lx. horsemen, and they fiersly set on the Frenchemen, which fled, and
they chased them, and reskued all the cattle, that the Frenchemen had taken,
and with great difficulty, brought them to the Marshe beside Calice.

The.xxviii. day of May.v.C. horsemen, and.xvi.C. footmen, came to a village
called Froyton, within the English pale, and many auentured over the Water to
have taken all the cattle in the Marrishes, of Hamnes, Guysnes, and Calice,
which were of great number, but the Frenchemen that made the adventure in the
night, were askried and s^ain al save two. Then the Frenchemen returned in a
great fury, and swear that they would once rob the Marrisses or else they
would dye for it, and so returned to Bullein, whether were come of new,
five.C. horsemen called Stradiats, which fortified well the French parties, in
so much that they passed in number five times the Englishmen.

You have hard before, Riot ac Beggam.
how the Cardinal suppressed many monasteries, of the which one was called
Beggam in Sussex, the which was very commodious to the country: but so
befell the cause, that a riotus compaignie, disguysed and unknown, with
painted faces and visures, came to the same Monastery, and brought with them
the Chanons, and put them in their place again, and promised them that
whenever they rang the bell, that they would come with a great power, and
defend the^. This doing came to the ear of the kings counsel, which caused
the Chanons to be taken, and they confessed the capitaines, which were
emprisoned, and sore punished.

The Cardinal about this season, by his power Legantyne, sent a Chappelein of
his, called Doctor Ihon Alein, a man of more learning then virtue, or good
conscience, to visit all places religious: this priest road in his goune of
velvet, with a great train, and was received into every Religion with
Procession, as though the legate had been there, and took such great sommes
for his visitacion, that the religious sore were grieved, and murmured much
against it, and in especial, for they were charged with great sommes of money
to the king, and now this sudden visitacion or predacion, Predation, that is a
robbery.
clean shaued them. The common people spoke much against this, and also they
said, that the^ Cardinal by Uisitacions, making of Abbottes, probates of
testamentes, grauntyng of faculties, lice^ses, and other pollynges in his
Courts legantines, had made his threasore egall with the kings, and yet every
year he sent great sommes to Rome: this was their communicacion, ever against
the Cardinal, and his high authority, and the spiritual men most disdained
it.

You shall understand, the king in his fresh youth, was in the cheynes of
love, with a fair damsel called Elizabeth Blount, daughter to sir Ihon Blunt
knight, which damsel in syngyng, daunsyng, and in all goodly pastymes,
exceded all other, by the which goodly pastymes, she wan the kings heart: and
she again showed him such favor, that by him she bare a goodly manne child,
of beauty like to the father and mother. This child was well brought up, like
a Princes child, and when he was.vi. year of age, the king made him knight, and
called him lord Henry Fitz Roy, and on Sondaie being the.xviii. day of June,
at the Manor or place of Bridewell, thesaied Lord led by two Earls, was
created Earl of Notyngha^, and then he was brought back again by thesaied two
Earls: then the Dukes of Norffolke and Suffolk, led him into the great chamber
again and the king created him, Duke of Richemond and Somerset: The creacion of
the duke of Richemond.
and the same day was the lord Henry Courtenay Earl of Devonshire, and cosyn
germain to the king, was created Marquis of Excester, and the lord Henry
Brandon, son to the duke of Suffolk and the French Queen the kings sister,
a child of two year old, was created Earl of Lincoln, and sir Thomas Manners
lord Roos, was created Earl of Rutlande, and sir Henry Clifford, was created
Earl of Cumberlande, and the lord Fitz Water sir Robert Radclif was created
Uiscount Fitz Water, and sir Thomas Bullein, threasorer of the kings household,
was created Uiscount Rocheforde, and at those creacions, were kept great
feasts and disguisynges.

After this the Cardinal took upon him, as the kings chief counsailer, to^e a
reformacion in the order of the kings houshode, wherein he made certain
ordinances. He also made all new officers in the house of the Duke of
Richemond, which was then newly begone: Also at that time he ordained a
cou^saill, and stablished another household, for the lady Mary, then being
Princes of the realm, so that all thing that was d^en, was done by him, and
without his assent, nothing was done: he took so much upon him, and made the
King believe, that all things should be to his honor, and that he neded not to
take any pain, so that to him was the charge of all things committed, at the
which wise men becked, and light men laughed, thynkyng great folly in his
high presu^pcion. And at this time, thesaied Cardinal gave to the king, the
lease of the Manor of Hampton Court, which he had of the lease of the lord of
Saint Ihones, and on which he had done great cost. Therefore the king of
his gentle nature, licensed him to lie in his Manor of Richemo^d at his
pleasure, and so he lay there at certain times: but when the common people,
and in especial such, as had been king Henry the seue^thes servants, saw
the Cardinal keep house in the Manor royal of Richmond, which king Henry the
seventh, so highly esteemed it, was a marvel to here, how they grudged and
said, see a Bochers dog lie in the Manor of Richemond: these with many
approbrious words, were spoken against the Cardinal, whose pride was so high
that the nothing regarded, and yet was he hated so most men.

In this season the French kings mother, Regent of France, and the three
estates of the realm, assembled together, concerning the estate of their
realm: First, they sent a sole^pne Ambassador or themperor, with articles (as
they thought reasonable) for ye deliuerau^ce of the French king and also for a
peace, they sent also a messenger to the king of England, for a saueconduite
for an Ambassador, to be sent into England, for a treaty of peace, which to
the messenger, was granted and diliuered.

Then came over as Ambassador from France, Ihon Iokyn now called Monsire de
Uaux, which as you have hard in the last year, was kept secret in Master
Larkes house, and when he came into England, he was welcomed of the Cardinal,
and there between them were such communicacions, that at the suit of thesaied
Ihon Iokyn, a truce was concluded, from the.xiii. day of July for forty
days, between England and France, both on the sea and beyond the sea. Full
well wist Ihon Iokyn, what he meant, when he desired peace for forty days,
for in that season the Pikardes, might have a quiet harvest, to carry in their
Corn, which they should not have, if the garriso^s of Calice and Guysnes: and
other within the English pale, had not been restreined from war, and also
the Fishermen of Deep, Bullein, and Traiport, had quiet fi^hyng, by this
truce, for the navy of England, was come home to harborough, this truce
grieved the men of war on both parties, it was so sudden that they wist not
well what to do.

When the Flemynges hard tell of truce, and that they were not comprehended in
the same, they began to rail and said, that the king (...) England* had not
done truly with the^, to take a truce without their knowledge: the Englishemen
answered, that they had no Ambassador in England, and if that they had had
any, they should have been made privy, but the king would send them no
word of his affairs, if they would not send to know, for he ought their
master, nor yet them such service.

The Frenchemen in this season, enterprised to enter into Flaunders, by New
dike, but they were manfully defended by the Flemynges, and because the
Frenchemen passed by the English pale, and had nothing done to them, the
Flemynges were sore displeased, with the Engl^shemen of Calice.

In the latter end of July came into England, Monsire Bryond chief President
of Roan, and was brought to the Cardinals presence, at the Manor of
Richemond, and when his Commission was showed, (...) was doubted whether the
authority were sufficient, because the* king his Master was prisoner in Spain:
but then he showed authority given to the Lady Regent, and certain nobles of
the realm of France, by the French king in open Parliament, before his going
into Italy for all things that ^id or might concern his Realm, during his
absence. When the Commission was thought reasonable, then was rehearsed to the
Frenchemen their double^es, their unsteadfastness, and how they had behaved
theimselfes toward the king of England: then they answered if we have
offended* you have us punished, for you have br^nt our tounes, slain our
people, destroyed our country, so that you have brought the low parties, to a
long misery without recovery, and therefore sith we be the lesers for our
offense, yet we sue for peace, least we be more punished. After long
consult^cion, they offered many offers: first, to pay all such sommes of money
as were due, both for the yearly tribute, and also for the city of Turnay, and
the French Queen's dowar, and farther to recompense the king o^ England his
expenses done in the wars.

During this treaty, word was brought to the king of England, that there
was a truce so^ainly concluded, between the realm of France and the ^adie
Margaret, Duches of Sauoy, and Gouerner of Flaunde^s and the low countries,
for the space of.v. months, so that no ^ntercourse should be between them for
merchantes, but by saueconduite, and that this Proclamacion was proclaimed at
saint Omers, the ^irste day of August, ^herupon the king was contented, that
a peace should be taken from the.xiiii. day of August, to the first day of
December, which was proclaimed in London: and by this truce every Englishema^
without sauecondute, might pass into France, and they likewise into England.
When this truce was proclaimed, the people (...) and said, now has the
Frenchemen gotten their fishyng quictly, and if they had been kept from that,
they had been undone* and so with ^aire words they help themselfes, which
(...) we have war again, shall hurt us, for this Herryng shall vitaill their
tounes the next year. This the common people talked, but it was to no purpose.

This year the king sent Docter Henry Standishe, Ambassadors into De^mark
Bishop of saint Ass, and sir Ihon Baker knight into the realm of Denmark,
to comen and entreat with the nobles of the Countery for the reduccion of king
Cristierne, to his realm, Croune, and dignity, but all that could be said or
persuaded, could not bring the Danes to any reason, they hated him so for his
great cruelty, and in especial for the great tyranny that he committed at
Stokeholme in Swethen, where he desired a great number of his nobles to a
banquet, and after the ba^ket, struck of their heddes. When the Ambassadors of
England saw that they could not bring him in again: they then began to
require, that his son might have the croune and dominion, which never them
offended, and was of progeny borne of lady Isabell, sister to the Emperor
Charles the.v. which also made great labor and instaunce for the same: but the
Danes answered they would none of his procreacion, for they said, the son
would follow the father, or else at the least he would revenge his fathers wrong,
and so with this answer they departed.

So much did the Ambassadors of France, both by offers and entreatyes, that
the king of England and his counsel, did condiscende to a peace, and the more
sooner because they saw if war should continue, money must be demanded of
the commons, which had lever rebel then pay any more money, as you have hard
in the last year. When peace was concluded, then were Proclamacions of the same,
sent to every city and good town, and the.viii. day of September, this peace
was proclaimed solemply with a Trumpet through the city of London, the effect
whereof was, that upon humble suite and large profers, made by the lady Regent
of France, and the three estates of the same, a peace, league, and amity was
concluded, between both the kings of England and France, and their countries
and subjects, so that the subjects of either realm may lawfully pass and
repasse, into the others realm and dominions, to bye and sell frankely and
freely, without let or interrupcion, and that this league in no wise, was a
breche of the league taken with the Emperor and the lady Margaret, gouernesse
of Flaunders in no point, but that thesaied Emperor and lady Margaret, and all
other the kings old and ancient confederates and alies, were comprehended in
the same, and for due restitucion to be made to the Frenchmen, there was
appoyncted the reverend father, Cutberd bishop of London, and forrestitucion
to be made to the Englisheme^, was appointed the chief President of Roan.

And on the.xi. day of September, was a truce proclaimed in Spain, in the town
of Uale Dolito, between themperor and the French king, from that day to the
end of December next ensuyng, at which time the Emperor had not seen the
French king, which was conueighed by sea out of Italy into Spain, to a Castle
called Madrill, and there remaygned: and shortly after fell sore sick, and was
in great ieoperdy, for the which the Frenchmen cared little, for they said
that if he died, they should pay no ransom, and then their realm should be
quiet.

This peace between England and France, nothing pleased the Flemynges,
wherefore when they had drunk well, they spoke largely, and bosted how they
had victailed the English armies, and found them carts and cariages, and
thought it not kyndly done, to refuse them as old friends and make peace with
old enemies, but they did not considre what money the Englishemen left in their
country, nor how the Frenchmen for dred of the Englishemen, would not invade
Flaunders, so that they lived quietly, all this they considered not.

In the same month this peace was proclaimed, in Paris, Lio^s, Roan and Amias:
by this peace the king of England, should receive at certain days.xx. hundred
thousand Crounes, which then was four hundred thousand pound sterlyng, of
the which one payment of fifty thousand pound was paid in hand. After
this peace taken, all the men of war, that were about the retinue of Calice,
Hammes, and Guysnes, we called home, and the ships brought into the havens,
and many a Kreker wist not how to live.

In the month of October were sent into France, sir Willyam Fitz-Willyam
Threasorer of the kings house, and docter Tayllor, as Ambassadors from the
king of England, and were received through France very honorably, and by long
iorneis at the last, came to the city of Lio^s the.xxiiii. day of November,
where to them were presented, Wine, Fish, Flesh, and Ware, and they were
visited with diverse noble men. And on the.xxvi. day they were conueighed to
the Court by two Earls, and at the gate received with two Cardinals, and
so brought to the lady regent, which with much honor them received, and then
they delivered the kings letters, which she took in great reverence, and so
with her counsel, departed into her privy chamber, and there tarried almost
two hours, and then came out again, to whom Docter Tailor made an eloquent
Oracion in Latin, of the commodities of peace, and declared that the king his
Master for very love, and not for no dred nor need did co^discend to peace. To
whom the bishop of Besanson, Chaunceller to the Lady Regent made answer, and
that done, the Ambassadors were feasted, and served with men of great estate,
and after that they were conueighed to their lodgings.

And on Sondaie next ensuyng, the Ambassadors were conueighed to the Court, The
league sworn.
and from thence the lady Regent and all the Court, rode solemply to the
Cathedral church of Lions, and there a Cardinal sang a solemn Mass, and
after that Mass was dooen, the Lady Regent took the two Ambassadors, the one
on the right hand* and the other on the left hand, and so went up to the high
altar, and there she laid her hand on the Canon and Crucifix of the Mass
book, and there swear to observe, fulfill, and keep, all the articles and
agrementes, concluded in the league and treaty of peace, by her commissioners.
And when this was done, the bishop of Bisanson made an eloquent sermon, taking
for his antitheme. Quis est homo qui uult uitam, diligit dies uidere bonos,
Inquire pacem. etc. In this sermon he much praised the king of England,
which assented to peace and lauded the Cardinal, whom he called the Legate of
God, for counsailyng him to peace: for now was France free, and aall
hostility seized, and when this sermon was done, Te deum was song, and then
the Trumpettes blewe, and all other instruments Musaicall, and then the Lady
Regent, with all her train returned to the palace, and there were the
Ambassadors highly feasted, and then sir Willyam Fitz Willyam took his leave,
and came shortly into England, leauyng behind him Doctor Tailor, which
tarried there till the French king was delivered.

When the articles of peace, were known to themperor and his counsel, full
well wist they that the king of England now would be friend to the French
king, wherefore he and his subjects, showed themselfes more strange and
unkind to the Englishemen, then they had been accustomed. In somuche that the
English merchauntes, put up a supplicacion to the Emperor, showing him how
their goods were taken, by letters of Mark, their ships restrained, new
imposicions taken of them, and most of all they complained, that by an act
made in Spain called Premetica which ordeineth that every cloth, should be of
a certain number of thredes, the clothes of England there could not be sold,
to the great hynderaunce of the English Merchauntes: For the clothiers of
England, know not the number appointed by the statute, and when they make
cloth, they know not to what country that cloth shall be sold, of these things
the English Merchauntes desired a redress.

At a day appointed the Englishmen had an answer delivered them in writing,
conteignyng certain articles. The first, if any wrongs be Premetica, made by

In this Winter was great death in London, wherefore the Term was adiorned,
and the king for to eschew the plague, kept his Chrstmas at Eltham with a small
number, for no man might come thither, but such as were appointed by name:
this Christmas in the kings house, was called the still Christmas. But the
Cardinal in this sea^on, lay at the Manor of Richemond, and there kept open
household, to lords, ladies, and all other that would come, with plays and
disguisyng in most royal manner: which sore grieved the people, and in especial
the kings servants, to se him keep an open Court, and the king a secret
Court.

The Cardinal came to Eltham the.viii. day of January, and tarried there till
the.xxii. day. In which season the Cardinal, and other of the kings
cou^saill, sat for a direccion to be taken in the kings house, and first it
was considered, that the great number of the yomen of the guard were very
chargeable, and that there were many officers far stricken in age: which had
servants in the Court, and so the king was served with their servants, and
not with his own servants, which was thought not convenient Wherefore first
the officers servants, were put out of the Court, and many old officers were
put to live in their countries, but the king of his bounty enhaunsed their
livings, for he that had three pound wages, had six pound annuitie, without
attendaunce, and he that had.xl. s. had four pound, and so every man after
that rate, and young men were put in their romes. Then was there.lxiiii. of
the guard, which had.xii. d. the day checked, put out of that wages, and they
had.vi. d. a day vnchecked, and should dwell in their countries and come not
at the court, til they were sent for except it were for suites: in the which the
Cardinal promised the^, to be their helper: Alas what sorrow, and what
lamentacion was made, when all these persons should depart the court Some
said that poor servants were undone and must steal: Some said that they
were found of the reuercions of the officers service, so that for them was
nothing more set out at the bres^er, and it was great charit^^ to ^ynde them.
Other said that the yomen of the guard, which were put out, were now not able
to find themselfes and their horse, to do the King service. Other said, that
now they would polle and pill in their countries, and oppress the poor
people, thus every anm had his saying.

At this season the Cardinal made many ordin linces, concerning the kings
house, which be at this day called the statutes of Eltham, the which some
said were more profitable then honor^ble.

This monethe of January was a peace concluded, between the realms of England
and Scotland, for three years and six months, of the which the Scotts were
very glad, and especially the borderers, for they were sore hurt by this war.

This year the king on Shrouetewesdaie, kept a solemn Iustes at his Manor of
Grenewiche, he himself and.xi. were on the one part, and the Marquis of Excester
with.xi. were on the other part: the Kings barde and base and all his bend,
were of cloth of gold and silver, richely embraudered, with a man's heart in a
press, with f^ames about it, and in letters were written, Declare le nose, in
English, Declare I dare not, the Marquis and his bend were in Grene Ueluet, and
c^mosyn sattyn embro^ered with hearts burning, and over every hatte a Ladies
haned coming out of a cloud, holdyng a garden water pot, which dropped
silver drops on the heart: (...)
At this Iustes was many a spear broken, and by chance of shiueryng of the
spear, sir Frances Brian lost one of his ^yes. After these Iustes, the king
made to the Queen, and lords and ladies a costly banquet, and did service to
the Queen, and ladies himself.

In the monethe of February the.xi. day being Sondaie, the Cardinal with
great pomp, came to the Cathedral Church of Paul's, on whom Bi^^oppes,
Abbottes, and a great number of doctors, gave their atten^aunce and there he
sat in pont^^^calibus, under his cloth of estate (...) c^othe of Gold: and
there on Friar Barnes a Friar Augustyne (...) (...)
for certain points of heresy, as the Bishops said: and two Merchauntes
of the Stilierd bare fagottes, for eating flesh on ^ Fridaie* and there the
bishop of Rochester Doctor Fisher, made a sermon reprouyng Martin Luthers
opinion, a Friar of Germany, which wrote against the power of the Bishop of
Rome, and in his sermon he spoke so much honor of the Pope and his
Cardinals, and of their dignity and prehenminence, that he forgot to speak
any thing of the Gospel, which he took in hand to declare, which sermon was
much praised o^ the Cardinal and bishops, wherefore the Cardinal gave to
all the people his benediccion, and then departed.

All this year was continual suite made to the Emperor and his cou^sail, by
the Lady Regent of France, and all the realm there, for the deliverance of
Frances the French king, and after many communicacions which took none
effect, was sent into Spain of Ambassade, the noble lady Margaret, late duches
of Alaunson, sister to the French king, with a great compaignie of nobles and
honorable personages. Themperor Charles met thesaied lady in the Market place
of the cite of Toleto, and her right heartily welcomed, and after that the
Duches and her compaignie, had refused to agree to certain articles, which the
French king had offered himself, thesaied Duches had license of the Emperor,
to go to Madrill, where the French king was kept as prisoner, and there to
know his mind. When she was there, she and other divised such a way, that
the French king should have escaped, and post horses were laid every where:
this was not so secret, (...)
but the Emperor was thereof, informed, and took certain Frenchemen, which
confessed how all things should have been brought to pass. The Duches of
Alaunson hearing that this priuitie was opened, on post horses with all speed
returned into France, leuyng the whole matter at large.

But for all this the lords of France, ceased not daily to sue, for the
deliverance of their sovereign lord, and at last to the Emperor was
delivered a book for the French kings deliverance, for the Emperor said he
would nothing demand of him, for having him he had more then he could give
him. Then the French king and his counsel, offered a book conteignyng many
articles to the Emperor: and when the Emperor had well understand the
contents of the same, he said to the French Ambassadors, is this the full
will and agreement of your Master, they answered yea: well said the Emperor, if
this be his own offer, I trust that he will keep it. Then themperor thought
best to bring the French king to more liberty, and to visit him himself,
which he had not done but in the time of his sickness. Where the.xiiii. day
of February, the Emperor accompaignied with the great Constable of France,
the Duke of Enphantaso, the Duke of Civil, the Duke of Nas^o, the Duke of
Aluoy, the Duke of Alberkirke, the Duke of Medena, the Duke of Massedonia, the
Marquis of Aguler, the Marquis Uillas^a^ea, the Marquis of Sturgus, the Earl of
Barselona, the Earl of Boniuent, the Earl of Ieniuer, the Earl of Salenas, the
Earl of Arrowffe, the Earl of Saluator, and.xii. Bishops, and a great number
of nobles, came to the castle of Madrill, to whom was the French king brought
with a noble repair, to whom the Emperor made lo reverence, and declared to
him how all victories, consist in the hand of God, and where great debate,
war, and strief, had land continued between the^, he said it was the very
ha^dy work of God, to deliver him to captivity, so that by his restaint of
liberty, a general peace should be concluded through all Christendom, and
now sith you have offered us reasonable con^icions, we entendyng not your
punishment, nor restraint of your liberty have gently rece^ued your offers,
signed with your own hand, which all your nobles shall hear read.





















l.



two elder sons, which should remain in Spain, till that all these articles
were performed: and if after he came into his realm, the three estates of
France, would not condescend and agree to these articles, which he had offered
and sworn, then he should shortly come again into spain, and yield himself
prisoner again, and his children then to be redeliuered into France.

Item, for the more fortificacion of this concord, and for the more amity

In the time of this entreatie came into Spain, Charles Duke of Burbon which
appeled the French king, that he contrary to al right and Justice, had
procured and imagened, the death and destruction of thesaied Duke without any
cause, but only to possede his soueraigneties and dominions, by reason
whereof, thesaied Duke was compelled to live in exile, out of his country, and
that the Regent of France, contrary to Justice had proclaimed him a traitor,
and seized all his goods and lands, wherefore he desired that the French
king, might to him make a condign recompense: to whom the Emperor answered,
that a prisoner might not be appeled: but yet for his good service, the
Emperor did so much, that an article was concluded, that the duke of Burbo^
should be restored to his first title, state, honor, and dignity, and to all
his other Duches, Counties, seigniories, and Dominions, and there the French
king freely pardoned to him al offenses, and swear that al process,
proclamacions, impeticions, had or dooen against him should be void, annulled
and repeled, and farther the French king, in recompense of al wrongs done to
him, and for the restitucion of his goods, promised and swear to pay the same
duke.CC. thousand crounes, with all the rentes, and profits received of the
lands of thesaied duke, in the time of his exile. When all these articles were
concluded, sworn, and appointed, the Emperor judged that the French king,
would never love the Duke of Burbon, and that by some new found fault, or by
some privy enemy, he might be brought to confusion: wherefore of his noble
liberality, considering the good service that the duke had done to him, and
might do if he were of possessions and dominions, gave unto the Duke the whole
Duchy of Millain, so that thesaied duke should find yearly four thousand
footmen, and five hundred men of arms, and pay to the Emperor yearly four
thousand Ducates, but he never obteigned the possession, for lack of the
inuesture or creacion: Also the Emperor gave to the Uiceroy of Naples, the
Duchy of Boysee, and the County of Ast, and many great rewards for his good
service.

This peace thus concluded between the Empe^our and the French king, was
openly proclaimed through all Spain, France, Flaunders and the Emperors
dominions, whereof their subjects were glad, and made fires and triumphs
through all their countries. The king of England like wise, which was
included in the same League, was very g^ad of the peace, and caused the
Cardinal and all the nobles and prelates, to assemble at the Cathedral
Church of saint Paul, and there was Te deum song, and the Cardinal gave
benediccion to all the people, and that night ^ites was made through all
London. The common people said as they thought: some said the peace was
honorable to the Emperor, and other said, the French king would not keep
his promise, when he was once delivered, and so it proved.

The king of England hearing that ye French king was at a point to be
deliue^ed, sent a knight of his chamber, called sir Thomas Cheyney, to the
French king, ce^tefiyng him of the great gladness ye he ha^ of his delivery, and
also the comfort that he had for the conclusion of peace: of which kind
remembrance, the French king much reioysed. The French king took his leave of
themperor, and took his journey into France ward, and came to Uictoria, in
which season the fame went, that the Dolphin which should have been
delivered, as one of the hostages for the French King his father was disseased,
and so the French King was stayed for xv. days, till the truth was known:
other said that the cause was that there were between Fontrabie and
Bayon.xxx.M. men, and doubted lest if he had been brought down to Fou^traby,
he might have been rescued: but whatsoever the cause was, he was restraigned as
you have hard.

And at the last when the day came of his diliuery, The deliue^^^ of the
French King.
and he was discretely moved, that he should not speak to his children, for
fear that lamentacion and sorrow might in such wise rise, that hurt might
ensue of it. When the day was come that he should be delivered, there was
between the borders of France and Spain, a Lake of no great depenes, in the
mids whereof was laid a great empty boat at an anchor, and at every shore
was another boat, and when the French king was come to the bank, he entered
the boat on the Spanishe side, and six Spaniardes with him, and like wise on
the French part the two Princes sons to the French king, entered the other
boat and six Frenchmen with them, and so both the boats came to the boat
liyng in the mids, the French king entered at the one end, and his children
at the other, and passed through the great boat, and even in the midst of
the boat they met, and he with his hand blessed them, without speaking of
any words, but sadly regarded them, and so he entered into the boat with the
Frenchemen, and his children into the boat with Spaniardes, and each of them
were shortly at the shore, and mounted on horseback, and the French king rode
to Bayon, where he was nobely received, almost of all the nobles in the realm,
and in especial of his mother: and his.ii. children were (...) to Fountraby
and so upward, and were well cherished in all things, by the great Constable
of Spain and his wife.

Thus was Frances the French king, co^ueighed into his realm the xxi. day of
March, which was taken the.xxiiii. day of February, the year last past.

After that themperor had concluded, and taken his leave of the French king,
he rode to the fair city of Civil, and there he with great triu^ph married
lady Isabell, daughter to king Emanuell of Portyngall, The marriage of themperor.
with whom he had great threasures and sommes of money, and great friendship of
the Portyngalles, for he had.xi. hundred thousand Ducates with her marriage.
When this marriage was known in England, the Englishemen sore murmured, that
the Emperor being at Wynsore, in the.xiiii. year of the king, had faithfully
promised to mary, the lady Mary, daughter to the King of England. But for a
very truth the Emperoures counsel was not content with the answer made to
Monsire de Beuers the last year, and so counseled the Emperor, not to tarry
for the lady Mary which was young: and also they said that she was begotten
of the king of England by his brothers wife. And also an act was made in
Spain, that he should not depart the country, till he had issue. All these
things were laid to him, which caused him to incline to marriage, and seeing
the great offer that the king of Portyngal made to him, he was there to
agreyng, and so married the lady Isabell, sister to king Ihon of Portyngall.

The.xviii. year.
THE.xxviii. day of April, The.xviii. year.
in the beginning of this.xviii. year, came to the Court to Grenewiche, Monsire
Brenion chief president of Roan, and Ihon Iokyn now called Monsire de Uaux,
which President of Roan, before the King set in a Throne, and accompaignied
with all his nobles, and the Ambassadors of Rome, of the Emperor, of Uenice,
and Florence being there present, made in the Latin toungue a solemn oracion,
the effect whereof was that he showed, The oracion of the President of Roan
how dreadful the wars had been between the realms of England and France,
what great loss the realm of France, had susteigned by thesaied wars: He
declared farther of what power the king of England was of and what conquest he
might have made in France, the king being prisoner, and knowleged the king of
Englandes right in the wars, and their wrongs, where he humbly thanked him
of his pity and compassion that he had on them in their neccss^^^e and
a^^^ic^ion, that he would concent to peace. To this Oracion the Chan^eller of
the Duchy of Lancastre, by name sir Thomas More made answer saying: that it
much reioysed the king, that they first considered, how by his power he might
have oppressed, and how by his pi^ie he had releued them: wherefore the would
here after that for kindness, they should show him none unkindness, but
inuiolatly to keep that league which was concluded.

The next day after being Sondaie, The peace ^worne.
the Cardinal song a solemn Mass, in the kings chapel of Grenewiche, and
after Mass the king swear before the French Ambassadors, the four
Ambassadors above rehearsed being present, that he should keep the peace and
league concluded, between him and his brother and perpetual alie the French
king, during his life and a year after, and after Mass to all Ambassadoures
was made a great feast.

In the month of May was a proclamacio^ made, against al unlawful games,
according to the statutes made in this behalf, and commissio^s a warded into
every shire, for the execucion of the same, so that in all places, Tables, Dice,
Cards, and Boules, were taken and brent. Wherefore the people murmured against
the Cardinal* saiyug: that he grudged at every man's pleasure, saving his
own, but this Proclamacion small time endured: and when young men were
forbidden Boules, and such other games: some fell to drinkyng, and some to
ferettyng of other meu^es Conies, and stealyng of Dear in Parkes, and other
unthriftiness.

Because all this Summer the King took his pastyme in huntyng, and nothing
happened worthy to be written of: I will return to the French king, now
comen again into his realm.

When he was at Paris he said and wrote to the Emperor, that he would observe
and keep his promises in every point, but what he thought I will not judge: For
shortly after he set ^urth a book, called the appollogie or defense against the
conuencion or agreement made between the Emperor and him at Madrill, allegyng
that he was compelled to make that agreement, or else he should never have been
diliuered: He alleged farther that the Lawers of his realm clearly determined,
all promises and couenauntes made by any person to his own hurt, with him
that is more of power then he to be made by compulsio^, and so of none effect
and not to be performed. He also said that the governors of the Law,
determined that no oath or promise is of any effect, where a man is in
ieoperdie of life, or of perpetual imprisonement or bondage, and most in
especial when it is done by compulsion or thretenyng.Moreover he said that he
might give away nothing apperteignyng to his Croune, without thassent of his
peers, and the three estates of his realm (to the which he was sworn at the
time of his Coronacio^, which would thereto in no wise assent, and therefore he
said that his oath and promise was void, and so he declared to the Uiceroy of
Naples, being then with him as Ambassador for the Emperor, and offered for his
ransom to pay as much money as ever French king paid, with diverse other
articles of new divised.

When these articles came to the Emperor, he them refused and said, that he
had desired nothing impossible of the French King, and if he might not or
would noy keep, the appoynteme^t between theun made, yet he bad him keep that
point of covenant, which only depended in his will, that was that he should
yield himself prisoner again, and so he should have his children delivered:
and then he would reasonably commen with him, of new articles of agreement, and
as to he appollegie set furthe by the French king, that his oath and promise
was void, and made by compulsion and threatenyng, it was answered by another
book called the Refutacion or Ouercommyng of the apollogie, of the conue^ncion
of Madrill. Which two works were so eloquently set forth, with such and so
many perswacions and allegacions, both on the one part and the other, that it
would comber a wise man (except he were perfectly indifferent) to judge to
which part he should most incline, and give credence, therefore I leave it
at large.

After that the French king was delivered, and the peace concluded, the
Emperor was fully determined to pass the seas into Italy, and so to Rome, and
there to be crouned Emperor, whereof hearing the bishop of Rome, called Pope
Clement the seventh, a man of great wit and vice, and of little virtue or
learning: much doubted in himself what damage might come to him, if the emperor
had both Naples, Scicill, and the Duchy of Millain, and also were crouned
Emperor. Wherefore he sent to the Uenicians, and to the Flore^tines, and to
Fraunces Sforce duke of Millain, which had committed treason against
themperor, and was deprived by judgment of his name and dignity, and the same
given to the Duke of Burbon, but yet by power he kept much of the possession:
and declared to them, by what puyssaunce the Emperor would come into Italy, and
what great possessions he* had there, at every end of Italy, so that if he
were once crouned Emperor, he would look to have the seigniorie of all Italy:
wherefore they consulted and debated for their own surety, how to banishe him
and his all Italy by power: and as they were debatyng of this matter, they hard
word how the French king was returned into France, and sought all ways and
means, how to break with the Emperor. When they saw so open an accion
offered to them, with all diligence they sent their several Ambassadors, that
is to say, the Pope twain, the duke of Uenice called Andrew Gritty, one
(which was his secretorie) and the Florentynes one, and the Duke of Millaine
one, these five Ambassadors came to the French King, and delcared what joy
and gladness their masters had of his safe return into his realm, and then
they showed to him how they by the Bishop of Romes exhortacion had divised a
league, which should set a perpetual peace between all princes Christen, and
for the more expedicion, they had set forth and agreed upon articles, for the
whole league. When the French king saw the articles it was as he would have
it, for he thought by the whole power of the confederates, his children should
be delivered, and he yet again once to have a medelyng in Italy: wherefore with
great gladness and solempnitie he entered into the league, and swear to keep
it, and gave to the Ambassadors great rewards.



But yet the E^perour should not be admitted, till he had delivered the
French kings children, having a reasonable sum of money for the same, nor
before he had restored the Duke of Millain to his whole Duchy, franckly and
freely, and all other persons of Italy, in like manner as they were before the
last wars began: Nor he shall not once come into Italy for his Coronacion or
other wise, but with such a train as the Pope and the Duke of Uenice shall
think convenient, and that with in three months after he has entered into
this league, he shall pay to the king of England, all such sommes as he
ought him before ye time















When this League was thus concluded, it was sent to the King of England,
which with great deliberacion like a wise prince, consulted much with his
counsel of this weighty matter, and when al things were fully perceived, he
answered to thambassadours, that he thanked much the confederates of their
good will, but he would not enter into the league, because he would be an
indifferent entreator between both parties and a mean for a peace: and so he
wrote to the Emperor, which heartily thanked him, and took it for great
kyndnes: this league was called the holy league of Clement. When the Bishop of
Rome saw that this league was concluded, because he would show that he and
the confederates, had just cause of war against the Emperor, for things done
in Italy, he sent to him a letter, dated at Rome the.xxiii. day of June: in
the which letter he most craftily laid to the Emperors charge, what he had
done for him before he was Pope, and sith he was promoted to that dignity, he
left nothing unremembered, that either he had friendly meant or actualy done to
the Emperor: and accused him of much unkindness, and in especial that he would
not pardon Frances Sforce duke of Millain, at his request. He accused him also
of the coueteous desire which he had, to have or obtein the whole Monarchy of
Italy, with many other pretty inuencions: for which causes he said he was
compelled, for the ^uretie of all Italy, and in especial for the church of
Rome, to join himself with great Princes, and to make war for the defense
of the same. This letter was delivered to the Emperor with all speed, to whom
the Emperor answered by a letter, dated the.xiiii. day of September,
conteinyng.xxiiii. shetes of paper, in such wise that all wise men may se by
the same, that the Romish bishop accused the emperor, where he should have
blamed himself, for the Emperor laid a great number of ingratitudes and
untruths to him, and clearly avoided all things, that he laid to his charge.
The Pope sent his Ambassador another letter, that if the first letter were not
delivered, then he should retain it, but as God would, for manifestyng of the
truth, the letter was delivered ten days before.

After the first letters written, the holy father of Rome raised in all have an
army of eight thousand footmen, with a valiant compaignie of horsemen,
which passed the river of Poo, and joined themselfes with the power of the
Uenicians, whereof was capitain Frances duke of Urbine, and so they all together
marched toward Millain: and in the mean season they had sent Octauian Sforcia
Bishop of Aretyne, which for the French king should retain.xiiii. M. Swysses,
and they were coming out of Swyserlande, to join with the army of Italy.
The Intent of this army was to drive all the Emperors power, out of the Duchy
of Millain, but all their devises proved contrary, as you shall after plainly
perceive. For you shall understand, that although the French king was taken
before Pauia, a year and more before this time, and all the Frenchemen driven
out of the Duchy of Millain, yet the Emperor left not the duchy without an
army, for he left there Anthony de Leua, which was capitain of Pauia, at the
siege laid by the French King, and Fernando Daual and Alphons his brethren,
two valiant capitaines, but Fernando died, the more pity: these capitaines had
with them Spaniardes and Almaines and other, to the number of eight or ten
thousand, and lay still till the new confederacy set forward, and
especially they were sore moved with Frances Sforce duke of Millain, which had
the possession of the most part of all the fortresses of the duchy, that he
would ^e one of the co^federates: wherefore they thought best to begin with him
and to get the possession out of his hand. Wherefore Alphons Daual sent for all
themperors army together, and they came al together to war, and when he was
there, he sent for Moron chief counsailer with the duke of Millain, which
mistrustyng nothing came to him, and there he laid to him how the Duke his
Master was false to the Emperor, and Moron it denied, then he was kept there as
a prisoner, whether it were by cautele or no I cannot tell, but he wrote to the
Duke, that he perceived that the Emperor was like to prevail, and advised
him for auoydyng of al mistrust, and also to show him self the very friend of
the Emperor, and his obedient subject, to deliver all the strong holds into
his captains hands: The Duke hearing this counsel, and willing not to have
the enmity of the Imperial capitaines, assented and delivered to Dauall all
the fortresses that he had, except the castelles of Millain and Cremona, which
he said he kept only for the health of his body, because he had been long
sick.

Then Dauall with his power of Almains and Spaniardes came to y^ city of
Milaine and lodged his people in eueri house, and fearing y^ the duke imagened
some thing by keeping of the two strongest castles, for if he delivered those
two castelles to the army of the confederates, the Emperoures capitaynes and
people should be in great danger, wherefore he gentlye with great persuasion
desired to have the keeping of the castle of Millayn, which the duke would in
nowise assent, mistrustyng, that then he should lose the duchy and al,
wherefore Daual with all speed laid sege to the castle, the duke being with
in. During ye time of this sege, the capitaynes ever took monney and other
things from the Citezyns which sore thereat grudged and said that they would
suffer it no more, and so as an almaine came to a smith for a docate, the smith
cried help, and with that the town rose: then the capitaynes came into the
city to se what was done, the soldiers that kept the sege seeing that, ran
into the city and there was much entreting on both parts.

The duke hering the noies in the city and seeing the besegers gone, came out
of the castle, thinking that his friends had come to his reskue, but when he
saw no succor, and hard the noyes seized, he e^tred the castle again. When
the Capitaines had long entreated the people were ons co^te^ted, but by means
of one sedicious fellow they begane again, and there was a sore fight, but the
night came so fast on that both the parts severed them selves.

The citizens sore grieved with the spaniardes said openly that shortly they
trus^ed to se all themperours friends driven out of Italy, and with many ill
words rebuked the souldiais: and when they came into the city they hurt them.

Anthony deleua and Dauall, perceiuyng this* devised how to be reve^ged,
wherefore in the euenyng they entered with a thousand spaniards and other, and
slew one citize^ and set his head on a polle and caused it to be borne before
the^ and set, iii. or iiii, houses a ^ire, which when the citizens pe^c^iued
they were greatly aferd and ran to harness, and cast down stones and bars,
but the hand gonnes shot so fast at them, that they durst not look out: the
Almaines set fire in many houses, least they should have leyser to fight, and
some of the Spaniardes that kept the towers, slew the citezens. Alas the city
was in great peril, and that well perceived Leua and Dauall, for if the
remnant of the Spaniardes had come in, the whole city had been burned or
utterly destroyed* wherefore they caused the soldiers to cease, which were
content, for they had been in harnes from the sun set, till nine of the
clock the next day.

In this season tharmy of the co^federates, made have to help the duke of
Millain, and in the mean way the city of Lawde was yielded to the duke of
Urbin: Dauall went thither wtih a small co^paignie to reskew the city and when
he saw that it was past reskew he returned* saying: it were better to lose
Lawde, then Millain, and so brought al his people to Millain.

The Emperor from time to time was advertised, of all things done in Italy,
wherefore with great diligence he sent the duke of Burbon thither, with ten
sail, and landed at Sauona, and brought with him.x.M. men, whereof the
Millaners were very glad, and besought him to be good to the^, to whom he gave
many good words and swear, and prayed God that his brains might be stricken
out with a gonne, except he did deliver the^ shortly of their great burden, and
oppression of the Spaniardes, so they would deliver him.xxx.M. ducates, for the
wages of the soldiers that he had brought with him, which wish was thought
to have happened to him at Rome, for breakyng of his promise: for after he had
received the money, for a little space the Millaners were in good quiet, but
shortly after, they were worse then before, in so much as some substanciall
men, for fear of their lives, hanged themselfes.

When the Millaners hard how the city of Lawde was taken, and the Spaniardes
put out, they thought that.v.M. Spaniardes and.iii.M Almaines, and no great
number of horsemen, being without wages and vitaile, could not defend so great
a city long, against the whole power of the princes confederate* While the
power of y^ confederates, were slowly coming to Millain ward, the duke and his
compaignie lacked victaile, wherefore of necessity, when they saw the watch
negligently kept, they sent out of the castle.CC. men, which with strength
passed the siege, and came to the army of the confederates, and showed them in
what case the castle was in, which bad them be of a good chere, and so they
marched forward toward a gate of Millain, called Rome gate, and Ihon de
Medices which led the forward, shot six gonnes at a tower to have overthrown
the same, and so to have entered in by that way. The Emperors men came to the
place, and not only defended the same, but valiantly set forward to fight with
their enemies, and skirmished with them very sore. The Italians seeing that the
Spaniardes were so fierce. thought it not best to fight with them, but to tarry
till the Swysses were come, and then they thought themselves sure of victory:
and so with shame enough, they returned to Meligia.

After his return, the Imperialles fortified the city in many places. The
duke of Millein seeing that he lacked victaile, and that his succors had failed
him, sent to the duke of Burbon word, that he would deliver the castle, so
that he should be bound to no farther inconvenience: so they agreed that he and
his, should have their bag and baggage, and should have the city of Come for
his abode til he were tried of themperor, of the accusacions against him
alleged: The castle of Millain yielded to thempeours use.
upon which condition he yielded the castle, and went directly to tharmy of the
confederates. And after ye he went to Come, according to his appointment: but
the Spaniardes which kept the town, would not suffer him to enter, wherefore
of necessity he was compelled to return, to tharmy of the confederates, and
there became enemy to themperors meny All this Summer tharmie of Italy gat
nothing, but the city of Lawde, and they durst not fight with the Spanyardes,
wherefore they went and besieged Cremona, in the which were.i.M Almaines,
and.v.C. Spanyardes. All the Swisshes and.viii.M of the Popes men, and all the
horsemen of Malatesta, were sent to the siege, whereof was capitain ye said
Malatesta Ballio Perusine, which, as he would have entered the castle was
salin, and.i.M. men and more of his bend: wherefore the duke of Urbyne, and the
whole army of the Uenicians were sent for, which made so great a number, and
had such ordinance, that they within began to treat, and by appointment
delivered the city.

After this, the whole army of the Italia^s or confederates, determ^ned clearly
to besiege Millain, but suddenly the bishop of Rome sent for his army (for what
cause you shall here after) and also they hard say, that George Fronsberge a
valiant capitain an Almain, which served the^peror in his last wars: was
coming with.x^ii. M. Lanceknightes, which were paid their wages before hand,
for.iiii. months, to aid themperors part When the confederate army hard
this, they were astonished, and durst not enterprise the siege, but at a certain
Abbay, two mile from the city of Millain, they made a fortificacion
for.iii.M. fotemen, and five hundred horsemen, to lie surely all winter, to
suffer no recourse to come to the city, which city was all this So^mer
season well fortified and victaled.

After the Popes army was departed at Cremona, as you have hard, there came to
tharmy of the confederates. Michael Anthonio Marquis of Saluce* as capitain
general for the French king, and brought with him.iii.M. Eascons, and.v.C.
men of arms, and, xv.C. light horses, according to the league. Then this whole
army hearing that y^ Almaines were coming forward, with great ordinance, and a
great number of horsemen, and had passed the straightes of the mountaignes
maugre the Uenicians, and that Couradine Lepontine, which had delivered up
Cremona with.i. M. Almaines, was joined with capitain George. When tharmy of
the confederates were well informed of this great army that was coming toward
Millain, the capitaines clearly determined to mete with the^, and by battaill
or otherwise, to let them from passing the river of Poo, or to join with
themperors army, wherefore they marched forward, and found that the Almaynes
were come into the territories of Mantua: then the duke of Urbyn, and Ihon de
Medi^s cousin to the Pope thought to weary the Almaines with light skirmishes,
but Ihon de Medi^^s skirmished so nere tharmie, to get him a name above other,
that he was hit with a gonne, and so shortly died. Then the Almaines came to
Florenciola and there took counsel, and thought it not best to soiorne all
winter in the Duchy of Millain, because al thing there was scace, by reason of
the continual wars: wherefore they determined to take the Popes tounes, as
aucthor of all the mischief and war, and surely they had taken the town of
Plesance, if tharmie of the confederates had not strongly, both with men and
artilery, fortified the town.

While all these things were a doing, there continued a great hatered between
the bishop of Rome, and the noble famely of Colume in Rome all which famely
was Imperial, in so much that the Bishop said to Pompey Cardinal of Colume,
that he would take away his Cardinals hat, An answer of a Cardinal to the
Bishop of Rome,
and the other answered if he did so, that he would put on a helmet to overthrow
his three crounes. When this malice had long continued, the Bishop of Rome began
to lack money, to maintein his wars, and sore he fered the Columes his
domestical enemies, and so of his own mocion began to break the matter with
Ascayn Colume, son to Prosper de Columna, in name of the whole blood of the
Columes, saying: that it were more convenient for both parties to agree, then
to abide the chance of battaill, to the which they both were parties (for
the Columes had men of war in themperors battaill, as the bishop had in
tharmy of the confederates) then every day to retain soldiers at home each
for fear of other, to their great charges and loss. Ascaine hearing this,
said he would speak with his kynred, and so did: and this communicacion had
taken effect, and Hugo de Moncado had not been. For this Hugo was a little
before sent from themperor to the Pope, with certain articles to conclude a
peace, to the which the Pope would not agree, saying he came to late, and when
he saw the bishops proud answer, and perceived him enemy to his master, he
then sought an occasion, to oppress the bishop and his power, and so moved the
Cardinal of Colume, and Ascain Colume, to invade Rome with a sudden fraie, and
to take Pope Clement or he were ware.

They being glad to please themperor, gathererd secretly.ii. M. soldiers, and
entered Rome with such speed, that they wet at. S. Ihon Latere^ce nere to the
Popes Palace, or any man spied them, then began a cry, the Cardinal of
Colume comes with a great power. The Pope thynkyng it to late to send for
aid, fled by a secret vaw^e to the castle Angel, and with him fled
Cardinals, Bishops, and other of his palace, to a great number, so that
there was not victaile enough, for them all. The bishop Clement saw that
shortly he and they, should be famished in the castle, sent to Hugo de Moncado,
which had declared that he was thauctor of this act, not mindyng to hurt the
Pope, but to make him themperors friend, or else to cause him to surcesse, for
doing themperor any damage, and to thesaid Hugo he offered, to keep peace with
the Emperor and his confederates for four months, and in the mean season to
treat a peace, and also to call his army again over the Poo, and for the
performance of this, he delivered to the Columes good hostage, and returned his
army from Cremona, as you have hard before, and so he was delivered at large:
Now will I leave the Emperors army liyng in Italy, and speak of a great
mischief that fell in Hongary.

The great Turk Sultan Soliman Pac, hearing of the strie^ and war that was
between Christen princes, imagened that his time was come, to do some great
act in Christendo^, wher^ore he assembled a puissant army of.C.xx.M. men, and
entered into Hungary, sore destroiyng the country. Whereof hearing Jews king
of Hongary, a courageous knight of.xxvi. year of age, with a small number
marched forward in June, and was on the great army of the Turks or he wist,
and so with good courage joined battaill, but he was oppressed with multitude,
and was compelled to fly into a marreis, where he horse and man were drouned
and many other with him, his body was found after and buried. The saying was
that he was betrayed, by an Earl of his own, called Ihon de Uoada, and so it
was likely, for the Turk afterward made him king of Hongary, The King of
Ho^gary slain
but he enjoyed but one part of it called Tra^siluan^a: for Fernando themperors
brother, which had married the sister and heir of king Jews ye was slain,
kept the chief part of Hongary. The great Turk himself was not at the fight,
but when he hard that the king was slain, he reioysed much, and spoiled the
country, and brought many a Christian soul into captivity to Turkey. Of this
victory he wrote to the Uenicians, as to his friends, which letter was red
openly in Uenice, before Doctor Pace Ambassador there for the king of England,
but whether they were joyous or sorrowful of the tidings, I cannot well tell
you.

This so^mer was great grudge against merchant strangers in London in so much ye
if ye matter had not been well pacified, much business might have followed, the
cause of the grudge was this, there was an act made in the.iiii. year of king
Henry, ye no stranger should bring in no wine nor woade in an aliens ship: so
ye thenglishmen after ye went to Tholose, and brought much woade to London, and
served all the clothiers repairing to London: and now in this year by means of
gentlemen about the king, the ^^rangers had license to bring in woade in
strangers bottomes, so that al London was full of their woade, and also they
sent their woade into the country, so ye thenglishmennes woade in London lay
unbought: wherefore sir Iho^ Alen knight being Mayor, sent for a great sort of
strangers, which were the chief merchantes of all, and showed unto the^ what
gains they had gotten in the city, by reason whereof they should auaunce the
city, and not hurt it, wherefore he willed the^ to sell their woade to the
mercha^tes of London, and they should be paid in continent, and not to resort
to other places in the country with their woade, to the hinderance of the
Londoners. The strangers proudely answered the Mayor* ye they would seek every
place for their aua^tage, and so in mockyng manner depa^ted. The Mayor
perceiuyng ye, called a common counsel in the month of August, and there were
many bills laid against the strangers, and at last it was enacted, that no
citezen nor freman, should bye nor sell in no place, nor excha^ge nor meddle
with certain strangers, called Anthony Bonuice, Laurence Bo^uice, Anthony
Uiuald, Anthony Caueler, Fra^ces de Bard, Thomas Calnecant* and a great sort mo
whose names I let pass, and if any person did meddle or occupy with them,
contrary to this act, he should lose his fredome, and liberty in the city of
London: by which act the strangers were so brideled, that they came to a
reasonable point and conclusion.

In this season the angel noble was just the sixth part of an ounce Troy The
first in^aunsyng of the Angel.
so y^ six Angels were just an ounce, which was.xl. s. sterlyng and the Angel
was worth.ii. ounces of silver so ye six Angels were.xii. ounces, which was
but.xl. s. in silver: but in Flaunders, Braband, and Zeland, the Angel was
worth.vii. s.iiii. d. so y^ merchantes daily carried over much money, to the
great hynderance of the merchandise of this realm, for most men carried gold,
and when it was there, it was loss in every noble.viii. d. to bring it hither
again: and when thenglishmen spoke to the rulers there, to leave thenhau^cyng
of the kings coin, they laughed the^ to skorne. The king and his counsel
perceived to what end this enhauncement in Flanders, if it were not met with
shortly would bring ye riches of this realm: wherefore in the month of
September, he by Proclamacion, enhaunced the Angel to.viii. s.iiii. d. and the
Royal to.xi. s. and the croune to.iiii. s and.iiii. d. and this Proclamacion
was made through al England: and to bring out of Flaunders to great nober of
English gold which was there, The second inhaunsyng.
the king by Proclamacion again, the fifth day of November, enhaunced the
Angel to.vii. s.vi. d. and so every ounce of gold should be.xlv. s. and that
an ounce of silver should be.iii. s.ix. d. in value.

This year on Michaelmas even, Thomas Hynd which was chosen shrife before, was
called to take his oath, but he made defaute, wherefore on Suno^ Rice was chosen
which refused, then was one George Robinson Mercer chosen, which took his oath
not to be able. The commons were in such a fury, ye they swear ye they would
have a Mercer. Master Nicholas La^bert an Alderman and Grocer, which had a
dispensacion for y^ shriualtie for ye year, seeing this discord, said to the
co^mo^s, masters, although my time be not come, yet to appease your strief, if
you will chose me, I will take it, and so he was chosen with great thanks. In
this season a sudden rumor began in Spain, y^ themperor would have war with
king of England, whereof hearing thenglishe merchantes, which lay in Spain at
diverse ports, concluded to send to doctor Edward Lee, Ambassador for the
king of England in the^perors court to know y^ certentie, which gently
answered the^* that he trusted ye there was no such cause, of ye which they
should be aferd, for the king his master and themperor, were yet in perfect
love* and amity, and farther he sent them word, ye the king of England was
not entered into the league of Italy with the confederates, as they would have
him, for he laboreth to make a universal peace, which he could not
conuenlently do, if he were protector or a co^tractor in y^ league, this answer
he sent to them from Granado, the.v. day of September.

In the month of December, the king kept a solemn Christmas, at his Manor of
Grenewiche, with great ple^tie of victaile, Revels, Maskes, disguysynges, and
bankettes: and the.xxx. day of December, was an enterprise of Iustes made at
the tilt by six gentlemen, against al co^mers, which valiantly furnished
the same, both with spear and sword, and like Iustes were kept the third day
of January, where were.CCC. speres broken. That same night, the king and many
young gentlemen with him, came to Bridewell, and there put him, and.xv. other,
al in Maskyng apparel, and then took his Barge, and towed to the Cardinals
place, where were at supper a great compaignie of lords and ladies, and then
the Maskers dau^ced, and made goodly pastyme, and when they had well danced,
the Ladies plucked away their visors, and so they were all known and to the
king was made a great banquet.

The.xiii. day of January came to the court, Don Hugo de Mendosa, a great man
borne in Spain, of a noble famely, this person was sent as Ambassador from the
Emperor, to the king of England with large commission, for themperor put it to
the king of Englandes determinacion, whether his demaundes which he required
of the French King, were reasonable or not, and for the declaracion thereof,
and for to know the king of Englandes request and entreatie concerning the
peace, was this noble man sent into England, which many times consulted with
the king and his counsel, and he tarried here two years full.

This Christmas was a goodly disguisyng played at Greis inn, A play at Grayes
inn.
which was compiled for the most part, by master Ihon Roo, seriant at the
law.xx. year past, and long before the Cardinal had any authority, the
effect of the play was, that lord governance was ruled by dissipacion and
negligence, by whose misgouernance and evil order, lady Public well was put
from governance: which caused Rumor Populi, Inward grudge and disdain of wanton
souereignetie, to rise with a great multitude, to expel negligence and
dissipacion, and to restore Publik wealth again to her estate, which was so
done. This play was so set forth with rich and costly apparel, with strange
diuises of Maskes and morrishes that it was highly praised of all men, saving
of the Cardinal, which imagined that the play had been divised of him, and
in a great fury sent for thesaied master Roo, and took from him his Coyfe,
and sent him to the Flete, and after he sent for the young gentlemen, that
played in the play, and them highly rebuked and thretened, and sen^ one of
them called Thomas Moyle of Kent to the Flete, but by the means of friends
Master Roo and he were delivered at last. This play sore displeased the
Cardinal, and yet it was never meante to him, as you have hard, wherefore many
wisemen grudged to see him take it so heartily, and ever the Cardinal said
that the king was highly displeased with it, and spoke nothing of himself.

In this year the second day of March were received to London, Ambassadore from
the French King
with a great compaignie of noble men, the bishop of Tarbe Frances visou^t of
Toraine, and master Anthony Uescy, second president of Paris, as Ambassadors
from the French king, and so brought through London to the Tailers hall and
there lodged, and afterward were co^ueighed to Grenewiche to the king, where
they were right haitely enterteined, and after their letters red and their
requests haro, they departed for a season to London.

On shrouetewes^aie, A Iustes.
the king himself in a new harnes all gilte, of a strange fashion that had not
been seen, and with him.viii. gentlemen all in cloth of gold of one suite,
embrodered with knottes of silver, and the Marquis of Excester, and.viii. with
him in blewe velvet and white saten, like the waves of the sea, these men of
arms came to the tilte, and there ran many fresh courses, till.cc.lxxxvi.
speres were broken* and then they disarmed and went to the queen's chamber, where
for them was provided a costly banquet.

The French Ambassadors having their recourse to the king and his counsel,
much labored to have in marriage the Lady Mary daughter to the king* and after
long counsailyng, that matter was put in suspe^ce because the president of
Paris, doubted whether the marriage between the king and her mother, being his
brothers wife were good or no: of this first mocion grew much business or it
were ended, as you shall here, afterward. The common people repugned sore
against that demand, for they said that she was heir apparent to her father,
and if he should dye, they would have no Frencheman to be king of England, and
thus the common people spoke, as their minds served them.

While the French Ambassadors lay thus in London, it happened one euenyng as
they were coming from the black Friars, from supper to the Tailers hall, two
boys were in a gutter castyng down rubbishe, which the rain had driven there,
and unware hit a lackay belonging to the viscount of Tourain, and hurt him
nothing, for scantly touched it his cote, but the French lords took the
matter highly, as a thing done in dispite, and sent word to the Cardinal,
which being to hasty of credence, sent for sir Thomas Seimer knight, lord
Mayor of the city, and in all have commanded him upon his allegiance, to take
the husband, wife, children and servants of the house, and them to emprison,
till he knew farther of the kings pleasure, and that the.ii. boys
apprentices should be sent to the Tower, which commandment was accomplished
without any favor: For the man and his wife, and servants, were kept in the
Counter till the sixth day of May, which was six wekes full, and their
neighbors of gentleness kept their house in the mean time, and one of the
appre^tices died in the Tower, and the other was almost lame: of the cruelty
of the Cardinal, and of the pride of the Frenchemen, much people spoke, and
would have been revenged on the Frenchemen, if wisemen in the city had not
appeased it with fair words.

On the.xiiii. day of March were conueighed from London to Grenewiche,
Ambassadors from the King of Hong^^^^.
by therle of Rutlande and other, the lord Gabliel de Salamanka Earl of
Ottonbrough, Ihon Burgraue of Siluerberge, and Ihon Faber a famous clerk after
bishop of Uien, as Ambassadors from Don Fernando, brother to the Emperor, newly
elect king of Hungarye and Beam, after the death of his brother in law king
Jews, which was slain by the Turk the last Summer, as you have hard before:
this compaignie was welcomed of the high Officers, and after brought into the
kings presence, all the nobility being present, and there after great
reverence made, An Oracion made by Master Faber.
thesaied Clerk Master Faber made a notable Oracion, taking his ground of the
Gospel, Exiit seminare semen suum, and of that he declared how Christ and his
disciples went furthe to sow, and how their sede was good that fell into the
good ground, and brought forth good fruit, which was the Christen faith: and
then he declared how contrary to that sowyng, Machomete had sown seed, which
brought furthe the evil sede, and showed from the beginning, how the Turks
have encresed in power, what realms they had conquered, what people they had
subdued even to that day: he declared farther what acts ye great Turk then
living had done, and in especial he noted the gettyng of Belgrade, and of the
Rhodes, and the slaiyng of the king of Hungary, to the great rebuke (as he
said) of all the kings christened: he set forth also what power the Turk had,
what diversities of co^paignies, what armure, what capitaines he had, so that
he thought, that without a marvelous great number of people, he could not be
overthrown: Wherefore he most humbly beseched the king, as Saint Georges
knight, and defender of the faith, to assist the king his Master, in that
Godly war and verteous purpose To this oracion the king, The answer
by the mouth of sir Thomas More answered, that much he lamented the loss
that happened in Hongarie, and if it were not for the wars, which were between
the two great princes, he thought that the Turk would not have enterprised
that act, wherefore he with all his study would take pain, first, to set an
unity and peace throughout all Christendom, and after that he both with money
and men, would be ready to help toward that glorious war, as much as any
other prince in Christendom. After this done the Ambassadors were well
cherished, and diverse times resorted to the Court, and had great chere and
good rewards, and so the third day of May next ensuyng, they took their
leave and departed homeward.

This season the fame went, Themperors letter to the French king.
that themperor had written to the French king, admonishyng him to regard his
oath and promise toward God, and his honor and fame toward the world, allegyng
that if he kept his promise toward him, that he should find him such a
friend, that all France should rejoice of it, and if he would not keep his
former promise, which he made and swear at Madrill, he took God to witness,
that he would never leave the war, til fire and sword had brought him to
accomplish his promise, or else to drive him out of his realm and dominions
with strength and puissaunce, which letter the French king nothing regarded
saying that the Emperor the next year should have war enough.

The fame went and letters came to London, that the Emperoures army in Italy
the xii. day of April had met with the Uenicians as they were going homewarde,
and that between them there was a cruel fight and by fine force the Uenicians
were put to ^lyght, and no marvel as the Uenicyans answer, for they sai that
by cause there was a peace concluded for six months between the bishop of
Rome, and Hugo Demountcado, and that the viceroy of Naples was come to Rome to
co^ferme the same truce, therefore they sent their ordinance and harnes and
looked for no war, but only tarried together till they were paid there wages, and
so unprovided they were set on and overcome.

In the end of this year the people were sore troubled with pouertye for the
great paymentes of money that were past, and also in winter in the seade
season fell such abound ans of rain in Septe^bre, Nouembre and Decembre, and
on the xvi day of Ianiuer fell such a great rain that there of ensued great
fluddes which distroyed corn, feldes, and pastures: and drouned many sheep
and beasts: then was it dry till the xii day of April and from thence it
rayned every day or night till the third day of June, and in May it rayned,
xxx. hours contynually with out ceasyng which caused great fluddes and did
much ha^me, so that corn sore failed the next year as you shall perceive
hereafter.

The.xix, year,
THis time a bill was set up in London much contrary to the honor of the
Cardinal, in the which the Cardinal was warned that he should not counsel
the king to mary his daughter in to France, for if he did, he should show
him self enemy to the king and the Realm with many threatnyng words: this
bill was delivered to the Cardinal by sir Thomas Seimer Mayor of the city,
which thanked him for the same, and made much search for the author of that
bill, but he could not be found, which sore displeased the Cardinal, and
upon this occasion the last day of April at night he caused a great watch to be
kept at Westminster and had there cart gonnes read^ charged and caused diverse
watches to be kept about London in Newington. S. Jones street, Westminster. S.
Giles, Iseldon, and other places nere London, which watches were kept by
gentelme^ and their servants, with householders and al for fear of y^
Lo^doners because of this bil. When y^ citizens knew of this, they said that
they marueiled whi the Cardinal hated the^ so for they said that if he
mistrusted the^, he loved not them, and where love is not, there is hatred, and
they affirmed that they never ente^ded no harm toward him, and mused of this
chance, for if.v. or.vi. lewd persons had made Alarm in the city, the^ had
e^tred all these watch me^ with there train which might have spoiled the
city without cause, wherefore they much murmured against the Cardinal and his
indiscreet doings.

Sunday the fifth day of May was a solempe Ma^se song at Grenewiche the
Cardinal and the Archbishop of Canterbury with.x. prelates mi^e^ed being
present, and there the French Ambassadors, in the name of the French king
there Master, swear to observe the peace and legaue concluded between the^ for
the term of two princes lives, and there openly the bishop of Terby gave to
the king hearty thanks for the great favor he showed to the king his master,
in the time of his visitacion (as he called it) that is to were when he was in
prison, for he said the king by his mercy had conquered the whole hearts of the
realm which he could not do by strength. The^bassadors also desired as you
have hard, the marriage of the lady Mary for the duke of Orleance.ii. son to
the French King. Some said she was mete for him ^elf: but many a man marueled
why she was denayed for the second son, seeing that in the.x. year of this
king it was concluded that she should mary the Dolphin being the first son:
but this demand was not concluded nor answered but deferred because of her
tender age, till another time. For the more enterteinyng of the French
ambassadors the king caused a sole^pne Iustes to be done by sir Nicholas Carew,
sir Robert Iernyngham, sir Anthony Broune, and Nicholas Haruy, the valiant
esquier as chalengers: which were appareled in bases and bardes all of one
suite, the right side was rich tyssue embaudered with a compass or roundell
of black velvet and in the compass a right hand holdyng a sword, and a boute
the sword were pens and pieces of money of diverse coins, all embrawdered,
under the hand was embraudered Loialte, and on that side of the bard was
written in embraudery, By pen, pain nor treasure, truth shall not be violated.
The otherside of the bases and bardes were of cloth of gold and cloth of
silver. When these four chalengars were come to the tilt, then entered the
Marquis of Excester and.xiii. with him all armed and barded and based of one
suit: that is to say, the right sides cloth of gold cut in clouds engrayled
with Damask gold, the otherside cloth of silver set with mountains full of
Olive branches, made of gold all mouyng. These men of arms ran many a fair
course with little missyng, for with in two hours and a half, notwithstanding
that yt rained apace, they brake.iii hundredth speres at the least, and when
night approached they disarmed and went to the court.

The king against that night had caused a banquet house to be made on the one
side of the tylt yard at Grenewyche of an hundredth foot of length and.xxx.
foot breadth, the roof was purple cloth full of roses and Pomgarnettes, the
wyndowes, were all clear stories with curious monneles strangely wrought, the
Iawe pieces and crestes were karued with Uinettes and trailes of savage work,
and richely gilted with gold and Bise, this work corbolyng bare the
candelstykes of antyke work which bare little torchettes of white wax, these
candelstickes were polished like Aumbre: at the one side was a haute place for
herawldes and minstrelles: this house was richly hanged and therein was raised a
cupbord of seven stages high and.xiii. foot long, set with standing cups
Bolles, Flaggons and great pottes all of fine gold: some garnyshed with one
stone and some with other stones and perles, on the other side was a another
Cupbord of.ix. stages high, set full of high pottes flago^s and bolles, all was
massy plate of silver and gilte, so high and so broad that it was marvel to
behold: at the nether end were two broad arches upon three Antike pillars all
of gold, burnished swaged and graven full of Gargills and Serpents, supportyng
the edifices the Arches were vawted with Armorie, all of Bice and gold, and
above the Arches were made many sondri Antikes and diuises: In this chamber,
was three ewry bordes, one for the king, another for the queen, and the third
for the princes: the first bourde had.ix. great ewers, and basins al gilt, and
plain, the second bourde had seven great gilt basins chased, and three pair
of covered basyns, chasid al gilt with Cups of assaie, they were so great
that every Lord grudged to bear them: the third ewery had.ix. basyns and two
pair of coueryd Basines, and cups of assaie, this ewery was all of gold, and
the Ba^ins were so massye that they troubled sore the bearers: The hole supper
was served in vessel of gold: to rehearse the fare, the strau^genes of dishes,
with devises of beasts and fowls it were to long, wherefore I will let pass
over the supper with songs and minstrelsie. When supper was done, the king,
the queen and the ambassadors washed, and after talked at their pleasure and
then they rose and went out of the banquet chamber by the forsaied Arches, and
when they were between the vttermoste door and the Arches the king caused them
to turn back and look on that side of the Arches, and there they saw how
Tyrwin was beseged, and the very manner of every man's camp, very connyngly
wroughte, which work more pleased them the^ the remembering of the thing in
deed. From thens they passed by a long galerie richely hanged into a chamber
fair and large the door whereof was made with masonrie, emba^ayled with
Jasper, and within that a porche with a tipe, and crokettes gilt, this chamber
was raised with stages.v. degrees on every side, and rayled and cou^trerailed
borne by pillars of Azute, full of stars and flower delice of gold* every
pillar had at the top a basin silver, wherein stood great branches of white
wax, the degrees were all of Marble ^oler, and the railes like white marble:
in the midst of this Chamber, was a gate, the Arches whereof stretched from
side to side, this Arche was figured masonrie on water tables with haunses
receiuyng pillars wrapped, being Dormants Antike, and over the gate stood the
pictures of Hercules, Scipio, Julius, ^ompe^* and such other co^quererours,
the ventes and embowes were of very strange work, with leaves, balls, and
other garnishinges, all gold, and in the hole arche was nothing but fine Bice
and gold, the rofe of this chamber was conninglie made by the kings
Astronimer, for on the ground of the rofe, was made the hole earth environed
with the Sea, like a very Map or Carte, and by a conning making of a another
cloth, the zodiac with the.xii. Signs, and the five circles or girdelles and
the two poles apered on the earth and water compassing the same, and in the
zodiak were the twelve signs, curiously made, and above this were made the
seven planettes, as Mars, Jupiter, Sol, Mercurius, Venus, Saturnus, and Luna,
every one in their proper houses, made according to their properties, that it
was a connyng thing and a pleasant sight to be hold.

When the king and the queen, were set under their clothes of estate which were
rich and goodly, and the ambassadors set on the right side of the chamber,
then entered a person clothed in cloth of gold, and over that mantell of blew
silk, full of eyes of gold, and over his head a cap of gold, with a garland of
Laurel set with beries of five gold, this peron made a solemn Oracio^, An
Oracion.
in the Latin tongue, declaryng what Joy was to the people of both the realms
of England and France, to here and know the great love, league, and amity,
that was between the two kings of the same Realms geuyng great praise to the
king of England for granting of peace, and also to the French king for suyng
for the same, and also to the Cardinal for being a mediator in the same: and when
he had done, then entered eight of the kings Chapel with a song and brought
with them one richly appareled: and in likewise at the other side, entered
eight other of the said Chapel bringyng with them a another person, A
dialogue,
likewise appareled, these two persons played a dialog theffect whereof was
whether riches were better the^ love, and when they could not agree upon a
conclusion, each called in three knights, all armed, three of them would have
entered the gate of the Arche in the middel of the chamber, and the other iii
resisted, and suddenly between the six knights, The fight at barriars
out of the Arche fell down a bar all gilte, at the which bar the sir
kinghtes fought a fair battle, and then they were departed, and so went out of
the place: then came in an old man with a silver berd, and he concluded that
love and riches, both be necessary for princes (that is to say) by love to be
obeyed and served, and with riches ^o reward his lovers and friends, and with
this conclusion the dialogue ended.

The^ at y^ nether end, A rich mount
by lettyng down of a courtaine, apered a goodly mount, walled with towers and
vamures al gilt, with all things necessary for afortresse, and all the mount
was set full of Crystal coralles, and rich rocks of rubie cureously
conterfaited and full of roses and pomgranates as though they grew: on this
rock sat eight Lords appareled in cloth of Tissue and silver cut in quater
foyles, Maskers
the gold engrailed with silver, and the silver with gold, al loose on white
satin, and on there heddes cappes of blake velvet set with perle and stone, they
had also mantelles of blame saten: and then they suddenly descended from the
mount and took ladies, and dau^ced diverse daunces,

The^ out of a cave issued out the lady Mary daughter to the king and with her
seven ladies, all appareled after the romayne fashion in rich cloth of gold
oftissue and Crimosin tinsel bendy and their here is wrapped in calls of gold
with bonetes of Crimosin velvet on their heddes, set full of pearl and stone:
these eight Ladies dau^ced with the eight Lords of the mount, and as they
daunced, suddenly entered six personages, appareled in cloth of silver and
black ^^nsell satin, and whodes on there heddes with tippetes of cloth of
gold* there garments were long after the fashion of Ireland, and these
persons had visers with silver berdes, so that they were not known: these
Maskers took Ladies and daunsed lustely about the place,

Then suddenly the king and the viscount of Torayne were conueighed out of the
place into a chamber thereby, and there quickly they.ii. and six other in
maskyng apparel of cloth of gold and purple tinsell satin, great, long, and
large, after the Uenicians fashion and over them great robes, and there faces
were visard with beardes of gold: then with minstrelsie these.viii. noble
personages entered and daunsed long with the ladies, and when they had daunsed
there fill, then the queen plucked of the kings visar, and so did the Ladies
the visars of the other Lords, and then al were known: the^ the king gave to
the viscou^t of Torayn, the maskyng apparel that the king him self ware and
also the apparel that the viscount him self masked in, which were very rich,
for the which he thanked him.

Then the king queen and the ambassadors, returned to the banquet chamber,
where they found a banked ready set on the board, of so many and marvelous
dishes, that it was wonder to se, then the king sat down and there was joy,
mirth and melody: and after that all was done the king and all other went to
rest, for the night was spent, and the day even at the breakyng.

The morrow after the ambassadors took there leave of the king, and had great
rewards given them and so came to London, and there rested two days and so
departed in have homeward.

These two houses with Cupbordes, ha^gynges and al other things the king
commanded should stand still, for three or four days, that al honest persons
might see and behold the houses and riches, and thither came a great nombre of
people, to see and behold y^ riches and costely devices

After that the ambassadors of France were departed the king sent an other
ambassade into France (that is to say) Sir Thomas Boleyne knight, viscou^t of
Rochforth, and Sir Anthony Broune knight, which came to Paris to the bishop of
Bathe, which lay in France as ambassador for the king of England, and then
these three went to the court and saw the French king in person swear to keep
the league and amity concluded between him and the king of England, and there
they had great chere and maskes showed unto them, but little rewards were
given, and so y^ viscount Rochforth returned into England, and so did the
bishop of Bathe shortly after, leauyng sir Anthony Brou^e behind for a ligier.

In this month of May y^.x. day the king sent sir Frau^ces Poynes knight, An
ambassad sent to the emperor*
as a^bassadour from y^ king of England, to Charles themperor and with him he
sent Clarenseaux, king of arms, to demand the one half of the treasure and
ordinance which was taken at Pauia, for so much as that war, was made as well
at the kings charge, as themperors charge: he demanded also the duke of
Orleau^ce, to be delivered to him, and also it was demanded that the emperor
should deliver y^ bishop of Rome which was taken this month as you shall here,
and also should bring his army out of Italy, and if he refused to do any of
these poinctes, then Clare^seauxin the kings name of England should make to
him defiaunce.

When it was known that war like to be between the Emperor and the king of
England, the commons of England sore lamented the chance, for all merchandise
were rest rayned to pass in to any of themperours dominions, and he
merchants were desired by the Cardinal to keep there martes at Caleis, to the
which in nowise they would assenf.

This same month the king sent two fair ships, well manned and vitailed,
having in them diverse connyng men, to seek strange regions: Ships sent to
seek strau^g Rigions.
and so forth they set, out of the Tha^is, the twenty day of May, if they sped
well you shall here at their return.

The.xxii. day of May came in post to the king out of France the bishop of
Tarbie, which was here in the beginning of this month, this bishop brought to
the king of England, the articles which the French king now offered to the
Emperor, which were contrary to the articles sworn at Madryll in the.xvii.
year of the king, and farther he moved the king of England to be enemy to
the emperor, which request (as well men say) was much furtherd by the Cadinall,
because of the wars in Italy, between the Pope and the emperor: this bishop
made short tariyng with the king, for in post a ga^^e he returned to Paris, to
sir Frances Poynes, and Clare^seaux, which tarried there for him, and so they al
took there Io^^ay toward Spain.

Now will I return to the duke of Burbo^, and themperou^s army, which all y^
last winter lived ingreat poverty, with our clothes, victaile or wages, so
that they were in manner desperate, and so went toward Parme and Bononie,
belongyng to the Sea of Rome. The bishop of Rome hearing this sent a messenger
to the duke to redeem the Popes towns, so that they should not be spoiled nor
hurt: the duke and the captain axed three hundredth and fifty thowsa^d
Ducates, for saving of the Popes la^d, and if they might have so much money,
they would depart to Naples: but when they saw that they could have no money,
they with all speed turned toward Florence the.xxii. of April, whereof hearing
the Romans they were glad, for they thought that the Florentines would hold
good war with them, and tha^ the Pope and the Romans would give the lokyng
on: but the chau^se turned, as you shall here after.

For a suertie the duke of Burbon thought to have gone to Florence for this
cause, for there was a gentleman in Florence called Peter de saluiata which had
a brother that served themperor in his wars, which promised to deliver y^
city, for he determined to cause the commons to rebel in y^ city gaynst the
heddes, and in the mean season y^ dukes company should scale y^ walls: when
this Peter knew y^ themperours army Army was come to a place called Le Chase,
within twelve mile of the City, to bring his purpose to a conclusyon, he with
such as he had trained to him, cried in the City: Liber^ate de populo, that
is in English Liberty of the people: with which voice the people styrred and
came to the Palace in great nombre, and there they took the.vi. Lords of the
counsel which had the rule of the Publyke welthe of the City (as they call
it) and slew one of them: The Family of Medices, which were the Popes kynred,
were at this time sore a fraied. Thus this Peter de Saluiota, with the Commons
gate the Palace and rang the common bell. In this season was in Florence a
Capitayn of the French kings called Frederico de Bodsoo, he had with
him.iii.C. men: and when he saw this rebellyon, he came to the Commons and
said: Syrs, if you continue in this case, your fair City is like to be
subverted, for your enemies be at hand: which notwithstanding that you bear
some favor to the emperor as appears, yet their needinesse and poverty is
soch, that without mercy they will rob, (...) and sley you, your wyfes and
children, and set fire on your beautiful City.

This Captain much steyed the City, notwithstanding that.xx. or more
persons were sleyne in the ruffle, yet they were well avoided, and sodeyngly
entered into the City the Duke of Urbyne, which lay but.vi. mile from
Florence, and.xviii. mile from themperours army whom he had coasted, but he
thought no advantage to meddle. This Duke brought with him* v.M. footmen,
and.vi.C, horsemen, and when he was entered the City, a cry was made that all
things was pardoned, so that every man departed home and delivered his weapon,
which was dooen: and thus the City was appeased, the.xxviii. day of Apryll.

All this doing within the City was unknown to themperours army, for it was
beyonne and ended in.iiii. or.v. hours, and so for lack of knowledge, this
enterprise was lost, which was happy for the Florentynes. Sore displeased were
themperours Capitaynes when they knew of this channce, and also how the Duke of
Urbyne was entered into the City of Florence for their defense, but they
could not do with all. And so shortly they departed and came to the City of
Seynes.xxx. mile of, and there they lost their great ordinance, and took
counsel to go to Rome (notwithstanding the trewce concluded between the Pope
and the Uiceroy of Naples, and Hugo de Moncada, as you have heard) and so
much they traucyled by nyghtes and days, commenly passing.xl, mile, day and
night (Their good will was soche) that the vi. day of May, with banners
displaied, they came before the City of Rome being saturdaye the some day:
and sunday the Romans made Bulwarks, Rampires, and other defenses, and laid
ordinance on the walls, and shot at them without fearcely.

The Duke of Burbon determined that it were not best to lie still without, Rome
assauted.
and be slain with ordinance, considering that they were all naked people,
and without great ordinance: wherefore he determined to take the chance and to
give the assaute, and so manfully they approached the walls between the Burgo
nouo and old Rome. But the Romans valiauntly defended them with handgn^nes,
pykes, stones, and other weapons, so that the enemies were feign to retreyte.
Then the Romans were glad, and set many fair banners on their Towers and
Bulwarks, and made great showtes: Which seeing the Duke of Burbon cried to a
new assaute. Then the Drumslades blew, and every man with a ladder mounted: and
at the ^yrst encounter, again the Romans put them a little back: Which
perceiui^g, the duke of Burbo^ cried: God and the emperor. Then every man
manfully set on, there was a sore fight, many an arrow shot, and many a man
felled: but at the last the Emperors men got the wall: and between every
assaute fell a mist, so that they within could not see what part they without
would assail, which was profitable to themperours party: At the three
assautes were sleyne.iii.C. Swyshes of the Popes Guard In this last assaute was
the Duke of Burbon stryken in the thygh with a handgo^ne, The Duke of Burbon
sleyn,
of the which he shortly dyed in a chapel of s. Syst, whyther his Soldiers
had brought him* And this chance notwithstanding the Army entered into Rome,
and took the Popes Palace and set up themperours Arms. The same day that these
three assautes were made, Pope Clement passed little on the Emperors Army:
^urse of the Pope.
for he had accursed them on the saturday before, and in his curse he called
the Almaynes Lutheranes, and the Spaniards Murreynes or mores: and when he was
hearing of mass, sodeinly the Almaynes entered the Church, and slew his Guard
and diverse other. He seeing that, fled in all haste by a preuye way to the
Castle s. Angel: and al they that followed him that way and could not enter,
were sleyne, and if he in that fury had been taken, he had been sleine. The
Cardinals and other prelates fled to the castle of s. Angel, over the bridge,
where many of the commen people were ouerpr^ssed and drowned as they gave way
to the Cardinals and other estates that passed toward the castle for
succor.

The Cardinal of Senes, of Sesaryne, of Tudertine, of Iacobace and of the
Ualle, tarried so long, that they could not get to the castle for multitude of
people: wherefore they were compelled to take a another house, called the Palace
of s. George, where they kept them self for a while, as secretly as they
myngt. You must understand, that thorough the City of Rome, ronneth a famous
River, called Tyber: and on the one side of the River stands the Castle s.
Angel, or the Borough of s, Angel: and the other side is called Burgo Nouo,
or the New Borough. This Bridge is called, the Bridge of Syxte, which lies
directly before the Castle. At the end of this Bridge was a wondrous strong
Bulwark, well Ordinaunced and well manned. The Emperors men saw that they
could do nothing to the Pope nor to that port of the City but by the
bridge, determined to assaute the Bulwark: and so as men without fear, came
on the bridge: and the Romans so well defended them, that they slew
almost.iiii.M. men. That seeing the Prince of Orange, and the Marquis of
Gnasto, with all speed gave assaute, and notwithstanding that the Romans shot
great ordinances, handgonnes quarrels, and all that might be shot: yet the
Imperial persons never shranke, but manly entered the Bulwark and slew and
threw down out at the loupes all the Romans that they found, and after rased
the bulwark to the ground. The Pope was in the Castle Angel and beheld
this fight, and with him were.xxiii. Cardinals, of which one called the
Cardinal Sanctorum quatuor, or the Cardinal of Pouche was slain, and with
him were a.M. Prelates and Priests.v.C. Genglemen.v.C. souldyers: wherefore
immediately the Capitayns determined to ley Siege to the Castle of s. Angel,
lest they within might issue out and turn them to damage: wherefore sodeinly
a Siege was planted round about the Castle. Rome spo^^^^
In the mean srason the souldyers fell to spoil, never was Rome so pylled
neither of the Goths, nor Uandales, for the soldiers were not content with
the spoil of the Citizens, but they robbed the Churches, brake up the houses
of close religious persons, and overthrew the cloisters and spoiled virgins,
and rauyshed married women: Men were tormented if they had not to give every new
asker or demaunder: some were strangeled, some were punyshed by the priuey
me^bres, to cause them to confess their treasure. This woodnesse continued a
great while, and some man might think that when they had gotten so much, then
they would cease and be quiet, but that was not so, for they played
continually at dyce, some.v.C. some a.M. ducates at a cast: and he that came to
play laded wtih pla^e, went away again almost naked, and then fell to ryfelyng
again. Many of the Citizens which could not patiently suffer that vexacion,
drowned them selves in Tiber: The soldiers daily that ley at the siege, made
Iestes of the Pope, sometime they had one ridyng^ like the Pope with a whore
behind him, sometime he blessed, and sometime he cursed, and sometime they
would with one voice call him Antech^ist. And they went about to vndermynde
the Castle, and to have thrown it down on his head, but the water that
ennironeth the castle dispoynted their purpose. In this season the Duke of
Urbyne with.xv,M. men came to aid the Pope: but hearing that Rome was taken he
^aried, lx. mile from Rome till he heard other word. The Marquis of Saluce, and
sir Frederico de Bodso with.xv.M. footmen and a.M. horsemen were at Uitarbe
the.x, dai of May. Where they hering that the city of Rome was taken also
tarried. The cardinal of Colume came with an army of Neapolitans to help
themperours men: but when he saw the cruelty of the soldiers, he did little to
help the^, but he hated the^ much

The bishop of Rome was thus besieged, till the.viii. ides of Iuli, at which
dai he yielded him self for necessity and penury of al things in the castle.
And then he was restored to give Graces and grant Bulls as he did before:
but he tarried still in the Castle saint Angel, and had a great nombre of
Almaynes and Spanyardes to keep him: But the Spanyardes bare most rule in the
Castle, for no man entered nor came out of the Castle but by them. When the
month of July came, corn began to fail in Rome, and the pestilence began
to wax strong: wherefore the great Army removed to a place called Naruya, xl.
mile from Rome* leauyng behind them such as kept the bishop of Rome.

When they were departed, the Spanyardes never were contented till they had
gotten the Almaynes out of the Castle of s. Angel, and so they had the whole
custodye of the Pope. This Rome continued in peace till Septembre, till the
Army came again from Naruya: for then the Almayns swear, that they would set
the City and all on fire, except the Pope would pay them their full wages.

The bishop of Rome was sumwhat astonyed, and sent to commen with them, only
two Archebisshops and two Bishops and two Gentlemen: These six persons, the
Almayns took as pledges, coutrarye to the Popes meaning, and said: they would
keep them there till they were paid, and so put them in a strong chaumbre, in
the Palace of s. George: and every day almost they would bring them forth
openly, and scolde and chyde with them, and make them believe that they would
hang them if they were not paid. And so they kept them emprisoned in a
chau^bre and.xxiiii. watched every night without the chaumbre door, and.xiiii.
all day likewise: An Escape.
and yet for all that watch, they got out at a chymney, on saint Andrews
eve, and were no more seen of them.

This escape was sooner known of the Spanyardes that kept the Pope, then of
the Almaynes that watched the door. The Almaynes were so wood with this
chance, that they came to the Prince of Orange their general Captain, and
demanded money of him, in such rigorouse manier, that he was feign secretly
to flee to Senes: and then for him they chose Captain, the Marquis of Gnasto,
which governed them till February, that he brought them to Naples.

About the.xxviii. day of May, there were letters brought to the King of
England from the French king, of part of this troble: but sunday, the second
day of June, the King received letters at the Castle of Wyndsore, by the
which he perceived all the order and manier of the sackyng of Rome, and taking
of the Pope, in manier and form as you have heard: Wherefore the King was
sorye, and so were many Prelates: but the Comminaltie little mourned for it, and
said that the Pope was a ruffyan, and was not meet for the room: wherefore
they said that he began the myschief, and so he was well served. But the
Cardynall which took this matter highly, called to him the Prelates and the
Clergy, and much mourned the fall of the Bishop of Rome, and saw how the
people grudged against the Spirituality, for their great Pride, Pomp, and
ill living: Wherefore he came to the King, and said: Sir, by them only calling
of God, you be made Defendor of the Christian faith: Now consydre in what
state the Church of Christ stands: See how the head of the Church of Rome
is in captivity: See how the holy farthers ^e brought into thraldom, and be
without comfort, now show your self an aid, a defendour of the Church, and
god shall reward you.

The king answered, The kings answer,
my Lord, I more lament this euel chance then my toungue can tell, but where
you lay that I am defendor of the faith, I assure you, that this war between
the Emperor and the Pope, is not for the faith but for temporal possessions
and dominions, and now since bishop Clement is taken by men of war, what should
I do? my person nor my people cannot him reskue, but if my treasure may help
him, take that which to you seems most convenient: for the which offer the
Cardinal thanked the king on his knee, The thr^a^or g^ther^d,
and there upon the Cardinal caused to be gathered together of the kings
treasure.xii. score thousand pound, which he carried over the Sea with him, as
you shall hear after.

Then the Cardinal sent co^missions, as legate to al bishopes, commau^dyng that
they should cause in every parish Church, solemn processions to be made for
the releuyng of the Pope, and moved the people to fast.iii. days in the weke,
but ^ew men fasted, for the priests said, that there commandment was,
prayer and fasting,
to exhort the lay people to fast and not to fall them selfs: and the lay
people said, that the priests should first fast, because the very cause of
the fas^yng, lwas for a priest, but none of both almost fasted.

This season began a fame in London that y^ kings co^fessor, being bishop of
Lyncolne, called doctor Lo^gla^d, and diverse other great Clerks had told the
king that the marriage between him and the Lady Katheryn, late wife to his
brother, prince Arthure, was not good, but damnable and the king here upon
should mary, the duchess of Alanso^, sister to y^ French king at the tou^e of
Caleis this summer, and that y^ viscou^t Rochforth had brought with him the
picture of the said Ladi, and that at his return out of france ye Cardinal
should pass the Se to go into France to fetch her

This rumor spra^g so much, that the king sent for sir Thomas Seimer mayor of
London and straightly charged him to s^ that y^ people should sease of this
co^municacion, upon pain of the kings high displeasu^e.

But whatsoever the Commons talked, it was concluded by the king and his
counsayll, that the Cardinal should pass into France, as his high
ambassador, but for what cause no person knew but the king til his return.

Then was much preparacion made at Calleis, for the receauyng of ye Cardinal,
but y^ common saying was that y^ king would come to Caleis and meet with y^
French king, and ^or y^ cause such preparacio^ was made* but he ca^ not there
at al, and always the people comoned as they durst of the kings marriage.

The iii. day of July, The Cardinal rides to^^rde France.
the Cardynall of York, passed thorough the city of London, acco^paigned with
many Lords and Ge^tleme^, to the nombre of twelve hundredth horse, toward the
Sea side, and at Cauntorburie he rested, and there to the people declared the
destruction of Rome, and how the Pope was in captivity with many Cardinals:
wherefore he caused a Letany to be so^g by the monks of Christ's Church, after
this manner. A new fond Letany
S, Maria, or a pro Clemente papa. S. Petri ora pro Clemente papa. and so forth
al y^ letany: the^ he exhorted the people to fast and pray for his deliuerau^ce
which fewdid.

The xi. day of May, the Cardinal with all his train, took shipping at Dover,
and the same day la^ded at Caleis, where he was received with procession, and
with the hole garrison of the town.

When the Cardinal was la^ded, Barrelles of gold
there were set on land.xvi. barrelles al full of gold of the kings money,
which were delivered to the capitain of the castle in charge: of this money the
people much grudged, and said this money shall be spent out of y^ realm, and
yet Englisheme^ shall have no part nor proffit of it, but only it shall be spent
for ye Cardinals pleasure and the French kings, and the Popes proffite.

The Cardinal was so sore displeased with the Emperor for keeping the Pope in
pryso^ (although it were against his will and knowlege^) that he imagened all the
ways and means possible how to hurt and dommage the emperor and therefore he
set for thenglish merchants, willing them to keep ye mar^e at Caleis, bu they
a^swered that y^ town of Caleis, was a town of war, and al merchants must
have liberty at al hours of the night, in the mart season, which they
could not have at Caleis: also the haven is not able to receive great Hulkes,
and Carikes that come to a mart: The Mart to be kept at Calice.
but some merchants to please the Cardinal, brought their clothes to Caleis,
and so caused there friends of Andwarpe to come to Caleis, and to say, that they
had bought the merchants clothes, and there at Caleis paid the custom, and
so carried them, to the town of Andwarp at the^glish me^nes charge, and there
sold the^ to the great loss of the^glishme^.

While the Cardinal lay in Calleis, the French men daily resorted to Calleis,
to welcome the Cardinal, and suddenly there upon a noise sprang that Calleis
should be delivered, to the French king, which vain saying, made many men
muse,

But the.xxii. day of Iuli, the Cardinal departed out of Calleis, and with
him was the lord Cutberd Tu^stal bishop of London, the Lord Sands,
Chamberlayn to the king, the Earl of Darby, sir Henry Guildforde, sir Thomas
More, with many knights and squyres, to y^ number of.xii.C. horse, and in the
cariages.lxxx. wagons, and.lx. moyles and sumpter horses and at Sandifelde, met
with him the cou^tie Brian governor of Picardie, and Monsir de Bees, captain
of Bullein, with.iiii.C men of arms, well appareiled, with banners displaied
and al well horsed, which with trumpets and melody received the Cardinal, and
at Marguiso^ there met him the Cardinal of Lorayn, The receiving of the
Cardinal to Bole^yne.
and.vi. bishops, and xl. gentlemen, well furnished, and in their
company.iiii.C. horse, and so they rode furthe to Bullein where the burges them
received.

And at the gate was made a pageaunte in the which was a Nonne called holy
church, and three Spaniardes and three Almaynes had her violated, and a
Cardinal her reskued, and set her up of new again.

A another Pageaunte, was a Cardinal geuyng a Paxe to the King of England and
the French king, in token of peace, a another Paegant was the Pope, liyng under,
and the Emperor sittyng in his Majesty, and a Cardinal pulled down the
Emperor, and set up the Pope.

When wise men saw this Pagiaunt, they smiled and said, well can the French
king flatter, for hard it were for one Cardinal to subde him that has pulled
down the master of all Cardinals.

Many words were spoken in reprove of this pageau^t, but still with great
triu^ph rode these.ii. Cardinals together, to the Abbey under a Canapie boren
over them, and there lodged.

The morrow being the three and twenty day he with all his train removed toward
Muttrel, and.ii. mile without the town there met with him the bailies, there to
him was made a solemn oracio^, and when he came to the town he was received
with the Clergy, and there the Englishmen had strayt lodging, the nombre was so
great, and so ye morrow he removed toward Abbeuil where he was reciued of the
Baylife and advocates of the town, and then of the garrison of men of war of
the town, and there was he received with procession, and Pageauntes to his
praise under a Canapie, and so brought to the Chruch, and after to his lodging,
and all the Canapies were set with T C for Thomas Cardinal, and so were al his
servants cotes.

The third day of August in the City of Amias, came the French king in a cote
of blakce Ueluet upon white Satin, and tied with laces agglated with gold, and
with him, the king of Nauer, and the Cardinal of Burbon, the great master,
the Duke of Uandosme, Monsir de Guise, and Monsir Uaudemount his brother, and
the French kings mother* with many Lords and Ladies, which were there
solemplie received.

And on So^day the.iiii. day of August, the Cardinal came fro Pickqueny toward
Amias, in which town he lay the night before, and in the way he was received
with the provost of the City, and many honorable personages of the city, and
after the^^ came the Justices and advocates and with an eloquent oracion
saluted him, and when he was with in half a mile of the town, the French
king him self with all his Nobles met with him, and lovingly embraced him,
and welcomed him and after took all the Nobles of England, by the hand, and so
brought the said Cardinal to Amias: where for him were devised many
Pagiauntes, to his praise, and ever he was called Cardinalis pacificu^ the
Cardinal pacifique, and so was written at the gate of his lodging.

The French king brought the Cardinal to his lodging, and he would have
brought the king to his Court again, but he would in nowise suffer him, but
left him in his lodgyng and the same night the Cardinal rode to visit the
French kings mother, and there he had long communicacion and so departed to
his lodging.

The.v. day of August the Cardinal with the great estates of France was
conueighed to the French kings Court, where he was receined of the French
kings guard, and in the first Chamber he was received of Knights and
ge^tlemen, In the the secou^d Chamber, of Earls Barons and bishops. In the
third of Ladies^ in which chamber the king lay on a bed, and his mother sat hy
him, because he had a sore Leg. Then the Cardinal showed his commission, which
was very large, and in that was none but he alone: the Bishop of London and the
Lord Sands, were in another commission, but that was not showed than, nor
they called to counsel. There was the Cardinal highly thanked of the great
love that he bare to the house of France: Then he and the French Lords fell
to counsel, first concerning the Articles of peace, and for the suerty of
performaunce of the same, and so that day they sat four hours, and so every
day was the Cardinal in Counsel with the French kings Counsel, till
the.xxviii. day of August, at which day was made in the Cathedral Church of
Amias, for the Cardinal of England a place on the North side of the Church
for his Traues, and directly in the mids of the quere was a curious chapel
wroughte of carved wood all gilt set for the French king and his mother, which
was covered with Crimosyn velvet, richely embrodered and hanged with clothes of
Antike making, set with pearl and stone, very curiously: The Mass was song by
a Cardinal, and after Mass, the French king and diverse of his Lords, were
sworn to keep the league, and then was a great Charter sealed on the high
aultare, and delivered to the Cardinal by the kings own hand, and then the
Cardinal of England gave to them all (as he said clear remission) and then
was Te deum song, and so they all departed.

Now will I leave the Cardinal still at Amias in counsel, and return to Sir
Fraunces Poynes, and Clare^ceaux which were at this time arrived in Spain, in
the town of Uale Doli^e, the third day of July, where they found Doctor Le^
the kings Almoner: there ambassador for the king of England, and with him
tarried till the sixte day of July, and then Sir Fraunces Poynes was brought to
his presence, and delivered the king his masters letter, and beside that prayed
his Majesty to consider what the king of England had done for him sense his
tender age, how that he help him^ at all times with money and treasure, and
how that at such time as the Lords of Spain would not receive him as there
king during his mothers life, yet by the kings mean and his great labor and
cost* he was to that Realm received: And also how the king of England had
always defended and protected the contreys of Flaunders, Brabant, and zeland,
against all persons, and in the quarrel of themperoure he had strongly invaded
the Realm of France so that by his invasion at home, the emperor had obtained
great victory in foreign places, which he could not have done, if all the whole
realm of France had been without any enemies at home: wherefore the king him
as reason would, the one half of the profit of the battle of Pauy and also
for his part he required the duke of Orleau^ce to be delivered to him, and
also to pay to the king, forty thousand pownde, which he ought to him as
money lent, toward his charges: and farther that he should deliver the Pope,
and make him a reasonable amends, and no farther to make war on him or his
dominions. The Emperors answ^r
The Emperor after this demand, answerered, sir we assure you that the love
of our uncle of England, toward us and the manifold benefits that we have
receiuid of him and by his means we shall never forget, and although our power
be not able to recompense the same, yet our good will shall never fail, to
endeuer us to do him pleasure: and as concerning his letters we with our
counsel shall take advice, and we trust you shall have a reasonable answer,
during which time, you may repose you, and althinges necessary shall be at your
commandment: with this answer, Sir Frau^ces departed at this time. When it
was known in Spain, that the king of England was alied with the French king,
the Spaniardes spoke largeli and said that they cared not for the king of
England, and said farther that all this was the drift of the Cardinal, and by
reason hereof the English marchanntes were evil entertained in Spain, but the
Emperor perceiving this, gave a general commandment, that all Englishmen
should be orderid and reputed as his loving friends.

In this very month, tidings was brought to the Emperor, how the
inhabitauntes of Turnei conspired to distroy Monsire Delanoies their Captain,
and devised to bid him to a banquet, and so to ^^ey him and all that loved the
Emperor, but as God would, he had knowledge of this treason, and took the chief
Capitaynes, and did on the sharp execucion for fear whereof many fled into
france.

The Emperor within a day or twain called to him Doctor Lee, and Sir Fraunces
Poynes the king of Englandes ambassadors, and said, my lords, we have
percei^ed the king your masters requests, which be great and of a weighty
Importance, wherefore we entend with all speed to write to the king our
uncle, and when we have received answer from him, we shall deliver you of
such things as you demand, praiyng you in the mean season, to take
patience, and so for the time they departed.

By this time was it known that the Cardinal of England was with the French
king, and full well knew the Emperor that the Cardinal would do all for to
aid the French king and to damage him yet had he a great pencion of the
Emperor.

The English Merchants fearing the sequel of this matter, co^ueighed away
there goods daily out of the Emperors dominions: but still the English
ambassadors came to the Emperors Court, and one day the Emperor said to
them, my Lords, I marueill how the King mine uncle is moved aginst me and my
subjects, I assure you I will no war with him, I trust in his faithful promise,
and his accustomed goodness, and his people I take as my fre^des. If he love the
French king I may not so do, for he to me is untrue and keeps no just
promise, and we never compelled him to make any offer, but his offer was of his
own mocion and he also sworn to maintain the same, which he now refuses,
and to our great prejudice has persuaded against us our dear uncle of England
by peruers imaginacions, which I trust will never be our enemy. This many
times the Emperor would comen with the English ambassadors which lay in
Spain.

But now must I return to the Cardinal of England which lay at Amyas, there
was great counsailyng from day to day: First how the Pope should be delivered
and the sea of Rome brought to a quietness: Secondarily how to bring the Emperor
to some reasonable agreement so that the French kings children might be
delivered. It was well considered that themperor had a great ^ordell by reason
of the said.ii. hostages, which fordele might perchance so stomach him y^ he
would agree to no new conditions nor agrementes. The it was answered on the
otherside that if a great army were sent into Italy which might drive the
Emperors power out of Italy, then that army should set the Pope a^ liberty
and also drive themperor to come to their purpose, or else he should le^se both
the realms of Naples and Scycylle, and the duchy o^ Myllayn and other
dominions, wherefore the French king determined to ^end an army royal into
Italy under the conduict of Mounsire O^yt de Law^rick earl of Foys, which was
appointed before in June to go to the borders of Italy with a small number, but
now to him was assigned viii.M. Bretons with notable capitaines of the same
country, and viii.M. Normans with like capitaines, and viii.M. Gascoynes, and
vi.M. Burgonions, iii.M. Sauosyns, viii.M. Swyches and Almaines, and vi.M.
Pycardes of which men were v.M. horsemen under the conduict of Mounsire
Ealyas, and in this army went sir Robert Iernyngham and Ihon Carew of Hakam and
lxxx. other English gentlemen which were sent thither by the Cardinal from
Amyas. When this army was assembled, the Cardinal delivered the king of
Englandes money that he had brought out of England in barrels as you have heard,
English ^oney deliu^red.
with which money was this army paid two months before hand, and the
remnant was delivered to sir Robert Iernyngha^ which was called treasorer of
the wars. In this army were.iii.M. carriage men, and adventurers.iiii.
thousand, so that when they were over the mountains they were lix.M. men, and
some writers say C. thousand. This army was called in Latin Excercitus Angli^
et Gallorum Regum, pr^ Pontific^ R^mano liberando congregatus, that is to say,
the army of the kings of England, and France gathered for the deliverance
of the bishop of Rome, and so was this army reputed. Although few people
knew at the beginning in England of the conueiyng of the money over the sea,
yet when the English coin was the common payment of the army it was then
openly known: then many men said alas, so much money spent out of the
realm, and of this charge the realm shall not be one penny the better, the king
has had of us a loan and that is not paid, and the great subsedie was
granted to make the king rich and now is that money to help our old enemies
and the Pope which never shall do us good, this the people spoke and much
worse. While the Cardinal was with the French king, the Pope sent to him a
bull and made him Uycar general under him through all the king of Englandes
dominions, and there by a bull he created Anthony de Prato bishop of Sens and
Chauncelor to the French king a Cardinal with great solempnitie. The Cardinal
for his solace rode with the French king to Compeigne and Mountdedier, and was
ever highly feasted of the king and his mother and of the Chauncellor of
France, and of all the nobility. The was it concluded by the Cardinal and the
French kings counsel what articles of offer should be sent to the Emperor,
which if he refused then open defiaunce to be made to him in the name of both
the kings: The profters were these.

First that the French king should pay for his ransom xxv.M. crounes which
amounts to v.M. pound sterlyng, one writer calls it two myllions of crounes.

The second to release all the pencion that he had in Naples with all the right
of the same.

The third, that he should never claim title to the duchy of Myllain.
That.iiii, that he should release the superiority of Flaunders for ever and
the right that he had to the city of Turnay.

The v. to release all the homages of all other persons within the said
countries.

The.vi. to withdraw his army out of Italy.

The.vii. to forsake the aid of the Swyches against the Emperor.

The viii. to take no more the part of Robert de la March against the Emperor.

The.ix. never to aid the king of Nauerne against him, although he had married
the kings sister.

The.x. never to aid y^ duke of Gelder nor to challenge the same duchy.

The.xi. to aid the Emperor with ships and men to his coronacion.

The.xii. to mary lady Elianor the queen of Portyngale sister to the Emperor.

The.xiii. that the Dolphyn shoud mary the said queen's daughter.

The.xiiii. that if the French king had any children male by the said queen,
then the duchy of Burgoyne to remain to the said child bring a male.

The.xv. that the French king should be friend to the Emperor and his friends,
and enemy to his enemies.

These with many other articles which were not openly known were sent to the
bishop of Tarby and the vicount of Thorayn ambassadors to the Emperor from the
French king. And other articles were sent to the king of Englandes ambassadors
being in Spain: first to move the Emperor to take a reasonable peace with the
French king.

Also that the king of England would release to him all the sums of money due
to him as well by themperor Maximilian his grau^dfather as by himself, and take
the French king as detter for the same.

Item if the Emperor would not thereto agree, then the French king should mary
the lady Mari daughter to the king of England and they both to be enemies to
the Emperor.

When all these things were concluded, the Cardinal took his leave of the
French king and his mother (which told him that a noble ambassade should be
shortly sent again into England from the realm of France for fortefiyng of
all conclusions) and so the said Cardinal with great rewards returned with
all his train and by journeys the last day of September he came to Rychmond to
the king of England and there ascertained the king of all his doings, but so
could no lord that then was in Commission with him, for they knew nothing of
all his doings, which sore grieved their stomachs.

The Cardinal which much reioysed in this peace, came y^ first day of the
term into the star chamber and there by his commandment were present the
lords spiritual and temporal of the kings counsel, and the Mayor and
Aldermen of the city of London, and the judges of the law, and all the
Justices of peace of all shyres then being at Westminster. And then he said,
how much is the realm of England bound to God for the high peace that now is
concluded? A high peace, yea such a peace as was never concluded between no
realm, for by my labor and industry I have knit the realms of England and
France in such a perfect knot y^ it shall never fail, for the three estates of
France (which here we call a Parliament) have affirmed the same, and therefore
now my lords be merry for the king shall neuermore charge you with wars in
France, nor the Mayer and other merchants shall never be charged farther
with expenses, so that with exaccions for wars of France you shall no more
be charged, for the king shall have no need, because that he by this league
shall be the richest prince of the world, for I assure you he shall have more
treasure out of France yearly then all his revenues and customs amount to,
yea and count his wards, forfeites and all such casualties. Now sith you
have such an honorable peace and such a profitable peace how much be you
bou^^ to him which has brought this peace about^ for this is a peace in secula
seculorum. And because this peace is so noble it is sealed with a seal of
gold, and so he caused all there present to look on the seal, which was the
very great seal of France printed in fine gold: at this tale many a man
after laughed to think how the Cardinal lied, for they knew that that he said
was for his own glory, and nothing should follow as he said.

The French king according to his appointment sent the lord Annas of
Momorancy great Master of his house and after that high Constable of France,
and the bishop of Bayon, the chief president of Roan and Mounsire de Hunyers,
as his Ambassadors to the king of England accompanied with lx. gentlemen well
appointed, which the xiiii. day of October la^ded at Dover whose servants
demeaned the^ selfs so in passing through Kent that much business was to lodge
the^ in London, but the Cardinal commanded corporacions of the city to
provide lodgyng for them which was never seen before, whereat the people
murmured sore, saying that the Cardinal was all French. So on the xx. day of
October the said ambassadors were met on Black heth by y^ marquis of Exeter,
the bishop of London, the Uycount Rocheford and lord Mou^tioy with many men of
honor and gentlemen to the number of v.C. horses and more. The Mayor and
Aldermen of the city of London and the chief comminers on horseback in their
gounes met the said ambassadors at S. Georges bar and there was made to them
a solemn Oracion, and so from thence they were conveyed through London to y^
bishop of Londons palace and there and nere there about they were well lodged.

The citezens of London presented them with v. fat oxen, xx. sheep, xii.
Swannes, A present ge^^n by y^ (...) to the French ambassadors.
xii. Cranes, xii. Fesantz, iiii. dosyn Patriches, xx. loaves of Sugar,
Comfettes and other spyce and wax, and viii. hoggesheades of wine with many
other things which I cannot rehearse.

On tewsday being the xxii. day or September, the said ambassadors were conveyed
by water to Grenewyche, where before the king sittyng under his clothe of
estate the foresaid Mounsire Bayon president of Roan made an eloquent
proposicon in the which he much thanked the king for sendyng so high an
ambassador as the Cardinal was, a man of such prudence and wit as it appeared
by y^ knittyng of the league, that like to him could none be found, for by hs
only mediacion the.ii. princes were accorded so surely as never were princes
before that time, so y^ by this co^federacion the Pope and his Cardinals which
were in captivity and thraldom should by the power of these.ii. princes be
delivered and all the Emperors power should be clean banished and driven out of
Italy, and the Pope should be restored to his old estate and dignity again.

When this Oracion was done and an answer made to the same, the king welcomed
all the gentlemen of France and then they had wine and spyce brought to them,
whereof they took part and drank and so departed to their barge. Daily these
ambassadors repaired to ye cardinals place and there were highly entertained,
and the morrow after S. Symons day and ^ude the bishop of Bayon and a great
number of ye Frenchegentlemen dyned at the Majors feast, and so they tarried in
London til Al^alonday, on which day the king accompanied with the ambassadors
of France and all his nobility rode to the Cathedral church of S. Paul where
the Cardinal sang Mass, and after mass done y^ people were desired to pray,
that by their prayers Pope Clement might the sooner be delivered out of
captivity: and when that wa^ done the king of England before the (...) swear
to keep and perform the league. The common people said what ^ede all this
swearyng, the French king was once sworn and all his nobility, yea and all
his good tounes, but yet they brake with us, and so will they again when they
see an a^auntage.

For the more love to be engendered between these two princes it was concluded
y^ the king of England should elect the French king knight of the noble order
of the Garter, The French king knight of the Garter.
and that the French king should elect the king of England companion of his
order of saint Mychel, which ^leccions passed on both parties. Wherefore in all
speed ye king sent sir Arthur Plantagenet Uycount Lysle and bastard son to
king Edward the fourth, Doctor Tailor Master of the Rolls, sir Nycholas Carew
knight Master of ye kings horses, and sir Anthony Broune knight, and sir
Thomas Wryothesley knight bring Garter king of arms of the order, with the
whole habit collar and habilimentes of y^ order, which order he received on
sunday the x. day of Noue^ber in the city of Paris and rode in the said habit
from the house of saint Poule to our lady church and there heard a solemn
Mass and dyned in his robe of the order, having with him thambassadors of
England, and the same night he made to them a banquet and so the next day they
departed. In likewise the self same sunday the king at Grenewiche received y^
order of saint Mychel by the hands of the great Master of France and Mounsire
Huniers compaignions of thesayd order: The king of England knight of the order
of saint Mychel.
and they al there ware the Mantels of the said order which were of cloth of
silver embrodered with Frau^ces knottes and kocle shelles and the collor was of
the same devise having hangyng before the breast the image of saint Mychel, and
in these Mantels they went down to the chapel to Mass and there heard Mass,
which was ^ong by a bishop, and after Mass they returued to the kings
chamber where was made a great feast, and after diner which was late they were
conveyed into the tyltyard and there were Iustes of pleasure xii. against xii.
which valiauntly furnished their courses til they had broken C. staves, and
then they departed, for night was suddenly come.

Then the king brought the Ambassadors to the new banquet chamber which was
hanged with a costly verdor all new, the ground thereof was all gold and the
flowers were al of Sattyn silver of that by the brightsomenes of the gold, the
flowers appeared so freshly that they seemed as they were growyng in deed, the
cupberdes of gold and gilte plate with the eweryes, the same I over pass
because you have heard thereof in the beginning of this year. Then the king,
queen and ambassadors satte down to supper and were served with lxxxx. dishes,
all the galleryes and chambers were full of lords, knights and gentlemen, and
the ga^rates above full of French lackays and verlettes which were ple^teously
served.

After supper was done, the king led the ambassadors into the great chamber of
disguisynges, ^he banquet house.
and in the end of the same chamber was a fountain, and on the one side was a
Hawthorne tree all of silk with white flowers, and on the other side of the
fountain was a Mulbery tree full of fair beryes all silk, on the top of the
Hawthorne was the arms of England compassed with the collar of the garter of
S. Mychel, and in the top of the Moulberie tree stood the arms of France
within a garter. This fountain was all of white Marble graven and chased, the
bases of the same were balls of gold supported by rampyng beasts wound in
leaves of gold. In the first work were gargylles of gold fiersly faced with
spoutes runnyng, The second receipt of this fountain was environed with wynged
serpents all of gold which gryped the second receite of the fountain, and on
the so^mit or top of the same was a fair lady, out of whose breasts ran
abundantly water of merueilous dilicious sauer. About this fountain were
benches of Rosemary fret^ed in braydes laid on gold, all the sides set with
roses in branches as they were growyng about this fountain, On the benches sat
viii. fair ladies in straung attier and so richely apparelled in clothe of
gold embrodered and cut over silver, that I cannot express the connyng
workema^ship thereof. Then when the king and queen were set, there was played
before them by children in the Latin tongue in manner of Tragedy, A play.
the effect whereof was that y^ pope was in captivity and the church brought
under the foot, wherefore S. Peter appeared and put the Cardinal in authority
to bring the Pope to his liberty and to set up the church again, and so the
Cardinal made intercession to the kings of England and of France, that they
took part together, and by their means the pope was delivered. Then in came
the French kings children and complained to the Cardinal how the Emperor kept
them as hostages and would not come to no reasonable point with their father,
wherefore they desired y^ Cardinal to help for their deliuerau^ce, which
wrought so with the king his master and the French king that he brought the
Emperor to a peace, and caused the two young princes to be delivered. At this
play wisemen smyled and thought that it sounded more glorious to the Cardinal
then true to the matter in deed.

When the play was done and iiii. companies of maskers daunsed, the king, the
great master of France, the duke of Suffolk, the marquis of Exceter, sir
Edward Newel and other three apparelled in cloth of gold and purple Tynsell
sattyn set with cut warkes of cloth of silver plyghted goord fret and folded
each clothe upon other, and one plucked under another very richely: they had
also mantels of crimosyn Sattyn cast about them Bauderike wise, so that the
other garments might largely appear, and then they entered with noise of
mynstrelsie and took the ladies that sat about the fountain and dau^sed with
them very lustely, and when they had daunsed enough then they put of their
visers and were known, and so with disporte all this night passed.

The next day the great master and all his company took their leave of the king
(except the bishop of Bayon which abode as Ambassador in England) and were
highly rewarded, The amba^^^dors departed
and so passed to Dover and took ship there and landed at Bullein.

After that the Frenchmen were departed y^ commons spoke sore against the
Cardinal and said that the Frenchemen did never good to England, and for the
Cardinals pleasure we should forsake out old fre^des and receive our old
enemies. When the Cardinal heard of these sayings he was not content, wherefore
he sent a Commission to the Mayor of London to command al men not to talk of
ye kings affairs and business or of ye queen, or of the kings cou^sail. And
if any person spoke or talked of any of these matters, then he to be taken and
brought to the Cardinal. When this commandment was once known, every man
mistrusted other and noman durst break his mind to other.

In this month of November the Cardinal as legate called y^ whole clergy
before him a Westminster and there he said that all the abusions of the church
should be amended, Arthur, B^lne^ Geffery Lome and Garret.
but he did nothing thereto, but abiured Arthur, Bylney, Geffery Lome, and
Garret that spoke against the Popes authority and his pomp and pride.

By reason of the great raines which fell in the sowyng time and in the
beginning of the last year, now in the beginning of this year corn began sore
to fail throughout the realm, insomuche that in the city of London, A great
derth of wheat.
bread for a while was very skant and people did starve daily for bread, for
wheat so failed that none could be gotten for money. Saving that the king of
his goodness sent to the city of his own provision vi.C. quarters, or else for
a week there had been little bread in London, yet was the scarcity more then
y^ derth: For then wheat was only at xv.s. the quarter and from thence it rose
to xx.s. and after to xxvi.s.viii.d. the quarter. Men said that the negligence
was in sir Thomas Seymer knight then Mayor. Many substancial men would have
made provision for their houses, but they feared left the co^minaltie would
have taken it from them. Then were co^missions sent into all shyres and
commissioners appointed to se what wheat was in the realm, and the
commissioners ordered that no wheat should be conveyed out of one shyre to
another, which commandment had like to have raised trouble, and specially
the city of London with the same was sore agreued, for they had no arable ground
to sow, but must make provision with money, which provision was them denied in
diverse shyres by that commandment, whereat the citezens grudged, so the Mayor
and Aldermen seeing that the people began to murmur, came to the Cardinal and
moved him of the mischief that was like to ensue: either the people must dye
for famyne or else they with strong hand will fetch corn from them that have
it.

To who^ he answered y^ they should have wheat enough out of France, for the
French king said to me quod the Cardinal that if he had but three bushels of
corn in all France, England should have twain so much he loves and
regards this realm: with this answer they departed and every day looked for
French wheat but none came: and farther such wheat as ye merchants of
England had brought and shipped in Normandy and other places were there
restrained, so that the relefe there failed, but the gentle merchants of y^
Styliard brought from Danske, Breme, Hamborough and other places great ple^tie,
and so did other merchants from Flanders, Holand, and Frisland, so that
wheat was better chepe in London then in all England over. Then the people
said, see how we had been served by the Frenchemen in our necessity if
themperors subjects had not helped us. For this kyndnes the common people
loved themperor the better and all his subjects. The king of his goodness
hearing that ye wheat in France was stopped, mused not a little, and so for
comfort of his city of London he lent M. quarters, for the which they both
thanked him and prayed for him. Then within short space the merchants of
London so diligently made provision in all places for Wheat and Rye, that
after Christmas they lacked none, and all the parties adioynyng to them were
feign to fetch wheat of them and none to them was denied, notwithstanding
their unkind commandment given that the Londoners should none have of them.

Now let us speak of the army y^ the lord Lawtrick had into Italy at ye
charges of the king of England and the French king for y^ deliuerau^ce of pope
Clement. The lord Lawtrick after that his whole army was come to him to Lions,
and that al things necessary were in readiness, then he set forward with great
diligence: but or he had passed y^ mountains y^ Uenicians army was come into
Lo^bardy abidyng ye coming of the Frenchemen, and in the mean season they
marched toward themperors army which lay at y^ city of Myllain. Whereof
hearing Anthony de Leua with viii.C. Almaines and Spaniardes on foot, and as
many Italyans marched forward to mete with the^, and by force caused the^ to take
the town of Meligna for refuge, where he hearing y^ Ihon de Medices with a
great number were coming toward the Uenicians, he in the euenyng or his enemies
were, aware suddenly set on the said Ihon de Medyces, which began to set his
men in an order, but he was so enclosed that he could do nothing, but took his
horse and fled and le^t his company alone, which were slain almost all, and
lost.iiii. great pieces of ordinance, which Anthony de Leua car^ed with him
to Myllam. In which season the lord Lawtrick with his army was pas^ed the
mountains and was come to the city of As^er abidyng the Swyches, where he
heard tell how that Lewe Earl of Lodron with a great crew of Almaines was come
to the town to Boskenye Alexa^dry with money and vitail to aid the Almaines
that kept Alexandrye: wherefore he sent his horsemen to stop them that they
should not pass to Alexandry, and after them he followed with his whole army
and beseged them in Boske which a certain days defended, but at the last they
yielded the town, and became soldiers to the lord Lawtrick. In this same
season Andrewe Dorye admyral of the French navy lay before the haven of Gene
and kept the Genowayes from al marchaundise and vitailes which to the city
might repair, and in especial he let certain ships of corn which lay at
Pont de Ferry between Gene and Sauona to come to Gene. The Genowayes which
lacked corn and were on the land side besieged by a citezen of their own
which was on the French part called Caesar Fulgosus, imagined how to bring the
ships of corn into the city, and when they saw that Andrewe Dorye had but
xvii. Galyes. They prepared vi. galeyes to fight with Andrew Dorye, During which
fight the ships with corn should enter y^ haven. When the galeys were abroad,
a sudden tempest rose with such a violence, that Andrew Dory was tayne to take
ye port of Saunona for his succor, and so the ships or corn came safe into
the haven of Geane, and all the galeys in safety: this good was fortune to
Geane at this time.

When the citezens of Geane were thus vitailed, they took to them good courage
and in warlike manner issued out against Caesar Fulgosus which knew well that
they had little more then iii.C. Spaniardes that could skyll of the war, and
as for the remnant were neither of stomach nor of experience in war,
wherefore he boldly set on them, and while they were fightyng without, the
citezens within which be ever mutable, suddenly cried France France, which
^lamour came to the ears of Adurnus which was imperial, wherefore he retired
back into the city to appeace the rumor, but their enemies followed them in
such have that both entered together and, so Geane was become French. Then
thither came the lord Lawtrick and put there a captain with a retinue for y^
safe keeping of the city. Then Adurnus duke of Geane which was in the castle
with diverse of the Emperors friends and lacked vitail and saw no comfort of
reskue, yielded the castle upon condition to depart with bag and baggage and
so they did. In the mean season certain Frenchmen which were left at Boske
defaced the town and then came before Alexandrie, and there kept a siege
volant that no aid nor succor should come to the town, till the whole army
were assembled to besiege ye town. But for all that purpose, by the Dounes of
Alexandrie, Albericke Barbian with v.C. soldiers came into the town which
much comforted the garrison there which was in manner dismayed because their
aid at Boske had failed them. The Frenchmen besieged the town and bet it with
ordinance and they within manfully defended it and made new countermures so
that their enemies could not enter without ieopardy. But at the last y^
Uenicians brought thither great pieces of ordinance which so sore bet the
walls that Baptist Lodryn the capitain saw that he was not able to defend it
and so he delivered the town upon this co^posicion that he and his should
depart with bag and baggage, and he nor his to wear no harnys against the
French king nor his confederates by y^ space of vi. months. Then the lord
Lawtrick delivered the town to Frau^ces Sforcia according to y^ league, which
Frau^ces put there a convenient garriso^. Thence y^ army removed to Belgrasse
which to the^ was yielded and also delivered to ye duke of Myllain, and from
thence they removed toward y^ city of Myllain, whereof hering Anthony de Leua
fortefied y^ of Myllayn and sent Jews Barbyan to defend the city of Pauye.

When the lord Lawtrick was with in viii. mile of Myllayn, he suddenly returned
toward Pauy, which men judged to be done for y^ displeasure that was done
there to the Frenchemen when their king was taken, and so the.xix. day of
September they besieged Pauye, and daily between them were great skirmishes, but
at last they bet the walls so with great ordinance that they made the town
assautable. Then the Frenchmen threw into the dyches fagottes and emptye pypes
and shortly entered the town. The capitain per^eiuyng the town entered,
opened the gate and yielded himself prisoner. Then the Frenchmen ^lewe and
killed on every side, robbed and spoiled houses and churches and spared no
person nor place, and of cruelty rau^somed one man v. or vi. times, and the
Gascoynes which were most cruel set fire in the fair houses and had brent
the whole city if the lord Lawtrick after vii. days spoilyng had not
commanded them to case. When Pauye was thus taken and spoiled the lord
Lawtrick determined with the Cardinal Innocent Legate of Bonony, which was
come for the^ deliverance of the Pope incontinent to pas^e to Rome and to
drive away all the Emperors power from thence, and to restore the pope to
liberty.

F^aunces Sforcia duke of Myllayn hearing of this determinacion came to the
lord Lawtri^k to Pauye and required him first to rid the duchy of Myllayn of
themperors soldiers rather then to go forward and leave his enemies behynd
him. The lord Lawtrick answered that he was of the same opinion, but the
commission that he had of the French king and the king of England was, that
with all speed he should go forward to deliver the bishop of Rome, which done
he faithfully promised that he would return and expulse all the Emperors power
out of Lombaroy, and in the mean season he would that the duke and the
Uenicians should besiege Anthony de Leua in the castle of Myllayn. Duke
Fraunces seemed to be content with this answer, but yet he perceived that the
French king cared not for his restoryng lest he should be emperial. So for
that time the duke dissembled the matter and took possession of the city of
Pauye* When the lord Lowtrick had layen xvi. days at Pauy, he dismyssed y^
Swyches which in no wise would go with him to Rome, wherefore he marched
forward with his own army and came to Plesance where he concluded a league with
Alphons duke of Farrer and Frederike marquis of Mantua, so y^ then he knew well
that he might well pass in saftie: and then in good order of battle he marched
toward Rome for y^ finishyng of his enterprise. But or he was passed out of
Lo^bardy themperor had sent letters to y^ B. of Rome and excused him self that
he neither willed nor commanded such mischief to be done, and straightly
commanded his capitaines to deliver him. The prince of Orange and other
capitaines of themperors hearing his commandment, took agreement with the pope
and his Cardinals^ and so he and xii. Cardinals were bound to perform certain
articles to ye number of xi. and then he was delivered out the Castle saint
Angel the.x. day of December and was conveyed to Oruyet, Clementpope delivered.
where after, he had paid certain money for the souldiars wages he was put at
full liberty and the Emperors people departed from him, and thence he removed
to Ancona. When tidings was brought into England of his deliverance the
Cardinal in great have caused Te deum to be song on Newyeres day in the kings
chapel and declared openly that he was escaped and said not delivered, which
made many men to muse: and on sunday the.v. day of January the Cardinal with
great triumph came to the church of saint Paul in London, and on him attended
diverse prelates of the clergy and there Te deum was song again, and after that
doctor Capon openly declared how that bishop Clement had been long kept in
distres by fault of tyra^nes and infidels and so kept as prisoner to the
behofe of Charles the Emperor, till now of late through the prayers of good
Christen people he was escaped the hands of his enemies, for which cause he
wylled all men to give thanks to God: That night were great fyers made in the
kings court and in all London. Shortly after this truth was known, that the
Pope was delivered by composicion and not freely escaped as the Cardinal had
blown abroad, but men said that he could not leave his liyng.

While the lord Lawtrick was continually going forward to deliver poeple
Clement, he was credibly informed at Bonnony that he was delivered and at hs
liberty, wherefore he thought his journey void to go to Rome to do nothing, he
therefore determined to turn toward Naples and to take the city if it were not
fortefied or replenished with men of war, and so according to this purpose he
iornied forward with great diligence. The Emperors capitaines perceiuyng the
Frenchemennes intent caused all their soldiers to depart out of Rome in the
beginning of February (which was against the mind of the soldiers) and so
came into the realm of Naples and fortefied certain tounes as they passed, and
so came to a town called Troy and there they tarried: This remouyng was to them
very profitable. For if they had tarried at Rome they had been set on with the
Italyans on the one side, and the Frenchmen on the otherside, that by every
man's judgment they should all have been taken or slain. The lord Lawtrick
departed from Bonnony to Inmole and so to Fayance Forlicke, Pezere, Senegal,
Ancone, Rauenna, Loret and to Fern which is at the foot of the mountains of
Sybylles in the duchy of Bresse percell of the realm of Naples, in which
town were certain nobles of that country which seeing the army so puissant
departed thence to Naples. As the army passed the mountains in the Lent
season, there died of very cold v.C. Gascoynes and mo, and so with much pain
they came nere to Troy in Puylle the xv. day of March, where the Spaniardes
and the Emperors army lay. Sir Robert Iernyngha^ of England which was
capitain of the light horsemen, knowing their enemies so nere, desired the
lord Lawtrick that he with his company might assay the Spaniardes. The lord
Lawtreck (whether it was for lack of courage or that he were corrupted by
money) in no wise would suffe sir Robert Iernyngham to fight, but said he
would take them at a more auantage shortly, which answer sore grieved sir
Robert, in somuche he said he would accuse him, to both the kings their
Masters.

The Spaniardes which lay at Troy, thought to enter Naples before the
Frenchemen, and so on the.xxi. day of March being Saterdaie, they removed
and came to Naples, and fortified the city, which was happy for the Emperor,
for surely if the Frenchmen had come first, they had been Masters of the city.
After the Emperors people were departed from Troy, as you have hard, the
Frenchemen besieged it, and within a xi. days it was to them yielded, and from
thence they removed to Melphe, a strong little town, where they s^ewe and put
to flight.iiii.M. Spaniardes but they lost many of their men there, so that this
town was not to them very profitable: Since the army was entered into the
realm of Naples there was ever some sickness amongst them, and in especial
there raygned amongst the^ a sore hoar fever, of the which many gentlemen
died or they came to Naples, for at the town of Uerse there died sir Richard
Iernyngham, and Ihon Carew of Hackam, two valiant capitaines, sent thither by
the king of England and diverse other, which two gentlemen be there buried.

When the Frenchemen had taken Melphe, they removed to Boniue^t and from thence
to Magdelon, where they lay al Easter: and after Easter they came before the
city of Naples, and first they took the palace that stands without the
city, very pleasant to behold, and after that was taken, they planted their
siege round about the city, and cast trenches, and made fortificacio^s, for
the defense of sudden invasions of their enemies: all the whole army lay in
an open plain ground, without couerture very nere the city, by reason
whereof, they were sore cu^bered with hete and drougth, whereupon ensued great
mortality and death, for if they had lien on the hill side nere couerte, they
had lien more wholesomly, but their intent was to lie nere the ^words^, to the
intent to keep their enemies straight, and therefore they planted their ^words^
the plain, which turned them to much displeasure and disease. Thus was the
siege planted before Naples, in the beginning of April, and continued till
the.xxvi. day of August next insuyng, and then by mean of mortality they
removed as you shall here.

While the lord Lawtreck was thus passing toward Naples, sir Fra^ces Poynes
Knight, which was sent with Clarenseaux king of Arms into Spain to the
Emperor, returned into England before Christmas, in the end of December, and
left Clarenseaux behind, to bring farther answer from themperor of things
demanded, whereof he said he would take longer auice or he would answer. This
sir Frances reported that the Emperor so much favored and esteemed the king of
England, that at his only request and contemplacion, he had released and
discharged twelve articles, which were most grievous and disprofitable to the
French king, not for the French kings sake, but at the intercession of the
king of England: yet this notwithstanding, the Cardinal so muegled the king,
that he so highly favored the French king, that all his causes he took and
reputed as his own, and did all that he might, to bring the French kings
purposes about.

The Emperor before this time had written to the French king, and also
advertised thereof the French Ambassadors, that lay in Spain, that he would
that the French King should send to him a diffinitiue answer, if he would
withdraw his people out of Italy or not, and let the Duchy of Millain alone,
and to cease of all Invasions or not, and this answer to be given the last
day of January following, and if the said French king answered not by that
day, then the lack of answer to be taken for a defiaunce. Then the French
Ambassadors before the day, showed to the Emperor, the proffe^ which the
French king offered to him in articles, as you have hard before, in the
conclusion taken at Amias by the French King and the Cardinal in August last
passed. Themperors answer to the foresaied Articles.
Which profers when the Emperor had hard and seen, he said to the
Ambassadors, we thought surely that our cousin the French king and we, had
been at a full conclusion, when the league and appoyntme^t was agreed at our
town of Madrill: for when he sued for his deliverance to us, he and his
counsel offered us certain profers, which we never demanded, but we of
pity having compassion of his affliccion, accepted thesaied offers, and agreed
to his deliverance, which Articles he promised in the oath of a King, and
also on the holy Evangelists, to perform to the vttermoste, and the^
inuiolatly to observe and keep. Whereupon we clearly remitted, and delivered
him into his country, of all which promises he has performed none, wherefore
we take him as perjured, and not worthy to be trusted, and now he offers
new offers, which he cannot perform, as for the money we believe he is able
to pay* but as for money dew for the kingdom of Naples, we know no such
duty, for it is our inheritance, although king Charles the seventh, by
sotletie once usurped the same, which he long not enioied: as to release his
title to Millain, that release is void, for the Duchy is Imperial, and in
our gift as many other seigniories be: and as touching Tournay, ours it is of
right and now in our possession: So that in all these things he would release
and render things that he has not: and as to the withdrawyng of his army out
of Italy, he shall not need, for we trust that our army shall expel them
all Italy, maugre their hearts. And as touching the King of Nauarr, the Duke of
Gelder, and Robert de la March, we of pity let them alone till we se our
time, and then they shall know our puyssaunce: And as touching his offer to
aid us with a navy, we trust we have such a navy provided, that we shall
need none of his: and where he says he will mary our sister queen Aelienor,
daughter of Portyngall, if he had been true, that he might have dooen or this,
but now we entende not to give her to our enemy: and as touching her
daughter to be married to the Dolphyn, that we leave in suspense for this
time: But where he says that he will defend us, that touches our honor, for
well knows he that our own might and puyssaunce, has ever defended us, and
him and his power has defaced and vanquished wherefore we need not of his
defense, which is not able to defend himself: and as touching the king of
Englandes debt, we shall reasonably answer his Ambassadors, for that touches
not the French King: But now my Lords Ambassadors, said the Emperor, let
the French King your Master, fulfill the promise that he was sworn to, as a
true Prince ought to do, and then he shall have his children delivered, or else
according to his oath, let him yield himself prisoner again, and so shall his
honor and truth be saved, or else not, so with this answer the Ambassadors
departed. Nevertheless they daily sued to the Emperor and his Counsel to
take the offers which were proffered by the French king, and amongst other
things, the war was sore laid to the French Ambassadors charge, for that
that the French king made war on the Emperors possessions, without cause
and without defiaunce, to which accusement they answered that that army was
procured by the Cardinal of England, when he was at Amias, for the delivery of
Clement Bishop of Rome, and that the king of England bare the most charge.
When the Emperor hard this answer, he sent for the Ambassadoure of England,
and to him said: My Lord Ambassadoure, I much maruaill why the king your
Master, has so great love to the French king, his new reconsiled friend, and
withdrawn his love from me, that am his cosyn and alye: How fortuneth this,
that your old ancient enemies be now in favor, and your old friends cast
out of favor. I se well there is indignacio^ had at our estate, and ways
sought to grieve us, which we hope to withstand: But who would have thought
that our Uncle of England, would have made war on us? How would he have us
grant his requests and desires for the French king, seeing he shows himself
our open enemy? Then the Ambassadoure discretly answered, that he neither heard
nor knew of such doings, on his faith and honor. Well said the
Emperor, if it be true that is reported, mine Uncle is not the Prince that I
have taken him for, and if he be mine enemy, I must withstand him, and in a
great fury, the Emperor withdrewe him from the Ambassadoure, to his privy
chamber.

Daily the Ambassadors, both of England and of France, solicited themperor
and his counsel, to accept the French Kings offers* which made ever
answer, that they would not trust to the new promise, seeing that the old
promise which was sworn, was not observed and kept. Now whosoever
indifferently shall consider, the Articles which were offered in the treaty
of Madrill, and the Articles offered now at Amias shall openly perceive, that
the greatest thing which the French king refused to do, was the delivery of
the Duchy of Burgoyn and the County Charoloys, for declaracion whereof, the
French king sent for all the nobles of both the countries, and declared to
them this promise and concord, taken with the Emperor, which answered that no
realm or dominion could be transferred to any foreign prince or person without
the sentence, agreement, and submission of the nobles, and commons of the same
country, and therefore they would never assent to that alteracio^: This
answer was delivered to lord Charles de la Noa Uiceroy of Naples, then
Ambassador for the Emperor in France, which thereof certified the Emperors
counsel. But the Emperor and his Counsel thought this to be but a
deceipte, in somuche as the French king had only called such of Burgoyne, as
him pleased, and not the substanciall of the country. And farther the Emperor
so much desired the Duchy of Burgoyne, because he was the very heir there of
blood descended from duke Phillip, soonne to king Ihon of France, that by no
means he would have that article broken, but he would have that Duchy. The
French king perceived his mind, and offered to him great sommes of money for
the redemyng of that article, the king of England also offered to be surety
for the payment: but all this could not move the Emperor, but he would have
Burgoyne, and all thesaied treaty and agreement performed.

The king of England considering how much he had done for the Emperor, and
calling to his remembrance, both that the Lords and Commons of Spain, would
not have taken him as king* his mother living (although she were Lunatike)
because she was heir, without his great labor and intercession, and also
that he help him to be elected Emperor, which the French king had
obteigned, if he had not put thereunto his aid* and sent Docter Richard Pace
his Secretory to the Electors to Franckeford, and most of all that he at all
times, had succored thesaied Emperor with money, and was not paid,
wherefore he was not alitle displeased with the Emperors wilfulnes, but more
with his unkindness, and perceived clearly, that sith by his means he was so
exalted, that now he had forgotten all the kyndnes to him showed wherefore he
thought to make him to know himself by wars, the sooner to bring him to
accomplish his request, and to make him to remember his old kyndnes, and so
by the auise of the Cardinal of York (which loved not the Emperor, for the
Bishop of Romes case) and other of his counsel, he sent word to
Clarenseaux King of arms, to make defiaunce to the Emperor, Def^aunces made
to the Emperor.
and so Guyan Herault for the French king and thesaid Clarenseaux for the king
of England, the.xiiii day of January, in the city of Burgues in Castle, came
before the Emperor being nobly accompaignied with Dukes, Marqueses, Earls, and
Barons, in his great hall, and there made their defiaunce.

When the defiaunces were made by both the Kings of Arms, as you have heard,
all the nobles which were present, as the Constable of Castle, the Duke of
Massedonia, the Duke of Inuancaso, the Duke of Alberkirke, the Duke of Civil,
the Duke of Nassaw, or Nazareth, the Duke of Aluoy, the Marquis of Sturgus, the
Marquis of Agular, the Marquis of Uillafranca, the Earl Barcelon, the Earl of
Salamatero, the Earl Boniu^nt, the Earl Arowen, the Earl Agulard, the Earl
Salienas, the Earl Geneuer, with six great Lords Commendatories Crossed, and
many other noble men and gentlemen, for a truth to the number of seven
hundred at the least: all these drew out their swerdes, and swear that the
defiaunces then made should be revenged, and said to the Emperor: Sir, if
the dispite of this defiaunce be unrevenged, the infamy* and rebuke thereof,
shall remain to us and our heirs for ever, wherefore our lands, life's, and
lordshippes, shall be at your commandment, and while any lain of your
succession remain, this ignominy shall be ever new and not dye, till you have
obteigned the double honor, against all your enemies.

When the Emperor was thus defied, the war was Proclaimed in Civil, in
Ualedolite, in Burgus, and in other places through all Spain: But when the
commen people heard of this defiaunce, they wrong themselfes by the berdes and
swear, that all their lands and goods should be spent, for the honor of the
Emperor, and to be revenged on the French king, whom they called perjured
Prince, and so the common people cried in the streets, now is come the time,
that Spain shall be renoumed, and revenged on the Frenchmen* for their falsenes
and wrong doings. But alas said they, why should we make war with the
English nation, which ever loved us, and never offended us: but this defiance
proceeds not of them, but only of the French king, and of the Cardinal of
England, which is sworn french: thus the Spanyardes talked, and ever
excused the king of England, and accused the Cardinal and said, that he had
a great pencion out of Spain, and that notwithstanding, because he might not
have the bishoprike of Toledo, he caused all this war. This Proclamacion of
war, was proclaimed with baners displaied, in the which were painted a red
sword, and a Cresset burning, against he French king and his part takers,
not meaning the king of England, by express name, but it was rehearsed in the
Proclamacion, that the King of England had manace^, and defied the Emperor,
The English Merchantes arrested in Spain.
in the French kings querell. Then were the English Merchantes in Spain
attached, and their goods put in safe custody, and to the^ was said that they
were stayed only, till the Emperor was advertised, how his subjects were
ordered in England.

Tidings of this was first known in France, and from thence letters were
sent to the French Ambassadors in London, how both the Ambassadors of
france and of England, being in Spain, and Guien and Cl^renseaux officers of
Arms, were retained by the Emperor as prisoners, which report was false, for
they were at liberty, and well cherished, and in especial the English
Ambassadors and Clare^seaux were friendly enterteined in all places. When the
Cardinal hard this report, he was to light of credence (which he forthought
afterward) and was sore therewith moved, and in his fury the.xii. day of
February, he caused Don Hugo de Me^dosa, the Emperors Ambassador, to be taken
out of his house, in saint Swithines lane in London, and to be brought to sir
Ihon Daunces place in Mark lane, as a prisoner, and his house with his goods
were kept by the Cardinals servants, til the kings pleasure were farther
known.

The morrow after being the.xiii. day of February, the Cardinal being in the
Star chamber, called before him al Justices of the Peace, The Cardinals
saying in the Star Chamber.
and other honest personages to a great number, and to them said: My lords
and all you the kings loving subjects, his graces pleasure is that I should
declare to you, how that his highness, not of his own sekyng, but rather
against his will and intent, is entered into war: For the elect Emperor
Charles the fifth, has him so handeled and moved, that he must of necessity
with him make war. First, it is not unknown to you all, how good the King has
been to him, fithe his infancy* how he has defended his low countries during
his noneage? Ye* what pain the king took by his Ambassadors, to solicit the
lords of Spain, which refused to take him as their king, while his mother
lived, and by the kings only labor, he came to the kingdom of Spain, what it
cost the king to help him to be Emperor, we that be his counsailers can tell,
for if the king had not been, surely the French king had been Emperor. Beside
all these kyndnesses, he has lent to thesaid Emperor, diverse great sommes of
money, to defend his countries, and what profit his countries have by the
resort of Englishemen thither, ye that be Merchauntes can tell: for these
things with many mo proffites, commodities, and gratuities, the king of him is
so little regarded, that I am half ashamed to report it. True it is that
Frances the french king, was to him prisoner (which chance has happened to
many high princes) the king our master, highly regardyng the peace of Christen
princes, by which peace God might the more be glorified: disired the Emperor
to take some reasonable ^nde for his deliverance, and for that purpose has
sent to him sondery Ambassadors, which gave them ea^es, but dalied with the^,
and nothing would do at all, and regarded no more his requests, then I would
the desire of my servant (and perauenture not so much) so that for all
gratuities and frendshippes to him, by the king our sovereign lord, at all
times showed, he shows himself ingrate and ungentle, and for kyndnes
rendere^h unkindness: as for the French King I assure you, he has humbled
himself as much as a prince may, his honor saved. He has offered him so
great offers, that except he should give (...) his realm and Croune, he can
offer no more larger, which offers I^^sure you, sore minishe the beauty of
his Croune, which I shall breuely declare unto you. For he offers to pay
five hundred thousand pounds sterlyng, whereof three hundred thousand, to
be paid in hand* for the remnaunt sufficient Bankers to be bound, and farther
to discharge the Emperor, of all such sommes of money, as he owes to the
King of England, and to deliver him a sufficient acquitaunce for the same. Also
where the French king should have, out of the kingdom of Naples an hundred
thousand Crounes yearly, the French king will release the same pencion, with
all the arrerages which are no small some. Also he will release his whole
title and right, which he has to the Duchy of Millayne, his very
enheritaunce, and never he to challenge or claim the same nor his posterity.
Also where the County of Flaunders may lawfully appeal to the Parliamentes
of France, from judgments given by the Emperor or his Justices, he is
content to release the same superiority and resort, which is a great
minishement to the prerogative royal, of the Realm of France, for which of
you (said the Cardinal) would concent that the king should release his
Seignioritie or superiority of Wales, Irelande, or Cornwall, I dare say you
would rather spend your lives and goods.

Farther where the French King bought of the King the City of Tournay, for
six hundred thousand Crounes and odd, yet he is content to yield and release
the same City to the Emperor for ever, yea, and beside this he offers to
take to wife, Elianor Queen Dowager of Portyngall, without any dower, yea, in
her kirtell, and to endowe her with ten thousand Marks sterlyng by the
year, and farther that the child if it be a male, which shall be gotten of
them two, shall be Duke of Burgoyne, and be partetaker of all the honors of
France, which is a great thing: Also that the Dolphyn his son and heir,
shall mary the daughter of thesaied Lady Elianor, without any threasure to be
received for the same, which proffer is worth two hundred thousand Marks
sterlyng.

Farther more, he woll lend the Emperor Ships and Mariners, to conueigh him
to Rome, and also defend him against all men, yea, what woll he do more,
although the King of Nauerr have married his own sister, whose Kingdom the
Emperor keeps by force, yet he offers neither to aid nor comfort him
against the Emperor, but in his querel to be against him: Also he offers to
forsake his old and approved friends, Sir Robert de la March, and the Duke of
Gelders, which faithfully has served the realm of France, and al for the
Emperors sake. But the Emperor said he, is so indurate, so unkind and
wilful, that he neither regardes these reasonable requests, nor yet the
Kings prayers nor requests, but answered and said: that if the French king
can do all this, he shall have his children. So that the Emperor woll
trust no man, but every manne must trust him: Yet the French King
offers farther, to withdraw the puyssaunt army of the Lord Lawtrecke in
Italy, and yet the same passes prosperiously forward, and is like to do the
Emperor more disauauntage, then I will now rehearse: but the Emperor is so
proud, and his people so cruel, that he nothing regards these offers: for
what a cruelty was this, to pull down Gods Uicar of Rome, and persecute the
holy ^athers by extreme tyranny, violated the holy Sacrament, and threw the
hosts down on the altar, and like robbers took the Pixe: and farther in the
Church, they violated Uirgins, and stupred matrones, and dispoyled the holy
Relics of the city of Rome. And like as the King in huntyng time has s^ain
iii.C. dear, and the garbage and paunches be cast round about, in every
quarter of the Park, so (said the Cardinal) every street lay full of the
privy members and genitures of the Cardinals and holy prelates: the whole
history were to abominable to tell. Yet notwithstanding all these offers
mocioned, and nothing regardyng this detestable tyranny, the which every good
Christen man abhors, he will incline to no reason, I am sure that I could
show you.xx. articles of promises, which he has broken with the King: so
that I assure you, he keeps no promise with our sovereign lord, also contra
ius Gencium, which I am sure the great Turk would not do, he keeps
prisoner the kings Ambassador Docter Lee, the French Ambassador, and the
Ambassador of Uenice: and for as much as the Emperor refuses these offers,
which amount to eight kings raunsomes, I trust by this war we shall bridle
him, and bring him to peace, and this occasion of war, I would all you should
declare in your country.

When the Cardinal had said, The murmor ^f the people.
some knocked other on the elbow, and said softly he lies, other said, that
evil will said never well, other said that the French crounes, made him speak
evil of themperor, but they that knew all that you have hard before said,
that it was shame for him to lie in such an audience. The common people much
lamented, that war should arise between the King and themperor, and especial
their consideracion was, because the Emperors dominions, had helped them with
corn, and releued them with grain, when they could have no corn, or little out
of France. And in this rumor were diverse ships come out of Flanders and that
parties, laden with Heryng, Sturgion and all other victale necessary: beside
eight fair ships, which were laden with corn, all the said ships,
Ships arrested.
and all the ships of Spain, were stayed and arested, and their ^ailes taken
from them, and put in safe custody. This doing was much talked of by
Merchantes, which frequented the Emperors dominions, for they knew and openly
said, that the let of the intercourse of Merchantes, should turn to the
great loss of the Princes, but yet Englishemen were content, to obey their
king and his counsel.

The declaracion of war in England against the Emperor, and the restraint
of Ships of the Emperoures Subjects, were shortly known to the Lady
Margaret daughter of Sauoy, and aunte to the Emperor, which was governor of
Flaunders, Brabant, and Zeland and of all the Low Countries: wherefore she by
the auice of the Emperoures Counsel to her associate, caused all the
Englishemen and their goods and Ships to be restrained, and they and their
goods were put in safe keeping. Thus the poor Merchantes suffered great
loss, for the doings of their Princes, as Horace says: Qui^ quid delirant
Reges, plectuntur achini: whatsoever kings do, the Commons be punished. Now
after this sudden storm, which the Cardinal had moved openly against the
Emperor, for evil entreatyng of the kings Ambassador, he had perfect
knowledge that the Emperor, both did the kings Ambassador great honor, and
also that he never restrained him from his liberty, whereupon he caused the
Emperors Ambassador, which before was restrained of his liberty, to be sent
to his own lodgyng again, and said that by the report made by the French
Ambassadors, he him restraygned, and now sith he knew the truth, he
mocioned the King for his deliverance.

The Emperors Ambassador, called Don Hugo de Mendosa, dissimuled the matter
by apparent signs: and the Cardinal the more to avoid suspicion on his
behalf, toward all the world, said: the king was informed by the French
Ambassadors, that the Ambassadors of both Princes were put in prison, and
farther he said that Clarenseaux had made the defiaunce to the Emperor
without the kings commandment, but only did it by the mocion of the French
Ambassadors, to accompaignie the French Herault, and for his presumpteous
act, he should suffer death at Calice at his return: all these excuses the
Cardinal showed to the Emperors Ambassador, which certified the Emperor of
every point, and sent the letter by post into Spain, which letters were
opened and copied, by the capitain of Bayon, as the post passed that way. And
when Clarenseaux returned homewarde out of Spain, the Capitain gently showed to
him the copy of the letters, that the Emperors Ambassadoure had written.
Clareseau^ made a ^ear^.
Think you not but Clarenseaux was dismayed, to here his days so short: yet
he trustyng in his truth, and grace of his Prince* passed forward and came to
Bullein, where he hard word again of the danger that he was in, wherefore like
a wise man he left Calice, and took a Ship at Bullein, and landed at Rye, and
came secretly to Hampton Court, where the king la^e, and by frendeship of sir
Nicholas Carew, one of the kings privy chamber, he was brought to the kings
presence, or the Cardinal wist of his return and to him showed the three
Letters, which the Cardinal had sent to him, chargyng him to make the
defiaunce, or he did intimate the war. He declared farther, that neither the
Ambassadors of the king, nor the French king, nor he were never sequestered
from liberty, but gently entertained, and to the king he showed a chain, to
the value of seven hundred Ducat^s, which the Emperor had given him, and
showed also the copy of the Emperoures Ambassadoures letters, which he had at
Bayon. The wi^e saying of y^ king
When the king had heard all the circumstaunce of his declaracion, he mused a
great while, and said: O Lord Jesus* he that I trusted most, told me all
these things contrary, well Clarenseaux I will be no more of so light credence
hereafter, for now I see perfectly, that I am made to believe the thing that
was never done.

Then the King sent for the Cardinal, and privily talked with him, but
whatsoever he said to him, the Cardinal was not very merry, and after that
time, the King mistrusted him ever after. When the King and his Counsel, had
well digested the Emperoures answer, and his gentle demeanor toward the kings
Ambassadors, and also had pondered that the low countries of the Emperor, were
glad to please the king of England and his Subjects: wherefore the king
commanded, to sir Ihon Style knight, to discharge all the Duchemen and their
Ships, and delivered their Sails, and gave them license to return: Nay
said the Duchemen, the Spanyardes and we be the Emperors Subjects, why should
not they be also discharged? sir Ihon Style answered the^, that his Commission
was only to discharge them. The Duchemen fearyng that the Frenchemen, would
take the seas before the^, and so to stop the^, departed hastily, curssyng the
Cardinal as aucthor of this war.

When the Lady Margaret heard tell, how the Duche nation with their Ships
and goods were released, and not the Spanyardes, she sent for the English
Merchauntes, and to them said: Sirs, sith the King your Master, has
delivered only the Duche men, and not the Spanyardes, we relese your bodies
fr^e, to go at your liberty, but your goods shall remain, till we know what
shall become of the Spanyardes, and when they be delivered, come for your
goods, and you shall have them delivered, thus the Englishemen departed, and
came to the king, and declared to him and his counsel, how they were
entreated.

This war with the Emperor was displeasant* both to Merchantes and Clothiers,
Co^playnte of ^h^ Clothi^rs
for the Merchauntes durst not adventure into Spain, sith April last past,
and now was come the.xi. day of March, wherefore all broad Clothes, Kerseis,
and Cottons, lay on their hands. In somuche as when the Clothiers of Essex,
Kent, Wilshire, Suffolk, and other shires which use Clothmakyng, brought
clothes into Blackewell hall of London, to be sold as they were wont to do: few
Merchantes or none bought any cloth at all. When the Clothiers lacked sale,
then they put from them their spinners, carders, tuckers, and such other that
live by clothworkyng which caused the people greatly to murmor, and specially
in Suffolk, for if the duke of Norffolk had not wisely appeased them, no
doubt but they had fallen to some riotous act. When the kings counsel was
advertised of this inconvenience, the Cardinal sent for a great number of the
Merchantes of London, and to them said: Sirs the king is informed, that you
use not your selfs like Mercha^tes, but like Grasiers and artificers* for
where the Clothiers do daily bring clothes, to your market for your ease, to
their great cost, and there be ready to sell them, you of your wilfulnes will
not bye them, as you have been accustomed to do: what manner of men be you said
the Cardinal? I tell you that the king straightly commands you to bye their
Clothes, as before time you have been accustomed to do, upon pain of his high
displeasure.

The Merchantes answered, my lord you know well, that we have had no trade
outward this twelve months past, and we have so many clothes in our hands,
that we know not how to utter them, therefore it were great loss to us to
bye any more: wherefore we trust you will not move us to bye the thing, which
we cannot utter, for in all places our vent is stopped and forbidden. Well
said the Cardinal, if you will not bye the clothes at Blackewell hall, they
shall be brought to the White Hall at Westminster, and so you of London shall
lose the liberty, and the king shall bye them all, and sell them to Merchant
strangers. Then answered a wise Merchant, my lord, the king may bye them
as well at Blackewell hall, if it please him, and the strangers will gladlyer
receive them there, then at Westminster: You shall not order that matter,
said the Cardinal, and first I will send into London, to know what Clothes
you have in your hands, and that done the king and his counsel shall appoint
who shall bye the Clothes I warrant you, with this answer the Londoners
departed.

When the Clothiers hard that the Cardinal took their part, they wared proud,
and spoke evil of the Merchantes, and when the Mercha^tes came to bye Clothes,
the Clothiers set them hire, then they were accustomed to be sold: but at
length they were fain, both to abate the price, and also to seek of the
Merchant men, for all the Cardinals saying.

If this war was displeasaunt to many in England (as you have hard) surely
it was as much or more displeasant, to the tounes and people of Flaunders,
Brabant, Hollande, and Zelande, and in especial to the tounes of Andwarpe and
Barrow, where the Martes were kept, and where the resort of Englishemen was,
for they said that their Martes were undone, if the Englishemen came not
there, and if there were no Mart, their Ships, Hoyes, and Wagons might
rest, and all artificers, Hosts, and Brokers might sleep, and so the people
should fall into misery and pouerite, of these things daily complaints were
made to the lady Margaret, and the Emperors counsel, which wisely pondered
the complaints, and after long consultacion had, they appointed certain
Ambassadors to go to the king of England* and to entreat for a truce, or
abstinence of war, which Ambassadors came into England, and associated
themselfes with Don Hugo de Mendosa, Ambassadoure there for the Emperor: the
one Ambassador was Provost of Cassell, and the other Master Ihon Lay sovereign
of Flaunders: these.iii. Ambassadors came to the king, the.xxix. day of March
to Richemond* and after reverence done, The saying of Hugo d^ Mendos^.
the lord Hugo de Me^dosa said to the king* sir themperours Majesty so much
knowlegeth himself bound to your grace, for manifold kind acts and
beneuolences, done and showed to him since his tender age, that he in no wise
woll take the defiaunce, dooen by your Herault as a paremptory intimacion of
war, till he had heard farther of your pleasure, and therefore his counsel
has sent hither these two noble persons and me, to know your determinate
answer, and final resolucion in that behalf. The King The Kings a^swere.
after a good auisement had, answered and said: Of war I am nothing joyful,
and of war I am less fearful, I thank God I have no cause to care for
war, for I have both men and money, and all thing ready prepared for
the same, (which things I know y^ other princes lack, for all their high
words) and therefore to that question of war, I could sone agree, but or I
make you a determinate answer, some part of my mind I will declare to you, and
I tell you although your Master be a great Emperor, and a mighty Prince, I
cannot nor may not suffer him, to bear down and destroy the realm of
France, which is our true inheritance, and for the which our brother and
alie the French king, paieth us yearly a great pencion and tribute, wherefore
we of Justice and equity, must maintein that land, out of which we have so
fair a rent and such a profit.

Then said the Provost of Cassell, yea sir, and it please you to call to your
remembrance, the old and ancient love and familiarity, which has been
between your Realm, and the houses of Burgoyne and Flaunders, and the low
countries, I assure you the people of all those countries will live and dye
with you, above all men next their sovereign Lord, wherefore most noble
Prince never concent, that old love that has so long continued, be now broken
and separated: we say this for no fear, for we be well furnished for war,
both of men and strong castles, all which before this time has been at your
commandment, and therefore the love that we have ever borne you, we continue
and offer you now to continue: and where we offer you choice of war or peace,
at your pleasure, surely the Emperor means that for your honor, as though
you should command which you would: and if you chose war, we have
commission to entreat for peace, and you chose peace, we have like commission
to thank you, and to offer us and ours at your commandment Then said the
Lord Hugo de Mendosa to the king, The saying of Hugo de Mendosa.
sir of very right the Emperor and his countries, ought to have your love and
favor, before the French king and his nation: for the Frenchmen in the time of
their affliccion, made humble suits and requests to your grace, which they
never would do in the time of their prosperity, but the Emperor has ever
continued one man at all times, wherefore he is better to be trusted, then
they which never were long true to you. Well said the king sith I have well
perceived the intent of your coming, I woll be auised, and then I will make
you an auised answer, and in the mean season I am content, that there be an
abstinence of war for a time, so the Ambassadors departed for a season, and
the Provost of Casselles, departed to the lady Margaret with this answer.

After this the king which was wise, well learned, and a far castyng prince,
consulted with his counsel of this matter, and there after long debatyng it
was considered, that the king was rich, strong, and puyssant enough to make
war with any prince Christen, and that no prince could hurt him by war or
invasion, therefore some thought it best to have war, but the king and the
wiser sort considered that if he had war with the Emperor, that his
merchants should lose much, and if they lost, the clothyers and the
clothworkers, of which were a great multitude should lose and be brought to
extreme poverty. For it was considered that the Emperor was lord of all
Spain, Naples, Sardinia and so southward to Epuskaia, and likewise northest
ward from Grauelyn to Rye and Revel, so that English merchants passing on
those costs were ever in danger. Also no Alame could come into England but
through his dominions, by reason whereof cloth making should decay. Wherefore the
king considered if the merchants lost, the porer sort should lose, and at
length he should lose in his customs. Wherefore leauyng the glory of war he
took mercy on his subjects and concluded to take a peace for a time till
farther co^municacion might be had between his cou^sail and the Emperors. And
upon this point letters were sent into Spain, France, and Flaunders, and so
this matter continued vndertermined till answers were brought from outward
parts.

In this season the bishop of Bayon which afterward was bishop and Cardinal of
Paris being ambassador from the Frenchekyng and soiornyng in London, The su^te
of the French A^bassadors
hard tell how the Empe^ors ambassadors made much su^te to the king and his
counsel where he came to ye court and desired to speak with the king and so
was brought to the kings presence, to whom he said: pleases your highness to
consider the great and high peace that is concluded between you and your loving
brother and perpetual alye the French king my master, which is ratified and
confirmed by the three estates of the realm of France, by ye which you have
yearly xx.M. pound sterlyng, which realm you have promised to defend against
all persons: Now in showing your love that you bear to the French king and
his subjects. If you would make sharp war on the Emperors subjects, I
assure you the whole realm of France would take it so thankefully that it
should never be forgotten. The kings answer^s.
Well said the king, as touching the league and amity between my brother of
France and me it shall be inuiolately kept for me, but sir to enter into war
it needs no counsel, but how to end war with honor and pro^ite men must
needs study. As touching y^ defense of the realm of France I assure you it
shall be defended to my power though it be to my loss, and my study is no less
to have a peace which might be honorable to your master then to mine own
self. With which saying the Ambassador held him well contented, So that you
may perceive that the great pencion and profit that the king of England had
out of France with the great league and amity concluded and sworn, was the
very cause why the king of England so much held with the French king and not
for mere love. For this matter was daily great counsels, and one day
themperors ambassador was present, another day the French kings ambassador
was present, but the Cardinal was ever on the French part. So thus continued
this daily counsels with great study.

In the same season a French Crayer of.xxx. tonne manned with xxxviii.
Frenchemen lay at Margate to wait for a pray of some Flemyng that should come
out of the river of Thames, and by chance a Crayer of Armew which was
appointed to waft the fisher botes between Grauelyn and Ost end, was come by
North of Goodwyn sa^des to Nor^hsand head and so came to Grauesend and took in
bread. This Crayer was of xxviii. tonne and had in her xxiiii. Flemynges: When
she was vitayled she made to the sea ward, and suddenly he espied the
Frenchemen which houed under a sail, The Flemynges mistrusted and incontinent
put them selfs in a readynes and came so nigh that he hayled the Frencheman,
the Frenchman shot a piece of ordinance and with that laid the Flemyng
aborde, there was sore fightyng, for the Frenchmen had crosoowes and the
Flemynges had handgunnes. The Frencheman fell of and would have been gone, that
seeing the Flemyng whysteled and after the Frencheman made sail. Now the wind
was so straynable Est that the Frencheman could sail no whither but into the
Thames, and so he did and the Fleuiyng followed, and before Grauesend the
Flemyng borded the Frencheman and there they fought again, but away again went
the Frenchman and the Flemyng after with all his sails, and so far sailed the
Frencheman that he ra^ne a long the Tower wharffe as though he would have reuen
his ship, the Flemyng set on and entered the ship for any thing the
Frencheman could do and cried I have taken the thief. ^ ship ^hased to the
Tower wharfe.
Sir Edmond Walsynghga^ Leuetenaunt of the Tower was on the wharffe and saw
them fight, called his men and entered the ships and took both the capitaines
and their men. The Flemyng boldly challenged his prise, for he said that open
war was between France and Flaunders, and said farther that the Frencheman
was a pirate: The kings counsel took up the matter and made an end between
them. This chance was much talked of that two ships should sail in chase
from Margate to the Tower wharffe, because ye before time such a like thing
had never been hard.

Now let us return to the lord Lawtrick which had gotten many tounes in
Italy, and had with his great army besieged the city of Naples and so it
happened that the prince of Orange and other capitaines y^ xix. day of April
set on a great part of the French army and notwithstanding their hardynes the
Emperors army obtained the victory, so that from that time forth the
Frenchemen lost, what by pestilence which then was great in Italy, and what by
sudden skyrmishes.

This year the.xxii. day of February the king created at Wynsor sir Pierce
Buelar of Ireland, earl of Osserey.

The.xx. year.
THe king kept the day of saint George with the companions of the order of the
Garter with great solempnitie at his Manor of Rychemond, where to him came
tidings from the army of the lord Lawtrick in Italy, which letters showed
that the lord Lawtrick had sent the lord Peter de Nauarro the third day of
March last past to a great town called Melffe with x.M. Frenchemen, and
within the town were viii.C. Spaniardes good men of war, the lord Peter de
Nauarro besieged the town, and after gave to the same a great assaut, but y^
Spaniardes so defended them with ordinance and resistences that they slew v.
or vi.M Frenchemen and caused them to retrete. The lord Lautrick hearing this
came in person with a great number to the town of Smell and merueilously be^
the town with ordinance and then gave to it a great and fierce assaut, and so
sore that the Spaniardes were put back, yet they defended them, so that it was
meruail to behold, for they slew and destroyed iiii. M. Frenchemen. The
French army entered the town on all sides, and yet the Spanyardes kept y^
market with their ordinance as long as they might, but at the last being
oppressed with multitude they all were slain without mercy, so cruel were the
Frenchemen: In this town was taken the prince of Melff a noble man perteinyng
to the Emperor. Thus was the town of Melffe taken and spoiled, not greatly to
the Frenchemennes profit, for they lost almost x.M. men which sore
diminished their power.

Although that this season was an abstinence of war taken between the king of
England and the lady Margarete so that the dutche nation might safely come and
go into England, and y^ Englishmen might safely ^epaire thither, yet between
the Frenchemen and y^ Flemynges was hot war on the frontiers, and many a
prisoner was taken, and many men slain, and likewise the one part took the
other on the seas, and someti^^ the Frenchemen would spoil English ships,
saying that they ha^ Flemynges goods or Spaniardes goods, and likewise the
Flemynges would enter the English ships, and say they had Frenchemens
goods, so the Englishmen lost till the king sent ships to keep y^ sea: But
for a truth the Spanyardes were strong on the sea, and to the Frenchemen did
much harm. The king perceiuyng that there was nothing concluded between
themperor and him, thought not to be behynd hand, wherefore he ordained that the
lord Sa^des should pass to Guisnes with a M. soldiers that was v.C. archers
and v.C. horsemen, and that the duke of Suffolk should pass over after with a
great army to invade Flaunders. These lords made much preparacion and
mustered their men at y^ Mantels beside saint Ihones and was ready to depart,
but the Emperors ambassador and thambassador of Flaunders so much did with the
king and his cou^sail (and the French king also asse^ted) that truce was taken
between England, Flaunders, and the countries of Pycardy on this side the water
of Some for viii. months* the peace to begin y^ first day o^ May* and to
endure to ye last day o^ February. This peace was pro^laymed in London the.xix.
day of June, so y^ now all Englishmen might lawfully pass into the low
countries but not into Spayn, which sore grieved mare^auntes that haunted that
parties, In ye same proclamacion was farther contained, that if a final peace
were not fully agreed between the said.iii. princes within ye said.viii.
months, that then all ma^ch^u^tes should have two months after to pass
into their own countries with their wares and marchaunoises in safety. The
Emperor sone enclyned to this peace, for he saw that by y^ Mart many of his
friends in high Dutcheland and other places ^^ke great profit and especially
his own low countries, wherefore he thought not to hurt his friends for the
displeasure he bare to his enemies of France, and also to show himself
^ouyng to the king of England he was content to take this peace.

In this season the duke Charles of G^lders perceiuyng y^ Emperor was at war
with France, raised a great power of horsemen and came to a great town of
Holland called the Hage where the law and justice is kept for that country,
by reason whereof the town was very rich, and suddenly he entered the town
without resistance and spoiled and robbed the town and slew diverse persons
and with much riches laded their wagons and so departed and carried with him
diverse rich prisoners. The lady Margarete gouernesse of the low countries
hearing of this raised a great power under the conduict of the lord
Isylsteinge, which lord with a great puis^aunce entered Gelderland and gat
the town of Hatton, the castle of Howryng, and forraied and destroyed the
country: las^ly on Whitsonday being the last day of May the Gelders gave
battle to the lord Isylsteinge and fought valiauntly as any men could do, but
yet by fortune of war they were overcome and fled and were chased a great way
and many slain. This chance was while the treaty of peace was in England.

In the very end of May began in the city of London the sickness called the
sweatyng sickness, The swea^^yng sickness
and afterward went all the realm almost of the which many dyed within v. or
vi. hours, By reason of this sickness the term was adiorned and the circuites
of Assi^e also. The king was sore troubled with this plage, for diverse dyed in
the court, of who^ one was sir Fraunces Poynes which was Ambassador in Spain,
and other, so that the king for a space removed almost every day, till at the
la^^ he came to Tytynhangar a place of the abbot of saint Albones, and there he
with a few determined to bide the chance that God would send him, which place
was so purged daily with fyers and other preservatives, that neither he nor the
queen nor none of their company was enfected of y^ disease, such was the
pleasure of God. In this great plage dyed sir Wyllyam Compton knight and
Wyllyam Carry esquier which were of the kings privy chamber, and whom the king
highly favored and many other worshipful men and women in England.

By reason of this plague the watches which were wont to be kept yearly in
London on saint Ihons even at Mydsommer and saint Peter's eve were by the king
and his counsel commanded to be left for that year, wherefore the Armorers
made great suite to the king and declared their great hynderaunce, which was
not so much considered as the mischief that might have ensued if that so great
a number should have assembled together in that hot time and the plage of
sw^atyng raynyng. Now let us leave England all this Summer season troubled and
vexed with this sweatyng sickness, and let us return to the affairs of Italy.

The Emperor which knew how the lord Lawtrick was in Italy with a great army,
thought it not for his profit to leave his army there vnsuccored, wherefore he
sent ye lord Henry the younger duke of Bru^swyke with a great company of
Almaynes both on foot and horseback. Wherefore the Uenicians set Fraunces duke
of Orbyne to keep the straytes and to stop him the passage: But when he heard
of the puissaunce of the duke of Bru^swycke and the great municions and
provisions of war that the Almaynes brought, he turned his journey, and by
advise of the Uenicians determined to fortify the tounes and to defend them
against the Almaynes, and so the duke of Bru^swyke with his army passed the
mountains and entered Italy burning, rasyng and raunsomyng tounes as he
passed, and ever he marched toward Myllain, whereof hearing the Mylleners which
were brought to extreme poverty by these wars, began to lament and wail
for the great tyranny that they judged to follow which followed in deed. For
when the Almaines came to Myllain and demanded money of the Citezens, they
that had nothing to pay, were tied in chains and kept miserably in prison
till they had made some provision for the payment, which caused the Citezens
to flee out of the city and to leave it in manner desolate: which thing
Anthony de Leua perceiuyng, moved with great compassion for the desolacion of
the city called the Citezens together and promised them that if they would
pay the wages of the soldiers for xx. days only, he would cause all the
whole army to remove out of the city, the poor citezens made shyft and paid
the soldiers, and so they al departed from Myllayne and came to the city of
Pauye and took it with little labor and after that took diverse other tounes.

Anthony de Leua knew well the Duke of Brunswycke would in the spryng of the
year set forward toward Naples to aid the Emperors army against the lord
Lawtrick, therefore he desired the Duke that or he passed out of the duchye of
Myllayne, he would put all the Frenchemen out of such fortresses as they kept,
which thing he said might be easily done considering the great puissaunce of
the Almaynes and the debilitie and lack of power of the duke of Myllayne, and
in especial considering that the Uenicians kept their tounes and would not aid
the French part, to the which persuasions the Duke agreed and went toward
the city of Lawde to the which they gave the assaut, but they within so well
defended if that the Almaynes lost more then they wanne, wherefore the duke
determined to famishe them within for he knew by their great number that their
vitaile must needs fail and so it did in deed, so that no creature but men of
war had any vitaile and therefore the poor Citezens were compelled either to go
into the hands of their enemies or to dye for famyn.

In this season was through all Italy a universal war, famyn and pe^^ilence
or a morreyn whereof the people died in every place, and in especially in the
Dukes army which caused the most part of the Almayues to return into their
country, wherefore the duke wisely considered the chance and saw that his army
was greatly minished by death, and saw farther that for lack of vitaile and
money he was not able to convey the remnaunt of his army to Naples, by the advice of Anthony de Leua concluded to return and so shortly after in good
order returned and lost more by the pestilence then by his enemies.

The French king was advertised by the lord Lawtrick how his people decayed
sore before Naples, and how the Duke of Brunswyke was coming to raise the
siege and reskue the city, wherefore the French king sent lord Fraunces earl
saint Poul brother to the duke of Uandosme with.viii.M. men to follow the duke
of Bru^swyke to Naples, and if he went not to Naples, then he should join
himself with Frau^ces Sforcia duke of Myllayne and the Uenicians and so to
expel Anthony de Leua and all the Emperors soldiers out of Lombardy.

The Spaniardes within Naples were advertised that new succors were coming to
the Frenchemen, wherefore they determined to fight with them or their new aid
came, and so one day they issued out of the city and fought with the
Frenchemen and slew many of them, but by force they were compelled to return.
The lord Lawtrick knew well that the city could not hold long for lack of
vitaile (for a suertie if vitaile had not come by sea, the town had been
yielded) wherefore the lord Lawtrick suffered his army to lie still in the
plain field all the heat of the Summer and brought them not to the shadow,
by reason whereof there fell such a disease amongst his army that they dyed
daily in great number and he himself fell sick and left the army and lay at
Uerse, of the which mortality there dyed in the French camp above xxiiii.M.
The death at Naples.
men beside the most part of all their horses and beasts, of which number as
diverse writers do agree there dyed above v.M. gentlemen, amongst whom there
dyed the lord Uawdemont brother to Anthony duke of Lorraine, the lord of
Grauntmount, the capitain Molyac, the lord Lauall of the Dolphenye, the
captain Luper, the lord Charles Uyuone lord of Chataygneray son to the
lord Andrewe of Uyuone Seneschal of Poytew, and many othex noblemen of name.

During which plag^e the town of Cappe (which most of all the tounes in the
realm of Naples held on the French part) became imperial and turned to the
Emperors part, Whereof hearing the lord Lawtrick made therefore great sorrow,
and being somewhat amended of his disease, took his horse and came to visit
the Camp, and when he saw his number so minished and his Camp so deso^ate of
people that he perceived that his enterprise could not be performed, he fell
into such a malencoly y^ his sickness took him more ferue^tly then before, so
that within two days after, which was the xxi. day of August he died at and
his body was sered and conveyed after into France.

The Marquis of Saluce which was Liuetenaunt under the lord Lawtrick called to
counsel the Earl Guy of Rancon and Peter de Nauer and other capitaines that were
left, and after long consultacion they considered their number to be to small
either to keep the siege or to abide battle, for they passed not v.M. in all.
Wherefore they concluded to leave the siege and to return, and so the xxv. day
of August they brake up their Camp and returned toward France, in which
return the Spaniardes ever costed them, and when they took any Frencheman at
advantage, they either siewe or took them. Thus was the end of this journey
by reason of the great mortality, which if it had not happened, the city and
the whole realm of Naples had been recovered: For the city of Naples could
not have holden x. days, after the army removed as they con^essed after.

The Earl of saint Poul (which was appointed to pass into Italye as you have
heard before) knew nothing of the mortality at Naples. Wherefore with all speed
he passed the mountains the same sea^on that the duke of Bru^swyke returned
and came into the duchy of Myllain and took certain fortresses which the
Emperors power had won, and after that the aids of the Uenicians and duke
Fraunces Sforcias were joined with him, he besieged the city of Pauye and
within a few days the city was taken by force and the walls beaten down to
the ground for dispite that the French king was taken before the town. These
doings were not so much pleasant to the French king as the loss of the
city of Geane was to him displeasaunt. For the same season Andrewe Dorye
which was all the doet for the French king on the sea* and had before time in
the French kings quarrel vanquished the lord Hugo Uiceroy of Naples, and had
taken ye Marquis of Gnasto and Ascayne de Columna and other capitaines
belongyng to the Emperor, which prisoners the French king commanded him to
deliver into his hands, which thing Andrew Dory thought not reasonable,
co^sideryng that he took him, and for that cause and because his wages was not
paid, he took his Galeys and sailed to Geane where he was borne and also was
there of great authority and estimacion, and there he so persuaded the people
that they became unperial and took Trenulsius the French kings friend and
put him in ward, and prepared to detende the city against the French kings
power, whereof hearing the Earl of saint Poule sent in all have his light
horsemen to succor the city but or they came the citezens were so furnished
that the Frenchemen had no hope of recovery, wherefore they returned to
Alexa^dry, and there they counseled together how to take the city of Myllayne
which was sore desolate of people and brought to great mischief by the
cruelty of Spaniardes and Almaines, but when they heard tell that the Emperor
had sent ii.M. Spaniardes to aid Anthony de Leua, they changed their purpose
and determined to recover the city of Geane again. For which purpose the
earl lefe the Uenicians at Casyan, and the power of duke Fraunces Sforcie he
left at Pauye to keep the passages that the Spaniardes should not stray far
abroad, and also to keep the passages that no vitayle should come to y^
Spaniardes which at that time had only the city and castle of Myllain and
none other fortress to resort to. And therle himself lay at a village called
Landryan, and for the more speed of his enterprise he sent his forward with all
his artille^y before toward ^eane, having with him his middle ward and
rerewarde. Of all these doings Anthony de Leua liyng at Myllayn by his espyals
was truly from time to time advertised, wherefore he like a polletike captain
considered how the earl had done folishly to send his ordinance and forward
before, he therefore determined to take the advantage of the Frenchemen if he
might, and so called to him all his capitaines and to them said: Fellows in
arms and soldiers to the Emperor our master, Anthony de (...) enco^ag^th his
soul^d^^rs
see and consider what a great occasion of victory is offered to us this
present day, for the Uenicians and the Sforcians be severed from the
Frenchemen, and therle of saint Poul with part of his army lies at Landryan
and has sent his forward and his ordinance toward Geane, wherefore we will set
on him suddenly if you agree, and if we overcome him the praise shall be ours,
and if he fly at our coming yet following him we shall get a great pray and
botie. To this intent all the other soldiers agreed (for they were very nedy
and glad to have somewhat) and so he caused it to be proclaimed that all his
men should be ready at an hour, and that every man should have a white shyrt
above his apparel that one in the dark might know another, and when every man
was ready and the euenyng approached, Anthony de Leua according to his
enterprise set forward and was all armed and satte in a chair carried by iiii.
^ Camisad^.
strong persons.

When y^ citezens of Myllain saw him thus armed and borne in a chair and knew
well that he had a ro^nyng gout and could not stir himself, they meruailed
much of his audacitie, but by y^ experience of other things by him done, they
judged that he intended some great enterprise, but because the number of his
people was so little they doubted the sequel of his adventure. But for all
their imaginacions he with his people secretly issued out of Myllain and
passed forward without any noise, and in the morning suddenly set on therle of
saint Poul and his army, so that the earl had no leisure to send for his
ordinance and forward but was feign to trust to such as were then with him.
And at the first brunte the Almaynes fled, and the French horsemen also, and
with a little fight all the other fled, and as the Earl himself was fleyng over
a great ^iche on horseback, he with the earl Guy of Raucon and the lord
Castillyon and many other nobles and gentlemen were taken prisoners and all
their vitail purue^aunce and artillery were prays to themperors soldiers
which much refreshed the^. After this journey ye French king had no army in
Italy, wherefore Fraunces Sforcia seeing himself de^titute of aid, made means
to the Emperor by Pope Clement ^or the appointment both of the duchy of Myllain
and also for his answer of certain treasons of the which he was accused to the
Emperor, to whom themperor answered that the next summer he would come into
Italy to receive his Emperial croune, and then he would take such an order as
right and equity should require. This was the end of the wars begone between
the king of England and the French king on ye one party and the Emperor on
the other party, in the xix. year of the king as you have heard before. For
after this journey the lady Margaret duches of Sauoy and aunt to themperor, and
the lady Loyse duches of Angulesme and mother to the French king continually
labored for a peace, so that by their means a treaty was appointed to be kept
at Ca^bray in June following as you shall hear after.

Now let us return to the king of England which was in a great scruple of his
conscience and not quiet in his mind, because that diverse divines well learned
secretly informed him that he lived in adultry with his brothers wife to the
great peril of his soul, and told him farther y^ the court of Rome could not
dispense with Gods commandment and precept. These things were talked among the
common people since the first day of his marriage as you have heard before,
insomuche that now the kings counsailors advised him to know the truth.
Wherefore he like a wise prince for qui^tyng of his conscience called together
the best learned of the realm which were of several opinions, wherefore he
thought to know the truth by indifferent judges lest perauenture y^ Spanyardes
in favor of ye queen would say that his own subjects were not indif^erent
judges, wherefore he wrote his cause to Rome because the best ^^erkes in
Christendom were there, and also he sent to all the universities of Italy and
France and to the great clerks of al christendom to know their opinions, and
desired the court of Rome to send into his realm a legate to hear the cause
debated which should be indifferent and of a great judgment. At whose request
the whole consistorye of the college of Rome sent thither Laurence Campeius a
pressed Cardinal, a man of great wit and experience, but more learned in ye papal
law then in divinity which was sent as legate into England in the x. year of
this king as you have heard in the said year, and with him was joined in
commission y^ Cardinal o^ York and legate of England, and so this Cardinal
Campeius by long iorneyes came into England and much preparacion was made to
receive him triumphantly into London, but he was so sore vexed with the gout
that he refused all such solempnities, and desired heartely that he might
without pomp be conveyed to his lodgyng for his more quiet and (...), and so
the ix. day of October he came from saint Mary Ouereys by water to the bishop
of Bathes place without Temple bar where he lo^ged the last time he was in
England. Where he was visited of the Car^inal of York and di^ers other e^tates
and prelates. (...) cardinal ^ampe^us co^m^ng to London.
And after he had rested him a season and was somewhat releued of his pain, he
was brought to the kings presence then liyng at Brydewel by ye Cardinal of
york and was carried in a chayer of Crimosyn velvet borne between iiii.
persons for he was not able to stand, and the Cardinal of york and he sat
both on the right hand of the kings throne, and there one Frauncisco
secretary to Cardinal Campe^^s made an eloquent oracion The oracior.
in the Latin tongue, in the which he rehearsed, ^yrst with what cruelty the
Emperors soldiers had handeled the pope, what tyranny they had showed to the
Cardinals and priests, what sacrilege and spoil they had committed in saint
Peter's church* how they had violat virgyns, ravished men's wives, and in
conclusion spoiled robbed and tormented all the Romans and inhabitants in
the city of Rome: and farther he showed what friendship the college of Rome
found at the kings hands and the French kings in the time of that
tribulacion, that if they had not joined together, the city of Rome with all
their governors had been brought to utter ruin and decay, for y^ which he
said that pope Clement and al his college of cardinals and the Senators of ye
city with all the citezens rendered to the king their hearty thanks, and
promised him their love, favor and amity perpetual.

This oracion (as concerning the trouble of Rome) was set forth with such
lamentacio^s, such abominable acts and tyra^nyes that the most part of the
hearers thought it more eloquent then true. To the which Oracion doctor Fox
Provost of Cambridge made a discrete answer, The answer
and as to the first point he declared that the king much lamented to hear
his friends yea or any other christen men to be ordered or ha^deled with such
tyranny and oppression: and as touching the second point he said that the king
did but the duty of a christen prince to releue his fre^des being in
captivity for the which he would y^ the whole city of Rome should give
thanks to God and not to him. After which answer made the two legates
communed secretly with the king a long space and after departed to their
lodgyng.

Of the coming of this Legate the common people being ignorant of the truth
and in especial women and other that favored the queen talked largely, and said
that the king would for his own pleasure have another wife and had sent for
this legate to be deuorsed from his queen, with many folishe words, insomuche
that whosoever spoke against the marriage was of the common people abhored and
reproved, which common rumor and folishe co^municacions were related to y^
king, wherefore he like a prudent prince and circumsp^^^ doer in all his
affairs, and willing all men to know his intent and purpose, caused all his
nobility, Judges and counsailors with diverse other persons to come to his
palace of Brydewell on sunday the viii. day of Noue^ber at after noone in his
great chamber and there to them said as nere as my wit could bear away these
words following.

Our trusty and well-beloved subjects both you of the nobility and you of the
meaner sort, The kings Oracion co^^cernyng his first marriage.
it is not unknown to you how that we, both by Gods provision and true and
lawful inheritance have reigned over this realm of England almost the term
of xx. years, During which time we have so ordered us, thanked be God that no
outward enemy has oppressed you nor taken any thing from us, nor we have
invaded no realm but we have had victory and honor, so that we think that you
nor none of your predecessors never lived more quietly, more wealthy, nor in
more estimacion under any of our noble progen^tors: But when we remember our
mortali^ie and that we must dye, then we think that all our doings in our
life time are clearly defaced and worthy of no memory if we leave you in
trouble at the time of our death. For if our true heir be not known at the
time of our death, se what mischief and trouble shall succeed to you and your
children. The experience thereof some of you have seen after the death of our
noble graundfather king Edward the.iiii. and some have heard what mischief and
manslaughter continues in this realm between the houses of York and
Lancaster, by y^ which discencion this realm was like to have been clearly
destroyed. And although it has pleased almighty God to send us a fair
daughter of a noble woman and me begotten to our great comfort and joy, yet it
has been told us by diverse great clerks that neither she is our lawful
daughter nor her mother our lawful wife, but that we live together abhominably
and detestably in open adultry, insomuche that when our ambassade was last in
France and mocion was made that the Duke of Orleance should mary our said
daughter, one of the chief cou^sailors to the French king said, It were well
done to know whither she be the king of England his lawful daughter or not, for
well known it is that he begat her on his brothers wife which is directly
against Gods law and his precept. Think you my lords that these words touch
not by body and soul, think you y^ these doings do not daily and hourly
trouble my conscience and vex my spirits, yes we doubt not but and if it were
your own cause every man would seek remedy when the peril of your soul and
the loss of your inheritance is openly laid to you. For this only cause I
protest before God and in the word of a prince, I have asked counsel of the
greatest clerks in Christendom, and for this cause I have sent for this
legate as a man indifferent only to know the truth and to settle my conscience
and for none other cause as God can judge. And as touching the queen, if it be
adjudged by y^ law of God that she is my lawful wife, there was never thing
more pleasant nor more acceptable to me in my life both for the discharge and
cleryng of my conscience and also for the good qualities and conditions the
which I know to be in her. For I assure you all, The pr^rse of the queen.
that beside her noble parentage of the which she is descended (as all you
know) she is a woman of most gentleness, of most humility and buxumnes, yea
and of al good qualities appertainyng to nobility, she is without comparison,
as I this xx. years almost have had the true experiment, so that if I were to
mary again i^ the marriage might be good I would surely chsoe her above all
other women: But if it be determined by judgment that our marriage was against
Gods law and clearly void, then I shall not only sorrow the departing from
so good a Lady and loving companion, but much more lament and bewail my
^nfortunate chance that I have so long lived in adultry to Gods great
displeasure, and have no true heir of my body to inherit this realm. These
be the sores that vex my mind, these be the panges that trouble my
conscience, and for these greues I seek a remedy. Therefore I require of you all
as our trust and confidence is in you to declare to our subjects our mind and
intent according to our true meaning, and desire them to pray with us that the
very truth may be known for the discharge of our conscience and saving of our
soul, and for the declaracion hereof I have assembled you together and now you
may depart.

To see what countenance was made amongst the hearers of this Oracion it was
a strange sight, for some sighthed and said nothing, other were sorry to hear
the king so troubled in his conscience. Other that ^auored the queen much
sorowed that this matter was now opened, and so every man spoke as his heart
served him, but the king ever labored to know the truth for discharge of his
conscience.

Shortly after this the two Legates came to the queen at the same place of
Brydewell, The saying of the Legate.
and declared to her how they were deputed judges indifferent between the king
and her to hear and determyn whether the marriage between them siode with
Gods law or not. When she heard the cause of their coming, no merueil
though she were astonnied for it touched her very nere. And when she had paused
a while she answered: Al^s my lords is it now a question whether I be the
kings lawful wife or no? (...)
When I have been married to him almost xx. years and in the mean season never
question was made before? Diverse prelates yet being alive and lords also and
privy cou^sailors with the king at that time, then adjudged our marriage lawful
and honest, and now to say it is detestable and abominable, I think it great
marvel: and in especial when I consider, what a wise prince the kings father
was, and also the love and natural affeccion, that King Fernando my father
bare unto me: I think in my self that neither of our fathers, were so
uncircumspect, so unwise, and of so small imaginacion, but they forsawe what
might follow of our marriage, and in especial the King my father, sent to the
Court of Rome, and there after long suite, with great cost and charge,
obteigned a license and dispensacion, that I being the one brothers wife, and
perauenture carnally known, might without scrupull of conscience, mary with
the other brother lawfully, which license under lead I have yet to show,
which things make me to say and surely believe, that our marriage was both
lawful, good, and Godly: But of this trouble I only may thank you my lord
Cardinal of York, for because I have wondered at your high pride and
vainglory, and abhor your volupteous life, and abominable Lechery, and little
regard your presu^pteous power and tyranny, therefore of malice you have
kyndeled this fire, and set this matter a broche, and in especial for the
great malice, that you bear to my nephewe the Emperor, whom I perfectly
know you hate worse then a Scorpion, because he would not satisfy your
ambicion, and make you Pope by force, and therefore you have said more then
once, that you would trouble him and his friends, and you have kept him true
promise, for of all his wars and vexacio^s, he only may thank you, and as
for me his poor aunte and kynswoman, what trouble you put me to, by this new
found doubt, God knows, to whom I commit my cause according to the truth. The
Cardinal of York excused himself, saying, that he was not the beginner, nor
the mouer of the doubt, and that it was sore against his will, that ever the
marriage should come in question, but he said that by his superior the Bishop
of Rome, he was deputied as a Judge to hear the cause, which he swear on his
profession to hear indifferently, but whatsoever was said, she believed him
not, and so the Legates took their leave of her and departed. These words
were spoken in French, and written by Cardinal Campeius secretory, which was
present, and by me translated as nere as I could.

The king notwithstanding that his mind was unquiet, yet he kept a good
countenance toward the Queen, with as much love, honor, and gentleness, as
could be showed to such a Princes, but he absteined from her bed, till the
truth was tried* according as his Ghostly counsel had auised him, which was
to him no little pain, for surely he loved her as well, as any Prince might love
his wife, and she him again, and therefore it was great pity, that their
marriage was not good.

The more to quicken his spirits and for recreacion, the King kept his
Christmas at Grenewiche, with much solempnitie and great plenty of viandes,
and thither came the two Legates, which were received by two Dukes, and
diverse Earls, Barons and Gentlemen, to whom the king showed great pleasures,
both of Iustes, Tornay, Bankettes Maskes and disguisynges, Cardinal (...)
soonne ^words^ knight.
and on the xii. day he made the lawful son of Cardinal Campeius, borne in
wedlock, knight, and gave him a collar of. S. S. of gold: but the Queen
showed to them no manner of countenance, and made no great joy of nothing, her
mind was so troubled.

This doing in England, was spread over al Christendo^ by letters, and in every
region except Spain, and the Emperors dominions, they adjudged the king a
wise, a verteous, and a prudent prince, for triyng out of the truth,
considering that the question was not only doubtful to learned men in
Divinity, but upon the uncertainty of the same, depended the ruin of his
realm and the succession of the same, which was a weighty thing to consider,
and no wisdom to let so great a doubt lie undiscussed.

After Christmas and all Lent till Easter, was none other thing commoned of,
but only of the kings marriage, the Archbishop of Cantorbury sent for the
famous docters, of both the Uniuersities to Lambeth and there were every day
disputacions, and co^monynges of this matter, and because the king perceived
and knew well, that the queen was wedded to her own opinion, and that he
would that she should do nothing without counsel, he bad her chose the best
clerks of his realm, to be of her counsel, and licensed them to do* the
best on her part that they could according to the truth: then she elected
Willyam Warha^ Archbishop of Ca^torbury, and Nicholas West bishop of Elie,
docters of the laws, and Ihon Fi^^her bishop of Rochester, and Henry Standishe
bishop of saint Ass, docters of Divinity, and many other docters and well
learned men, which for a suertie like men well learned, defended her cause as
far as learning might defend it, as you shall here in the year following.

This year was sir James Spenser Mayor of London, in whose time the watch in
London on Midsomer night was laid down.

The.xxi. year. The.xxi. year.

IN the beginning of this year, in a great Hall within the black Friars of
London, was ordained a solemn place, for the two Legates to sit in, with
two cheyers covered with clothe of gold, and cusshions of the same, and a
Dormant table rai^ed before, like a solemn Court, all covered with Carpettes
and Tapissery: The Court at the Black Friars.
on the right hand of the court was hanged a clothe of estate, with a Chayer
and Cusshions of rich Tissue, for the king, and on the left hand of the
Court, was set rich chayer for the Queen. When the place was ready, the King
and the Queen were ascited by Docter Sampson, to appear before the Legates, at
the forenamed place, the twenty and eight day of May, being then the morrow
after the feast of Corpus Christi, in proper person, or by their Proctors. At
the day assigned, the Legates came to the forenamed place, with Crosses
Pillars, Axes, and all the Ceremonies belongyng to their degrees, and after
that they were set (the Cardinal of York sittyng on the right hand) their
Commission was read, and the cause of their coming thither openly declared,
the effect whereof was, that the Court of Rome was instructed, that great
Clerks and learned men, had informed the King, that his marriage with his
brothers wife, was unlawful, da^pnable, and directly againat the Law of God,
wherefore they were directed and appointed by thesaied Court, to be judges in
the cause, and to here what on both parties could be alleged: after this was
dooen the king was called by name, for whom two procters appeared, then the
Queen was called, which within short space, being accompaignied with the
four Bishops, and other of her counsel, and a great compaignie of Ladies
and gentle women following her, The Queen appealed.
came personally before the Legates, and after her obeisance, sadly and with
great gravity done, she appeled from them, as Judges not competent for that
cause, to the Court of Rome* and after that done she departed again.
Notwithstanding this appele, the Legates sat wekely, and every day were
arguments on both parts, and nothing else done.

The king which only desired, to have an end in this matter, for discharge
of his conscience, came to the Court the of June, and the Queen also, where he
standing under his clothe of estate, said these words in effect following: The
Kings Oracion.
My lords, Legates of the Sea Appostolike, which be deputied Judges, in this
great and weighty matter, I most heartily beseech you, to ponder my mind and
intent, which only is to have a final end, for the discharge of my
conscience: for every good christen man knows what pain, ^ what unquietness he
suffers, which has his conscience grieved, for I assure you on mine honor,
that this matter has so vexed my mind, and troubled my spirits, that I can
scantely study any thing, which should be proffitable for my Realm and
people. And for to have a quietness in body and soul, is my desire and request,
and not for any grudge that I bear to her that I have married for I dare say
that for her womanhode, wisdom, nobility, and gentleness, never Prince had
such another, and therefore if I would willyngly change I were not wise:
wherefore my suite is to you my Lords at this time, to have a spedy end,
according to right, for the quietness of my mind and conscience only, and for
no other cause as God knows.

When the King had said, the Queen departed without any thing saying, then she
was called, to know whether she would bide by her appeal, or answer there
before the Legates, her Procter answered, that she would bide by her appeal,
that notwithstanding, the Counsailers on both sides every day almost met,
and debated this matter substancially, so that at the last the Divines were all
of opinion, that the marriage was against the Law of God, if she were carnally
known, by the first brother which thing she clearly denied) but to that was
answered, that Prince Arthur her husband, confessed the act done, when he
called for drink early in the morning, saying: that he had been in Spain
that night, which was a hot country, meaning that he had carnally used her,
father at the time of the death of Prince Arthur, she thought and judged that
she was with child, and for that cause, the king was deferred from the Title
and Creacion of the Prince of Wales, almost half a year, which thing could
not have been judged, if she had not been carnally known.

Also she her self caused a Bull to be purchased, in the which were these
words, Vel forsan cogni^am, which is as much to say, as perauenture
carnally known, which words were not in the first Bull granted by July at
her second marriage to the King, which second Bull with that clause was only
purchased* to dispense with the second Matrimony, although there were carnal
copulacion before, which Bull neded not to have been purchased, if there had
been no carnal copulacion, for then the first Bull had been sufficient.

When the Divines on her side, were beaten from that ground, then they fell to
persuasions of Natural reason, how this should not be undone for three causes:
One was because if it should be broken, the only child o^ the King, should
be a Bastard, which were a great mischief to the realm: Secondly, the
seperacion should be a cause of great unkindness, between her kynred and this
realm. And the third cause was, that the continuance of so long space, had
made the Marriage honest: These persuasions with many other, were set furthe
by the Queen's Counsel, and in especial by the Bishop of Rochester, which
stood stiff in her cause, but yet Gods precept was not answered, wherefore
they left that ground and fell to pleadyng, that the Court of Rome had
dispensed with that Marriage: To this some Lawers said, that no yearthely
person is able to dispense with the positive Law of God.

When the Legates had heard the opinions of the Divines, and saw that their
opinion for the most part, was against the Matrimony, and that now the
question was brought to dispute, the authority of the Court of Rome, they
began a little to quicken: For they consi^ered that if they should ^aie and
determyne, that the Court of Rome might not dispense in that case, that few
men would think, that they might dispense in any other case, which should
be to them, a great loss and hurt. Wherefore they dissimuled the matter, and
ever told the King, that he should have an end shortly, and tracted furthe the
time with Oracions and Sophistical arguments, till August began to
approach: then Cardinal Campeius said, that they might not sit after July,
till October, all which season was a vacacion in the Court of Rome, and their
Court being a member of the Court of Rome, they must needs do the same:
this saying was reported to the king, which by that saying knew perfectly,
that he should then have no end, and then he complained to the dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk, and other nobles of his counsel, how he was delayed, and
willed them at the next Session, to require them to make an end of the
cause, and what Judgment soever they gave, he would gladly accept it, for the
quietness of his conscience.

These noble men came to the place, where the Legates sat, the.xxx. day of
August, being Fridaie, where as Cardinal Campeius, declared in eloquent Latin,
and swear on his honor and faith that he bare to the churhce of Rome, that the
course of the courts there be, at the end of July, to suspende all causes, till
the.iiii. day of October, and if any cause be treated, and judged in the
mean season, that judgment to be clearly void, and therefore he required the
king to take patience, till that time, trustyng that then they should proceed
toward sentence, so that he should be contented: the noble men desired them
to make an end, whatsoever it were, that day or the next day, which was
the last day of July: but they answered that they could sit no more till
October, which answer sore displeased the noble men, which the king had
sent thither, in so much that Charles Duke of Suffolk, seeing the delay,
gave a great clappe on the Table with his hand and said: by the Mass, now I
see that the old said saw is true, that there was never Legate nor
Cardinal, that did good in England, and with that saying all the Temporal
Lords departed to the King* leauyng the Legates sittyng one lookyng on the
other sore astonnied, because they saw the Temporal lords depart in anger.

You may be sure, that the king was not well content, when he hard of this
delay, but yet like a wise Prince, he took it patiently, trustyng to have an
end in October ensuyng: But when he heard tell, that a letter was sent for the
Cardinal Campeius, that he should with speed, return into Italy, and that he
provided for his journey: Then he openly perceived, that the Legates dissimuled
the time to have the matter in the Court at Rome, for the mainteinaunce of
their authority, knoweyng perfectly, that there he should be foded furthe
with arguments so long, that he should be in manner weary, and also all that
time, he should be unquiet in his conscience, which was the greatest care,
that he had, but the second care that he took, was to see the Cardinal of
York, (whom he so highly favored and trusted, and whom he had so highly
promoted, both to the Archbishopriche of York, and the Bishopriches of
Winchester, Duresme, and the Abbay of Saint Albones, with many other great
dignities and promocions, beside the Chauncellorshippe of England) so
unfaithfully to dissimule with him, and not to open the very truth, which
caused him clearly to cast him out of his favor, in the which he had long been.

When the nobles and prelates perceived, that the kings favor was from the
Cardinal sore minished, every manne of the Kings Counsel, began to lay
to him such offenses, as they knew by him, and all their accusacions were
written in a book, and all their hands set to it, to the nombre of thirty and
four, which book they presented to the king. When the king saw the book, he
marueiled not a little, for by the Articles conteigned in the same, he evidently
perceived the high pride and coueteousnes of the Cardinal, and saw openly
with what dissimulacion and clokyng, he had handeled the kings causes: how he
with fair liyng words, he blinded and defrauded the king, most untruly,
which accusacions sore moved the king against him, but yet he kept it close
for a time, and so the King rode on his progress with the Queen to Woodstocke.
And at the feast of the Nativity of our Lady, he came to Grafton, beside Stony
Stratforde, and thither came the two Legates, and were but meanly received,
saving that the King made to them good semblaunce, and in especial to
Cardinal Campeius, because he came into England at his request: and after
dinner the said Campeius took his leave of the king, and then the king him
conueighed to the chamber door, and there they departed, and the Cardinal of
York also went with his compaignion to Tocester, and on the morrow he came to
Grafton to speak with the king, which was then rydyng out on huntyng, and
sent him word by Henry Norreis, that he should accompaignie Campeius to
London, and when the king came to London, he would more common with him: thus
almost dismayed the Cardinal of York, returned to his compaignion to
Tocester, and so they came together to London, where to the Cardinal Campeius,
were delivered great rewards, and so he took his journey toward the sea side
Where the kings counsel, caused his chestes and cariages to be opened to se
what letters the Cardinal of York had sent to the court of Rome, and there were
but a few letters found, for they were sent before in post, but in many
chestes were found, old hosen, old coats, and such vile stuff, as no honest
man would eary to have it, which search much displeased Ca^peius, and the more
because his coffers were like wise opened in Chepe, by the rashenes of a Moile,
as you heard in the tenth year of the king.

Thus departed out of England in high displeasure, the crafty Cardinal
Campeius, The last time the Card^nall came to the kings presence.
leauyng behind him his subtle fellow, which after their departing from the
king at Grafton, never saw the King, nor came in his presence. This great
Session of the legates, was commued of through Christendom, and in especial
in Spain, and other the Emperors Dominions, which sore grudged that the Queen
should be divorced from the king: and surely the most part of the lay people
of England, which knew not the law of God, sore murmored at the matter, and
much the more, because there was a gentle woman in the Court, called Anne
Bulleyne, daughter to sir Thomas Bulleyne, Uiscount Rocheforde, whom the king
much favored in all honesty, and surely none otherwise, as all the world
well knew after. For this cause the Queen's ladies, gentlewomen, and
servants, largely spoke and said that she so entised the king, and brought
him in such amors, that only for her sake and occasion, he would be divorced
from his Queen, this was the foolish communicacion of people, contrary to the
truth, as you have hard declared before.

The king which all the twenty year paste, had been ruled by other, and in
especial by the Cardinal of York, began now to be a ruler and a King, yea, a
King of such wit, wisdom, and policy, that the like has not reigned
over this Realm, as you shall plainly perceive here after: as well for the
setting furthe of true Doctrine, as also ^or the augmentacion of his Croune.
For when he perceived, how the Cardinals had handeled him, and saw plainly
that the law of God was clear, that he might not mary his brothers wife, he
thought to send his Ambassadors to all the Uniuersities in France and Italy,
to know their determinacions, and for that cause he sent Doctor Stokesley, and
Doctor Fox, two great Cler^es into France, which sped as you shall here
after declared, when the ^^tter serves.

The king continually studiyng on this matter, The King begins to rule.
called a counsel of the chief of his nobles, to begin at Westminster, the
first day of October next ensuyng, and also somoned a Parliament, to begin
the third day of November, then immediately following, and declared that the same
cou^saill, should devise diverse acts, necessary and needful to be passed at
thesaied Parliament, for reformacion of certain exaccions, dooen by the clergy
to the lay people, to which counsel and Parliament, the Cardinal was
warned and somoned, which much conforted him, that he outwardly little
abashed: and so he and all the counsel, came to the cou^saill chamber at
Westminster, The Cardinals prid^ abated.
and there diverse days, communed of diverse things, but nothing was fully
concluded, and there the Cardinal showed himself, much more humblier, then he
was wont to be, and the lords showed themselfes more higher and stranger,
then they were wont to be, but for all that he abashed not his countenance,
but came into Westminster hall with all his train, the first day of the
Term: but none of the kings servants would go before, as they were wont to
do, and so he sat in the Chauncery, but not in the Star chamber, for all the
lords and other the kings counsel, were gone to Wynsore to the King, where
they informed the King, that all things that he had dooen almost, by his
power Legantyne, were in the case of the Praemunire and prouison: and that the
Cardinal had forfected, all his lands, tenementes, The Cardinal in the
Praemunire.
goods, and catelles to the king: wherefore the king willing to order him,
according to the order of his laws, caused his attorney Cristopher Hales, to
sue out a Writ of Praemunire against him, in the which he licensed him, to
make an attorney.

And farther, the seuentene day of November, he sent the two dukes of
Norffolke and Suffolk, to his place at Westminster, to fetch away the great
Seal of England, which he was loathe to deliver, if there had been may
remedy, but in conclusion he delivered it, to the two Dukes, which delivered
the same to Docter Tailor Master of the Rolls to carry it to the king, which so
did the next day: and beside this the King sent sir William Fitz Willyam
knight of the Garter, and Thresorer of his house, and Docter Stephin Gardener,
newle made Secretary, to se that no goods should be embesiled out of his
house: and farther ordained that the Cardinal should remove to Ashire beside
kyngston, there to tarry the kings pleasure, and to have all thynes delivered
to him, which were necessary for him, but not after his old po^peous and
superfluous fashion: For all his goods were seized to the kings use. When the
seal was thus taken from the Cardinal, the dukes of Norffolke and Suffolk,
with many Earls, Bishops, and Barons, came into the Star chamber, the.xix
day of October, where the duke of Norffolke declared that the kings highness,
for diueise and sondery offenses, had taken from him his great Seal, and
deposed him of all Offices, and least men might complain for lack of
Justice, (...) had appointed him and the duke of Suffolk, with the assent to
the (...) lords, to sit in the Star chamber, to hear and determine causes
indifferently, and that of all things the Kings pleasure and commandment
was, that they should keep their hands close, from any rewards taking, or
maintenance, and so that weke they sat in the Star chamber, and determined
causes.

On the day of the same month, the Cardinal removed out of his house called
York place, The Cardinals remouyng from York place.
with one Cross saying, that he would he had never borne more, meaning that by
his cross, that he bare as legate which degree taking was his confusion, as
you se openly, and so he took his barge, and went to Putney by Water, and there
took his horse and rode to Asher, where he remaigned till Lent after.

During which time, he being called on for an answer in the kings Bench, to
the praemunire, for geuyng benefices by preuension, in disturbance of men's
enheritaunce, and diverse other open causes in the praemunire: he according to
the kings license, constituted Ihon Scute and Edmond Ienny, apprentices of the
Law his attorneis, which by his own warrant signed with his hand, confessed
all things concerning thesaid suite, for they were to open to be cloked or
hidden, and so judgment was given, that he should forfet al his lands,
teneme^tes, goods and catalles, and should be out of the kings proteccio^,
but for all that the king sent him a sufficient proteccion: and of his
gentleness left to him the Bishoprikes of York and Winchester, and gave to him
plate and stuff, convenient for his degree, and the bishoprike of Duresme, he
gave to docter Tunstall bishop of London, and the Abbey of saint Albones he
gave to the Prior of Norwiche, and to London he promoted Docter Ihon Stokesley,
then Ambassador to the Uniuersities, for the kings marriage, as you have hard
before. For all these kyndnes showed to the Cardinal, yet he still maligned
against the king, as you shall perceive here after, by his untrue doings,
which brought him to confusion.

The twenty and three day of October, the king came to his Manor of
Grenewiche, and there much consulted with his counsel, for a mete manne to
be his Chancellor, so that in no wise he were no man of the Spirituality,
and so after long debate, the King resoluted himself upon sir Thomas More
knight, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancastre, a man well learned in the
toungues, and also in the Common Law, whose wit was fine, and full of
imaginacions, by reason whereof, he was to much given to mockyng, which was to
his gravity a great blemishe. Sir Thomas More made Chauncellor.
And then on the Sondaie, the twenty and four day of the same monethe, the
king made him his Chancellor, and delivered him the great Seal, which
Lord Chancellor, the next morrow after, was led into the Chauncery, by the
two dukes of Norffolk and Suffolk, and there sworn, and then the Mace was
borne before him.

Now let us return to the treaty of Cambray, which was appointed to be
kept the last Summer, for the conclusion of a peace, between the Emperor on
the one part, and the king of England, and the French king on the other
part, for which conclusion there came to Cambrey, the Lady Margaret Duches of
Sauoy, Aunte to the Emperor and the Lady Loyse Duches of Angulesme, and mother
to the French king and Docter Tunstall bishop of London, and after bishop
of Duresme, and sir Thomas More knight, after made Chancellor of England,
and diverse other for the King of England, all these met there in the
beginning of July, accompaignied with diverse great princes and Counsailers, on
every part, and after long debatyng on both sides, there was a good
conclusion taken, the fifth day of August, in the which was concluded, that
the treaty of Madrill, should stand in his full strength and virtue, saving
the third and fourth, and the leuenth and fourtenth articles, which touch
the Duchy of Burgoyne, and other lordshippes.

Item, it was agreed that the French king should have his children delivered
again, paiyng to the Emperor two Millyons of Crounes of gold, whereof he
should pay at the deliueryng of the children, twelve hundred thousand Crounes.

Item, that the French king should acquit the Emperor, against the king of
England, of four skore and ten thousand Crounes, which the Emperor
ought to the king of England, and the king of England to deliver all such
bonds and gages, as he had of the Emperors.

Item, as touching the remnant, which was five hundred and ten thousand
Crounes, the Emperor should have.xxv. thousand crounes rent yearly, for the
which he should have the lands, of the Duches of Uandosme, liyng in
Flaunders, and Brabant bound.

Item, that Flaunders and diverse other countries, should not behold in chief,
nor have resort to the croune of France.

Item, that the realm of Naples, the Duchy of Millain, and the county of
Ast, should for ever remain to the Emperor.

Item, that the French King should with draw all such soldiers as he had,
out of Italy.

Item, that the Lady Elianor should be brought into France, with the French
Kings children, and in time convenient should be married to the French king.

Item, that the French King should aid the Emperor with twelve Galleys to go
into Italy.

Item, that all prisoners on both parties should be acquitted.

Item, that the French King should not aid Robert de la March, against the
bishop of Luke.

Item, that all the goods moveable and immovable, of Charles late Duke of
Burbon, should be restored to his heirs, they paiyng to lord Henry, Marquis
of Dapenete, and Earl of Nassaw, Lord Chamberlayne to the Emperor, ten
thousand Ducates, which he lent to thesaied Duke of Burbon.

Item, that Ihon Earl of Panthieure, should be remitted to al such goods, as
were Earl Rene his fathers.

Item, the Lord Laurence de Gorowod, great Master to the Emperor, should
be restored to the Lordeshippes of Chalmount, and Monteualle, which he bought
of the Duke of Burbon, or else to have his money again.

Item, Phillip de Chalon Prince of Orange and Uiceroy of Naples, to be restored
to all his lands in Burgoyne.

Item, that the Duches of Uandosme, and Loys Earl of Nau^rs should have all
such right and accions, as they should have had, before the war began.

In the Emperors countries, when all things were written, sealed and
finished, there was a solemn Mass song in the Cathedral church of Cambrey,
the two ladies Ambassadors of the king of England, sittyng in great estate,
and after Mass the peace was Proclaimed, between the three Princes, and Te
deum song, and money cast to the people, and great fires made through the
city. The Same night the French King came into Cambrey, well and nobly
accompaignied and saluted the Ladies, and to them made diverse bankettes, and
then all persons, departed into their country glad of this concord.

This peace was called the womennes peace, The womennes peace.
for because that notwithstanding this conclusion, yet neither the Emperor
trusted the French king, nor he neither trusted nor loved him, and their
Subjects were in the same case. This Proclamacion was proclaimed solempnely, by
Herauldes, with tro^pettes in the city of London, which Proclamacion much
reioysed the English Merchantes, repairing into Spain, Flaunders, Brabant,
Zelande, and other the Emperors dominions, for during the wars, Merchantes
were evil handeled on both parties, which caused them to be desirous of
peace.

Here is to be remembered, that at this present time, Willya^ Tyndale had newly
translated and imprinted the New Testament in English, and the Bishop of
London, Cutbard Tu^stall bishop o^ London, bought New Testamentes to burn.
not pleased with the translacion thereof, debated with himself, how he might
compass and devise, to destroy that false and erroneous translacion, (as he
said). And so it happened that one Augustine Packyngton, a Mercer and Merchant
of London, and of a great honesty, the same time was in Andwarp, where the
Bishope then was, and this Packyngton was a man that highly favored William
Tindale, but to the bishop utterly showed himself to the contrary. The bishop
desirous to have his purpose brought to pass, commoned of the New Testamentes,
and how gladly he would bye them. Packyngton then hearing that he wished for,
said unto the bishop, my Lord, if it be your pleasure, I can in his matter
do more I dare say, then most of the Merchauntes of England that are here,
for I know the Dutche men and straungiers, that have bought them of Tyndale,
and have them here to sell, so that if it be your lordshippes pleasure, to
pay for them, for otherwise I cannot come by them, but I must disburse money
for them, I will then assure you, to have every book of them, that is
imprinted and is here unsold. The Bishop thinkyng that he had God by the too,
when in deed he had (as after he thought) the Deuell by the fifte, said,
gentle Master Packyngton, do your diligence and get them and with all my heart
I will pay for them, whatsoever they cost you, for the books are erroneous and
naughtes and I entende surely to destroy them all, Augustyne Packyngton the
Bishop of Londo^s merchaunt.
and to burn them at Paul's Cross. Agustine Packyngton came to Willyam
Tyndale and said, Willyam I know thou art a poor man, and have a hepe of
new Testamentes, and books by thee, for the which thou have both indaungered
thy friends, and beggered thy self, and I have now gotten thee a Merchaunt,
which with ready money shall dispatche thee of all that thou have, if you
think it so proffitable for hour self. Who is the Merchant said Tindale? The
bishop of London said Packyngton, O that is because he will burn them said
Thyndale, ye Mary quod Packyngton, I am the gladder said Tyndale, for these two
benefits shall come thereof, I shall get money of him for these books, to bring
my self out of debt, (and the whole world shall cry out upon the burning of
Gods word). And the overplus of the money, that shall remain to me, shall
make me more studious, to correct thesaid New Testament, and so newly to
Imprint the same once again, and I trust the second will much better like you,
then ever did the first: And so forward went the bargain, the bishop had the
books, Packyngton had the thanks, and Tyndale had the money.

Afterward when mo new Testamentes were Imprinted, they came thick and
threfold into England, the bishop of London hearing that still there were so
many New Testamentes abroad, sent for Augustyne Packyngton and said unto him:
Sir how comes this, that there are so many New Testamentes abroad, and your
promised and assured me, that you had bought al? then said Packyngto^, I promise
you I bought all that then was to be had: but I perceive they have made more
sense, and it will never be better, as long as they have the letters and
stampes, therefore it were best for your lordeshippe, to bye the stampes to, and
then are you sure: the bishop smiled at him and said, well Packyngton well,
and so ended this matter.

Shortly after it fortuned one George Constantine, George Constantyne.
to be apprehended by sir Thomas More, which then was lord Chauncellor of
England, of suspicio^ of certain heresies. And this Constantine being with
More, after diverse examinacions of diverse things, among other, Master More
said in this wise to Constantine, Constantine I would have thee plain with me,
in one thing that I will ask of thee, and I promise thee I will show thee
favor, in all the other things, whereof thou art accused to me. There is
beyond the sea, Tyndale, Joy, and a great many mo of you, I know they cannot
live without help, some sends them money and succoureth them, and thy self
being one of them, had part thereof, and therefor know from whence it
came. I pray thee who be they that thus help them? My lord quod Constantine,
will you that I shall tell you the truethe? Yea I pray thee quod my Lord. Mary
I will quod Constantyne, truly quod he it is the Bishop of London that has
helped us, for he has be^^owed among us, a great deal of money in New
Testamentes to burn them, and that has and yet is our only succoure and
comfort. Now by my trothe quod More, I think eue^ the same, and I said so much
to the bishop, when he went about to bye them.

While this treaty was thus in communicacion at Cambrey, themperor which
knew that his people lacked aid in Italy, and also perceived that the people
of Germany and Italy, had him not in such honor as they would, if he were once
crouned Emperor, for in all writings they called him only Charles elected
Emperor, wherefore he determined to go into Italy with a great puyssaunce,
both to receive his Imperial Croune, and also to aid his people, which
there remained, and so acc^^paignied with many Princes and noble men of Spain,
and men of war he took shipp at Barcilona, and sailed to Geane, where he was
received with the seigniorie of the citte, The Pope ^ame to ^onony.
with great triumph and honor, and great presents given to him. Pope Clement
hearing that the Emperor was come into Italy, with all his Cardinals and
whole court, came to his city of Bononie, and there tarried the Emperors
coming.

While the Emperor lay at Geane, thither came to him diverse great Princes of
Italy, with great powers* and when all things were ready, he set forward in
good order of battaill toward Bononie, and in every town he was received,
presented with great gifts and feasted, and so by long iorneis, he came nere
to Bononie, where first met with him, all the Clergy of the City with
procession, then all the university in there habites, al on horsebake, then
came all the Children of the city, in white satin fringed with gold, after
them the merchants of the city, al in ^rimosyn Damask, then followed the
potestates and governors of the city all in Crimosyn velvet, and within a mile
of the city there met him four and twenty Cardinals: with this triumph
themperor was co^ueighed to the Cathedral church, where on the steps, of the
west door in a chair sat Pope Clement, and then the Emperor a lighted and
kissed his foot The Emperor kiss^th the Popes fete.
and then they embraced together, and went into the church together and after
went in to the palace where they were lodged both, and daily kept great
counsayles together. While the Cardinal lay at Bononie, there came to him
Fraunces Sforse Duke of Millane, to excuse him self of all things to him
objected, and by much entreatyng at the Popes request he pardoned him his
offense, and restored him to his dignity and possession, paiyng to him nine
hundredth thousand Ducates, and till they were paid, the Castle of Millayne, and
the town of Crome, should abide in themperours possession. After this agreement
the Emperor sent for Anthony de leua, and made him captain of his
ordinance, and so now the duchy of Millayne was brought to quiet. In the same
season the king of England sent sir Nicholas Carew knight master of his horses,
and Doctor Sa^pson to Bononie for the ratificacion of the league concluded at
Cambray, to the performance whereof the Emperor was solemplie sworn, and so
the ambassadors departed: likewise the emperor sent into England, Peter Lord of
Rosebec, which likewise saw the king of England sworn to perform the same,

According to the somons the king of England began his high court of
parliament, the third day of Nouembre. On which day he came by water to his
place of Bridewell, and there he and his nobles put on there robes of
parliament, and so came to the black Freers church, where a Mass of the holy
ghost was solemplie song by the kings Chapel, and after the Mass, the king
with all the Lords of the parliament, and Commons which were somoned to apere
at that day came in to the parliament chamber, where the king sat in his Throne
or seat royal, and Sir Thomas More his Chauncelor standing on the righthand of
the king behind the bar made an eloquent Oracion, An Oracion
declaryng that like as a good shepard which not alonely keeps and attends
well his sheep, but also forseeth and provides for althyng, which either may
be hurtful or noisome to his stoke, or may preserve and defend the same against
all peryles that may chance to come, so the king which was the sheaperd,
ruler and governor of his realm, vigila^tly forseyng things to come
considered how diverse laws before this time were made now by long continuance
of time and mutacion of things, very insufficient, and vnperfight, and also by
the frayl condition of man, diverse new enormities were spro^g amongst the
people, for the which no law was yet made to reform the same, which was the
very cause why at that time the king had somoned his high court of parliament:
and he resembled the king to a shepard, or heard man for this cause, for if a
prince be compared to his riches, he is but a richeman, if a prince be compared
to his honor, he is but an honorable man: but compare him to the multitude of
his people and the number of his flock, the^ he is a ruler, a governor of
might and puissaunce, so that his people makes him a prince, as of the
multitude of sheep comes the name of a shepherd: and as you se that amongst
a great flock of sheep some be rotten and fauty which the good sheperd sends
from the good sheep, so the great wether which is of late fallen as you all
know, so craftily, so scabedly, ye and so untruly iuggeled with the king, that
all men must needs guess and think that he thought in him self, that the had
no wit to perceive his crafty doing, or else that he presumed that the king
would not se nor know his fraudulent Iuggeling and attemptes: but he was
deceived, for his graces sight was to quike and penetrable, that he saw him, ye
and saw through him, both with in and without, so that all thing to him was
open, and according to his desert he has had a gentle correction, which small
ponishme^t the king will not to be an example to other offendoures, but clerly
declares that whosoever here after shall make like attempt or commit like
offense, shall not escape with like ponyshment: and because you of the common
house be am gross* multitude, and cannot speak all at one time: Therefore the
kings pleasure is, that you shall resort totn he nether house, and there
amongst your self according to the old and ancient custom to chose an able
person to be your common mouth and speaker, and after your election so made to
advertise his grace thereof, which will declare to you his pleasure what day he
will have him present in this place

After this done, the commons resorted to the nether house, and they chose for
there speaker Thomas Audeley Thomas Audelei chosen speake^.
Esquier and attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, and the same day was the
parliament adiourned to Westminster. On the sixth day of the same month the
king came in to the parliament chamber and all the Lords in there robes, and
there the commons of the nether house presented there speker, which there made
an eloquent Oracion An oracion
which co^sisted in two poynctes, the first poynct was that he much praised
the king for his equity and Justice, mixed with mercy and pity, so that none
offense was forgotten and left vnponished nor in the punishment the extremity
nor the rigor of the law not cruelly extended, which should be a cause to
bridel all men from doing like (...), and also a comfort to ^ffendors to
confess there crime and offense, and an occasion of amendment and
reconciliacion.

The second poinct was, that he disabled him self, both for lack of wit
learning and discrecio^ to so high an office, beseching the king to cause his
c^mons to resort eftsoon to there common house, and there to chose an other
speaker for that parliament.

To this the king (by the mouth of the Lord Chauncelor) answered that where be
disabled him self in* wit and learning, his own ornate oracion there made
testified the contrary, and as touching his discrecio^ and other qualities, the
king him self had well known him and his doings, since he was in his service,
to be both wise and discrete, and so for an hable man he accepted him, and for
the speaker he him admitted.

When the commons were assembled in the nether house, they began to common of
their grefes wherewith the spirituality had before time grievously oppressed
them* both contrary to the law of the realm, and contrary to al right, and
in especial they were sore moved with six great causes.

The first for the excess fynes, which the ordinaries took for probat of

The second cause was the great polling and extreme exaccion, which

The third cause was, that priests being surueiors, stuardes and officers

The fourth cause was the Abbotes Priors and spiritual men kept

The fifth cause, was beause that spiritual persons promoted to great

The sixth cause was to se one priest being little learned to have ten

These things before this time might in nowise, be towched nor yet talked of
by no man except he would be made an heritike, to lose all that he had, for the
bishopes were chauncelors, and had all the rule about the king, so that no man
durst once presume to attempt any thing contrary to their proffit, or
commodity.

But now when god had illumined the eyes of the king, and that there subtell
doings was once espied: then men began charitably to desire a reformacion, and
so at this Parliament men began to show there grudges.

Where upon the Burgesses of the Parliament, appoincted such as were learned
in the law being of the common house, to draw one bill of the probates of
Testamentes, a another for Mortuaries, and the third for none reside^ce,
pluralities, and taking of Fermes by spiritual men,

The learned men took much pain, and first set furthe the bill of
Mortuaries, which passed the common house, and was sent up to the Lords.

To this bill, the spiritual Lords made a fair face, saying that surely
priests and curates took more then they should, and therefore it were well
done to take some reasonable order, thus they spoke because it touched them
little.

But with in two days after was sent up the bill concerning probates of
Testamentes, at the which the Archbishop of Cauntorburre in especial, and all
other bishops in general both frowned and gruntyd, for that touched there
proffite, insomuch as Doctor Ihon Fisher bishop of Rochester, The saiyug of I*
Fisher B* of Rochester.
said openly in the Parliament chamber these words: my Lords, you se daily
what bills come hither from the common house and all is to the destruction of
the church, for Gods sake se what a Realm the kingdom of Boheme was, and
when the Church went down, then fell the glory of the kingdom, now with the
Commons is nothing but down with the Church, and all this me seems is for
lack of faith only.

When these words were reported to the Commons of the nether house, that the
bishop should say that all there doings were for lack of faith, they took the
matter gre^ously, for they Imagined that the bishop esteemed them as Heretics,
and so by his slanderous words would have persuaded the temporal Lords to
have restrained there consent from the said two bills, which they before had
passed, as you have hard before.

Wherefore the Commons after long debate, determined to send the speaker of the
Parliament to the kings highness, with a grievous complaynt, against the bishop
of Rochester, and so on a day when the king was at layser, A complain (...) to
the king
Thomas Audeley the speaker for the commons and thirty of the chief of the
common house, came to the kings presence in his palace at Westminster, which
before was called york place and there very eloquently declared what a
dishonor to the king and the realm it was so say that they which were elected
for the wysest men of all the She^^s (...), and boroughes within the realm of
England should be declared in so noble and open presence to lack faith,
which was equivalent to say, that they were Infidelles and no Christians, as
as Turks or Sarasins, so that what pain or study so ever they took for the
common wealth, or what acts or laws so ever they made or stablished, should
be taken as laws made by Panyms and hethen people, and not worthi to be kept
by christian men: wherefore he most hymbly besought the kings highness, to call
the said bishop before him and to cause him to speak more discretly of such a
nombre as was in the common house

The king was not well contented with the saying of the bishop, yet he gently
answered the speaker, that he would send for the bishop and send them word
what answer he made, and so they departed again, After this the king sent for
the archebishope of Cauntorburie and six other bishopes, and for the bishop of
Rochester also, and there declared to him the grudge of the commons, The,
bishops excuse
to the which the bishop answered that he meant the doings of the Bohemians was
for lack of faith, and not the doings of them that were in the common house,
which saying was confirmed by the bishopes being present, which had him in
great reputacio^, and so by that only saying the king accepted his excuse and
therefore sent word to the commons by sir william Fitz william knight treasoror
of his househoulde, which blind excuse pleased the commons nothing at all.

After this diverse assemblies were kept between certain of the lords and
certain of the commons, for the bills of probates of Testamentes, and the
mortuaries: the temporaltie laid tot he spirituality there own laws and
constitucions, and the spirituality sore defended them by prescripsion and
usage, to whom an answer was made by a gentleman of Greyes Inn: the usage
has ever ben of thieves to rob on shoters hill, ergo is it lawful* with this
answer the spiritual men were sore offended, because there doings were
called robberies, but the temporal men stood still by there sayings, in so
much the said gentle man said to the Archbishop of Cauntorburie, that both
the exaccion of probates of Testamentes, and the taking of Mortuaries, as they
were used were open robbery and theft: after long disputacion, the temporal
lords began to lean to the commons, but for all that, the bills remained
vnconcluded a while.

In the mean season, The ^oane released
there was a bill assented by the Lords, and sent down to the commons,
theffect whereof was, that the whole realm by the said act, did release tot
he king, all such somes of money as he had borrowed of them at the loan, in
the fiftene year of his reign (as you have hard before) this bill was sore
argued in the common house but the most part of the commons were the kings
servants, and the other were so labored to by other, that the bill was
assented to.

When this realease of the loan was known to the commons of the Realm, Lord
so they grudged, and spoke ill of the hole Parliament, for almost every man
counted it his debt, and reconed suerly of the payment of the same, and
therefore some made there wills of the same, and some other did set it over to
other for debt, and so many men had loss by it, which caused them sore to
murmur, but there was no remedy, The king like a good and a discrete prince,
seeing that his commons in the Parliament house had released the loan,
entendyng somewhat to requite the same, granted to them a general Pardon, of
all offenses, certain great offenses and debtes only except: also he aidid them
for the redress of there greues against the spirituality, and caused two new
bills to be made indifferently, both for the probate of Testamentes and
mor^uaries, which bills were so reasonable that the spiritual lords assented
to them all though they were sore against there minds, and in especial the
probate of Testamentes sore displeased the bishopes, and the mortuaries sore
displeased the persons and vicars.

After these Acts, thus agreed, the Commons, made a another act for
pluralitis, of benefices, none residence, biyng and selling and taking of
f^rmes by spiritual persons, which act so displeased the spirituality that
the priests railed on the commons of the common house, and called them
heretics and scismatikes, for the which diverse priests were ponished.

This act was sore debated above in the parliament chamber, and the Lords
spiritual would in nowise consent. Wherefore the king perceiving the grudge of
his commons, caused eight lords and eight of his commons to mete in the star
chamber at an after none, and there was sore debatyng of the cause, insomuche
that the temporal Lords of the upper house, which were there, took part with
the Commons, against the spiritual lords and by force of reason caused them
to assent to the bil with a little qualifiyng, which bill the next day was
wholly a greed to in the lords house, to the great reioisyng of the lay people,
and to the great displeasor of the spiritual persons.

During this Parliament was brought down to the commons, the book of articles
which the Lords had put to the king against the Cardinal, the chief
articles were these.

First that he without the kings assent had procured to be a Legate, by reason
whereof he took away the right of all bishopes and spiritual persons,

Item, in all writings which he wrote to Rome or any other foreyn Prince, he
wrote Ego et Rex meus, I and my king, as who would say that the king were his
servant.

Item, that he has sclaundered the church of England in the court of Rome,
for his suggestion to be legate was to reform the church of England, which as
he worte was F^cta in reprobum censum.

Item, he without the kings assent, carried the kings great Seal, with him
into Flaunders when he was sent ambassad to the Emperor,

Item, he without the kings assent, sent a commission to Sir Gregory de
Cassado, knighte, to conclude a league between the king and the Duke of Farrar,
without the kings knowledge.

Item that he having the French pockes presumed to come and breath on the king.

Item, that he caused the Cardinals hat to be put on the kings coin.

Item, that he would not suffer the kings clarke of the market, to sit at
Saint Talbons.

Item, that he had sent innumerable substance to Rome, for the obteinyng of
his dignities to the great enpouerishment of the realm,

These Articles with many more, red in the common house, and signed with the
Cardinals hand, was confessed by him, and also there was showed a writing
sealed with his Seal, by the which he gave to the king all his mouables and
vnmouables.

On the day of the concepcion of our Lady, the king at York place at
Westminster, in the parliament time created the vicount Rochforth Earl of
Wilshire, and the vicount Fitzwater, was created Earl of Sussex, and the Lord
Hastynges, was created Earl of Huntyngton.

When althynges were concluded in the Parliament house, the king came to the
Parliament chamber the seuentene day of Decembre, and there put his royal
assent, to althynges done by the Lords and commons, and so proroged his court
of Parliament, till the next year.

After the Parliament was thus ended, the king removed to Grenewiche and there
kept his Christemas with the queen in great triumph: with great plenti^ of
viaundes, and diverse disguisynges and Enterludes, to the great reioisyng of
his people.

You have hard before how the Emperor and the Pope was at Bononie, where the
Emperor made great proparacion for the solempnisyng of his coronacion, which
was appoincted to be of Saint Mathias day, or the four and twenty day of
February, on which day, he was borne, and that day also the French king was
taken, and because that that day had been ever fortunate to him he appoincted
his coronacion on that day: he apoincted it also at that place, because he
would the sooner pass into Almayne, to appece such striefes and debates as
was risen between the princes there.

And so wha^ the day came and every thing was ready, he was crowned Emperor, in
the church of. S. Peter, in the city of Bononi by pope Clement the.vii. with all the ceremonies thereto belonging. At this coronacio^ were present the Dukes of
Sauoy and Millayn, duke Frederik brother to the Pala^tine of Rine, and the
deputies to all the seven Electors and the most part of all the nobles of
Italy, an Spain. This coronacion was done with great solemnities, there was
feastyng, iustyng and torney, and althinges that might sound to honor was
there showed, both in apparel, and viaunde: and after that the Emperor and
the Pope, with the hole college of Cardinals, and all the noble men being
present rode in procession through the hie streets of Bononi, with such a
pomp and triumph as had not been seen in Italy many years before.

While the Emperor lay thus at Bononie, the king of England was advertised by
his ambassadoures, which he had sent to diverse universities for the assoluyng
of the doubt concerning his marriage, that the said universities were agreed
and had clerly concluded, that the one brother to mary the other brothers wife,
carnally known was directly against gods law, and that the pope nor the
court of Rome could in no wise dispense with the same.

Wherefore the king knowing the emperor and the bishop of Rome to be to gether
at Bononie, determined to send thither asolempne ambassade, both to declare to
them the law of god, and the determinacion of the universities, and also to
require the bishop of Rome to do Justice acco^^yng to the treuth, and also to
show to the Emperor that the king did not move this matter for any
displeasure that he bare to him or the queen his awnt, but only for the
discharge of his conscience, and for the quietness of his Realm.

When this purpose was agreed by the kings counsel, the king appoincted Sir
Thomas Bulleyne late created Earl of Wylshier and Doctor Stoksley elected
bishop of London, and Doctor, Edward Lee, his almoner, two great Clerks, for
his ambassadors and with them he sent diverse doctors both of the law and
divinity. These ambassadoures made great preparacion, and about the beginning
of February they set forward, and so much they travailed that they came to
Sauoy where the Duke in the fair town of Cambrey, caused them honorably to be
received and fested.

So they passed the Mountains, and so through the duchy of Millain and by
long iorneis they came to Bononie in lent, where they were honorably received by
the master of the Emperoures house, and diverse Lords and Gentlemen belongyng
to the Pope, and within short space the said ambassadoures were first
conueighed to the Pope, and there declared there message and showed the
determinacion of the great Doctors and famous universities. Pope Clement which
was a man of no learning but of a great wit made to them a gentle answer, The
Pop^s an^wear.
and said that he would here the matter disputed when he came to Rome and
according to right he would do Justice. But his intent was al contrary, for
he knew well that if he should give sentence, that Pope July could not dispense
with the breach of Gods law, that then the authority of the court of Rome
would little be regarded, and also he feared the Emperors displeasure if he
should give sentence against his awnte, so that for fear of losing
authority, and of themperors displeasure, bishop Clement, durst no^ Judge
according to gods law. After they had been with the Pope, they came to the
Emperor, which them gently received, and after they had done their message,
he answered them that he in no wise would be against the law of God, and if
the court of rome would adiudge that the matrimony were not good, he would be
co^te^t, but he thought al otherwise, for he solicited the pope and all the
Cardinals which were his friends to stand by the dispe^sacio^, which he judged
to be as strong as gods law. After this answer they took there leave of the
Emperor, which the next weke after departed out of Bononie toward Almayne in
good order of battle, he him self in gilt harnes, and his nobles in white
harnes with rich cotes and trappers very curiously besene.

After that the emperor was gone out of Bononie, the ambassadoures of England
took there leave of the bishop of Rome, which went toward Rome again, and
returned toward England, through the Duchy of Millayn, which was received by
the Earl Lodouick, great counsaylor to the Duke of Millain, which earl
co^ducted them through the whole Duchy of Millayne, and paid al their charges
by the dukes commandment. And when these ambassadors were passed the
mountains, they received letters from the king, which appoincted the Earl of
Wilshire to go ambassade to the French king, which then lay at Bordeaux making
provision for money for the redemyng of his children: and the bishop of London
was appoyncted to go to Padua, and other universities in Italy to know there
opinions in the kings case, and the kings almoner was apoincted to return
into England, and so he did, thus was the end of this ambassad.

You have hard before how the Cardinal was attainted in the praemunire and how
he was put out of the office of the chauncelor and lay at Asher: In this Lent
season the king by the advice of his counsel licenced him to go into his
diocese of ^orke, and gave him commandment to keep him in his diocese and
not to return southwarde without the kings special license in writing.

So he made great great provision to go northwarde and appareled his servants
newly and bought many costely things for his household and so he might well
enough, Thomas cromwell came in to the kings service.
for he had of the kings ge^tlenes the bishopprickes of york and Winchester,
which were no small things, but at this time diverse of his servants departed
from him to the kings service, and in especial Thomas Crumwel one of his
chief counsel and chief doer for him in the suppressio^ of abbeis. After that
al things necessary for his iornay were prepared, he took his journey northward
til he came to Southwel which is in his dioces and there he continued this year,
ever grudging at his fall as you shall here after: but the lands which he had
given to his Colleges in Oxforde and Ypswych, were now come to the kings
hands, by his atteinder in the praemunire, and yet the king of his gentleness
and for favor that he bare to good learning erected again the College in
Oxford, and where it was named the Cardinals College, he called it the kings
College, and endewed it with fair possessions, and put in new statutes and
ordinances, and for because the College of Ypswich was thought to be nothing
proffitable, therefore he left that dissolved.

The last Somer while the peace was treated at Cambray as you have hard before*
Ferdinando brother to the Emperor, recovered certain tounes which the Turks
had taken from him in Hyngry, and put to flighte his ennemy Ihon the Uainoda,
which falsely named him self king of Hungary. This Uainoda destitute of all
succoure fled to Sultan Soliman the great Turk, desiryng him of succor, to
recover Hungry a gaiue. The Turk being glad to have an occasion to distroy
Hungry, assembled a puissan^t army, and entered into Hungry, and made
proclamacion that what town or City would not obey king Ihon as there king,
should be put to fire and sword. This proclamacion so fearid the Hu^garians,
that al in manner yielded the^ self subjects to the Uainoda, the city of Bude
only except: which at the last was yelden, by composicion that the^ should
depart with bag and baggage, but for all there safe conduit signed with the
great Turks hand, they were first robbed of the Ian^zeres, and after that
shamfully slain,

When the Turk had thus Bude in possession, he left there the Uainoda,
Cruelty of y^ Turks,
and Jews great bastard son to the Duke of Uenice, with five thousand
fotemen, and two thousand horsemen, and he with all haste entered into Austrice,
where his people committed such cruelty and tyranny, as never has been hard
nor written, for of some they put out the eyes of other they cut of the noses
and ears, of other they cut of the privy members, of women they cut of the
pappes, and ravished Uirgins and of women great with child, they cut there
bellies and brent the children: beside this as they passed they brent corn,
trees, howses, and all that would be brent to make the contry desolate, and at
the last the two and twenty day of Septembre, the turks army came nigh to
Uienne, a rich and a famous City in Austrice.

The fame was that he had two hundredth and fifty thousand men in his army,
and five and twenty thousand tents in the sight of the city.

At the beginning of the siege certain Christian men were taken of the Turks,
which turks cut of the heddes of four lepers in a lazer cote, without the
city and put them upon poles, and made christen prisoners present the^ to the
great turk, which thereof took great joy: of y^ which prisoners he released
certain and bad them go to the captains and to tell the^ that if they would
yield the city of him, they should depart with bag and bagage, and if they
would keep it by force, by would suerly have it and put the^ al to the sword.
Now in the city was captayn duke Phillip of Bauier, Earl Palantine of the
Rine, and nephew to the Palsgraue elector, a young man, but of noble courage,
and with him were twenty thousand Almaynes, and two thousand horsemen, which
nothing feared the Turks threatenings. The Turk perceiuyng there boldness bent
his great ordinance, which were three hundredth pieces a gaynst the walls, and
commaundyd the town to be assauted: the Turks gave a great assaut, but the
christen men valiantly defended them, so that the Turks were compelled to fle,
and many of them were slain,.

The fourth day of Octobre, the Turk bent all his Ordinance against the wall,
which so shoke the wall that al men within supposed that the walls would have
fallen down, but they did little harm, which was sone amendid. The sixth day of
Octobre, eight thousand christen men issued out of the town, and came where the
Turks miners were working and slew a great nombre and destroyed the mines. The
same dai the Turks gave a great assaute to the city: the christyan men
valiantly them defended, and threw down great loggs and bars of Iron, and
slew many Turks. Thus the Turks assauted the city a leven times, and somany
times they were bete^ away, but the great and terrible assaut was the twelve day
of Octobre, at which assaut the christyan men so valiantly defended them self
and slew and hurt so many of the Turks, that after that day, for no
commandment that the Turk could give, they would no more give assaute.

The Turk perceived well both the strength of the City and the courage of the
capitaines with in, and also the winter there was much more colder then in his
contreys, which sore troubled him and his people, wherefore he called his
counsel and concluded to break up his siege and to depart, and so the
fouretene day of Octobre he shot great stones into the city all day till
night^ and a boute ten of the clok in the night he caused his tents to be
taken up, and (...) fire on the straw, and such other stuff, and so removed
al his army, toward Bude, saving fifty thousand horsemen which tarried all
the next day behind, cariyng with him a great nombre of Christyan prisoners,
which he put to the mines and such other vile service.

At this siege the Turk lost by Murder, The number of the turks that died
Sickness, and cold, above fourscore thousand men, as one of his bassates did
afterward confess.

Thus was the city of Uienne defended a gaynst the great Turk, and all his
power which was to him a great displeasure, and in especially because he
n^uer beseg^d City before, but either it was yelden, or taken, of the time of
this siege a metrician made these verses.

Caesar in Italiam quo venit Carolus anno
Cincta est ripheis nostra Vienna getis.
In this year the emperor gave to the lord master of saint Ihones of Jerusalem,
and his brethren the Island of Malto liyng between Scicile and Barbary, there
to employ them self upon Christ's ennemies which lord master had no place
suer to enhabite there since he was put from the Rodes by this Turk that
beseged Uienne, as you have hard before.

The.xxii. year
IN the beginning of this two and twenty year, the king like a politic and a
prudent prince, perceived that his subjects and other persons had diverse times
within four years last past, brought into his realm, great nombre of printed
books, of the new Testament, translated into the English tongue by Tyndall,
Joy, and other, which books the common people used and daily red privily, which
the clargie would not admit, for they punnished such persons as had red,
studied or taught the same with great extremity, but because the multitude was
so great, it was not in their power to redress there grefe: wherefore they
made complaint to the Chauncelor (which leaned much to the spiritual men's
part, in all causes) where upon he imprisoned and punished a great number, so
that for this cause a great rumor and controversy rose daily amongst the
people: wherefore the king co^sideryng what good might come of readyng of the
new Testament with reverence and following the same, and what evil might come
of the readyng of the same if it were evil translated, and not followed: came
into the star chamber the five and twenty day of May, and there commoned
with his counsel and the prelates concerning this cause, and after long
debatyng, it was alleged that the translacion of Tyndall and Joy were not
truly translated, and also that in them were prologues and prefaces which
sounded to heresy, The new testament ^orbidden,
and rayled against the bishopes uncharitably, wherefore all suhe books were
prohibited and commandment given by the king to the bishops, that they
calling to them the best learned men of the universities should cause a new
translacion to be made, so that the people should not be ignoraunte in the law
of god: And notwithstanding this commandment the bishopes did nothing at all
to set forth a new tra^slacio^, which caused the people to stody Tindalles
translacion, by reason where of many things came to light, as you shall here
after.

In this year in May, the bishop of London caused al his new Testame^tes
which he had bought with many other books, to be brought into Paul's
churcheyarde in London and there was openly burned,

In the end of this year, the wild Irishmen knowing the Earl of Ki^dare to
be in England* entered his land, and spoiled and brent his country, and diverse
other contreyes, and the Earl of Ossery being the kings deputy made little
resistaunce, for lack of power, wherefore the king sent the earl of Kyldare
into Ireland, and with him sir Wyllyam Skeuyngton knight, Master of the kings
ordinance and diverse Gunners with him, which so pollitickly ordered them
self that their enemies were glad to offer amends and to treat for turce,
and so sir Wyllyam Skeuyngton the next year returned into England leuyng there
the Earl of Kyldare for the kings deputy.

Now I will return to y^ execucion of the treaty of Cambray in the which it
was agreed that the Lady Elianor and the French kings children should be
delivered when the ransom appointed was paid as you have heard in the last
year: Wherefore ye French king gathered money of his subjects with all speed,
and when the money was ready he sent the great Master of France called Annas
de Memorancye and (...) other nobles to Bayon with the money, and to receive
the lady and the children. And thither came to them the great Constable of
Castle and Mounsire Prat for the Emperor, and there the crounes were wayed and
touched, and what fault soever the Spanyardes found in them they would not
receive a great number of them, and so they carried the children back from
Fou^traby into Spain. Thus the great master of France and his company lay
still at Bayon without having his purpose performed from March till the end
of June, and longer had lain i^ y^ king of England had not sent sir Fraunces
Bryan to Bayon to warrant the payment: whereupon the day of deliverance was
appointed to be on saint Peter's day in June. At which day the great Master
with xxxi. Mulettes laden with the crounes came to y^ one side The deliverance
of the French kings children.
of the river of Auday which river departs Spain and France and there
tarried till the first day of July: on which day the lady Elianor and the
children were put in two great boats, having only xii. gentlemen of Spain
with them: and in like manner the great Master with two great boats in the
which the money was and xii. gentlemen with him. All these boats met at a
bridge made in the mids of the river: The Constable of Spayn and his xii.
gentlemen met with the great Master of France and his xii. gentlemen on the
bridge, and after a little salutacion the Frenchemen entered into the ii. boats
where the Lady and the two children were, and the Spanyardes into the two
boats where the money was, and then each part hasted to land. Thus were the
French kings wife and children delivered into his hands, for which
deliverance was great joy and triumph made in France: and also in July were
fyers made in London and diverse other places for the same consideracion and
cause.

The Emperor as you have heard the last year, passed out of Italy into Germany
and was received with great honor and triumph into the city of Ausborough or
August, where in June were present all the electors and almost all the princes
of the Empire: there was kept a great counsel for the princes of Germany were
of two several opinions and of several names, the part that favored the pope
and all things done by his authority were called Catholical, and the other
part which followed and preached only the fospel of Christ were called
euangclical. Of these and other things concerning our faith there were many
cou^sailes: but Cardinal Campeius the Popes legate would not suffer the
Euangelical persons (whom he called Lutherans) to argue against y^ Catholical
men (who^ y^ Eua^gelical persons called papystes) lest by the openyng of the
scripture the authority of ye court of Rome should have been bamned, and
therefore the Emperor put of the matter till another time: But this matter was
not so let slyppe, for of this mocion men so serched the law of God that within
a few years after, many people refused the Pope for the head of the Church and
forsook him and his pardons.

On the xix. day of September in the city of London was made this
Proclamacion. A proclamacion.
The kings highness straytly charge and commands that no manner of person
of what estate, degree or condition soever he or they be of, do purchase or
attempt to puchase from y^ court of Rome or else where, nor use and put in
execucion, diuulge, or publishe any thing heretofore within this year passed
purchased or to be purchased hereafter containyng matter prejudicial to the
high authority, iurisdiccion and prerogative royal, of this his said realm,
or to the let, hynderau^ce or impechement of his graces noble and virtuous
intended purposes in the premises, upon pain of incurryng his highness
indignacion and imprisonment and farther punishment of their bodies for their
so doing at his graces pleasure, to the dreadful example of all other.

This Proclamacion was much mused at and every word of the same well noted.
Some said that it was made because that the queen had purchased a new Bull for
the ratificacion of her marriage, other said that it was made because the
Cardinal had purchased a Bull to curse the king i^ he would not restore him to
his old dignities, and that the king should suffer him to correct the
spirituality and he not to meddle with the^ame. This inuencion sounded most to
the truth as you shall hear afterward.

In October the river of Tyber was of such an height that in Rome and other
places about Rome almost xii.M. persons were drouned, and in the next month
zeland, Holland and Brabant were sore noyed with waters and many people and
much cattle were drouned.

You have heard in the last year how the Cardinal of York was attainted in
the praemunire and that notwithstanding the king had given him the b^^^oprickes
of york and Wynchester with great plenty of substance, and had lice^sed him
to lie in his dioces of York. He being this in his dioces grudgyng at his fall
and not remembryng the kings kyndnes showed to him, wrote to the court of Rome
and to diverse other princes letters in reproach of the king, and in as much as
in him lay, he stirred them to revenge his cause against the king and his
realm, insomuche that diverse opprobrious words of the king were spoken to
doctor Edward Keerne the kings Orator at Rome, and it was said to him that for
the Cardinals sake, the king should have the worse speed in the suite of his
matrimony. The pride of the Cardinal,
The Cardinal also would speak fair to the people to win their hearts and
declared ever that he was unjustly and untruly ordered, which fair speaking
made many me^ believe that he said true: and to ge^tlemen he gave great gifts
to allure them unto him: And to be had in the more reputacion among the people
he determined to be installed or inthronised at york with all the pomp that
might be, and caused a trone to be erected in the Cathedral church in such an
height and fashion as was never seen, and sent to all the lords, Abbo^tes,
Priors, knights esquiers and gentlemen of his dioces, to be at his Manor of
Cawod the vi. day of November and so to bring him to york with all manner of
pomp and solempnitie.

The king which knew his doings and priuye conueyaunce, all this year
dissembled the matter to see what he would do at length, till that he saw his
proud heart so high exalted that he would be so triumphantly installed without
making the king priuye, yea and in manner in disdain of the king, thought it
not mete nor convenient to suffer him any longer to continue in his malicious
and proud purposes and attemptes: wherefore he directed his letters to Henry
the vi. earl of Northumberland, willing him with all diligence to arrest the
Cardinal and to deliver him to therle of Shrewsbury great steward if the
kings household: When the earl had seen the letter, he with a convenient
number came to the Manor of Cawod the iiii. day of November, and when he was
brought to the Cardinal in his chamber, he said to him, my lord I pray you take
patience, The Cardinal arreste^.
for here I arrest you. Arrest me said ye Cardinal, yea said the earl I have a
commandment so to do: you have no such power said the Cardinal, for I am
both a Cardinal and a Legate de Latere and a pere of the College of Rome and
oughtnot to be arrested by any temporal power, for I am not subject to that
power, wherefore if you arrest me I will withstand it: well said the earl, here
is the kings Commission (which he showed him) and therefore I charge you to
obey, the Cardianl somewhat remembered himself and said, well my lord, I am
content to obey, but although that I by negligence fell into the punishment of
the Praemunire and lost by the law all my lands and goods, yet my person was
in the kings proteccion and I was pardoned that offense, wherefore I meruail
why I now should be arrested and specially considering that I am a mamber of
the sea Apostolic on who^ no temporal man ought to lay violent hands, well I
see the king lacks good counsel: well said the earl when I was sworn Warden
of the Marches, you your self told me that I might with my staff arrest all
men under the degree of a king* and now I am more stronger for I have a
commission so to do which you have seen. The Cardinal at length obeyed and was
kept in his privy chamber and his goods seized and his officers discharged,
and his Phisician called doctor Augustyne was likewise arrested and brought to
the Tower by sir Walter Welshe one of the kings chamber. The vi. day of
November he was conveyed from Cawod to Sheffelde castle and there delivered to
therle of Shrewsburies keeping till the kings pleasure were known: Of this
attachement was much commonyng amongst the common people, wherefore many were
glad, for surely he was not in the favor of the cominaltie.

When the Cardinal was thus arrested the king sent sir Wyllyam Kyngston knight
captain of the Guard and Constable of the Tower of London with certain of the
yomen of the Guard to Sheffeld to fetch the Cardinal to the Tower. When the
Cardinal saw the capitaini of the guard, he was sore astonnyed and shortly
became sick, for then he perceived some great trouble toward him, and for
that cause men said that he willyngly took so much quantity of strong
purgacion that his nature was not able to bear it: but sir Wylliam Kyngston
comforted him, and by easy iornayes he brought him to the Abbay of Lecester the
xxvii. day of November, The Cardinal dead and buried at Leycester.
where for very feebleness of nature caused by purgacions and vomites he dyed the
second night following, and in the same abbay lies buried. This Cardinal as you
may perceive in this story was of a great stomach, for he compted himself
egall with princes, and by crafty suggestion gatte into his hands innumerable
treasure: The discrip^ion of the Cardinal.
He forced little on symony and was not pityful and stood affeccionate in his
own opinion: In open presence he would lie and say untruth and was double both
in speech and meaning: He would promise much and perform little: He was
vicious of his body and gave the clergy evil example: He hated sore the city
of London and feared it: It was told him that he should dye in the way toward
London* wherefore he feared lest the commons of the city would arise in riotous
manner and so sley him, yet for all that he dyed in the way toward London. The
authority of this Cardinal set the clergy in such a pride that they
disdained all men, wherefore when he was fallen they followed after as you shall
hear. To write the life and doings of this Cardinal, it were a great work,
but whatsoever he did God forgive his soul his bodies misdedes.

After the Cardinal was dead, the king removed from Hampton court to Grenewiche
where he with queen Katherine kept a solemn Christmas, and on the twelfe
night he satte in the halle in his estate, where as were diverse Enterludes,
rich Maskes and disportes, and after that a great banquet. And after Christmas
he came to his Manor of Westminster, which before was called york place, for
after that the Cardinal was attainted in the Praemunire and was gone Northward,
he made a feoffement of the same place to the king, and the chapter of the
Cathedral church of York by their writing confirmed the same feoffement and
then then king changed the name and called it the kings Manor of Westminster
and no more York place.

The whole clergy of England ever supported and maintained the power legantyne
of the Cardinal, wherefore the kings counsel learned said plainly that they
all were in the Praemunire, the spiritual lords were called by process into the
kings Benche to answer, but before their day of apperaunce they in their
Conuocacion concluded an humble submission in writing and offered the king a C.
M. pound to be their good lord, and also to give them a pardon of all offenses
touching the Praemunire by act of Parliament, ye which offer with much labor
was accepted, and their pardon promised. In this submission the Clergy called
the king supreme head of ye church of England, The king first named supreme
head.
which thing they never confessed before, whereupon many things followed after
as you shall hear.

When the Parliament was bego^ne the vi. day of January, the pardon of the
spiritual persons was signed with the kings hand and sent to the lords,
which in time convenient assented tot he bill and sent it to the commons in
the lower house, and when it was red, diverse froward persons would in no wise
assent to it except all men were pardoned, saying that all men which had any
thing to do with the Cardinal were in the same case: the wyser sort answered
that they would not compel the king to give them his pardon, and beside that
it was uncharitably done of them to hurt the Clergy and do themselfes no good,
wherefore they advised them to consent to the bill and after to sue to the king
for their pardon, which counsel was not followed, but they determined first to
send the Speaker to the king or they would assent to the bill, whereupon Thomas
Audely spekar for the commons with a convenient number of the common house came
to the kings presence and there eloquently declared to the king how the
commons sore lamented and bewailed their chance to think or imagyne them
selfs to be out of his gracious favor, because that he had graciously given
his pardon of the Praemunire to his spiritual subjects and not to them,
wherefore they most humbly besought his grace of his accustomed goodness and
clemency to include them in the same pardon.

The king wisely answered that he was their prince and sovereign lord and
that they ought not to restrain him of his liberty, nor to co^pel him to
show his mercy, for it was at his pleasure to use the extremity of his laws,
or mitigate and pardon the same, wherefore, since they denied to assent to the
pardon of the spiritual persons, which pardon he said he might give without
their assent by his great seal, he would be well advised or he pardoned them,
because he would not be noted to be compelled to do it: with this answer the
speaker and the commons departed very sorrowful and pensive and some light
persons said that Thomas Crumwell which was newly come to the favor or the
king had disclosed the secrets of the commons, which thing caused the king to
be so extreme.

The king like a good prince considered how sorrowful his commons were of the
answer that he made them, and thought that they were not quiet, wherefore of
his own mocion he caused a pardon of the Praemunire to be drawn, and signed it
with his hand and sent it to the common house by Christopher Hales his atturnay,
which bill was sone assented to. Then the commons louyngly thanked the king
and much praised his wit that he had denied it to them when they unworthily
demanded it, and had bountyfully granted it when he perceived that they
sorowed and lamented.

While the Parliamene sat, of the xxx. day of March at after noone there came
into the common house the lord Chauncelor and diverse lords of the
spirituality and temporaltie to the number of xii. and there the lord
Chauncelor said, you of this worshipful house I am sure be not so ignorant but
you know well that the king our sovereign lord has married his brothers wife,
for she was both wedded and bedded with his brother prince Arthur, and therefore
you may surely say that he has married his brothers wife, if this marriage be
good or no many clerks do doubt. Wherefore the king like a virtuous prince
willing to be satisfied in his conscience and also for the surety of his
realm has with great deliberacion consulted with great clerks, and has sent
my lord of London here present to the chief universities of all Chirstendome
to know their opinion and judgment in that behalf, And although that the
universities of Cambryge and Oxforde had been sufficient to discuss y^ cause,
yet because they be in his realm and to avoid all suspicion of parcialitie he
has sent into the realm of France, Italy the Popes dominions, and Uenicians
to know their judgment in that bahalfe, which have concluded, written and
sealed their determinacions according as you shall hear red. Then sir Bryan
Tuke took out of a box xii. writings sealed, and red them word by word as
after ensues translated out of Latin into the English tongue.

The determinacion of the university of Orliaunce.
Not long syns there were put forth to us the College of doctors, regentes of
the university of Orliaunce, Orleaunce
these two questions that follow. The first, whether it be lawful by the law
of God for the brother to take to wife that woman whom his brother has left?
The second if this be forbidden by the law of God, whether this prohibicion of
the law of God may be remitted by the Pope his dispensacion? We the foresaid
College of doctors regentes according to our custom and usage came many times
together and did sit diverse times upon the discussyng of these foresaid doubts
and questions and did examyne and way as much as we might diverse and many
places both of the old testament and new, and also the interpreters and
declarers both of the law of God and the Canon law. After we had wayed and
considered all things exactly and with good leisure and deliberacio^, we have
determined and concluded that these foresaid marriages cannot be attempted nor
enterprised except a man do wrong and plain contrary to the law of God: yea
and that although it be done by pardon and sufferaunce of the Pope. And in
witness of this conclusion and determinacion we have caused this present public
writing to be signed by our Scribe of our said university, and to be
strengthed and fortified with the seal of the ^ame: Enacted in the chapel of
our lady the Annunciacion, or the good ^idynges that she had of Christ's
coming in Orleaunce, the year of our Lord M.D.xxix. the.v. day of April.

The determinacion of the faculty of Decrees of the university of Paris.
In the name of the Lord so be it. Lawers of Paris.
There was put forth before us the Deane and College of the right counsailful
faculty of Decrees of the university of Paris this question. Whither that the
Pope might dispense, that the brother might mary the wife that his brother has
left, if marriage between his brother now dead and his wife were once
consummate? we the Deane and College of the said faculty after many
disputacions and reasons made of both sides upon this matter and after great
and long turnyng and serchyug of books, both of the law of God and the Popes
law and of the law Civil, we counsel and say that the Pope has no power to
dispense in this foresaid case: In witness whereof we have caused this present
writing to be strengthed with the seal of our faculty and with the sign of
our Scribe or chief Bedle. Yeuen in the congregation or assemble at saint Ihon
Laterenense in Paris the second day of May M.D.xxx.

The determinacion of Ciuilians and Canonistes of the university of Angevv.
Not long time syns there were purposed unto us y^ Rector and doctors Regentes
in law Canon and Civil of the university of Angew Angew*
these ii. questions here following, that is to we^e, whether it is unlawful by
the law of God and the law of nature for a man to mary the wife of his
brother that is departed without children so that the marriage was consummate?
And again whether it is lawful for the Pope to dispense with such marriage?
We the aforesaid Rector and doctors have according to our custom and usage
many times communed together and sytten to dispute these questions, and to
find out the certainty of them. And after that we had discussed and examined
many and diverse places as well of the law of God as of the law of man, which
seemed to pertain to the same purpose, and after that we had brought for both
parties and examined them. All things faithfully and after good conscience
considered and upon sufficient deliberacion and auisement taken, we defyne and
determyne that neither by the law of God nor of nature it is permitted for any
christen man, no not even with the authority of the sea Apostolic, or with
any dispensacion granted by the Pope to mary the wife that his brother has
left, although his brother be departed without children, after that the marriage
is once finished and consummate. And for witness of these aforesaid things, we
have commanded our Scribe of our said university to sign this present
public in^^rument, and it to be fortified with the great seal of our
university, Ena^ted in the church of saint Peter in Angew, the year of our
Lord M.D.xxx, the vii. day of May.

The determinacion of the faculty of divinity in the university of Paris.
The Deane and the faculty of the holy divinity of the university of Paris,
Paris.
to all them to whom this present writing shall come wysheth sa^etie in our
savior Jesus Christ which is the very true safety: Where of late there is
risen a great controversy of great difficulty upon the marriage between the
most noble Henry the viii. king of England defendor of the faith and lord of
Ireland. etc. and the noble lady Katherine queen of England, daughter to the
Catholic king Ferdinand, which marriage was not only contract between her and
her former husband, but also consummate and finished by carnal intermedelyng.
This question also was purposed to us to discuss and examine according to
justice and truth, that is to say, whether to mary her that our brother dead
without children has left being so prohibited by the law of God and nature,
that it can not be made lefull by the Popes dispensacion, that any Christen
manne should mary the wife that his brother has left? We the foresaid Deane
and faculty calling to our remembrance how virtuous and how holy a thing and
how agreeable to our profession, unto our duty of love and charity, it is for
us to show the way of justice and right, of virtue and honesty to them
which desire to lead and pass over their life in the law of our Lord with
sure and quiet conscience: could not but be ready to satisfy so honest and
just requests: whereupon after our old wont, we came together upon our oath in
the church of S. Maturyne, and there for the same cause had a sole^pne Mass
with devout prayer to the holy ghost. And also we took an oath every man to
deliver and to study upon the foresaid question, as should be to the pleasure
of God and according to conscience: And after diverse and many Sessions or
sittynges, which we had and continued in the church of saint Maturyn, and
also in the college called Sarbo^e from the viii. day of June to the second day
of July. When we had searched and examined through and through with as much
diligence as we could and with such reverence and religion or conscience as
becomes in such a matter, both the books of holy scripture, and also the
most approved interpreters of the same: Finally the general and synodal
cou^sailes, decrees and constitucions of the sacre and holy Church, which by
long custom has been received and approbate, we the foresaid Deane and
faculty disputyng upon the foresaid question and making answer to the same,
and that after the judgment and full consent of the most part of the said
faculty have concluded and determined that the foresaid marriage with the
brothers wife departing without children be so forbidden both by the law of God
and of nature that the pope has no power to dispense with such marriages whether
they be contract or to be contract. And for credence, believe, and witness of
this our Assercion and determinacion, we have caused the s^ale of our faculty
with our Notaries sign to be put unto this present writing. Dated in our
general congregation that we keep by an oath at saint Maturynes, the year of
our Lord M.D.xxx. the second day of July.

The determinacion of the university of Burges in Berry or Biturs.
We the Deane and faculty of divinity in the University of Burges, Burges*
because we will according to the example of S. Paul doctor of ye Gentiles
which does likewise, will begin our writing with prayer unto all the beloved
of God, among whom you most dear readers unto whom we write be called, grace,
peace and quietness of conscience come to you from God the father and from our
Lord Jesus Christ: while we were gathered together all into one place (in the
octaues of Whitsontide) both in body and mind, and were sittyng in the house
of the said deane, there was a question put to us again, which had been
purposed to us often times before, being no small question, which was this:
Whither the brother taking the wife of his brother now dead, and the marriage
once consummate and perfect does a thing unlawful or no? At the last when we
had sought for the truth of the thing and had perceived and found it our by
much labor and study of every one of us by himself, and by much and often
turnyng of holy books, every one of us not corrupt, whereby we might the less
obey the truth, began as the holy ghost did put in his mind to give every man
one arbitrament and sentence which was this. I have well perceived in very
truth without regard or respect of any person that those persons which be
rehearsed in y^ xviii.cha. of ye Leuiti^al law, be forbidden by ye very law of
nature to co^ matrimony together and that this law can in no wise be released
by any authority of any manne by the which there is made an abominable
discovering of his brothers foulnes. And this is the sign of our commen Bedyll
or Notarie and the seal of our foresaid faculty put unto this present writing
the x. day of June, in the year of our Lord M.D.xxx. And because the foot of
our writing shall be of one form and fashion with the head, as we began with
prayer, so let us end after the example of S. Paul that we spoke of before,
and say, the grace and favor of our Lord Jesus Christ, the charity and love of
God and the communicacion of the holy ghost be with you all. Amen.

The determinacion of the divines in the popes university of Bonony.
God best and mightiest taught first the old law and testament with his own
mouth, Bonony.
to form and fashion according to love and charity, the manners and life of
men. And secondarely the same God did take afterward manhod upon him for to
be the redemer of man and so made the new law or new Testament not only to
form and fashion according to love and charity the life and manners of men,
but also to take away and to declare doubts the which did arise in many
cases, which when they be once clearly determined shall help greatly to
perfect virtue and goodness, that is to say, to perfect love and charity.
Wherefore we thought it evermore, that it should be our part to follow these
most holy doctrines and laws of our father of heaven, and that we lightened by
the light of God above and of the holy ghost should give our sentence and
judgment in high and doubtful matters after that we have once leyserly and
sufficiently taken aduisement upon the cause, and have clearly serched out and
opened the thing by many reasons and writings of holy fathers as well for the
one part as for the other, doing nothing as nere as we can rashly or without
deliberacion. Therefore where certain great and noble men did instantly desire
us that we would with all diligence possible look for this case that after
ensues, and afterward to give our judgment upon the same, according to most
equity, right, and conscience, stickyng ouely to the truth: All the doctors
of divinity of this University, when we had every one by himself examined
the matter at home in our houses, came all together into one place and there
treated upon it many days with as much connyng and learning as we could, we
anon looked on the case together, we examined it together, we compared all thing
together, we handelyng every thing by it self, did try them even as you would
say by line and rule, we brought forth all manner of reasons, which we thought
could be brought for the contrary part, and afterward solued them yea even the
reasons of the most reverend father Cardinal Cai^taine, yea and moreover the
Deu^eronomi dispensacion of stirryng up the brothers sede, and shortly all
other manner of reasons and opinions of ye contrary part, as many as seemed to
belong to this purpose, and this question that was asked of us was this:
Whether it was forbidden only by the ordinance of the church or else by the
law of God, that a man might not mary the wife left of his brother departed
without children? and if it were commanded by both the laws not to be done,
whether the Pope may dispense with any man to make such marriage? the which
question now that we have examined it both by our self secretly and also
openly and diligently and exactly as we could possible, and discussed it after
ye best manner that our wits would serve: we determyne, give judgment and
say, and as stiffly as we can we witness and without any doubt do steadfastly hold
that this marriage should be horrible, accursed and to be cried out upon and
utterly abominable not only for a christen man but for an infidele,
unfaithful or heathen, And that it is prohibit under grievous pains and
punishementes by the law of God, of nature and of man, and that the Pope,
though that he almost may do all things, unto whom Christ did give the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, has no power to give a dispensacion to any man for
to contract such a marriage for any manner of cause, consideracion or
suggestion: And all we be ^eady at all times and in all places to defend and
maintain the truth of this our conclusion. In witness whereof we have made this
present writing, and have fortefied the same both with the seal of our
vniuers^tie and also with the seal of our College of doctors of divinity and
have subscribed and signed it with our general and accustomed subscripcion in
the Cathedral church of Bonony the x. day of June, the year of our
Lord.M.D.xxx.

The determinacion of the faculty of divinity in the university of Padua in
Italy.
They that have written for the maintenance of the catholic faith, affirm
that God best and mightiest did give the precepts and commandments of the
old law with his own mouth, to be an exampler for us, wherein we might see
how we should order our life and manners, and this God had done before he became
manne: and after that he had put upon him our manhod and was become redemer or
byer of mankind, He made the new law or testament, and of his mere
liberality did give it us, not only for the cause aforesaid, but also to take
away and declare all manner of doubts and questions that might arise, the
which once opened and declared what their very true meaning is, to thentent
that thereby we might be made perfitely good which be greatly fruitful to us and
wholesome: and seeing that this was the mind of God in making these laws, it
has been our intent and evermore shall be, as it becomes christen men to follow
these most sole^pne ordinances of ye most high workemaster God, and the help
of his light, y^ is above the capacity of nature, to utter our judgment in
all manner of doubts and hard questions. After we had once considered the
thing after the best manner, and had by sufficient leisure made it clear by many
evident reasons of both parties, and by many aucthorities of the fathers of the
Church, determinyng nothing as nere as were can, rashely or without convenient
deliberacion. Seeing therefore that certain great Orators or ambassadors did
humbly require and pray us that we would vouchesafe and search out with all the
diligence that we could this case following and afterward to give our sentence
upon the same, plainly and simply lokyng only on the truth. After the Doctors
of divinity of this University came together, and after that we had every man
examined the thing particulerly in our own houses and have beaten it with all
learning and connyng that we were able: Anon when we were together, we
considered, examined and wayed all things by them selfs, and brought in all
manner of reasons, which we thought might by any means be made to the
contrary, and without all color or cloak did wholly and clearly dissolve them
and take them away. And amongst al, the dispensacion by the law of
Deut^ronomi of styrryng up the brothers sede, and al manner other reasons and
determinacions to the contrary, that seemed to us to pertain any thing to that
purpose we utterly confuted and dispatched them. And the question that is put
to us is this: Whether to mary the wife of our brother departed without
children is forbidden only by y^ law of the Church or by ye law of God
also: and if it be forbidden by both these laws, whither the Pope may dispense
with any man for such matrimony or no? which question now that we have
discussed it, and as far as we could, have made it clear, both privately
every man by him self, and after al togethers openly, we say, judge, decree,
witness and for a truth affirm y^ such marriage is no marriage, yea and that it
is abhorred and cursed of every christen man, and to be abhominate as a grievous
sin. And that it is as clearly as can be forbidden under most cruel
penalties by the laws of nature, of God and of man: And that the Pope, unto
whom y^ keys of the kingdom of heaven be committed by Christ the son of
God, has no power to dispense by the right and law for any cause, suggestion
or excuse, that any such matrimonye should be contract. For those things
which be forbidden by the law of God be not underneath his power but above it,
nor he is not the Uicar of God as concerning those things, but only in such
things as God has not determined himself in his law, but has left them to
the determinacion and ordinance of man. And to mayntaine the truth of this
our sentence and conclusion, and for most certain and undoubted defense of
the same, we al of one mind and accord shall at tall times and in every place
be ready. In witness whereof we have made this writing and have authorized it with
the accustomed seal of our University and also of our College of divines,
Dated at Padway in the Church of the Hermites of saint Austen the first day of
July, in the year of our Lord M.D.xxx.

The Determinacion of the University of Tholose.
There was treated in our university of Tholose a very hard question: Whether
it be lefull for the brother to marye her which had been wife to his brother now
departed, and that without children? There was beside this another thing that
troubled us very sore: Whether, if the pope which has the cure of Christ's
flock would by his dispensacion (as men call it) suffer this, that then at the
least wise it might be lawful? The Rector of the University called to
counsel all the doctors rege^tes that were that time at Tholose for to show
their minds on this question, and that not once, but twyse: For he judged that
counsel geuyng ought not to be hasted nor done upon head, and that we had
need of time and space to do any thing conveniently and as it ought to be.
At the last there came together into one place all the best learned and
connyngest doctors, both of holy divinity, and also doctors that were best
learned in both laws, yea, and finally as many as had any experience in any
matter and were able to do any thing either by judgment and discresion, or by
eloquence or their excellent wits. And there did swear that they would obey
the sacre and holy counsels, and would follow the Decrees of the Fathers,
which no man that has any good conscience will violate or break. And so every
man said his mind, and the matter was debated and reasoned diffusely and at
large for both parts. In conclusion, we fell so fast to this point, that this
was the sentence and determinacion that our University, with one voice of
all, did determine and conclude with most pure and clear conscience and
defiled with no manner of leven or corrupcion: That it is lawful for no man,
neither by the law of God, nor by the law of nature, to take her to wife that
his brother has left: And seeing that it may not be done by the law of God
nor of nature, we answered all: That the Pope can lose no man from that law
nor dispense with him. And as for that thing can not be contrary to our
sentence and verdyct: that the brother in old time was compelled by the law of
Deuteronomy to mary the brothes wife departed without issue: For this law was
but a shadow and a figure of things to come, which vanyshed away as soon as
ever the light and truth of the Gospel appeared: And because these things be
thus, we have given our sentence after this form above, and have commanded
the same to be sygned by our Notary which is our secretory, and to be fortified
and aucthorised by the puttyng to of our autenticall Seal of our University
aforesaid, at Tholose the Calendes or first day of Octobre, the year of our
Lord a thousand.v.C.xxx.

After these Determinacions were read, there were showed above an hundredth
books drawn by Doctors of strange Regions, which all agreed the Kings
Marriage to be unlawful, which were not read, for the day was spent. Then the
Chauncellor said: Now you of this commen house may report in your countries
what you have seen and heard and then al men shall openly perceive that the
King has not attempted this matter of will or pleasure, as some strangers
report, but only for the discharge of his conscience and surety of the
succession of his realm: This is the cause of our repair hither to you, and
now we will depart.

When these Determinacions were publysshed, all wise men in the Realm much
abhorred that marriage: but women, and such as were more wylfull then wise or
learned, spoke against the Determinacion, and said that the Uniuersities were
corrupt and entysed so to do, which is not to be thought. The King him self
sore lamented his chance and made no manner o^ mirth nor pastyme as he was wont
to do, and dyned and resorted to the queen as he was accustomed, and minished
nothing of her estate, and much loved and cheryshed their daughter the Lady
Mary: but in no wise he would not come to her bed. When Ester began to draw
nere, the Parliament for that time ended, and was proroged till the last day of
March, in the next year.

In the Parliament aforesaid was an Act made, The Act of Po^^onyng.
that whosoever did poison any person, should be boiled in hot water to the
death: which Act was made because one Richard Roose, in the Parliament time
had poisoned diverse persons at the Bishop of Rochesters place, which Richard,
according to the same Act, was boiled in Smythfelde the Teneber wednis^ay
followyng, to the terrible example of all other.

This winter season, on the.xxvi. day of Ianyuer, in the city of Luxborne in
Portingale, was a wondrous Earthquake, (...) erthquake
which destroyed many houses and towers, and slew many people by falling down
of the same, the Kings Palace shoke so, that he and the Queen, and the Ladies
fled out of their Palace, without any servants, and sought succor where they
might get it, and sodeinly the quakyng seassed: Then the Rocks opened, and out
sprange the water, that the ships in the haven were like to have peryshed:
Then the earth quaked again, and did more harm then before, and at night it
ceased: of which Earthquake, many men were murdered and distroyed.

When the university aforesaid, and a great nombre of clerks and well learned
men had determined the Kings marriage to be unlawful, detestable, and against
Gods law, as you have heard, the King willing the Queen to have knowledge of
the same, sent to her diverse Lords of the counsel the last dai of May being
the wednisday in Whitson weke: the which Lords, (...)
in her chaumbre at Grenewyche, declared to her all the Determinacion as you
have heard, and asked her whether she would for the quietness of the Kings
conscience, put the matter to.iiii. Prelates, and.iiii. temporal Lords of
this Realm, or abide by her appele. The Queen answered: The King my father
which concluded my marriage, I am sure, was not so ignorant but he asked
conncell of clerks and well learned men before he married me the second time:
for if he had had any doubt in my marriage, he would not have disbursed so
great a treasure as he did, and then all Doctors in manner agreed my marriage to
be good, insomoche that the Pope him self, which knew best what was to be
dooen, did both dispense and ratified my second marriage, against whose doing
I marvel that any person will speak or write: And as to the Determinacion
of the university, I am a woman and lack wit and learning to answer to
them, but to God I commit the judgment of that, whether they have done justly
or percially: for this I am sure, that neither the Kings father, nor my father
would have condiscended to our Marriage if it had been declared to be unlawful:
and where you say that I should put the cause to.viii. persons of this Realm
for quyetnes of the Kings conscience, I pray God send his grace a quiet
conscience, and this shall be your answer: That I say I am his lawful wife, and
to him lawfully married, and by the order of holy Church I was to him espowsed
as his true wife, although I was not so worthy, and in that point I will abide
till the cowrte of Rome which was preuy to the beginning have made thereof a
determinacion and final endyng. With this answer the Lords departed to the
King, which was sorye to hear of her wylfull opinion, and in especial that
she more trusted in the Popes law then in keeping the Precepts of God.

The King like a politic Prince, perceived that the Merchaunt strangers, and
in especial, Italians, Spanyardes and Portyngales daily brought Oade, Oil,
Sylke, Clothes of Gold, Ueluet, and other Merchau^dyse into this Realm, and
therefore received ready money, which money they ever delivered to other
merchauntes by exchange, and never employed the same money on the commodities
of this Realm, so that thereby the King was hyndered in his Custom outward,
and also the commodities of his Realm were not uttered, to the great
hynderaunce of his subjects: wherefore he caused a Proclamacion to be made in
Mydsomer Term, A Proclamacion of Exchange.
according to an old Estatute made in the time of King Richard the second:
That no person should make any exchange contrary to the true meaning of the
same Act and Estatute, upon pain to be taken the kings mortal enemy, and to
forfayte all that he might forfayte. After this Proclamacion, many clothes and
other commodities of this Realm were well sold, but shortly after Merchauntes
fell to exchange again, and the Proclamacion was shortly forgotten.

The King after Whytsontyde and the Queen removed to Wyndsore, and there
continued till the.xiiii. day of Iulye, on which day the King removed to
Woodstocke and left her at Wyndsore, where she lay a while, and after removed
to the Moore, and afterward to Estamstede: and after this day, the King and
she never saw together. Wherefore the Commen people dailye murmured and spoke
their folysh fantasies. But the affairs of Princes be not ordered by the
commen people, nor it were not convenient that all things were opened to them.

After this, the King sent certain Lords to the Queen to Estamstede to
advise her to be confirmable to the law of God, and to show unto her, that
all the Uniuersities had clearly determined, that the Pope could in no wise
dispense with her Marriage, and therefore the Dispensacion to which she most
trusted of all, was clearly void and of none effect. These, with many mo
causes and aduysementes were declared to her, which nothing moved her at all,
but still she said: Truly I am the Kings true wife, and to him married: and if
all Doctors were dead, or law, or learning so far out of man's mind at that
time of our marriage, yet I can not think that the court of Rome and the whole
Church of England would consent to a thing unlawful and detestable (as you
call it) but still I say I am his wife, and for him will I pray. With this
answer the Lords departed, and came to the King and made report as you have
heard.

This marriage was not alonly talked of in England* but in France Spain*
Italy, yea, thorough all Christendom in manner, and especially in themperourrs
Court, insomoche as a great Marquis of Spain said to sir Nicholas Heruy
knight being the Kings Ambassader in themperours Cowrte at Gaunte: My Lord
Ambassador of England, I marvel not a little why the King your Master
dalyeth so with themperours Aunte, she is dissended I assure you of a noble
blood and hye Parentage, themperours Majesty may not nor will not suffer so^he
iniurye to be done to his blood and lynage, that she should whole.xxii.
years and more serve him as his wife and bedfelow and now to reiecte her, what
Princely manner is that* therein is neither love nor loyalty? For if a poor
verlet had so long served a Prince, what heart could have then rejected him or
put him from him? it can not be said that your King is well councelled: the
matter is much meruayled at amongst Christen Princes and think her not to be
honestly handeled nor honorably: And if it be so that she be not his wife
(because she was once his brothers wife) as your Doctors say and affirm, then
no man can excuse your King nor say bnt that she has been evil handeled, and
kept like a Concubine or Paramour for the bodily appetite, which is a great
spotte, shame, and rebuke to her and to her whole lynage, which spot no ways
can be sponged out nor recompensed, for shame in a kynred can by no treasure be
redeemed: If he King your Master remember well this matter, he shall find that
it transcendeth far above the loss of erthly possessions, I would he would
be better aduysed.

The Englysh Ambassador answered: An Answer.
My Lord, my commission exte^deth not to answer this matter, but to inform
you of the truth, I will somewhat say beside my commission: First I say to you,
that the king my master never meant in this matter but honorably, truly, and
virtuously both for the pleasure of God and the profit and surety of his
Realm, nor never was nor shall be any Prince that ever was better contented
and pleased with a woman then he has been with her, nor never Prince more
loved, cherished, nor honored a woman, then the king my Master has dooen
her, and would with heart, mind, and will her still keep as his wife, if
Gods law would suffer it: My Lord, if you remember well all thing, you
shall find that this doubt was first moved in the Council of Spain, when the
Emperor and the King of England were agreed, that themperoure should marye
the Lady Marye the Kings Daughter: Upon that communicacion this doubt was
put to themperours Council, whether she were the Kings lawful Daughter or
not, because it was well known that he had married his brothers wife.

This matter was not so secret but it spread into the council both of France
and Flaunders, to the great defamacion of the King of England, and to the
great vncertaintye of the succession of his Realm: whereof when he was
aduertysed, I think never Prince took it more sorrowfully nor more dolently,
and for satisfiynge of his conscience, he called his Cleargye and felt their
opinions, and not trustyng his own subjects only (which I ensure you be
excellently learned) sent to all the Uniuersities of France, Italye, and diverse
other Realms to know their judgments in this case, and surely the King my
master sore lamenteth his chance and bewaileth the time myspent if it so
^uccede, for then is his Realm destitute of a lawful heir begotten of his
body, which is the greatest displeasure that may come to a Prince: The
Marriage was well meant both of the kings father and the Queen's father, and
they married together by the aduyce and council of their friends, and so
louyngly continued together as man and wife without any scruple or doubt, till
you of Spain moved first the question and put the marriage in ambiguitie, and
therefore you can not with honor think but that the King has done like a
wise Prince to search out the solucion of your doubt which so near touches
his soul and the suretye of his Realm: And all thing that he has done he
has done by great aduysement and with a great deliberacion, wherefore no
reasonable man can say but he has done like a wise and virtuous Prince. The
Marquis hearing this answer said, that the King did wisely to try the
truth, and was somewhat ashamed of that that he had spoken, as I was infourmed
by them that were present.

You have heard before how the Cleargye in their Conuocacion had granted to
the King the so^me of one hundredth thousand pound to be pardoned of the
Praemunire: for leuiyng of the which sum, every Bishop in his Dioces called
before him all the Priests as well chauntrie and parysh priests as Persons
and Uycars, amongst whom, Doctor Ihon Stokesley Bishop of London, a man of
great wit and learning, but of little discresion and humanity (which caused
him to be out of the favor of the common people) called before him all the
Preistes within the City of London, whether they were Curates or Stipendaries,
the first day of Septembre being fridaye, in the Chapter House of Saint Paull,
at which day the Priests appeared, and the Bysshoppes policye was to have
only six or eight priests together, and by persuacions to have caused them
to grant some porsion toward the payment of the foresaid One Hundredth.M.
pound, but the nombre of the Priests was so great, for they were six
hundredth at the least, and with them came many Temporal men to hear of the
matter, that the Bishop was disapoynted of his purpose: for when the
Bysshoppes Officers called in certain Priests by name into the Chapter
house: with that, a great nombre entered, for they put the Bysshppes Officers
that kept the door a side. After this the officers got the door shut again:
then the priests without said: We will not be kept without, and our fellows
be within: we know not what the Bishop will do with them. The Temporal
men being present stomaked and conforted the priests to enter, so that by
force they opened the door, and one struck the Bysshoppes Officer over the face
and entered the Chapter house and many temporal men with them, and long it
was or any silence could be made: and at last when they were appea^ed the
Bishop stood up and said: Brethern, I marvel not a little why you be so
heddy and know not what shall be said to you, The bishopes saying
therefore I pray you to keep silence and to hear me patiently: My friends
all, you know well that we be men frail of condition and no Angels, and by
frayltie and lack of wisdom we have misdemeaned our self toward the King
our Soueraygne Lord and his laws, so that all we of the Clearge were in the
Praemunire, by reason whereof, all our Promocions, Lands, Goods and Catelles
were to him forfayte and our bodies ^eadye to be enprisoned, yet his grace
moved with pity and compassyon, demanded of us what we could say why he
should not extend his laws upon us, then the fathers of the Cleargye humbly
besought his grace of mercy, to whom he answered that he was ever enclyned to
mercy: then for all our great offenses we had little penance for where he
might by the rygor of his law have taken al our lyuelod, goods and catels, he
was contented with one hundredth thousand pounds to be paid in five years: and
although that this so^me be more then we may easelye bear, yet by the rygor
of his laws we should have borne the whole burdeyne: Wheerfore my brethren, I
charitably exhort you to bear your parts of your liuelod and salary toward
the payment of this so^me granted. Then it was shortly said to the
Bishop: My Lord, twentye nobles a year is but a ba^e living for a priest,
for now victayle and every thing in manner is so dear, that poverty in manner
enforces us to say nay: beside that, my Lord we never offended in the
Praemunire, for we medeled never with the Cardinals faculties, let the
Bysshoppes and Abbottes which have offended pay. Then the Bysshoppes officers
gave to the priests high words, which caused them to be the more
obs^^nate. Also diverse temporal men which were present conforted the Priests
and bade them agree to no payment. In this rumor, diverse of the Bysshoppes
servants were buffyted and stryken so that the Bishop began to be a
frayde, and with fair words appeased the noise, and for all things which
were done or said there he pardoned them and gave to them his blessyng and
prayed them to depart in charity. And then they departed thynkyng to hear no
more of the matter, but they were disceyued, for the Bishop went to sir Thomas
Moore then being Lord Chauncellor (which greatly favored the Bishop and the
Cleargye) and to him made a greuouse complaynte and declared the fact very
grievously, whereupon commandment was sent to sir Thomas Pargitor Mayer of the
City, to attache certain priests and temporal men, and so.xv. priests
and.v. temporal men were arrested, of the which, some were sent to the Tower,
some to the Fleet, and other Prisons, where they remained long after.

In this season were diverse Preachynges in the Realm, one contrary to another
concerning the Kings Marriage, and in especial one Thomas Ab^ll clerk, both
preached and wrote a Book, that the Marriage was lawful, which caused many
simple men to believe his opinion: This Abell was the Queens Chaplayne, and
wrote this Book to please her withal: wherefore the King caused a
Determinacio^ of the Uniuersities, and all the iudgementz of great Clerks to be
compyled into a Book and to be Printed, which Book did satisfy the minds
of all indifferent and discrete persons: but some men were perciall that
neither learning nor reason could satisfy their wylfull minds.

This year the King kept his Christemas at Grenewyche with great solempnitie,
but all men said that there was no myrthe in that Christemas because the
Queen and the Ladies were absent.

After Christemas the.xv. day of January the Parliament began to sytte, and
amongst diverse griefs which the Commons were grieved with, they sore
co^playned of the cruelty of the Ordinarirs, for calling men before them Ex
officio: that is, by reason of there office: For the Ordinaries would send for
men and ley Accusacions to them of Heresye, and say they were accused, and ley
Articles to them, but no Accuser should be brought forth, which to the Commons
was very dredeful and grievous: for the party so Assited must either Abjure or
be burned, for Purgacion he might make none.

When this matter and other Exactions done by the Clergy in their Courts were
long debated in the Common House, at the last it was concluded and agreed, that
all the griefs which the temporal men were grieved with, should be put in
writing and delivered to the King, which by great aduyce was done: wherefore,
the.xviii. day of March the Common speaker accompanied with diverse Knights
and Burgesses of the Common House came to the Kings presence, and there
declared to him how the temporal men of his Realm were sore agreued with the
cruel demeanoure of the Prelattes and Ordinaryes, which ^ouched both their
bodies and goods, all which griefs, the Speaker delivered to the King in
wri^ynge, most humbly besechyng his gr^c^ to t^ke soche an order and direction
i^ that ^aie, as to his high wisdom might seem most convenient. Further he
beseched the king to consider what pain, charge and cost, his humble subjects
o^ the nether house had sust^yned sith the beginning of this Parliament, and
that it would please his grace of his Princely benignity to dissolve his
court of Parliament, that his subi^^tes might repair into their countries.

When the King had received the Supplicacion of the Commons, he paused a while
and then said: It is not the office of a King which is a Judge to be to light
of credence, The Kings saying.
nor I have not, nor will not use the same: for I will hear the party that is
accu^ed speak or I give any ^entence: your book conteyn^th diverse Articles of
great and weyghtye matters, and as I perceive, it is against the Spiritual
persons and Prelates of our Realm, of which thing you desire a redress and
a re^ormacion, which desire and request is mere contraryant to yout last
Peticion: For you require to have the Parlyament dissolved and to depart into
your countries, and yet you would have a reformacion of your griefs with all
diligence: Although that your pain have been great in tariyng, I as^ure you
mine has been no less then yours, and yet all the pain that I take for your
wealths is to me a pleasure: therefore if you will have protyte of your
complaynte, you must tarry the time, orels to be without remedy: I much commend
you that you will not contend nor stand in strife with the Spiritual men,
which be your Christen brethren, but much more me thinks that you should
not contend with me that am your Souereygne Lord and King, considering that
I seek peace and quietness of you: For I have sent to you a byll concerning
wards and primer season, in the which things I am greatly wronged: wherefore I
have offered you reason as I thy^ke, yea, and so thinks all the Lords, for
they have set their hands to the book: Therefore I assure you, if you will not
take some reasonable end now when it is offered, I will se^che out the
extremity of the law, and then will I not off^e you so much again: with
this answer, the Speaker and his company departed. The cause why the King
spoke these words was this: Daily men made Feoffementes of their lands to
their uses, and declared their wylles of their lands with soch remaynders,
that not alonly the king but all other Lords lost their Wards, Marriages and
relieffes, and the king also lost his primer season, and the profit of the
lyuerey, which was to him very prediudiciall and a great loss: wherefore he,
like an indifferent Prince, not willing to take all, nor to lose all, caused a
byll to be drawn by his learned council, in the which was devised, that
every man might make his will of the half of his land, so that he left the
other half to the heir by descent. When this Byil came first among the
Commons, lord how the ignorant persons were grieved, and how shamefully they
spoke of the byll and of the Kings learned Council: but the wise men which
understood and saw the myschiefe to come, would gladly have had the byll to
be assented to, or at the least to have put the King in a suretye of the third
or fourth part, which offer I was credebly informed the King would have
taken: but many froward and wylfull persons, not regardyng what might ensue
(as it did in deed) would neither consent to the byll as the Lords had
agreed and set to their hands, nor yet agree to no reasonable qualificacion of
the same, which they sore repented: For after this, the King called the Judges
and best learned men of his Realm, and they disputed this matter in the
Chau^cery, and agreed that land could not be wylled by the order of the
common law: whereupon an Act was made, that no man might declare his will of no
part of his land: which Act sore grieved the Lords and Gentlemen that had
many children to setfurth. Therefore you may judge what myschiefe comes of
wylfull blyndnesse and lack of foresyght in so great causes.

This Parliament was proroged till the tenth day of Apryll, in the which
Parliament was an Act made, that Bishops should pay no more Annates or money
for their Bulls to the Pope: for it was openly proved that there was paid for
the Bulls of Bysshoppes, in the fourth year of King Henry the seventh, the
Kings father, till this year, one hundredth three score thousand pound
sterlyng, beside all other Dispensacions and Pardones, whereof the sum was
incredible.

When the Parliament was begone again after Ester, there came down to the
Common house the Lord Chauncelloure, the Dukes of Norffolke and Suffolk, the
Earls of Arundell, Oxforde, Northumbrelande, Rutlande, Wylshyre and Sussex, and
after they were set, the Lord Chauncellor declared, how the King was
advertised by his Council, and in especial by the Duke of Norffolke, how on
the Marches between England and Scotland was very little habitacion, on the
Englysh side, but on the Scottysh side was great habitacion, and the Scotts
dwelled even just on the border, by the reason whereof they invaded England
dyuets times, and did to the Kings subjects great hurt and displeasure:
wherefore the King intended to make dwelling houses there, and also to make new
diverse Pyles and stoppes to let the Scottysh men from their invasions, to the
great commodity of all his people there dwelling, which things could not be
done without great cost: Wherefore considering the Kings good entente, he
said, that the Lords thought it conueniente to grant to the King some
reasonable aid toward his charges, and prayed the Commons to consulte on the
same, and then he and all the Lords departed.

After their departure, the commons considering the kings good intent,
lovingly granted to him a.xv. toward his charges, but this grant was not
enacted at this Sessyon, because that sodeinly began a Pestilence in
Westmynster, wherefore the Parlyament was proroged till the next year.

In this year was an old Toll demanded in Flaunders of Englysh men, called
the Toll of the Hounde, which is a River and a passage: The Toll is.xii.
pence of a Fardell. This Toll had been often times demanded, but never paid:
insomoche that King Henry the seventh, for the demand of that Toll,
prohibited all his subjects to keep any Mart al Antwerpe or Barow, but caused
the Martes to be kept at Calyes: at which time it was agreed that the said
Toll should never be demanded, so that the Englysh men would resort again
into the Dukes country, and after that, it was not demanded till now:
Wherefore the King sent Doctor Knight and other to Calyes, and thither came
themperours Commissioners, and the matter was put in suspense for a time.

Ye have heard before how the King had purchased the Bishop of Yorkes place,
which was a fair By^shops house, but not meet for a King: wherefore the King
purchased all the meadows about saint James, and all the whole house of s.
James, and there made a fair mansion and a park, and builded many costly and
commodious houses for great pleasure.

Now must I declare to you a noble enterprise, although it were not done in
England, yet because diverse Englysh men were at that adventure, I will declare
it as the Lord Master of the Religion of Saint Ihons wrote to the Lord of
saint Ihons in England: The Lord Mas^er of the Religion, lamentyng sore the
loss of the Rodes, which he thought not sone to be recovered, considered that
the Turk held the town of Modon which stands on the Sea side, and is a
fair Port, and woul^e have gladlye had that town out of the Turks
possession* called to him a trusty servant of his, called Caloram, which was
well langaged, and to him declared, that he would have him to sail to Modon,
and to dwell there as a Turk unknown, and if he might by any means to come
into service with Massy de Huga, which was Captain there. Caloram answered,
that to go thither for the accomplyshyng of the Lord masters desire, he was
very well content, but to come in service and favor with the Captain, must
come in process of time and by continuance, and that not without great
expense: The Lord Master promised him sufficient treasure and a great
reward: When Caloram was perfectly enstructed in all thing he took his leave
and came privily to Modon, and there dwelled, and within short space he was
the Capitayns servant, and for his great diligence was with his master in
great favor. Then he wrote to the Lord Miaster all thing, and asserrayned
him that his intent could not take effect hastily, but bade him ever be
ready. This matter thus continued two year, in which time Caloram well
perceyned how the town might be taken, and therefore wrote to the Lord
Master, which shortly came to a place called Mucollutea. The Turks have a
condition in August and Septembre, to resort into the country to see the
fruytes, and to solace them self, wherefore the Lord Master appointed the
Prior of Rome and the Tur^uplya^ of England to be Capitaynes of this
enterprise, and with them were.lx. knights of the Religion, and.vii.C. and
fyftye souldyers in.vi. Galyes and Brigantes, and passed the Cape Blanke in the
land of Calaber, the.xviii. day of August, and there they ankered: and from,
that place they might sail lx. mile to Modon, under the hills of Stroffadees.
And in the way they stopped all the ships that passed toward Modon: and from
thence they sent word to Caloram, which sent them word, not to be to
hastye: for the Uenicians had reported in Modon, that the Galyes of the
Religion were on the sea: and also a Captain of the Turks, called Frombylam
was come to Modon with.ii.C. horsemen to view the town so that Caloram was in
great fear of his enterprice. But the same night there came to Modon a Gripe
or small vessel, in the which were three knights of the Religion all in
marynors arrey, and there sought for fresh water and other victails necessary,
which knights spoke with Calora^, and the same day the Captain Frombylam
departed from Modon. Then Caloram sent word to the Capitaynes, that he trusted
that their journey should be well sped: which knights departed and came to
the Capitaynes, which wisely assembled all their people at a Road called
Stroffades, and there declared their commission of their Lord Master, and also
showed Calorams letters, whereof every man was greatly comforted to know what
enterprise they went about. Then it was appointed that the Prior of Rome
should first enter and take the gate of the principal tower, and the
Turkeiplier with.vi. English knights were appointed to defend the Molle or
Peer at the haven mouth: and to every gate was a Capitayn appointed with a
nombre for the gates of the town and the Fortresses were well known to the
Religion of.s. Ihon Baptist. When all this order was appointed, the Galies
disancored and came to the I Will of Sapience.iii. mile from Modon. All this while
Caloram was in great ^eare till the two Capiteins sent a vessel called a
Gripe, and in her, iii.C. men: They were no so ner entered the peer, but the
Turks came a board and asked for the merchau^tz (for all the men were
appearlled like Mariners) they answered that the Merchauntes which had the
charge were gone a land into the town, and said they would bring them to the
Merchauntes, and that all their merchau^dise was good wodde, which thing the
Turks much desire: So the christian knights like mariners weut with the
Turks, which were to the nombre of.xiii. entendyng to begin their enterprise,
and some went toward the tower, and some went toward the gate followyng
the.xii. Turks, and after them issued all the soldiers out of the Gripe,
Modon tak^.
and so with force they got the gate, and after that ye molle or pyre, and on
that set a ba^ner of the Religion to the which Caloram helped much: with that
came all the Galyes and landed. Then began a terrible slaughter of al parts,
the Turks fled, and the Christen men followed, and the Capitaynes took the
walls: and from thence Caloram lead them to the house of Messyre Huga, in
which house was a great strength: For his house was like a Fortress or tower,
which joined to the wall of the town, out of which was a Posterne, whereof
issued out certain Turks which askryed the Christen men abroad in the
country. But in the mean season the Christen men assauted the said
Fortress, which was sore defended: and there the Prior of Rome was by a
hackbush slain, which chance made the Christen men more furious, and slew in
the town.iii.C Turks and above. Then they blew to retreite, and councelled
together and well perceived that they could not keep the town except they
had the fortress or tower, which they could not obtain without a Siege, and
then they had no ordinance nor people enough, therefore they determined to take
their most advantage by pyllage, and so spoiled the town and took.viii.C.
prisoners and sent them to the Galyes. And when the Turks saw the Christian men
still pulfer (as the usage of soldiers is) they issued out of their hold and
fortress and fought with the Christian men boldly in the streets, so that the
streets ran blood in the canels, the fight was sore: and ever the Turks
came in at the posterne by askry, and assauted the Christen men, which
valiauntly defended them and for all the Turks power came to their Galies with
their pray and prisoners, and came to the I Will of Malto with all their booty,
not leesyng.xl. persons in all their journey: whereof the Lord Master was
much reioyed and well rewarded Caleram, which also came with them to Malto.
This enterprise was dooen on a sunday, being the.xviii. day of August, the
year of our Lord a thousand, five hundredth, thyrtie and one, and this.xxiii.
year of his Reign.

After this enterprise, the.xxii. day of Septembre, dyed Lady Loyse Duchess
of Angulesme and mother to the French King, a wise and a sad Lady: whereof the
King being advertised, caused a solemn Obsequye to be made and kept for her
in the Abbey of Waltham in Essex, at the which solempnitie, the King and a
great nombre of the Nobles and Prelates of the Realm were present in mournyng
apparel at the Kings cost and charge.

The.xxiiii. year.
IN the beginning of this, xxiiii. year, the Lady Anne Bulleyne was so much in
the Kings favor, that the commen people which knew not the Kings true
intent, said and thought that the absence of the Queen was only for her sake,
which was not true: for the king was openly rebuked of Preachers for keeping
company with his brothers wife, which was thoccasyon that he eschued her
company, till the truth were tried.

The last day of April the parliament sittyng, the king sent for Thomas
Awdeley, Spekar of the common house, and certain other, and dec^ared to the^,
how they had exhibited a book of their greues, the last year against the
Spirituality, which at their requests, he had delivered to his spiritual
subjects, to make answer there to, but he could have no answer, till within
three days last past, which answer he delivered to the Spekar, saying: we
think their answer will smally please you, for it seems to us very slender,
you be a great sort of wisemen, I doubt not but you will look circumspectly
on the matter, and we will be indifferent between you. And for a truth their
answer was very Sophistical, and nothing auoydyng the greues of the lay
people: and farther the king said, that he marueiled not a little, why one of
the Parliament house spoke openly, of the absence of the Queen from him, which
matter was not to be determined there, for he said it touched his soul, and
wisshed the matrimony to be good, for then had he never been vexed in
conscience, but the docters of the universities said he, have determined the
marriage to be void, and detestable before God, which grudge of conscience,
caused me to abstein from her compaignie, and no folishe or wanton appetite:
for I am said he.xli. year old, at which age the lust of man is not ^o quick,
as in lusty youth: and saving in Spain and Portyngall it has not been seen,
that one man has married two sisters, the one being carnally known before: but
the brother to mary the brothers wife was so abhorred amongst all nations,
that I never heard it, that any Christen man did it, but my self: wherefore you
se my conscience troubled and so I pray you report: so the Spekar departed,
and declared to the commons the kings saying, both of the Spiritual men's
answer, and also concerning the kings marriage, which sight answer displesed
the commons.

The occasion why the King spoke of his marige, was because one Temse in the
common house, moved the commons to sue to the king, to take the Queen again
into his compaignie, and declared certain great mischiefs, as in bastardyng
the Lady Marie, the kings only child, and diverse other inconveniences,
which words were reported to the king, which was the cause that he declared
his conscience.

The.xi. day of May, the king sent for the Speker again, and.xii. of the
common house, having with him eight Lords, and said to them, well-beloved
subjects, we thought that ye clergy of our realm, had been our subjects
wholly, but now we have well perceived, that they be but half our subjects,
yea, and scace our subjects: for all the Prelates at their consecracion, make
an oath to the Pope, clean contrary to the oath that they make to us, so that
they seem to be his subjects, and not ours, the copy of both the oaths, I
deliver here to you, requiryng you to invent some order, that we be not thus
deluded, of our Spiritual subjects. The Spekar departed, and caused the oaths
to be read in the common house, the very tenor whereof ensues.

I Ihon Bishop or Abbot of A. from this hour forward, Oath to the Pope.
shall be faithefull and obedient to saint Peter, and to the holy Church of
Rome, and to my lord the Pope, and his successors Canonically enteryng, I
shall not be of counsel nor concent, that they shall lose either life or
member, or shall be taken, or suffer any violence, or any wrong by any means,
their Counsel to me credited, by them their messyngers or letters, I shall
not willyngly discover to any person: the Papacy of Rome, the rules of the
holy fathers, and the Regalie of saint Peter, I shall help and retain, and
defend against all men: the Legate of the Sea Apostolic, going and coming I
shall honorably entreat, the rightes, honors, privilege, aucthorities of the
Church of Rome, and of the Pope and his successors, I shall cause to be
conserved, defended, augmented, and promoted, I shall not be in counsel,
treaty, or any act, in the which any thing shall be imagined against him, or
the Church of Rome, there rightes, states, honors, or powers. And if I know
any such to be moved or compassed, I shall resist it to my power, and as soon as I can, I shall advertise him, or such as may give him knowledge. The rules
of the holy fathers, the Decrees, Ordinances, Sentences, Disposicions,
Reseruacions, Provisions, and Commandments Apostolic, to my power I shall
keep and cause to be kept of other: Heretics, Sismatikes, and rebels to our
holy father and his successors, I shall resist and persecute to my power, I
shall come to the Sinode, when I am called, except I be let by a Canonical
impediment, the lights of the Apostles I shall visit yearly personally, or by
my deputy, I shall not alien nor fell my possession, without the Popes
Counsel: so God me help and the holy Evangelists.

I Ihon Bishop of.A. utterly renounce and clearly forsake, Oath to the King.
all such clauses, words, sentences, and grauntes, which I have or shall
have here after, of the Popes holiness, of and for the Bishopric of.A. that in
any wise has been, is or hereafter may be hurtefull, or prejudicial to your
highness, your heirs, successors, dignity, privilege, or estate royal: and
also I do swear, that I shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth I
shall bear to you my sovereign lord, and to your heirs kings of the same,
of life and lymme, and yearthly worship above all creatures, for to live and
dye with you and yours, against all people, and diligently I shall be attendant,
to all your needs and business, after my wit and power, and your counsel I
shall keep and hold, knowlegyng my self to hold my bishoprcke of you only,
besechyng you of restitucion of the temporalties of the same, promisyng as
before, that I shall be faithefull, true, and obedient subject to your said
highness heirs, and successors during my life, and the services and other
things dew to your highness, for the restitucion of the Temporalties, of
the same Bishoprike I shall truly do and obediently perform, so God me help
and all saints.

The openyng of these oaths, was one of the occasions, why the Pope within two
year following, lost all his inrisdiccion in England, as you shall here
afterward. The.xiiii. day ye parliament was proroged, til the iiii. day of
February next ensuyng. After which prorogacion, sir Thomas More Chaunceller of
England, after long suits made to the king to be^ discharged of that office,
the.xvi. day of May, he delivered to the king of Westminster, the great
Seal of England, and was with the kings favor discharged, which Seal the
king kept til Whitson^de following* and on the Mondaie in Whitson weke, Thomas
^wdeley keeper of the great s^al^
he dubbed Thomas Awdeley, Speker o^ the parliament knight, and made him lord
keeper of the great Seal, and so was he called.

The king being in progress this Summer, was advertised that the Pope and the
French King, had appointed to mete at Marcelles in Province, in the beginning
of the next Spryng* wherefore the king like a wise and pollitike prince,
thought it convenient to speak with the French king in his own person,
before the Pope and he should come together, and to declare to him both the
determinacion, of the Uniuersities and Doctors concerning his Matrimony, and
also the general cou^sailes, which ordained such causes, to be tried in the
poruinces and countries, where the doubt should rise, trustyng that the French
king should cause the Pope to incline to Gods law, and to leave his own
tradicions, and void dispensacions, whereupon both the princes concluded, to
mete in October following, between Calic^ and Bulleyn: wherefore the king of
England sent out his letters, to his nobility prelates, and servants,
commaundyng them to be ready at Cantorbury, the xxvi day of September, to
pass the Seas with him, for the accomplishyng of the enteruew, between him and
his brother the French king. Many men were sorry to here, that the king should
pass the sea in Winter, and specially in October, when the seas be rough, but
their sayings let not his purpose: for he marched forward from Ampthill to
Wynsore, where on Sundaie being the first day of September, he created the
lady Anne Bulleyn, Marchiones of Penbroke, and gave to her one thousand pound
land by the year, and that solemnity finished, he rode to the College to
Mass, and when the Mass was ended, a new league was concluded and sworn, A
new league
between the king and the French king, Messire Pomoray the French Ambassador
then being present. After which oath taken* Doctor Fox the kings amner, made
an eloquent oracion in Latin, in praise of peace, love, and amity: which
dooen the trumpettes blewe, and the king returned to the Castle, where was
kept a solemn feast. From thence the king removed to Grenewiche* and so
forward to Cantorbury, where at the day appointed, he found ready fur^ished,
all such as were commanded to pass the sea with him, well and richely
adorned, both they and their servants.

The.x. day of October, the king came to Dover, and on the.xi. day in the
morning being Fridaie, at three of the clock he took shippyng in Dover rode,
and before.x. of the clock the same day, he with the lady Marchiones of
Pembroke, landed at Caleis, where he was honorably received with procession,
and brought to saint Nicholas church, where he hard Mass, and so to his place
called Thexchequer, where he lodged And on the Sondaie after came to Caleis,
the lord Roche Baron, and Monsire de Mountpesat, messengers from the
Frenchkyng, aduertisyng the king of England, that the French king would
repair to Abuile the same night marchyng toward Bull^yne, of which tidings
the king was very glad: but suddenly came a messenger, and reported that the
great Master of France, and the Archebishoppe of Roan, with diverse noble men
of France, were come to Sandifeld, entendyng to come to Caleis, to salute the
king, from the king their Master. He being thereof advertised, sent in great
have the.xv. day of October, the Duke of Norffolke the Marquis of Excester,
the Earls of Oxford, Darby, and Rutlande, the lord Sands, and the lord
Fitzwater, with.iii.C. gentlemen, which honorably received the French lords,
at the English pale, and so brought the^ to the kings presence in Caleis,
which stood under a ri^h clothe of estate* of such value that they much
mused of the riches. The king (as he that knew all honor and nurture) received
the French lords, very louyngly and amiably, and with the^ took a day and
place of metyng: these lords were highly feasted, and after diner departed to
Bullein.

While the king lay thus in Caleis, he vewed the walls, towers, and Bulwerkes,
and devised certain new fortificacio^s, for the maintenance and defense of the
town. The town of Caleis had at this season.xxiiii.C. beds, and stablyng
for.ii M. horses, beside the villages adjacent.

The.xx. day of this month, the king being advertised, that the French king
was come to a village called Marguiso^, nigh to the English pa^e, marched out
of Caleis the next day after, accompaignied with the Dukes of Norffolke and
Suffolk, and with the Marquesses of Dorcet and Excester, the Earls of
Arundell, Oxford, Surrey, Essex, Derby Rutlande, Huntyngdon, and Sussex, and
diverse Uiscountes, Barons, Knights of the Garter, and Gentlemen, freshely
appareled, and richly trimmed, and so passed toward the place, appointed for
the enteruewe, leuyng behind the^ the greatest part of ye yomen in Caleis,
because that Bulleyne was to little for both the trains. For the Frenchemen
said their train was xx. M. horse, which caused the Englishmen to cast many
perelles, and especially because it was bruted abroad, that the French king
should say, the King of England was once his enemy, and maintained the
Emp^ror and the duke of Burbo^ against him, and now he was become his most
friend. The rehersyng of these old grudges many Englishmen suspected, and very
loathe that the king should go to Bulleyne, but the king continued still in his
journey, and came to Sandyngfelde, and a little from that place in a valey, was
the French king nobely accompaignied, with three hundred horse, and not much
more. The Kings tr^in waued on the left hand, to give the French King and
his train the ^ight hand: like wise did the French part, to give the
Englishemen the right hand: so the two kings with all lovely honor met with
bare heddes, and embrased other in such fashion, that all that beheld them
reioysed. The king of England was appareled, The Kings apparel.
in a cote of great riches, in braides of gold laid lose on Russer Ueluet,
and set with Traifoyles, full of pearl and stone. The French King was in a
coat of cr^mosin velvet, all to cut, lined with slender cloth of gold plucked
out through the cuttes. The noble men on both parties, were richely apparreled,
and as was reported, the French king said openly, to the king of England:
The saying of the French King.
sir you be the same person, that I am most bound to in the world, and sith
it has pleased you, in person to visit me, I am bound in person to seek
you, and for the very friendship, that I have found in you. I am yours and will
be, and so I require you to take me, and with that put of is bonet: the king of
England soberly answered. If ever I did thing to your likyng I am glad, and as
touching the pain to come hither to se you, I assure you it is my great
comfort, yea, and I had come farther to have visited you. Then the kings
embrased the lords and estates, as the French king the lords of England, and
the king of England, the lords of France, and that done, they set forward
toward Bulleyne, and in ridyng they cast of Hawks called Sakers to the Kytes,
which made to them great sport. And in a valey beyond Sa^dyngfeld, the
king of Nauerr met the kings, and there they a lighted and drank, and after
that they mounted on horseback, and with haukyng and other princely pastyme,
they came nere to Bulleyn, where on a hill stood ranged in a fair band, the
number of five hundred men on horseback, of whom the chief were, the French
kings three sons, the Dolphin, the Duke of Orleaunce, and the Duke of
Angulesme, and on them gave attendaunce, the Admiral of France, and three
Cardinals with diverse other nobles of France: these three Princes marched
forward, and welcomed the king of England, which them well beheld and
louyngly them received, as he that could as much nurture, as any Prince that
ever was. Then the French king said to his children openly: My children, I am
your father, but to this Prince here you are as much bound, as to me your
natural father, for he redeemed me and you from captivity: wherefore on my
blessyng I charge you, to be to him loving always. The king of England
ceased the French kings tale, and embrased the young Princes, each after
other: all their three apparelles were black Ueluet, embraudered with silver
of Damask. Then all these noble compaignie came to Bulleyne, The Kings
coming to Bulleyn.
where was a great shot of Artilery, for on the one side they shot great
pellettes, which made a great noise: then these two Princes offered at our
Lady of Bulleyne, and the French king brought the king of England to his
lodgyng, in the Abbay directly against his own lodging, where the king of
England had diverse chambers, the utter chamber was hanged with fair Arras,
and another chamber was hanged with grene Ueluet, embraudered with Uinettes of
gold, and fret with flowers of Silver, and small twigges of wrethen work, and
in the middle of every pane, or piece, was a fable of Ovid in Matamorphoseos
embraudered, and a clothe of estate of the same work, valanced with frettes,
knotted and langettes tassaled with Uenice gold and silver: and in this
chamber was hanged a great branch of silver percell gilte, to bear lights.
Then was there an in^er chamber, hanged with rich clothe of gold of Tissue,
and the ro^e siled with the same: The.iiii. chamber was with velvet, and
hachementes of arms, and diuises of nedle work, very connyngly wrought. Eue^y
man was appointed to his lodgyng (which there was very straight) according to
his degree, and great chere was made to all the Engli^hemen: the Poultrees,
Larders, Spicer^is, and Sellars of Wine were al open, and likewise Hay and
Litter, and all other things, ask and have and no man durst take any money,
for the French king paid for all.

The French king caused two gounes to be made of white velvet, pricked with
gold o^ damask, and the capes and ventes, were of frettes of whipped gold of
damask very rich, which two gounes he sent to the king of England, praiyng
him to chose the one, and to wear it for his sake, which gladly took it, and
so that Tewesdaie, the two kings were both in one suite: the same night the
French king, made to the king of England a supper in his chamber, which was
hanged with Arras, and ^iled over with rich silk, and two clothes of ^states
were set up, one at the one end, and the other at the other end, the one
clothe was embraudered with the image of an old man, and a woman with a naked
child in her arm, and the woman gave the old man suck of her breast, and about
was written in French: Better it is child^en wantonly to weep, then old mea for
need to peri^he On the other clothe of estate, was enbraudered then sun going
down of ^^ne gold, and a beast thereon, the head covered with a helm, and a
coro^ail of a dukes estate, the beasts body was al perle, and the cloth was
crimosin satin. A rich cupbord was set up of plate, wi^h a great number of
pieces of the new fashion, iiii. great branches hong in the chamber, all o^
silver and gilt, which bare torches of white wax, all the ge^tlemen of France
made thenglishemen great chere, and served them of delicate viandes.

In the Church of Bulleyne was a Trauerse set up for the French king, open on
every side, saving it was siled with blew velvet, embraudered with ^lower
Delices gold, the pillars were hanged with the same work: On the French
kings right hand, was another trauerse siled, and cortened all of white
Satin, embraudered with Cables cast, of cut clothe of gold, embraudered and
gilted after the fashion that Mariners cast their ropes: this trauerse was
valensed of like work, and fringed with fine gold. Daily the kings heard
their Masses in these trauerses and commonly they went together to Mass.
Diverse times the kings communed together in counsel, and sometime in the
morning, or the princes were stirryng* their cou^sailes met, and sat together
agreat while.

While the king of England, lay thus at Bulleyn, the French king to show
himself loving to the noble men of England, the.xxv. day of October, called a
Chapter of the compaignions of his Order, called Saint Michell, of whom the
king of England was one, and so there elected Thomas Duke of Norffolke, and
Charles Duke of Suffolk, to be compaignions of thesaied Order, which were
brought into the Chapter, and had there Collers delivered to them, and were
sworn to the Statutes of the Order, their obeysaunce to their sovereign
Lord, always reserved: which Dukes thanked the French King, and gave to the
Officers of Arms two hundred Crounes a piece. All this season the French king
and his court were fresh, and his guard were appareled, in frockes of blewe
Crimosin, and yelowe velvet. With the French king, was the king of Nauerr, the
Dolphin of Uien, the Dukes of Orliaunce, Angulesme, Uandosine, Guyse, Longuile,
the Earls of Saint Paul, Neuers, Estampes, Lauall, and many other Earls and
Barons and the prince of Melffe, four Cardinals, and a leven bishops with
their trains and resort, which surely was a great compaignie: so continued
these two kings at Bulleyn, Mondaie, Tewesdaie, Wednesdaie, and Thursdaie,
and on Fridaie the.xxv. day of October, they departed out of Bulleyn to
Calice: the French kings train was twelve hundred persons, and so many horse
or more, and without Calice two mile, met with them the Duke of Richemond, the
Kings bastard son of England, a goodly young Prince, and full of favor
and beauty, with a great compaignie of noble men, which were not at Bulleyne,
so the Duke with his compaignie, embrased the French king, and so did other
noble men, then the lord of England set forward, as the Dukes of Richemond,
Norffolke and Suffolk, the Marquis of Excester, the Earls of Aru^dell, Oxford,
Surrey, Darby, Worcester, Rutland, Sussex, and Huntyngdon, the Uiscountes of
Lis^e, and Rocheforde, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Lyncolne, and
Bathe, the lord William Haward, the lord Matrauerse, the lord Montacute, the
lord Cobham, the lord Sa^des, the lord Bray, the lord Morda^t, the lord
Leonard Gray, the lord Clinton, and sir William Fitzwillyam knight, tresorer
of the kings house, and sir William Paulet, Co^ptroler of the same with a
gre^te number of knights, beside the lusty Esquires and young gentlemen. These
noble personages and gentlemen of England, accompaignied the French Lords to
Newnam Bridge, where as Thomas Palmer, capitain of the fortress, with a fair
compaignie of soldiers saluted the Kings, and so they passed toward Calice:
where at their coming, that what out of the Town and the Castle, and what out
of Ricebancke, and the Ships in the Haven, the French men said they never
heard such a shot: And when they were entered the Mill gate, all the
Soldiers of the Town, stood on the one side, appareled in Read and Blewe,
and on the other side of the streets, stood all the seruyng men of England,
in coats of French Tawney, with their lords and Masters diuises embraudered,
and every manne a Scarlette cap and a white fether, which made a goodly show:
there were lodged in Caleis that night, beside the town dwellers, eight
thousand persons at the least. The King of England brought the French King
to his lodgyng, to the Staple in, where his chamber was hanged with so rich
verdore, The first Chamber.
as has not been seen, the ground of it was gold and damask, and all over the
tuffes and flowers, were of Satin Silk and Silver, so curiously wrought that
they seemed to grow, every chamber was richer and other: The second Chamber.
the second chamber all of Tissue, with a clothe of estate of nedle work, set
with great Roses of large pearl. The third was hanged with Ueluet, The third
Chamber.
upon velvet pirled grene and Crimosyn, and embraudered over with branches, of
flowers of Gold Bullion, and garnished with arms and beasts of the same gold,
set with pearl and stone. If the French King made good chere to the King of
England, and his train at Bulleyne, I assure you he and his train, were
requited at Caleis, for the plenty of wild foul, Uenison, Fish, and all
other things which were there, it was marueill to see, for the Kings
Officers of England, had made preparacion in every place, so that the
Frenchemenne were served, with such multitude of diverse fishes, this Fridaie
and Saterdaie, that the masters of the French kings houshod, much wondered at
the prouison. In like wise on the Sondaie, they had al manner of flesh, foul,
spice, Uenison, both of falowe Dear and read Dear, and as for wine they
lacked none, so that well was thenglishe man that might well entertain the
French man: the lords of France never fetched their viandes, but they were
sent to them, and often time their proporcion of victaill was so abundaunt,
that they refused a great part thereof.

While the kings were thus in Caleis, The trauerses
they road every day to saint Marie Church, where were set two trauerses,
the one for the French King, which was Crimosyn Ueluet, replenished with
great Roses of massy Bullion of fine gold, and the seed of thesaied Roses
were great orient pearl, and about every Rose, was a wrethe al of pearl and
stone which trauerse was much wondered at by the Frenchemen: the other
trauerse of blewe Ueluet and clothe of Tissue, raised with flowers of silver
paned, all the blewe Ueluet was embrodered with knottes, and subtle draughtes,
of leaves and branches, that few men could judge the cunnyng of the
workmanship. The sundaie at night, the French king supped with the king of
England, The Supper made to the French king.
in a chamber hanged with tissue, reised with silver, paned with cloth of
silver, reised with gold, and the semes of the same were covered with broad
wrethes, of goldsmithes work, full of stone and perle. In this chamber was a
coberd of.vii. stages high al of plate of gold, and no gilt plate, beside that
there hong in thesaid chamber x. branches of silver and gilt, and.x. branches
al white silver, every brau^che hangyng by a long chain of the same suit,
beryng.v. lights of wax. To tell the riches of the clothes of estates, the
basens and other vessels which was there occupied, I assure you my wit is
insufficie^t, for there was nothing occupied that night, but all of gold. The
French king was served iii. course, and his meat dressed after the French
fashion, and the king of England had like courses after thenglishe fashion, the
first course of every king was.xl. dishes, the second.lx. y^ third.lxx. which
were costly and pleasant

After supper came in the Marchiones of Penbroke, with.vii. ladies in Maskyng
apparel, of strange fashion, made of clothe of gold, compassed with crimosyn
Tinsell Satin, owned with Clothe of Silver, liyng lose and knit with laces of
Gold: these ladies were brought into the chamber, with four damoselles
appareled in Crimosin sattyn, with Tabardes of fine Cipres: the lady Marquis
took the French King, and the Countes of Darby, took the King of Nauerr, and
every Lady took a lord, and in daunsyng the king of England, took away the
ladies visers, so that there the ladies beauties were showed, and after they
had daunsed a while they ceased, and the French King talked with the
Marchiones of Penbroke a space, and then he took his leave of the ladies, and
the king conueighed him to his lodgyng: the same night the Duke of Norffolke
feasted all the nobles of France, being there in the castle of Caleis, with
many goodly sportes and pastymes.

On the Mondaie being Simon and Iudes day, there dined with the king of
England, the king of Nauerr, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the great
Master, and Admiral of France, on which day the king of England, called a
Chapter of the knights of the Gartier, at which Chapter the French king
ware the Blewe Mantell of the order, because he was of the same order, and there
were elected, Annas Memorancie Earl of Beaumont, great Master of the French
kings house, and Phillip de Chabbot Earl of Newblanke, great Admiral of
France, which had to them their Collers and Garters delivered, for the which
they rendered to the king great thanks.

The morrow after being the thirty day of October, the two kings departed
out of Caleis, and came nere to Sa^dyngfeld, and there alighted in a fair
grene place, where was a table set, and there the Englishemen served the
Frenchemen of wine, Ypocras, fruit, and spice abondantly. When the two kings
had communed a little, they mounted on their horses, and at the very enteryng of
the French ground, The Kings departure.
they took hands, and with Princely countenance, loving behauor, and hearty
words, each embrased other and so there departed.

While the king of England was in the French kings dominion, he had the
upper hand, and like wise had the French king, in his dominion, and as the
French king paid, all the Englishmennes charges at Bulleyn, so did the king of
England at Caleis, so that every thing was reco^pensed: saving that the king
of England, gave to the French king, diverse precious Iuelles and great
horses, and to his nobles great ple^tie of plate, for the which I could never
hear, that he gave the king of England any other thing, but the white goune,
as you have hard, but to the lords of the kings counsel, he gave certain
plate and chains.

When the king was returned to Calice, many gentlemen took ship to sail into
England, but the wynd was so contrariant, that diverse of them were driven
back again into Calice, and diverse into Flaunders, and in November rose such
a Wind, o^ the North and North Weste, that all the ^hippes in Caleis haven, were
in great ieoperdy, and in especial y^ Hoyes, at which season was such a
spryng tide, that it brake the walls of Hollande and Zelande, and drouned
diverse tounes in Flanders* in somuche that the water rose three foot above
the wharfe, where the Key stood in Andwarpe: this storm continued till the
fourth day of November, but for all that the wynd changed not. The eight day
rose such a Wind tempest and Thonder, that no man could conveniently stir
in the streates of Caleis: much lamentacion was made for them that had taken
ship into England, for no man knew what was become of them. On Sondaie the
wether was fair, the king caused his bed and other things to be shipped,
and intended to depart, but suddenly rose such a mist, that no Master could
guide a ship, and so he tarried that day. On Tewesdaie at midnight he took
ship, and landed at Dover the morrow after, being the.xiiii. day of November,
at.v. of the clock in the morning, wherefore the Saterdaie after, was song Te
deum in the Cathedral Church of saint Paul in London: the Lord keeper of
the great Seal, the Mayor of London, (and diverse other noble and sad
persons, which made their abode in London, for the governance of the realm
in the kings absence, being present). The king after his return, ^he King
married to lady Anne Bulleyne.
married privily the lady Anne Bulleyn, on saint Erkenwaldes day, which
marriage was kept so secret, that very few knew it, til she was great with
child, at Easter after.

When the king should pass over the sea, he co^sidred that the Scotts had
robbed his subjects, both by sea and land, and that no redress was made for
the same, imagined that in his absence, they would attempt some outrageous
enterprise against his people, wherefore like a prudent prince to be in a
surety, he sent sir Arthur Darcy knight, with three hundred tall men to
Barwicke, to defend the invasions of the Scotts. The Scotts hearing of his
coming, came into Northumberlande, by ye middle Marches, and came to a place
called Fowbery, and in their journey fired certain villages and returned. Sir
Arthur Darcy hearing of this adventure, was nothing content. Now at this
season there lay at Berwicke, Archibald Doglas Earl of Angus, which had
married the Queen of Scotts, the kings sister, and was banished Scotland and
she was from him divorced, and married to another. The Scotts bragged of their
enterprise, and said that sir Arthur had brought them good luck, and said,
that he and the Earl of Angus, slepte well in Barwicke: they hearing of this
brag, made a road with.iiii.C. men into Scotland, and set a village on fire:
then shortly assembled together.viii.C Scotts. When thenglishemen perceived
the Scotts, they caused their trompet to blow a retreat, and the Earl
and.xx. with him, showed him self on a hill, even in the face of the Scotts,
and the trumpette blewe at their backs, so that the Scotts thought that there
had been ii. compaignies which caused the Scotts to fly, and the Englishemen
followed, and slew a great a number, and took many prisoners, and brought them
to Berwicke, the twenty day of October.

The King this year kept his Christemas at Grenewiche, and after Christmas sir
Thomas Awdeley, Sir Thomas Awdeley made Chauncellor.
lord keeper of the great Seal, was made Chaunceller of England, and when
the Parli^ment began, because the office of the Spekar* was void, Hu^frey
Wyngfeld of Grais Inn, was elected Spekar of the parliament, which was
presented according as you have heard, of the other Spekar before. In the
which Parliament was made an act, that no person should appeal for any
cause, out of this realm, to the Court of Rome, but from Commissarie to the
Bishop, and from Bishop to the Archbishop, and from Archbishop to the king,
and all causes of the king* to be tried in the upper house of the Conuocacion.
And in the same Parliament was enacted, that queen Katheryn should from thence
forth, be no more called queen, but princes Dowager, of prince Arthur.

In this Summer season last past died Willyam Warham Archebishoppe of
Cantorbury, and to that Bishopriche was named, Doctor Thomas Cranmer, the
kings chappelein, a man of good learning, and of a verteous life, which also
not long before, was the kings Ambassador to the Bishop of Rome, which was
consecrate in Lent.

After the King perceiuyng his new wife Queen Anne, to be great with child,
caused all officers necessary, to be appointed to her, and so on Easter eve,
she went to her Closet openly as Queen, with all solempnitie, and then the King
appoynt^d the (...) of her Coronacion, to be kept on Whitso^ Sondaie next
following, and ^^^tynges were sent to al Shriues, to certi^e the names of men
of (...) pound, to receive the Order of knighthod, or else to make a fine: the
assessement of which fines, were appointed to Thomas Cro^well, Master of the
Kings Iuell house, and counsailer to the kyn^, and newly in his high favor,
which so pollitikely handeled the matter, that he raised of that sessyng of
fines, a great sum of money to the Kings use: Also the King wrote letters
to the city of London, to prepare pagiauntes against the same coronacion.

The.xxv. year.
THe king in the beginning of this.xxv. year, kept the day of saint George,
at his Manor of Grenewiche, with great solempnitie, and the Court was grea^ly
replenished, with lords knights, and with ladies and gentlewomen, to a great
number, with all soalce and pleasure You have hard the last year, how the
Parliament had enacted that no person should after a day, appele to Rome for
any cause, wha^soeuer it were, and that the Queen now, called the Princes
Dowager, h^^ appeled to the Court of Rome, before the act made, so that it was
doubted, whether that appele were good or not. This question was well handeled
in the Parliament hou^e, but much better in the Co^uocacion house, but in both
houses it was alleged, yea, and by books showed, that in the Counsels of
Calcedone, Af^ricke, Toletane, and diverse other famous Counsels, in the
primitive Church, yea, in the time of saint Augustine, it was affirmed,
delcared, and determined, that a cause risyng in one Province, should be
determined in the same, and that neither the patriarcke of Constantinople,
should meddle in causes moved in the iurisdiccio^ of the patriarcke of Antioche,
nor no bishop should entermit, within another Province or country: which
things were so clerkely opened, so connyngly set furthe to all intentes,
that every man that had wit, and was determined to follow the truth, and not
affeccionate nor wilfully wedded to his own mind, might plainly se that all
appeles made to Rome, were clearly void and of none effect: which Doctrines
and Counsels, were showed to the lady Katerine Princes Dowager, but she (as
women love to lose no dignity) ever continued in her old song, trustyng more
to the Popes parcialitie, then to the determinacion of Christ's verity.
Whereupon the Archbishop of Cantorbury, accompaignied with the bishops of
London, Winchester, Bathe, Lincoln, and diverse other great clerks, in a
great number rode to Dunstable, which is six mile from Ampthil, where the
Princes Dowager lay, and there by a Doctor called Doctor Lee, she was ascited
to appear before thesaied Archebishoppe, in cause of Matrimony, in thesaied
town of Dunstable, and at the day of apparaunce she would not appear, but
made defaute, and so she was called peremptory, The King and queen Katherine*
divorced
every day.xv. days together, and at the last for lack of apparaunce, and
for c^^tumacie, by thassent of all the learned men there being present, she was
divorced from the king, and their Marriage declared to be void and of none
effect, which sentence given, the Archbishop and all the other, returned
whether it pleased them.

After which divorce sued, many wise men said, that the king was not well
counseled, to mary the lady Anne Bulleyne, before the divorce were adjudged,
for by mariyng before the first marriage was dissolved, they said, that the
second marriage might be brought in question, and verily they said true, for so
it was in the monethe of May, three year following, as you shall here after,
when I come to the time. Of this divorce every man spoke, as his discrecion and
wisdom was, for wise men said that it was Godly and honorably done, for the
discharge of the Kings conscience, and profitable for the surety of the
realm, and that God loved this marriage, considering that the new Queen, was
so sone with child. Other said that the bishop of Rome, would curse all
Englishemen, and that themperor and he, would invade the realm, and destroy
the people, and specially the Spanyardes bosted much, but thanks be to God,
their doings were much less then their words: but after every man had talked
enough, there was no more communyng of the matter, but all was in peace*

A little before this time was there a worshipful esquier in Gloucester shyre
called Wyllyam Tracy Wylliam Tracy.
of Todyngton which made in his will that he would no funeral pomp at his
buriyng, neither passed he upon Mass, and farther said that he trusted in God
only and hopyng by him to besaued and not by no saint, This gentleman dyed and
his son as executor brought y^ will to the bishop of Cauntorbury to prove,
which he showed to the co^uocacion and there unadvisedly they adjudged him to
be taken out of the ground and to be brent as an heretic, and sent a
commission to doctor P^rker chauncelor of the dyoces of Worcester to execute
their sentence, which accomplished the same. The king hearing his subject to
be exhumate and brent without his knowledge or order of his law sent for the
Chauncelor and laid the high offense to him, which excused him by the
archbishop of Cau^torbury which was late dead: but in conclusion it cost him
CCC. pound to have his pardon. But yet for a farther truth to be known of
this gentleman's death, and the cruel ignorau^cye of the bishops, I have here
expressed his will word by word as follows.

In the name of God Amen, I Wyllyam Tracy of Todyngton in y^ county of
Gloucester esquier make my Testament and last will as hereafter follows.
First and before al other things I commit me unto God and to his mercy,
beleuyng without any doubt or mistrust that by his grace and the merits of
Jesus Christ, and by the virtue of his passion and of his resurreccion I have
and shall have remission of my sins and resurreccion of body and soul
according as it is written, Job. (...).
I believe that my redemer lives, and that in the last day I shall rise out of
the earth and in my flesh shall see my savior, this my hope is laid up in my
bosom.

And touching the wealth of my soul, the faith that I have taken and rehearsed
is sufficient (as I suppose) without any other man's work or works. My
ground and belefe is, that there is but one God and one mediator between God
and man, which is Jesus Christ, so that I accept none in heaven nor in yerth
to be mediator between me and God, but only Jesus Christ, all other be but
peticioners in receiuyng of grace, but none hable to give influence of grace.
And therefore will I bestow no part of my goods for that intent that any man
should say, or do, to help my soul, for therein I trust only to the promises
of God: he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark.xvi.
and he that believes not shall be damned.

As touching the buriyng of my body, it avails me not whatsoever be done
thereto* for saint Augustine says de cura agenda pro mortuis that the funeral
pompes are rather the solace of them that live, then for the wealth and comfort
of them that are deed, and therefore I remitte it only to the discrecion of
mine executors.

And touching the distribucion of my temporal goods, my purpose is by the
grace of God to bestow them, to be accepted as the fruits of faith so that I
do not suppose that my merit is by good bestowyng of them, but my merit is
the faith of Jesus Christ only, Math.xxv.
by whom such works are good according to the words of our lord: I was
hungry and thou gave me to eat.etc. and it follows, that ye have done to the
least of my brethren ye have done it to me.etc. and ever we should consider the
true sentence, that a good work makes not a good man, but a good man makes a
good work: Roma.xiiii.
for faith makes the man both good and righteous, for a righteous man lives
by faith: and whatsoever spryngeth not of faith is sin.

And all my temporal goods that I have not given or delivered or not given by
writing of mine own hand bearyng the date of this present writing, I do leave
and give to Margaret my wife and to Richard my son whom I make mine
Executors. Wytnes this mine own hand, the x. day of October in the xxii. year
of the reign of king Henry the viii.

This is the true copy of his will, for the which as you have heard before
after he was almost three years dead, they took him up and burned him.

In the month of May Pope Clement sent an Orator to the king at Grenewyche
certifiyng him that he had appointed a general counsel to be kept at Mantua
the year following, and thereof had advertised all princes Christen, requiryng
the king likewise as he did all other princes Christen for the universal wealth
of all Christendom and for y^ quietyng of opinions newly grown, to appear
there personally: to the which it was answered that it was both ieopardeous
for y^ king and for his whole realm to have their prince absent for fear of
invasions by vtward enemies, but he said he would send thither a sufficient
procuracie and convenient proctors, and desired to see the Orators commission.

When he with an evil will had showed his commission, there appeared neither
place nor time of the counsel. For the king knew well before his coming that
the Marquis of Mantua had made a full denial to the pope that he would have no
such assemble to be kept in his city nor dominions for diverse great and
urgent causes, and so the popes Orator departed with an uncertain answer to an
uncertain demand but not unrewarded.

The king being advertised by the French king how that he and y^ Pope should
mete at Nece in June following, thought it convenient to send a solemn
Ambassade to y^ French king both to accompany him to Nece and also to common
with the bishop of Rome concerning his unlawful stay in the kings deuorce:
where upon he appointed the duke of Norffolke, the lord Rocheforde brother to
the new queen, sir Wyllyam Pawlet comptroller of the kings household, sir
Anthonye Brown and sir Fraunces Bryan knights to be his ambassadors which
made great provision for that purpose and so with the number of Clx. horses
came to Dover and so to Calys on Whitson eve, on which day the queen made her
entry through the city of London toward her coronacion) where they made their
abode a certain space and passed through all France till they came to Lions,
where they remained a space as you shall here after.

This very season was daily skirmishyng between the borderers of the Marches of
England and Scotland, and yet no war proclaimed and many robberies, murders
and ma^slaughters done on both parts, and although the commisioners of the
realms of England and of Scotlay at Newcastle upon Tyne entreatyng a truce and
amity, yet during the communicacion the Scotts ceased not to rob both by
sea and land, and took diverse little botes laden with corn and fish, whereof
hearing the king of England, he decked and vitailed diverse ships of war and
sent them to the North seas to defend his subjects. The Scotts hearing that
the English nauye was come on their cost, in all have fled home to their
harbor, but yet the Englishemen followed then and fetched many of their prays
out of their havens maugre of their heads.

In the beginning of May the king caused open Proclamacions to be made that al
men that claimed to do any service or execute any office at the solemn feast
of the coronacion, by the way of Tenor, grant or prescripcion should put their
grant iii. wekes after Ester in the star chamber before Charles duke of
Suffolk for that time high steward of England and the lord Chauncelor and
other commissioners.

The duke of Norffolke claymed to be earl Marshall and to exercise his office
at that feast. The earl of Arrondell claymed to be high butler and to exercise
the same: the earl of Oxforde claymed to be chamberlain: the vicount Lys^e
claymed to be panter: the lord Burgaine to the chief larderer, and the lord
Bray claimed to be almoner, and sir Henry Wiat knight claymed to be ewrer: All
these noble parsonages desired their offices with their fees. Beside these the
Mayor of London claymed to serve the queen with a cup of gold and acuppe of
assay of the same, and that xii. citizens should attend on the cupborde and
the Mayor to have the cup and cup of assay for his labor, which peticion
was allowed. The v. Ports claymed to bear a Canapie over the queen's head the
day of the Coronacion with.iiii. gilte Belles and to have the same for a
reward which also to them was allowed. Diverse other put in petie claymes
which were not allowed because they seemed only to ^e done at the kings
coronacion. All this season great purueiau^ce was made of all manner of
vitailes, and lords, knights and squiers were sent for out of all countries
which came to London at their day with a great number of people.

The receiuyng, conueiyng and coronacion of queen Anne wife to the high and
mighty prince king Henry the eight.
After that the kings highness had addressed his gracious letters to the Mayor
and cominaltie of the city, signifiyng to them that his pleasure was to
solempnise and celebrate the coronacion of his most dear and well-beloved wife
Queen Anne at Westminster the Whitsonday next ensuyng, willing them to make
preparacion as well to fetch her grace from Grenewyche to the Tower by water as
to see the city ordered and garnished with pageau^tes in places accustomed,
for the honor of her grace. When she should be conveyed from the Tower to
Westminster, there was a common counsel called, and commandment was given to
the Haberdashers (of which craft the Mayor sir Stephen Pecocke then was) that
they should prepare a barge for the Batchelers with a wafter and a foyst
garnished which banners and streamers likewise as they use to do when the
Mayor is presented at Westminster on the morrow after Simon and Jude. Also all
other crafts were commanded to prepare barges and to garnishe them not
alonely with their banners accustomed, but also to deck them with Targettes
by the sides of the barges, and so set up all such semely banners and
bannorettes as they had in their halles or could get mete to furnishe their
said barges, and every barge to have mynstrelsie, according to which
commandments great preparacion was made for all things necessary for such
a noble triumph.

The coming by water from Grenevvyche the thursday.
The.xix. day of May the Mayor and his brethren all in Scarlet, and such as
were knights had collers of Esses and the remnant having good chains, and the
counsel of the city with them assembled at saint Mari Hill, and at one of the
clock descended to the Newstayre to their barge, which was garnished with
many goodly ba^ners and stremers, and richely covered, In which barge were
Shalmes, Shagbushes and diverse other instruments, which continually made
goodly armony. After that the Mayor and his brethren were in their barge seeing
that all the companyes to the number of fifty barges were ready to wait upon
them. They gave commandment to the companyes that no barge should row nerer
to another then twyse the length of the barge upon a great pain. And to see
the order kept, there were three light wheryes prepared, and in every one of
them two officers to call on them to keep their order, after which
commandment given they set forth in order as hereafter is discribed.

First before the Majors barge was a Foyst or Wafter full of ordinance, in
which Foyst was a great Dragon continually mouyng, and castyng wyldfyer, and
round about the said Foyst stood terrible monsters and wild men castyng fire,
and making hidious noyses: Next after the Foyst a good distaunce came the
Majors barge, on whose right hand was the Batchelers barge, in the which were
trumpettes and diverse other melodious instruments. The deckes of the said
barge and the sailyardes and the top castles were hanged with rich cloth of
gold and silk. At the foreship and the Stern were two great banners rich
beaten with the arms of the king and the queen, and on the top castle also
was a long stremer newly beaten with the said arms. The sides of the barge was
set full of Flagges and banners of the devises of the company of Haberdashers
and merchants adventurers, and the cords were hanged with innumerable
penselles having little belles at ye ends which made a goodly noise and a
goodly sight waueryng in the wind. On the outsyde of the barge were three dosen
Scochyons in metal of arms of the king and the queen which were beaten upon
square bocrame divided so that the right side had the kings colors, and the
left side the queen's, which Scochyons were fastened on the clothes of gold and
silver hangyng on the deckes on the left hand. On the left hand of the Mayor
was another Foyst, in the which was a mount and on the same stood a white
Fawcon crouned upon a rote of gold environed with white roses and red* which
was the Queen's devise: about which mount satte virgyns singyng and plaiyng
swetely. Next after the Mayor followed his fellowship the Haberdashers, Next
after them the Mercers, then the Grocers, and so every company in his order,
and last of all the Majors and shiriffes officers, every company having melodye
in his barge by himself, and goodly garnished with banners and some garnished
with silk and some with Arras and rich carpettes, which was a goodly sight
to behold, and in this order they ^owed to Grenewyche to the point next beyond
Grenewyche, and there they turned backward in another order, that is to wete,
the Mayor and Shiriffes officers first, and the meanest craft next, and so
ascendyng to the uttermost crafts in order and ye Mayor last as they go to
Poules at Christmas, and in that order they rowed douneward to Grenewiche town
and there cast anchor making great melody. At three of the clock the queen
appeared in rich clothe of gold entered into her barge accompanied with
diverse ladies and gentlewomen, and incontinent the Citizens set forwards in
their order, their minstrels continually plaiyng, and the Batchelers barge
going on the queen's right hand which she took great pleasure to behold.
About the queen's barge were many noble men, as the duke of Suffolk, the
Marquis Dorset, the Earl of Wylshyre her father, the Earls of Arrondel, Darby,
Rutland, Worceter, Huntyngton, Sussex, Oxford, and many bishops and noblemen
every one in his barge, which was a goodly sight to behold. She thus being
accompanied rowed toward the Tower, and in the mean way the ships which
were commanded to lie on the shore for lettyng of the barges shot diverse
peales of gunnes, and or she landed there was a marvelous shot out of the
Tower as ever was hard there. And at her landyng there met with her the lord
Chamberlain with the officers of arms and brougth her to the king, which
received her with loving countenance at the Posterne by the water side and
kyssed her, and then she turned back again and thanked the Mayor and the
citezens with many goodly words, and so entered into the Tower. After which
entry the citezens all this while houed before the Tower making great melody
and went not alande, for none were assigned to land but the Mayor, the Recorder
and two Aldermen. But for to speak of the people that stood on every shore to
behold the sight, he that saw it not would not believe it.

On Friday at diner served the king all such aswere appointed by his highness
to be knights of y^ bath, which after dinner were brought to their chambers,
and that night were bathed and shreuen according to the old usage of England,
and the next day in the morning the king dubbed them according tot he
ceremonies thereto belongyng whose names ensues.

The Marquis Dorset.
The Earl of Darby. The lord Clyfforde. The lord Fitzwater. The lord
Hastynges. The lord Mountaigle. Sir Ihon Mordant. The lord Uaux. Sir Henry
Parker. Sir Wyllyam Wynsore. Sir Fraunces Weston. Sir Thomas Arrondell. Sir
John Hulstone. Sir Thomas Pownynges. Sir Henry Sauell. Sir George Fitzwillyam
Sir Ihon Tyndall. Sir Thomas Iermey.
Saturday the xxxi. day.
The receiuyng and conueiyng of the queen through London.
To the intent that the horses should not slide on the Pauement, nor that ye
people should not be hurted by horses, the high streets where the queen should
pass were all graueled from the Tower to Temple bar and railed on the one
side, within which rayles stood the crafts along in their order from Grace
church where the merchants of the Styllyard stood till the little conduite in
Chepe where the Aldermen stood, and on the there side of the street stood the
Constables of the city apparelled in velvet and silk with great staves in
their hands to cause the people to keep rome and good order. And when the
streets were somewhat ordered, the Mayor clothed in a goune of crimosyn Ueluet
and a rich collor of Esses with two footmen clad in white and red damask
road to the Tower to give his attendance on the Queen, on whom the Shiriffes
with their officers did wait till they came to Tower hill, where they taking
their leave road down the high streates commaundyng the Constables to see
rome and good order kept, and so went and stood by the Aldermen in Chepe. And
before the queen and her train should come, Cornehill and Gracious streate
were hanged with fine Scarlet, Crimosyn and other grayned clothes, and in some
place with rich Arras, Tapestry and Carpettes, and the most part of the Chepe
was hanged with clothe of Tyssue, Gold, Ueluet and many rich hangynges which
made a goodly show, and all the wyndowes were replenished with ladies and
gentlewomen to behold the queen and her train as they should pass by. The
first of the queen's company that set forward were xii. Frenchemen which were
belongyng to the French Ambassador clothed in coats of blewe velvet with
steues of yelowe and blewe velvet and their horses trapped with close trappers
of blewe Sarcenet poudered with white crosses: after them marched gentlemen,
squiers knights ii. and ii. After them the Judges, and after them the knights
of the bath in Uiolet gounes with hoddes purfeled with Miniuer like doctors,
after them abbottes, then Barons, after them bishops, then Earls and
Marquesses, then the lord Chauncelor of England, after him the archbishop of
York and the ambassador of Uenice, after him the archbishop of Cauntorbury
and the ambassador of France, after road.ii. squiers of honor with robes of
estate rolled and worn baudrike wise about their necks with cappes of estate
represe^tyng the dukes of Normandy and Acquitaine, after them road the Mayor
of London with his Mace and Garter in his coat of arms, which Mayor bare his
Mase to Westminster halle, after them road the lord Wylliam Haward with the
Marshals rod deputy to his brother ye duke of Norffolke Marshall of England
which was ambassador then in France: and on his right hand road Charles Duke
of Suffolk for that day high Constable of England bearyng the verder of silver
appertainyng to y^ office of Constableship, and all the lords for the most
part were clothed in Crimosyn velvet, and all the Queen's servants or
officers of arms in Scarlet. Next before the queen road her chau^celor
barcheded, the sergeau^tes and officers of arms road on both the sides of the
lords. Then came the queen in a litter of white cloth of gold not covered nor
bayled which was led by ii. palferies clad in white damask down to the
ground head and all, led by her fotemen. She had on a circot of white clothe of
Tyssue and a mantle of the same furred with Ermyne, her here hanged down, but
on her head she had a coyffe with a circlet about it full of rich stones. Over
her was borne a Canapie of clothe of gold with iiii. gilte staves and iiii.
silver belles. For bearyng of which Canapye were appointed xvi. knights,
iiii. to bear it one space on foot and other iiii. another space according to
their own appointment. Next after the queen road the lord Borough her
cha^berlain, next after him Wyllia^ Coffyn Master of the Horses leadyng a spa^e
horse with a side saddie trapped down with clothe of tyssue: after him road
vii. ladies in crimosyn velvet turned up we cloth of gold and of tyssue and
their horses trapped with cloth of gold, after them ii. chariotes covered with
red cloth of gold. In the first Chariot was ii. ladies which were ye old
duches of Norfolk and the old marchiones of Dorset. In the second chariot were
iiiii. ladies all in Crimosyn velvet. After them road vii. ladies in the same
suite their horses trappers and all, after them came the third Chariot all
white with.vi. Ladies in Crimosyn velvet, next after them came the fowerth
Chariot all red with viii. ladies also in crimosyn Ueluet, after who^ f^lowed
xxx. ge^tlewomen all in velvet and silk in the livery of their ladies on whom
they gave their attendaunce. After them followed the Guard in coats of
Goldsmythes work, in which order they road forth till they came to
Fanchurche, where was made a pageaunt all with children apparelled like
merchants which welcomed her to the City with two proper preposicions both
in French and English, and from thence she road to Gracious church corner,
where was a costly and a marvelous connyng pageaunt made by the merchants of
the Styllyarde, for there was the mount Pernasus with the fountain of Helycon,
which was of white Marble and iiii. streams with out pype did rise an ell hye
and met together in a little cup above the fou^tain, which fountain ran
abundantly Racked Rennishe wine til night. On the mountain satte Appollo and
at his feet satte Calliope, and on every side of the mountain satte iiii.
Muses plaiyng on several sweet instruments, and at their feet Epigrammes and
Poyses were written in golden letters, in the which every Muse according to
her property praised the Queen: so from thence she passed to Leaden Halle
where was a goodly pageaunt with a type and a heavenly toffe, and under the
type was a rote of gold set on a little mountain environed with red roses and
white, out of the type came down a Fawcon all white and sat upon the rote,
and incontinent came down an Angel with great melody and set a close croune
of gold on the Fawcons head, and in the same pageau^t satte saint Anne with
all her issue beneth her, and under Mari Cleop^ satte her iiii. children* of
the which children one made a goodly Oracion to the queen of the fruitfulnes
of saint Anne and of her generation, trustyng that like fruit should come of
her. Then she passed to the conduicte in Cornehill where were three graces set in
a throne, before who^ was the spryng of grace continually ronnyng wine. Before
the fou^tain satte a Poet d^claring the properties of every grace, and that
done every lady by her self according to her property gave to the queen a
several gift of grace. That done she passed by y^ great co^duite in Chepe
which was newly painted with arms of devises: out of the which conduit by a
goodly fountain set at the one end ra^ne continually wine both white and claret
all that after noone, and so she rode to the Standard which was richely painted
with images of kings and queen's and hanged with ba^ners of arms, and in the
top was marvelous sweet armony both of song and instrument. Then she went
forward to the cross which was newly gilt, til she came where the Aldermen
stood, and then Master Baker the Recorder came to her with low reverence
making a proper and brief proposicion and gave to her in the name of the City
a thousand marks in gold in a Purse of gold, which she thankefully accepted
with many goodly words, and so road to the little conduite where was a rich
pageaunt full of melodye and song, in which pageaunt was Pallas, Juno and
Uenus, and before them stood Mercury, which in the name of the iii. goddesses
gave to her a balle of gold divided in three, signifiyng three gifts ye which
three Goddesses gave to her, that is to say, wisdom, riches and felicity. As
she entered into Paul's gate there was a pretty pageaunt in which satte three
ladies rychely clothed, and in a circle on their head was written Regina Anna
prospere proceed e^regna. The Lady in the mids had a Tablet in the which was
written Veni amica coronaberis, And under the tablet satte an angel with a
close croune, and the lady sittyng on the right hand had a Tablet of silver
in which was written Domine direcre gressus meos, and the third lady had a
Tablet of gold with letters Asure written, confido in domino, and under their
feet was written, Anna Regina nominum Regis de sanguine narum, cum paries
populis a^ea secla tuis. And these ladies cast down Wafers, on the which the
two verses were written. From thence she passed to the East end of Paul's
Churcheyarde against the schole, where stood on a S^affolde two hundredth
children well apparelled, which said to her diverse goodly verses of Poets
translated into English, to the honor of the king and her, which she highly
commended. And when she came to Ludgate, the gate was newly garnished with
gold and byse. And on the ledes of saint Martyns Church stood a goodly quere
of singyng men and children which sang new balades made in praise of her.
After that she was passed Ludgate she proceeded toward Fletestrete where, the
Conduict was newely painted, and all the arms and angels refreshed, and the
chyme melodiously sownyng. Upon the Conduite was made a town with iiii.
Turrettes, and in every Turret stood one of the cardinal virtues with their
tokens and properties, which had several speches, promisyng the Queen never to
leave her, but to be aydyng and comfortyng her, And in the mids of the tower
closely was such several solemn instruments, that it seemed to be an
heavenly noise, and was much regarded and praised: and beside this the said
Conduyte ran wine Claret and Red all the afternoon. So she with all her
company and the Mayor road forth to Temple bar, which was newly painted
and repaired, where stood also diverse singyngmen and children, til she came to
Westminster halle, which was richely hanged with clothe of Arras and new
glased. And in the mids of the halle she was taken out of her littre, and so
led up to the high dece under the clothe of estate, on whose left hand was a
cupborde of x. stages merueilous rich and beutifull to behold, and within a
little season was brought to the queen with a solemn service in great standing
spyce plates, a void of Spice and subtilties with Ipocras and other wynes,
which she sent down to her ladies, and when the ladies had drunk she gave
hearty thanks to the lords and ladies, and to the Mayor and other that had
given their attendance on her, and so withdrew her self with a few ladies to
the Whitehalle and so to her chamber, and there shifted her, and after went
into her barge secretly to the king to his Manor of Westminster where she
rested that night.

Sunday being vvhitsonday the first day of June and the day of her coronacion.
On sunday the Mayor cladde in crimosyn velvet and with his collor and all the
Aldermen and shiriffes in Scarlet and the counsel of the city took their
barge at the Crane by seven of the clock and came to Westminster where they
were welcomed and brought into ye halle by Master Treasorer and other of the
kings house, and so gave their attendaunce till the queen should come forth.
Between viii. and ix. she came into the halle and stood under the clothe of
estate, and then came in the kings chapel and the monks of Westminster all in
rich copes and many bishops and Abbottes in Copes and miters which went
into the mids of the halle, and there stood a season. Then was there a raye
clothe spread from the queen's standing in the halle through the palace and
saintuary, which was railed on both sides to the high Altar of Westminster.
After that the raye clothe was cast, the officers of arms appointed the order
accustomed. First went gentlemen, then esquiers, then knights, then the
aldermen of the city in their clokes of Scarlet, after them the Judges in
their mantels of Scarlet and coyffes. Then followed the knights of the bathe
being no lords, every man having a white lace on his left sleue, Then followed
Barons and vicountes in their parliament robes of Scarlet. After them came
Earls, Marquesses and Dukes in their robes of estate of crimosyn velvet furred
with Ermyne poudered according to their degr^es. After them came the lord
Chau^celor in a robe of Scarlet open before bordered with Lettice: after him
came the kings chapel and y^ Monks solempnely singyng with procession, then
came abbottes and bishops mitered, then sergeauntes and officers of arms,
then after them went the Mayor of London with his mace and garter in his cote
of arms, Then went the Marquis Dorcet in a robe of estate which bare the
scepter of gold, and the earl of Arrondel which bare the rod on Yuery with the
Dove both together: Then went alone the earl of Oxforde high Chamberlain of
England which bare y^ croune, after him went the duke of Suffolk in his robe
of estate also for that day being high steward of England, having a long white
rod in his hand, and the lord Wyllyam Hawarde with the rod of the
Marshalship, and every knight of the Garter had on his collor of the order.
Then proceeded forth the queen in a circot and robe of purple Ueluet furred with
Ermyne in her here coyffe and circlet as she had the saturday, and over her was
borne the Canape by iiii. of the.v. Ports all crimosyn with points of blewe
and red hangyng on their sleues, and the bishops of London and Wynchester
bare up the lappes of y^ queen's robe. The queen's train which was very long
was borne by y^ old duchess of Norffolke: after her followed ladies being lords
wives which had circottes of scarlet with narow sleues, the breast all Lettice
with bars of according to their degrees. And over that they had mantels of
Scarlet furred, and every mantle had lettice about y^ neck like a neckercher
likewise poudered, so that by ye pouderynges there degree was known. Then
followed ladies bring knights wives in gounes of Scarlet with narow sleues
without trains only edged with lettice, and likewise had all the queen's
gentlewomen. When she was thus brought to the high place made in the mids of
the church between the quere and the high alter she was set in a rich chair.
And after that she had rested a while she descended down to the high Alter and
there prostrate her self while the archbishop of Cauntorbury said certain
collettes: then she rose and the bishop anointed her on the head and on the
breast, and then she was led up again, where after diverse Orisons said, the
archbishop set the croune of saint Edward on her head, and then delivered her
the scepter of gold in her right hand, and the rod of Iuery with the dove in
the left hand, and then all the quere sang Te deum. etc. Which fone the bishop
took of the croune of saint Edward being heavy and set on the croune made for
her, and so went to Mass. And when the offertory was begone she descended down
and offered being crouned, and so ascended up again and sat in her chair till
Agnus, And then she went down and kneled before the alter where she received
of the archbishop the holy sacrament and then went up to her place again.
After that Mass was done she went to saint Edwardes shryne and there offered,
after which offering done she withdrewe her into a little place made for the
nones on the one side of the quere. Now in ye mean season every duches had put
on their bonettes a coronal of gold wrought with flowers, and every Marquesses
put on a demi Coronal of gold, every counties a plain circlet of gold without
flowers, and every king of arms put on a croune of Coper and gilte all which
were worn till night. When the queen had a little reposed her, the company
returned in the same order that they set forth, and the Queen went crouned and
so did the Ladies aforesaid. Her right hand was sustained by the earl of
Wylshire her father, and her left hand by the lord Talbot deputy for the earl
of Shrewsbury and lord Forynfal his father. And when she was out of the
saintuary and appeared within the palace the trumpettes played marvelous
freshely, and so she was brought to Westminster halle, and so to her
withdrawyng chamber, during which time ye lords, Judges, Mayor and Aldermen
put of their robes, Mantels and Clokes, and took their hoddes from their necks
and cast them about their shoulders, and the lords satte only in their
circottes, and the Judges and Aldermen in their gounes. And all the lords that
served that day served in their circottes and their hoddes about their
shoulders. Also diverse officers of the kings house being no lords had
circottes and hoddes of Scarlet edged with Myniuer, as the Treasorer,
Controller and Master of the Iuel house, but their circottes were not gilte.

The order and sittyng at diner.
While the queen was in her chamber, every lord and other that ought to do
service at coronacions did prepare them according to their duty, as the duke
of Suffolk high steward of England which was richely apparelled, his doblet
and ^aket set with orient perle, his goune of crimosin velvet enbrodered, his
courser trapped with a cloth trapper head and all to the ground of Crimosyn
Ueluet set full of letters of gold of goldsmithes work having a long white
rod in his hand, on his left hand road the lord Wylliam, deputy for his
brother as earl Marshal with the Marshals rod, whose goune was C^imosyn velvet,
and his horse trapper purple velvet cut on white satin enbrodered with white
Lions. The earl of Oxforde was high Chamberlain, the earl of Essex caruer, the
earl of Sussex suer, the earl of Arrondel chief butler on who^ xii. citizens
of London did give their attendaunce at the cupbord. The earl of Darby
Cupberer, the Uicount Lysle Panter, the lord of Burgayne chief larder, the
lord Bray almoner for him and his coperteners, and the Mayor of Oxford kept
the buttry bar, and Thomas Wiat was chief eurer for sir Henry Wiat his
father. When all thing was ready, the Queen under her canapy came to the halle
and washed and satte down in the mids of the table under the cloth of
estate. On the right side of the chair stood the countess of Oxforde wydowe,
and on the left side stood the countess of Worcester all the dinner season,
which diverse times in the dinner time did hold a fine cloth before the queen's
face when she list to spet or do otherwise at her pleasure. At the tables end
satte the archebishoppe of Cauntorbury on the right hand of the queen, and in
the myddest between the archebishoppe and the countess of Oxforde stood the
earl of Oxforde with a white staff all diner time, and at the queen's feet
under the table satte.ii. gentlewomen all dinner time. When all these things
were thus ordered came in the Duke of Suffolk and the lord Wyllyam Haward on
horseback and the sergeauntes of arms before them, and after them the Sewer,
and then the knights of the bath bringyng in the first course which was
xxviii. dishes beside subtilties and ships made of wax marvelous gorgious
to behold, all which time of service the trumpettes standing in the wyndow at
the netherende of the halle played melodiously. When her grace was setued of
two dishes, then the archebishoppes service was set down, whose Sewer came
equal with the third dishe of the queen's service on his left hand. After that
the queen and the archbishop was served, the Barons of the ports began the
table on the right hand next the wall, next them at the table sat the masters
and clerks of the chau^cery, and beneth them at the table other doctors and
gentlemen. The table next the wall on the left hand by the cupborde was begone
by the Mayor and Aldermen the chamberlain and the counsel of the city of
London, and beneth them satte substancial merchants, and so douneward other
worshipful persons. At the table on the right hand in ye mids of the halle
sat the lord Chauncelor and other temporal lords on the the right side of
the table, in their circottes: And on the left side of the same table, sat
Bishops and Abbottes in their Parliament robes, beneth them sat the Judges,
Seriantes, and the kings counsel, beneth the^ the knights of the Bathe. At
the table on the left hand, in the middle part, sat Ducheses, Marqueses,
Countesses, Baronesses, in their robes, and other ladies in circottes, and
gentle women in gounes. Al which ladies and gentle women, sat on the left side
of the table a long, and none on the rightside: and when all were thus set,
they were incontinent served and so quickly, that it was maruaill, for the
seruitors gave such good attendance, that meat or drink ne any thing else,
neded not to be called for, which in so great a multitude was maruaill. As
touching the fare there could be devised, no more costlier dishes nor
subtilties. The Mayor of London was served with.xxxiii. dishes at two courses,
and so were all his brethren, and such as sat at his table. The Queen had at
her second course.xxiiii. dishes, and thirty at the third course: and
between the two last courses, the kings of Arms cried Larges, in three
parts of the hall: and after stood in their place, which was in the bekins at
the kings Benche. And on the right hand, out of the Cloister of. S. Stephe^s,
was made a little Closet, in which the king with diverse Ambassadors, stood to
behold the service. The Duke of Suffolk and the lord Willyam, rode often
times about the hall, cheryng the lords, ladies, and the Mayor and his
brethren. After they all had dined, they had Wafers and Ypocras, and then they
washed, and were commanded to rise, and to stand still in their places,
before the table or on the fourmes till the Queen had washed: when she had
taken Wafers and Ypocrase, the table was taken up, and the Earl of Rutlande
brought up the surnap, and laid it at the bordes end, which immediately was
drawn, and cast by Master Rode, Marshal of the hall: And the Queen washed, and
after the Archbishop, and after the Surnap was drawn of, she arose and stood
in the mids of the Hall place: to whom the Earl of Sussex in a goodly spice
plate, brought a void of spice and comfettes. After him the Mayor of London,
brought a standing cup of gold, set in a cup of assaie of gold, and after
that she had drunk, she gave the Mayor the Cup, with the Cup of assaie,
because there was no leyar, according to the claim of the city, thankyng him
and all his brethren, of their pain. Then she under her Canapie, departed to
her Chamber, and at the entry of her Chamber, she gave the Canapy with Belles
and all, to the Barons of the Ports, according to their claim, with great
thanks. Then the Mayor of London bearyng his Cup in his hand, with his
brethren, went through the hall to their barge, and so did all other noble men
and gentlemen, for it was six of the clock.

On Mondaie were the Iustes at the Tilte, before the Kings gate, where the
Mayor and his brethren had a goodly sta^dyng: but there were very few speres
broken, by reason the horses would no cope.

On Wednesdaie, the King sent for the Mayor and his brethren to Westminster,
and there he himself gave to them hearty thanks, with many goodly words.

On Midsomer day after, the lady Mary the French Queen died in Suffolk, at
the lordship of who was the late wife to Jews the xii. and after married to
Charles duke of Suffolk, and was buried at

This season the king kept his progress about London, because of the Queen.

The vii day of September being Sondaie, between three and four of the Clock
at after noone, The Christenyng of y^ lady Elizabeth.
the Queen was delivered of a fair Lady, which day the Duke of Norffolke
came home to the christenyng, and for the Queen's good deliverance, Te deum was
song in continently, and great preparacion was made for the christenyng: and
the Mayor and his brethren, and.xl. of the chief of the citezens, were
commanded to be at the Christenyng, the Wednesdaie following, upon which day
the Mayor, sir Stephen Pecocke, in a goune of Crimosin Ueluet, with his collar
of S. S. and all the Aldermen in Scarlet, with collers and cheines, and all the
counsel of the city with them, took their barge after diner, at one of the
clock, and the citeze^s had another barge, and so rowed to Grenewiche, where
were many lords, knights, and gentlemen assembled. All the walls between the
Kings place and the Friars, were hanged with Arras, and all the way strawed
with grene Rushis: the Friars Church was also hanged with Arras. The Funt was
of silver, and stood in the mids of the Church, three steps high, which
was covered with a fine clothe, and diverse gentlemen with aperns, and towelles
about their necks, gave attendaunce about it, that no filthe should come in
the Funt, over it hong a square Canape of crimosin Satin, fringed with gold,
about it was a rail covered with read say: between the quier and the body
of the Church, was a close place with a pan of fire, to make the child ready
in: when al these things were ordered, the child was brought to the hall, and
then every man set forward: First the citezens two and two, then gentlemen,
Esquiers and chapeleins, next after them the Aldermen, and the Mayor alone:
next the Mayor, the kings counsel, the kings Chapel in copes: then Barons,
Bishops, Earls, then came the Earl of Essex, bearyng the covered basins
gilte, after him the Marquis of Excester with y^ taper of virgin wax, next him
the Marquis Dorset, bearyng the salt, behynd him the lady Mary of Norffolk,
bearyng the cresom which was very rich of perle and stone, the old Duches of
Norffolke bare the child, in a Mantell of purple velvet, with a long train
furred with Ermine The duke of Norffolke, with his Marshall rod went on the
right hand of thesaied duches, and the duke of Suffolk on the left hand, and
before them went the officers of arms: the countes of Kent bare the long
train of the childs mantell, and between the Countes of Kent and the child,
went therle of Wilshire on the right hand* and therle of Darby on the left
hand, supportyng thesaid train: in the mids over thesaid child was borne a
Canapy, by the lord Rocheford, the lord Husee, the lord Willya^ Haward, and
by the lord Thomas Haward the elder, after the child followed many ladies, and
gentlewomen, when the child was come to the church door, the bishop of London
met it with diverse bishops and Abbottes mitred, and began the obseruaunces
of the Sacrament. The Godfather was the lord Archbishop of Cantorbury: the
Godmothers were the old Duches of Norffolke, and the old Marchiones of Dorset
widows, and the child was named Elizabeth: and after that al thing was done,
at the church door the child was brought to the Fount, and christened, and
this done, Garter chief king of arms cried a loud, God of his infinite
goodness, send prosperous life and long, to the high and mighty Princes of
England Elizabeth: and then the trumpettes blewe, then the child was brought
up to the altar, and the Gospel said over it: and after that immediately the
Archbishop of Cantorbury confirmed it, the Marchiones of Excester being
Godmother, then the Archbishop of Cantorbury, gave to the Princes a standing
cup of gold: the Duches of Norffolke, gave to her a standing cup of gold,
fretted with perale: the Marchiones of Dorset gave three gilt boulles, pounced
with a cover: and the Marchiones of Excester, gave three standing bolles graven,
all gilt with a cover. Then was brought in Wafers, Comfettes, Ypocras in such
plenty, that every man had as much, as he would desire. Then they set
forwards, the trumpettes going before in the same order, toward the kings
place, as they did when they came thither ward, saving that the gifts that
the Godfather, and the Godmothers gave, were borne before the child by four
persons, that is to say: First sir Ihon Dudley, bare the gift of the Lady of
Excester: the lord Thomas Haward the younger, bare the gift of the lady of
Dorset: the lord Fitzwater, bare the gift of the Lady of Norffolk, and the
Earl of Worcester, bare the gift of the Archbishop of Cantorbury, and all the
one side as they went, was full of staff Torches, to the number of five
hundred, borne by the guard and other of the kings servants, and about the
child were borne, many other proper torches borne by gentlemen: and in this
order they brought the princes, to the Queen's chamber, and tarried there a
while, with his brethren the Aldermen, and at the last the Dukes of Norffolke
and Suffolk, came out from the King, thankyng them heartily, and commanded
them to give them thanks in his name: and from thence they were had to the
seller to drink, and so went to their Barges.

This year also, one Pauier Pauyer.
town clerk of the city of London, hanged himself, which surely was a man,
that in nowise could abide to here that the Gospel should be in English, and
I my self heard him once say to me and other that were by, swearyng a great
oath, that if he thought the kings highness, would set forth the scripture in
English, and set it be red of the people by his authority, rather then he
would so long live he would cut his awn throat, but he brake promise, for as you
have hard he hanged himself: but of what mind and intent he so did, God judge.
About this season was espied a new found Saint, and holy Hypocrite, called
the maid of Kent, which by the great labor, dilig^nce, and pain taking of
tharch^bishop of Cantorbury, and the lord Cromewell, and one called Hugh
Latimer a priest (which shortly after was made Bishop of Worce^^er) the
iugglyng and crafty decept of this maid, was manifested and brought to light:
whereupon after diverse examinacions, she with all her adherentes, were in
November brought to the star chamber: the names of them all shall follow, The
holy Ma^de of Kent.
first Elizabeth Barton, which was she that called her self ye holy maid of
Kent, Richard Master priest person of Aldyngton in the County of Kent, Edward
Bockyng doctor in Divinity, Monk of Cantorbury, Richard Deryng Monk also of
Cantorbury, Edward Twaites gentleman, Thomas Laure^ce register to tharchedeacon
of Cantorbury, Henry Gold person of Aldermary bachiler or Divinity, Hugh Rich
Friar Obseruaunt, and Richard Risby, Thomas Gold gentleman. These all being in
the star chamber, before diverse of the kings counsel, confested their
feined hipocrisy, and dissimuled sanctitee, and treit^rous purposes and
intentes, and then was there by the kings counsel adjudged, to stand at
Paul's cross, where they with their aw^e hands, should severally deliver each
of them to the preacher that should be appointed, a bill declaryng their
subtle, crafty and supersticious doings. Which thing the next Sondaie
after, they all above rehearsed, standing on a stage at Paul's Cross, made for
that purpose did accomplish: but for their treasons committed, the matter
thereof was respited to the Parliamet next following, where all they abouesaid,
with other as after ye shall here, were attainted by act of parliam^t, and
suffered death as traitors, by hangyng, drawyng, and quarteryng at Tyborne.

In September the king of Scotts, sent his Commissioners to the town of New
Castle, where were for the king of England commissioners sir Thomas Clifford,
and doctor Magnus, and sir Raufe Elderkare. And first the Scotts without any
long communicacion, demanded great amends, saying, that the Englishmen had
robbed and spoiled them to their loss, and that greatly, and said that the
king of England of his honor, must needs make satisfaccion, if he would be
called honorable. Then it was answered, that notwithstanding the leagues,
written, sealed and sworn, the Scottishe nacio^ would never keep peace in
so much, while we be here in treatyng, your people are robbyng: wherefore the
king demands of you, the goods and prisoners taken contrary to the peace,
whereof we here deliver you a writing, which the Scotts received, and at their
next metyng they said, that the ships to them were lawful prises, by reason
that therle of Anguishe, was maintened in England, which is rebel to our
king, and therle and you have done to us much skathe, and we have taken a few
ships, in recompense of some part of our great losses, which we may not
deliver, and therefore, we parie you demand them not: but here we deliver
you our book, which amounts to a greater sum by ten thousand mark. The
English commissioners received the book, and in the same the Scotts demanded,
recompense for burning their tounes, and destroiyng many of their strong Piles,
above.xxiiii, which were destroyed from the.xxiiii. day of April, in the
last.xxiiii. year of the king, to the.xxx. day of April. The English
commisioners answered, that if the Scotts would send to the king of England,
they doubted not, but they should have a good answer for the king of England
bad him chose peace or war: so they agreed to send to both their kings
letters of their doings, which in haste was dooen. And after much suite of
the Scotts part, when they had much demanded, and little or nothing was
granted, they then being weary of war desired peace, which was concluded,
during both the kings lives, and the twenty day of May, in the next year
of the king following, it was openly Proclaimed, to the great comfort and
reioysyng of all lovers of peace.

The.xviii. day of December, the Duke of Suffolk was sent by the king and his
counsel, to Bugden beside Huntyngdon, where the lady Katheryne Princes
Dowager lay. For the King was advertised, and had good proves of the same, that
she of froward mind would consent, neither to the determinacion of the
Uniuersities, nor yet to the sentence of the whole conuocacion of the realm,
but being counseled by a few Spaniardes, which had little lernyng, did all
that she could to infringe the determinacion of thesaid Uniuersities and
clergy. In somuche that she wrote to the Pope, and to other potentates, to
grieve the King and his realm, because he would not follow her mind, and break
the commandment of God. Wherefore the Kings counsel mocioned the king,
that such as were about her, and moved her thereto, should be put from her, for
they thought it no reason, that she should have such liberty to work that
^hyng, by the which the king ans his realm, might have detriment or damage.
Wherefore thesaied Duke was sent to her, which showed to her openly, Articles
of her suites to the Pope, and how she sought means to grieve the King and
his Realm, which hereafter she should not be suffered to do. For the same
time was a Curse sent from the Pope, The Pope accurssed the King and Realm.
which accurssed both the King, and the whole Realm, which Curse the
bearer thereof, being not by like the^ hardiest manne that ever showed himself
in front of battaill, thought it a great deal more better for him to bestow
it without the Kings reche, then to adventure to come within his Dominions,
and therefore set it up in the Town of Dunkercke in Flaunders, where it was
taken down by Wyllyam Lock, Mercer of London. Willya^ Lock Mercer.
The Queen answered the Duke very highly and obstinately, with many high
words, and suddenly in a fury she departed from him, into her privy Chamber
and shut the door. He seeing that, brake all the order of the Queen's Court,
and discharged a great sort of her household servants, and yet left there
a convenient number, to serve her like a Princes. There was great lamentacion
among them that departed, but there was no remedy. Then they that remaigned to
serve her, were sworn to serve her as a Princes Dowager, and not as Queen,
some said they were sworn to her as Queen, and otherwise they would not
serve, and so they departed. Other that were sworn to serve her as Princes, and
remained there, she them utterly refused for her servants, wherefore she
remained with the less number of servants.

The king kept his Christmas at Grenewiche, with great solempnitee, and after
Christmas began the Parliament. In which Parliament Elizabeth Barton, the
holy Maid of Kent, with all her adherentes, of whom ye have heard before, was
attaynted. And because her offenses, were both against God and the king, so
great and wicked, that the like was never heard nor known before, I will
declare unto you the process of her matter, in such manner as the truth
thereof, is declared in her attainder, by Act of Parliament. First thesaied
Elizabeth Barton (being a Nonne professed in the house and Priory of Saint
S^pulcres of Cauntorbury) which long before ^he was professed Nonne, dwelled
with one Thomas Cobbe, in the Parish of Aldyngton, in the County of Kent, and
happened to be visited with sickness, and by occasion thereof, brought in
such debilitie and weakness of her brain, because she could not eat ne
drink, by a long space, that in the violence of her infirmity, she seemed to
be in Traunses, and spoke and uttered many foolish and Idle words. And one
Richard Master, Clerk, being Person of thesaied Parish of Aldyngton, in
thesaied County of Kent, after that he had made to the late Archebishoppe of
Cauntorbury, a far and a larger report, concerning the Hypocrisy, traunses
and speeches of thesaied Elizabeth, then he could justify and abide by, and
after that he was commanded by thesaied Archbishop, to give good attendaunce
upon her, if she shoud fortune to have any ^^o such traunses and speeches, and
to send him knowledge thereof, to the intent to mainteigne, uphold and verefy,
such report as he had made, as well to the Archebishoppe aforesaied, as to
other, of the wounderfull traunses and speeches of thesaied Nonne, he falsely
and craftily informed thesaid Elizabeth, that the merueilous words which she
spoke in her traunses, before his ridyng to the Archbishop aforsaied, proceeded
of the inspiracion of the holy ghost, and that she was greatly to be blamed if
she would hide or dissemble the wonderful works of God showed to her: for
before this his said informacion and instruccion, she said constantly, that
she could not remember, that she spoke any such notable words in her
traunses, as were reported unto her, by thesaied Richard Master. Which
Elizabeth being in this manner of wise, often times persuaded, procured and
informed, by thesaied Person of Aloyngton, took boldenes and courage to
forge, feign, and counterfeat such manner of Tra^^ses, and crafty speeches,
as thesaied Person of Aldyngton told her, that she used in her sickness, before
he went to thesaid Archbishop. And when thesaid Elizabeth had used, this
false, feigned cou^terfeatyng for a ceason, and was perfect therein (so that
the fame thereof, was greatly spread abroad, in those parties) then thesaied
Person, to the intent aforsaid, and to the intent the people, should give more
faith and credit unto her, and because he would have increased, the devotion
of the people, in coming on pilgrimage to a Chapel, set in Court at Stete,
within thesaied Parish, dedicate in the honor of our Lady, for his own lucre
and advantage, imagined, devised, compassed, and declared, with the aid,
help, and counsaiill of one Edward Bockyng Monk, professed in the Monastery
in Christ's Church in Cauntorbury, and Doctor in Diuinitee, that thesaied
Elizabeth, being in the ecstasy and extremity of her sickness, in a manner
distract in trau^ses, should say amongst other wounderfull words, that she
should never take health of her body, till such time as she had visited the
Image of our Lady, being in thesaied Chapel at Court at Street aforesaied:
and that our Lady had appeared unto her, and showed her, that if she came to
thesaied Chapel, at the day appointed, she should be restored to her health
by Miracle, where in very deed, she was restored to her perfect health, by
diet and Phisike, and by the course of nature, which expelled the matter,
being cause of her sickness, in the mean time while thesaid person of
Aldyngton, was with the Archebishoppe, as is before rehearsed. And albeit
thesaied Elizabeth, was restored to her health, yet she being accustomed and
acquainted, with the manner and fashion, of her distracte Traunses, by the
counsaiell, conspiracy, and confede^a^ie of thesaied Edward Bockyng, and
Richard Master, did falsely practice, use and show unto the people, diverse
and merueilous sondery alteracions, of her sensible parts of her body,
craftily vtteryng in her said feigned and false Traunses, diverse and many
verteous and holy words, tendyng to the rebuke of sin, and in reprouyng of
such new opinions, as then began to spryng in this Realm, which she
called Heresies, as she was induced and taught, by thesaied Edward Bockyng and
Richard Master, vsyng all the ways of false Hypocrisy, to the intent the
people should give belefe and credence unto her, whereby they might be the
sooner brought, into the detestable crimes of blasphemy and Idolatry, against
almighty GOD. And thesaied Edward Bockyng, being maliciously fixed in his
opinion, against the Kings highness, in his detested Matrimony with Queen
Katheryne, and intendyng in his mind, afterward for his part, falsely and
Traitorously to use thesaied Elizabeth, as a Diabolicke instrument, to stir,
move, and provoke the people of this Realm as well nobles as other, to murmoure
and grudge, against the Majesty of our Soucreigne Lord, and all his just
and Lawful procedynges, in thesaied Deuorce and feperacion, as after he did in
very deed: for the accomplishyng of his said false, malicious and Traiterous
intentes, falsely devised and conspired, with thesaied Richard, that thesaied
Elizabeth should show and manifest her self, to the people, to be an
excellent verteous and an holy woman, and that all her words and deeds,
should appear to the world, to proceed of a maru^ilous holiness, rebukyng the
common sins and vices of the world, as though she were taught and inspired,
of the holy spirit of God. And not only moved and counseled thesaied
Elizabeth, thus to use her self, surmittyng to her that she spoke such
things, in the ecstasy of her sickness, that came by the inspiracion of God,
but also counseled and procured thesaied Elizabeth, to be brought and
conueighed, to thesaied Chapel of our Lady, and therein openly in the
presence of the people, (that there should be assembled by their procurementes)
should use and experiment such like Traunses, and alteracions of her face, and
other the outward sensible parts of her body, as she used in the extremity
and ecstasy of her sickness. To whose counsels and aduertisementes, thesaied
Elizabeth agreed. Whereupon at a day by them appointed and agreed, thesaied
Edward and Richard, labored, solicited, and procured, above the number of two
thousand persons, to repair to thesaied Chapel, surmittyng that thesaied
Elizabeth, which as they said, had marvelous and many Uisions and
Reuelacions of God, should be brought thither, and there receive her health,
by Miracle of our Lady, whose Image was in thesaied Chapel. By reason of
which false, feigned and detestable conspiracy and Hypocrysy, at the day by
them appointed, there assembled to thesaied Chapel, above the number of two
thousand people. At which day also, thesaied Edward Bockyng, and Richard
Master procured, and caused thesaied Elizabeth, to repair to thesaied Chapel,
where thesaied Elizabeth, albeit she at that time, and long before was restored
to health of her body, and discharged of her torments and affliccions,
which she had in the ecstasy of her sickness: Yet nevertheless by the
procurement and crafty counsel of thesaied Edward Bockyng, and Richard
Master, did falsely feign and show unto the people in the same Chapel, many
alteracions of her face, and other outward sensible parts of her body, and
falsely feigned and showed her self in Traunces, vtteryng wondrous words, as
she was before subtelly and craftily induced and taught, by thesaied Richard
and Edward to do. And emonges other things she uttered, that it was the
pleasure of God, that thesaied Edward Bockyng, should be her ghostly father,
and that she should be a Religious woman, as she was taught by thesaied Edward
Bockyng, and Richard Master. And within a while after demonstracion, of such
false feigned and dissimuled traunces, she appeared to the people, to be
suddenly reveled from her sickness and affliccions, by the intercession and
means of the Image of our Lady, being in the same Chapel. By means of
which false feigned Hypocrysy, dissimuled and cloked Sanctitee, so conspired
and craftily imagined by thesaied Edward Bockyng, and Richard Master,
thesaied Elizabeth was brought into a meruellous fame, credit and good
opinion, of a great multitude of the people of this Realm. And to increase
the ^ame of thesaid false feigned Hypocrisy, thesaid Elizabeth after wards, by
the counsel and procurement of thesaied Edward Bockyng, entered into
Religion, and became a Nonne, professed in thesaied Priory of Saint
Sepulchers, to whom thesaied Edward Bockyng, had commonly his resort, not
without probable, vehement, and violent suspicion of incontinencie, pretending
to be he^ Ghostly father, by Gods appointment. And by conspiracy between her
and him, caused her still to persist and abide, in the practisyng of her said
false hipocrisy, and dissimulyng traunces and raptes. And that she should
surmit to the people, that when she was in such simuled alteracio^, of her
sensible parts of her body, that she was then rapt by almighty God, from
thaffeccions of this world, and told by the holy spirit of God, many things
that should follow to the world, for punishment of the sins of the princes
and the people. And that she should also (...) that she was much provoked and
tempted, as well to the sin of the flesh as otherwise, by her ghostly enemy
the devil, at diverse and sundry times, and in diverse and sondery ways and
fashions. And yet never theles that she by the grace of almighty God was
preserved, and steadfastly resisted such temptacion. By occasion of which
counsel and procurement, of thesaid Edward Bockyng, thesaid Elizabeth by
continuance of time, took such a courage upon her, that she falsely feined
and said, that she had many reuelacions, of almighty God and his holy
saincte^, with heavenly lights, heavenly voices, heavenly melodies and joys, and
specially in a chapel of.s. Giles, in thesaid Nonnery, to the which chapel,
she often times resorted, to receive visions and reuelacions, as commanded by
God, as she falsely reported, and specially by night saying, that the Dorture
door was made open to her by Gods power, vtteryng the same, as well to
thesaied Edward Bockyng, as to diverse other persons. By the which her false
feined reuelacions, and cloked hipocrisy, she was reputed amongst many people
of this realm, to be a very holy woman, inspired with God, where in very
deed, she never had vision or reuelacion from God, as she has plainly and
openly, confessed her self. And therefore her stealyng furthe of the Dorture in
the night, which was not once or twice wekely was not for spiritual business,
nor to receive reuelacio^s of God, but rather for bodily co^municacio^ and
pleasure with her fre^des, which could not have so goodleasure and oportunite
with her by day. Andfor ratificacio^ of her false feined reuelacio^s, thesaid
Edward by co^spiracy, between him and thesaid Elizabeth, reveled the same to the
most reverent father, Willya^ late Archbishop of Ca^torbury, who by false and
untrue surmises, tales and lies of thesaid Edward and Elizabeth, was allured,
brought and induced to credit them, and made no diligent serches, for the
trial of their said falsehodes, and consideracions, but suffered and admitted
the same, to the blasphemy of almighty god, and to the great deceit of the
prince, and people of this realm. And for a perpetual memory of thesaid
feined and dissimuled hipocrisy, and false reuelacions of thesaied Elizabeth,
thesaied Edward Bockyng, Richard Master, and one Ihon Deryng; a Monk in
thesaid Monastery of Christ's church a forsaied, made, writ, and caused to be
written, sondery books both great and small, both printed and written,
concerning the perticularities of thesaied false and feined hipocrisy, and
reuelacio^s of thesaid Elizabeth, or the defense or great praise of the same:
surmittyng and puttyng forth the same false and feined practices, and
reuelacio^s of thesaid Elizabeth, to be just and true miracles, showed by
almighty God, in the favor of the sanctitee of thesaid Elizabeth, where in
deed they been and were falsely devised, compassed, co^spired, written and
maintained by thesaid Elizabeth Barton, Edward Bockyng, Richard Master, and
Iho^ Deryng, to thonly intent to bring thesaid Elizabeth, in the fame and
credit of the people of this realm, whereby the people should the more be apt
and disposed, by her false cloked hipocrisy and sanctitee, to commit the crimes
of blasphemy, and ydolatrie against God, and also the sooner induced, by the
false reuelacions of thesaied Elizabeth to murnor, and grudge, and be of evil
opinion, against the Majesty of our sovereign lord, to the great peril and
danger of his most royal person. And one Edward Thwaites ge^tleman,
translated and wrote diverse quaiers, and shetes of paper, concerning thesaid
false feined reuelacions, of thesaied Elizabeth. Also one Thomas Laurence of
Cantorbury, being regester to tharchebishop of Cantorbury, at thinstance and
desire of thesaid Edward Bockyng, wrote a great book of thesaied false and
feined miracles, and reuelacions of thesaid Elizabeth in a fair hand, ready to
be a copy to the printer, when thesaied book should be put to stamp.

Emonges which false and feined reuelacions, surmised by thesaied Elizabeth,
and put in writings in diverse books, by the false co^spiracie means and
procurement of thesaid Edward Bockyng, Richard Master, Ihon Deryng, and other
their accomplices, there is expressed that the devil should appear, to thesaied
Elizabeth in diverse fashions, sometimes like a man wantonly appareiled,
sometime like a bird deformed, and sometime otherwise. And that Mary
Magdalene, should often apere to thesaied Elizabeth, and reuele to her many
reuelacions. And at one time should deliver unto her, a letter written in
heaven, part whereof was limmed with golden letters, where in deed the same
letters were written with the hand of a Monk of saint Augustines in
Cantorbury named Hawkhurst.

There was also written and contained, amongst thesaid false and feined
miracles and reuelacio^s, that when the kings highness was at Calice in
thenteruewe, between his majesty and the French king, and heryng Mass in the
Church of our Lady at Calice, that God was displeased with the kings highness,
that his grace saw not at the Mass the blessed Sacrament in form of bread:
for it was taken away from the priest (being at Mass) by an Angel, and
ministered unto thesaid Elizabeth, then being there present and invisible, and
suddenly conueighed and rapt thence again, by the power of God into thesaied
Nonnery, where she is professed, with many other false feined fables, and tales
devised, conspired and defended by thesaid Elizabeth, Edward Bockyng and Ihon
Deryng, writce^ as miracles in thesaid books for a memorial, to set forth the
false and feined hypocrisy, and cloked sanctitee of thesaied Elizabeth, to the
people of this realm, as by thesaied sondery books and writings thereof made,
seen and examined by the kings most honorable cou^saill more plainly ape^eth:
in which books be written such terms and sentences of reproach and slander,
against the kings highness and the queen, which were to shameful to be written
against the most vile and ungracious persons living, which to here, would
abhor every true subject of this realm.

And after thesaid Elizabeth by such her false and feined hipocrisy, and
dissimuled sanctitee, was brought in a great brute and fame of the people, in
sundry parties of this realm, then thesaid Edward Bockyng by procurement and
secret conspiracy, of diverse persons unknown, which maligned against the
kings procedynges, for the seperacion and deuorse in thesaied detested and
unlawful marriage, traitorously intendyng to put the kings highness in a
murmor, and evil opinion of his people, for the same counseled and s^irred
thesaid Elizabeth, that she should ask a peticio^ of almighty God, to know
whether God was displeased with the kings highness, for procedyng in thesaid
deuorce, and seperacion of the marriage between his highness, and thesaied lady
Katherin, declaryng to her many times, that he and diverse other learned men of
this realm, and many of the common people of the same, were in firm opinions
that the kings procedyng in thesaied deuorce, was against the laws of God.
Whereupon thesaid Elizabeth subtlely and craftily, concerning the opinion and
mind of thesaied Edward, willing to please him, reveled and showed unto
thesaied Edward, that she had knowledge by reuelacion from God, that God was
highly displeased with our sovereign lord, for the same matter And in case he
desisted not from his procedinges, in thesaid deuorce and seperacion, but
pursued the same and married again, that then within one month after such
marriage, he should no longer by king of this realm: and in the reputacion of
almighty God, should not be a king one day, nor one hour: and that he should
dye a villeines death: saying farther, that there was a root with.iii.
branches, and til they were plucked up, it should never be merry in England:
interpretyng the root to be the late lord Cardinal, and the first branch to
be the king our sovereign lord, the second the duke of Norffolke, and
the.iii. the duke of Suffolk. Which false feined reuelacio^s, by the
mischeuous and malicious cou^sail and conspiracy of thesaid Edward Bockyng,
with y^ said Elizabeth, were written and expressed, in thesaied books and
volumes, conteignyng the false and feined reuelacions and Miracles, of thesaied
Elizabeth, for a perpetual memory thereof, to the utter reproach and perell of
destruction of the Kings person, his honor, fame and name* and privily and
secretly, set furthe by thesaied Elizabeth, Edward Bockyng, Ihon Deryng, and
Richard Master generally to diverse and many of the kings subjects, and
specially as to elect persons, to Ihon Bishop of Rochester, and Ihon Adeson
clerk, chapelain to thesaied bishop, and to one Henry Gold priest, bacheler of
Diuinitee, to Hugh Rich Friar Obseruaunt, and late Wardein of the Friars
Obseruauntes of Cantorbury, which bear malice and malignitie, to all the
kings procedynges, in thesaied deuorse and seperacion, because it was contrary
to their perverse and froward opinions, intendyng by color of thesaied false
and feined hypocrisy, and reuelacions of thesaied Elizabeth, not only to let
thesaied deuorse and seperacion, but also to bring and set forth secretly, in
the heddes of the people of this realm, as well nobles as other, that all the
kings acts and procedynges in the same, were against holy scriptures, and the
pleasure of almighty God: whereby the kings highness should be brought in a
grudge, and evil opinion of his people. And thesaied Ihon Bishop of
Rochester, Henry Gold, Hugh Rich, Richard Risby, Richard Master, Ihon Deryng,
at sondery and several times and places, spoke with thesaid Elizabeth, and
took relacion of her, of thesaied false and feined reuelacions, which she
feined that she had of almighty God, as well concerning the kings highness as
other, after the form and terms above specified. And having knowledge thereof,
thesaied Hugh Rich, Richard Risby, and Henry Gold clerk, gave such firm
and constant credit thereunto, that they Traitorously conceled it from the
kings highness, and trayteroyusly believed in their hearts, that the King our
sovereign Lord, after the late marriage solemnized, between his highness, and
his most dear and entierly beloved wife Queen Anne, was no longer rightful
king of this realm, in the reputacion of almighty God, whereby in their
hearts and wills, they trayterous^y withdrewe from his highness, their natural
duties of obedience: and secretly taught and moved other persons (to whom
they reveled thesaid false and ^eined reuelacions) that they ought and might
lawfully do in the same wise: and practiced thesaied matters, against the
kings Majesty, falsely, maliciously, and traitorously, at so^dery places and
times, with the fathers, and Nonnes of Syon, and diverse Monks of the Charter
house of London and Shene, and with diverse Freers Obseruauntes, the places of
Richemont, Grenewiche, and Cauntorbury, and to diverse other, both spiritual
and temporal persons in great number, to the intent to sow a secret murmor
and grudge, in the hearts of the Kings subjects, against the Majesty of our
sovereign lord, and all his procedynges, in thesaied divorce and seperacion,
intendyng thereby to make such a division and rebellyng in this realm,
amongst the kings subjects, whereby the kings highness, should not only
have been put to peril of his life, but also in ieoperdy to be deprived from
his croune and dignity royal.

And for a more plain and particular declaracion of the malicious and
traiterous intentes of the said Elizabeth, Edward Bockyng, Ihon Deryng, Hugh
Rich, Rychard Rysoy, and Henry Gold, they concluded by a confederacy among
them selfs each with other, to set forth in sermons and prechynges thesayd
reuelacions to the people of this realm against the kings Majesty,
whenever it should please y^ said Elizabeth to appoint them the time when
they should so do, and agreed each with other secretly, and set forth thesayd
false and feigned reuelacions to their acquayntaunce and friends in this realm,
intendyng to make a great multitude of people of this realm, by their secret
conspiracies, in an aptnes to receive and take such their sermons and
preachynges which they intended to make, as is aforesaid, concerning the
premi^^es, traitorously inte^dyng thereby to put our said sovereign lord, not
only in peril of his life, but also in ieopardye of loss and depriuacion of
his croune and dignity royal of this realm, from him and his lawful
succession for ever. And in accomplishyng their false, traiterous, and
malicious intentes against our said sovereign lord, they caused the said
Elizabeth, at ii. times, secretly to declare thesayd false and feigned
reuelacions to ii. of the Popes Orators and ambassadors at the Cities of
Cau^torbury and London. At which time the said Henry Gold took upon him to
be interpretor thereof, between thesayd Elizabeth and thesayd Orators named
Anthony Pulleon: and the interpretor to the other Orator named Syluester, was
the foresaid Lawrence of Cauntorbury, to the intent the kings highness, and all
his procedynges in thesayd deuorce and seperacion should be brought into an
evil opinion with the Pope and other princes and Potentates. And the said Hugh
Rich actually travailed to sundry places of this realm, and made secret
relacion of the premises concerning the kings highness to diverse lords both
spiritual and temporal, and diverse other persons lay and learned, seculer and
religious. And the said Henry Gold over this, actually travailed and made
relacion thereof to thesayd lady Katheryne princes dowager, to animate her to
make commocion in this realm against our said sovereign lord, surmittyng
that thesayd Elizabeth should have by reuelacion of God, that the said lady
Katheryne should prosper and do well, and that her issue the lady Mary the
kings daughter should prosper and reign in this realm and have many friends
to sustain and maintain her. And the said Elizabeth and Edward Bockyng, Ihon
Deryng and Richard Master likewise actually travailed to diverse places in this
realm and made secret relacion of thesayd false feigned hipocrysie and
reuelacions of thesayd Elizabeth and gave knowledge hereof to diverse other
sundry persons of this realm.

All which conspiracies and confederacies of thesayd Elizabeth, and other her
accomplices above mentioned, was traitorously and maliciously devised and
practiced by the said Elizabeth, Edward Bockyng, Ihon Deryng, Rychard Master,
Henry Gold, Hugh Rich, and Rychard Rysby to the intent traitorously to
destroy our said sovereign lord, and to deprive him and his lawful
succession from the croune and dignity royal of this realm, which matter
has been practiced and imagined amongst them for the space of many years:
whereof the whole circumstaunce were very long to be written in this act. And
the said Ihon Fysher bishop of Rochester and one Thomas Gold gentleman, and
thesayd Thomas Laurence, Edward Thwaytes, and Ihon Adeson chapelein to thesayd
Ihon bishop of Rochester, having knowledge of the false fained and dissimuled
reuelacions, traitorously co^spired against our said sovereign lord (as is
aforesaid) did nevertheless make concelement thereof, and uttered not the same
to our said sovereign lord, nor any his honorable counsel, against their
duties and allegeaunce in that behalf.

And furthermore, the said Thomas Gold, for the accomplishement of his most
traiterous intent, has of late been a messenger from thesayd Elizabeth, sithen
she was in ward in the Tower of London for thesayd most false and traiterous
offenses by her and her said accomplices committed and done, he then being at
liberty, by his message has comforted diverse others to stand stiffly by her
reuelacions, that they were of God: notwithstanding that she had confessed all
her said falshed before diverse of the kings counsailours, and that they were
manifestly proved, found, and tried most false and untrue: which thing he did
only to raise and put sedicion and murmur in the people against the kings
highness, his croune and dignity royal. And one Thomas Abel clerk being of the
confederacy aforesaid, and taking such ^irme and constant credit to thesayd
falls and feigned reuelacions and miracles of thesayd Nonne, not only caused to
be Printed and set forth in this realm diverse books against thesayd deuorce
and separacion to the disslaunder of our said sovereign lord, but also
animated thesayd lady Katherine obstinatly to persist in her wilful opinion
against the same deuorce and separacion: and after thesayd deuorce lawfully had,
to usurp and take upon her still to be queen, and procured diverse writings to
be made by her, by the name of Queen: and also procured and abbetted the
servants of thesayd Lady Katheryne against the kings express commandment
and proclamacion, to name, call, accept, and repute thesayd lady Katherine for
queen of this realm to the intent to make a common division and rebellion in
this realm to the great peril and danger of our said sovereign lord.

Thus much have I recited unto you out of the act as it is there expressed
word for word: now after follows the manner of her attainder and of the other
as in the act more at large does appear. But to conclude the xxi. day of
April next following she with other were drawn to Tyborne and there executed as
most justly they had deserved as you may perceive by the premises.

And at the place of execucion, and the present time that she suffered she said
these words, The words of Elizabeth Barton otherwise called y^ holy maid of
Kent at he^ death.
hither am I come to dye, and I have not been the only cause of mine own
death which most justly I have deserved, but also I am the cause of the death
of all these persons which at this time here suffer: and yet to say the
truth, I am not somuche to be blamed co^sideryng it was well known unto these
learned men y^ I was a poor wenche without learning and therefore they might
have easily perceived that the things that were done by me could not proceed
in no such sort, but their capacities and learning could right well judge
from whence they proceeded, and that they were altogether feigned: but because the
things which I feigned was proffitable unto them, therefore they much praised
me and bare me in hand that it was the holy ghost and not I that did them,
and then I being puffed up with their praises fell into a certain pride and
folishe fantasy with my self and thought I might feign what I would, which
thing has brought me to this case, and for the which now I cry God and the
kings highness most heartely mercy, and desire all you good people to pray to
God to have mercy on me and on all them that here suffer with me.

In this parliament also was made the act of succession for the suertie of the
croune, to the which every person being of lawful age should be sworn upon
the pain expressed in that act, as in the same ye may most evidently see.

Monday the xxiii. day of March in the Parliament time, were solempnely
received into London as ambassadors from James the v. king of Scotts, the
bishop of Aberdyne, the Abbot of Kynlos and Adam Otterborne the kings
A^turney, with diverse gentlemen on them atte^dant which were brought to the
Taylers hall and there lodged. And on the day of the Annuncia^cion of our Lady
they were brought to the kings place at Westminster, where they showed their
commission and message, for the which the king appointed them days to
cou^sail. And shortly after commissioners were appointed as you shall hear.

During the Parliament time, every sunday preached at Paul's cross a bishop,
which declared the Pope not to be the head of the Church.

The xxx. day of March the Parliament was proroged, and there every lord and
burges and all other, were sworn to the act of succession, and subscribed
their hands to a Parchement fixed to the same oath. This Parliament was
proroged till the third day of November next. After this, commissions were sent
over all England to take the oath of all men and women to the act of
succession, at which few repyned, except doctor Ihon Fysher, sir Thomas Moore
knight late lord Chau^celor, and doctor Nicholas Wylson parson of saint Thomas
Apostles in London: wherefore these three persons, after long exhortacion to
them made by the bishop of Cauntorbury at Lambeth, and express denial of them
to be sworn, they were sent to the Tower where they remained and were
oftentimes mocioned to be sworn: but the Bishop and sir Thomas More said
that they had in their writings written the princes dowager Queen, and
therefore they might not go against that, and the doctor said that he in
preaching called her queen, which he would not withsay, howbeit at length he
was very well contented, and dissembled the matter and so escaped: But the other
twain stood against all the realm in their opinion.

In this year it chanced that two merchant strangers fell in love Wolfes wife
with a harlot which was called Wolfes wife, and this harlot had often h^unted
the strangers chambers. And so one time the same harlot appointed these
st^au^gers to come to Westminster, and she had prepar^d for them a boat, in the
which bote was but one manne to row which was a ^trong the^e, and in the
end of the boat lay Wolf her husband covered with a lether that botemen use
to cover their Cusshyns with, and so these strangers satte them down
mistrustyng nothing, and when this boteman had brought them as far as a
place that is called the Turnyng tree, suddenly stepped up the said Wolf and
with his dagger thrust the one of them through, the other cried out to save his
life and offered a great sum of money to the boteman and him to save his life,
but no proferres (...) be heard, nor mercy would they extend, but as cruel
murderers without pity slew the other also and bound them face to face and so
threw them into the Thames in the foresaid place, where they were long after
before they were found. But immediately the harlot Wolfes wife went to the
strangers chambers and took f^o^ thence so much as she could come by. And at
the last she and her husband as they deserved, were apprehended, arraigned and
hanged at the foresaid tu^nyng tree, where she hanged still and was not cut
down, until such time as it was known that beastly and filthy wretches had
most shamefully abused her being dead.

The.xxvi year.
THe nynth day of July was the lord Dacres of the North arreigned at
Westminster of high treason, The ^old^ Dacr^^ of the North.
where the duke of Norffolke sat as judge and high Steward of England. The said
lord Dacres being brought to the bar with the axe of the Tower before him,
after his indictment red, not only improued thesayd indictment as false and
maliciously devised against him and answered every part and matter therein
contained, but also so manly, wittily, and directly confuted his accusors
which there were ready to auouche their accusacions, that to their great
shames, and to his great honor, he was found that day by his peers not guilty,
which undoubtedly the commons excedyngly ioyed and reioy^ed of, insomuche as
there was in the hall at those words, not guilty, the greatest shoute and
cry of joy that the like no man living may remember that ever he heard.

The xiiii. day of July one Ihon Frith being very well learned and Ihon Fri^^.
had an excellent goodly wit, was brought out of the Tower where he had been
long, and was there imprisoned for making of a book against Purgatory: but in
the mean while that he was there, he was required by one who heartely loved
him and had a very good opinion in him, to declare to him his faith and opinion
in the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ and that he would put the same
in writing, which thing he did. But after it chanced that the same person
which had this writing of Ihon Frith was acquainted with a Tailor in London
called Wyllyam Holt, which outwardely professed much honestye, but inwardly
was a very spy and a very betrayer of as many men as he might bring in
daungier. This Holt required after he had seen it, to have this writing, and he
had it, and forthwith he presented it to sir Thomas More then lord Chau^celor,
and he immediately made answer to the same in writing, which also by the means
of thesayd Holt, came to the hands of Ihon Frith. Ihon Frith then perceiuyng
that the thing that he was so loath to write or meddle in (for it was a matter
that none could get him to talk of, saving such that he as much trusted as
him self) was now so far spread abroad that it was answered unto, after he
had not a little rebuked the negligence and folly of his friend whom he trusted,
stood to the derence of his first treatise, and made a farther declaracion of
his mind upon the same matter as appears in a book which bears his name.
For the which opinion with other he was after diverse and sundry examinacions
(as well at Lambeth with the Bishop of Cauntorbury as also at Croydon, and
likewise with the bishop of Wynche^^er) brought unto the Consistory in Paul's
Church in London before diverse bishops, where after much disputyng, for
that he would not yield nor submit himself to them, they condemned him and
delivered him to the seculer power to be brent as an heretic.

At the same time was one Andrew Hewet a very simple and utterly unlearned young
man a Tailor, which was also betrayed by the foresaid Holt: This young man
being in like manner accused in the Consistory before thesayd bishops for
holding opinion against the Sacrament. One of the bishops asked him how he
believed in the Sacrament? he answered, he believed therein as Master Frith did:
why said they, do thou not believe that it is ye very body of Christ really
flesh and blood even as he was borne of the virgyn Mari? No said he, why so
said the bishop? because said he, that Christ bid me yt I should not believe
them that say here is Christ and there is Christ, for ^alse Christ's and false
prophets shall arise to deceive you says Christ. Then certain of y^ bishops
smyled, and doctor Stokesley then bishop of London said: Frith is an heretic
and is condemned and delivered to the temporal power to be brent, if thou will
not submit thy self and acknowledge thine error, thou shall likewise be
condemned and delivered. I am content said he. Wylt thou not abjure thine
heresy quod the bishop? No said he, for I will do as Master Frith does. Then we
will condemn thee said ye bishop: do so said he. And so they pronounced
sentence on him, and delivered him to the Shiriffes: and from thence they were
sent to Newgate where they remained til the xxii. day of July, and that day
were both brent at one s^ake in Smythfelde. Where at the same time one doctor
Cook which was person of Honey Lane, and one that was the Master of the Temple,
willed the people to pray no more for them then they would pray for dogs, at
which uncharitable words Frith smyled and prayed God to forgive them, and the
people sore grudged at them for so saying.

The xiiii. day of August was a great fire at Temple bar and diverse houses
brent. And the xvi. day of the same month was burned the kings stable at
Charyng cross otherwise called the Mowse, wherein was brent many great Horses
and great store of hay.

In this year the third day of Noue^ber the kings highness held his high court
of Parliament, in the which was concluded and made many and sundry good,
wholesome, and godly statutes: but among al one special estatute, which
aucthorised the kings highness to be supreme head of the Church of England, by
the which the Pope with all his College of Cardinals with all their Pardons
and Indulgences was utterly abholished out of this realm, The Pope abholished.
God be euerlastyngly praised therefore. In this Parliament also was given to
the kings highness the first fruits and tenthes of all dignities and spiritual
promocions. And in the end of the same Parliament the kings Majesty most
graciously granted (and wylled it by the same Parliament to be established) his
most gracious and general free pardon.

This year also came in the great Admyrall of France: which Admyrall was
honorably received, and at his departing was liberally rewarded.

In this time dyed the Earl of Kyldare prisoner in the Tower. And even at
the same time Thomas Fitzgarard his son began to rebel against the king and
took all the kings Ordinance, and sent Ambassadors to the Emperor to have
intre^ted him to take part with him. Also he slew the bishop of Deuelyn and
brent and robbed all such as would not obey him: But at the last he was
apprehended and had as he deserved as after shall appear.

The.xxvii. year*
IN the beginning of this year the duke of Norffolke and the Bishop of Ely went
to Caleys, and thither came the Admyral of France. And the xix. day of June
was three Monks of the Charterhouse hanged, drawn, and quartred at Tyborne and
their quarters set up about London for deniyng the king to be supreme head of
the Church. Their names were Exmewe, Myddlemore, and Nudigate. These men when
they were arreigned at Westminster, behaved them selfs very stiffly and
stubbornly for hearing their indictment red how traitorously they had spoken
against the kings Majesty his croune and dignity, they neither blushed nor
bashed at it, but very folishly and hipocritically knowleged their treason
which maliciously they avouched, having no lernyng for their defense, but
rather being asked diverse questions, thye used a malicious silence, thinkyng as
by their examinacions afterward in the Tower of London it did appear, for so
they said, yt they thought those men which was ye lord Crumwel and other that
there satte upon them in judgment to be heretics and not of the Church of
God, and therefore not worthy to be either answered or spoken unto. And
therefore as they deserved, they received as you have heard before.

Also the xxii. day of the same month Ihon Fysher bishop of Rochester was
beheaded, and his head set upon London bridge. Ihon Fy^he^ bishop of Rochester.
This bishop was of very many men lamented, for he was reported to be a man
of great learning, and a man of very good life, but therein wonderfully
deceived, for he maintained the Pope to be supreme head of ye Church, and very
maliciously refused the kings title of supreme head. It was said that the
Pope, for that he held so manfully with him and stood so stiffly in his cause,
did elect him a Cardinal, and sent the Cardinals hat as far as Caleys, but
the head it should have stand on, was as high as London bridge or ever the hat
could come to Bishop Fysher, and then it was to late, and therefore he neither
ware it nor enjoyed his office. This man as I said was accoumpted learned, yea,
and that very nota^ly learned, and yet have you heard how he was deceived with
Elizabeth Barton that called herself the holy maid of Kent, and no doubt so was
he in the defense of that usurped authority, the more pity: wonderful it is
that a man being learned should be so blind in the scriptures of God that
proves the supreme authority of princes so manyfestly. Also the vi. day of
Iulye was sir Thomas More beheaded for the like Sir Thomas ^oore behedded.
treason before rehearsed, which as you have heard was for the deniyng of the
kings Majesty's supremitie. This manne was also coumpted learned, and as you
have heard before he was lord Chauncelor of England, and in that time a great
persecutor of such as detested the supremacy of the bi^hop of Rome, which he
himself so highly favored that he stood to it till he was brought to the
Skaffolde on the Tower hill where on a block his head was stricken from his
shoulders and had no more harm. I cannot tell whether I should call him a
foolish wyseman, or a wise foolishman, for undoubtedly he beside his learning,
had a great wit, but it was so myngled with tauntyng and mocking, that it
seemed to them that best knew him, that he thought nothing to be well spoken
except he had ministered some mock in the communicacion, insomuche as at his
coming to the Tower, one of the officers demanded his upper garment for his
fee, meaning his goune, and he answered, he should have it, and took him his
cappe, saying it was the vppermoste g^rment that he had. Likewise, even going
to his death at the Tower gate, a poor woman called unto him and besought him
to declare that he had certain evidences of hers in the time that he was in
e^^ice (which after he was apprehended she could not come by) and that he
would in^reate she might have them again, or else she was undone. He answered,
good woman have patience a little while, for the king is so good unto me that
even within this half hour he will discharge me of all busynesses, and help
thee himself. Also when he went up the stayer on the Skaffolde, he desired one
of the Shiriffes officers to give him his hand to help him up, and said, when
I come down again, let me shift ^or my self as well as I can. Also the
ha^gman kneled down to him askyng him forgeuenes of his death (as the manner
is) to whom he said I forgive thee, but I promise thee that thou shall never
have honesty of the strykyng of my head, my neck is so short. Also even when
he should lay down his head on the block, he having a great gray beard,
striked out his beard and said to the hangma^, I pray you let me lay my beard
over the block least ye should cut it, thus with a mock he ended his life.

This year in the time that the king went his progress, which was to
Gloucester and so Westward, the king of Scotts was installed at Wynsore by the
lord Erskyn his Procurator. And in October following Stephyn Gardener bishop of
Winchester was sent ambassador into France where he remained three years after.

In November was a solemn procession through the city of London of all the
priests and religious in and about the city for the recoueryng of the French
king to his health. And the viii. day of January following dyed the princes
dowager at Kymbalton and was buried at Peterborough. Queen Anne ware yelowe for
the mournyng.

And in February following was queen Anne brought a bed of a Queen (...)
brough^ (...) before her time.
child before her time, which was borne dead.

This year in the month of September Wyllyam Tyndale otherwise called Hichyns
was by the cruelty of the clergy of Louayn condemned and burned in a town
beside Bruxelles in Braband called Wyllyem Tyndall.
Uylford. This man translated the New testament into English and first put it
in Prynt, and likewise he translated the v. books of Moses, Joshua, Iudicum,
Ruth, the books of the Kings and the books of Paralipomenon, Nehemias or the
first of Esoras, the Prophet Jonas, and no more of ye holy scripture. He made
also diverse treatises, which of many were well lyked and highly praised, and of
many utterly despised and abhorred, and especially of the most part of the
bishops of this realm, who often by their great labors caused Proclamacions
to be made against his books, and gatte them condemned and brent, as well the
New testament as other works of his doings. Such as best knew him
reported him to be a very sobre man, borne upon the borders of Wales, and
brought up in the University of Oxforde, and in life and conversation
unreprovable: and at the last being in Oxford Luther then setting forth
certain works against the Bishop of Rome, Tyndale occasioned by them to
search the scriptures whether Luther said the truth or no, did thereby not
only himself attain the knowledge of the usurped authority of the bishop of
Rome, and his supersticious and dampnable doctrynes that he had taught and
published through all Christendom, but also lamentyng the ignorant state that
his native country of England was in, who altogether were wrapped in errors
thought it his duty, for that God had reveled the light of his Gospel to him,
to bestow his talent to the honor of God and proffite of his country, and
thought no way so good to reduce the people from their error as first to make
them acquaynted with Gods word, that they might know what Gods will was
that we should do, and what the bishop of Rome said that we must do: and
therefore first as is aforesaid, he translated into English the New
testament, a work no doubt very notable and to him very paynefull, for that
he was forced to fly his own native country, and to live in a strange land
among people that as well varyed from his manners, as the persons to him were
unknown.

Amongst whom after great pains by him taken, and many and diverse treatises
by him published, he was at Andwarp this year by one Philippes an Englisheman
and then a scholar at Louayn, betrayed and taken, and as many said, not without
the help and procurement of some bishops of this realm: but true it is,
that after he had been in prison more then a year and almost forgotten, he was
labored for by letters written by the lord Cromwell, and then in all have
because he would reca^t no part of his doings, was burned as you have hea^d
before. But yet this report did the Procurator general there (which we call
here the Liuetenaunt) make of him, that he was, homo doctus, pius et bonus,
that is to say, learned, godly, and good.

The fowerth day of February the king held his high court of Parliament at
Westminster, in the which was many good and wholesome statutes and laws made
and concluded. And in this time was given unto the king by the consent of the
great and fat abbottes, all religious houses that were of the value of CCC.
mark and under, in hope that their great Monasteries should have continued
still: But even at that time one said in the Parliament house that these were
as thorns, but the great abbottes were putrified old Oaks and they must needs
follow: and so will other do in Christendom quod doctor Stokesley bishop of
London or many years be passed.

The.xxviii. year.
ON May day were a solemn Iustes kept at Grenewyche, and suddenly from the
Iustes the king departed having not above vi. persons with him, and came in the
euenyng from Grenewyche to his place at Westminster. Of this sudden departing
many men mused, but most chiefly the queen, who the next day was apprehended
and brought from Grenewyche to the Tower of London, Queen Anne sent to the
^ower.
where after she was arreigned of high treason, and condemned. Also at the same
time was likewise apprehended, the lord Rocheforde brother to thesayd Queen,
and Henry Norrys, Mark Smeton, Wyllyam a Bruton and sir Fraunces Weston, all
of the kings privy chamber. All these were likewise committed to the Tower and
after arreigned and condemned of high treason. And all the gentlemen were
beheaded on the Skaffolde at the Tower hill: But the Queen was with a sword
beheaded within the Tower. And these following were the words that she spoke
the day of her death which was the xix. day of May. 1536.

Good Christen people, I am come hither to dye, The words of queen Anne
Bolleyn at her death.
for according to the law and by the law I am judged to dye, and therefore I
will speak nothing against it. I am come hither to accuse noman, nor to speak
any thing of that whereof I am accused and condemned to dye, but I pray God
save the king and send him long to reign over you, for a gentler nor a more
merciful prince was there never: and to me he was ever a good, a gentle, and
sovereign lord. And if any person will meddle of my cause, I require them to
judge the best. And thus I take my leave of the world and of you all, and I
heartely desire you all to pray for me. O lord have mercy on me, to God I
commend my ^oule. And then she kneled down saying: To Christ I commend my
soul, Jesus receive my soul diverse times, till that her head was stryken of
with the sword. And on the Assencion day following, the king ware white for
mournyng.

The weke before Whitsontyde the king married lady Jane daughter to the right
worshipful sir Ihon Seymer knight, which at Whitsontyde was openly showed as
Queen.

The viii. day of June the king held his high court of Parliament in the
which Parliament the kings two first marriages, that is to say with the lady
Katheryne, and with the Lady Anne Bulleyn were both adjudged unlawful, as more
at large appears in the act in the book of statutes.

In the Parliament ceason lord Thomas Hawarde without the kings assent aff^ed
the lady Margaret Douglas daughter to the queen of Scotts and nece to the
king: for which presumpteous act he was attainted of treason, and an act
made for like offenders, and so he dyed in the Tower, and she was long there as
prisoner.

In the time of this Parliament, the bishops and all the clergy of the
realm held a solemn conuocacion at Paul's church in London where after
much disputacion and debatyng of matters they published a book of religion
entitled, Articles devised by the kings highness etc. In this book is
specially mentioned but iii. Sacraments, with the which the Lyncolneshyremen
(I mean their ignorant priests) were offended, and of that occasion depraved
the kings doings. And this was their first beginning, as after ye shall
plainly hear.

After this book which passed by the kings authority with the consent of
the Clergy, was published, the which contained certain articles of religion
necessary to be taught unto the people, and among other it specially treated of
no more then three Sacraments, where always the people had been taught vii.
Sacraments, and beside this book, certain Iniunccions were that time given
whereby a number of their holy days was abrogated and specially such as fell
in the harvest time, the keeping of which was much to the hinderaunce of the
gatheryng in of corn, hay, fruit, and other such like necessary and
profitable commodities.

These articles thus ordained and to the people delivered. The insurrecci^n in
Lyncoln^hyre.
The inhabitauntes of the North parts being at that time very ignorant and
rude, knowing not what true religion meant, but altogether noseled in
supersticion and popery, and also by the means of certain Abbottes and
ignorant priests not a little stirred and provoked for the suppression of
certain Monasteries, and for the extirpacion and a^holishyng of the bishop of
Rome, now taking an occasion at this book, saying see friends now is taken
from us four of the vii. Sacraments and shortly ye shall lose the other three
also, and thus the faith of holy church shall utterly be suppressed and
abholished: and therefore suddenly they spread abroad and raised great and
shameful slanders only to move the people to sedicion and rebellion, and to
kyndle in the people hateful and malicious minds against the kings Majesty
and the Magestrates of the realm, saying let us fully bend our selves to the
mayntenaunce of religion, and rather then to suffer it thus to decay even to
dye in the field. And amongst them also were to many even of the nobility
that did not a little provoke and stir up the ignorant and rude people the
more stiffly to rebel and stand therein, faithfully promisyng them both aid
and succor against the king and their own natyue country (like foolish and
wicked men) thynkyng by their so doing to have done God high pleasor and
service. There were also certain other malicious and busye persons who added
Oil (as the Adage says) to the Furnace: These made open clamours in every
place where opportunity served, that Christian religion should be utterly
violate, despised and set aside, and that rather then so, it behooved and was
the parts of every true Christen manue to defend it even to the death, and
not to admit and suffer by any means the faith (in the which their
forefathers so long and so many thousand years have lived and continued) now
to be subverted and destroyed. Among these were many priests which deceived
also the people with many false fables and venomous lies and ymaginacions
(which could never enter nor take place in the heart of any good man, nor
faithful subject) saying that al manner of prayer and fasting and all Gods
service should utterly be destroyed and taken away, that no man should mary a
wife or be partaker of the Sacraments, or at length should eat a piece of
^ost meat, but he should for the same first pay unto the king a certain sum
of money, and that they should be brought in more bondage and in a more wicked
manner of life, then the Sarazins be under y^ great Turk. with these and such
other like errors and slanderous tales, the people thus instructed (or as I
may trulier speak) deceived and mocked, being to light or credit, incotinent
to the help and maintenance of religion once established and confirmed, they
stiffly and stoutly did conspire and agree: and in a part of Lincolneshire,
first they assembled and shortly after, joined into an Army, being (as it was
supposed) of men apt and feet for the war, in nombre about twenty
thousand.

Against these traiterous rebels, with all the haste and speed that might be
(after he hard thereof) the kings toyal majesty, in his own proper person,
furnished with a goodly and warlike Army, lackyng nothing that to such a
company ^^oulde appertein, marched toward them. But these rebels hearing
that his majesty was present with his power and army royal, feared what
would follow of this matter, and such as were noble men and Gentlemen, that
before favored them began to withdraw them selves, so that they were destitute
of Capitaines: and at the last they in writing made certain peticions to the
kings majesty, professyng that they never intended hurt toward his royal
person. The kings majesty received there peticions, and made an swear unto
them as follows.

First we begin and make answer to the four and six articles, because upon
them depends much of the rest. The kings answer to the rebels.
Concerning cho^yng of counsaylors, I never have red, hard, nor known, that
princes counsailors and prelates, should be appointed by rude and ignorant
common people, nor that they were persons mete, nor of ability to, discern
and chose mete and sufficient cou^sailors for a prince: how presumpteous then
are ye the rude commons of one shire, and that one of the most brute and
beastly of the whole realm, and of the least experience, to find fault with
your Prince for the electyng of his counsaylours and prelates, and to take upon
you contrary to gods law and man's law to rule your prince, whom ye are
bound by all laws to obey and serve with both your lives, lands and goods,
and for no worldly cause to withstand? the contrary whereof you like traitors
and rebels have attempted and not like true subjects as ye name your selfs.

As to the suppression of religious houses and monastaries, we wolle that ye
and all our subjects should well know that this is granted us by all the
nobles spiritual and temporal, of this our Realm, and by all the commons in
the same by act of Parliament, and not set forth by any counsailor or
counsaylors upon there mere will and fantasy, as ye full falsely would
persuade our realm to believe.

And where ye allege that the service of god is much diminished, the troth
thereof is contrary, for there be no houses suppressed where god was well
served, but where most vice, mischief and abhominacion of living was used, and
that does well apere by there own confessions subcribed with there own hands
in the time of their visitacions, and yet we suffered a great many of them
(more then we neded by the act) to stand wherein if they amend not there living,
we fear, we have more to answer for, then for the suppression of all the rest.
And as for the hospitality for the relief of the pore, we wonder ye be not
ashamed to affirm that they have been a great releief of pore people, when a
great many or the most part has not past four of five religious persons in
them, and diverse but one which spent the substance of the goods of there
houses in norishyng of vice and abominable living. Now what unkindness and
vnnaturalitie may we impute to you and all our subjects that be of that
mind, that had leauer such an unthrifty sort of vicious persons, should
enjoy such possessions, profits and Emolumentes, as grow of thesaied houses,
to the maintenance of there unthrifty life, then we your natural prince,
sovereign lord and king, which does and has spent more in your defenses of
our own, then six times they be worth? As touching the act of uses, we
marvel what madness is in your brain, or upon what ground ye would take
authority upon you to cause us to break these laws and statutes, which by
all the nobles knights and gentlemen of this realm (whom the same chiefly
touches) has been granted and assented to: seeing in no manner of things it
touches you the basse commons of our Realm.

Also the grounds of all those uses were false, and never admitted by any law:
but usurped upon the prince, contrary to all equity and justice, as it has been openly both disputed and declared by all the well learned men in the Realm
of England in Westminster hall: whereby ye may well perceive how mad and
unreasonable your demaundes be, both in that and in the rest, and how v^mete it
is for us and dishonorable, to grant or asse^t unto, and less mete and decent
for you in such a rebellious sort to demand the same of your prince.

As touching the fiftene which ye demand of us to be released, think ye that
we be so faintharted, that perforce ye of one shire (were ye a great many mo)
could compel us with your insurrections and such rebelleous demeanor to
remit the same? or think ye that any man will or may take you to be true
subjects, that first make and show a loving grant and then perforce would
compel your sovereign lord and king to release the same? the time of payment
whereof is not yet come, ye, and seeing the same will not cou^treuaile the tenth
penny of the charges, which we do and daily sustein for your tuicion and
safegarde: make you sure, by your occasions of these your ingratitudes,
vnnaturallnes and unkindness to us now administered, ye give us cause which has
always been as much dedicate to your wealth as ever was king, not somuche to
set or study for the setting forward of the same, seeing how unkindly and
untruly ye deal now with us, without any cause or occasion: and doubt ye not,
though you have no grace nor naturallnes in you to consider your duty of
allegiaunce to your king, and sovereign Lord, the rest of our Realm we
doubt not has: and we and they shall so look on this cause, that we trust it
shall be to your confusion, if according to your former letters you submit not
your selfs.

As touching the first fruits, we let you wit, it is a thing granted us by act
of parliament also, for the supportacion of part of the great and excessive
charges, which we supporte and bear for the maintenance of your wealths
and other our subjects: and we have known also that ye our commons have
much complained in times passed, that the most part of our gooddes, lands
and possessions, o^ the realm, were in the spiritual men's hands: and yet
bearyng us in hand that ye be as loving subjects to us as may be, ye cannot
find in your hearts that your prince and sovereign lord should have any
part thereof (and yet it is nothing prejudicial unto you our commons) but to
rebel and unlawfully rise against your prince, contrary to the duty of
allegeaunce and gods commandment, Si^s, remember your folies and
treiterous demeanours, and shame not your native country of England nor offend
no more so greueously your undoubted king and natural prince, which always
has showed him sel^ most loving unto you, and remember your duty of
allegiaunce, and that ye are bound to obey us your king, both by gods
commandment and law of nature.

Wherefore we charge you eftsoon upon the forsaied bonds and pains, that ye
withdraw your selfs to your own houses, eue^y man, and no more to assemble
contrary to our laws and your allegeaunces, and to cause the prouokers of
you to this mischief, to be delivered to our liftenauntes hands, or ours,
and you your selves to submit you to such condign ponishment as we and our
nobles shall think you worthy: for doubt you not els^hat we and our nobles can
nor will suffr^ this injury at your hands unrevenged, if ye give not place to
us of souereigntie, and show your selfs as bounden and obedient subjects,
and no more to entermeddle your selves from hencefurth with the weighty
affairs of the Realm, the direction whereof only apperteigneth to us your
king and such noble men and counsailours, as we li^t to elect and chose to
have the orderyng of the same: and thus we pray unto all mighty god, to give
you grace to do your duties, to use your selfs toward us like true and
faithful subjects, so as we may have cause, to order you thereafter, and
rather obediently to consent amongst you to deliver into hands of our
liuetenaunte a hundredth persons, to be ordered according to their demerites,
at our will and pleasure, then by your obstinacy and wilfulnes, to put your
selfs, your wives, children, lands, goods and cattalles, besides the
indignacion of god, in the utter adventure of total destruction, and utter
ruin, by force and violence of the swerd.

After the Lincolneshire men had received this the kings answer aforsaied,
made to their peticio^s, each mistrustyng other who should be noted to be the
greatest medeler, even very suddenly theibegan to shrin^, and out of hand they
were all divided, and every man at home in his own house in peace: but the
capitaines of these rebels eskaped not all clear, but were after apprehended,
and had as they deserved: he that took upon him as capitain of this rowte,
named him self capitain Cobbler, but it was a Monk called Doctor Makerel, with
diverse other which afterward were taken and executed.

All these things thus ended, the country appeased, and all things in quiet
the kings majesty retired, and brake up his army,

But se, even within six days following, was the king truly certefied that there
was a new insurrection A new insurrecc^on.
made by the Northrenmen, which had assembled them selfs into a hou^e and
great army of warlikemen and well appincted both with capitaines, horse,
harneis and artillary to the nombre of forty thousand men, which had
encamped them selfs in yorkshire: And these men had each of them to other
bound them selfs by their oath to be faithful and obedient to his captain:
they also declared by their proclamacio^s solemply made, that this their
insurreccion, should extend no farther but only to the maintenance and defense
of the faith of Christ and deliverance of holy Church sore decayed and
oppressed, and also for the furtherau^ce as well of private as publik matters in
the realm touching the wealth of all the kings poor subjects They named this
there sedicious and traitorous voyage, an holy and blessed Pilgrimage: they
had al^o certain banners in the field, whereupon was painted Christ ha^gyng on
the Cross on the one side, and a chalice with a painted kake in it on the
other side with diverse other banners of like hipocresie and fained sanctity:
the souldiars also had a certain cognisaunce or badge, embroudered or set upon
the sleues of there coats which was the similitude of the five wounds of
Christ, and in the midst thereof was written the name of our lord, and this
the rebellious Guarrison of Satan with his false and cou^terfeated signs of
holiness set forth and decked the^ selves, only to delude and deceive the
simple and ignorant people.

After that the kings highness was credebly certefied of this new in surged
insurrection, he making no delay in so weighty a matter, caused with all speed
the Dukes of Norffolke and Suffolk, the Marquis of of Excetter, the Earl of
Shrewsburie with other, accompanied with his mighty and royal army, which was
of great power and strength, forthwith to set upon the rebels: but when these
noble capitaines and cou^sailors approached the rebels and perc^iued their
n^mbre and saw how they were bent to battle, they practiced with great
policy to have pacefied al without bloudshedyng, but the Northrenmen were so
stif necked that they would in nowise stoop, but stoutly stood and mayntayned
there wicked entreprise, wherefore the nobles abouesaied perceiuyng and seeing
none other way to pacefie these wretched rebels, a greed upon a battle, the
battle was apoincted, and ye day was assigned: but, se ye same night which was
the night before the day of ye battle appointed, fell a small rain nothing to
speak of: but yet as it were by a great miracle of god, A true miracle of God.
the water which was but a very small forde, and y^ me^ in manner the day before,
might have gone dr^shod over, suddenly roase of such a height depnes, and breadth
that the like noman that there did inhabit could tell that ever they saw it so a
fore, so that the day, even when the hour of battle should come, it was
impossible for the one army to come at the other.

After this appointment made between both the ar^ies (disapointed as it is to
be thought only by God, who extended his great mercy and had compassion on the
great nombre of innocent persons, that in that deadly sla^ghter had like to
have been murdered) could take no place: Then, by the great wisdom and
pollecy of thesaied capitaines, a communicacion was had, and a pardon of the
kings Maies^ie obtained, for all the Captains and chief doers of this
insurreccion, and they promised that such things as they found them selves
agreued with all they should gently be hard, and there reasonable peticions
granted and that there articles should be presented to the kings Maies^ie,
that by his highness aucthorie, and wisdom of his Counsel, all things
should be brought to good order and conclusion: and with this order every man
quietly departed, and those which before were bent as hot as fire to fight,
being let thereof by God, went now peaseably to their houses, and were as
cold as water. A domino factum est istud.

In this time of insurrection, and in the rage of horley borley, even when the
kings army and the rebels were ^eady to join, the kings banner being
displaied, and the kings mais^ie then liyng at Winsore, there was a boocher
dwelling within.v. mile of Winsore which caused a priest to preach that all
such as took part with the yorkeshiremen A bocher and a priest hanged.
whom he named Gods people, did fight and defend Gods quarrel and farther
thesaied bocher in sellyng of his meat, one did bid him a less price of a
sheep the^ he made of it, he a^swered nay b^ gods soul, I ^ad rather ye good
fellows of the north had it among them and a skore more of y^ best I have: this
priest and boocher were accused to the kings majesty's counsayl of the treso^s
abouesaied on the Monday in the morning, and the same day were both sent for,
which confessed there treasons, and so according to the law mershal they were
adjudged to die: and so thesaied Monday, they were both examined, condemned
and hanged, the boocher was hanged on a new pair of Gallows set at the bridge
end before the castle gate: and the priest was hanged on a tree at the foot
of Winsore bridge.

This year in Decembre was the Thamis: of London all frosen over, wherefore the
kings Majesty with his beuti^ull spouse queen Jane, road throughout the
city of Londn to Grenewhich: And this Christmas the king by his messengers and
herauldes sent down into the North his general pardons to allk c^pitall
offenders: and shortly after came Ask to london, and so to the court to the
king: this Ask was the chief capitain of the last rebellion in the North, Ask
the rebel of the North.
and now both pardoned of the king, and his grace received him in to his favor
and gave unto him apparel and great rewards, but as after ye shall perceive
Ask enjoyed not the King his new friends kyndnes a year and a day, and pity
it was that he had any favor at all, for there lived not a veriar wretch as well
in parson as in condicio^s and deeds, specially against his anointed governor
and sovereign lord.

The third day of February was Thomas Fitz Garrad late Earl of of Kildare and
five of his uncles drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne, for high treason.

Also in thesaied month, Nichol Musgraue, Thomas Tylbie, with other began a
new rebellion at Kirbie Stapha^ in Westmerland, with eight thousand persons,
and beseged the City of Carlisle, from whence they were beaten, with the only
power of the city, and in their returning the Duke of Norffolke who then was
made liuetenaunt of the North, encountered with them and took the Capitanes, and
according to the law marciall, arreigned threscore and fourtene of them, and
hanged them on Carlisle walls, but Musgraue escaped. And in the same month of
February began yet a another insurrectio^ by the intysement of sir Fraun^es
Bigod, Sir Frau^ces Bigod.
a man no doubt that loved god, and feared his prince, with a right obedient
and loving fear: but now being deceived and provoked thereunto by false
rebellyous persons, it was his fortune to taste of the end which apperteigneth
to rebels: such are men when god leaves them to them selves, and when they
will entreprise the doing of that thing which Gods most holy word utterly
forbids. This Bigod was apprehended and brought to the Tower of London: this
last rebellion began in Setrington, and in Pikeryn Leigh, and Scarborough.

Also in the latter end of this year, the lord Darcy, Ask, Sir Rober^
Constable, Robert Ask taken
Sir Ihon Bulmer and his wife, Sir Thomas Percie brother to the Earl of
Northumbreland, Sir Stephyn Hamelton, Nicholas Tempest Esquier, William Lomley,
son to the Lord Lomley began again to conspire, although they before had
every one of them there pardons: and now they were all taken and brought to
the Tower of London.

In this year one Robert Packyngton, Robert Packyngton
Mercer of London, a man of good substance, and yet not so rich as honest and
wise, this man dwelled in Chepeside at the sign of the leg, and used daily at
four of the clock Winter and Summer to rise and go to Mass at a church then
called saint Thomas of Acres (but now named the Mercers chapel) and one morning
among all other, being a great Mistie morning such as has seldom besene, even
as he was crossyng the street from his house to the church, he was suddenly
murdered with a gonne, which of the neighbors was plainly hard, and by a great
nombre of laborers at the same time standing at Soper lane end, he was both
seen go forth of his house, and also the clap of the gonne was hard, but the
deed doer was never espied nor known, many were suspected, but none could be
found fauty: howbeit it is true, that forasmuch as he was known to be a man of
a great courage and one that both could speak and also would be hard: and
that the same time he was one of the Burgeses of the parliament, for the City
of London, and had talked somewhat a against the cou^tousnes and cruelty of the
Clergy, he was had in contempt with them, and therefore most like by one
of them thus shamefully murdered, as you perceive that Master Honne was in the
sixte year of the reign of this king.

The.xxix. year
IN June the lord Darcy and the lord Hosey were arreigned The Lord Darcy,
Lord Hosey.
at Westminster before the Marquis of Ex^eter, then high stuard of England, and
they were both found guilty and had there judgment as in caces of high treson.

Shorty after were also arreigned Sir Robert Conestable, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir
Fraunces Bigod, Sir Stephen hamelton, Sir Ihon Bulmer and his wife, which some
reported was not his wife but his paramour, also William Lomley, Nicholas
Tempest, and the Abbotes of Ierney and Rivers, and Robert Ask, and all found
guilty of high treason, and all put to death at Tiborne, saving Sir Robert
Conestable, which was hanged in chains on Beuerley gate at Hull and Ask was
also hanged in chains at York on a Tower, and Sir Ihon Bulmers Paramour, was
brent in Smithfelde in London: And in the latter end of June, was the Lord
Darcy behedded at Tower hill and shortly after was the lord Hosey behedded at
Lincoln.

This year at the Feast of Saint George, was the Lord Cromewell made knight of
the Gartier.

In Ocobre on saint Edwardes even was borne at Hampton Court the noble Impe
prince Edward, whose Godfathers at the Christenyng The birth of Prince Edward,
now our souereign Lord and (...) Edward the sixte
were the Archbishop of Cauntorburie, and the Duke of Norffolk and his
Godmother the Lady Mary the Kings daughter, and at the bishopyng was Godfather
the Duke of Suffolk: At the birth of this noble prince was great fires made
through the whole Realm and great Joy made with thanks geuyng to almighty
God which had sent so Queen Jane departed
noble a prince to succed in the croune of this Realm: But Lord what
lamentacion shortly after was made for the death of his noble and gracious
mother queen Jane, which departed out of this life the fourtene day of
Octobre, next following: and of none in the Realm was it more heauelier taken
then of the kings Majesty him self, whose death caused the king imediatly to
remove unto Westminster where he mourned and kept him self close and secret a
great while: Queen Jane buried.
and the eight day of Nouembre the Corpse of the Queen was carried to Winsor
with great solempnitie, and there was buried in the mids of the queer in
the Castle church: And at the same time was made in Poules a solemn herce
for her, where was Mass and dirigie, and in like manner was song Mass and
dirige in every parish church in London.

The kings majesty kept his Christmas at Grenewich in his mournyng apparel,
and so was all the Court till the morrow after Candle^as ^ay and then he and
all other changed.

Also this year the viscou^t Beauchamp was created Earl of Hertford and Sir
William Fitzwilliam high admiral created Earl of Southhampton.

This year James king of Scotts, married the lady Magdalene, the French kings
eldest daughter.

The.xxx. year*
IN May there was a Freer, called freer Forest, Fr^er Fo^^st.
one of the obseruaunt Freers, but he might have been more trulier named as
after shall appear, an obstinate Freer, this obstinat Freer had secretly in
confessions declared to many of the kings subjects that the king was not
supreme head, and being thereof accused and apprehended, he was examined how he
could say that the king was not supreme head of the church, when he him self
had sworn to the contrary, he answered that he took his oath with his outward
man, but his inward man never consented thereunto: At this answer the Lords who
examined him looked very strau^g^lye at the dissmulacion of the Freer, but being
farther a^cused of diverse heretical and dampnable articles, that he held
contrary to the scripture of god, he was after sundry examinacions convinced
and confuted, and gladly submited him self to abide the ponishment of the
church: But upon this his submission, having more liberty then before he had,
as well to talk with whom he would, as also who that would to talk with him,
ce^teyn such outward men as he was so talked with him and so incens^d him,
that the outward Freer was as far from his open submission as ever he was, and
when his abiuracion was sent him to read and look upon* he utterly refused it,
and obstinately stood in all his heresies and treaso^s before co^spired: al
gentle means that was possible to be sought for his reconciliac^n was had,
but the more gentler that the Magestrates were to him, the more onstinat was
the freer, and would neither argue nor answer: wherefore justly he was
co^de^pned, and after for him was prepared in Smithfelde in London a Gallows
on y^ which he was hanged in chains by the middle and armholes and quick, and
under y^ galowes was ma^e a fire, and he so consumed and bre^t to death. At his
coming to place of execution, there was prepared a great skaffolde, on which
sat the nobles of the Realm, and the kings Majesty's most honorable
counsel, only to have granted pardon to that wretched creature, if any spark
of repentance would have happened in him: there was also prepared a Pulpit
where a right reverend father in God and a renoumed and famous Clerk the bishop
of Worceter called Hugh Latimer, declared to him his errors and openly and
manifestly by the scripture of god confuted them, and with many and godly
exhortacions moved him to repe^tau^ce, but ^uche was his frowardnes that he
neither would here nor speak: And a little before the Execucio^, a houge and
great Image was bronght to the Galowes, which Image was brought out of Wales,
and of the Welshmen much sought and worshipped: This Iamage was called Daruell
Gatheren, and the Welshmen had a prophesy A prophecy.
that this Image should set a whole Forest a fire, which prophecy now took
effect, for he set this freer Forest on fire and consumed him to nothing This
Freer when he saw the fire come, and that present death was at hand caught
hold upon the ladder, which he would not let go, but so impatiently took his
death, that no man that ever put his trust in God never so unquietly nor so
ungodly ended his life: if men might judge him by his outward man, he appeared
to have little knowledge of God and his sincere truth, and less trust in him at
his endyng. Upon the gallows that he died on, was set up in great letters
these verses following David Daruell Gatheren. As says the Welshmen Fetched
Outlawes out of Hell. Now is he come, with spear and shilde In harnes to burn
in Smithfelde For in wales he may not dwell And Forest the Freer That obstinate
liar That wilfully shall be dead. In his contumacie The Gospel does deny The
king to be supreme head
In July was Edmond Coningsbey attainted of treason, for counterfeatyng of the
kings Sign Manuell: And in August was Edward Clifford for the same cause
attainted, and both put to execucion as traitors at Tiborne. And the Sunday
after Bartelmew day, A hangman hanged*
was one Cratwell hangman of London, and two persons more hanged at the
wrestlyng place on the backesyde of Clerkenwell beside London, for robbyng of a
bouthe in Bartholomew fair, at which execution was above twenty thousand
people as I my self judged.

In this month of August, the King of Scotts married the Lady Mary late duches
of Longuile. Images suppressed
And in Septembre by the special mocion of the lord Cromewel all the notable
Images unto the which were made any special Pilgrimages and Offerynges, were
utterly taken away, as the Images of Walsyngham, Yplwiche, Worceter, the lady
of Wilsdon, with many other. And likewise the Shrines of counterfeated
Saints, as the Shrine of Thomas Becket and diverse other. All co^^terfeat
relions suppress^d
And even forthwith by the means of the said Cro^well, all the ordres of
supersticious and beggyng Freers, as White, Gray, Black, Augustine, Croched
Freers, and likewise all the pulling Nonnes, with their Cloisters and houses were
suppressed and put down

In this season, suit was made by the Emperor to the kings Maies^ie, that he
would take to wife the duches of Millayn, but in this matter the Emperors
counsel so dalied with the king, that shortly he left of that suit: of the
which breakyng of with the Emperor, the Duke of Cleave hard, and therefore
forthwith he made suite to the kings Majesty, for his fair sister the Lady
Anne: undoubtedly the Emperors counsayl thought by a cautel to have brought
the king to sue to the bishop of Rome for a lic^nce, which thing the kings
Majesty sone smelled and perceived where about they went. In the month of
Nouembre one Iho^ Nicholso^ otherwise called Lambert a priest, Ihon Lamb^rt
otherwise called Iho^ Nicholson.
was accused of heresy, for deniyng the Sacrament of the Aultare to be Christ's
natural body: This man appealed to the kings Majesty, who graciously
consented to hear him, and a day was apoincted: against which day was made
in the kings palace at Westminster called the white hall, in the kings hall a
throne or siege royal for the kings Majesty, and skaffoldes for all the
lords, and a siege for Nichol^^n to stand on: this Nicholson was a man named
to be learned, but that day he uttered no such learning, as he was of many
supposed, that he both could and would have done, but was excedyng fear^ul and
timorous. The kings Majesty accompanied with his Lords and nobles of the
Realm and diverse of the bishops and clergy kept the day appoincted, where
before his maiesti^ was brought the forsaied Nicholson, to whom certain of the
bishops ministered diverse arguments, but specially the kings majesty him
self did most dispute with him, howbeit Nicholson was not persuaded nor would
not revoke although the Kings majesty granted him his pardon, wherefore there
was he condemned and had judgment, and shortly after was drawn and burned
in Smythfeld. The third day of Nouembre were henry Marquis of Excester and
earl of Devonshire and sir Henry Pole knight and lord Mountagew and Sir
Edward Neuell brother to the Lord Burgany sent to the towe^ which three were
accused by sir Gefferei Pole brother to the lord Mountagew, of high treason,
The Lord Mar ^ues of E^c^ster and other accused and condemned of high treason
and the two lords were arreigned the last day of Decembre, at Westminster
before the lord Awdeley of Walden, lord Chauncelor, and then the high stuard of
England, and there found guilty, likewise on the third day after was arreigned
Sir Edward Neuel, Sir Gefferey Pole and two priests called Croftes and
Collins, and one holand a Mariner and all attainted, and the ninth day of
January, were thesai^d two lords and Sir Edward Neuell behedded at the tow^r
hill, and the two priests and Holande were drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged
and quartered, and sir Gefferey Pole was pardoned.

On Ashwedn^soay, were Ihon Jones, Ihon Pottre, and William Maneryng, hanged in
the princes liueries, because they were the princes servants, Sir Nicholas
Carew behedded*
on the Southside of Paul's churchyard for kyllyng of Roger Cholmeley esquier
in the same place of malice prepen^ed.

Also on the third day of March, was sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington, in the
county of Surrey knight of the Gartier, and Master of the kings horse, before
attainted of treason, behedded at the tower hill, where he made a goodly
confession, both of his folly and supersticious faith, geuyng god most hearty
thanks that ever he came in the prison of the tower, where he first sauored
the life and swetenes of Gods most holy word meaning the Bible in English,
which there he read by the mean of one Thomas Phelips Thomas Phelips,
then keeper of that prison, but before he was a citezen and poyntmaker of
London, which Phillips two years before had been there prisoner him self, and
sore troubled as well by sir Thomas More as also by Doctor Stoks^ei bishop of
London, who often times examined thesaied Phelips, and laid many articles to
his charge, but he so wisely and coldly used him self, that he maugre their
euel wills, eskaped clerly their hands.

The ninth day of March, the king created at Westminster sir William Pawlet
knight treasorer of his householde, Lord Saint Ihon, and Sir Ihon Russell
comptroller of his house, Lord Russell.

The same time the king caused all the havens to be fortefied, and road to
Dover, and caused Bulwarks to be made on the sea coasts, and sent commissions
throughout all the realm, to have his people muster: and at the same season on
Easter day, was there three score unknown ships liyng in the downs, wherefore
all Kent arose, and mustered in harneis the same day.

The.xxxi. year.
THE eight and twenty day of April, began a Parliament at Westminster, in
the which Margaret countess of Salsbury Gertrude wife to the Marquis of
Excester, Reignold Poole* ^ Cardinal brother to the lord Mountagew, Sir
Adrian Foskew, and Thomas Dingley Knight of saint Iohnes, and diverse other were
attainted of high treason, which Foskew and Dynglei were the tenth day of Iuli
behedded. In this parliament was an act made which bare this title: An act for
abholishyng of diversity of opinions, in certain articles concerning Christen
religion, The act of six artiles,
this act established chiefly six articles, whereof among the common people it
was called the act of six articles, and of some it was named the whip with
six. strings, and of some other and that of the most part, it was named the
bloody statute, for of truth it so in short time after skourged a great nombre
in the city of London, where the first quest for the inquiry of the offenders
of the said statute sat at a church called Beckets house, now named the
Mercers Chapel, that the said quest being of purpose selected and picked out
among all the rest of the inhabitauntes of the city, that none might thereof
be admitted which either had red any part of the holy scripture in English, The
first quest that inquired of the six Articles,
or in any wise favored such as either had red it, or loved the preachers of
it: insomuch as this quest was so zealous and fervent in the execucio^ of this
statute, that they among them selves thought it not only sufficient to inquire
of the offenders of the said statute, but also by there fine wits and willing
minds, they invented to inquire of certain branches of the same statute as
they termed it, which was not only to inquire who spoke again masses, but who
they were that seldom came unto them: and also not only who denied the
Sacrament to be Christ's very natural body, but al so who held not up their
hands at sacryng time, and knocked not on there breasts: And they not only
inquired who offended in the six articles, but also who came seldom to the
church, who took no holy bread nor holy water, who red the Bible in the
church, or in communicacion contemned priests, or Images in the Churches.
etc. with a great nombre of such branches: this appoincted quest so sped them
selves with the ^ixe Articles, and there own branches, that in fourtene days
space there was not a preacher nor other person in the city of name, which
had spoken against the supremacy of the bishop of Rome, but he was wrapped in
the six articles, insomuche as they indicted and presented of suspicion to the
nombre of five hundred persons and above: so that if the kings majesty had
not granted his pardon, for that by the good lord Awdeley lord chauncelor his
grace was truly infourmed that they were indicted of mali^e: a great many of
them which all ready was in prison, had been shortly after skourged in
Smithfelde with ^iry fagottes, that would have made the best blood in there
bodies to have sprung, but most graciously at that time his grace remitted all:
although in the time that the^e six Articles endured which was eight years
and more, they brought many an honest and simple person to there deaths, for
such was the rigor of that law, that if two witnesses false or true, had
accused any and avouched that they had spoken against the sacrament, there was
then no way but death, for it boted not to confess that his faith was
contrary or that he said not as the accusors reported: for they would beleu^
the witnesses, ye and sometime certain of the clergy, when they had no
winesses would procure some, or else they were slaundered.

The kings highness which never ceased to stody and take pain both for the
auaunce meant of the common wealth of this his Realm of England, of the which
he was the only supreme governor and head, and also for the defense of al
the same, was lately enfourmed by his trusty and faithful friends y^ the
ca^kerd and cruel serpent the bishop of rome, by that Archetraitor Reignold
Poole, enemy to gods word and his natural country* had moved and stirred
diverse great princes and potentates of Christendom to invade the Realm of
England, and utterly to destroy the whole nation of the same: Wherefore his
Majesty in his own person, without any deley took very laborious and
payuefull iourneyes toward the sea coasts. Also he sent diverse of his nobles
and counsaylours to view and search all the Ports and dangers on the coasts
where any meet or convenient landyng place might be supposed, as well on the
borders of England as also of Wales. And in all soche doubtful places his
hyghnes caused dyu^rs and many Bulwarks and fortificacions to be made, And
further his hyghnes caused the Lord Admiral Earl of Southampton to prepayre
in redynesse Ships for the sea, to his great coast and charges.

And beside this, to have all his people in a redynesse, he directed his
Commissions thorough out the Realm to have his people mustered, and the
harneyes and weapons seen and viewed, to thentent that all things should be
in a redynesse if his enemies would make any attempt in to this Realm: And
amongst other, one Commission was directed to the right worshipful sir Tomas
Forman Knight Mayer of London and his brethren, for to certify all the names
of all men between the ages of.lx. and.xvi. and the nombre of harnesses,
weapons, with their kinds and diversities: Whereupon the said Lord Mayer and
his brethren, every one having with them one of the Council or learned men of
the City repaired to their wards, and there by the oath of the Common
Counsayll and Constables of the same ward took the nombre of the men,
harnesses and weapons, according to their Commission. And after that they had
well viewed their Books and the nombre of the persons, they thought it not
expedient to admyt the whole nombre of soche as were certefied for able and
apt persons for the Muster: Wherefore then they assembled them selfs again
and chose out the most able persons and put by the other, and specially all
soche as had no harness, nor for whom no harness could be provided. But
when they were credebly aduertysed by the Kings Counselor Thomas Lord
Cromewell Knight of the Noble Order of the Gartier Lord Preuye Seal (to whose
prudence and goodness the City was much bounden) that the King him self
would see the people of the City Muster in a convenient nombre, and not to
set furthe all their power, but to leave some at home to keep the City. Then
eftsoon every Alderman repaired to his ward, The great Muster in London.
and there put a side all soche as had Iackes, coats of plate, coats of
mayle and bryganders, and appointed none but soche as had white Harness,
except soch as should bear Morysh Pykes, which had no harness but skulles:
and they appointed none but soche as had white harness, neither did they admyt
any that was a Stranger, although they were Denyzens. When it was known that
the King would see the Muster, lord how glad the people were to prepare, and
what desire they had to do their Prince service, it would have made any
faithful subjects heart to have reioysed. Then every man being of any
substance provided himself a coat of white sylke, and garnyshed their
bassenetes with turues like cappes of sylke set with ouches, furnished with
chains of gold and feathers: other gylted their harness, their halb^rdes and
pollaxes. Some, and especyall certain goldsmythes had their breast plates yea
and their whole harness of silver bullyon. The Constables were all in
Iornettes of white sylke with chains and Battle Axes. The meaner sort of
people were all in coats of white cloth very curiously trymmed with the Arms
of the City before and behind. The lord Mayer him self was in a fair
Armor, the crestes thereof were gylte, and over that a coat of Black velvet
with hal^ sleues, and so was sir Robert Cholmley knight Recorder of London, and
all the other Aldermen and Shiriffes and such as had been Shiriffes, all well
mounted on stirryng horses rychely trapped and covered, with battle axes in
their hands and Mases and chains about their necks. The lord Mayer
had.iiii. footmen all in white sylke, cut, ruffed and pounced: he had
also.ii. Pages well mounted on stirryng coursers, rych^ly trapped and
apparelled in coats of Crymosyn velvet and cloth of gold paled, with chains
of gold, the one bearyng his Helm and the other his Axe. He had also, xvi.
tall men of foot with gylte halbardes, whose dobletz were white sylke, and
hosen doblettes and shoes all white, cut after the Almayne fassyon, puffed and
pulled out with red sarcenet, every one having a white lether Ierkyn al to
cuttt and chains about their necks, with feathers and broches on their cappes.
The Recorder and every Alde^man had about him, iiii. Halbardes trymmed wa^lyke.

The Chamberlayne of the City and the Councello^s of the same and the
Alderme^s deputies, which were appointed to be wyffelers on horsbacke were all
in white da^ma^ke coats on their harness, mounted on good horses well
trapped, with great chains about their necks, and propre Iauelyns or battle
axes in there hands and cappz of velvet richely decked.

The Wiffelers on foot, iiii.C. propre and light persons all apparelled in
white sylke or Ierkyns of lether cut, with white hose and shoes, every man
having a iauelyn or slaughsword to keep the people in array and chains about
their necks, and white feathers in their ^appes.

The Minstrels were all in white with the Arms of the (...), and so was every
other person at this Muster without any diversity, saving the lord Mayer,
the Recorder and his brethreu who had crosses of velvet or satin pyrled with
gold.

The Standarde bearers were the tallest m^n of every Ward, for who^ were
made.xxx. new sta^dardz of the devise of the city be^yde ba^ners

When every thyug was prepared, every Alderman mustered his own ward in the
feldes, viewyng every man in his harness, and to cause such as could shote, to
take bows in their hands, and the other bylles or pykes.

The.viii. day of May, according to the Kings pleasure, every Alderman in
order of battle with his ward came into the common field at Mile end, and
then all the gonnes seruered them selves into one place, the pykes in another,
and the bowmen in another, and likewise the byllmen, and there rynged and
snayled, which was a goodly sight to be^olde: for all the feldes from White
chapel to Mile end, and from Bednall G^ene to Ratelyf and to Stepney were all
covered with harness, men and weapons, and in especial the battle of pykes
seemed to be a great forest. Then every part was divided into.iii. parts, the
pikes in, iii. parts and so the other. then were appointed.iii. battles, a
forward, myddleward and rereward.

The Order in going.
About.viii. of the clock marched ^orward the light pieces of Ordinance, with
stone and powder, after them followed the Dro^mes and fyffes, and imediatly
after them a Guydon of the Arms of the C^tie. Then followed master Sadeler
captain of the go^ners upon a good horse in harness and a coat of velvet with
a chain of gold and.iiii. Halbardes about him apparelled as before is
rehearsed. Then followed the Gonners.iiii. in a rank, every one going.v. foot
a sonder, every man's shoulder eue^ with another, which shot altogether in
diverse places very cherefully, and especially before the Kings Majesty,
which at that time sa^e in his new gate house at his Palace at Westmynster
where he viewed all the whole company: In like manner passed the second and
third battles al well and rychely appointed. They passed as is said, the
foremost Capitayn at ix. of the clock in the morni^g by the little conduite
entryng into Paul's churchyard, and so directly to Westmynster, and so thorough
the sanctuary and round about the park of s. James, and so up into the field
and came home thorough Holborne: and as the first Captain entered again to
the little conduyte, the last of the Muster entered Paul's churchyard, which
then was.iiii. of the clock at after noone. The nombre was.xv. thousand,
beside Wyffelers and other wayters.

In this year about the Feast of s. Ihon Baptist, Insurrection in Gaunt.
the common people of the town of Gaunt in Flanders, began to grudge against
the Officers of the Emperor and thoccasion was this: The common people being
supported of diverse rich Merchauntes of the town, complained that the Excyse
of the Wine was so great, that they paid of every pottell.ii. d for thexcise
that they sold by retaile, beside the price of the wine, and likewise paid
the Merchauntes which sold it in great: and yet that more grieved them that the
Abbots, Friars, Chanons and other Religious persons and men of the Church (of
the which was grer store in that town) the which among them had the greatest
riches and wealth of that town, should be exempt and drunk Wine free without
paiyng Excise, which thing turned to the charges of other, and therewith the
commons found them selves sore grieved, and said that they were oppressed
contrary to their old and auncieut Privileges. The Rulers made promise that
an order and way should be taken therein, but they desired respyte that they
might know the mind of the Queen of Hungary, Regent for the Emperor of the
low country, which Queen at that time was at Bruxell, and even then was
going to vset the country of Holand. The Queen consented to nothing that the
commons desired, but sent them a very cruel and froward answer not without
great threats, that if they would not every man quietly remain in their
houses, and pay their excyse as they had been accustomed to do, they should like
rebels as they were be forced thereunto whether they would or not: wherefore the
Commons assembled, and when they had well digested the answer of the Queen,
they determined to seek another means, and first they assembled themselves
into a battle to the no^bre of.x. or.xii.M. well armed me^, night and day
watching and warding the towue, in such sort that themperours Officers bare no
rule: and he whom they called the chief Bailyf or Governor of the town durst
not once show his face amomgest them, but by the help of a boy he co^ueied
himself by a Postern and so got out of the town. The people of Gaunt
perceiuyng their Rulers thus departed, the chie^est of them that were in the
town condisce^ded and agreed to write unto the French King for aid, and
caused a Gentlemen of their town to deuyse a Letter, for the which a^terwarde
he lost his head.

The suit and request of the said men of Gaunt was, that it would please the
French King to send unto them men and municions, and to succor them as the
ancient subjects to the Crown of France, and to deliver them from the
bondage that they were in, and to remove from them the great Exactions and
imposicions, that the Officers of the said Emperor had oppressed them with
all, and they would yield and deliver all unto him as to their Sovereign
Lord, and in like manner would other towns to them adioynynge do. And for a
truth (says the writer of the Annals of A^quytayn) if the French King would
have herkened unto their request and suit, it had been an easy thing for him
both to have enjoyed the possession of the greatest nombre of all the towns in
the low country: as Flaunders, Arthoys and the rest of that country, and
also to have put the Emperor in great hazard. But the French King wyllyng to
keep and hold the Truce which was concluded and sworn, having a greater
respect to his ^ayth and promise then to his profit and gain, thinkyng that
if he should consent to the request of the Gauntoys, he should begin a new
War to the noiaunce of the common people of Christendom, wherefore he refused
utterly either to aid or succor them.

The Queen of Hungarye thinking to have pacifyed all this rumor, sent unto
the Town of Gaunte her right trustye and valiant Knight, the Lord of Sempy,
of the House of Crouy, accompanied with the Lord Lyquerque and one of her
Preuy Council: but these men amongst the commons were not so well entertained
as they thought they should have been, and therefore tarried not long amongst
them, but were glad to convey them selves from them in dissimuled apparel.

The Emperor being aduertysed of all this business, and perceiuyng his low
country by the reason of sedicion was in danger, devised means how he might
come to them, for tha^ he was in Spayn. He thought he would not hazard
himself upon the sea: and he durst not trust the Almaynes, because he had
broken promise with them so o^^en concerning their General Council that he
promised to have assembled: wherefore he determined to move the French King and
to sue for a safeconduyte to pass thorough France, which very gladly the
French King granted him, insomuch that after the French king knew of his
desire, both he and the Dolphyn entreted most hertely the Emperor to pass
that way, trustyng thereby that it sho^lde have been an occasyon of peace between
them.

All things meet for themperours assurance was so appointed by the Constable
of France, that the Emperor departed out of Spayn, and came to Bayon, from
thence to Bordeaux and so to Poyters: after he came to Loches where he met with
the French king and the Queen, and then they together passed from thence to
Orleaunce, and so to Paris, into which City they entered the first day of
January in the year of our Lord a 1539. and so from thence after great chere
and royal enterteynment he passed thorough the lower countries, and at last
came to Bruxelles in Braband.

And first the Emperor under color to have pytie and to remedy the poor
commons of Gau^t, and saying that he would not only pardon their offenses, but
also he could not blame them being oppressed to complayn, and by this means he
obtained license that the County of Reux acco^panyed with ii.C. men of Arms
and.v.M. Launceknightes entered the town, saying to thinhabitantes that this
power was only to keep the town in peace and quiet till a good and profitable
order shoud be taken for the Commons, The poor inhabitantz beleui^g all that
was promised and said unto them and mistrustyng nothing, threw of their
harness, and every man peaceably went to their houses. Then entered into the
town the emperor accompanied with his brother the king of Hongary, and his
sister the Queen Dowager of Hongary, the Duke of Sauoy and many other Princes,
Lords and Gentlemen, and a great power of men of war, which entery was
about Mydsomer, in the year a* M.v.C.xl.

The Emperor being in Gaunt and having thupper hand of them, that is to say,
being stronger within the town then thinhabitantes were, in the place of his
great pytie that he seemed to have on the poor inhabita^tz at his first entery,
he immediately began to do execucion, and that of a great nombre of them, and
without all mercy executed them, insomuch that among all other, the Gentlemen
which the Commons enforced to write the letter to the French king was beheded,
as before is expressed: and afterward the emperor caused an Abbey of s. Banon to
be suppressed, and in the same place at the charges of the Gauntois, he made a
Castle of a marvelous largeness, for it was.ix.C. foot long, and.viii.C.
large: and not contented with such as he put to death, but also of a great
nombre he confiscated there lands and goods, and finally he brake all their
Privileges and Ordinances, and left the poor inhabitants of Gaunt in a
miserable case: But now to return to thaffayres of England.

In August the gre^ O^ele and Odonele entered into the Englysh pale in Ireland,
and brent almost.xx. mile within the same: wherefore the Lord Gray the^ Deputy
there, assembled a great power and met with them the.xxx. day of August and put
them to flight, wherefore the King sent over five hundredth fresh souldyers to
aid his Deputy.

In the end of Septe^bre the.xvi. day of that month came to London Duke
Frederyke of Bauyre Countye Palantyne or Palsgraue of the Ryne, and the.xviii.
day came to London, the Marshall of Duke Ihon Frederick Prince Elector of
Saxony, and the Chauncellor of Willyam Duke of Cleue, Gulycke, Gelder and
Berry, The Palsgraue was receyned and conducted to Wynsore by the Duke of
Suffolk: and the other were acco^panyed with other nobles, and the.xxiii. dai of
the same month they al came to Wynsore, where.viii. days they continually
were feasted and hunted, with all pleasure that might be s^ewed unto them: and
the Palsgraue shortly departed and was honorably rewarded: and at that sea^o^
was concluded the marriage between the King and the lady Anne, sister to duke
Willya^ of Cleue, and great preparacio^ was made for the receiving of her.

The,xiiii. day of Nouembre Hugh Feringdon Abbot of Redyng and two Priests,
the one called Rugg, and the other named Onyon, were attaynted of high treason,
for deniyng the King to be supreme head of the Church, and was drawn hanged,
and quartered of Redyng. This Abbot was a stubborn Monk and utterly without
lerning. The same day was Richard Whityng Abbot of Glascenbury likewise
attaynted and hanged on Tower hyl beside his monastery, for the seid case and
other great treasons, which also was quartered: and the first day of Deceb. was
Ihon Beche Abbot of Colchest. put to execusio^ for y^ same co^federacy and
treso^

Iu Dece^bre were appointed to wait on the Kings highness person fyftye
Gentlemen called Pencioners or Spears, like as they were in the first year of
the King.

The.xi. day of Decembre at the Turnepyke on thyssyde Grauelyng The Receyu^ng
of the Lady Anne of Cleue.
was the Lady Anne of Cleue received by the Lord Lys^e Deputy of the town of
Calice and with the Speres and horsemen belongyng to the retynue there, all
being fresh and warlyke apparelled, and so marchi^g toward Calyce a mile and
more from the town met her Grace the Earl of Southhampton great Admiral of
England, and apparelled in a coat of purple velvet cut on cloth of gold and
tied with great aglettes and treifoiles of gold, to the number of.iiii.C, and
baudrickwise he ware a chain, at the which did hang a whystle of gold set
with rich stones of a great value. And in his company.xxx, gentlemen of the
Kings household very rychly appar^lled with great and massy chains, and in
especial sir Frau^cis Bryan and sir Thomas Seymers chains were of great valor
and strange fassyon. Beside this, the Lord Admiral had a great nombre of
gentlemen in blew velvet and crymosyn sattyn and his yomen in da^mask of the
same colors, and the Maryners of his ship in sattyn or Bridges, both coats
and sloppes of the same colors, which Lord Admiral with low obeysaunce
welcomed her, and so brought her into Calyce by the lantern gate, where the
Ships lay in the Haven garnyshed with their banners, pencellesand flagges,
pleasauntly to behold. And at her entry was shot such a peale of go^nes, that
all the retynew much merueiled at it. And at her entery into the town, the
Mayer of the town presented her with an.C. mark in gold. And before the
Staple hall stood the Merchauntes of the Staple well apparelled, which
likewise presented her with an.C. souereyns of gold in a rich pursse, which
hertely thanked them, and so she rode to the kings place called the Checker,
and there she lay.xv. days for lack of prosperous wind. During which time
goodly iustes and costly bankettes were made to her for her sol^ce and
recreacion. And on s, Ihons day in Christmas, she with.l. sail took passage
about noone and landed at De^le in the downs about, v. of the clock, where
sir Thomas Cheiny lord Warden of the Ports received her, and there she tarried
a space in a Castle newly buylte, and thither came the Duke and Duchess of
Suffolk and the bishop of Chichester, with a great nombre of Knights and
Esquiers and Ladies of Kent and other which welcomed her Grace, and so that
night brought her to Dover Cau^ell, where she rested till monday: on which day
for all the storm that then was she marched toward Caunterbury, and on Baram
down met her the Archbishop of Canterbury acco^panyed with the bishop of Ely,
Sayn^ Ass, Saint Dauyes and Dover, and a great company of gentlemen well
apparelled, and so brought her to s. Austens without Canterbury, where she lay
that night: and on the next dai she came to Syttyng burn and there lodged that
night. And as she passed toward Rochester on Newyeres even, on Reynam down met
her the duke of Norffolke and the lord Dac^^ of the South, and the lord
Mountioye with a great company of Knights and Esquiers of Norffolke and
Suffolk, and the Barons of thexchequer, all in coats of velvet with chains
of gold, which brought her to Rochester where she lay in the Palace all
Newyeres day. On which day the king which sore desired to see her Grace
acco^panyed with no more then.viii. persons of his preuy chau^bre, and both he
and they all apparelled in marble coats preuely came to Rochester, and
suddenly came to her presence, which therewith was sumwhat astonished: but after
he had spoken and welcomed her, she with most gracious and loving countenance and
behauior him received and welcomed on her knees, whom he gently took up and
kyssed: and all that after noone co^moned and devised with her, and that night
supped with her, and the next day he departed to Grenewich, and she came to
Dartford.

On the morrow being the third dai of January, and saturday, in a fair plain
on black heth more nerer the foot of shoters hyl then the ascendent of the
hill called black heth hyl, was pitched a rich cloth of gold and diverse other
Tents and Pauilions in the which were made fyers and perfumes for her and
such Ladies as should receive her Grace: and from the Tents to the park
gate of Grenewych were all busshes and fyrres cut down, and a large and
ample way made for the show of all persons. And first next to the park pale
on the East side, stood the Merchauntes of the Stillyard: and on the West side
stood the Merchau^tes of Iean, Florence and Uenyce, and the Spanyardes, in
coats of velvet. Then on both sides of the way stood the Merchau^tes of the
City of London and Aldermen with the counselors of the said City to the
no^bre of a C.lx. which were myxed with the Esquyers: Next upward toward the
tents stood Knights: tha^ the.l. gentlemen Pencioners, and all this sort were
apparelled in velvet and chayns of gold, truly accounted to the nombre
of.xii.C. and above beside them that came with the king and her Grace, which
were.vi.C. in velvet cotes and chains of gold. Behynd the gentlemen stood the
seruyngme^ in good order, well horsed and apparelled, that whosoever had well
viewed them might say that they for tall and comely personages and cle^e of
lym and body, were able to give the greatest Prince in Christendom a mortal
brekefast if he were the kings enemy: And of this sort the gentlemen
appertainyng to the lord Chau^cellor, the lord Preuy seal and the lord Admiral
and diverse other lords, beside the co^tly lyuereys and comely horses, ware
chayns of gold.

Thus was the lane ordered in ranks from the park gate toward the cross on
the Heth, which was between the Ranks and the Tents, and in this order they
continued till the King and she were returned.

About.xii. of the clock her grace with all the company which were of her own
nation to the nombre of a.C. horse, and accompanied with the Dukes of Norffolke
and Suffolk, the Archebisshop of Caunterburye and other bishops, l^rdes and
knights which had received and conveyed her as you have heard before, came
down shoters hill toward the tents, and a good space from the Tents met her
the Earl of Rutlande her Lord Chaumberleyn, sir Thomas Denyce her Chauncellor,
and all her councell^rs and officers, amongst whom, Doctor Day appointed to
her Almoner, made to her an eloquent Oracion in latin, presentyng to her on the
Kings behalf all the Officers and Servants: which Oracion was answered unto
by the Duke her brothers Secretary there being present: which done, the Lady
Margarete Doglas, daughter to the Queen of Scotts, the lady Marquis Dorcet,
daughter to the French Queen being Nieces to the King, and the Duchess of
Rychmond, and the Countess of Rutland and Herfford with diverse other ladies
and gentlewomen, to the no^bre of.lxv. saluted and welcomed her Grace, which
alyghted o^t of her Chariot in the which she had rydden all her long journey,
and with most godly demeanor and loving cou^tenau^ce gave to them hertye
thanks and kissed them all, and after all her cou^cellors and officers kyssed
her hand, which done, she with all the Ladies entered the tents, and there
warmed them a space.

When the King knew that she was arrived in her tent, he with all diligence set
out thorough the park. And first issued the Kings Trompettes, then the Kings
Officers being sworn of his Council, next after them followed the Gentlemen
of the Kings Preuy Chaumbre, some apparelled in coats of velvet enbrodered:
other had their coats guarded with chains of gold, very rich to behold,
which were well horsed and trapped: after them ensued Barons, the youngest
first, and so sir Willyam Hollys knight Lord Mayer of London rode with the
Lord Par being youngest Baron. Then followed Bishops apparelled in ^l^cke
satin. Then immediately followed the Earls, and then duke Philyppe of Bauyer
and County Palantyne of the Rhyne, rychely appare^led with the lyuerey of the
Toysant or Golden Fleece about his neck. Then followed the Ambassadors of
the French King and the emperor, next followed the Lord Preuy Seal Lord
Cromwell and the Lord Chauncellor: then Garter king of Arms, and the other
Officers of Arms and the Serieantes at Arms gave their attendance on every
side of the Lords: which Lords for the moast part were apparelled in Purple
velvet, the Lord Marquis Dorcet in the same suyte bare the Kings swoorde of
estate. After him a good distaunce followed the Kings highness mounted on a
goodly courser, trapped in rich cloth of gold trauerced latyce wise square,
all over enbrodered with gold of dammaske, pyrled on every side of the
enbroderye, the buckles and pendentes were all of fine gold. His person was
apparelled in a coat of purple velvet, somewhat made like a ^rocke, all over
enbrodered with flat gold of Dammaske with small lace myxed between of the
same gold, and other laces of the same of going trauerse wise, that the
ground little appeared: about which garment was a rich guard very curiously
enbrodered, the sleues and breast were cut lyned with cloth of gold, and tied
together with great buttons of Diamondes, Rubyes, and Orient Perle, his swoorde
and swoorde gyrdle adorned with stones and especial Emerodes, his night cappe
gartnyshed with stone, but his bonnet was so tyche of Iuels that ^ewe men
could value them. Beside all this he ware in baudricke wy^e a collar of s^che
Balystes and Perle that few men ever saw the like: and about his person
ran.x. footmen all rychely appa^elled in goldsmythes work. And
notwithstanding that this rich apparel and precious Iuelles were plesaunt to
the Nobles and all other being present to behold, yet his Princely
countenance, his goodly personage and royal gesture so far exceded all
other creatures being present, that in comparyson of his person, all his rich
apparel was little esteemed. After him followed his lord Chau^berlein, tha^ came
sir Anthony Brown master of his horse, a goodly ge^tleman and a comely
personage, well horsed trapped and rychely apparelled, leadyng the Kings horse
of estate by a long reyne of gold, which horse was trapped in manner like a
barde with crimosin velvet and satin, al over enbrodered with gold after an
antyke fassio^, very curiously wrought. Then followed the pages of honor in
coats of rich tynsell and crimosyn velvet paled, ridyng on great coursers, al
trapped in crimosyn velvet, enbrodered with new deuyses and knottz of gold which
were both pleasant and costly to behold. Then followed sir Antho^y Wyngfeld
Captain of the Guard, and then the Guard well horsed and in rich coats. In
this order the king rode to the last end of the rank where the Spears or
Pencyoners stood: and there every person that came with the King placed
himself on the one side or the other, the King standing in the mids.

When her Grace was aduertysed of the Kings coming, she issued o^t of her
tent being apparelled in a rich goune of cloth of gold reised, made round
without any train after the Dutche fassyon, and on her head a kall, and over
that a round bo^net or cappe set full of Orient Perle of a very propre
fassyon, and before that she had a cornet of black velvet, and about her neck
she had a partelet set full of rich stone which glystered all the field. And
at the door of the Tente she mounted on a ^ayre horse richely trapped, with her
fotemen about her in goldsmithes work enbrodered with the black Lion, and on
his shoulder a Carbuncle gold, and so she marched toward the King: which
perceiuyng her to approach came forward somewhat beyond the cross on Black
Heth, and there paused a little in a fair place till she came nerer: then he
put of his bonnet and came foreward to her, and with most lovely countenance
and Princely behauyour saluted, welcomed and enbrased her to the great
reioysyng of the beholders: and she likewise not forgettyng her duty, with most
amiable aspecte and womanly behauyour received his Grace with many sweet
words and great thanks and praisynges given to him. And while they two were
thus communynge, the fyftye Pencioners and the Guard departed to furnysh the
Court and Halle of Grenewyche. And when the King had talked with her a little
while, he put her on his right hand, and so with their footmen they rode as
though they had been coupeled together, O what a sight was this to see so goodly
a Prince and so noble a King to ride with so fair a Lady of so goodly a
stature and so womanly a countenance, and in especial of so good qualyties, I
think no creature could see them but his heart reioysed.

Now when the King and she were met and both their companyes joined
together, they returned thorough the ranks of Knights and Esquyers which
stood still all this while and removed not, in this order: First her Trompettes
went forward, which were twelve in nombre beside two kettle Drommes on
horseback, then followed the Kings Trompettes, then the Kings Councillors,
then the Gentlemen of the Pr^uy Chaumbre, then the Gentlemen of her Graces
country in coats of velvet, all on great horses: after them the Mayer of
London in crimosyn velvet with a richecollor, coupled with the youngest Baron*
then all the Barons, next followyng Bysshoppes, then Earls, with whom rode
the Earls of Quersteyn and Waldocke of her country, then Dukes and the
Archbysshop of Caunterbury and Duke Phillip of Bauire, next followed the
Ambassadors, then the Lord Preuye Seal and the Lord Chauncellor, then the
Lord Marquis with the Kings sword, next followed the King himself equally
ridyng with his fair Lady, and behind him rode for Anthony Brown with the
kyngz horse of Estate as you heard before, and behind her rode sir Johan
Dudley Master of her horses leadynge her spare Palferaye trapped in rich
Tyssue down to the ground: after them followed the Henxemen or Pages of
Honor, then followed the Lady Margarete Doglas, the Lady Marquis Dorset,
the Duchess of Richmond and Suffolk, and Countesses of Rutland and Hertforde,
and other Countesses: then followed her Graces Chariot in the which she rode
all her journey, well carved and gylte with Arms of her country curiously
wrought and covered with cloth of gold, all the horses were trapped with
black velvet, and on them rode Pages of Honor in coats of velvet, in the
which Charyot rode.ii. ancient Ladies of her country: next after the
Chariot followed, vi. Ladies and Gentlewomen of her country all richely
apparelled with cappes set with Perle, and great Chains of diverse fassyons
after the usage of their country, which were very fair of face, and with them
rode.vi. Ladies of England well besene. Then followed another Charyot likewise
gylte and furnyshed as the other was: after that Charyot followed.x. Englysh
Ladies well apparelled, next them another Chariot al covered with black
cloth, and in that.iiii. gentlewomen which were her Graces Chamberers: then
followed all the remnaunt of the Ladies, Gentlewomen and Maidens in a great
nombre of which did wear that day French whodes: last of all came another
Chariot all black with.iii. Launders appertaynyng to her Grace: next after
followed a Horselytter of cloth of gold and Crymosyn veluyt upon velvet paled,
with horses trapped accordi^gly which the king sent her, Then followed the
seruyng men of her train, all clothed in black and on great horses.

In this order they rode thorough the ranks, and so thorough the park and at
the late Freers wall all men alyghted saving the King, the.ii. Masters of the
Horses and the Henxmen which rode to the halle door, and the Ladies rode to the
Court gate. And as they passed they beheld on the wharfe how the Citizens of
London were rowyng up and down on the Thames even before them, every craft in
his Barge garnyshed with Banners, Flagges, Stremers, Pencelles and Targettes,
some painted and beaten with the Kings Arms, some with her Graces Arms, and
some with the Arms of their Craft or Mystery. Beside the Barges of every
craft, there was a Barge made like a ship, called the Batchelers bark, decked
with cloth of gold, penons, pencels, and targetz in great nombre, on who^
waited a Foyst that shot great pieces of Artillary. And in every barge was
diverse sorts of Instruments and children and men syngyng, which sang and
played altogether as the King and the Lady passed on the wharfe, which sight
and noies they much praised and allowed.

When the King and she were within the utter court, they alygted from their
horses, and the King louyngly embrased her and kyssed her, byddyng her welcome
to her own, and led her by her lift arm thorough the halle which was
furnyshed beneth the harth with the Kings Guard, and above the harth with the
fyftye Pencioners with their Batell Axes, and so brought her up to her preuy
chaumbre, where he left her for that time.

And as soon as the King and she was entered the Court, was shot out of the
Tower of Grenewyche and there about, a great peale of Gonnes.

When the Kings company and hers was entered the park, as you have heard,
then all the horse men on Black Heath brake their array and had license to
depart to London, or to their lodgyng. To se how long it was or the horsemen
could pass, and how late it was in the night yer the footmen could get
over London bridge, I assure you it was wondrous to behold. the nombre was so
great. Thus

This the Noble Lady remained unmarried until the tuysday followyng being the
day of the Epiphany: On which day about.viii. of the clock in the morning, his
Grace being apparelled in a gown of cloth of gold, raised with great flowers
or silver, furred with black Ienettes, his coat Crymsyn sattyn all to cut
and enbrodered and tied with great Diamondes, and a rich Collar about his
neck, came solemly with his Nobility into the galery next the closettes, and
there paused.

Then the Lords went to fetch the Lady Anne, which was apparelled in a
gown of rich cloth of gold set full of large flowers of great and Orient
Pearl, made after the Dutche fassion rownde, her here hangyng down, which was
fair, yellowe and long: On her head a Coronall of gold replenyshed with great
stone, and set about full of branches of Rosemary, about her neck and myddle,
Iuelles of great value and estimation, In this apparel she going between the
Earl of Ouersteyn and the Graunde Master Hostoden, which had the conduyte and
order of the performaunce of her marriage, with most demure countynaunce and sad
behavior, passed thorough the Kings chaumbre, all the Lords going before her
till they came to the galery where the King was, to whom she made three low
obeysaunces and curteisyes. Then the Archebysshop of Caunte^bury received them
and married them together, and the Earl of Ouersteyn did give her: and about
her mariyng ryng was written: GOD SEND ME WELL TO KEEP.

When the Marriage was celebrate, they went hand in hand into the Kings
closet and there hard Mass and offered their tapers, and after Mass had wine
and spyces, and that done, the King departed to his chaumbre, and all the
Ladies waited on her to her chau^bre, the Duke of Norffolke going on the right
hand, and the Duke of Suffolk on the left hand on her grace.

After.ix. of the clock, the King with a gown of rich Tyssue lyned with
Crymosyn Ueluet enbrodered, came to his closet, and she in her here in the same
apparel that she was married in, came to her Closet with her Serieant of Arms
and al her Officers, like a Queen, before her. And so the king and she went
openly on Procession and offered and dyned together. And after dinner she
changed into a gown like a man's gown, of Tyssue with long sleues gyrte to
her, furred with rich Sables, her narrow sleeves were very costly, but on her
head she had a cap as she ware on the saturdai before with a cornet of laune,
which cap was so rich of Perle and Stone, that it was judged to be of great
value. And after her fassyon, her Ladies and Gentlewomen were apparelled very
rich and costly with chains of diverse fassions, and in this apparel she went
that night to Eueniong, and after supped with the King: and after supper were
Bankettes, Maskes, and diverse dysportes, till the time came that it pleased
the King and her to take their rest.

The sunday after were kept solemn Iustes, which much pleased the
straungiers. On which day she was appareiled after the English fashion, with
a French whode, which so set forth her beauty and good visage* that every
creature reioysed to behold her.

When the earl of Ouerstein, and other lords and ladies which had given their
attendau^ce on her grace all that iornay, and had been highly ^easted of the
king and other no^les, very su^pteously, they took their leave and had great
g^^tes given to them, both in money and plate, and so returned toward their
country, leauyng behynd them the earl of Waldocke, and diverse other gentlemen
and damoselles, which were retained with her grace, till she were ^etter
acquainted in the realm.

The fourth day of February next ensuyng, the king and she came to Westminster
by water accompaignied with many nobles and prelates in Barges, on whom the
Mayor and his brethren in skarlet, and.xii. of the chief compaignies of the
city, all in Barges garnished with Banners, Penons, and targettes, richely
covered and replenished with mynstrelsy, gave their attendaunce, and by the
way all the ships shot their ordinance, and out of the tower was shot a
great peale of Gonnes, in goodly order.

The.xii. day of February, the Duke of Norffolke was sent in Ambassade to the
French king, of whom he was well enterteigned, and in the end of the same
month, he returned again into England.

The.xxiii. day of February, were four readers sent for to the Star Chamber,
of every house of the four principal Innes of Count one, where sat the lord
Chauncellor, the lord Preuie seal, and.xiiii. o^ the chief of the kings
counsel, and there the lord Chauncellor d^clared, how sir Ihon Shelto^
knight, had by the advice of sir Humfrey Broune Knight* the Kings Seriaunt,
si^ Nicholas Hare Knight, the Kings counsailor, and Speaker of the Parliament,
and Willyam Coignesby Esquire, attornay of the Duchy of Lancastre, all being
his servants and of his Fee, declared a fraudulent will of his lands,
contrary to the statute made anno.xxvii. to the great hynderaunce of the
Kings prerogative, and the true meaning of thesaied statute, and also to the
evil example of all other, that should defraude the lords of their
seigniories Wherefore thesaie^ sir Humffrey Brown, and sir Nicholas Hare, were
that day by the whole Counsel of the king, dismissed of their Offices and
service to the king* and sent to the tower: and within three days after was
William Coign^^by sent thither, where they remaigned ten days, and after were
delivered: but they three lost all their offices, that they had of the king.

The first Sondaie in Lent, Stephyn Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Wynchester.
preached of Paul's cross, and there entreated of the Gospel of that day:
and in his sermon especially, he touched the article of Iustifica^io^, and so
he handled it, that the third Sondaie in Lent next following, one Doctor Barnes,
Doctor Barnes.
o^ whom before you have heard, reproved in thesaied pulpit at Paul's, the
doctrine of thesaied Bishop: and being vexed with the Bishops Doctrine, he
used many tauntes against him, but one specially which was this, that he said
if the Bishop and he, were together in Rome with the Pope, he knew that
great sommes of money, could not save his life, but for the Bishop, there
was no fear, but that a little intreataunce, should purchase favor enough for
him: By this he noted the Bishop to be but a Papist, which the Bishop so
unquietly took, that he complained of Barnes to the king, and there had him
examined, and at the last by the Kings commandment, he came to the bishops
house, where likewise the bishop not only examined him, but also took upon
him to be his skolemaster, and as most men and specially such, as much
knew and least cause had to lie reported, he prepared the tower for his skole
house, and made such a rod to beat his skoler, that he beat him as small as
ashes, or he left him: although Barnes, with two other persons, that is to
say, Iherom and Garret, of whom in the next year following, ye shall here more,
were by the Bishops procurement, appointed in the Easter weke following, to
preach at saint Mary Spittle beside London, the three solemn sermons in one
of the which sermons that Barnes made, Barnes openly and before all the people,
asked the Bishop forgeuenes, for speaking to vnreue rently of him, in his
former sermon, and he required the bishop if he forgave him, in token thereof
to hold up his hand, which like as it was long before he did, so it appeared
afterward to many, that it was but a counterfeat forgeuenes.

The.xii. day of April began a Parliament, and sir Nicholas Hare restored to
the office of speaker, in the which was freely granted, without
co^tradictio^s, four fiftenes and a Subsedy, of two. s. of lands, and xii.
d. of goods, toward the great charges of Bulwarks.

The.xviii* day of April, at Westminster was Thomas lord Cromewell, created
Earl of Essex, Thomas lord Cro^wel creat^d Earl of Esse^.
and made great Chamberlain of England, which ever the Earls of Oxenford had,
which promocions he enjoyed short time, as after in the next year may appear.

The.xxxii. year.
THe first day of May, sir Iho^ Dudley, sir Thomas S^imour, sir George Carew,
sir Thomas Ponynges, sir Richard Cromewell, sir Anthony Kyngston knights,
enterprised a royal Iustes, A Iustes.
Tornay, and Barriers, which were in white Ueluet barded and based. The Iustes
began the first day of May, the Tornay the third day, and the Barriers the
fifth which challenge they valiau^tly performed, against all comers, and also
they kept open household at Duresme place, and feasted the king and Queen, and
all the Lords. Beside this, on Tewesdaie in the Regacion weke, they feasted
all the Knights and Burgesses of the Common house: and the morrow after they
had the Mayor, the Aldermen and all their wifes to dinner, and so the Fridaie
they brake up household.

In this Parliament which began the.xviii. day of April, as is before
rehearsed, the religion of saint Ihones in England, which of most me^ was
named the knights of the Rhodes, was dissolved, whereof hearing sir Willyam
Weston knight, Prior of saint Ihones, for thought died on the Assencion day,
being the fifth day of May.

In this monethe was sent to the Tower, Docter Wilson, and docter Sampson
bishop of Chichester, for releuyng of certain traitorous persons, which
denied the kings supremacy: and for the same offense was one Richard Farmer
Grocer of London, Richard Farmer Grocer condemned in a Pr^munire.
a rich and welthy man, and of good estimacion in the city, committed to the
Marshall See, and after in Westminster hall was arraigned and attainted in the
Praemunire, and lost all his goods.

The.ix. day of July, Thomas lord Cromewel, Thomas lord Cro^wel committed to
the Tower.
late made earl of Essex, as before you have hard, being in the counsel
chamber, was suddenly apprehended, and committed to the tower of London, the
which many lamented, but mo reioysed, and specially such, as either had been
religious men, or favored religious persons, for they banqueted, and triumphed
together that night, many wisshyng that that day, had been seven year before,
and some fearyng least he should escape, although he were imprisoned, could not
be merry. Other who knew nothing but truth by him, both lamented him, and
heartily prayed for him: But this is true that of certain of the Clergy, he was
detestably hated, and specially such as had borne swing, and by his means
was put from it, for in deed he was a man, that in all his doings, seemed not
to favor any kind of Popery, nor could not abide the snoffyng pride of some
prelates, which undoubtedly whatsoever else was the cause of his death, did
shorten his life, and procured the end that he was brought unto: which was
that the.xix. day of thesaied monethe, he was attaynted by Parliament, and
never came to his answer, which law many reported, he was the causer of the
making thereof, but the truth thereof I know not: The Articles for which he
died, appears in the Record, where his attaynder is written, which are to
long to be here reher^ed, but to conclude he was there attainted of heresy,
and high treason. And the.xxviii. day of July was brought to the skaffold on
the tower hill, where he said these words following.

I am come hither to dye, The words of the Lord Cro^well spoken at his death.
and not to purge my self, as may happen, some think that I will, for if I
shuold so do, I were a very wretch and miser: I am by the Law condemned to
die, and thank my lord God that has appointed me this death, for mine
offense: For sithence the time that I have had years of discrecion, I have
lived a sinner, and offended my Lord God, for the which I ask him heartily
forgeuenes. And it is not unknown to many of you, that I have been a great
traueler in this world, and being but of a base degree, was called to high
estate, and sithe^s the time I came thereunto, I have offended my prince, for
the which I ask him heartily forgeuenes, and beseech you all to pray to God
with me, that he will forgive me. O father forgive me. O son forgive me, O
holy ghost forgive me: O three persons in one God forgive me. And now I pray
you that be here, to bear me record, I die in the Catholic faith, not
doubtyng in any article of my faith, no nor doubtyng in any Sacrament of the
Church. Many has sclaundered me, and reported that I have been a bearer, of
such as has mainteigned evil opinions, which is untrue, but I confess that
like as God by his holy spirit, does instruct us in the truth, so the devil
is ready to seduce us, and I have been seduced: but bear me witness that I dye
in the Catholic faith of the holy Church. And I heartily desire you to pray
for the Kings grace, that he may long live with you, in health and
prosperity. And after him that his son prince Edward, that goodly ympe, may
long reign over you. And once again I desire you to pray for me, that so long
as life remaigneth in this flesh, I waver nothing in my faith. And then made
he his prayer, which was long, but not so long, as both Godly and learned,
and after committed his soul, into the hands of God, and so patiently
suffered the stroke of the axe, by a ragged and Boocherly miser, which very
ungoodly performed the Office.

On saint Peter's even, was kept the Serieantes feast Sergeauntes Feast.
at saint Ihones with all plenty of victaile. At which feast were made ten
Serieauntes, three out of Greyes Inn, and three out of Lyncolnes Inn, and of
every of the Temples two. At which feast were present, all the lords and
commons of the Parliament, beside the Mayor and the Aldermen, and a great
number of the commons of the city of London.

The morrow after Midsomer day, the king caused the Queen to remove to
Richemond, purposyng it to be more for her health, open air and pleasure: but
the sixth day of July, certain Lords came down into the neither house, which
expressly declared causes, that the marriage was not lawful, and in conclusion,
the matter was by the Conuocacion clearly determined, that the king might
lawfully mary where he would, and so might she: and so were they clearly
deuorsed and separated, and by the Parliament enacted and concluded, that she
should be taken no more as Queen, but called the Lady Anne of Cleue. Queen
Anne deuorced* and called Ladi^ Anne of cleue


In this year the lord Leonard Gray, brother to Thomas lord Marquis Dorset,
being the kings lieutenaunt in Ireland, practiced sondery feats for his
proffite, as in deliueryng treytors being hostages, and especially his nephew
Fitzgarard, brother to Thomas Fitzgarard before executed, and also caused such
of the Itishe men, as he had intelligence with all, to muade such of the
kings friends, which he favored not: Wherefore the king sent for him, and he
mistrustyng and seeing no refuge, wrote to the kings enemies, to invade
thenglishe pale after his departure. And also he kept the kings Treasure, to
his own use, without reteignyng soldiers, according to his commission
whereupon, when he came to London, he was sent to the Tower. The Lord Graye
sent to the Tower.


In July the Prince of Salerne, in the Realm of Naples, and the lord Lois
Deuola, came into England to se the king, which had high chere and great
rewards, and so departed. And after them came Done Frederick Marquis of
Padulla, brother to the Duke of Farrar, and the Prince of Macedonia, and the
Marquis of Terra Noua, and Mounsire de Flagy, and sixtene other gentlemen, from
the Emperors Court into England, to see the King, which on the day of Mary
Magdalene, came to the Court to Westminster, and were highly fea^^ed and well
enterteined, and with great rewards departed.

The twenty and eight day of July* as you have heard before in this year, was
the Lord Cromewell behedded, and with him likewi^e was behedded the Lord
Hongerford Lord Hungerford beheded.
of Heytesbury, which certainly at the time of his death, seemed to be very
unquiet in mind, and rather in a frenesy then otherwise.

The thirty day of July, were drawn on herdelles out of the Tower to
Smithfeld Robert Barnes Doctor in Diuinitee, Thomas Garard, and Wyllyam Jerome
Barnes, Garrard ^ Ierom
Bachelors in Diuinitee, Powell, Fetherston, and Abell. The first three were
drawn to the stake, there before set up, and were burned: and the latter three
drawn to the Galowes, likewise there set up, and were hanged, hedded, and
quartered. Here ye must note, that the first three, were men that professed
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and were Preachers thereof: But wherefore they were
now thus cruelly executed, I know not, although I have searched to know the
truth. But this I find in their atteindor, for ye must understand, that
after they had Preached at saint Mary Spittle, as before I have declared,
Barnes for learning his lesson no better was committed to the Skolehouse before
prepared, which was the Tower, where he was kept, and never called to
examinacion* till his rod that he should be beaten withal, was made, which
was a sharp and great Fire in Smithefelde: and for compaignie sake, was sent
to the Skolehouse with him, the fornamed Garet, and Jerome, which drunk all
of one Cup. And as I said before, thus much I find in their attaindor,
that they were detestable and abominable Heretics, and that they had taught
many heresies, the number whereof was to great in the atteindor to be recited,
so that there is not one alleged, which I have often wondered at, that their
heresies were so many, and not one there alleged, as special cause of their
death. And in deed at their death, they asked the Shirif^s, wherefore they
were condemned, who answered, they could not tell: but if I may say the
truth, most men said it was for Preaching, against the Doctrine of Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Wynchester, who chiefly procured this their death, God and
he knows, but great pity it was, that such learned men should so be
cast away, without examinacion, neither knowing what was laid to their
charge, nor never called to answer.

The last three which were Powell, Fetherston, and Abell, Powell, Fetherston,
and Abell.
were put to death for Treason, and in their attaindor, is special mention
made of their offenses, which was for the deniyng of the kings supremacy,
and affirmyng that his Marriage with the Lady Katheryne was good: These with
other were the treasons, that they were attainted of, and suffered death for.

The fourth day of August Thomas Epsam, sometime Monk of Westminster, which
had been prisoner for treason, three years and more in Newgate, came before the
Justices of Jail delivery at Newegate, and would not ask the kings pardon,
nor be sworn to be true to him wherefore his Monks garment, was plucked from
his back, and he repr^ed till the king knew his malicious obstinacy: and
this was the last Monk that was seen in his clothyng in England.

In this monethe were certain Commissioners, sent by the king into Ireland, to
inquire of the lord Leonard Gray, which certefied diverse articles against
him, as ye shall here in the next year following.

The eight day of August, was the Lady Katheryn Haward, Katheryn Haward showed
as Queen.
nece to the duke of Norffolk, and daughter to the lord Edmond Haward, showed
openly as Queen at Hampton Court, which dignity she enjoyed not long, as
after ye shall here.

In ye latter end of this month, was universally through the realm great
death, by reason of new hot agues and Flixes, and some Pes^ilence, in which
season was such a drougth, that Wells and small Rivers were clean dried, so
that much cattle died for lack of water: and the Thamis was so shalowe, and
the fresh water of so small strength, that the Salt water flowed above London
bridge, till the rain had increased the fresh waters.

On the.xxii. day of December, was Raufe Egerton servant to the Lord
Audeley, lord Chauncellor, hanged, Egerton hanged
drawn, and quartered, for counterfetyng of the kings great Seal, in a
signet, which was never seen, and sealed a great number of Licenses for
Denizens, and one Thomas Harman that wrote them, was executed: for the statute
made the last parliament, sore bound the straungiers, which were not Denizens,
which caused them to offer to Egerton, great sommes of money, the desire
whereof caused him to practice, that which brought him to the end, that
before is declared.

In the end of this year, the French King made a strong Castle at Arde, and
also a Bridge over into the English pale, which bridge the Crewe of Calice
did beat down, and the Frenchemen reedified the same and the Englishemen bet
it down again. And after the king of England sent fiftene hundred work men,
to wall and fortefie Guysnes, and sent with them five hundred men of war,
with capitaines to defend them. The noyes ran in France, that there were
fifty thousand Englishemenne, landed at Calice with great ordinance:
wherefore the French king sent in all have, the Duke of Uandosme, and diverse
other capitaines, to the Frontiers of Picardy, to defend the same. The king of
England hearing thereof, sent the Earls of Surrey and Southhampton and the
lord Russell, his great Admiral, into the Marches of Calice, to set an order
there: and after them sent.CC. light horsemen, of the borders of Scotland:
whom the Frenchmen called stradiates, which lords when they had set all
things in a good order, shortly returned.

In this year was burned in Smith^eld, a child named Richard Mekins, Richard
M^kyns brent.
this child passed not the age of.xv. years, and somewhat as he had heard some
other folks talk, chanced to speak against the Sacrament of the altar.
This boy was accused to Edmond Boner Bishop of London, who so diligently
followed the accusacion, that he first found the means to Indite him, and then
arreigned him, and after burned him And at the time he was brought to the
stake, he was taught to speak much good, of the Bishop of London, and of the
great Charitee, that he showed him: and that he defied all heresies, and
curssed the time that ever he knew Doctor Barnes, for of him had he learned
that heresy, which he died for: The poor boy would for the sauegarde of his
life, have gladly said that the twelve Apostles taught it him, for he had not
cared of whom he had named it, such was his childishe innocence and fear.
But for this deed many spoke and said, that it was great shame for the
Bishop, who they said ought rather to have labored to save his life, then to
procure that terrible execucion, seeing that he was such an ignorant soul, as
knew not what the affirmyng of an heresy was.

You have hard before in the beginning of this year, that doctor Wilson, and
doctor Sampson Bishop of Chichester, were sent unto the Tower: who now were
pardoned of the king, and set again at their liberty.

The.xxxiii. year.
IN the beginning of this year, v. priests in York shire began a new
rebellion, A new rebellion.
with thassent of one Leigh a gentleman, and.ix. temporal men, which were
apprehended, and shortly after in diverse places put in execucion, in somuche
that on the.xvii. day of May, thesaid Leigh and one Tatersall, and Thornton,
were drawn through London to Tiborne, and there were executed. And sir Ihon
Neuell knight, was executed for the same at York.

On the same day was Magaret Countess of Salisbury, which had been long
prisoner in the Tower, behedded in the Tower, and she was the last of the right
line and name, of Plantagenet.

The.ix. day of June, were Damport and Chapman, two of the kings Guard,
hanged at Grenewiche by the Friars Wall, for roberies in example of all other.

During this ceason, the commissioners that before were sent into Ireland, to
inquire of the lord Gray, The Lord Graye condemned.
certified.xx. articles of high treason against him, whereupon he was arreigned
and tried by knights, because he was a lord of name, but no lord of the
parliament: howbeit he discharged the Jury, and confessed the indictment, and
thereupon was judged, and after behedded at the tower hill, where he ended his
life very quietly and godly.

In this ceason was arreigned and condemned three gentlemen, called Mantell,
Roydon, and Frowdes, and were hanged at saint Thomas of Waterynges. Likewise
was Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of the Southe, arreigned before the Lord Awdeley
of Walden, then Chancellor of England, and that day high Stuard of the same
at Westminster, and there before thesaied Lord Chancellor and his Peers, he
confessed the Indictment, and so had Judgment to be hanged. The Lord Dacres
of the South hanged
And so the twenty and nine day of June, being Saint Peter's day at after
None, he was led on foot, between the two Shirifes of London, from the Tower
through the city to Tyborne, where he was strangled, as common murderers are,
and his body buried in the church of saint Sepulchers. The cause of the death
of this noble manne, and the other gentlemen, was a murder of a simple manne,
and an unlawful assemble made in Sussex. Great moan was made for them al,
but most specially for Mantell, who was as witty, and as toward a gentleman,
as any was in the realm, and a man able to have dooen good service.

This Summer the King kept his Progress to York, and passed through Lyncolne
Shire, where was made to him an humble submission Submissons
by the temporaltie, confessyng their offense, and thankyng the king for his
pardon: and the Town of Staunforde gave the King twenty pound, and Lyncolne
presented forty pound, and Boston fifty pound that part which is called
Lynsey gave three hundred pound, and ^estren and the Church of Lyncolne gave
fifty pound. And when he entered into York Shire, he was met with two
hundred gentlemen of the same Shire, in cotes of Ueluet, and four thousand
tall yomen, and seruyng men, well horsed: which on their knees made a
submission, by the mouth of sir Robert Bows, and gave to the King nine
hundred pound. And on Barnesdale met the king, the Archebishoppe of York,
with three hundred Priests and more, and made a like submission, and gave the
king six hundred pound. Like submission was made by the Mayor of York, New
Castle, and Hull, and each of them gave to the King an hundred pound. When
the King had been at York twelve days, he came to Hull, and devised there
certain fortificacions, and passed over the water of Homber, and so through
Lyncolne Shire, and at Halontide came to Hampton Court.

At this time the Queen late before married to the king called Queen Katheryne,
Queen Katheryne beheded.
was accused to the King of dissolute living, before her marriage, with Fraunces
Diram, and that was not secretly, but many knew it. And sith her Marriage,
she was vehemently suspected with Thomas Culpeper, which was brought to her
Chamber at Lyncolne* in August last, in the Progress time, by the Lady of
Rocheforde, and were there together alone, from a leven of the Clock at
Night, till four of the Clock in the Morning, and to him she gave a Chain,
and a rich Cap. Upon this the king removed to London, and she was sent to
Sion, and there kept close, but yet served as Queen. And for the offense
confessed by Culpeper and Diram, they were put to death at Tiborne, the tenth
day of December. And the twenty and two day of the same monethe, were
arreigned at Westminster, the lord Wyllyam Hawarde and his wife, which Lord
Wyllyam was Uncle to the Queen, Katheryne Tilney which was of counsel of her
having to do with Diram, Elizabeth Tilney, Boulmer, Restwould, the Queen's
women, and Walgraue, and Wyllyam Asby, and Damport gentle men, and servants
to the old Duches of Norffolke, and Margaret Benet a Butter wife, all indicted
of misprision, for counsailyng the evil demeanor of the Queen, to the slander
of the King, and his succession: all they confessed it, and had Judgment to
perpetual prison, and to lose their goods, and the proffite of their lands,
during their life's: howbeit shortly after, diverse of them were delivered by
the kings Pardon.

The sixtene day of January the Parliament began, in the which the Lords and
Commons assented, to desire of the king certain peticions. First, that he would
not vex himself, with the Queen's offense, and that

Also, because of protractyng of time, which the more should be to

Also, that Diram and Culpeper, before attainted by the common law

Also, that Agnes Duches of Norffolke, and Katheryn Countess of

Also, that whosoever had spoken or done any act, in the detestacion of her
abominable living, should be pardoned.

To the which peticions the king granted, saying, that he thanked the
Commons, that they took his sorrow to be theirs. Whereupon the Queen and the
Lady Rocheforde, were attainted by both the houses. And on Saturdaie being the
leuenth day of February, the King sent his royal assent, by his great Seal:
and then all the Lords were in their Robes, and the Common house called up,
and there the act read, and his assent declared. And so on the thirtene day,
these two Ladies were behedded Queen Katherin and the Lady Rocheford beheded.
on the Grene, within the Tower with an axe, and confessed their offenses, and
died repentaunt.

At this Parliament the King was Proclaimed king of Irelande, The King
Proclaimed King of Irelande.
which name this predecessors never had, but were always called lords of
Irelande.

In the beginning of March died sir Arthur Plantagenet viscount lis^e bastard
to King Edward the fourth, in the tower of London unattained, when he should
have been delivered and put at his liberty. And the twelve day of the said
month, sir Ihon Awdeley son and heir to the said Lord Lisles wife was at
Westmynster created Uiscount Lisle.

The Parliament sittyng, in Lent one George Ferreis George Ferr^ys.
Bourgeoys for the tonne of Plimmouth, was arested in London upon a
condempnacion, at the suite of one White. Whereupon the Seriaunt at arms, of
the Common house, was sent to the Counter in Bredestrete to fetch him: but the
Clerckes would not deliver him, wherefore the Serieaunt and his manne, would
have brought him away perforce. Diverse of the Shirifes officiers there
present, withstoode the Serieaunt, so that they fell to quarellyng, and the
Serieauntes man was sore hurt. After the Fraie ended, the Shirifes of London
whose names were Rowland Hill, and Henry Suckely came to the Counter, and first
denied the deliuerey of the prisoner, howbeit afterward they delivered him. But
this matter was so taken in the Common house, that the Shirifes and the
Clercke, and five Officiers, and the party plaintiff, were sent to the tower,
and there lay two days, and were delivered again by the Speaker and Common
house.

Although I have not used much to declare of private things done, in other
foreign Realms, yet will I now tell of one because the thing was so reported
to me, and the matter it self to written and delivered me, that I must needs
judge it to be a truth, and the like in all this work is not expressed,
therefore I purposed word by word, as it was written unto me, here to
express it. The matter is of a certain Gentelman in Scotland, who for
contemning of the Bishop of Romes usurped authority, and for praisyng and
commendyng the affairs and procedinges of England, and reprouyng the naughty
life of the Scottishe Clergy, was, as an heretic accused, and conuented
before diverse of them, as after may appear, there to make answer to such
Articles as should be objected against him. He knowing their accustomed favor,
fled from them into England. Against whom after he was gone, they proceeded in
such sort, as by this that follows which is the true copy of the process
may appear.

Sir Ihon Borthwike, Sir Ihon Borthwike.
commonly called Capitain Borthwike, accused, suspected, defamed and convicted
by witnesses, which were men of such honesty, against whom could none
excepcion be taken, the year of our lord, a thousand five hundred and
forty, the.xxviii. day of May in the Abbay of saint Androwes, in the
presence of the most worshipful fathers in Christ, Eawyn Archebishoppe of
Glasgue, Chauncellor of Scotland, William of Aberdowyn, Henry Bishop of
Galloway and of the Kings Chapel of Sterlyng, Ihon Bishop of Bre^th.
Willyam bishop of Dunblan: Andrew Abbot of Melros, George Abbot of
Dumfermelyng, Ihon Abbot of Paslay, Ihon Abbot Lundros, Robert Abbot of Kyllos,
and Willyam Abbot of Culros: Malcolme Prior of Whitytern, and Ihon Prior of
Pettywerin. Master Alexander Balfour Uicar of Kylmane, and Rector of the
University of saint Androwes. And before the cunnyng Masters, Master Ihon
Mair, and Master Peter Chapilain, professors, and doctors of Diuinitee, Master
Marten Balfour, Bachel^r of Divinity, and of the law, and Official
principal of saint Androwes, Ihon Wyrem Supprior, Ihon Wannand, and Thomas
Cunnyngha^, Chanones of the Abbay of saint Androwes, Ihon Thomson with his
fellow, Prior of the black Friars of saint Androwes, Ihon Tullidaff Wardein
of the Gray Friars, of. S. Androwes, and Ihon Patersone, vicar of the same
covent. And also before the noble mighty and right worshipful lords, George
Earl of Huntley, James earl of Arrain, Willyam earl Marshall, William earl of
Montrosse* Malcolme lord Flemmyng, Chamberlain of Scotland, Ihon lord
Lindesay, Ihon lord Erskyn, George lord Seiton, Hugh lord Symeruall, sir
James Homilton of Finnart, and Walter lord of.s. Ihones of Torphecten
knights, master James Fowls of Colynton clerk of the Register, to our most
sovereign Lord the King, and many and diverse and sondery other lords,
barons, and honest persons, required to be witnesses i^ the premises, does
affirm that he has holde^ these errors following, openly taught them, and
instructed them, that is to say.

First, that our most holiest lord the Pope, the Uicar of Jesus Christ,

Secondly, that Indulgenses and Pardons, granted by our most

Thirdly, he said that the Pope was a Simoniack, ever sellyng gifts,

Fourthly, that all English heresies (as they are called) or at the least,

Fifthly, that the people of Scotland, and the clergy thereof has been and

Item, likewise according unto tholde opinions, of Iho^ Wi^lief and

Item, he has said, holden, and affirmed falsely, and contrary to the
christian faith, would contrary to the law and liberty of the holy church
vendicat and challenge unto his private uses, all ecclesiastical possessions:
lands, and yearly rentes, given by his fore fathers, and also by himself, and
to enforce this matter he has also by writing persuaded our most noble king,
with all his endeavor.







Vnio Discidentium, conteinyng most manifest errors, and that he has red,
studied, and communicated, and presented the same to other men, as well openly as
privately, and that he has instructed and taught, very many Christians in
the same, to the effect, to turn them from the very true and Catholic faith.





Therefore we David of the title of saint Stephyn in the mount Celo of the holy
church of Rome priest Cardinal, The sentence or judgment.
archbishop of saint Androwes, Primate of this whole realm of Scotland and of
the Apostolic seat Legate create, sittyng in our seat of justice in nature
of Judges, the holy Evangelists of God set before us, that our judgments
proceed from the sight of God, and our eyes must look to equity, having only
God and the Catholic faith before our eyes, the name of God being called upon
and following the counsel as well of the deuines as lawyers, this foresaid Ihon
Borthwike called capitain Borthwike condemned of the foresaid heresies,
accused, suspected and infamed by lawful probacions had and brought against
him in all y^ foresaydes, convicted, cited, called and not appearyng but
absentyng him self like a runaway: Therefore let us think, pronounce, and
declare him to be convicted and to be punished worse then an heretic, And
further more all his mouables and vnmouables by whatsoever title they begotten
and in whatsoever parties they lie, they to be given to the secular power. And
all offices had by dower or by his wife to be confiscat and spent to the use
and custom or the law. Also we do declare by these presents the image of the
for^sayd Ihon to be made to the likeness of him, and to the brought into the
metrapolitan Church of saint Andrews and after that to y^ market cross of
the city, there to be brent as a sign and a memorial of his condemnyng to the
example and fear of all other. Likewise we do declare that if the same Ihon be
taken within our liberties to be punished according to the law of heretics.
Also we warn all true beleuers in Christ of whatsoever state and condition
they be, that they from this day do not receive or admit i^to their houses,
te^tes, villages of tounes Ihon Borthwike to eat or to drink or to prefer
any king of humanity in pain of such like punishment: Further, if there b^
any found culpable in these foresaid that they shall be accused as fautors and
maintayners of heretics, and they shall be punished according to the law. This
sentence red and made and put in writing in the Metrapolitan Church of saint
Androwes we sittyng in our Tribunals seat, the year of our Lord 1540. the
xxviii. day of May drawn out of the Regester made against heretics and
agreyng with the sentence of Ihon Borthwike.

The.xxxiiii year.
IN this year James earl of Desmo^d came to the king and was honorably
entertained and well rewarded. And in Septembre the great Onele came to the king
to Grenewyche, where he and a captain of the North parts of Ireland called
Magannysse and the bishop of Cloar, made their submission in writing,
co^fessyng their offenses, and promisyng to serve the king and his heirs
truly: which submission by the king considered, he upon the first day of
October created at Grenewyche thesayd sir Eustace Onele called great Onele
(because he was the chief of his lineage called Onele) Earl of Tereowen,
commonly called Tyron and gave him a great chain, and made Magannysse and his
cosyn knights and gave them both chains, and he gave to the lord Mathias
son to the earl, the Barony of Duncan

At this ceason the kings Majesty prepared for war into Scotland, the
cause why this war was made is most manifestly declared by that which
follows, which the kings Majesty published by this title, A declaracion
conteignyng the just causes and consideracions of this present war with the
Scotts: vvherin also appears the true and right title that the kings most
royal majesty has to his souereigntie of Scotland. And it begins thus.

Being now enforced to the war, which we have always hitherto so mu^he
abhorred and fled, A declaracion of the cause of war with ^^^^land set (...)
by the ^yng.
by our neighbor and Nephieu the king of Scotts, one, who above all other, for
our manyfolde benefits toward him, has most just cause to love us, to
honor us, and to rejoice in our quietness: We have thought good to notify unto
the world his doings and behauour in the prouocacion of this war, and
likewise the means and ways by us used to exchue and aduoyde it, and the just
and true occasions, whereby we be now provoked to prosecute the same, and by
vtteraunce and diuulgyng of that matter, to disburden some part of our inward
displeasure and grief, and the circumstaunces known, to lament openly with
the world, the infidelity of this time, in which things of such enormitie
do breast out and appear.

The king of Scotts our Nephieu and neighbor, whom we in his youth and tender
age preserved and maintained from the great danger of other, and by our
authority and power co^duced him safely to the real possession of his estate,
he now compels and forces us for preseruacion of our honor and right, to
use our puissau^ce and power against him. The like unkindness has been
heretofore showed by other in semblable cases against Gods law, man's law,
and all humanity: but the oftener it chances, the more it is to be abhorred,
and yet in the persons of princes for the raritie of them can so happen but
seldom, as it has now come to pass.

It has been very rarely and seldom seen before, that a king of Scotts has
had in marriage a daughter of England: We can not, ne will not reprehend the
king our fathers art therein, but lament and be sorry it took no better effect.
The king ou^ father in that matter minde^ love, amity, and perpetual
friendship between the postery of both, which how soon it failed, the death of
the king of Scotts, as a due punishment of God for his iniust invasion into
this our realm, is and shall be a perpetual testimony to their reproach for
ever, and yet in that present time could not the unkindness of the father
extinguyshe in us the natural love of our Nephieu his son, being then in the
miserable age of ten^er youth: but we than forgettyng ye displeasure that
should have worthyly provoked us to invade that realm, norished and brought up
our Nephieu to achieue his fathers possession and government, wherein he now
so unkindly uses and behaueth him toward us, as he compels us to take
armor and war against him.

It is specially to be noted, upon what grounds, and by what means we be
compelled to this war, wherein among other is our chief grief and
displeasure, that under a color of fair speech and flatteryng word^s, we be
in deeds s injured, co^tempned and despised, as we ought not with sufferaunce
to pretermitte and pass over. Words, writings, letters, messages,
ambassiates, excuses, allegacio^s, could not more pleasauntly, more gently, ne
more reverently be devised and sent, then has been made on y^ king of Scotts
behalf unto us, and ever we trusted the tree would bring forth good fruit,
that was of the one party of so good a stock, and continually in apparaunce
put forth so fair buddes: and therefore would hardely believe or give ear to
other, that ever alleged the deeds of the contrary, being nevertheless the same
deeds so manifest, as we must needs have regarded them, had we not been to
loathe to think evil of our Nephieu, w^om we had so many ways bound to be of
the best sort toward us. And therefore having a message sent unto us the year
past from our said Nephieu, and a promi^e made for the repayryng of thesayd
king of Scotts unto us to York, and after great preparacion on our part made
therefore, the same metyng was not only disappointed, but also at our being at
york, in the lieu thereof, an invasion made by our said Nephieu his subjects
into our realm, declaryng an evident contempt and di^pite of us: We were yet
glad to impute the defaute of the metyng to the advice of his counsel, and the
invasion to the lewdnes of his subie^tes: and according there unto gave as
benign and gentle audience to such ambassadors, as repaired hither at
Christmas afterward, as if no such causes of displeasure had occurred,
specially considering the good words, sweet words, pleasant words,
eftsoon proponed by the said Ambassadors, not only to excuse that was past,
but also to persuade kyndnes and perfect amity to ensue. And albeit the king
of Scotts having contrary to the ^rticle of the league of amity, received and
entetteigned such r^belles* as were of the chief and principle, in stirryng
the insurreccion in the North against us with refusal before time, upon
request made to restore the same: yet nevertheless upon offer made thesayd
ambassadors, to send co^mis^ion to the bordures, to determyng the debates of
the confinies in the same, with so great a pretense of amity and so fair
words, as could be in speech desired: we were content for the time to
forbear to press them over extremely in the matter of rebels. Albeit we
never remitted the same, but desirous to make trial of our said Nephieu in some
correspondence o^ deeds, condescended to the sendyng of commissioners to the
borders, which ^o our great charge we ^id, and the king of Scot^es our said
Nephieu the semblable. Where after great travail made by our commissioners,
this fruit ensued, that being for our part challenged a piece of our groun^e,
plainly usurped by the Scotts, and of no great value, being also for the same
showed such evidence, as more substancial, more autentique, more plain and
evident, can not be brought forth for any part of gournde within our realm.
The Same was neu^rthelesse by them denied, refused, and the evidence only for
this cause rejected, that it was made (as they alleged) by Englishemen. And yet
it was so ancient, as it could not be counterfaite now, and the value of the
ground so little, and of so small wait, as no man would have attempted to
falsify for such a matter. And yet this denial being in this wise made unto
our commissioners, they nevertheless by our commandment departed as friends
fro the commission^rs of Scotland, taking order as has been accustomed for
good rule upon the borders in the mean time.

After which their recesse, the lord Maxwell, Warden of the West Marches of
Scotland, made proclamacion for good rule, but yet added therewith, y^ the
borderers of Scotland should withdraw their goods from the borderers of
England: And incontinently after the Scottishe men borderers, the fowerth of
July, entered into our realm suddenly, and spoiled our subjects, contrary to
our leagues, even after such extremity, as it had been in time of open war.
Whereat we much meruailed, and were compelled therefore to furnishe our border
with a garrison for defense of the same. Whereupon the king of Scotts sent unto
us James Leyrmouth, Master of his household, with letters devised in the most
pleasant manner, offering redress and reformacion of all attemtates. And yet
nevertheless at the entry of the said Leyrmouth into England, a great nombre
of the Scotts, than not looked for, made a forrey into our borders, to the
great annoyaunce of our subjects, and to their extreme detr^^ent, wherewith
and with that unseemly dissimulacion, we were not a little moved, as reason
would we should. And yet did we not finally to extremely persecute and continue
our said displeasure, but that we gave benign audience to the said Leyrmouth,
and suffered our self to be somewhat altered by this words and fair
promises, tendyng to the persuasion that we ever desired, to find the king of
Scot^es such a Nephieu unto us, as our proximitie of blood, with our gratuitie
unto him, did require.

In the mean time of these fair words, y^ deeds of the borders were as
extreme as might be, and our subjects spoiled: and in a road made by sir
Robert Bows for a revenge thereof, the same sir Robert Bows with many other
taken prisoners, and yet detained in Scotland, without puttyng them to fine and
ransom, as has be ever accustomed. And being at the same time a surceaunce
made on both sides at the suite of the said Leyrmouth for a season: the
Scotts ceased not to make sundry invasion into our realm in such wise, as
we were compelled to forget fair words, and only to consider the king of
Scotts deeds, which appeared unto us of that sort, as they ought not for our
duty in defense o^ ou^ subjects, ne could not in respect of our honor, be
passed over unreformed: and therefore put in a readynesse our army, as a due
mean whereby we might attaigne such a peace, as for the safeguard of our
subjects we be bound to procure.

After which praparacion made, and knowledge had thereof, the king of Scotts
ceased not to use his accustomed mean of fair words, which in our
natural inclinacion wrought eftsoon their accustomed effect, evermore
desirous to find in the king of Scotts such a regard and respect to be
declared in deeds as the correspondence of natural love in the Nephieu to
such an Uncle, as we have showed our self toward him, does require.
Wherefore upon new request and suite made unto us, we determined to stay our
army at York, appointyng the duke of Norffolke our Lieutenaunt, the lord
Priuyseale, the bishop of Dureham, and the Master of our horses, there to
commen, treat and conclude with the Ambassadors of Scotland, for an amity and
peace upon such conditions, as by reason and equity were indifferent, whereby
the war might be exchued, being by sundry invasion of the Scotts than open
and manifest.

In this communicacion between our and their commissioners, after diverse
degrees of co^missions, showed by the Scotts, and finally one, that was by our
commissioners allowed, mat^ers were proponed for conclusion of amity, nothing
difficile or hard on our part, but so agreabl^ to reason, as the commissioners
of Scotland said, they doubted not, but if it might be brought to pass, that
the king of Scotts our Nephieu might have a metyng with us, all matters should
easily be componed and determined. Whereupon they left speaking of any articles
of amity, and the ambassadors of Scotland made much outward joy in
communicacion of metyng, they showed theimselfe in words, facion and behauor
much to delight in it, to re^oyce in it, and therewith thought it easy and
facile to be concluded and accomplished, and for their part they took it then
for a thing passed, a thing concluded, and most certain to take effect, and
only desired vi. days to obteigne answer from their Master, and our army
for that time to stay and go no further: Whereunto our commissioners then agreed.

After these vi. days was sent a Commission out of Scotland, with power to
conclude a metyng precisely at such a place, as they knew well we would not,
ne could not in winter observe and keep, wherewith when our commissioners were
miscontent, the Ambassadors of Scotland to relieve that displeasure, and to
tempre the matter, whereby to win more time, showed forth their instruccions,
wherein liberty was given to the ambassadors to excede their commission in the
appointment of the place, and to consent to any other by our commissioners
thought convenient, which manner of procedyng, when our commissioners re^used,
alleging that they would not conclude a metyng with men, having no commission
thereunto: the ambassadors of Scotland upon pretense to send for a more ample
and large commission agreeable to their instruccions for appointment of the
place, obtained a delay of other vi. days, to send for thesayd ample
commission without restraint of place. And after those vi. days they brought
forth a new commission, made in a good form, and without excepcion: But
therewith they showed also new instruccions, co^teinyng such a restainte as
the former commission did contain, so as the liberty given to the
Commissioners in the commission was now at the last removed and taken away by
the instruccions, with addicion of a special charge to the Ambassadors not to
excede the same.

And thus first the Ambassadors of Scotland seemed to have will and desire to
conclude a place semely and convenient, which for want of commission they
might not do, and at the last might have concluded a metyng by virtue of their
commission, and then for fear of the commandment in their second
instruccions they durst not. And so they showed their first instruccions partly
to excuse their king, who should seem secretly to will more, than in the
commission he did openly profess.

And than with an ample commission from the king, they showed their secret
instruccions for defense of theimselfe, why they proceeded not according to
their commission, not caryng how much they charged therein their king, whose
fault they disclosed to discharge them self, trustyng that by benefit of
the Winter approchyng, and the time lost in their co^municacion their Master
should be defended against our power for this year, without doing for their
part that by honor, right, law, and leagues they be obliged and bound to do.
And in this mean time our subjects taken prisoners in Scotland could not be
delivered upon any rau^some, contrary to all custom and usage of the borders
in the time of peace and war, and in this mean time stayed a great part of
our army already prested, and in our wages to go forward. In this time
Ambassadors (as ye have heard) assembled to talk of an amity and conclude it
not. The treatyng of amity was put over by communicacion of a metyng.

The co^municacion of metyng was so handled by alteracion of commission and
instruccions on their behalf, as it appears a plain devise only excogita^e
for a delay, which has given us light, whereupon more certainly to judge the
king of Scotts inward affeccion toward us, whose deeds and words well
wayed and considered, does us plainly to understand, how he has continually
labored to abuse us with sweet and pleasant words, and to satisfy the
appetites of other at home and abroad with his unkind and displeasaunt deeds.
In his words he professes an insoluble amity, he allegeth kynred, he
knowlegeth benef^tes, only the fault is that he speaks another language to
all the world in deeds, and thereby so touches us in honor and denegacion of
justice, as we be enforced and compelled to use the sword, which God has ^ut
in our hand as an extreme remedy, whereby to obteigne both quietness for our
subjects, and also that is due unto us by right, pactes, and leagues.

We have pacie^tly suffered many delusions, and notably the last year when we
made preparacion at York for his repair to us: But should we suffer our
people and subjects to be so often spoiled without remedy? This is done by the
Scotts whatsoever their words be. Should we suffer our rebels to be
deteigned contrary to the leagues without remedy? This is also done by them
whatsoever their words be.

Should we suffer our land to be usurped contrary to our most plain evidence,
only upon a will, pride, and arrogancy of the other party? This is done by
the^ whatsoever their words be. And all these be over pre^umptuously done
against us, and give such significacio^ of their arroga^cie, as it is
necessary for us to oppress it in the beginning, lest they should gather
further courage to ye greater displeasure of us and our posterity hereafter.
And yet in ye intreatyng of this mattter, if we had not evidently perceived the
lack of such affeccion as proximitie of blood should req^ire, we would much
rather have remitted these injuries in respect of proximitie of blood to our
Nephieu, than we did heretofore y^ invasion of his father. But considering we
be so surely ascertained of ye lack thereof, and that our blood is there frorne
with the cold air of Scotland, there was never prince more violently compelled
to war then we be, by the unkind dealyng, unjust behauor, unprincely
demeanor of him that yet in nature is our Nephieu, and in his acts and deeds
declares himself not to be moved there with; ne to have such ernest regard to
the obseruacion to his pactes and leagues, ne such respect to the
intertainement of the administracion of justice, as natural equity byndeth,
and co^seruacion of amity does require: which we much lament and be sorry
for, and use now our force and puissaunce against him, not for reuengeance of
our private displeasure (being so often deluded as we have been) but for
recovery of our right, the preseruacio^ of our subjects from injuries, and the
obseruacion of such leagues as have passed between us, firmly trustyng, that
almighty God under whom we reign, woll assist and aid our just procedynges
herein to the furtheraunce and advancement of the right, which we doubt not
shall ever prevail against wrong, falsehead, deceipte and dissimulacion.

Hitherto it appears how this present war has not proceeded of any demand
of our right of superiority, which the king of Scotts have always knowleged
by homage and fealty to our progenitors even from the beginning: But this
war has been provoked and occasioned upon present matter of displeasure,
present injury, present wrong ministered by the Nephieu to the Uncle most
unnaturally, and supported contrary to the deserts of our benefits most
unkindly. If we had minded the possession of Scotland, and by the mocion of
war to attain the same, there was never king of this realm had more
opportunity in the minority of our nephieu. Ne in any other realm a prince
that has more just title, more evident title, more certain title, to any
realm that he can claim, then we have to Scotland, not devised by pretense of
marriage, not imagined by covenant, or contrived by inuencion of argument, but
lineally descended from the beginning of that a state established by our
progenitors, and recognized successively of the kings of Scotland by deeds,
words, acts and writings continually almost without interrupcion, or at the
leest intermission, till the reign of our progenitor Henry the vi. in whose
time the Scotts abused the civil war of this realm, to their license and
boldness, in omittyng of their du^tie: which for y^ proximitie of blood between
us, we have been s^a^ke to require of them, being also of our self inclined to
peace, as we have ever been always glad, rather without prejudice to omit to
demand our right, if it might co^serue peace, than by demau^dyng thereof to be
seen to move war, specially against our neighbor, against our Nephieu,
against him, whom we have preserved from daungier, and in such a time as it
were expedient for all Christendom to be unite in peace, whereby to be the more
able to resist the common enemy the Turk.

But for whatsoever co^sideracions we have omitted to speak hitherto of the
matter, it is neue^theles true, that ye kings of Scotts have always
knowleged the kings of England superior lords of the realm of Scotland, and
have done homage and fealty for the same.

This appears first by history, written by such as for confirmacion of the
truth in memory, have truly noted and signified the same.

Secondly it appears by instruments of homage made by the kyng^s of Scotts,
and diverse notable personages of Scotland, at diverse and sundry times sealed
with their seals, and remainyng in our treasory. ^hyrdly it appears by
Regesters and Records iudicially and au^^ntiquely made, yet preserved for
confirmacion of the same. So as the ^atter of title being most plain, is
furnished also with all manner of evidences for declaracion thereof.

First as concerning histories, which be called witnesses of times, the light
of truth, and the life of memory, and finally the convenient way and mean,
whereby things of antiquiti^ may be brought to men's knowledge, they show as
plainly this matter as could be wyshed or required, with such^ a consent of
writers, as could not so agree upon an untruth, conteignyng declaracion of
such matter as has most evident probability and apparaunce. For as it is
probable and likely, that for the better administracion of justice among rude
people, two or m^ of one estate might be rulers in one country unite as this
Isle is: so is it probable and likely, that in the beginning it was so ordered
for auoydyng discencion, that there shuold be one superior in right, of whom
the said estates should depend. According whereunto we read how Brute, of whom
the realm than called Brytain took ^yrst tat name (being before that time
inhabited with Gyauntes, people without order or civility) had three sons,
Loc^ine, Albanact, and Camber, and determinyng to have the whole Isle within
the Occean sea to be after governed by them three, appointed Albanact to rule
that now is called Scotland, Camber the parties of Wales, and Locrine that
now is called England: unto who^ as being the elder son, the other two
brothers should do homage recognisyng and knowlegyng him as their superior. Now
consider if Brutus conquered all this Island, as the history says he did, and
then in his own time made this order of superiority as before: how can there be
a title devised of a more plain beginning, a more just beginning, a more
convenient beginning for the order of this Island, at that time specially when
the people were rude, which cannot without continual strife and variaunce
co^teine two or three rule^s in all points equal without any manner of
superiority, the inward conscience and remorse of which superiority should
in some part dull and diminishe the perverse courage of resistance and rebellion.
The first division of this Isle we find it written after this sort without
cause of suspeccion why they should write amysse. And according hereunto we
find also in history set forth by diverse, how for transgression against this
superiority, our predecessors have chastised the kings of Scott^s, and some
deposed, and put other in their places.

We will here omit to speak of the rudenes of the antiquity in
particularitie, which they cared not distinctly to commit to writing, but some
authors, as Anthonius Sabellicus among other diligently enserchyng, what he
might truly write of all Europe, and the Islands adioynyng, over and besides
that which he writes of the nature, manners, and conditions of the Scotts,
which who so list to read, shall find to have been the very same in times
paste, that we find them now at this present, he calls Scotland part of
England, which is aagreable to the division aforesaid, being in deed as in the
land continual without separacion of the sea, so also by homage and fealty
unite unto the same, as by particular declaracions shall most manifestly appear
by the testimony of such as have left writing for proof and con^irmacion
thereof. In which matter passing over the death of king Humber, the acts of
Dunwald king of this realm, the division of (...) and Brene, the victories of
king Arthur, we shall begin at the year of our Lord DCCCC. which is DCxlii.
years past, a time of sufficient auncientie, from which we shall make special
declaracion and evident of the execucion of our right and title of superiority
evermore continued and preserved hitherto.

Edward the first before the conquest, son to Alured king of England had
under his dominion and obedience the king of Scotts. And here is to be noted,
that this matter was so notorious and manifest, as Maryon a Scot writing that
story in those days, grants, confesses, and testifies the same, and this
dominion continued in that state xxiii. year: At which time Athelstaine
succeeded in the croune of England, and having by battle conquered Scotland,
he made one Constantyne king of that party, to rule and govern the country
of Scotland under him, addyng this princely word, That it was more honor to
him to make a king, than to be a king.

Xxiiii. years after that, which was the year of our lord, D ccccxlvii.
Eldred king our progenitor, Athelstaines brother, took homage of I^ise then
king of Scotts.

Xxx. years after that, which was in the year of Lord Dcccclxxvii. king Edgar
our predecessor took homage of Kinald king of Scotts. Here was a little trouble
in England by the death of S. Edward king and martyr, destroyed by the deceit
of his mother in law: but yet with in memory.

Xl. years after the homage done by Kynald to king Edgare, that is to say, in
the year of our lord M.xvii. Malcolme king of Scotts did homage to Knute our
predecessor. After this homage done the Scotts uttered some piece of their
natural disposicion, whereupon by war made by our progenitor saint Edawrde
the Confessor xxxix. year after that homage done, that is to say, the year of
our lord M.lvi. Malcolme king of Scotts was vanquished, and the realm of
Scotland given to Malcolme his son by our said progenitor saint Edward:
unto whom thesayd Malcolme made homage and fealty.

Within xi. years after that Wylliam Conqueror entered this realm whereo^ he
accoumpted no perfect conquest, until he had likewise subdued the Scotts, and
therefore in the said year, which was in the year of our Lord M.lxviii. the
said Malcolme king of Scotts did homage to the said Wyllyam Conqueror, as his
superior by conquest king of England.

Xxv. y^res after that, which was in the year of our Lord M.xciii. the said
Malcolme did homage and fealty to Wyllyam Rufus, son to the said Wyllyam
Conqueror: and yet after that was for his offenses and demerites deposed, and
his son substitute in his place, who likewise failed of his duty, and
therefore was ordained in that estate by the said Wyllyam Rufus, Edgare brother
to the last Malcolme, and son to the first, who did his homage and fealty
accordyngly.

Seven years after that, which was in the year of our Lord M.C. the said
Edgar king of Scotts, did homage to Henry the first, our progenitour.

Xxxvii. year after that David king of Scotts did homage to Matilde the
Emperatrice, as daughter and heir to Henry the first. Wherefore being after
required by Stephyn, then obteignyng possession of the realm, to make his
homage, he refused so to do, because he had before made it to the said Matilde,
and thereupon forbear. After which David's death, which ensued shortly after,
the son of the said David made homage to the said king Stephyn.

Xiiii. years after that, which was in the year of our Lord, M.Cl. Wyllyam
king of Scotts, and David his brother, with all the nobles of Scotland made
homage of Henry the secondes son, with a reseruacion of their duty to Henry
the second his father.

Xxv. years after that, which was in the year of our lord, M.Clxxv. Wyllyam
king of Scotland, after much rebellion and resistance, according to their
natural inclinacion, king Henry the second, than being in Normandy, Wyllya^
then king o^ Scotts knowleged finally his error, and made his peace and
composicion, confirmed with his great seal, and the seals of the nobility of
Scotland, making therewith his homage and fealty.

Within xv. years after that, which was y^ year of our lord M.C.lxxxx. the
said Wyllya^ king of Scotts, came to our city of Cauntorbury, and there did
homage to our noble progenitour king Richard the first.

Xiiii. years after that, thesayd Wyllyam did homage to our progenitor king
Ihon, upon a hill besides Lyncolne, making his oath upon the cross of Hubert
than archbishop of Cauntorbury, being there pr^sent a marvelous multitude
assembled for that purpose.

Xxvi. years after that, which was in the year of our lord M.CCxvi. Alexander
king of Scotts married Margarete, the daughter of our progenitor Henry the
third, at our city of York, in the feast of Christmas: at which time y^ said
Alexander did his homage to our said progenitor: who reigned in this realm,
lvi. years. And therefore between the homage made by the said Alexander king of
Scotts, and the homage done by Alexander, son, to ye said king of Scotts,
to Edward the first at his coronacion at Westminster, there was about fifty
years at which time the said Alexander king of Scotts repaired to the said
feast of coronacion, and there did his duty as is aforesaid.

Within xxviii. years after that, which was the year of our lord M.
CC.lxxxii. Ihon Baliol king of Scotts, made his homage and fealti^ to the said
king Edward the first, our progenitor.

After this began Robert Bruise to usurp the croune of Scotland, and to move
s^di^ion therefore, against them of the house of Balioll, which made for
^^cason some interrupcion in thesayd homage: but yet no (...) without the
terms of memory. For within xliiii. year after, which was the year of our
lord, M.CCCxlvi. Edward Baliol, after a great victory had in Scotland against
the other faction, and enjoying the croune of Scotland, made homage to our
progenitour Edward the third.

And xx. years after that, which was in the year of our Lord M. CCCxxvi.
David Bruise, who was ever in the contrary faction, did nevertheless in the
title of the croune of Scotland, whereof he was then in possession, make homage
to our said progenitor Edward the third.

Within ix. years after this, Edward the third, to chas^ise the infidelity of
the Scotts, made war against them: where after great victories, Edward
Balliol having the just and right title to the realm of Scotland, surrendered
^lerely the same to our said progenitour at the town of Rokysbrough in
Scotland: where our said progenitour accepted the same, and than caused
himself to be crouned king of Scotland, and for a time enterteigned it, and
enjoyed it, as very proprietary and owner of the realm, as on the one party by
confiscacion acquired, and on the other part by free will surrendered unto him.

And then after the death of our said progenitour Edward the third, began
sedicions and insurreccions in this our realm, in the time of our progenitour
Richard the second, which was augmented by the alt^^ation of the state of
thesayd Richard, and the deuolucion of the same, to Henry the fowerth, so as the
Scotts had some leisure to play their v^gues, and follow their accustomed
manier. And yet Henry the v. for recou^ry of his right in Fraucne, commanded
the king of Scotts to attend upon him in that journey. And in this time the
realm of Scotland being descended to the house of the Stewardes, of which our
Nephieu directly comes, James Steward king of Scotts, in the year of our
Lord M.CCCC.xxiii. made homage to Henry the vi. at Wyndsore. Which homage was
distaunt from the time of the other homage made by David Bruise lx. years and
more, but far within the fresh memory of man.

All which homages and fealties as they appear by storye to have been made
and done at times and season as before: so do there remain instruments made
thereupon and sealed with the seals of the kings of Scotland testifiyng
the same. And yet does it appear by story, how the Scotts practi^ed to steal
out of our treasurye diverse of these instruments, which nevertheless were
after recovered again. And to the intent ye may know of what form and
tenor the said instruments be, here is inserted the effect in word and
sentence as they be made, which we do, to mete with the cauellacion and
contrived evasion of the Scotts, allegyng the homage to have been made for the
Erledome of Hu^tyngto^, which is as true as the allegatio^ of him that is burnt
in the hand, to say he was cut with a sikle. And therefore the tenor of the
homage is this.

I Ihon.N. king of Scotts shall be true and faithful unto you lord Edward by
the grace of god king of England, the noble and superior lord of the kingdom
of Scotland, and unto you I make my fidelity of the same kingdom of Scotland,
the which I hold, and claim to hold of you: and I shall bear to you my faith
and fidelity of life and lymme and worldly honor against all men, and
faithfully I shall knowledge, and shall do to you service due unto you of the
kingdom of Scotland a foresaied, as god so help and these holy euangelies.

Now for the third part touching records and registres, we have them so
formal, so autentiquall, so seriously handeled, and with such circumstaunces
declaryng the matiers, as they be and ought to be a great corroboracion of that
has been in stories written and reported in this matter. For a monges other
things we have the solemn act, and judicial process of our progenitour
Edward the first, in discussion of the title of Scotland, when the same was
challenged by twelve competitours: That is to say,

Forentius comes Holandie. Patricius de Du^bar comes de Merchia. Willielmus de
Vesty Willielmus de Ros. Robertus de Pinbeny. Nicholaus de Souls. Patritius
Galightly. Rogerus de Mundeville Ioannes de Common. D. Ioannes de Hastinges.
Ioannes de Balliolo. Robertus de Bruise. Er^ius rex Norvvegie.
And finally, after a great consultacion and mature deliberacion, with
dis^ussion of the allegations proponed on all parties, sentence was given for
the title of Balliol, according where unto he enjoyed the realm. But for
confirmacio^ of the duty of the homage before that time observed by the kings
of Scotts, it appears in those records, how when those competitours of the
Realm of Scotland repaired to our said progenitour, as to the chief lord
for discussion of the same, in as much as the a^^horitie of the judgment to
be given depended there upon: It was than ordered, that the whole parliament of
Scotland spiritual temporal and of all degrees assembled for that purpose,
and considering upon what ground and foundation the Kings of Scotland had in
times past made the said homages and recognition of superiority, the said
parliament ^yndyng the same good and true, should if they so demed it, yield and
give place, and by express consent recognize the same. At which parliament was
alleged unto them, as appears in the same records, not only these acts of
the princes before those days, and before rehearsed: but also besides the
testimonye of stories, the writings and letters of foreign princes, at that
time recityng and rehersyng the same: Whereupon thesaied parliament did there
agree to this our superiority, and ensuyng their determination did
particularly and severally make homage and fealty with Proclamation, that
whosoever withdrue him self from doing his duty therein, should be reputed
as a rebel: And so all made homage and fealty to our progenitour Edward the
first. This Realm was in the time of the discussion of the title ruled by
Gardians deputed by him, al castles and holds were surrendered to him as to
the superior lord in the time of vacation, benefises, offices, fees, promotio^s
passed in that time from the mere gift of our said progenitour, as in the
right of this croune of England, Shirifes named and appointed, writtes and
precepts made, obeyed, and executed: and finally all that we do now in the
Duchy of Lancaster, the same did our progenitour for the time of our
contencion for that title in the realm of Scotland, by the consent of an
agrument of all estates of the realm assembled and consulted with for that
purpose. At which time the bishopes of saint Andrews and Glascoo were not as
they now be arche byshopes, but recognized the archbishop of York, which
extended over all that country,

Now if the Scotts will take exception to the homage of there princes as made in
war and by force which is not true: what will they say or can they for shame
allege against there own parliament, not of some but of all confirmed and
testefied by there writings and seals? whereunto nothing enforced them, but
right and reason, being passed in peace and q^iet wit^out armoure or
compulsion. If they say they did it not, they speak like them selfs, If they
say they did it, then do they now like them self, to withdraw there duty, not
so much to be blamed, as to be amended.

Thus apereth unto you the beginning of the right of superiority, with a
perpetual continuance, without intermission within memory, certain omssi^on
and forbearyng upon the grounds and occasions before specified we deny not.
Whereby they have many times sought and taken there oportunities, to withdraw
the doing of there duty in knowledge of our superiority over them, which to
avoid, they have not cared what they said or alleged* though it were never s
untrue: lyeng always in a wait when they might annoy this Realm, not without
there own great danger, peril, and extreme detryment. But as they detracted
the doing of their duty, so god ever granted unto this realm force to
compel them thereunto within memory, notwithstanding any their interruptio^ by
resistaunce, which unto the time of our progenitor Henry the sixth never endured
so long as it made intermission within time of mind whereby they possession
might seem to be enpaired, from the time of Henry the sixte unto the seventh
year of our reign, our Realm has been for a season lacerate and torn by
diversity of titles till our time and sithence by war outwardly vexed and
troubled: The storye is so lalamentable for some part thereof, as were tedious
to rehearse,

Sythen the death of our progenitor, Henry the.vi. our Graundfather Edward
the.iiii. reigned, who after great traueyls to attain quietness in his Realm,
finally in the time of preparation of war against Scotland, dyed.

Richard the.iii. then usurped for a small time in years, whom the King our
father by the strength of Gods hand ouerthr^w in battayll, and most justly
attained the possession of this Realm, who nevertheless after the great
tempestious storms, finding all matters not yet brought to a perfect quiet
and rest, ceased and forbear to require of the Scotts to do their duty,
thinkyng it policy rather for that time to assay to tame their nature by the
pleasant conjunction and conuer^ation of affinity, then to charge them with
their fault, and require duty of them, when opportunity served not, by force
and fear to constrayne and compel them.

And thus passed over the reign of our father, without demand of this
homage* And being our reign now.xxxiiii. years, we were.xxi. year latted by
our Nephieu his minority, being then more careful how to bring him out of
danger, to the place of a king, then to receive of him homage when he had full
possession of the same. Wherefore being now passed since the last homage made
by the king of Scotts to our progenitor Henry the.vi.C.xxii. year, at which
time the homage was done at Wyndesore by James Stuard, then king of Scotts, as
before, lvi. of these years the crown of this Realm was in contencion, the
trouble whereof engendered also some business in the time of the king our
father, which was xxiiii. year: And in our time.xxi. year has passed in the
minority of our Nephieu. So as finally the Scotts resorting to their only
defense of discontinuance of possession, can only allege iustli but.xiii. year
of silence in the time of our reygne, being all the other times sythens the
homage done by James Steward, such as the silence in them had they ben never
so long, could not have engendered prejudice to the loss of any right, that may
yet be declared and proved due. For what can be imputed to King Edward for not
demaundyng homage being in strife for that estate, whereunto the homage was
due? What should Rychard the *iii. search for homage in Scotland* that had
neither right ne leisure to have homage done unto him in England? Who can
blame our father, knowing the Scotts nature, never to do their duty but for
fear, if he demanded not that of them, which they would exchue if they
might, being his Realm not clearly then purged from ill seed of sedicio^,
sparkled and scattered in the cruel civil wars before.

Law and reason serves, that the passing over of time not commodious y^ the
purpose, is not allegeable in prescriptio^ for the loss of any right. And the
minority of the king of Scotts has endured.xxi. years of our reign, which
being an impediment on their part, the whole prescription of the Scotts, if
the matter were prescriptible, is thus deduced evidently to.xiii. year,
which.xiii. year without excuse we have ceased and forborne to demand our
duty, like as the Scotts have likewise ^eassed to offer and tend the same.
For which cause nevertheless we do not enter this war, ne minded to
demand any such matter, now being rather desirous to rejoice and take
comfort in the friendship of our Nephieu, as our neyboure, then to move matter
unto him of displeasure, whereby to alienate such natural inclinacion of love,
as he should have toward us. But such be the works of God, superior over all,
to suffer occasions to be ministered, whereby due superiority may be known,
demanded and required, to the intent that according there unto all things
governed in due order here, we may to his pleasure pass over this life to his
honor and glory: which he grant us to do, in such rest, peace and
tranquillity, as shall be mete and convenient for us.

When the King had setfurth the Declaracion of the cause of his war as is above
mentioned. Then sent he forth the duke of Norffolke Li^utenaunt general,
acco^panyed with the Earls of Shrewisbury Da^by, Comberland, Surrey, Hertford,
Anguysh, Ru^land, and the Lords of the North parties, and sir Anthony Brown
Master of the Kings horse, sir Ihon Gage Comptroller of the Kings house,
and.xx. M. men well appointed, which entered Scotland the.xxi. day of October,
and tarried there, viii. days without battle, and brent the towns of Paxton,
Ramrige, Styne, Gradyn, Shylles Lang Ednem, Newton, Skytshell, Newthorne,
Smellem Spyttle, the two Merdens, Siederyke, and the two Broxlawes, Florys and
the Fair Crofte, Ednem Spyttle, Roxborough, Kelsey and the Abbey, Lang
Spronstow, Ryden, and Hadenston, And while the Duke was at Farneton in
Scotland the.iiii. day. there came to speak with him half a mile from the
Host, from the king of Scotts, the Bishop of Orkeney and James Leiremouth
Master of the household, to entreat peace, but they agreed not. And the Army
lay so long in Scotland^ as they might for hongre and cold without any
countynaunce of harm, and so for necessytie returned to Barwycke. And all this
journey the Standarde of the Earl of Hampton which dyed at New Castle, was
borne in the forward, because he was appointed Captain of the same.

The king of Scotts hearing that the Army was returned, raised an army of.xv.
thousand chosen men of all pa^tes of his Realm under the guydyng of the Lord
Maxwell Wardeyn of his west Marches, bosting to tarry as long in England as the
Duke did in Scotland. And so on fridai being s. Katheryns even, they passed
over the water of Eske and brent certain houses of the Greues on the very
border. Thomas bastard Dacres with Jack of Musgraue sent word to sir Thomas
wharton Wardein for the king on the west Marches, to come on to succor them:
but the said.ii. valiau^t Captayns, although the Scotts entered fiersly, yet
they manfully and coragiously set on them, with an, C. light horse, and left
a stale on the side of a hill, where withal the Scotts were wonderfully
dismaide, either thynkyng that the duke of Norffolke, had been come to the west
Marches, with his great army: or else they thought that some greater army came,
^he Uictorie a^ the Water of Esk^.
when they espied sir Thomas Wharton, coming with.iii.C. men only. But at
that time, so God ordained it to be, that they at the first bront fied, and
thenglishemen followed, and there were taken prisoners therles of Casselles, and
Glancarne, the lord Maxwell, Admiral and Wa^dein, the lord Flemmyng, the
lord Somerwell, the lord Oliphant, the lord Gray, sir Oliver Senclere, the
kings minio^, Ihon Rosse lord of Oragy, Robert Eskyn son to the lord Eskyn,
Carre Larde of Gredon, the Lord Maxwelles two brethren, Ihon Lesley Bastard
to the Earl of Rothus, and two hundred gentlemenne more, and above eight
hundred common people, in somuche that some one man, yea, and women had three
or four prisoners. They took also twenty and four gonnes, four carts with
spears, and ten pauilio^s. This was only the handstroke of God, for the
Cardinal of Scotland promised them heaven, for destruction of England.

The king of Scotts took a great thought, The death of the Scottishe King.
for this discomfiture, and also because that an English Herald called
Somerset was slain at Dunbarre, which things together he took so impatiently
that he died in a Frenesy. Although many reported that the king himself was at
this bickeryng, and there received his deaths wound, and fled therewith into
Scotland. But howsoever it was, true it is as is aforesaied he died, and the
Queen his wife was delivered of a daughter, on our lady Even before Christmas,
called Mary. Of the prisoners aforesaied twenty and four of the chief of
them, were brought up to the Tower of London, and there were two days. And
on Saint Thomas day the Apostle before Christmas, they were solemply
conueighed through London to Westminster, where the Kings counsel sat, and
there the Lord Chauncellor, declared to them their untruth, unkindness, and
false dissimulacion, declaryng farther how the king had cause of war against
them, both for the deniyng of their homages, and also for their traiterous
invasions without defiaunce, and also for keeping his subjects prisoners
without redemption, contrary to the old Laws of the Marches, for which
doings, God as they might perceive had skourged them: Howbeit the king more
regardyng his honor, then his princely power, was content to show to them
kyndenes, for unkindness, and right for wrong. And although he might have kept
them in strait prison, by just law of Arms, yet he was content that they
should have liberty, to be with the nobles of his Realm, in their houses.
And so according to their estates, they were appointed to Dukes, Earls,
Bishops, Knights, and other Gentlemen, which so entretaigned them, that
they confessed theimselfes, never to be better enterteigned, nor to have had
greater chere.

But after their new gladness, tidings came to them, of the death of their
King, which they sore lamented, and hearing that he had left an only
daughter his heir, they wisshed her in England, to be married to the Prince
the kings son. The King and his Counsel, perceiuyng the ouerture now to
be made, which way without war these two realms, might be brought into
one, sent for all the prisoners few lackyng, to his Manor of Ha^pton Court, on
saint Stephens day, where they were so well enterteigned, both of the king
and his nobles, that they said, they never saw king but him, and said that
God was better served here, then in their country: howbeit their Kirkmen
preached, that in England was neither Mass, nor any service of God. And they
promised the king, to do all that in them lay with their friends to perform
as much as he required. Whereupon not without great rewards, they departed
toward Scotland, on New years day, and by the way they saw the Prince,
and came to New Castle to the Duke of Suffolk, who upon hostages delivered
them, and so the^ entered Scotland and were well and gladly welcomed.

Likewise therle of Angus, which was banished Scotland, and had of the kings
Fee, yearly a thousand mark, and sir George Douglas his brother, had five
hundred mark. These were accepted into Scotland, and restored by the last
kings will, and therle of Angus and diverse of the Lords that were prisoners,
were made of the privy counsel of the realm, by the Earl of Arrein,
Governor of the young Queen, and the realm, as next heir apparaunt:
notwithstanding that the Archbishop of Saint Androwes and Cardinal, enemy
mortal to the King and realm of England, for the Bishop of Romes
authority (and partly set on by the French king, for the same cause) had
forged a will, that the king had made him Governor, associate with two Earls
of his affinity, both of the Realm, and of the young Queen, contrary to the
Laws of Scotland. Whereupon thesaied Earl of Arrain, according to his right,
with the help of his friends, took upon him the rule of Governor, and put
thesaied false Cardinal in prison, and delivered sir Robert Bows and other
prisoners, by their bands, according to the custom of the Marches. And so in
March next following, the Scotts began their Parliament.

All this year there was neither perfect peace, nor open war, between
England and France, but Ships were taken on both sides, and Merchantes
robbed. And at the last the Merchantes goods on both parties were seized,
and likewise the Ambassadors, of both Realms were stayed: howbeit shortly
after, the Ambassadors were delivered, but yet the Merchauntes were robbed, and
no war proclaimed.

In the end of this year, came from the Governor of Scotland as
Ambassadors, sir William Hambleton, James Leyremouthe, and the Secretory of
Scotland, whose message was so meanly liked, that they were fain to send an
Herald into Scotland, for other Ambassadors, and so hither came the earl of
Glancarn, and sir George Douglash and whatsoever their answer was, sir George
returned in Post, and within twenty days, came again with an honest answer,
but that honesty eudured a small time.

The.xxxv. year.
IN the beginning of this year on Trinity Sondaie, was a new League sworn,
between the King and the Emperor, at Hampton Court, to be friends to their
friends, and enemies to their enemies.

The third day of June came to the Court, from the Realm of Irelande, the
Lord Obryn, the Lord Macke Willyam Brough, the Lord Macke Gilpatricke. And
in July thesaied Obryn was created Earl of Townon, and Lord Macke Willyam, was
created Earl of Claurikard, and sir Dunon Obryn was made Baron of Ebranky, and
so with rewards they took their leave, and returned. Also the same Monethe,
the Scottishe Ambassadors returned with great rewards.

At this season the King and the Emperor, sent Garter and Toyson Kings at
Arms, to demand certain things of the French King, which if he did deny,
then to defy him, but he would not suffer them to come within his land, and
so they returned. Whereupon thesaied demaundes, were showed to the Ambassadoure
at Westminster. And in July the King sent over six thousand tall men,
whereof was Capitain general, sir Ihon Wallop, and sir Thomas Seymour
Marshall, and sir Richard Cromewell Capitain of the horse men, which
assaulted a Town called Laundersey, Laundersey
unto the which assault came the Emperor in proper person. And shortly
after came down the French King in proper person, with a great army, and
offered the Emperor battaill, by reason whereof the siege was raised, and
straight the French men victayled the Town, which was the only cause of
their coming. For the next day, the Emperor being ready, at the hour
appointed to give battaill, and the Frenchemenne made great show, as though
they would have come forward, but they dalied of all that Day, and in the
Night, they ran a way, and trusted some to their Horses, and some to their
legs like tall fellows.

In this Monethe were Indicted, arraigned and condemned at new Wynsore* four
men, Four perso^^ condemned.
that is to say, Anthony Person Priest, Robert Testwood a Syngyng manne
Henry Filmer a Tailor, and Ihon Marbeck a Syngyng manne. All these men were
at one time, as is aforesaied, arreigned and condemned of Heresy, by force of
the six Articles. The Heresies that they were condemned for, were these as
they are alleged in their Inditementes: First, that Anthony Person Antony
Person.
should Preach two year before he was arreigned, in a place called







Item, Henry Filmer Henry Filmer
the Taylour arraigned of this Article, that he should say. That the sacrament
of the Aultare, is nothing but a similitude and a Ceremony. And also, if God be
in the Sacrament of the aultare, I have eaten twenty Gods in my life.

Robert Testwoode Robert Testwood.
arreigned of this Article, that he should say in the time that the Priest
was liftyng up the Sacrament, what, will thou lift him up so high, what yet
higher, take heed, let him not fall.

Ihon Marbecke arreigned, Ihon Marbecke.
for that he had with his own hand, gathered out of diverse men's writings,
certain things that were expressly against both the Mass, and the Sacrament
of the Altar.

These four persons, were arraigned, condemned, and burned for the articles
above said, except Ihon Marbecke, whose honesty and innocence, purchased him
the Kings Pardon, the other three were burned at Wynsore aforsaied.

Beside these men, were a great number of Gentle men, as well of the Kings
privy Chamber, as other Indicted, by the procurement of one Doctor London,
Doctor London: Wyllyam Symons*
a Prebendary of Wynsore* and one Wyllyam Symones a Uaunt Parler: Which
Gentlemenne made suy^e to the Kings Majesty, declaryng in what case they
stood. Whereupon Doctor London was examined, and so was thesaied Symones,
which upon their Oath of allegeaunce, denied their Traiterous purposes, as
after it was proved to their faces. Wherefore they were adjudged as Perjured
persons, to wear Papers in Wynsore, and so they did, and were after committed
to the Flete, where thesaied Doctor London died. And here have I an occasion,
because of doctor Londons perjury, to tell you how he was also the occasyon
that another committed wylfull perjury. The matter was, that a certain robbery
was committed in Oxford in a College whereof the said Doctor London was Master,
and certain plate by one of the said College was taken away and brought to
London to sell, and it was sold to a Goldsmyth in London named Willyam
Calaway. Willyam Calaway.
This Goldsmyth had before bought much plate of the party (which now sold
the said stolen plate) being a man of credyte, and therefore suspected
nothing. But this matter was so followed, that the party that stole it was
taken, and so was diverse accessaryes. At the last, Doctor London knowing to
whom it was sold, and that the Goldsmyth was a man of the New Learning (as
they called him) swear a great oath that he would hang him or else it should
cost him five hundredth pound: whereupon he caused also the said Goldsmyth to
be attached as accessarye, and arreigned him at the Sessyons holden at Newgate
in London: where it was alleged that they ought not by the law to inquire of
the accessarye before the principal: and there for the dispatche of the said
Goldsmyth, it was alleged that the principal was hanged, which was nothing
so, for he was set at his lybertye and lives still. But to be short, the
Goldsmyth (which undoubtedly is a known, tried and proved honest man and ever
was of honest name and fame) was found gyltye, and no remedy but he must
declare what he could say why he should not dye according to the law: he
prayed to have his book: which was answered that he could not have it, for he
was Bigamus. And now comes the Perjury that I promised to tell you of: His
wife, which of all persons that knows her, is certainly known to be an
honest woman, and from her birth has ever ben of as much honesty as any
woman may be: And this woman had had two husbands before, which also were
honest men, and she had children by them, and therefore was it alleged against
this Goldsmyth that he was Bigamus: This good woman perceyuyng that her former
marriages should shorten her husbands days, came into the open Court before
the Judges and affyrmed by her oath contrary to the truth, that she was never
married to mo men then to the said Goldsmyth, although she had children by her
other husbands and continued diverse years with them, yet she swear she was
Whore to them both and not married. And so by defamyng of her self, to her
great praise, she delivered her innocent husband.

In this year was in London a great death of the Pestilence, and therefore
Myghelmas Term was adiourned to Saint Albons, and there was kept to the end.

In the weke of Christmas, came to the King to Hampton Court Ferdinando de
Gonzaga Ui^eroy of Cicile Prince of Malfeta Duke of Iuano, Captain general
of the chyualrye and Army of the Emperor Charles, which came to the King to
appoynte what time the Army and the Empero^r should be ready to invade
France, and the appointment taken he departed, and had for his reward a
C.liii. ounces in golden plate, and.iiii.M.iii. oz in gylte plate, which al was
very curiously wrought. And all the time that he lay here, he lay at the Kings
cost.

The sunday before Christmas was Lord Willyam Parre, brother to the Queen,
which had married the daughter and heir of Lord Henry Burchier Earl of Essex,
at Hampton Court, created Earl of Essex. And sir Willyam Parre Knight uncle to
them both, was made Lord Par of Horton and chaumberleyn to the Queen. And on
Newyeres day was Sir Thomas Wriothesley the Kings Secretary made Lord
Wriothesley of Tychefelde,

Also this year was open war proclaimed with France, and license given to the
Kings subjects to ieaze upon the Frenchemen and their goods as in like cases
before had been accustomed.

The.xxxvi. year
THIS YEAR the King sent a great army into Scotland by sea, and he made the
Earl of Hertfford Lieutenaunt General of the same. And the Uicount Lisle high
Admiral, which valiant Capitaynes so sped them, that the third day of May
the Lord Admiral arrived with all his Flcete which was two hundredth sail in
the Fryth, where he landed diverse of his men and there took diverse vessels
which after did high service. And shortly they approached unto the town of
Lyth where they landed their men, and marched forward in three great
batteyles, whereof my Lord Admyrall led the vawarde, the Earl of Shrewsbury the
arrerewarde, and the Noble Earl of Hertforde being Lieutenaunt, the battle:
Where they found the Scotts assembled to the nombre of sire thousand
horsemen beside footmen to stop the passage of the army. And at the first the
Scotts made toward the Englyshmen as though they would have set on the
vaward, but when they perceived the Englyshme^ so willing to encountre with
them, namely the Cardinal who was there present, which perceived the devotion
the Englyshmen had to see his holiness, after certain shot on both sides,
they made a sudden retreat, and leauyng their artillary behind them fled
toward Edenborough. The first man that fled was the Cardinal like a valiant
Champion, and with him the Governor, the Earl of Huntley, Murrey and Bothwell,
with many other great men of the Realm. And shortly after the Englishmen
mauger all the Scotts might do, entered the town of Lith where that night the
army encamped them, Lyth ta^en.
and there they found such richesse as they thought not to have found in any
town of Scotland,

The next day the Army went toward Edenborough town, and when they
approached nere, the provost of the town accompanied with one or two Burgesses,
and two or three officers at arms desired to speak with the kings
liuetenaunt, and in the name of all the town said, that the keys of the town
should be delivered unto his lordship condicionally, that they might go with
bag and baggage and the town to be saved from fire: Whereunto answer was made
by thesaid lord lieutenaun^e, that where as the Scotts had so manifestly
broken there promises confirmed by oaths and Seals and certefied by the whole
parliament as is euidetly known to the whole world, he was sent thither by
the kings highness to take vengeance of there detestable falsehed, to declare
and show the force of his highness sword to all such as should make any
resistance unto his graces power sent theither for that purpose: And therefore
he told them ^esolutely that unless they would yield up the town franckly
without condition, and cause man, woman and child, to issue in to the feldes,
submittyng them to his will and pleasure, he would put them to the sword and
there town to the fire. The provost answered that it were better for them to
stand to there defense. Whereupon commandment was given to thesaied provost
and officers at arms upon there peril to depart. And forth with the lord
li^utenaunt sent to the vaward that they should march toward the town
which courageously set forward, and the English gonners manfully set on the
gates, specially sir Christopher Morice, that they did beat the Skottes from
there ordinance, and so entered the gate called Cany gate by fine force, and
there slew a great nombre of the Skottes: And finally it was determined by
thesaied lord lieutenaunt utterly to ruinate and destroy thesaied town with
fire, which thing immediately was attempted, but because night was come, the
army withdrue to their camp, and the^ a fresh the next day set fire where
none was before, Edenbo^ugh brent.
which continued that day and two days after burning. And shortly after came
unto this Army by land four thousand light horsemen sent by the king, which
after they were come, the army forsook there Ships and sent them home laden
with spoil and goneshot which they found there, and dislodged their camp out
of the town of Lith, and set fire in every house, and brent it to the ground:
and so returned home by land, through all the mayn contry of Scotland burning
and destroiyng every pile, fortress and village that was in their walk, and
so with great honor to the great reioysyng as well of the kings majesty as of
all his faithful and ^uyng subjects they returned a gayn into England with the
loss ska^ of forty persons: and because their great exployt may be the
better inowen, here shall follow the names of the chief boroughes, castelles and
tounes brent and desolated by this royll army.

The borough and town of Ede^borough with the Abbey: alled holy toode house,
and the kings palace adioynyng to the same.

The Abbey of new botle: part of Muskleboroug^ town, with the ^happell of
our lady of Lawret.

Hadingto^ town with the Friars and Nonry. Lauresto^ with y^ grau^ge

The town of Lith brent, and the haven and pier destroyed.

The Castle and village of Cragmiller. Preston town and the Castle A Castle
of Oliver Sancklers, The town of Dumbarre.

Drilawe. Broughton. Dudistone. Beuerton. Markle. Hatherwike. Bowland.
Blackborne. Wester Crag. Chester Felles. Stanhouse. Trauent. Trapren. Belton..
Butterden. Raunto. Enderleigh the pile and town. Crawnend. The Ficket.
Shenstone. Kirkland hill. East Barnes. Quickwood. Bildy and the tower.
Also tounes and vilages brent upon the sea by the Englsh flete, which I cannot
name the half.
Kynkone. S. Minetes. The queen's Fery.
part of petynwaynes. The brent Isla^d, with many other whose names I could
not come by.

In this year also the kings majesty prepared two great armies to France,
the one was conducted and led by the duke of Norffolke and the gentle lord
Russell lord preuy seal, which encamped at Muttrell and beseged the town,
where they lay a long time, and left the town as they found yt: The other
army was led by the valiante duke of Suffolk which was the kings liuetenaunt
of that army, and being accu^panyed with the lord chambreleyn, the Earl of
Aro^ndell Marshall of the field, and Sir Ihon Gage comptrollor of the kings
house, and Sir Anthony Brown master of the kings horses, with diverse and
many other capitaynes: the ninetene day of July encamped before Bull leyn on the
Est side of the same upon the hill, Boleyn besege^
where after many sharp skyrmishes they gained first the oldman, and shortly
after basse Boleyn.

The fourtene ^ay of July the kings majesty in his royal person passed the
ses from Dover to Calis, and the six and twenty day encamped him self before
Bolleyn, on the north side with in less then half a (...) of the town, where
his grace remained till the town was surrender^ unto his majesty: the which
town he so sore assauted and so beseged with ^uche a boundaunce of great
ordinance that never was there a more ^aliau^ter assaute made, for beside the
undermining of the castle, tower and walls, the town was so beaten with
ordinance that there was no^ left one house whole therein: and so sore was
laid to the charge of the F^e^c^men that after the king had aslauted them by
the space of a monet^ they sent forth of the town to the king two of their
chie^ captains, called Mounsire Semblemound, and Mounsire de Haies, which
declared tha^he chief captain of the town with his retinew was contented to
delyu^^ the town unto his grace, so that they might pass with bag and
baggage, which request the kings majesty, mercifully granted them. And so
on the next day, the duke of Suffolk rode into Bullein, to whom in the kings
name, they delivered the keys of the town. And at after none departed out of
Bullein all the Frenchemen. The number of the men of war, that were strong
and galaunt, that came out of the town, were of horsemen.lxvii. of
footmen.xv.C.lxiii. of Gonners viii.C. of hurt men lxxxvii: of women and
children.xix.C.xxvii. So there was in all that came out of the town, four
thousand, four hundred fifty and four, beside a great number of aged,
sick and hurt persons, that was not able to go furthe of the town. The last
person that came furthe, was Monsire de Ueruine, graund capitain of the Town,
which when he approached nere the place, where the king stood, he alighted from
his horse, and came to the King. And after he had talked with him a space, the
king took him by the hand, and he reverently knelyng upon his knees, kissed his
hand, and afterward mounted upon his horse and so departed.

The.xviii. day, The Kings enteraunce (...) to Bullein.
the kings highness having the sword borne naked before him, by the Lord
Marquis Dorset, like a noble and valiant conqueror rode into Bullein, and all
the Trompetters standing on the walls of the toune^, sounded their Trompettes,
at the time of his enteryng, to the great comfort of all the kings true
subjects, the same beholding. And in the enteryng, there met him the duke of
Suffolk, and delivered unto him the keys of the town, and so he road toward
his lodgyng, which was prepared for him, on the South side of the town. And
within two days after, the king rode about all the town, within the walls,
and then commanded that our Lady Church of Bullein, should be defaced and
plucked down, where he appointed a Mount to be made, for the great force and
strength of the town.

When the king had set all things there in such order, as to his wisdom was
thought best, he returned, to the great reioysyng of all his loving subjects.

In the mean ceason, that the king lay before Bullein, and was like to have
conquered the same, as at the last he did, as before you have hard, the Emperor
took a peace with the French king, to the no little grefe and displeasure of
the Kings majesty, and that was the cause that the king so suddenly brake up
his army, as well at Bullein as also at Muttrell, and so he returned.

Shortly after, beside diverse and many sharp skirmishes, made by the
Frenchemen at Bullein as well by the Dolphin with a great power which in the
night season, stale upon Base Bullein, taking there a great sort of sick
persons, and women in their beds, whom without mercy they slew. Howbeit so
manfully the Englishmen, which escaped out of Base Bullein, behaved
theimselfes, gettyng weapons out of the high town, that they bet the
Frenchemen again out of the Base town, and after with the help of the high
town, they slew a great number of them, and so again possessed quietly,
thesaied Base Town: Beside I say this ski^mishe and many mo, Monsire de Bees
came with.xv.M. men, and encamped right against the Town, on the otherside of
the water, entendyng there to have builded a Forte. But the fourth day of
February, he was set upon in his own camp, by the most valiant and
fortunate Earl of Hertford, and Lord Lisle, the Lord Gray and other: at whose
coming thesaied Monsire de Bees, with all his puyssaunce fled, leauyng behind
them all their ordinance, Tents and plate.

The.xxxvii. year.
THe.vii. day of June, a great army of Frenchemen, came nere to the haven of
Bullem, and skirmished with thengl^shemen, to the no great gain of the
Frenchmen: but this army which was accounted to the number of.xx M. there
encamped, and began again to build a Fort, which before they departed,
accomplished the same.

In June the lord Lisle Admiral of England, with thenglishe flete entered
the mouth of the river of Sain, and came before New haven, where the great
army of France lay, which were CC. sail of ships and.xxvi. Galies of
force, whereof the Bishop of Rome had sent.xx. well furnished with men and
money, to aid the French king. Thenglishemen being but an.C.lx. sail, and
all great ships, did not determyne to set on the whole navy, but shot
certain pieces of ordinance at them, which caused the Galies to come abroad,
and shot at the Englishemen, which Galies had great advantage, by reason of
the calm wether: twice each part assauted other with ordinance, but suddenly
the wind rose so great, that the Galies could not endure the rage of the
seas: and thenglishemen were compelled to enter the main seas, for fear of
flattes, and so sailed unto Portesmouthe, where the King then lay, for he had
knowledge by his espialles, that the French army, intended to land in the esle
of Wight, wherefore he repaired to that cost, to se his realm defended.

After the departing of thenglishe navy, from New haven, the Admiral of
France, called the Lord Donibalt, a man of great experience, halsed up his
sails, and with his whole navy, came to the point of the Isle of Wight,
called. S. Helenes point, and there in good order cast their Ankers, and
sent.xvi. of his Galies daily, to the very haven of Portesmouthe. Thenglishe
navy liyng in the haven, made them pressed and set out toward the^, and still
the one shot at the other. But one day above all other, the whole navy of the
Englishmen made out, and purposed to set on the Frenchmen: but in their setting
forward, a goodly ship of England, called the Mary Rose, was by to much folly,
drouned in the midst of the haven, for she was laden with much ordinance,
and the ports left open, which were very low, and the great ordinance
vnbreched, so that when the ship should turn, the water entered, and suddenly
she sanke. In her was sir George Carewe knight, Capitain of thesaied ship,
and four hundred men, and much ordinance.

At the same time certain of the French men, landed in the Isle of Wight,
where their capitain was slain and many other, and were both to their great
loss and pain, driven again to their Galies.

The king perceiuyng the great navy of the Frenchmen to approach sent letters
for men into Hampshire, Somerset shire, Wilshire, and diverse other places
adioynyng: which repaired to his presence in great nombers, well furnished
with armure and victaill, and all things necessary, so that the Isle was
garnished, and all the frontiers on the Scacoast, furnished with men in great
number.

The French capitaines having knowledge, by certain Fisher men which they
took, that the king was present, and also of the great power that he had in
readiness, they disancted and sailed along the coasts of Sussex, and a small
number of them landed in Sussex, which never returned to their ships, for
they were taken up by the way.

When they had searched all the costs, and saw men ever ready to receive them,
they turned the stern, and returned home again, without any act worthy to be
written* done or enterprised: saving that in this mean time their new Forte
against Bullein, was strongly furnished and finished.

The number of the Frenchemen, as diverse prisoners that were taken in the isle
of Wight, and in Sussex did report, were.lx M. And at this time the French king
wrote to the Emperor, and declared to him, that his army had gotten the is^e
of Wight, the Ports of Hampto^ and Portesmouth, and diverse other places,
which writing was as true, as the French king has in all his leagues and
promises, been to the king of England.

In August following, the noble Earl of Hert^ord entered into Scotland,
with.xii.M. men, and destroyed all the tounes in the middle Marches, and passed
to the West Marches, to the great detriment and loss of Scotland, and
destroyed Coldyngham Abbey: and yet the Frenchmen and Scotts, which lay at
Kelsey, durst not once encountre with him.

In this month died Charles, the noble and valiant duke of Suffolk, The
death of Charles duke of Suffolk.
a hardy gentleman, and yet not so hardy, as almost of all estates and degrees
of men high and low, rich and poor, heartily beloved, and his death of them
much lamented, he was buried at Wynsore.

The.xxiiii. day of November, a Parliament began at Westminster, by
authority whereof, was granted to the king a Subsedy, of.ii.^. viii.^. of
the pound, of moveable goods, and.iiii.^. the pound in land, to be paid in
two year. And all Colleges, Chaunteries, and Hospitalles, were committed to the
kings order, during his life, to alter and tra^spose: which his grace at the
prorogacion of the Parliament, promised to do to the glory of God, and the
common proffite of the realm.

A little before this time, the noble and valiant lord Lis^e, lord Admiral
landed in Normandy, and brent the subbarbes of Tre^port, and diverse villages
along the sea coast, and destroyed and took almost all the ships in the
haven, which was a rich and a goodly pray, and so returned without any
damage.

The French king sore moved with these doings, sent Monsire de Bees
with.xii.M. men, which entered into thenglishe pale, beside Grauelyn, and
brent Mark and diverse small villages, and then returned.

Ever in manner were skirmishes and Alarmes. between high Bullein and the new
builded fortress, but the loss ran ever on the Frenchme^nes side

This winter was means made by thempetor, that certain Ambassadors, of
England and France might mete, to common of a peace, whereupon the king of
England sent to Guisnes, Curbert bishop of Duresme sir William Paget his
secretory, and doctor Tregonell. And the French king sent to Arde a bishop,
the chief President of Roan, and a Notarie, but no conclusion came to effect.
Wherefore the King having perfect knowledge, how the Frenchemen intended, to
build a new fortress on. S. Ihones rode, between Bullein and Calice: which
thing had not only sore distrussed Calice, but daily had put Bullein in
trouble. Wherefore he meaning to prevent so great a mischief, sent over the
noble Earl of Hertford, and the valiant lord Li^^e Admiral, and many valiant
capitaines, with.vii.M. good soldiers, which gate the rode but two days
before the Frenchemen appointed to have been there, and in that place enca^ped
themselves. Monsire de Bees leader and conducter, of all the French affairs,
enca^ped himself beside Hardelow, and durst not once come forth to set on our
men, notwithstanding his former preparacion and device.

These things thus hangyng, many great skirmishes were daily between the
Bullenois, and the French Bastilion: and one day the one part lost, and the
other gained, and likewise the losers regained: but in one skirmishe were
lost.xvi. English gentlemen, and.lxxx. other, although there were slain three
rascal Frenchemen, and in this skirmishe was slain, sir George Pollard. And in
a like journey was slain sir Raufe Elderkare, Capitain of the light horsemen,
with a few other Englishemen, but yet a great multitude of Frenchemen, at
that time lay on the ground.

The.xxiiii. day of December, the kings majesty came into the parliament
house, to give his royal assent, to such acts as there had passed, where was
made unto him by the Speaker, an eloquent oracion, to the which it has ever
been accustomed, that the lord Chau^cellor made answer, but at this time it
was the kings pleasure, that it should be otherwise, for the king himself
made him answer, as follows word for word, as nere as I was able to
report it.

Although my Chauncellor for the time being, King Henry the (...) answer to
the speaker of the Parliament.
has before this time used, very eloquently and substancially, to make answer
to such oracions, as has been set forth in this high court of Parliament,
yet is he not so able to open and set furthe my mind and meaning, and the
secrets of my heart, in so plain and ample manner, as I my self am and can do:
wherefore I taking upon me, to answer your eloquent oracion master Speaker,
say, that where you, in the name of our well-beloved commons has both praised
and extolled me, for the notable qualities, that you have conceived to be in
me, I most heartily thank you al, that you have put me in remembrance of my
duty, which is to endeavor my self to obtein and get such excellent
qualities, and necessary virtues, as a Prince or governor, should or ought to
have, of which gifts I recognize my self, both bare and barrein: but of
such small qualities, as God has endued me withal, I render to his goodness
my most humble thanks, entendyng with all my wit and diligence, to get and
acquire to me such notable virtues, and princely qualities, as you have
alleged to be incorporate in my person: These thanks for your loving
admonicion and good counsel first remembered, I eftsoon thank you again,
because that you considering our great charges (not for our pleasure, but for
your defense, not for our gain, but to our great cost) which we have lately
sustained, as well in defense of our and your enemies, as for the conquest of
that fortress, which was to this realm, most displeasaunt and noisome, and
shall be by Gods grace hereafter, to our nation most proffitable and
pleasant, have freely of your own minds, granted to us a certain subsedy,
here in an act specified, which verily we take in good part, regardyng more
your kyndnes, then the proffite thereof, as he that sets more by your loving
hearts, then by your substance Beside this hearty kyndnes, I cannot a little
rejoice when I consider, the perfect trust and sure confidence, which you have
put in me, as men having undoubted hope, and unfeigned belefe in my good
doings, and just procedynges for you, without my desire or request, have
committed to mine order and disposicion all Chauntreyes, Colleges, Hospitalles,
and other places specefied in a certain act, firmly trustyng that I will order
them to the glory of God, and the proffite of the common wealth. Surely if I
contrary to your expectacion, should suffer the ministers of the Church to
decaie, or learning (which is so great a iuell) to be minished, or poor and
miserable people, to be vnrelieued, you might say that Ibeyng put in so
special a trust, as I am in this case, were no trusty friend to you, nor
charitable man to mine even christian, neither a lover of the public wealth,
nor yet one that feared God, to whom account must be rendered of all our
doings. Doubt not I pray you, but your expectacion shall be served, more Godly
and goodly then you will wish or desire, as hereafter you shall plainly
perceive.

Now, sithence I find such kyndenes, on your part toward me, I can not chose,
but love and favor you* affirmyng that no prince in the world, more favors
his subjects, then I do you, nor no subjects or commo^s more love and obaye,
their sovereign lord, then I perceive you do me, for whose defense my
treasure shall not be hidden, nor if necessity require my person shall not
be vnaduentured: yet although I with you, and you with me, be in this perfect
love and concord, this friendly amity can not continue, except both you my
lords temporal, and you my lords spiritual, and you my loving subjects,
study and take pain to amend one thing, which surely is amiss, and far out
of order, to the which I most heartily require you, which is, that charity
and concord is not amongst amongst you, but discord and dissencio^, bears
rule in every place. S. Paul says to the Corinthians, in the.xiii. Chapter,
Charity is gentle Charity is not envious, Charity is not proud, and so
forth in thesaid Chapter: Behold then what love and Charity is amongst you,
when the one calls the other, Heretic and Anabaptist, and he calls him
again Papist, Ypocrite, and Pharisey. Be these tokens of charity emo^gest you?
Are these the signs of fraternall love between you? No, no, I assure you, that
this lack of Charity amongst your selfs, will be the hynderaunce and
asswagyng, of the fervent love between us, as I said before, except this wound
be salued, and clearly made whole. I must needs judge the fault and occasion of
this discord, to be partly by negligence, of you the fathers and preachers of
the spirituality. For if I know a man which lives in adultery, I must judge
him a lecherous and a carnal person: If I se a man boast and bragg himself, I
cannot but deem him a proud manne. I se and here daily that you of the Clergy
preach one against another, teach one contrary to another inueigh one against
another, without Charity or discrecio^. Some to be stiff in their old
Mumpsimus, other be to busy and curious, in their new Sumpsimus. Thus all men
almost be in variety and discord, and few or none preach truly and
sincerely the word of God, according as they ought to do. Shall I now judge
you charitable persons doing this? No, no, I cannot so do: alas how can the
poor souls live in concord, when you preachers sow emonges them in your
sermons, debate and discord? Of you they look for light, and you bring them to
darckenes. Amend these crimes I exhort you, and set forth Gods word, both
by true preaching, and good example geuyng, or else I whom God has appointed
his Uicare, and high minister here, will se these divisions extinct, and these
enormities corrected, according to my very duty, or else I am an unprofitable
servant, and untrue officer.

Although as I say, the spiritual men be in some fault, that charity is not
kept amongst you, yet you of the temporaltie, be not clean and unspotted of
malice and envy, for you rail on Bishops, speak slau^derously of Priests,
and rebuke and taunte Preachers, both contrary to good order, and Christian
f^aternitie. If you know surely that a bishop or preacher, erreth or teaches
perverse doctrine, come and declare it to some of our Counsel or to us, to
whom is committed by God the high authority to reform and order such causes
and behauiours: and be not Judges your selfs, of your own fantastical
opinions, and vain exposicions, for in such high causes ye may lightly err.
And although you be permitted to read holy scripture, and to have the word of
God in your mother toungue, you must understand that it is licensed you so to
do, only to inform your own conscience, and to instruct your children and
famely, and not to dispute and make scripture, a railyng and a tauntyng stock,
against Priests and Preachers (as many light persons do.) I am very sorry to
know and here, how irreverently that most precious iuell the word of God is
disputed, rimed, song, and iangeled in every Al^house and Tavern, contrary to
the true meaning and doctrine of the same. And yet I am even as much sorry, that
the readers of the same, follow it in dooyng so faintly and coldly: for of this
I am sure, that Charity was never so faint amongst you, and verteous and
Godly living was never less used, nor God himself amongst Christians, was
never less reverenced, honored, or served. Therefore as I said before, be in
Charity one with another, like brother and brother, love dread and serve God
(to the which I as your supreme hedde, and sovereign lord, exhort and require
you) and then I doubt not, but that love and league, that I spoke of in the
beginning shall never be dissolved or broken between us. And to the making of
laws, which be now made and concluded, I exhort you the makers, to be as
diligent in puttyng them in execucio^, as you were in making and furtheryng
the same, or else your labor shall be in vain, and your common wealth nothing
releued. Now to your peticion, concerning our royal assent, to be given to
such acts as has passed both the houses. They shall be read openly, that ye
may here them.

Then were they openly read, and to many his grace assented, and diverse he
assented not unto. This the kings Oracion was to his subjects there present
such comfort, that the like joy could not be unto them in this world. And
thus the acts read, as the manner is, and his assen^ given his grace rose and
departed.

In this time, there was by the Frenchemen, a voyage made toward the Isle of
Bra^^le, with a ship called the Barcke Age^, Barcke Age^,
which they had taken from the Edglishemen before. And in their way, they
fortuned to mete suddenly with a little Craer, of whom was Master one Goldyng,
which Goldyng was a feate and hardy man. The Barcke perceiuyng this small
Craer to be an Englisheman, shot at him and bouged him, wherefore the Craer
drew straight to the great ship, and six or seven of the men lept into the
Bark. The Frenchemen lookyng over the boorde at the sinkyng of the Craer,
nothing mistrustyng any thing, that might be done by the Englishemen. And so it
fortuned that those Englishmen, which climed into the ship, found in the end
thereof, a great number of lime pottes, which they with water quenched, or
rather* as the nature thereof is, set them a fire, and threw them at the
Frenchemen that were aborde, and so blinded them, that those few Englishemen
that entered the Ship, vanquished all that were therein, and drive them under
hatches, and brought the Barcke clearly away again into England.

The.xxxviii. year.
IN the month of April, A peace co^cl^dede between England and France.
by means of diverse Princes, an assemble was had, between both the realms,
of England and France* at Guysnes and Arde. There were for the King of
England, the Earl of Hertford, the Lord Lisle Admiral, Sir Willyam Paget
Secretary, and Doctor Wotton Dean of Cauntorbury. And for the French King, the
Lord Clado Don^ball Admiral, and Marshall of France: the Bishop of Eureux,
a president and a Secretary. After long debatyng, and diverse breches, a peace
was concluded, and proclaimed in the kings Court, and in the city of London
on Whitsondaie, with sound of Trompettes. And likewise was it dooen at Paris
and Roan. For the performaunce whereof, the Uiscount Lis^e Admiral, with the
Bishop of Duresme, and diverse lords, and above an hundred gentlemen, all in
Ueluet coats, and cheynes of gold, went to Paris, and were there solemply
received and feasted, and shortly returned.

After whose return, the Admiral of France, accompaignied with the Bishop
of Eureux, the Earls of Naunteuile, and Uilliers, and diverse great Lords,
beside two hundred Gentlemen well appointed, took his Galey at Deep, and
having in his compaignie twelve fair Galies, well trimmed and decked, sailed
into England, and never took land, til he came to Grenewiche, where he was
received by the Earls of Essex, and Darby, the.xix. day of August. And the
next day, he with all his Galies, landed at the Tower Wharfe, and on all the
banks by the water side, lay pieces of ordinance which shot of, but
especially the tower of London, where was shot a terrible peale of ordinance.
And from thence he rode through London, in great triumph, the Mayor and the
crafts standing in the streets in good order, to the Bishops Palaice of
London, where he lodged till Bartholomew even, on which day he was conueighed
toward Hampton Court, where in the way the prince having with him the
Archebishoppe of York, the Earls of Hertforde, and Huntyngdon, and above two
thousand horse, met him and enbraced him, in such lowly and honorable
manner, that all the beholders greatly reioysed, and much marueiled at his wit
and audacitie, and so he came to the Court, geuyng the Prince the upper hand
as he road. And at the utter gate of the Court, the Lord Chauncellor, and
all the Kings counsel received him, and brought him to his lodgyng.

On Bartholomew day, the King richely appareled, welcomed him, and in great
triu^phe went to the Chapel, where the league was sworn and signed To tell you
of the costly banquet houses, that were buylt, and of the great banquettes, the
costly Maskes, the liberal huntynges that were showed to him, you would much
marvel, and skant believe. But of Fridaie following, he being rewarded with a
Cupborde of plate, to the valor of twelve hundred pound, returned to London,
and on So^daie took his Galies and departed. Beside this diverse of his
compainie, had much plate, and many horses, and Greyhoundes given them. Also
the Admiral had given to him, of the city of London, two Flagons gilte, and
two parcel gilte, to the sum of an hundred and six and thirty pound,
beside Wine, Wax, and Torches: and thus they laden with more riches then they
brought, returned into France.

Although this peace pleased, both the English and the French nations, yet
surely both mistrusted, the continuance of the same, considering the old
Proverb, that the iye sees, the heart rueth, for the French men still longed
for Bullein, and the Englishemen minded not to give it over: in so much as
during the Admiralles of France being in England, the capitain of the new
Fortress, began to make a Pile, even at the very haven mouth of Bullein: but
the Lord Gray capitain there, put away the work men, and took away their
tools, and filled the trenches, to the Frenchemennes great displeasure. And
after the French king caused upon a great pain, that all the Trenches and new
inuencions, should be cast down, and filled by his own people, least he
should seem to be the breaker of the peace.

In this year was arreigned, condemned and burned, for affirmyng opinions,
contrary to the six Articles, four persons, that is to say, Anne Askew
Gentlewoman, (...)
Ihon Lacelles a gentleman, Nicholas Otterden Priest, and Ihon Adlam a Tailor:
all these were burned in Smithfelde, the.xvi. day of July: and because the
whole process of their matters, is by diverse writers set furthe, therefore
I pass it over. In January were attainted of high treason, Thomas duke of
Norffolke, (...)
and Henry his son earl of Surrey which Earl was behedded at the Tower Hill.

Now approached to this noble King, that which is by God decreed, and appointed
to all men, for at this ceason in the monethe of January, he yielded his
spirit to almighty God, and departed this world and lies buried at Wynsore.
(...)
And the last day of January was his true, lawful and only son Prince
Edward, Proclaimed King, of al his fathers dominions, and the.xix. day of
February, (...)
was crouned and anointed King of this realm, whom Jesus preserve, long to
reign over us.

FINIS
God save the King.





LONDINI IN OFFICINA RICHARDI GRAFTONITYPIS IMPRESS.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM. Anno. M.D.XLVIII.


