MORTALITIES MEDITATION: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF SIN.

With a Definition and plain setting forth of Man's three chiefest and greatest
Enemies; to wit, the WORLD, the FLESH, and the DEVIL.

Written by WILLIAM HALL.

Gutta cadent lapides, non vi sed saepe cadendo:
Sic homo fit Doctus, non vi sed saepe studendo.
In English thus:

By often falling, not by force do rain the stones make soft,
So Man's made learned not by force, but its by studying often.
Nemo sine Crimine viuit.
Imprinted at London, by Aug. Mathewes, for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold
at his Shop in Paternoster Row, at the Sign of the Talbot. 1624

TO THAT COURTEOUS GENTLEMAN, AND MY much respected Friend M. JOHN LOW,
Junior, Esquire; WILLIAM HALL humbly dedicates the Buds and Blossoms of these
is first Fruits, wishing all Honor during this Life, and after Death Life
eternal.
I Have presumed to Dedicate this Book
To you; on which if you will vouchsafe to look,
And if you please kindly to accept it,
And from all slanderous tongues to protect it;
Then at your feet I prostrate my Burden,
If you accept it I have my guerdon:
In loves unlimited and lawles Band,
I unto you so far obliged stand,
That if I should the Age of Nestor live, Tres centos fertur vixisse amos.

I satisfaction to you should not give,
For undeserved kindnesses receiving,
Which makes me thankful whilst I Have life and breathing:
For trusty friends are scarce to be gotten,
Hard to be kept, but nere to be forgotten:
Amities chief breach is Ingratitude;
But unto that I Will not be servitude;
And in requital of the love I owe,
My weak Invention on you I Will bestow:
Some litterate Pamphlet better you befits;
Then the Invention of my shallow wits.
Yet kind Sir read them, although rude they be,
Judge with judicious eyes and you shall see
My untuned verse; but yet my Muse is free,
And so unto the end she means to be:
I Will not insinuate, flatter, lie nor feign,
My wit in Paper ca'nt your worth explain;
Still strive with virtue for to be superior,
Deiect and throw down vice as your Inferior:
Go on in Virtue as you have begun;
That godly Race unto the end outrun,
Then shall you be beloved of all good Men;
Here stays my Muse, and here shall rest my Pen.
Your Worships to command in what he may. WILLIAM HALL.

To the Courteous and discourteous Readers.
REaders, read judge, and then say what you will,
All Is one to me whether it be good or ill:
If you speak well, for that I am your Debtor,
And i^ this be not well, I would 'twere better:
But if you speak ill of it, all is one,
To cry you mercy, I Will never make my moan,
For ill men's tongues they say no slanders are,
Therefore say what you will and do not spare.
I must confess my Muse is young and tender,
And this is all he scuse that I can render,
This is the first time she did ever write;
Therefore with currish words do not her bite.
Lest in her budding you do spoil her growth,
If that you should do so I should be loath:
Give her no ill words with good words her nourish,
That she in time may grow, and bud, and flourish.
Yours, as you are his: WILL: HALL.

THE AVTHOR TO HIS BOOK.
NOw Farewell Book, travel the Word so wide,
Having no Tutor, Truths thy only guide:
From envious tongues Truth will still defend thee,
To good and bad men's Judgments I commend thee.
Mortalities Meditation, or a Description of Sin.
1
I That as yet nere tasted one poor drop,
Of the Castalian Liquor; nor as yet
Did ere mine eyes behold Pernassus top:
How should my understanding then beget,
Nay, or begin and frame my Pen to write,
Since I my self knows not how to indite.
2
Your help, Oh sacred Muses, I must crave,
But not the blotting of Apolloes P^n,
By any means I must, nor will not have,
But simply of mine own invention then;
And industry some simple work I Will make,
Since I have gone thus far to undertake.
3
Cicero I want thy learned eloquence,
And Mars thy stout and valiantnes of heart;
And likewise Sol thy shining influence,
To accommodate me and to take my part.
Against envious tongues that seek to shame me,
And belying me oft-times do defame me.
4
My Ink congeales, unwilling to fulfill,
My Hand unsteady, Palsie-like does shake:
My Memory is dull, and I want skill,
For to set forth that which my Mind should speak:
Obliuiousnesse does so my Brains possess,
That what I should, I forget to express.
5
Of Tilts and Triumphs my Muse shall not sing,
Ne wars nor wonders wrought within the air
Nor how Tamberlaine did Bajazet bring,
Conquered by him in the Turkish war:
And carried by him in ^n Iron Cage,
To be a Spectacle unto that Age.
6
Nor yet of ancient Stories will I write;
Nor travelers that go beyond the Cope,
As did Parismus, Huon and the like)
Nor such as sacrifice unto the Pope:
Hel-hounds they are that deny their Maker,
The Devils friends, but the Lords forsaker.
7
But of a meaner Subject will I treat,
That which I know is true I will reveal;
And all the Follies of my Youth repeat:
There Is nothing hidden that I will conceal:
And rip the target of my troubled heart,
Which long have caused my wounded soul to smart.
8
And having then laid open to your sight,
A Map of all my foul enormious Crimes,
Committed both by day and eke by night
In all places, all seasons, at all times:
Now I Will begin my doleful Song to sing,
And hope the same to good effect to bring.
9
But if I fail, I pray spare not to judge,
But pass your censures on me how you will;
I care not though you owe to me a grudge,
Speak what you will I care not good or ill:
Now once again my song I will begin,
No Song of Songs: but it is a Song of Sin.
10
For since the time that I was first conceived
Within the womb and entrails of my Mother;
Before I was into the world received
Sin was my Father, Sister, and my Brother:
Being borne in sin, in sin I lived still,
And unto pleasure only gave my will.
11
Who urged and pricked me always to go forward,
And follow still the same I had begun;
Saying, I was a goodly Child and toward;
But yet this pleasure I did seek to shun:
Who luld and rockt my senses fast asleep,
Which since has caused me many times to weep:
12
To see that pleasure overcame me so,
For I no Reason had it to withstand:
But when I saw it was my deadly foe,
I would no longer live at her Command:
But threw her slavish yoke from off my neck,
And then began my follies for to check.
13
Which long time had b^reft me of my sight,
That I at no time any good could see;
It kept me under in most slavish spite,
Until the Lord was merciful to me,
Opening my eyes to me the way did show,
That I must walk the Gospel for to know.
14
Then I began the English tongue to learn,
My vowels and my Letters for to spell;
And in mine years I somewhat could discern,
How Latin writers English do excel:
Who can compare with Horace, Virgil, and
Homer, which has all under his command.
15
In which mine years I many sins committed,
Through ignorance against my Sovereign Lord,
All those I hope through Christ are clean remitted,
As also those were done by my accord:
As I to knowledge afterward increased,
Sinning I sinned, from sinning I nere ceased.
16
But still prouokt the Lord of Hosts to ire,
And had no care his Statutes to obey;
The Stipend due for sinners is hell fire,
And those that from their Maker run astray,
Let them be sure to feel his scourging Rod,
He is a just, a wise, and loving God.
17
Ezeck. 27.18 21.
The death of Sinners he does not desire,
But that they would return and follow grace;
It Is true repentance that he does require,
That they may see his glory face to face:
And praise his glorious name with one accord,
Reu. 19.3.
With singing Halleluiah to the Lord.
18
My Infancy and Childhood being past,
My Youth and Manhood posting on with speed,
Non videbo id Manticae quod intergo est.
Still I my faults and sins behind me cast:
And would not see them until utmost need
Compelled me from this wicked kind of life,
Where was continual wars and deadly strife.
19
Betwixt my Spirit always ready pressed
For Gods Service contrary to evil;
And my weak flesh continually oppressed,
Having conflicts with the World and Devil:
Being thus bagirt with foes on every side,
Unto thy mercy Seat I come to hide.
20
My senses are inueloped in sin,
The weight whereof into Hell would sink me,
When on the wicked life I have lived in,
And Hels torments I begin to think me:
Oh how I am perplexed with grief of mind,
My troubled Conscience can no comfort find.
21
With David now I am enforst to cry, Psalm. 22.6.

I am a worm of men the very scorn,
My help on thee O Lord does still rely,
And have done ever since that I was borne:
In time of old age off do me not cast;
Nor yet when strength does fail me at the last. Psalm. 71.1.

22
The Sabbaths which thou unto us do give,
Commanding us it holy for to keep, Exodus 31.13.14.

Given as a sign, or else we should not live
Amongst the flock of thy elected sheep:
Who so defiles thy Sabbaths sure shall dye,
Were not for mercy Lord, even so should I.
23
For I thy Sabbaths often have profaned,
And spent them vildly to thy abusing;
Against thy holy name I have exclaimed,
Under color of my faults excusing:
I went to Church Gods holy word to hear,
But was exempt from all Paternall fear.
24
The subtle Serpent, subtiller then the rest,
Of all the beasts which the Lord God did make,
He cunningly does creep into my breast,
And the good sown seed away does take:
Pleasures of Sin also choke many seeds,
Which nere sprung up pulled down by vicious weeds.
25
I looked for Sundays to no other end,
But take my pleasure in pastime and play,
In doing so I was not my own friend,
The aged Counsel I would not obey:
But ran at pleasure to drink and carouse,
In some by place, or in some tippling house.
26
I cared not where if that I liquor had,
For to content and please my fianticke Brain,
I cared not greatly where 'twere good or bad,
If so I were in a right roaring strain;
A roaring strain, yea that's the term we used,
Whereby Gods day and name was much abused,
27
Yet in this Sin I never was alone,
But had Copartners always less or more;
For them, and I, and all, I make great moan,
And pray that they, nor I do so no more:
Who so does use it, let him mark me well,
It Is both the Highway and the Gate to Hell.
28
This sin is odious in Iehouahs sight,
He does abhor the person and the Crime,
With th'instrumentall means that gave them light,
Also the place, the season and the time:
Yet some do seek this sin for to extenuate,
But yet it does the users life abreuiate.
29
Pro. 23.29.30.
Who has woe, babbling, sorrow, who has strife,
But those that follow wine and drink their fill?
Of wine that's mixed, ohtis a drunken life,
To spend their days so wicked and so vile:
Let them be sure God will strike home at last,
Though he forbear his anger is not past.
30
With true repentance Lord I come to thee,
And hearty sorrowing for my former sin;
In mercy Lord vouchsafe to look on me,
To lead a new life now I will begin:
Grant me thy grace I beseech thee therefore,
My idle ways I may hate and abhor.
31
Forgive me Lord the sins I have committed,
Against thee both in word, in deed, and thought,
Having done evil but the good omitted,
Which in thy sacred Scriptures thou have taught:
Godly repentance works to salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10.

Whereby we shall be freed from condemnation.
32
Forgive me Lord, for mercy now I call,
Blot out my sins, no more them think upon;
Before thy Mercy seat I prostrate fall,
And beg thee bury them in oblivion:
Mercy good Lord, mercy, I mercy crave,
Hoping through Christ that thou my soul wilt save.
33
Farewell all sinful pleasures of my youth,
Thrice farewell to the exercise I have used:
Which long has caused me to err from the truth,
Both God contemned and his Laws abused:
Farewell I say; thrice farewell and adue,
Too long God knows I have been led by you.
34
For twenty years and upward I have led,
A wicked life displeasing unto God;
On worldly vanities I have still fed,
For which I do do serve Gods scourging Rod:
Except his Mercy, his Justice overcome,
I must expect a dismal day of Doom.
35
My life was sinful Lord I do confess it,
Spare them O Lord that do their faults confess;
As it was sinful now I will redress it,
And from those errors ever will I cease,
Then mercy on me take, hear my complaint,
Of a vild Sinner make me a glorious Saint.
36
Being with sin poluted and defild,
Which cannot be cleansed without Christ his blood;
(In whose sight I a Sinner am most vild)
Which was shed for us all to do us good;
Yea for us all which in time do repent.
That we Gods future anger may prevent.
37
There is no bondage like to that of Sin,
Where neither Body nor yet mind is free,
To slavish servitude we are kept in,
When as our Souls bereft of liberty:
From that bondage good Lord deliver me,
That I may sing continual praise to thee.
38
My Soul from out of prison Lord then bring,
As David prayed in like wise do I,
Thy Song in a strange Land how can I sing,
Psalm. 137.4.
I would be set at freedom willingly;
Freedom each Creature gladly does require,
And to be free from sin is my desire.
39
Three enemies we have with all to fight,
Which do incite us evil to commit,
Yea they suggest us all ways day and night,
That the good which we should do we omit:
We commit nothing but that which is evil,
These three are, the World, the flesh and Devil.
40
The World inticeth us to pleasures vain,
That momentary things we more respect,
Then that which do belong Heaven to gain,
Those things we altogether do neglect:
We spend our time, or study and our wit,
To that which turns not to our benefit.
41
Our greatest care is how to gather wealth, The nature of most men.

To purchase Land, to rise unto promotion;
At no time we take care for our Souls health,
Nor to serve God with any good Devotion:
That which by us should chiefly be respected,
Continually by us is still neglected.
42
We strive for honor, follow after pleasure,
Paul's exhortation seldom we obey,
As for Decorum we keep little measure,
Our chief delight's in pride and going gay:
Having good clothes that we go neat and fine,
We take no care how many Bodies pine.
43
David describes how vain man does wast, Homo vanitate fimales factus est.
Psalm. 144.4.

And to a shadow he does him compare,
Which is no sooner seen but staight its past,
So frail, so fickle, and so weak we are:
We gather wealth which turns to our annoy, Psalm. 39.7.

But yet know not who shall it enjoy.
44
The Lillies of the field, Luke 12.27.
consider how
They get their living, for they never spin;
Nor once take pains their Bodies for to bow,
At no time they do any work begin:
Yet Solomon being a mighty King,
Such clothing as this was he could not bring.
45
Baruch 3.17.19.
What are become of those that hoord up Gold,
And of their gettings never make an end?
Still scraping wealth until it cannot be told,
But yet they know not who the same shall spend:
Vanished they are and gone down to the grave,
Others come up their riches for to have.
46
Who will it spend faster then 'twas gotten,
When as their means do come into their hand;
Those friends that it gave shall be forgotten,
To purchase parrell they will pawn their Land:
They Will sell their credit all what ere they have,
But they will have clothes to go neat and brave.
47
Eclesiast. 5.12.3.
The son of Syrach poynteth at the pride,
And vain excess of parell in our days:
Decking our selves much good time we let slide,
And spend it all to Iehouahs dispraise,
Pride will reign in some men do what they can,
Eccles. 10.7.
It Is a sin hated both of God and man.
48
Eccles. 11.4.
To boast in raiment is against God a fault,
Knowing we are but worm*s meat and dust;
Likewise in honor our selves to exalt,
Neither in strength we ought not put our trust:
Help us good tord in trouble and in pain,
Psalm. 60.11.
As for the help of man it is but vain.
49
1 Timothy 6.7.
The Apostle wills us for to be content,
And not for worldly wealth to care and crack,
It is enough if we have food and raiment,
What need we then for drossie pelf to rake?
Considering as we here this wealth did find,
We must depart and leave it all behind.
50
From the mean Caitiue to the mightiest King,
That ever breathed, or on the earth did reign:
Into this world nothing at first did bring, 1 Timothy 6.1.

And sure shall carry nothing forth again:
Except a Coffin and a winding sheet,
Tied with two knots, one at the head and feet
51
To many errors the world does us lead,
Which for to follow we are apt you see;
But in the path of Virtue we nere tread,
We run the Race when once the raine's let free,
Of lustful youth we swagger, lie and swear,
And with blasphemous oaths the Lord we tear.
52
We ought to tremble when Gods name we hear,
And not blaspheme him, nor against him spue:
Such Oaths that stink before him (I do fear,
I write no more then what is too to true:)
We still blaspheme him, and we forget how
At's name each knee in heaven and earth shall bow. Phil. 2.10.

53
For four causes God bestows on men,
Riches to use, as goods unto them lent,
They must leave all behind but knows not when,
And therefore care not how their time be spent:
Th'vnthrifty will spend all in Prodigality,
But the old Miser none in hospitality.
54
The first is for the honor of Gods name, Pro. 3.9.

And propagation of Gods holy word,
Still to continue and preserve the same,
That we may praise his name with one accord,
And that the splendent light of this clear Sun,
May always shine but yet be never done.
55
The second use for which our goods were given,
Is for to spend it for our Countries sake;
By our wealth others might be relieuen,
With it a freedom or releasment make:
We ought to spend our goods, our lives, our blood,
In any thing to do our Countries good.
56
The third use.
Is for the good of those by whom we live,
That are in need, necessity, and want;
To them part of our means we ought to give,
And to relieve them if their store be scant:
Pro 31.20.
Yea to strengthen with all our power,
And to refresh their bodies every hour.
57
The last is for the maintenance of those
Which are our servants, yea and for us all;
Yea for our selves we may think and suppose,
And for all others that on him do call:
Luke 16.3.
Opening his hand each living thing does fill,
With plenteousnesse according to his will.
58
1 Ioh. 2.25.
Saint John exhorts us from this worldly love,
Quisquis amat mundum, amor dei non est in illum.
And not to love it nor the things therein,
Yea, very plainly, he the same does prove,
That whatsoere is of the world is sin:
Then of this enemy we must beware,
That he at no time do our Souls ensnare.
59
How many Dives at this time have we,
Which do fare most deliciously each day;
In Purple and fine Linen we them see,
Being bravely clad in Robes and rich array:
Luke 16.19.
These Silke-wormes many Lazarus will starve.
Rather then with their scraps they will them serve.
60
The second Enimie's our fleshly Lust, Man's second enemy is himself.

And always fresh assaults with him we have,
Unto our selves therefore we must not trust,
But fly to Christ, i^^^ he our Soul must save:
Who conquered has the grave, yea death, and hell,
All our adversaries for to expel.
61
Each sense and member festered is with sin,
Yea and corrupted in Iehouas sight:
Such an infectious time we do live in,
And this sin serpent-like does us so bite,
Even as a scurfe does ore man's body spread,
So soul and bodies with sinn's pestered.
62
Our bodies to sin are so linckt and chained,
Every sense of Virtue is be reft.
And Vitiousnesse in us so long has Reigned,
So little goodness in us there is left,
Turning from God, we are Christ's sinful abiects,
But unto Satan very loving subjects.
63
From top to toe we are with sin Closd fast,
That in us there is no whole part nor sound,
Our breath infects the Air at each blast,
Our feet unworthy to tread on the ground:
Sin does Reign in us and about us Round,
Is naught but sinfullnesse for to be found.
64
Our head is the Receptakle of sins,
And first receiver of ungodly deeds,
Yea the head Fountain where all vice begines,
Upon man's body greedily it feeds:
And like the horse-leach still does cry give, give,
Seldom forsaking men whilst they do live.
65
Our memory with dullness is possessed,
Especially in hearing of thy word;
For that we seek not which should please thee best,
But follow vanity with one accord:
We quite forsake that which being understood,
At present time would prove our future good.
66
Our eyes spectators on iniquity,
The gate and entrance to the inward man;
Delight we take to gaze on vanity,
But seldom satisfied do what we can:
We greedily desire what we do see,
Longing to have it although ill it be.
67
Our eyes should be imployd to better use,
The sacred Scripture with them we should read;
But often we do neglect and still refuse,
The way that we a godly life might lead:
We run the way that is composd of evil,
Following which path we walk unto the Devil.
68
Our ears are open blasphemies to hear,
And all reuilings against Gods holy name,
And against his Christ which all our sins did bear,
To free us from that everlasting pain:
To us belongs both shame and confusion,
To which we are led by Satan's illusion.
69
Psalm. 58.45.
Like the deaf Adder we do stop our ears,
Yea deaf and dumb almost our selves we feign,
The Charmers voice we do refuse to hear,
Charm whilst he will his charming is in vain:
Though he charm wisely we don't it respect,
He and his charming both we do neglect.
70
To talk of Riches, of wealth and glory,
To hear of news of merriment and sport,
To pass our time in things transitory,
To this whole flocks of people will resort:
With great attention all will hearken to it,
Though it be ill actors enough to do it.
71
Our mouth the Chamber of ungodliness,
Our lips the Roof which does that hose cover;
Through which all emitable beastlines,
Proceeds forth which does our lives discover:
And shows the wicked life we have lived in,
Which to amend we never do begin.
72
Our teeth's a hedge fos that unruly member,
Which do we what we can it will break out;
To have a care of him we must remember,
For in vain he too fast will run about,
The tongue is a good member if well used, Lingua quid peius eadem.

But it is the worst we have if that abused.
73
That godly Prophet holy David says,
As with a bit he will his mouth keep fast; Psa. 39.123.

Look to his tnngue take heed unto his ways,
And speak not till the wicked ones be past:
Yea from good words he also did refrain,
Although to him it was both grief and pain.
74
Scurrility we always ought to fly,
And not with cursings once our mouths defile;
All beastly idle talk and blasphemy,
We from our mouths should utterly exile:
Paul does will us lying to put away, Ephesians. 4.2^

And each man to his neighbor truth to say.
75
Mat. 12.6.
Its written we a just account must give
Of every idle word that we do speak;
But yet alas how vainly do we live,
And never care how we Gods Statutes break:
Mat. 12.37.
For by our words we iustifide shall be,
Or else condemned to live in misery.
76
Pro. 10.11.
A righteous mouth is like a Well of life,
From the which many godly streams do flow;
A wicked mouth is always filled with strife,
Which naught but wrath and violence does show:
Knowing the best, the same we ought to choose,
And from the worst refrain and it refuse.
77
Every member of us that's within
With wickedness is so repleat and stuffed;
We are so soon tempted unto each sin,
And with security we be so puffed:
If we consider how we are oppressed,
We never should live quiet, nor at rest.
78
Sin is a foe external and internal,
Eternally hereafter it will shame
And bring us into the Lake infernal,
Which still do burn in continual flame:
Both souls and bodies shall be there tormented,
If in life time our sins be not repented.
79
Psalm. 51.6.
Truth thou requirest in the inward parts,
We should perform as much as in us lies;
Create in us both new and contrite hearts,
Such ones (O Lord) which thou will not despise
Grant we may be amongst the sheep elected,
And not amongst the Goats to be rejected.
80
Our hearts are harder then an Adamant, Zach. 7.12.

Gods Law nor word we at no time will hear,
So obdurate that we cannot recant
Our wicked life, nor of God stand in fear:
We nere obey but disobey him still,
And do provoke to wrath Gods holy will.
81
Yet God is just in all that has been done,
Unto us sinners every thing is right,
But we contemned have God and his son,
And wickedly have we done in his sight:
Yet Lord forgive us our sins we thee pray,
Thy heavy hand of Justice from us stay.
82
Our mind so elevated is with pride,
Our selfe-conceipt does puff us up on high,
Our equals and inferiors we deride,
Against our betters oft-times we inueigh:
What we affect to be good we approve,
Though it be hurtful, yet the same we love.
83
Modesty is a bridle to rain back Modesty and humility are two bridles for
Pride.

This swift wingd pride swifter then a swallow,
Our appetite to it we should keep slack;
For if we give way sure it will follow:
If that we let it run his full Careere,
Ore souls and bodies it will donineere.
84
What things we do we must of it esteem,
So that in it no pride at all we take;
Better then we are we ought not to deem Romans 12.3.

Our selves* but from all errors to awake:
He that thinks himself wise in's own conceit,
Does like a fool fill his heart with deceit.
85
Humility a curb to keep us in,
Much like a Snaffle, nay rather a Bit,
Which does withold us from that deadly sin,
Mat. 11.4.
And keep us that we do not it commit:
Who humbles himself like unto a Child.
Of Heavens Joys shall not be beguild.
86
Psa. 131.13.
Like weaned Children we should us behave,
Have no proud looks, nor yet no scornful mind;
If that we do intend our souls to save,
These misdemeanors we must cast behind:
Our smallest thoughts on it we must not spend,
On Elohim should all our hope depend.
87
The pleasures of the flesh are manifold,
Yea numberless they cannot be accounted;
Which causes all to sin both young and old,
Our sins the sands in number have surmounted:
In number more then the hairs of our head,
Such an impious Course of life we have led.
88
Now having thus described each several sense,
Throughout man's body in which sin does reign;
Which often is colored under good pretense,
Of godliness from which we do refrain:
We take no pains nor care the Lord to serve,
The least of's mercies we do not deserve.
89
We never thank God for what he has done,
Creating us after his Image right;
And redeeming us with Christ his dear Son,
To sanctify us with his holy Spirit:
By our works we expect Justification,
And after death we hope glorification.
90
My Muse to the last enemy is come,
With much ado the other two are past;
My scantling glass of time is almost run,
Time is soon gone, yet comes again as fast:
Lord I beseech thee guide my heart and hand,
This cunning Adversary to withstand.
91
Satan did tempt our Parents first of all, Our third enemy is the Devil. Genesis
3.4.

And the forbidden fruit caused them to eat:
Eating this fruit it brought's all into thrall,
Our misery no tongue can half repeat:
Deceiuer-like he said ye shall not dye,
To which they condiscended willingly.
92
And eat the fruit forbidden of the Lord,
He first unto the woman did it give,
She to her Husband, thus with one accord
Both sure of death though promised to live:
By his inticements he them both allured,
By which he their eternal woe procured.
93
Against the feebler Sex his Rage is shown,
The woman he did first of all attempt;
Thus his deceit was at the first made known,
Yet from seducing he would not exempt,
Nor free himself; but like an old deceiuer,
Of Soul and Bodies good he is a bereauer.
94
He Is always ready for to lay his baits
To catch all silly Souls and to ensnare
Them in his subtle and deceiving slights;
For to withstand him then we must prepare,
We cannot him resist do what we can;
Help us Lord, for vain is the help of Man.
95
The presumption of Satan.
Our Saviors presence he did not refrain,
With proffered show of worldly wealth and pleasure;
This worldly pleasure he did clean disdain,
Having Gods word far better then all treasure:
Mat. 4.10.
Satan did tempt, yea reattempt again,
And thrice deui'de before he would refrain.
96
In thousand shapes he will to us appear,
What we command him he will that fulfill;
Invisible, we ca'nt him see nor hear,
Yet soon will be obedient to our will:
Of our desire we shall not fail or miss,
On the condition that we will be his.
97
To any thing he will tempt us that is ill,
Each motion that is good he will from us put;
With idleness allure us he will still,
Our thoughts in ignorance he close will shut:
And blind us from the love of God the highest,
2 Ioh. 1.7.
He Is a Deceiuer and an Antichrist.
98
He often will insinuate into
Our heads, our thoughts, our hearts for to offend;
God, King, and Country, all for to undo,
In whose defense our dear blood we should spend:
Against our selves he our own selves will set,
For to destroy us if we have no let.
99
He will attempt us for to hang our selves,
Gal. 3.13.
Whereby Gods heavy wrath we do procure;
To die in such a case like desperate clues,
A curse denounced against all its sure:
Yea against all that do this sin commit,
Amen.
God grant we may have grace to witstand it.
100
Sometime he tempts us when we are asleep,
With false deluding and deceitfuil dreams;
To drench our selves in some vast Ocean deep,
And lose our lives in one of Neptunes streams:
God did it give, it is he that must it take, 1 Cor. 10.20

A Satan's sacrifice we must not make. If we destroy our bodies, we sacrifice
them to the Devil.

101
Of our own bodies or of any other,
If Satan do entice us for to murder;
Our dearest friends, our Sister, or our brother,
To do wicked deeds he will us further:
With hearty prayers we must it prevent,
Think not on future time, but on the event.
102
And what will follow after shedding blood,
Especially of those whom God does love:
That we nere had been borne it had been good, Mat. 26.24.

Then to provoke the holy one above:
And grieve his holy Spirit which did seal Ephe. 4.30.

Us to salvation if we have true zeal.
103
A murderer from the Original Ioh. 8 44.

Beelzebub is, the truth he does abhor;
Also of lies he is the principal,
And is to be of us abhord therefore,
Because that in the truth we should rejoice, 1 Cor. 13.6.

And laud the Lord both with our hearts and voice.
104
He can transform himself to any shape,
His cunning purposes for to obtain;
Unto the likeness of a Bear or Ape,
And then that likeness can again regaine:
And change himself perchance to some Creature,
He is of such a variable nature.
105
Like a Camelion quickly he can change
His dark and obscure form both clear and bright:
Throughout the spacious Orb he still does range,
2 Cor. 11.14. Ephesians. 2.2.
And turns himself to an Angels shape of light;
Prince of the Air he is called likewise,
Which works in those that do the Lord despise.
106
To malice, pride, and anger he will provoke
Us unto drunkenness and letcherie;
All Godly thoughts in us he sure will choke,
And stir us up to wrath and treachery:
To play the Prodigal and the unthrift,
To win our souls to him is all his drift.
107
Each bait for vice is hidden under pleasure,
Which greedily we follow and pursue;
And wickedness we work beyond measure,
We nere regard, nor think what will ensue:
So that of pleasure we may have our fill,
We do not care although our souls it spill.
108
Under the honest show of cleanliness,
Pride walks mask't yet all men may it see;
Old griping, carking raking covetousness,
Is called of every cloth good Husbandry,
In the superlatiue degree they swear,
As if the Devil should them rent and tear.
109
Iam. 5.12.
My brethren says Saint James swear not at all*
Nether by Heaven nor yet by the Earth,
Nor any Oath that may our souls inthrall,
When ever Mors does come to stop our breath,
Mat. 5.37.
Yea, yea, nay, nay, are the oaths we should call,
Least into condemnation we fall.
110
Thus Swearing is the Devils instrument,
On of the lowdst alarums he can found;
Likewise the Devil Pride did first invent,
The first Author of any sin that is found:
He Is the first founder of iniquity,
And the Original of all antiquity.
111
We must assault this seven headed beast, Reu. 12.3.

Having ten horns; yet not with dint of sword,
Ne Lance nor Spear (deceiving he will nere rest)
He must be conquered by Gods holy word:
A Christians Armor then we must put on,
And take a Christians courage us upon.
112
Our Loins with truth they must be girded well, Ephesians. 6.44.15 16.17.18.

Of Righteousness we must have the breast plate,
With preparation of the Gospel,
Our feet must be shod, eschewing all hate:
The shield of Faith, laying aside all evil,
To quench the fiery Darts of the Devil.
113
Also the Helmet of Salvation,
The spiritual sword the Word of God;
Still praying with Prayer and Suppplication,
That God would turn away his scoerging Rod,
And all our misdeeds utterly deface,
Blot out our sins they nere may come in place.
114
Neither in this world us for to accuse,
Nor in the world to come us to condemn;
The death of Christ will all our sins excuse,
And his Bowels bury all and some:
And being then from servile sin made free, Romans 6.18.

True servants of righteousness we might be.
115
This old deceiuer will us not yet leave,
So long as there is any spark of life;
In our bodies he will our Souls deceive,
Till death does cut it with his fatal knife:
Ofttimes in sickness he will some molest:
With terrors which are not to be expressed.
116
This is the Dragon which would us devour,
This is the Serpent which did Eve beguile;
This is the roaring Lion which each hour,
This he that seeks t'insnare us with his wile:
This is the father of falsehood and lies,
The worker of our woes and miseries.
117
Peter commands us to be vigilant,
This deadly Adversary to withstand;
Him to resist with force and to be valiant,
Our souls and bodies against him to band:
And reunite our forces altogether,
Yea to defy him still we must persevere.
118
If these ungodly sins we follow still,
And the inticers of them do obey;
And follow it: in Folio we shall fill
A Volume great compiled against that day,
In which one good deed done will profit more
Then thousands of Gold hoorded up in store.
119
And having served these Masters whilst we live,
Far worse then slaves by them we are kept under;
Yet unto them by no means we shall give,
One inch of leave; for they are nere asunder:
To work our bodies or our souls annoy,
They do incite themselves both to destroy.
120
Our worldly pleasures little will avail,
Our fleshly lusts will nothing help at all;
Our hoorded wealth will naught at all prevail,
When we are summoned by deaths fatal call:
Who uncertain yet certain will meet us,
And with, Sir I arrest you, it will greet us.
121
Like a bold Sergeant with his Mase in's fist,
Not to be danted, for death no man fears;
Who can resist him then, not he that list,
The rich man's threats, nor yet the widows tears:
He Is unrelenting for he never respects,
Rich, poor, fair, foul, he all to grave deiects.
122
He Is so impartial that he none will spare,
Both young and old, yea all death will surprise;
For fatherless nor Orphants he does care,
Weep whilst they will he nere regards their cries:
Death is the wages that is due for sin, Romans 6.13.

Which all our life time we have lived in.
123
Certain death will come, we must expect it,
The time and place God has from us concealed;
Is It fit for us therefore for to neglect it,
Because our day of death is not revealed:
We should think on it and premeditate,
Before it come and our selves consolate.
124
Against the time that death will us deprive,
Of all this worldly pleasure we enjoy;
It is in vain to withstand him or strive
Against him: for he soon can us destroy:
And change us as is Gods decree we must,
Be turned into ashes and to dust.
125
Death is the deprivation of Life,
Ordaind by God, imposd on man for sin;
Romans 5.12.
A punishment which ends all our strift,
Due unto us since Life did first begin:
And by the disobedience of one man,
Sin entered first, and death by him began.
126
To seize on all the time of Adams Kace,
Upon each Creature, there is not one that is free,
Or can escape, each one must it embrace,
Yea, all are subject to Mortality:
Be it Emperor, King, Potentate or Prince,
Death stands not with him for to dispense.
127
Two kinds of death the Scripture says there are,
The first whereof is called corporal;
Of which each Mothers Son must have a share;
The last and second is spiritual.
Ordained by God to be a punishment,
For all hard hardened hearts that don't repent.
128
Of corporal death each Creature must taste,
Birds, Fishes, Beasts, as well as mortal men;
Therefore before spiritual death it is past,
As it in order first proceeds when
Corporal death of life does us deprive,
Against which all humane creatures still do strive.
129
Betwixt Man's death and Beasts the difference
After they are of vital life bereauen,
The spirit of Man has his perfect essence,
With the immortal God that reigns in Heaven:
And though man's body be dissolved to dust,
At day of Judgment rise again we must.
130
And having finished death corporal,
Which is the deprivation of breath;
So that our souls may become immortal,
So that we need not fear the second death: Reu. 2.11

That through Christ who has bruiz'd the Serpents head,
Our souls may live although our Bodies dead.
131
Yet dead we are not, but in Christ we sleep,
Though in the ground our bodies buried be;
We hope th^ogh Christ that God our souls does keep
Who has redeemed us with his blood, and freed
Us from the bondage both of death and Hell,
That his elected might in glory dwell.
132
The death of a beast now is otherwise,
He being dead his body is resolved;
To the first maker his soul does arise
From the temperature, and is dissolved,
To nothing, which was nothing first of all,
There is the end of breath and life final.
133
Spiritual d^ath's the total separation,
Of Soul and body from the love of Christ;
And from that blessed Congregation,
Which do remain above with God the highest
Triumphantly rejoice and singing praise,
Lauding and bless Gods holy name always.
134
Who would not then spend well in this little time,
That is bestowed on us, and us lent;
We should have a care to commit no crime,
To serve the Lord our chief care should be bent;
In prime of youth we ought to think on death,
Seeing you know not when he will stop our breath.
135
Perhaps it may be at this present hour,
When least of all we think upon our end;
Man withers (says Job) as does a flower,
So does Man perish and come to an end:
Christ which our sins did bear this salve did give,
Pet. 11.24.
Being dead through sin, to righteousness to live.
136
Our youthful days of iollity and pleasure,
Those days we sacrifice unto the devil;
For Gods service seldom we find leisure,
Our lips is ^o composed of all evil,
That sin^e we do commit whilst we have power,
And nere desist from sinning day nor hour.
137
But to do evil still we do ensue,
Ephesians. 4.19.
All wickedness we work with greediness,
Each motion that is good we do eschew,
We give our minds unto lasciviousness,
With wanton pleasures we our selves deceive,
And nere leave sinning till sin does us leave.
138
Death in his nature fearful is and grim,
Christ by his death that fear has rane away,
And with his powerful death vanquished him,
That we to death triumphantly may say:
1 Cor. 15.55
Death where is thy sting? and likewise to the grave
No victory of us thou now can have.
139
Psalm. 90.10.
Moses describes our years threescore and ten,
But few do live to that, fewer to more;
So short then are the days of mortal men,
Not one to twenty lives to be four score:
That godly Moses to the Lord still prays,
Teach me (says he) for to number my days.
140
That holy David likewise does entreat Psalm. 39.4.

That he the number of his days might know;
Yea earnestly these words he does repeat,
As is apparent, wherein he does show:
To know his frailty he does it require,
Which was the total sum of his desire.
141
My days thou have made like unto a span, Psalm. 39.5.

Mine age is nothing in respect of thee;
We must return to dust do what we can,
Every one living is but vanity:
Like to a shadow time does pass away,
Without controulement, no man can him stay.
142
Each day our life does hasten to an end,
For we are nearer unto death this day,
Then yesterday, who can with time contend,
Nor bostingly no man ought thus to say,
I certain am to live till to morrow,
The smallest moment of time who can borrow.
143
Man is by Job compared unto grass, Job. 14.2.

Which now do flourish, yet cut down ere night:
Or to a shadow which apace does pass,
Swifter then Eagles hastening in their flight:
Death still pursues men wheresoere they go,
Friend to the Godly, but the wickeds foe.
144
Life is compared to things of short continuance,
To smoke, to flowers, which do vanish soon;
Unto things which are of no persistance,
And changes oftener then the changing Moon:
Unto a dream, or likewise unto stubble,
Which fire does burn, or to a water-bubble.
145
Seeing man's life is so uncertain then,
We need not wish long livers for to be,
Being certain death will come we know not when,
And longest livers greatest sinners be:
Although we live long, yet death comes at last,
And then amongst dead men we must be plast.
146
Psalm. 34.12.
What man is he that lists long to live,
Unto the utmost as Long as may be,
His mind to viciousness he must not give,
If that he do intend good days to see:
His heart uprightly he must keep the while,
His tongue and lips that they do speak no guile.
147
Our life's composed of naught but misery,
In Youth, in Manhood, and Decrepit age;
Nothing attends on these but vanity,
Which does the shortness of man's life presage,
Which is Compared to glass that is so brittle,
And flies faster then a weauers Shittle,
148
For in this life is naught but vexation,
Our minds and bodies are always troubled,
Repleat with sorrow and contemplation,
Christ's death these sorrows all has comforted,
And buried them in his dear precious blood,
Which is the salve that should do our souls good.
149
God grant it may, that we may reign in heaven,
And with Jehoua sing continual praise;
Of care and sorrows we shall be bere^aen,
If we take care to serve the Lord always:
Which for to do we must our selves endeavor,
From doing good we never must persevere.
150
For of well-doing we should not be weary,
As we have sown so we shall reap likewise; Gal. 6.8.^.

Yea in due time we shall reap and be merry,
If that we faint not, nor Gods laws despise:
We need not fear the fatal dint of death,
Come when it will it can but take our breath.
151
Our bodies for a while may be dissolved,
And turned to dust and earth from whence it was taken: Genesis 18.27.

Our souls shall live we are certainly resolved,
To reign with Christ with whom they did remain:
When we were in our Mothers womb conceived,
Before we were into the world received.
152
As our soul is the union of life,
So is ^he Spirit of God the soul of ours,
Which cannot be divided with deaths knife,
If God his Spirit into our souls once power:
In the Celestial heaven we shall reign,
And never feel the force of death again.
153
The thought of death in some will terror breed,
(And like Belshazzar make them trembling stand;)
At the rememberance of each thought and deed,
When all our enemies themselves do band
Against us; and the devil will employ,
His best indeauors our souls to destroy.
154
Death to the Godly is a welcome guest,
And such a one as they do long to see,
It being come their troubles shall have rest,
And they Gods glory face to face shall see:
Blessed are those that in the Lord do die, Reu. 14.^.

From their labors they rest eternally.
155
Certain uncertain death we must expect,
And at all times we must stand on our Guard,
No time nor moment we must once neglect,
Unto our selves we must have more regard:
That death at no time unprovided catch us,
And unexpected to the grave do snatch us.
156
In dying well, God does two things require,
Of every Christian man that he should save;
At these two things I greatly do admire,
To see that men no greater wisdom have:
But to neglect a thing of greatest: good,
In time to come if they it understood.
157
The first is on death to premeditate,
Come when it will we may be ready for it;
And not defer it till it be too late,
So that we need not fear it, nor abhor it:
To bid death welcome we should ready be,
And think it the ioyful'st day we ere shall see.
158
The second thing God does of us require,
At time of death well our selves to behave;
Whereby we may escape Hels burning fire,
And fly to Christ that he our souls may save:
This we should do, deaths vigor to prevent,
Against God does come and call us to judgment.
159
Whilst we are living yet we may relent,
And turn from us Gods wrath and indignation,
But being dead its too late to repent,
There is no sacrifice nor satisfaction:
For after death there is no change at all,
The tree does lie as is at first his fall.
160
And as men die they must to indgement rise, Qualis vitae finisita.

To answer for those sins they have committed;
Even as they dyed and no otherwise,
They can add naught, nor ought can be omitted:
To think on death each man sometime should spend,
If that he will make a sanctified end.
161
As death does leave them so God will them find,
And as he finds them so they judged shall be;
If to do well they have themselves inclined,
From all eternal woe they shall be free:
Certain all must die by Gods appointment, Heb. 9.27.

And after death all must come to judgment.
162
Nam scriptum est that we account must give, Mat. 12.36.

Of every idle word we peake that's bad;
In what state of condition we did live,
A Red rationem must be had: Luke 16.2.

Of all our sins we must cast up the sum,
When we before Gods Judgment seat do come.
163
The Book laid open our offenses read, Reu. 20.12.

Before Gods face all must trembling stand;
Both small and great, yea all that have been dead,
Being summoned by Trumpets Command:
Blessed are they thrice blessed in their heart. Reu. 20.6.

That in the first Re^urrection had part.
164
Whether one talent be hid or destroyed, Mat. 25.1^.

Under ground, account shall be demanded,
To what good use or bad it be employed.
Doing Gods Service as we are commanded:
That we may go into our Mosters joy,
And utterly be freed from all annoy.
165
Mat. 24.29.
The Sun in that day shall be darkened quite,
The Firmaments of light shall be bereau^n;
The changing Moon shall not renew her light,
The Stars likewise shall fall down from Heaven:
All mortals hearts with fear must needs be taken
When as the powers of Heaven shall be shaken.
166
The Earth shall be removed from off her place,
The Air shall be dissolved to drops with heat;
Every thing thus changed, it is a heavy case,
The terror of that day who can repeat:
It would dissolve a heart harder then Ire,
To behold the world in a burning fire.
167
Zeph. 1.15.
This is a day of wrath and weariness,
A day of Clouds and of thick gloominesse,
A day of desolation and distress,
A day of trouble and of wastinesse:
This day will put the stoutest heart to fear,
Maugre his force in it he must appear.
168
1 Cor. 5.10.
Before the Judgment seat of Jesus Christ,
For to receive the guerdion for their hire;
If it be good they shall reign with the highest;
If otherwise they are fit for Hellfire:
Fuel for Gods wrath to be tormented,
Because in life their sins were not repented.
169
Iud. 1.6.
Jude, James his Brother, likewise tells us plain,
That the Angels which kept not their estate,
Their first estate, but followed pleasures vain,
Their Habitation they left desolate,
In everlasting chains he them reserues,
Against the Judgment day, as they deserves.
170
In what place will the sinner then apeare,
No place is left for him himself to hide;
When God in Judgment begins to draw near,
Before whose Justice he cannot abide:
With all his power he will cry and call,
And wish that mountains on him then would fall.
171
And hide them from the face of him that sits
Upon the Throne, and from the angry Lamb:
Being a Judge, all fear to him befitteth, Ioh. 15.^8.

To him that before Abram was, I am:
Before his face all men must trembling stand,
Like Belshazzer summond by trumphs command.
172
The sign of the Son of Man shall appear,
In the Clouds coming with power and glory,
Who will astonish all men's hearts with fear,
What will profit this life transitory?
Each creature for fear shall be forlorn,
And all the Tribes of the earth then shall mourn.
173
In an instant God will his Angels send, Mat. 25.39.

With Trumpets sound to gather his Elect;
From the four corners of the earth he will send
Legions of Angels to call his Elect:
This Iudgement's general we must surmise, Mat. 29 ^2.

All graves must open, all dead must arise.
174
And all before the Judge must be presented,
Rich, poor, young, old, persons are not respected,
Twice happy are those that their sins repented, Romans 2.11.

But treble woe to those that it neglected:
The joys of one shall nere be deceived,
The others torments cannot be conceived.
175
This is a time of trouble and Vexation,
A time of grief of sorrow and of pain;
A time of anguish and desolation,
A time that former time will not regaine:
One hour the worth of thousands will surmount,
Of hours, days, years, we now make no account.
176
A separation of Goats from the sheep,
Sheep on the right hand, Goats on left being placd:
With mercy and justice God will judgment keep,
In no wise he will have his Saints disgraced:
Each one shall shine far brighter then the Sun,
Being so decreed by God it must be done.
177
Unto the sheep with joy the Lord shall say,
Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father inherit
The Kingdom that is prepared for you for aye,
Because in life time you the same did merit:
You clothed me naked, hungry you me fed,
And if not me, poor Brethren in my stead.
178
Unto the goats the Lord will say in's ire,
Mat. 25.41.
Ye workers of iniquity depart;
Go ye cursed into erelasting fire,
I do hate and abhor you with my heart:
I being hungry you no meat me gave,
And in my Kingdom you no share shall have.
179
What joy and sorrow will be uttered then,
The just to go singing continual praise;
That they shall reign with God who were but men,
In the fellowship of Angels always:
Continually with praises there to sing,
Unto the Lord both earth and heavens King.
180
Oh endless Joy that does all Joy contain,
Oh happy haven whose harbor is ease;
Oh place of rest for to be freed from pain,
Oh fruitful tree that fruit do never lack,
Oh place delightful which shall never cease,
Oh Blessed haven that nere suffer wrack.
181
Even as their Joys be innumerable,
So in likewise the wicked are in pain;
They suffer torments insupportable,
And nere shall be at ease nor rest again,
A terrible woe against them is denounst,
When as the sentence, go, is once pronounced.
182
Woe be to them they still shall live in pain,
Woe unto them they torments shall endure;
Woe to them they shall nere be freed again,
Woe to their sins for they did this procure:
Woe be to them, and woe be to us all,
For sinning thus we bring our souls in thral
183
Now that we may leave sinning God grant grace,
That in the highest heavens we may reign;
There to behold Jehouahs shining face,
In that celestial place still to remain:
There we shall praise his name with one accord
With singing Halleluiah to the Lord.
Memento to esse Mortalem.
FINIS.

