TO MY EVER most worthily honored Lord, the Earl of NORWICH.
My most honored LORD:
I Might not but tell the world, that this Sermon which was mine in the Pulpit,
is Yours in the Press; your Lordships will (which shall never be other then a
command to me) fetches it forth into the Light before the fellows. Let me
be branded with the Title of it, if I can think it worthy of the public
view, in comparison of many acurate pieces of others, which I see content
themselves daily to dye in the ear. Howsoever, if it may do good, I shall
bless your Lordship for helping to advance my gain.

Your noble and sincere true-heartednesse to your God, your King, your
Country, your friend, is so well known, that it can be no disparagement to
your Lordship to patronize this Hypocrite; whose very inscription might cast a
blurr upon some guilty reputation. Go on still (most noble Lord) to be a great
Example of virtue and fidelity to an hollow and untrusty Age: You shall not
want either the acclamations or Prayers of

Your Lordships ever devoted in all true duty, and observance. IOS. Exon.

THE HYPOCRITE.
2. TIM. 5. 3. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.
IT is an imperfect Clause, you see, but a perfect description of an Hypocrite;
and that an Hypocrite of our own times, the last; which are so much the worse,
by how much they partake more of the craft and diseases of age.

The Prophets were the Seers of the old Testament, the Apostles were the Seers
of the new; those saw Christ's day and rejoiced; these foresaw the reign of
Antichrist and complained. These very times were as present to S. Paul, as to
us; our sense does not see them so clearly, as his revelation; I am with you
in the spirit, (says he to his absent Colossians) rejoicing and beholding your
order, he does as good as say to us, I am with you in the Spirit lamenting, and
beholding your mis-demeanours: By these divine Optics, he sees our formal
piety, real wickedness; both which make up the complete Hypocrisy in my Text;
Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.

I doubt not but some will be ready to set this sacred Prognostication to
another Meridian; and indeed we know a generation that loves themselves too
well, much more then peace and truth; so covetous that they would catch all the
world in S. Peter's net; proud boasters of their own merits, perfections,
supererogations; it would be long (though easy) to follow all: we know where
too many treasons are hatched; we know who in the height of mind exalts
himself above all that is called God; we know where pleasure has the most
delicate and debauched Clients; we know where Devotion is professedly formal,
and lives impure; and surely, were we clearly innocent of these crimes, I
should be the first that would cast this stone at Rome: but now, that we share
with them in these sins, there is no reason we should be seioyned in the
Censure. Take it among ye therefore, ye Hypocrites of all professions, for it
is your own; Ye have a form of Godliness, denying the power thereof.

What is an Hypocrite but a Player, the Zani of Religion? (as ye heard lately:)
a Player acts that he is not; so do ye, act good, and are wicked; here is a
semblance of good, a form of Godliness; here is a real evil, a denial of
the power of Godliness. There is nothing so good as Godliness, yea, there is
nothing good but it; nothing makes Godliness to be good, or to be Godliness,
but the power of it; for it is not, if it work not, and it works not if not
powerfully; now the denial of good must needs be evil; and so much more
evil, as the good which is denied is more good; and therefore the denial of
the power of Godliness must needs be as ill, as the form or show of
Godliness would seem good; and as the power of Godliness is good: this is
therefore the perfect hypocrisy of fashionable Christians; they have the
form, they deny the power; here is then a direct and professed opposition
betwixt (...) and (...), the form, and the power, and no less, between the
actions employed about them both; the one having, the other denying; having the
form, denying the power.

As all sin is originally from the Devil, so especially Hypocrisy; he is
the father of Lies, and what is Hypocrisy but a real Lie? that is his
Darling: and these two are well put together, (...), 1. TIM. 3. 2. in
Hypocrisy speaking Lies. Now as all things are more eminent in their causes
and originals, then in the effects derived from them; so it must needs be said,
that the greatest Hypocrite in the World is the Devil: I know he hears what
I say, but we must speak truth and shame him: For Satan is trasformed into an
Angel of light, says the Apostle; not he was, but he is; so transformed that
he never did, never will put off that counterfeit: and as all his Impes are
partakers of the Satanicall nature; so in every Hypocrite there is both the
Angel and the Devil; the seeming Angel, is the form of Godliness, the real
Devil is the denial of the power of Godliness. It must be in another sense
that that father said, Innocentia tempore posterior est quam malitia, I am sure
the Angel of light was before the Satan; and now because he is Satan, he puts
on the Angel of light; such shall be our method in this Hypocrite we treat of:
first we will begin with the Angel of Hypocrisy; and then show you the
Devil in his true shape.

First then, here is a form, and but a form of Godliness; A form does well,
but if it be but a form, it is an immateriall shadow of Piety: such was this
of these men; for they were unnatural, traitors, headye, high-minded, (...),
Surely, if they were unnatural, they must needs be unchristian; if they were
traitors to their King, they could be no Subjects to God; if heady and
high-minded, they had nothing to do with him whose first Lesson was, Learn of
me for I am meek; No Creature is more humble then God.
Nulla creatura humilior Deo, as Laurentius well; if they had pleasure for
their Idol, they could not have the Lord for their God, so as even without
God, they had yet a form of Godliness; Godliness is a thing much talked of,
little understood; whiles the ancient School had wont to say, that it is not
practical, not speculatiue, but affectiue; their meaning was that it is in all
these; in the heart, in the brain, in the hand, but most in the heart; it is
speculatiue, in the knowledge of God, practical in the Service to God,
affectiue in our fear of him, love to him, joy in him: Shortly then, to
apprehend God as he has revealed, to serve him as he has required, to be
affected to him as we ought, is Godliness; and the outward expression and
counterfaisance of all these is the form of Godliness. To this outside of
Godliness then, belongs all that glorious Pageant of fashionable profession,
which we see made in the World, whether in words, gesture, carriage.

First, here is a world of good words, whether to God* or of him; here are
words o^ sacred complement with God for the Hypocrite courts God in his
Prayers; no man speak^ fairer, no man louder then he* Here is Saul's Benedictus;
here is the Pharisees, Lord I thank thee; here is the colloguing Jews,
Domine, Domine, Lord, Lord.

And as to him, so of him; here are words of religious protestation for God,
like to the Jews Templum Domini, The Temple of the Lord.
or Herod's (...), MAT. 2. 8. I will worship the Babe. The man's secret fire of
zeal smokes forth into the holy breath of a good confession; here are words of
fervent excitation to the frozen hearts of others; yea, if need be words of
deep censure of the cold moderation which he apprehends in his wiser
Brethren; Neat in words if foul in fact.
so as he is comptus in verbo, if turpis in facto, as Bernard.

Yet more, here is a perfect Scoene of pious gestures; Knees bowed, hands
erected, turned up eyes, the breast beaten, the head shaken, the countenance
dejected, sighs ascending, tears dropping, the Bible hugged and kissed, the
ear nailed to the pulpit; what formality of devout Godliness is here vnacted?
if the man were within, as he is without, there were no Saint but he.

Yet this is not all to make up a perfect form of Godliness, here is a smooth
face of holy Carriage in actions: Devout Saul will be saving the fattest of the
Amalekitish flocks and herds for sacrifice to the Lord his God; good man, he
will not have God take up with the worst; every man is not of this diet; too
many think any off all good enough for their maker; but here is one that holds
the best to be fittest for those sacred Altars; when in the mean time the
Hypocrite had already sacrificed them to his own Mammon, and God must take up
with the reuersion: Shall I tell you of another as good, as devout as he? Do
ye not remember that Absalom would go to pay his vow in Hebron? The fair
Prince of Israel was courteour before, now he will be godly too. It was piety
that he would make a vow to God; our Gallants have somewhat else to do, then
to make holy vows; at every word they protest and vow, and perhaps swear, but
all like themselves, vainly, and idly; but Absalom makes a sollemne and
religious vow; It was more piety that he would perform it; this is not every
man's care; too many care not how much they run upon Gods score; this man will
pitch and pay. Unnatural parricide! first he had stolen the subjects hearts,
and now he would steal his Fathers Crown, and all this villainy must stalk
under a beasts hide, a Sacrifice at Hebron; Blood was in his thoughts, whiles
the Sacrifice was in his mouth: The old word is, full of courtesy, full of
craft; when ye see too glittering pretenses in vnapproued persons, suspect the
inside; Had you but seen a Jews fast you would say so; Esa. 58. 6. here was
nothing but drooping and ash-strawed heads, torn garments, bare feet, starued
cheeks, skrubbed skins, pined mawes, afflictiue devotions; yet a Jew still:
But had you seen Herod's formality you would have said it yet more; mark a
little and see Herod turned Disciple to John Baptist; What Saul among the
Prophets, Herod among the Disciples? Surely so; for he hears him; Tush,
hears him, what is that? There are those that hear and would not, forced to
hear by compulsion of Laws; who may say to Authority, as the Psalm mist says
to God; Aurem perforasti mihi: mine ear have thou boared; their ear is a
Protestant, whiles their heart is a Recusant. There are those that hear and
hear not; that come fashionably, and hear perfunctorily, whose ears are like
the Psalmists Idols; for form only, not for use; There are those that hear
and care not; who is so deaf as the wilful? there is auris aggrauata, Heavy
ear.
Es. 59. 1. Deaf ear.
there is auris surda, Mic. 7. But Herod hears, (...), gladly; with pleasure;
he heard because he loved to hear; yea, so does many a hollow heart still; ye
shall have such a one listen as if he were totus auris, all ear, as if he
would latch every word from the Preachers mouth ere it could get out: perhaps
it is new, perhaps witty, perhaps elegant, or some way pleasing; yea there are
some not only willing but greedy hearers, they have aures bibulas, they hear
hungrily and thirstily, but it is but to catch advantages; somewhat they hope
may fall to pay the Preacher; Herod is better then so, (...), he observed, he
respected, he countenanced this rough hewne Chaplain; Yea, so does many a
lewd Patron for his own turn; either the easy passage of his Simonaicall
subductions, or for a favorable conniuencie at his guilty debauchednesse; good
looks are good cheap; perhaps a meals meat may come in for a further
obligation too; but here is no good action the while; Herod is better then so,
(...), he did too, and did many things; lo he are he does not hear but do;
and not some things but many; It may be this Camel-hayr'd monitor told him of
some outrageous disorders in his Court, those he was willing to amend; perhaps
he told him of some, bribery of his Officers, unjust or hard measures offered
by oppressiue Ministers to his poor Subjects, those he was ready to reform,
(...) he did many things; One would think Bernard should not need to brand his
Hailardus, with intus Herodes, Herod within John without.
foris Johannes, his very outside was generally good, else he had not done
many things: Here was a form of Godliness, but let me tell you, and higher
form then many of us (for ought I see) care to climb up unto; there is is
hearing, and talking, and professing enough in the world, but where is the
doing? or if there be doing, yet it is small doing (God wot.) Some things we
may be drawn to do, not many; one good deed in a life is well; one fault amen
ded meriteth: to do many is not incident to many; so as too many of us are
upon a form of Godliness, but it is a lower form then Herod's; who heard, and
heard gladly, and observed his teacher, and did, and did ma- things; yet a
gross Hypocrite still because he did but many; (...) is God rule. Either all,
or none all.


What should I weary you with instances? Do ye see an Ananias and Saphira
making God their heir of their halfe-shared Patrimony? Do you see a griping
Usurer build Schools and Hospitals with ten in the hundred? Do you see a man
whose stomach insatiably craves new superadditions, upon the indigested
morsels of his last hours Lecture, and yet nauseates at the public prayers of
the Church? Do you see a superstitious votary looking rufully from his knees
upon his adored Crucifixe; and as Isaac the Syryan prescribes, living like a
dead man in a solitary Sepulcher, yet making no bones of killing Kings?

Nay, to ascend unto an higher key of pretended holiness* Do ye see some of
the elect Manichees lying upon hard mats, which S. Austin says were therefore
called Ma^tarij? Do ye see the penances of the three super-mortified Orders of
the Mahumetan Saints? Do ye see an illuminate Elder of the Anabaptists rapt in
divine ecstasies? Do ye see a stigmaticall Friar lashing himself to blood,
wallowing in the snow naked, returning the lice into his bosom? Do ye see a
nice humorist, that will not dress a dish, nor lay a cloth, nor walk abroad
on a Sunday, and yet make no conscience of coozening his neighbor on the
worke-day.

All these and many others of the same kind are Swans, which under white
feathers have a black skin; These have a form of Godliness, and are the
worse for it; for as it is the most dangerous and killing flattery that is
brought in under a pretense of liberty, so it is the most odious and perilous
impiety that is hid under a form of Godliness.

These men, I say, have a form; and nothing else save a form of Godliness,
But withal, let me add, that whosoever ever makes a good profession has this
form; and is so far commendable, as he professes well: If there be not
matter to this form, the fault is in what is not, and not in what there is.
Certainly Religion is not Chaos-like without form; As not Ciuility, so
Godliness cannot be without due form; ye cannot think Gods Service to be all
lining, no outside; A form there must be. It was a Law written in Greek and
Latin Letters over the gate of the first peculiar partition of the Temple,
which was atrium Iudaeorum; Every stranger that passes into the holy Place must
die; if he had not the mark of a Jew upon his flesh, it was capital to tread
in those holy Courts: The Temple was the Type of the Church; if we have not so
much as a form of Godliness; procul, o procul; without shall be dogs; and if a
Beast touch the Mount, it shall dye. What shall we say to those gallants that
hate to have so much as a form of Godliness? there cannot be a greater
disparagement cast upon them, then the very semblance of Devotion; To say Grace
at meals, to bow a knee in prayer, to name God other then in an oath, to once
mention Religion, is a base, mortified pusillanimous tenderness. What talk ye
of a Sermon? a Play if you will; what speak you of weeping for sins? talk of
drinking healths, singing of rounds, courting of Dames, revels, matches, games,
any thing save goodness; what should we say of these men? even this; He that
has but a form, is an Hypocrite; but he that has not a form is an Atheist;
I know not whether I should sever these two; Both are humane Devils well met;
an Hypocrite is a masked Devil; an Atheist is a Devil unmasked: whether of
them shall without their repentance be deeper in Hell, they shall once feel, I
determine not; Only let me assure them, that if the infernal Topheth be not
for them, it can challenge no guests.

Thus such for the form of Godliness, which is the Angel of Hypocrisy; our
speech descends to the Devil in Hypo- which is the denial of the power of
Godliness: but whiles I am about to represent unto you the ugly face of that
wicked one; God meets us in the way, and stays my thoughts and speech upon the
power of Godliness, ere we fall upon the denial of that power. What power then
is this of Godliness? what does it? what can it do? The weakness of it is too
apparent: If we look to the Author of it Christ Jesus; alas, he is (...), a
Butt or mark for opposition to shoot at; whereas true power is an Alchum, that
bars resistance, Prou. 30. if to the means of Godliness, here is the
foolishness of Preaching, 1. Cor. 1. 21. if to the effects of Godliness, here
is weak grace, strong corruption, To. 7. if to the opposites of Godliness, here
is a Law fighting; fighting? perhaps so it may be, and be foiled; nay, but here
is (...); a conquering and captiuing Law, To. 7. 23. whereby I am not only made
a slave, but sold for a slave (...), Romans 7. 14. So then here is an opposed
Savior, a foolish preaching, a feeble grace, a domineering corruption; and
where then is the power of Godliness all this while. Know O thou foolish man
that God is (...), the strong God; and yet there is a Devil; He could call in
the being of that malignant Spirit; but he will not; he knows how to magnify
his power by an opposite. Christ will be spoken against, not for impotence to
resist, but for the glory of his prevailing; so we have seen a well tempered
Target shot at to show the impenetrablenesse of it.

Preaching is foolishness, but it is stultitia Doi; and the foolishness of
God is wiser then then the wisdom of men. Grace is weak, where corruption is
strong, but where grace preuailes, sin dares not show his head; sin fights and
subdues his own Vassals, but the power of Godliness foyles it in the renewed;
so as if it live, yet it reigns not Great then is the power of Godliness;
great every way; great in respect of our enemies, great in respect of our
selves; of our enemies, The Devil, the World, the Flesh.

So great first, that it can resist the Devil; and this no small matter to
resist the powers and Principalities of Hell; whom resist, steadfast in the
faith.

Resist? Alas, what is this? The weak may perhaps resist the strong; the
Whelpe the Lion; We may resist the spirit of God himself, semper restitistis,
says Saint Stephen of the Jews; Lo here is resistance to God; and not for a
brunt, but perpetual; ye have always resisted, so the ship resists the Rock
against which it is shattered; so the crushed worm turns toward the foot that
treads it; Yea, but here is a preualent resistance, Resist the Diuill and he
shall flee from you, Iam. 4. 7. Lo, Godliness can make a Coward of the great
Prince of Darkness. He shall flee; but, if Parthian-like he shall shoot
fleeing, as he does; Lo, this shall quench all the fiery darts of Satan.
Ephesians. 6. If he betake himself to his hold; this can bater, and beat down
the strong holds of sin about his cares; this can enter, and bind the strong
man: Shortly, it can conquer Hell, yea make us more then Conquerors; Lo, to
conquer is not so much as to make another a Conqueror; but more then a
Conqueror is yet more; Is there any of you now that would be truly great and
victorious? it is the power of Godliness that must do it: Pyrrhus his word
concerning his Soldiers, was Tu grandes, ego fortes; Surely, if our Profession
make us great, our faith must make us valiant and successful: I tell you the
conquest of an evil spirit is more then the conquest of a world of men: Oh
then, what is it to conquer Legions?

And as it foiles Satan, so the world: No marvel, for if the greater, much
more the less. The world is a subject, Satan a Prince, the Prince of this
world: The world is a bigot, Satan is a God: The God of this world: If the
Prince, if the God be vanquished, how can the subject or suppliant stand out?
What do we talk of an Alexander, or a Caesar conquering the world: Alas what
spots of earth were they which they bragged to subdue: In so much that Rome
which in two hundred forty three years had gained but some fifteen miles
about, in Seneca's time, when her Dition was at the largest, had the
neighboring Germany for the bounds of it: Lo here a full conquest of the
whole world, The whole world is set in evil.
Mundns totus in maligno: To conquer the whole material world is not so
happy, so glorious a work, as to conquer the malignant, and this the power of
Godliness only can do, this is the victory that ouercomes the world; even
your faith. And now what can the flesh do, without the World, without the
Devil? Surely, were is not for the Devil: the world and the flesh were both
good; and if it were nor for the Devil and the World, the flesh were our best
friend: now they have debauched it, and turned it traitor to GOD, and the
Soul: now this proud flesh dares war against heaven Godliness does (...)
beat it black and blew: Yea, kill it dead, Martifie your earthly members,
Colos. 3. So as it has not a limb to stir, not a breath to draw. Anacharsis
his charge was too hard for another, but performable by a Christian, (...) He
can rule his tongue, his gut, his lust: Sampson was a strong man, yet two of
them he could not rule: the power of Godliness can rule all: Oh then the great
power of godliness that can trample upon the flesh, the World, the Devil: Super
aspidem, upon the Aspe, the Dragon, the Lion: Or as the Psalmist, Psalm. 91.
Upon that roaring Lion of Hell, upon that sinuous Dragon the World, upon that
close biting Aspe the flesh.

And as great in respect of our enemies, so no less great in respect of our
selves, Great, and beneficial: What wonders are done by Godliness? Is it not
a great wonder to make a Fool wise, to make the blind see? This godliness can
do: Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Let me be bold to say; we are naturally like Salomons
child; Folly is bound to our heart, Prou. 22. 15. in things pertaining to GOD;
((...)) We were foolish, says Saint Paul, Titus 3. Would any of us that are
thus borne naturals (to God) be wise to salvation? That is the true wisdom
indeed, all other is but folly, yea, madness to that: The Schools cannot
teach us this; Philosophy, whether, Natural, or Moral, or Politic can do
nothing to it; if ye trust to to it, it is but ((...)) vain deceit, as Saint
Paul, Coloss. 2. 8. Triobularis and vilis, as Chrysostom; It is only
Godliness must do it: Please your selves, how you list, without this, ye
great Politicians of the world, the wise God has put the pide coat upon your
backs, and past upon you his ((...)) Romans 1. 22. If ye were Oracles to men, ye
are Idiots to God: Malitia occaecat intellectum, Wickedness blinds the
understanding.
as he said, ye quick-sighted Eagles of the world, without this ye are as
blind as Beetles to heaven: If ye would have eyes to see him that is
invisible; the hand of your omnipotent Savior must touch you, and at his
bidding you must wash off your worldly clay with the Siloam of godliness.

Is it not a wonder to raise the dead? we are all naturally not sick, not
qualming, not dying, but dead in sin, Colos. 2. 13. Yea* with Lazarus
quatriduam, and ill senting; yea (if that will add any thing) as S. Iudes
trees, or as (they say of) acute Scotus, twice dead; would ye arise? It is only
godliness that can do it: Ye are risen up through the faith in the operation
of God, Colos. 2. 12. This only can call us out of the grave of our sins:
Arise thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee life: Christ is the author, godliness is the means. All ye that hear
me this day, either ye are alive, or would be: Life is sweet: every one
challenges it; Do ye live willingly in your sins; Let me tell you, ye are
dead in your sins: This life is a death: If you wish to live comfortably here,
and gloriously hereafter, it is godliness that must mortify this life in sin;
that must quicken you from this death in sin: Flatter your selves how you
please ye great gallants of both sexes, ye think your selves goodly pieces;
without godliness ye are the worst kind of carcasses: for as death or not
being is the worst condition that can befall a creature: So death in sin is
so much the worst kind of death, by how much grace is better then nature: A
living Dog, or Toad is better then a thus-dead sinner: Would ye rise out of
this loathsome and woeful plight, it is godliness, that must breathe grace
into your dead limbs, and that must give you the motions of holy obedience.

Is it not a wonder to cast out Devils? I tell you the corporal possession of
ill spirits is not so rare, as the spiritual is rife: No natural man is free:
One has the spirit of error, 1. Tim. 4. another the spirit of fornications,
Ose 2. another the spirit of fear, 2. Tim. 1. another the spirit of slumber,
another the spirit of giddiness, another the spirit of pride: all have
Spiritum mundi, the spirit of the world, 1. Cor. 1. 12. Our story in Guliel.
Neubrigensis, tells us of a countriman of ours, one Kettell of Farnham, in King
HENRY the Seconds time, that had the faculty to see spirits: by the same
token, that he saw the Devils spitting over the Drunkards shoulders, into
their pots: the same faculty is recorded of Anthony the Heremite, and
Sulpitius reports the same of Saint Martin, surely there need none of these
eyes to discern every natural man's soul haunted with these evil angels,
Let me assure you, all ye that have not yet felt the power of Godliness, ye
are as truly (though spiritually) carried, by evil spirits into the deeps of
your known wickedness, as ever the Gaderen hogs were carried by them down
the precipice, into the Sea; would ye be free from this hellish tyranny? only
the power of Godliness can do it. 2. Tim. 2. 23. If peradventure God will give
them repentance, that they may recover themselves out of the snares of the
Devil; and Repentance is you know a maine part of Godliness; If ever
therefore ye be dispossessed of that evil one, it is the power of Godliness
that must do it.

What speak I of power? I had like to have ascribed to it the acts of
omnipotency; And if I had done so; it had not bin much amiss; for what is
godliness but one of those rays that beams forth from that Almighty Deity?
What but that same, Dextra excelsi, The right hand of the most high.
whereby he works mightily upon the soul? Now, when I say the man is strong,
is it any derogation to say his arm is strong? Faith and Prayer are no small
pieces of Godliness, and what is it that God can do, which Prayer and Faith can
not do? Will ye see some instances of the further acts of Godliness? Is it
not an act of omnipotence to change nature? Iannes and Iambres, the Egyptian.
Sorcerers may iuggle away the Staff, and bring a Serpent into the room of it;
none but a Divine power (which Moses wrought by) could change the Rod into a
Serpent, or the Serpent into a Rod: Nothing is above nature, but the God of
nature; nothing can change nature, but that which is above it: for nature is
regular, in her proceedings; and will not be crossed by a finite power; since
all finite agents are within her command. Is it not a manifest change of the
nature of the Wolf, to dwell quietly with the Lamb, of the Leopard to dwell
with the kid, of the Lion to eat straw like the Ox, of the Aspe to play with
the child? How shall this be? it is an idle conceit of the Hebrews, that
savage beasts shall forgo their hurtful natures under the M^ssias; No, but
rat^onall beasts shall alter their dispositions: the ravenous oppressor is the
Wolf, the tyrannical persecutor is the Leopard; the venomous Heretic is the
Aspe; these shall turn innocent, and useful by the power of Godliness, for
then the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Esaias 11. 6, 7. Is
it not a manifest change of nature for the Ethiopian to turn white, for the
Leopard to turn spotless, This is done when those do good which are
accustomed to evil Ier. 13. 23. and this godliness can do: Is it not a
manifest change of nature for the Camel, to pass through a needles eye; this
is done, when through the power of godliness ye great and rich men get to
heaven. Lastly, it is an easy thing to turn men into beasts (a cup too much
can do it) but to turn beasts into Men; Men into Saints; Devils into Angels;
it is no less then a work of omnipotency, and this godliness can do.

But to rise higher then a change; Is it not an act of omnipotency to create?
Nature can go on in her tracke whether of continuing what she actually finds
to be; or of producing what she forbids to be potentially in pre-existing
causes; but to make new matter, transcends her power; this god linesse can do;
here is ((...)) a new creatre, 2. Cor. 5. There is in nature no predisposition
to grace; the man must be no less new, then when he was made first of the
dust of the earth, and that earth of nothing; Nouus homo, Ephesians. 4. 21. How is
this done by Creation, and how is he created? In righteousness and holiness;
holiness to God, righteousness to men; both make up Godliness, A
regeneration is here a Creation, Progenuit is expressed by Creauit, Iam. 1. 18.
and this by the word of truth. Old things are passed, says the Apostle, all
must be new, if we will have ought to do with God; our bodies must be renewed
by a glorious resurrection ere they can enjoy heaven; our souls must be
renewed by Grace ere we can enjoy God on earth: Are there any of us pained with
our heart of stone? We may b^e well enough, the stone of the reins or bladder
is a woeful pain, but the stone of the heart is more deadly; he can by this
power take it out, and give us a heart of flesh, Ezec. 12. Are there any of us
weary of carrying our old Adam about us? a grievous burden I confess, and
that which is able to weigh us down to Hell; do we groan under the load,
and long to be eased? none but that Almighty hand can do it; by the power of
godliness creating us anew, to the likeness of that second Adam, which is
from heaven, heavenly; without which there is no possibility of salvation: for
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: In a word, would we have
this earth of ours translated to heaven, it is only the power of godliness can
do it:

And as this power of godliness is great, so no less beneficial; Beneficial
every way, both here, and hereafter; Here, it frees us from evil, it feoffs us
in good; Godliness is an Antidote against all mischief, and misery; yea,
such is the power of it that it not only keeps us from evil, but turns that
evil to good: All things work together to the best to them that love and
fear God, says the Apostle; lo, all things; Crosses, sins; Crosses are
blessings, sins are advantages; Saint Paul's Viper befriended him, Saint
MARTINS Ellebore nourisht him; Saluti fuere pestifera, as Seneca speaks; And
what can hurt him that is blessed by crosses, and is bettered by sins? It
feoffes us in good; Wealth, Honor, Contentment; The Apostle puts two of them
together, Godliness is great gain with contentment, 1. Tim. 6. 6. Here are no
iffs, or ands; but gain, great gain, and gain with self-sufficiencie or
contentment; wickedness may yield a gain, such as it is for a time; but it
will be gravel in the throat; gain far from contentment. Length of days
are in the right hand of true wisdom, and in her left hand riches and honor,
Prou. 3. 16. Lo, honor and wealth are but gifts of the left hand; common and
mean favors; Length, yea, eternity of days is for the right, that is the
height of bounty; Godliness has the promises of this life, and of that which
is to come, says the Apostle; the promise, that is enough; Gods promises are
his performances; with men to promise, and to pay are two things; they are one
with God; To them that by patient continuing in well-doing, seek glory and
honor and immortality, eternal life, Romans 2. 7. Briefly (for I could dwell
here always) it is godliness that only can give us, the beatificall sight of
God; the sight? yea, the fruition of him, yea, the union with him; not by
apposition, not by ad haesion, but by a blessed participation of the divine
nature, 2. Pet. 1. 4. I can go no higher; no the Angels and Archangels cannot
look higher then this.

To sum up all then; Godliness can give wisdom to the fool, eyes to the
blind, life to the dead; it can eiect Devils, change the course of Nature,
create us anew, free us from evil feoffe us in good, honor, wealth,
contentment, everlasting happiness. Oh the wonderful, Oh the beneficial
power of Godliness! And now, what is the desire of my soul, but that all this
could make you in love with Godliness; that in stead o^ the ambitions of
honor, the tradings for wealth, the pursuit of pleasure, your hearts could be
set on fire with the zealous affectation of true Godliness; Alas, the least
ouerture of any of these makes us mad of the world; if but the shadow of a
little honor, wealth, promotion, pleasure be cast before us, how eagerly do
we prosecute it, to the eternal hazard of our Souls? behold, the substance of
them all put to together offers* it self in Godliness; how zealously should we
embrace them: and never give rest to our Souls, till we have laid those true
grounds of hapnesse, which shall continue with us, when all our riches, and
earthly glory shall lie down with us in the dust: Alas, noble and Christian
hearers, ye may be outwardly great, and inwardly miserable; it was a great
Caesar that said, I have been all things, and am never the better; It is not
your bags ye wealthy Citizens that can keep the Gout from your joints, or Care
from your hearts; It is not a Coronet, ye great Peers that can keep your
heads from aching; all this earthly pomp and magnificence cannot keep out
either death, or conscience; Our prosperity presents us as goodly Lillies,
which whiles they are whole, look fair and smell sweet, but if once bruised a
little, are nastie both in sight and sent; it is only Godliness that can hold
up our heads in the evil day, that can bid us make a mock at all the
blustering storms of the world, that can protect us from all miseries (which
if they kill* yet they cannot hurt us) that can improve our sufferings, and
inuest us with true and eternal glory; Oh then be covetous, be ambitious of
this blessed estate of the Soul; and as Simon Macchabeus with three years
labor took down the top of mount Acra in Jerusalem, that no hill might
stand in competition of height with the Temple of God, so let us humble and
prostrate all other desires to this one, that true Godliness may have the sway
in us.

Neither is this consideration more fit to be a whetstone to our zeal, then a
touch stone to our condition; Godliness? why it is an herb that grows in
every soil; as Platina observes, that for 900. years and upwards, none of
those Popes of whom sanctity is ascribed in the abstract, were yet held Saints
after their death, except Celestine the 5. which gave up the Pontifical
Chair, after six Months weary sitting in it; so on the contrary, we may
live Ages ere we hear a man profess himself god-lesse, whiles he is
abominably such: He is too bad, that will not be thought godly; as it is a
brazen-faced Curtezan, that would not be held honest.

That which Lactantius said of the Heathen Philosophers, that they had many
Scholars, few followers, I cannot say of the Diuiue; we have enough to learn,
enough to imitate, but few to act; Be not deceived, Godliness is not impotent;
where ever Godliness is, there is power: Has it then prevailed to open our
eyes, to see the great things of our peace? has it raised us, up from the
grave of our sins? eiected our hellish corruptions, changed our wicked
natures, new created our hearts? well may we applaud our selves is the
confidence of our godliness; but if we be still old, still corrupt, still
blind, still dead, still devilish; Away vain Hypocrites, ye have nothing to
do with Godliness, because Godliness has had no power on you: Are ye
godly, that care to know any thing rather then God and spiritual things: Are
ye godly, that have neither ability nor will to serve that God whom ye
fashionably pretend to know? Are ye godly, which have no inward awe of that God
whom ye pretend to serve? No government of your Passions, no Conscience of
your Actions, no care of your Lives? False Hypocrites, ye do but abuse and
profane that name which ye unjustly arrogate; No, no; Godliness can no more
be without power, then the God that works it; Show me your Godliness in the
true feruor of your Devotions, in the effectual sanctification of your hearts
and tongues; in the conscionable carriage of your lives. Else lo the wicked,
says God, what have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed, PSALM. 50. 16.

Ye have heard the power of Godliness; hear now the denial of this power:
How then is it denied; Surely, there is a verbal; there is a real denial;
and rebus and verbis, as Hilary, It is a mistaking of Logicians, that Negation
is the affection of a Proposition only; No; God and Diuiuitie find it more in
Practice; This very power is as stoutly challenged by some men in words, as
truly denied in actions; As one says of the Pharisees answer concerning John's
calling, verum dicebant and mentiebantur; They told truth and yet lied.
so may I of these men; It is not in the power of words to deny so strongly as
deeds can; both the hand, and the tongue interpret the heart, but the hand so
much more lively, as there is more substance in acts, then sounds; As he said
Spectamur agendo; we are both seen and heard in our actions. He that says
there is no God is a vocal Atheist; he that lives as if there were no God is
a vital Atheist; he that should say Godliness has no power is a verbal
Atheist; he that shall live as if Godliness had no power, is a real Atheist:
they are Atheists both. We would fly upon a man that should deny a God with
Diagoras, though (as Anselme well) no man can do this interius, from within;
we would burn a man that should deny the Deity of Christ with Arrius; we
would rend our clothes at the blasphemy of that man, who with the Epicures and
Apelleians should exempt the cares and operations of God from the things below;
we would spit at a man that durst say, there is no power in Godliness: These
monsters (if there be such) hide their ugly heads, and find* it not safe to
look on the light; Fagots are the best language to such miscreants: but these
real denyals are so much more rife, and bold, as they can take the advantage
of their outward safety, and vnconuinciblenesse.

Their words are honey, their life poison, as Bernard said of his Arnoldus:
And these actions make too much noise in the world; that which Saint
Chrysostom says of the last day, that men's works shall speak, their tongues
shall be silent; is partly true in the mean time; their works cry out, whiles
their tongues whisper: There is then really a double denial of the power of
Godliness; the one in not doing the good it requires, the other in doing the
evil it forbids: The one a privative, the other a positine denial.

In the former, what power has Godliness if it have not made us good? a
feeble Godliness it is that is ineffectuall; if it have not wrought us to be
devout to God, just to men, sober and temperate in the use of Gods creatures,
humble in our selves, charitable to others; where is the Godliness? where is
the power? If these were not aparantly done, there were no form of Godline, if
these be not soundly and heartily done, there is a palpable denial of the
power of Godliness. Hear this then ye ignorant and seduced souls that measure
your Devotions by number not by weight; or that leaning upon your idle elbow
yawningly patter out those prayers, whose sound or sense ye understand not;
ye that bring list-lesse ears severed from your wandering hearts, to the
Messages sent from Heaven; ye that come to Gods board, as a surfeited stomach
to an Hony-combe, or a sick stomach to a Potion: Shortly, ye that pray
without feeling, hear without care, receive without appetite; ye have a form
of godliness, but deny the power of it.

Hear this, ye that wear out the floor of Gods house with your frequent
attendance; ye that have your ears open to Gods Messengers, and yet shut to
the cries of the Poor, of the Orphan, of the Labourer, of the distressed
Debtor; ye that can lift up those hands to heaven in your fashionable prayers,
which ye have not reached out to the relief of the needy members of your
Savior; (whiles I must tell you by the way that hard rule of Laurentius, Magis
delinquit dives non largiendo superflua, quam pauper rapiendo necessaria; the
rich man offends more in not giving his superfluities, then the poor man in
stealing necessaries) Ye that have a fluent tongue to talk unto God, but have
no tongue to speak for God, or to speak in the cause of the dumb: Ye have a
form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof.

Shortly, ye that have no fear of God before your eyes, no love to goodness,
no care of obedience, no conscience of your actions, no diligence in your
Callings, ye have denied the power of Godliness; This very privative denial,
shall without your repentance damn your souls: Remember, Oh, remember that
there needs no other ground of your last and heauiest doom, then Ye have not
given, Ye have not visited; But the Positive denial is yet more irrefragable;
If very priuations and silence speak, much more are actions vocal: Hear this
then ye visors of Christianity, who notwithstanding all your civil
smoothness, when ye are once moved, can tear Heaven with your Blasphemies,
and bandy the dreadful name, of GOD in your impure mouths, by your bloody
Oaths, and Execrations; ye that dare to exercise your saucie wits in profane
scoffs at Religion; ye that presume to whet your law-lesse tongues, and lift
up your rebellious hands against lawful authority whether in Church or State;
ye that grind faces like edge-tooles, and spill blood like water; ye that
can neigh after strange flesh, and upon your voluptuous beds act the
filthiness of Sodomiticall Aretinismes; ye that can quaffe your drunken
carouses till you have drowned your reason in a deluge of deadly Healthes; ye
whose foul hands are belimed with bribery, and besmeared with the price of
blood; ye whose sacrilegious throats have swallowed down whole Churches, and
Hospitals; whose mawes have put over whole Parishes of sold, and affamished
souls; ye whose faction and turbulencie in novel opinions rends the
seame-lesse Coat, not considering that of Melancthon, that Schism is no less
sin then Idolatry; and there cannot easily be a worse then Idolatry; either
of them both are enough to ruin any Church under Heaven: Now the God of Heaven
ever keep this Church of ours from the mischief of them both; ye whose
tongues trade in lies, whose very profession is fraud and cozenage; ye cruel
Usurers, false Flatterers, lying and envious Detractors. In a word, ye, who
ever ye are, that go resolutely forward in a course of any known sins, and
will not be reclaimed, ye, ye are the men that spit God in the face, and
deny flatly the power of Godliness: woe is me, we have enough of these Birds
every where, at home. I appeal your eyes, your ears, would to God they would
convince me of a slander.

But what of all this now, the power of Godliness is denied by wicked men; How
then? what is their case? Surely inexplicably, vnconceiuably fearful; The
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness* says the
Apostle; How revealed, say you? wherein differ they from their neighbors
unless it be perhaps in better fare? no gripes in their conscience, no
afflictions in their life, no bands in their death, impunitas ausum, ausus
excessum parit, as Bernard, Their impunitie makes them bold, their boldness
outrageous: Alas, wretched Souls! The World has nothing more woeful then a
Sinners welfare: It is for slaughter that this Ox is fattened; Ease slays
the simple, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them, PRO. 1. 22. This
brasteata foelicitas, which they enjoy here, is but as Carpets spread over the
mouth of Hell; For if they deny the power of Godliness, the God of power
shall be sure to deny them: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know
you not; There cannot be a worse doom, then Depart from me; that is depart
from peace, from blessedness, from life, from hope, from possibility of being
any other then eternally, exquisitely miserable; Qui te non habet Domine Deus,
totum per didit; He who haith not thee, O Lord God, has lost all, as Bernard
truly; dying is but departing, but this departing is the worst dying; dying in
Soul, ever dying; so as if there be an Ite, depart, there must needs be a
maledicti, depart ye cursed; cursed that ever they were borne, who live to dye
everlastingly: For this departure, this curse ends in that fire which can
never, never end. Oh the deplorable condition of those damned souls that have
slighted the power of Godliness? what tears can be enough to bewail their
everlasting burnings? what heart can bleed enough at the thought of those
tortures, which they can neither suffer, nor avoid; Hold but your finger for
one minute in the weak flame of a farthing Candle, can flesh and blood endure
it? With what horror then must we needs think of Body and Soul frying
endlesly in that infernal Topheth: Oh think of this ye that forget Got, and
contemn Godliness; with what confusion shall ye look upon the frowns of an
angry God rejecting you; the ugly and merciless Fiends snatching you to your
torments, the flames of Hell flashing up to meet you? with what horror shall ye
feel the gnawing of your guilty consciences, and hear that hellish shrieking,
and weeping, and wailing, and gnashing? It is a pain to mention these woes, it
is more then death to feel them, perhorreseite minas, formidate supplicia, as
Chrysostom. Certainly, my beloved, if wicked sinners did truly apprehend an
hell, there would be more danger of their despair, and distraction, then of
their security: It is the Devils policy, like a Raven, first to pull out the
eyes of those that are dead in their sins, that they may not see their
imminent damnation. But for us; Tell me, ye that hear me this day; Are ye
Christians in earnest, or are ye not? It ye be not, what do ye here? If ye
be, there i^ an hell in your Creed. Ye do not less believe there is an Hell
for the godless, then an Earth for men, a firmament for stars, an heaven for
Saints, a God in heaven* And if ye do thus firmly believe, it cast but your
eyes aside upon that fiery gulf, and sin if ye dare* Ye love your selves
well enough to avoid a known pain; we know there are Stocks, and
Bride-wells, and Iayles, and Dungeons, and Rackes, and Gibbers, for
malefactors, and our very fear keeps us innocent; were your hearts equally
assured of those hellish torments, ye could not, ye durst not continue in
those sins, for which they are prepared.

But what an unpleasing, and unseasonable subject am I fallen upon, to speak
of Hell in a Chrstian Court, the Emblem of Heaven: Let me answer for my self
with devout Bernard Sic mihi contingat semper bear amicos terrendo salubriter,
non adulando falaciter; Let me thus ever bless my friends with wholesome
frights, rather then with plausible soothings. Sumenda sunt amara salubria,
says Saint Austin; Bitter wholesome is a safe receipt for a Christian; and what
is more bitter, or more wholesome, then this thought. The way not to feel an
Hell, is to see it, to fear it* I fear we are all generally defective this
way; we do not retire our selves enough into the Chamber of Meditation: and
think sadly of the things of another world: Our Self-love puts off this
torment, (notwithstanding our willing sins) with David's pla^ue, non
oppropinquabit, It shall not come nigh thee; if we do not make a league with
hell and death, yet with our selves against them; Fallit peccatum falsa
dulcedine, as Saint Austin, sin deceiues us with a false pleasure, the
pleasure of the world is like that Colchian honey, whereof Xenophons soldiers no
sooner tasted, then they were miserably distemperd; those that took little
were drunk, those that took more were mad; those that took most were dead:
thus are we either intoxicated, or infatuated, or killed right out with this
deceitful world, that we are sensible of our just fears; at the best we are
besotted with our stupid security, that we are not affected with our danger;
Woe, is me the impenitent, resolved sinner is already fallen into the mouth of
hell, and hangs there but by a slender twigge of his momentanie life, when that
hold fails, he falls down headlong into that pit of horror and desolation; Oh
ye my dear brethren, so many as love your souls, have mercy upon your
selves; Call aloud out of the deeps of your sins, to that compassionate
Savior, that he will give you the hand of faith, to lay hold upon the hand of
his mercy, and plenteous redemption, and pull you out of that otherwise
irrecouerable destruction; Else ye are gone, ye are gone for ever: Two
things, as Bernard borrowes of Saint Gregory, make a man both good, and safe.
To repent of evil, To abstain from evil; would ye escape the wrath of God,
the fire of hell? Oh wash you clean, and keep you so; There is no lauer for
you, but your own tears, and the blood of your Savior; Bathe your Souls in
both of these, and be secure; Consider how many are dying now, which would
give a world for one hour to repent in; Oh be ye careful then to improve
your free, and quiet hours, in a serious and hearty contrition for your
sins; say to God with the Psalmist, Deliver me from the evil man* that is,
from my self; as that Father construes it; and for the sequel, in steed of
the denying the power of Godliness, resolve to deny your selves, to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, godly in this
present world; that having felt and approved the power of godliness in the
illuminating our eyes, in raising us from our sins, in eiecting our
corruptions, in changing our lives, and creating our hearts anew, we may at the
last, feel the happy consummation of this power, in the full possessing of
us, in that eternal blessedness and glory which he has prepared for all that
love him to the perfect fruition whereof he bring us that has dearly bought
us Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom, etc.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOr Scaene read Scene, page 12. l. 2. Haillardu^. r. A^^^lardus p. 18. l
penult. none (...) marg p. 20 such. r much p. 25. l. 19 for aids r finds pa.
^4. 20 p. 27. l 15. r. (...). p 34. 5. or as in steed read as.


