Contemplations UPON THE HISTORICAL Part of the Old Testament.

THE EIGHTH and LAST VOLVME.

In two Books.

By I. H. Deane of Worcester.

LONDON Printed by M. Flesher for Nath. Butter.

1626.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES, BY The Grace of God KING of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
My dread Sovereign Lord and Master. May it please your Majesty:
NOw at last (thanks be to my good God) I have finished the long-taske of my
Meditations upon the historical part of the Old Testament: A Work that I
foresaw must be the issue both of time, and thoughts; It presumed to entitle it
self at first, to your Gracious name, in succession to your immortal
Brothers; and now, it brings to your Royal hands, a due account of an happy
dispatch.

Besides my own public engagement, the encouragements of many worthy
Divines, both at home, and abroad, drew me on, in this pleasing, though busy,
labor; and made me believe the service would not be of more pain, then use.

I humbly present it to your Majesty; not fearing to say, that in regard of
the subject, it is not so fit for any eyes as Princely; For what does it else
but comment upon that, which God has thought good to say of Kings; what they
have done, what they should have done; how they sped in good, in evil?
Certainly there can be none such miroir of Princes under heaven, as this, which
God has made for the faces of his Deputies on earth. Neither can the eyes of
Sovereign Greatness be better taken up then with this sacred reflection. If
my defects have not been notorious, the matter shall enough commend the work;
which together with the unworthy Author, humbly casts it self at the feet of
your Majesty; with the best vows of fidelity and observance, from him, that
prides himself in nothing more, then in the style of

Your Majesty's most faithfully devoted servant, IOS: HALL.

Contemplations.
The 20th Book.
1 The Shunamite suing to Iehoram: Elisha conferring with Hazael. 2 Iehu with
Iehoram and Iezebel. 3 Iehu killing the sons of Abab, and the Priests of
Baal. 4 Athaliah and Ioash. 5 Ioash with Elisha dying. 6 Vzziah leprous. 7 Ahaz
with his new Altar. 8 The utter destruction of the Kingdom of Israel. 9
Hezekiah and Senacherib. 10 Hezekiah sick, recovered, visited. 11 Manasseh. 12
Iosiahs reformation. 13 Iosiahs death, with the desolation of the Temple and
Jerusalem.
Contemplations.
The SHVNAMITE suing to IEHORAM; ELISHA conferring with HAZAEL.
HOw royally has Elisha 2 Kings 8.
paid the Shunamite for his lodging! To him already she owes the life of her
son, both given, and restored; and now again (after so many years, as might
well have worn out the memory of so small a courtesy) her self, her son,
her family owe their lives to so thankful a guest. That table, and bed, and
stool, and candlestick was well bestowed: That candlestick repaid her the
light of her future life and condition, that table the means of maintenance,
that stool a seat of safe abode, that bed a quiet rest from the common
calamities of her nation: He is a niggard to himself, that scants his
beneficence to a Prophet, whose very cold water shall not go unrewarded. Elijah
preserved the Sareptan from famine; Elisha the Shunamite; he, by provision of
oil and meal; this, by premonition: Arise, and go, thou and thine household,
and soiourne wheresoever thou can soiourne. The Sareptan was poor, and
driven to extremes, therefore the Prophet prouides for her, from hand to mouth:
The Shunamite was wealthy, and therefore the Prophet sends her to provide for
her self: The same goodness that relieues our necessity, leaves our competency
to the hand of our own counsel; in the one, he will make use of his own
power, in the other, of our providence.

The very Prophet aduises this holy Client to leave the bounds of the Church:
and to seek life, where she should not find religion: Extremity is for the
time a just dispensation with some common rules of our outward demeanure, and
motions, even from better to worse. All Israel and Judah shall be affamished;
The body can be preserved no where, but where the soul shall want; Sometimes
the conueniences of the soul must yield to bodily necessities. Wantonness and
curiosity can find no advantage from that which is done out of the power of
need.

It is a long famine that shall afflict Israel; He upon whom the spirit of
Elijah was doubled, doubled the judgment inflicted by his Master; Three years
and an half did Israel gasp under the drought of Elijah; seven years dearth
shall it suffer under Elisha: The trials of God are many times not more
grievous for their sharpness, then for their continuance.

This scarcity shall not come alone; God shall call for it: what ever be the
second cause, he is the first. The executioners of the Almighty (such are his
judgments) stand ready waiting upon his just Throne; and do no sooner receive
the watchword, then they fly upon the world, and plague it for sin; Only
the cry of our sins moves God to call for vengeance: And if God once call, it
must come; How often, how earnestly are we called to repentance, and stir not?
the messengers of Gods wrath fly forth at the least beck; and fulfill the
will of his revenge upon those, whose obedience would not fulfill the will of
his command.

After so many proofs of fidelity the Shunamite cannot distrust the Prophet;
not staying therefore to be convicted by the event, she remoues her family into
the Land of the Philistims: No nation was more opposite to Israel, none more
worthily odious; yet, there does the Shunamite seek, and find shelter; Even
the shade of those trees that are unwholesome, may keep us from a storm; Every
where will God find room for his own. The fields of Philistines flourish,
whiles the soil of Israel yields nothing but weeds and barrenness: Not that
Israel was more sinful, but that the sin of Israel is more intolerable. The
offers of grace are so many aggrauations of wickedness: In equal offenses
those do justly smart more, who are more obliged. No pestilence is so
contagious as that which has taken the purest air.

These Philistine neighbors would never have endured themselves to be pestered
with forrainers; especially Israelites, whom they hated (besides religion) for
their usurpation: neither were they in all likelihood pressed with multitude:
The rest of Israel were led on with hopes; presuming upon the amends of the
next harvest, till their want grew desperate, and irremediable; only the
forwarned Shunamite preuents the mischief; now she finds what it is to have a
Prophet her friend: Happy are those souls that upon all occasions consult with
Gods Seers; they shall be freed from the plagues, wherein the secure blindness
of others is heedlesly overtaken.

Seven years had this Shunamite soiourned in Palestine, now she returns to
her own; and is excluded: She that found harbor among Philistines, finds
oppression and violence among Israelites: Those of her kindred, taking advantage
of her absence, had shared her possessions. How often does it fall out that the
worst enemies of a man are those of his own, house? All went by contraries
with this Shunamite; In the famine she had enough, in the common plenty she was
scanted; Philistines were kind to her, Israelites cruel: Both our fears, and
our hopes do not seldom disappoint us; It is safe trusting to that stay which
can never fail us; who can easily provide us both of friendship in Palestine,
and of justice in Israel. We may not judge of the religion by particular
actions; A very Philistine may be merciful, when an Israelite is unjust; The
person may be faulty, when the profession is holy.

It was not long since the Prophet made that friendly offer to the Shunamite,
out of the desire of a thankful requital; What is to be done for thee?
would thou be spoken for to the King, or to the Captain of the Host? and
she answered; I dwell among my brethren. Little did she then think of this
injurious measure; else she might have said; I dwell amongst mine enemies, I
dwell amongst robbers. It is like they were then friendly, who were now cruel,
and oppressiue; There is no trust to be reposed in flesh and blood: How should
their favors be constant, who are in their nature, and disposition, variable?
It is the furest way to rely on him, who is ever like himself; the measure of
whose love is eternity.

Whither should the Shunamite go to complain of her wrong, but to the Court?
There is no other refuge of the oppressed, but public authority: All Justice
is derived from Sovereignty: Kings are not called Gods for nothing; They do
both sentence and execute for the Almighty.

Doubtless, now the poor Shunamite thought of the courteous profer of Elisha;
and missing a friend at the Court, is glad to be the presenter of her own
petition.

How happily does God contriue all events for the good of his! This suppliant
shall fall upon that instant for her suit, when the King shall be talking with
Gehezi; when Gehezi shall be talking of her, to the King; The words of Gehezi,
the thoughts of the King, the desires of the Shunamite shall be all drawn
together by the wise providence of God into the center of one moment, that his
oppressed servant might receive a speedy justice. Oh the infinite wisdom,
power, mercy of our God, that insensibly orders all our ways, as to his own
holy purposes, so to our best advantage.

What does Iehoram the King talking with Gehezi the Leper? That very presence
was an eyesore.

But if the cohabitation with the infectious were forbidden, yet not the
conference. Certainly, I begin to think of some goodness in both these: Had
there not been some goodness in Iehoram, he had not taken pleasure to hear,
even from a leprous mouth, the miraculous acts and praises of Gods Prophet; Had
there not been some goodness in Gehezi, he had not after so fearful an
infliction of judgment, thus ingenuously recounted the praises of his severe
Master; He that told that deare-bought lie to the Prophet, tells now all
truths of the Prophet, to the King: Perhaps his leprosy had made him clean;
If so: Happy was it for him that his forhead was white with the disease, if his
soul became hereupon white with repentance. But we may well know that the
desire, or report of historical Truths, does not always argue grace. Still
Iehoram, after the inquiry of the Prophets miracles, continues his Idolatry. He
that was curious to harken after the wonders of Elisha, is not careful to
follow his doctrine; Therefore are Gehezi and the Shunamite met before him,
that he may be convicted, who will not be reformed: Why was it else that the
presence of the persons should thus inexpectedly make good the relation, if God
had not meant the inexcusablenesse of Iehoram; whiles he must needs say within
himself; Thus potent is the Prophet of that God, whom I obey not; Were not
Elishaes, the true God, how could he work such wonders? And if he be the true
God, why is he not mine? But what? Shall I change Ahabs God for Iehosaphats?
No; I cannot deny the miracles, I will not admit of the author: Let Elisha be
powerful, I will be constant. O wretched Iehoram; how much better had it been
for thee never to have seen the face of Gehezi, and the son of the Shunamite;
then to go away unmoved with the vengeance of leprosy in the one, with the
merciful resuscitation of the other? Therefore is thy judgment fearfully
aggrauated, because thou would not yield to what thou could not oppose. Had
not Ahabs obdurateness been propagated to his son, so powerful
demonstrations of divine power could not have been ineffectual. Wicked hearts
are so much worse by how much God is better; This anvile is the harder by being
continually beaten upon, whether with judgments, or mercy.

Yet this good use will God have made of this report, and this presence, that
the poor Shunamite shall have justice; That son, whose life was restored,
shall have his inheritance revived; His estate shall fare the better for
Elishaes miracle: How much more will our merciful God second his own
blessings, when the favors of unjust men are therefore drawn to us, because
we have been the subjects of divine beneficence.

It was a large, and full award, that this occurrence drew from the King;
Restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field, since the day that
she left the land, even until now. Not the present possession only is given
her, but the arerages.

Nothing hinders, but that outward justice may stand with gross Idolatry. The
Widow may thank Elisha for this; His miracle wrought still; and put this new
life into her dead estate; His absence did that for the preservation of life,
which his presence did for the restoring it from death. She that was so ready
to expostulate with the man of God, upon the loss of her son, might perhaps
have been as ready to impute the loss of her estate to his advice; Now, that
for his sake she is enriched with her own; how does she bless God for so
happy a guest? When we have forgotten our own good turns, God remembers and
crowns them: Let us do good to all whiles we have time, but especially to the
household of faith.

Could Israel have been sensible of their own condition, it was no small
unhappiness to lose the presence of Elisha: Whether, for the Idolatries, or
for the famine of Israel, the Prophet is gone into Syria; No doubt Naaman
welcomd him thither; and now would force upon him those thanks for his cure,
which the man of God would not receive at home.

How famous is he now grown that was taken from the Teame? His name is not
confined to his own Nation; Foreign countries take notice of it; and Kings
are glad to listen after him, and woo him with presents: Benhadad the King of
Syria, whose counsels he had detected, reioyeeth to hear of his presence; and
now, as having forgotten that he had sent a whole host, to besiege the Prophet
in Dothan, sends an honorable messenger to him, laden with the burden of forty
Camels, to consult with this Oracle, concerning his sickness, and recovery.

This Syrian belike in his distress dares not trust to his own gods; but
having had good proof of the power of the God of Israel, both in Naamans cure,
and in the miraculous defeats of his greatest forces, is glad to send to that
servant of God, whom he had persecuted. Wicked men are not the same in health
and in sickness: their affliction is worthy of the thanks, if they be
well-minded; not themselves.

Doubtless the errand of Benhadad was not only to inquire of the issue of his
disease, but to require the prayers of the Prophet for a good issue: Even the
worst man does so love himself, that he can be content to make a beneficial
use of those instruments, whose goodness he hates.

Hazael, the chief Peer of Syria is designed to this message; The wealth of
his present strives with the humility of his carriage, and speech: Thy son
Benhadad King of Syria has sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover of this
disease? Not long since, Iehoram King of Israel had said to Elisha, My father,
shall I smite them; and now Benhadad King of Syria, says, My father, shall I
recover: Lo how this poor Meholathite has Kings to his sons: How great is the
honor of Gods Prophets with Pagans, with Princes? Who can be but confounded to
see Evangelical Prophets despised by the meanest Christians?

It is more then a single answer that the Prophet returns to this message: One
answer he gives to Benhadad, that sent it; another he gives to Hazael, that
brings it: That to Benhadad, is, Thou may surely recover; That to Hazael,
The Lord has showed me that he shall surely dye: What shall we say then? Is
there a lie, or an equivocation in the holy mouth of the Prophet? God forbid:
It is one thing what shall be the nature, and issue of the disease; Another
thing what may outwardly befall the person of Benhadad: The question is moved
of the former; whereto the answer is direct; The disease is not mortal; But
withal an intimation is given to the bearer, of an event beyond the reach of
his demand; which he may know, but either needs not, or may not return: The
Lord has showed me that he shall surely dye; by another means, though not by
the disease.

The Seer of God descries more in Hazael, then he could see in himself; he
fixes his eyes therefore steadfastly in the Syrians face, as one that in those
lines read the bloody story of his life.

Hazael blushes, Elisha weeps; The intention of those eyes did not so much
amaze Hazael, as the tears; As yet he was not guilty to himself of any wrong
that might strain out this juice of sorrow: Why weepeth my Lord?

The Prophet fears not to foretell Hazael all the villainies which he should
once do to Israel; How he should fire their forts, and kill their young men, and
rip the mothers, and dash the children. I marvel not now at the tears of
those eyes which foresaw this miserable vastation of the inheritance of God;
The very mention whereof is abhorred of the future author: What is thy servant
a dog, that I should do this great thing? They are savage cruelties whereof
thou speak; It were more fit for me to weep that thou should repute me
so brutish; I should no less condemn my self for a beast, if I could suspect
my own degeneration so far. Wicked men are carried into those heights of
impiety, which they could not in their good mood have possibly believed; Nature
is subject to favorable opinions of it self; and will rather mistrust a
Prophet of God, then her own good disposition: How many from honest
beginnings, have risen to incredible licentiousness, whose lives are now such,
that it were as hard for a man to believe they had ever been good, as to have
persuaded them once they should prove so desperately ill.

To give some ouerture unto Hazael of the opportunity of this ensuing
mischief; the Prophet foretells him from God, that he shall be the King of
Syria.

He that shows the event, does not appoint the means; Far was it from the
spirit of Gods Prophet to set, or encourage a treason: whiles he said
therefore, Thou shall be King of Syria; he said not, Go home, and kill thy
master: The wicked ambition of Hazael draws this damnable conclusion out of
holy premises; and now having fed the hopes of his Sovereign with the
expectation of recovery; the next day he smothers his Master. The impotent
desire of rule brooks no delay: Had not Hazael been gracelesly cruel, after
he had received this prediction of the Seer, he should have patiently awaited
for the crown of Syria, till lawful means had set it upon his head; now, he
will by a close execution make way to the throne; A wet cloth has stopped the
mouth of his sick Sovereign; No noise is heard; the carcass is fair; Who
can complain of any thing but the disease?

O Hazael, thou shall not thus easily stop the mouth of thine own conscience;
that shall call thee Traitor, even in thy chair of state; and shall check all
thy royal triumphs, with, Thou have founded thy throne in blood. I am deceived
if this wet cloth shall not wipe thy lips in thy iollyest feasts, and make thy
best morsells unsavory: Sovereignty is painful upon the fairest terms; but
upon treachery, and murder, tormenting: Woeful is the case of that man whose
public cares are aggrauated with private guiltiness; and happy is he, that
can enjoy a little with the peace of an honest heart.

IEHV with IEHORAM and IEZEBEL.
YEt Hazael began his 2 Kings 9.
cruelty with loss: Ramoth Gilead is won from him; Iehoram the son has
recovered that, which Ahab his father attempted in vain; That City was
dear-bought of Israel; it cost the life of Ahab, the blood of Iehoram; Those
wounds were healed with victory; The King tends his health at Iezreel, whiles
the Captains were enjoying, and seconding their success at Ramoth.

Old Elisha has neither cotage, nor foot of land, yet sitting in an obscure
corner, he gives order for Kingdoms; Not by way of authority (this usurpation
had been no less proud, then unjust) but by way of message, from the God of
kings; Even a mean Herald may go on a great errand: The Prophets of the
Gospel have nothing to do but with spiritual Kingdoms; To beat down the
kingdoms of sin and Satan; to translate souls to the Kingdom of heaven.

He that renewed the life of the Shunamites son, must stoop to age; That
block lies in his way to Iehu; The aged Prophet imployes a speedier messenger,
who must also gird up his loins, for have: No common pace will serve us when
we go on Gods message; The very loss of minutes may be unrecoverable. This
great Seer of God well saw a present concurrence of all oportunities: The
Captains of the Host were then readily combined for this exploit: the Army was
on foot; Iehoram absent; a small delay might have troubled the work; the
dispersion of the Captains, and Host, or the presence of the King, might
either have defeated, or slacked the dispatch: He is prodigal of his success,
that is slow in his execution.

The directions of Elisha to the young Prophet, are full, and punctual:
whither to go; what to carry; what to do; where to do it; what to say, what
speed to make, in his act, in his return: In the businesses of God it matters
not how little is left to our discretion; There is no important business of
the Almighty, wherein his precepts are not strict, and express; Look how much
more specialty there is in the charge of God, so much more danger is in the
violation.

The young Prophet is curiously obedient; in his haste; in his observation and
carriage: and finding Iehu, according to Elishaes prediction, set amongst the
Captains of the Host, he singles him forth, by a reverent compellation; I have
an errand to thee, O Captain; Might not the Prophet have stayed till the table
had risen, and then have followed Iehu to his lodging? Surely, the wisdom of
God has purposely pitched upon this season, that the public view of a sacred
messenger, and the hasty euocation of so noted a person, to such a secrecy,
might prepare the hearts of those Commanders of Israel, to the expectation of
some great design.

The inmost room is but close enough for this act; Ere many hours, all Israel
shall know that, which yet may not be trusted with one eye; The goodness of
God makes wise provision for the safety of his messengers, and whiles he
imployes their service, preuents their dangers.

But how is it that of all the Kings of the Ten tribes, none was ever anointed
but Iehu? Is it for that the God, who would not countenance the erection of
that usurped throne, would countenance the alteration? Or is it, that by this
visible testimony of divine ordination, the courage of the Israelitish
Captains might be raised up to second the high and bold attempt of him, whom
they saw destined from heaven to rule?

Together with the oil of this unction, here was a charge of revenge; A
revenge of the blood of the Prophets, upon Iezebel; of wickedness and
Idolatry, upon Ahab: neither was the extirpation of this lewd family
fore-prophesied only to Iehu, but enjoined.

Elijah foretold, and the world expected some fearful account of the
abominable cruelty, and impiety of that accursed house; Now it is called for,
when it seemed forgotten: Ahab shall have no posterity, Iezebel shall have no
toomb, but the dogs. This woeful doom is committed to Iehues execution.

Oh the sure, though patient, justice of the Almighty: Not only Ahab and
Iezebel had been bloody, and idolatrous, but Israel was drawn into the
partnership of their crimes; All these shall share in the judgment: Elijahs
complaint in the cave now receives this late answer; Hazael shall plague
Israel; Iehu shall plague the house of Ahab and Iezebel; Elishaes servant thus
seconds Elishaes master: When wickedness is ripe in the field, God will not let
it sheed to grow again, but cuts it up by a just, and seasonable vengeance:
Ahabs drouping under the threat has put off the judgment from his own days;
now it comes, and sweepes away his wife, his issue; and falls heavy upon his
subjects. Please your selves, o ye vain sinners, in the slow pace of
vengeance; it will be neither less certain, nor more easy for the delay;
rather it will pay for that leisure in the extremity.

The Prophet has done his errand, and is gone. Iehu returns to his fellows,
with his head not more wet with oil, then busied with thoughts: no doubt, his
face bewrayed some inward tumults, and distractions of imagination; neither
seemed he to return the same he went out. They ask therefore, Is all well?
Wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? The Prophets of God were to these
idolatrous Israelites, like comets; who were never seen without the
portendement of a mischief: When the priests of their Baal were quietly
sacrificing, all was well; but now when a Prophet of God comes in sight, their
guiltiness asks, Is all well? All would be well but for their sins; they
fear not these, they fear their reprouer.

Israel was comne to a good pass, when the Prophets of God went with them for
mad men: Oh ye Baalitish Ruffians, whither has your impiety and profaneness
carried you, that ye should thus blaspheme the servants of the living God? Ye
that run on madding after vain Idols, tax the sober guides of true worship,
for madness. Thus it becomes the godless enemies of truth, the heralds of our
patience, to mis-call our innocence, to revile our most holy profession: What
wonder is it that Gods messengers are mad men unto those, to whom the wisdom
of God is foolishnes?

The message was not delivered to Iehu for a concealment, but for publication:
Silence could not effect the word that was told him; common notice must; Ye
know the man, and his communication: The habit shows you the man; the calling
shows you his erra^d: Even Prophets were distinguished by their clothes; Their
mantle was not the common wear; why should not this sacred vocation be known
by a peculiar attire? These Captains had not called him a madman, if they had
not known him a Prophet: By the man therefore they might guess at his
message; Prophets do not use to appear, but upon serious errands; whether of
reproof, or of prediction.

Nice ciuilities of denialls were not then known to the world; They said, It
is false, tell us now: Amongst these Captains no combat, no unkindness
follows upon a word so rudely familiar.

Iehu needs not tell them, that the man was a Prophet; he tells them the
prophecy of the man; what he had said, what he had done.

Their eyes had no sooner seen the oil; their ears had no sooner heard, Thus
says the Lord, I have anointed thee King over Israel, then they rise from
their seats, as rapt with a tempest, and are hurled into arms; So do they
have to proclaim Iehu, that they scarce stay to snatch up their garments,
which they had perhaps left behind them for speed, had they not meant with
these rich abiliments to garnish a state for their new Sovereign; To whom
having now erected an extemporall Throne, they do by the sound of Trumpets
give the style of Royalty, Iehu is King.

So much credit has that mad fellow with these gallants of Israel, that upon
his word they will presently adventure their lives, and change the Crown. God
gives a secret authority to his despised servants; so as they which hate their
person, yet reverence their truth: Even very scorners cannot but believe them;
If when the Prophets of the Gospel tell us of a spiritual Kingdom, they be
distrusted of those which profess to observe them, how shameful is the
disproportion? how just shall their judgment be?

Yet I cannot say whether mere obedience to the Prophet, or personal dislikes
of Iehoram, or partial respects to Iehu, drew the Captains of Israel; The
will of God may be done thanklesly, when fulfilling the substance, we fail of
the intention, and err in circumstance.

Only Ramoth is conscious of this sudden Inauguration; This new prince-dome
yet reaches no further then the sound of the trumpet: Iehu is no less subtle,
then valiant; he knew that the notice of this inexpected change might work a
busy, and dangerous resistance; he therefore gives order that no messenger of
the news may prevent his personal execution, that so he might surprise
Iehoram in his palace of Izreel, whether tending his late wounds, or securely
feasting his friends, and dreaming of nothing less then danger; and might be
seen, and felt at once. Secrecy is the safest guard of any design; disclosed
proiects are either frustrated, or made needlessly difficult.

Neither is Iehu more close, then swift; That very trumpet with the same wind
sounds his march; from the top of the stairs, he steps down into his
charet; That man means to speed, who can be at once reserved in his counsels,
and resolute and quick in his performances.

Who could but pity the unhappy and unseasonable visitation of the grandchild
of Iehosaphat, were it not that he was degenerate into the family of Abab?
Ahaziah King of Judah is comne to visit Iehoram King of Israel; the knowledge
of his late received wounds has drawn thither this kind ill-matched allie: He
who was partner of the war, cannot but be a visitor of the wounds.

The two Kings are in the height of their complement, and entertainments, when
the watchman of the Tower of Izreel espies a troop, a far off. For ought was
known, there was nothing but peace in all the Land of Israel; and Judah was
now so combined with it, that both their Kings were feasting under one roof;
yet, in the midst of this supposed safety, the watchtower is not unfurnished
with heedy eyes: No security of peace can free wise Governors from a careful
suspicion of what may come, and a providence against the worst. Even whiles we
know of no enemies, the watchtower of due intelligence may not be empty.

In vain are dangers foreseen, if they be not premonished; It is all one to
have a blind and a mute watchman; This speaks what he sees; I see a company.

Doubtless Iehorams head was now full of thoughts; neither knew he what
construction to put upon this approaching troop; Perhaps, the Syrians (he
thinks) may have recovered Ramoth; and chased the garrison of Israel; neither
can he imagine whether these should be hostile victors, or vanquished
subjects, or conspiring rebels. Every way this rout was dreadful. Oh Iehoram,
thou beginst thy fears too late; Had thou been afraid to provoke the God of
Israel, thine innocence had yielded no room to these terrors.

An horseman is dispatched to discover the meaning of this descryed concourse:
He meets them, and inquires of peace; but receives a short answer, What have
thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me? A second is addressed; with the
same success: Both attend the train of Iehu in stead of returning; Indeed, it
is not for private persons to hope to rectify the public affairs, when they
are grown to an height of disorder, and from thence to a ripeness of
mis-cariage: Sooner may a well-meaning man hurt himself, then redress the
common danger.

These messengers were now within the mercy of a multitude, had they but
endeavored to retire, they had perished as wilfully, as vainly: Whosoever will
be striving against the torrent of a just judgment, must needs be carried down
in the stream: Sometimes there is as much wisdom in yielding, as courage in
resistance.

Had this troop been far off, the watchman could not have descryed the
arrival of the messengers, their turning behind, the manner of the march; Iehu
was a noted Captain, his carriage and motion was observed more full of fire,
then his fellows; The driving is like Iehues, for he drives furiously: God
makes choice of fit instruments, as of mercy, so of revenge; These spirits were
needful for so tragical a scene, as was now preparing in Israel.

Iehoram and Abaziah, as netled with this forced patience of expectation, can
no longer keep their seats; but will needs hasten their charets; and fetch
that costly satisfaction, which would not be sent, but given.

They are infatuated, which shall perish; otherwise Iehoram had been warned
enough by the forceable retention of his messengers, to expect none but an
enemy. A friend, or a subject could not have been unwilling to be known, to
be looked for; Now; forgetting his wounds, he will go to fetch death.

Yet when he sees Iehu, whom he left a subject, hopes strive with his doubts,
Is it peace, Iehu? what may be the reason of this sudden journey? Is the army
foiled by the Syrians? Is Ramoth recovered? or has the flight of the enemy
left thee no further work? or is some other ill news guilty of thy have? What
means this vnwished presence, and return?

There needs no stay for an answer; The very face of Iehu, and those sparkling
eyes of his spoke fury, and death to Iehoram; which yet his tongue angerly
seconds: What peace, so long as the whordomes of thy mother Iezebel, and her
witchcrafts are so many?

Wicked Tyran, what speak thou of peace with men, when thou have thus long
waged war with the Almighty? That cursed mother of thine has nursed thee
with blood, and trained thee up in abominable Idolatries.

Thou art not more hers, then her sin is thine; thou art polluted with her
spiritual whoredoms, and enchanted with her hellish witchcrafts: Now that
just God whom thou, and thy parents have so hainously despited, sends thee by
me this last message of his vengeance; which whiles he spoke, his hand is
drawing up that deadly arrow, which shall cure the former wounds with a worse.

Too late now does wretched Iehoram turn his charet, and flee; and cry
Treason, o Ahaziah; There was treason before, o Iehoram; thy treason against
the Majesty of God, is now revenged by the treason of Iehu against thee.

That fatal shaft, notwithstanding the swift pace of both the charets, is
directed to the heart of Iehoram; there is no erring of those feathers which
are guided by the hand of destiny.

How just are the judgments of God! It was in the field of Naboth, wherein
Iehoram met with Iehu; That very ground called to him for blood; And now this
new auenger remembers that prophecy which he heard from the mouth of Elijah,
in that very place, following the heels of Ahab; and is careful to perform
it. Little did Iehu think, when he heard that message of Elijah, that his
hands should act it; now, as zealous of accomplishing the word of a Prophet;
he gives charge to Bidkar his Captain, that the bleeding carcass of Iehoram
should be cast upon that very platt of Naboth: Oh Naboths blood well paid for!
Ahabs blood is licked by dogs, in the very place where those dogs lickt
Naboths; Iehorams blood shall manure that ground, which was wrung from Naboth;
and Iezebel shall add to this compost. Oh garden of herbs dearly bought,
royally dunged.

What a resemblance there is betwixt the death of the father, and the son;
Ahab and Iehoram? Both are slain in their charet; Both with an arrow; Both
repay their blood to Naboth; and how perfect is this retaliation? Not only
Naboth miscarried in that cruel injustice, but his sons also; else the
inheritance of the vineyard had descended to his heirs, notwithstanding his
pretended offense; and now not only Ahab forfaits his blood to this field; but
his son Iehoram also: Face does not more answer to face, then punishment to
sin.

It was time for Ahaziah King of Judah, to flee: Nay it had been time long
before to have fled from the sins, yea from the house of Ahab; That brand is
fearful which God sets upon him; He did evil in the sight of the Lord as did
the house of Ahab; for he was the 2 Kings 27
son in law of the house of Ahab; Affinity is too often guilty of corruption;
The son of good Iehosaphat is lost in Ahabs daughter.

Now he pays for his kind alliance; accompanying the son of Ahab in his
death, whom he consorted with in his Idolatry: Young Ahaziah was scarce warm
in his throne, when the mis-matched blood of Athaliah is required from him;
Nothing is more dangerous then to be imped in a wicked family; this relation
too often draws in a share both of sin, and punishment.

Who would not have looked that Iezebel hearing of this bloody end of her son;
and pursuit of her allye; and the fearful proceedings of this prosperous
conspiracy, should have put her self into sackcloth and ashes; and now
finding no means either of defense, or escape, should have cast her self into
such a posture of humiliation, as might have moved the compassion of Iehu; Her
proud heart could not suddenly learn to stoop: rather she recollects her high
spirits; and in stead of humbling her soul by repentance, and addressing her
self for an imminent death; she pranks up her old carcass, and paints her
wrinkled face, and as one that vainly hopes to daunt the courage of an usurper,
by the sudden beams of Majesty; she looks out, and thinks to fright him with
the challenge of a traitor, whose either mercy, or justice could not be
avoided: Extremity finds us such as our peace leaves us; Our last thoughts
are spent upon that we care most for; those that have regarded their face more
then their soul, in their latter end are more taken up with desire of seeming
fair, then being happy: It is no marvel if an heart obdured with the custom
of sin shut up gracelesly. Counterfeit beauty agrees well with inward
uncleanness.

Iebues resolution was too strongly settled to be removed with a painted face,
or an opprobrious tongue; He looks up to the window, and says, Who is on my
side, who? There want not those every where, which will be ready to observe
prevailing greatness: Two or three Eunuchs look out; He bids them, Throw her
down: They instantly lay hold on their lately adored Mistress, and
notwithstanding all her shrieks and prayers, cast her down headlong into the
street.

What heed is to be taken of the deep professed services of hollow hearted
followers; All this while they have with humble smiles, and officious devotions
fawned upon their great Queen; now upon the call of a prosperous enemy, they
forget their respects, her royalty; and cast her down, as willing
executioners, into the jaws of a fearful death: It is hard for greatness to
know them whom it may trust: Perhaps the fairest semblance is from the falsest
heart; It was a just plague of God upon wicked Iezebel, that she was inwardly
hated of her own; He whose servants she persecuted, raised up enemies to her
from her own elbow.

Thus must pride fall; Insolent, idolatrous, cruel Iezebel besprinkles the
walls, and pauement with her blood; and now those brains that devised
mischief against the servants of God, are strawed upon the stones; and she
that insulted upon the Prophets, is trampled upon by the horses heels: The
wicked is kept Job 21.
for the day of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.

Death puts an end commonly to the highest displeasure. He that was severe in the
execution of the living, is merciful in the sepulture of the dead; Go see now
this cursed woman, and bury her, for she is a Kings daughter; She that
vpbrayded Iehu with the name of Zimri, shall be interred by Iehu as Omries
daughter in law, as a Sydonian Princess; Somewhat must be yielded to
humanity; somewhat to State.

The dogs have prevented Iehu in this purpose, and have given her a living
toomb more ignoble, then the worst of the earth; Only the scull, hands, and
feet of that vanished carcass yet remain; The scull which was the roof of
all her wicked devices, the hands and feet which were the executioners; these
shall remain as the monuments of those shameful exequies: that future times
seeing these fragments of a body, might say, The dogs were worthy of the
rest; Thus Iezebel is turned to dung, and dogs-meat; Elijah is verified, Naboth
is revenged; Izreel is purged, Iehu is zealous, and in all, God is just.

IEHV killing the sons of AHAB, and the Priests of BAAL.
THere were two 2 Kings 10.
prime Cities of the Ten Tribes, which were the set Courts of the Kingdom of
Israel; Samaria and Iezreel; The chief palace of the King was Iezreel, the
mother City of the Kingdom, was Samaria; Iehu is possessed of the one, without
any sword drawn against him; Iezreel willingly changes the master, yielding it
self to the victor of two Kings, to the auenger of Iezebel; the next care is
Samaria; Either policy, or force shall fetch in that head of the Tribes.

The plentiful issue of Princes is no small assurance to the people; Ahab had
sons enough to furnish the Thrones of all the neighbor nations, to maintain
the hopes of succession, to all times; How secure did he think the perpetuation
of his posterity, when he saw seventy sons from his own loins? Neither was
this Royal issue trusted, either to weak walls, or to one roof; but to the
strong bulwarks of Samaria, and therein to the several guards of the chief
Peers; It was the wise care of their parents not to have them obnoxious to the
danger of a common mis-cariage, or, of those emulations which wait upon the
cloyednesse of an undivided conversation; but, to order their separation so, as
one may rescue other from the peril of assault, as one may respect other out
of a familiar strangeness. Had Ahab and Iezebel been as wise for their
souls, as they were for their seed, both had prospered.

Iehu is yet but in his first act; If all the sons of Ahab bleed not, the
prophecy is unanswered; There shall be no need of his sword, his pen shall
work all this slaughter. He writes a Challenge to Samaria, and therein to the
guardians of the sons of Ahab; daring them, out of the confidence in their
defenced City, in their charets, and horses, in their associats and arms, to
set up the best of their masters sons, on his fathers throne, and to fight
for his succession.

All the Governors of Ahabs children conspire in one common fear; no doubt
there wanted not in that numerous brood of Kings, some great spirits that if,
at least they attained to the notice of this design, longed for a revenge, and
suggested counsels of resolution to their cowardly guardians; Shall an
audacious usurper run thus away with the Crown of Israel? Shall the blood of
Iezebel be thus traitorously spilt, thus wilfully forgotten? O Israelites, can
ye be so base, as to be ruled by my fathers servant? Where are the merits of
Ahab, and Iehoram? What is becomne of the loyal courage of Israel? Doubtless,
ye shall not want able seconds to your valor; Do ye think the royal and
potent alliances of our mother Iezebel; and the remaining heirs of Judah, can
draw back their hands from your aid? will they endure to swallow so cruel an
indignity? Stir up your astonished fortitude, o ye Nobles of Israel; redeem
your bleeding honor, revenge this treacherous conspirator, and establish the
right of the undoubted heirs of your Sovereigns; But as warm clothes to a
dead man, so are the motions of valor to a fearful heart: Behold two Kings
stood not before him, how then shall we stand?

Fear affrights it self rather then it will want bugs of terror: It is true:
Two Kings fell before Iehu; but, two Kings unarmed, unguarded; Had not the
surprizall of Iehu taken advantage of the vnsuspitious nakedness of these two
Princes, his victory had not been thus successful, thus easy. Half one of
those two Kings, upon advertisement and preparation, had abated the fury of
that hot Leader. It is the fashion of fear to represent unto us always the
vvorst, in every event: not looking at the inequality of the advantages, but
the misery of the success: as contrarily, it is the guise of faith, and
valor, by the good issue of one enterprise to raise up the heart to an
expectation and assurance of more.

These men's hearts are dead with their Kings, neither dare entertain the hope
of a safe and prosperous resistance, but basely return, We are thy servants,
and will do all that thou shall bid us, we will not make any King; do thou
that which is good in thine eyes.

Well may Iehu think, these men which are thus disloyal to their charge,
cannot be faithful to me; It is their fear that draws them to this
observation: Were they not cowards, they would not be traitors to their
Princes, subjects to me: I may use their hands, but I will not trust them: It
is a thanklesse obedience that is grounded upon fear; there can be no true
fidelity without love, and reverence. Neither is it other betwixt God and us;
if out of a dread of hell we be officious, who shall thank us for these
respects to our selves?

As one that had tasted already the sweetness of a resolute expedition, Iehu
writes back instantly, If ye be mine, and if ye will harken unto my voice;
take ye the heads of the men your Masters sons, and come to me to Iezreel by
to morrow this time. Valiant Iehu was so well acquainted with the nature of
fear, that he well knew this passion once grown desperate, would be ready to
swallow all conditions: so far therefore does his wisdom improve it, as to
make these Peers his executioners; who presently upon the receipt of his charge
turn cruel, and by a joint consent fetch off the seauenty heads of those
Princes, whom they undertook to guard, whom they had flattered with the
hopes of greater honor.

No doubt, but amongst so many sons of Ahab, some had so demeaned themselves,
that they had won zealous professions of love from their guardians: Except
perhaps death stole upon them in sleep, what tears, what entreaties, what
co^iurations must here needs have been?

What have we done, o ye Peers of Israel, that might deserve this bloody
measure? We are the sons of Ahab, therefore have ye hitherto professed to
observe us; what change is this? why should that which has hitherto kept you
loyal, now make you cruel? Is this the reward of the long peaceable
government of our father? are these the Trophies of Ahabs victories against
Benhadad, Iehorams against Hazael? If we may not reign, yet at least, let us
live: Or if we must dye; why will your hands be imbrued in that blood, which
ye had wont to term royal, and sacred? why will ye of Tutors turn
murderers? All pleas are in vain to them that are deafned with their own
fears. Perhaps these expostulations might have fetched some dewes of pity from
the eyes, and kisses from the lips of these unfaithful Tutors, but cannot
prevent the stroke of death; These Crocodiles weep upon those, whom they
must kill: and if their own sons had been in the place of Ahabs, doubtless
they had been sacrificed to the will of an usurper, to the paients safety: It
is ill relying upon timorous natures; upon every occasion those crazie reeds
will break, and run into our hands. How worthy were Ahab and Iezebel of
such friends? They had been ever false to God, how should men be true to the^?
They had sold themselves to work wickedness, and now they are requited with a
mercenary fidelity: for a few lines have these men sold all the heads of Ahabs
posterity: Could ever the policy of Iezebel have reached so far, as to suspect
the possibility of the extirpation of so ample an issue in one night, by the
hands of her trustiest subjects?

Now she that by her letter sent to the Elders of Iezreel, shed the blood of
Naboth and his sons, has the blood of all her sons shed by a letter sent
from Iezreel, to the Elders of Samaria. At last, God will be sure to come out
of the debt of wicked sinners, and will pay them with that coin, which is
both most proper, and least looked for.

Early in the morning, in that gate of Iezreel where Ahab had passed many an
unjust sentence, is presented unto Iehu, the fearful pledge of his
sovereignty, seventy ghastly heads of the sons of Ahab.

Some carnal eye that had seen so many young and smooth faces besmeared with
blood, would have melted into compassion, bemoning their harmless age, their
untimely end: It is not for the justice of God to stand at the bar of our
corrupted judgment. Except we include some grandchildren of Ahab within this
number, none of these dyed before they were seasoned with horrible Idolatry;
or if they had; they were in the loins of Ahab when he sold himself to work
wickedness; and now it is just with God to punish Ahabs wickedness in this
fruit of his loins. The holy severity of God in the revenge of sin sometimes
goes so far that our ignorance is ready to mistake it for cruelty.

The vvonder and horror of those two heaps has easily drawn together the
people of Iezreel: Iehu meets them in that seat of public judgment; and
finding much amazednes and passionate confusion in their faces; he cleares
them, and sends them to the true original of these sudden and astonishing
massacres.

Howeuer his own conspiracy, and the cowardly treachery of the Princes of
Israel had been (not without their heinous sin) the visible means of this
judgment, yet he directs their eyes to an hyer authority; the just decree of
the Almighty, manifested by his servant Elijah; who even by the vvilling
sins of men can most wisely, most hostilely fetch about his most righteous
and blessed purposes.

If the Peers of Samaria out of a base fear, if Iehu out of an ambition of
reigning shed the foul blood of Ahabs posterity; the sin is their own, but in
the mean time the act is no other then what the infinite justice of God would
justly work by their mis-intentions. Let these Israelites but look up from
earth to heaven, these tragical changes cannot trouble the^; thither Iehu
sends them; wiping off the envy of all this blood, by the warrant of the divine
preordination: In obedience whereunto he sends after these heirs of Ahab, all
his kinsfolks, favorites, priests that remained in Iezreel: and now having
cleared these coasts, he hasts to Samaria: whom should he meet with, in the
way, but the brethren of Ahaziah King of Judah; they are going to visit their
cozens the sons of Ahab: This young troop was thinking of nothing but
iollity, and courtly intertainment, when they meet with death: So suddenly, so
secretly had Iehu dispatched these bold executions, that these Princes could
imagine no cause of suspicion: How could they think it might be dangerous to
be known for the brethren of Ahaziah, or friends to the brethren of Iehoram?
The just providence of the Almighty has brought all this covie under one net;
Iehu thinks it not safe to let go so many auengers of Ahaziahs blood; so many
corriuals of his Sovereignty. The unhappy affinity of Iehosaphat with Ahab is
no less guilty of this slaughter, then Iehues ambition; This match by the
inoculation of one bud, has tainted all the sap of the house of Judah. The two
and forty brethren of Ahaziah are therefore sent after the seventy sons of
Ahab; that they may overtake them in death, whom they came to visit; God will
much less brook Idolatry from the loins of a Iehosaphat: Our entireness
with wicked men feoffs us both in their sins and judgments.

Doubtless, many Israelites that were devoted to the family and allies of
Ahab, looked (what they durst) awry at this common effusion of royal blood; yet
in the worst of the deprauednes of Israel, there were some which both drouped
under the deplored Idolatry of the times, and congratulated to Iehu this severe
vindication of Gods inheritance: Amongst the rest, Ionadab the son of Rechab
was most eminent. That man was by descent derived from Iethro; a Midianite by
nation, but incorporated into Israel; a man, whose piety, and strict
conversation did both teach, and shame those twelve Tribes to which he was
joined; He was the author of an austere rule of ciuility to his posterity; to
whom he debarred the use of wine, cities, possessions: This old and rough
friend of Iehu, (out of his moving habitations) meets him, and applauds his
success; He that allowed not wine to his seed, allows the blood of Ahabs seed
poured out, by the hand of Iehu; He that shunned the city, is carried in Iehues
charet, to the palace of Samaria.

How easily might Iehu have been deceived? Many a one professes uprightness,
who yet is all guile: Ionadabs carriage has been such, that his word merits
trust: It is a blessing upon the plainehearted, that they can be believed:
Honest Ionadab is admitted to the honor of Iehues seat; and called (in stead of
many) to witness the zeal of the new-anointed King of Israel.

Whiles Iehu had to do with Kings, his cunning and his courage held equal pace
together; but now that he is to deal with idolatrous priests, his wile goes
alone, and preuailes: He calls the people together, and dissembling his
intentions, says, Ahad served Baal a little, but Iehu shall serve him much:
Now therefore call unto me all the Prophets of Baal, all his servants, and all
his priests, let none be wanting: for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal:
whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live.

What a dead palenesse was there now in the faces of those few true-harted
Israelites, that looked for an happy restoration of the religion of God? How
could they choose but think; Alas, how are we fallen from our hopes? Is this
the change we looked for? was it only ambition that has set this edge upon the
sword of Iehu? It was not the person of Ahab that we disliked but the sins: If
those must still succeed, what have we gained? Woe be to us, if only the
author of our misery be changed, not the condition, not the cause of our misery.

On the other side, what insultations and triumphs sounded every where of the
joyful Baalites? What glorying of the truth of their profession, because of
the success? what scorns of their dejected opposites? what exprobrations of
the disappointed hopes, and predictions of their adverse Prophets? what
promises to themselves of a perpetuity of Baalisme? How did the dispersed
priests of Baal now flock together, and applaud each others happiness, and
magnify the devotions of their new Sovereign? Never had that Idol so
glorious a day as this for the pomp of his service; Before, he was adored
singlely in corners, now solemn sacrifices shall be offered to him by all his
clients, in the great Temple of the mother City of Israel. I can commend the
zeal of Iehu, I cannot commend the fraud of Iehu; We may come to our end even
by crooked ways: He that bad him to smite for him, did not bid him to lie for
him: Falsehood, though it be but tentatiue, is neither needed, nor approved by
the God of truth: If policy have allowed officious untruths, Religion never.

By this device, the house of Baal is well furnished, well filled; not one of
his Chemarim either might, or would be absent: not one of those which were
present, might be vnrobed: False Gods have ever affected to imitate the true.
Even Baal has Temples, Altars, Priests, vestments: All religions have allotted
peculiar habits to their highest devotions. Those Vestments which they mis-called
sacred are brought forth, and put on for the glory of this service.

Iehu and Ionadab are first careful that this separation be exact; they
search, and see that no servant of the Lord be crept into that thro^g: What
should a religious Israelite do in the Temple of Baal? Were any such there,
he had deserved their smart, who would partake with their worship; but if
curiosity should have drawn any thither, the mercy of Iehu seeks his rescue:
How much more favorable is the God of mercies in not taking advantage of our
infirmities.

Well might this search have bred suspicion, were it not that in all those
Idolatrous sacrifices, the first care was to avoid the profane: Even Baal would
admit no mixture, how should the true God abide it?

Nothing wanted now, but the sacrifice: No doubt whole herds and flocks were
ready for a pretense of some royal hecatombs; whereof some had now already
smoked on their Altars. O Iehu what means this dilation? If thou abhorrest
Baal, why did thou give way to this last sacrifice? why did thou not cut
off these Idolaters before this vpshot of their wickedness? Was it that thou
might be sure of their guiltiness? was it that their number, together with
their sin, might be complete? What acclamations were here to Baal, what joy
in the freedom of their revived worship: when all on the sudden, those that
had sacrificed, are sacrificed; The Soldiers of Iehu by his appointment rush
in with their swords drawn, and turn the temple into a slaughterhouse. How
is the tune now changed? What shrieking was here? what outcries? what running
from one sword, to the edge of another? what scrambling up the walls and
pillars? what climbing into the windows? what vain endeavors to escape that
death which would not be shunned? whether running, or kneeling, or prostrate,
they must dye.

The first part of the sacrifice was Baals, the latter is Gods: The blood of
beasts was offered in the one, of men in the other; the shedding of this was so
much more acceptable to God, by how much these men were more beasts, then those
they sacrificed. Oh happy obedience; God was pleased with a sacrifice from the
house of Baal; The Idolaters are slain, the Idols burnt, the house of Baal
turned to a draught (tho even thus less unclean, less noisome, then in the
former perfumes;) and in one word, Baal is destroyed out of Israel.

Who that had seen all this zeal for God, would not have said; Iehu is a true
Israelite. Yet, he that rooted out Ahab, would not be rid of Jeroboam: He that
destroyed Baal, maintained the two Calves of Dan and Bethel. That Idolatry was
of a lower rank; as being a mis-worship of the true God, whereas the other was
a worship of the false: Even the easier of both is heinous; and shall robb Iehu
of the praise of his uprightness.

A false heart may laudably quit it self of some one gross sin, and in the
mean time hugg some lesser evil that may condemn it: As a man recovered of a
Fever, may dye of a Iaundis, or a Dropsy. We lose the thank of all, if we
wilfully fault in one.

It is an entire goodness that God cares for: Perhaps (such is the bounty of our
God) a partial obedience may be rewarded with a temporal blessing; (as Iehues
severity to Ahab shall carry the crown to his seed for four generations) but we
can never have any comfortable assurance of an eternal retribution, if our
hearts and ways be not perfect with God. Woe be to us, o God, if we be not
all thine: we cannot but everlastingly depart from thee, if we depart not
from every sin: Thou have purged our hearts from the Baal of our gross
Idolatries, oh clear us from the golden Calves of our pety-corruptions also;
that thou may take pleasure in our uprightness; and we may reap the sweet
comforts of thy gracious remuneration.

ATHALIAH and IOASH.
OH the woeful ruins 2 Kings 11, and 12. And 2 Chronicles. 23. and 24.
of the house of good Iehosaphat: Iehu has slain two and forty of his issue;
Athaliah hopes to root out the rest: This daughter of Ahab was not like to be
other then fatal to that holy Line; One drop of that wicked blood was enough
both to impure, and spill all the rest which affinity had mixed with it.

It is not unlike that Ahaziah betaking himself to the society of Iehorams
wars, committed the sway of his Scepter to his mother Athaliah. The daughter
of Iezebel cannot but be plotting: when she hears of the death of Ahaziah, and
his brethren, inflicted by the heavy hand of Iehu, she straight casts for the
Kingdom of Judah: The true heirs are infants, their minority gives her both
color of rule, and opportunity of an easy extirpation. Perhaps, her ambition
was not more guilty then her zeal of Baalisme: she saw Iehu out of a
detestation of Idolatry, trampling on the blood of Iehoram, Iezebel, Ahaziah,
the sons of Ahab, the brethren of Ahaziah, the priests and prophets of Baal;
and in one word, triumphing in the destruction both of Ahab, and his Gods out
of Israel: and now she thinks, Why should not I destroy Iehosaphat, and his God
out of Judah?

Who ever saw an Idolater that was not cruel? Athaliah must needs let out some
of her own blood, out of the throat of Ahaziahs sons; yet she spares not to
shed it out of a thirst of sovereignty. O God how worthy of wonder are thy just
and merciful dispensations? In that thou suffer the seed of good Iehosaphat
to be destroyed by her hand, in whose affinity he offended, and yet sauest one
branch of this stock of Iehosaphat, for the sake of so faithful a progenitor.

Wicked Athaliah, could thou think God would so far forget his Servant
David (though no other of those loins had seconded his virtues) as to suffer
all his seed to be rooted out of the earth? This vengeance was for thy father
Ahab; The man according to Gods own heart shall have a lineall heir to
succeed in his Throne, when thou and thy fathers house shall have vanished into
forgetfulness.

For this purpose has the wise providence of God ordained a Iehosheba, and
matched her in the priestly Tribe: Such reverence did Iehoram, King of Judah
(though degenerated into the Idolatry of his father in law Ahab) bear to this
sacred function, that he marries his daughter to Iehoiada the Priest. Even
Princesses did not then scorn the bed of those that served at Gods Altar: Why
should the Gospel pour contempt upon that which the Law honored?

That good Lady had too much of Iehosaphat in her, to suffer the utter
extirpation of that royal seed; She could not doubtless, without the extreme
danger of her own life, save the life of her nephew Ioash; With what a loving
boldness does she adventure to steal him from amongst those bleeding
carcasses, in the chamber of death? Her match gave her opportunity to effect
that, which both nature, and religion moved her to attempt: neither know I,
whether more to wonder at the cunning of the device, or the courage of the
enterprise, or the secrecy of the concealment, or the happiness of the
success: Certainly, Athaliah was too cruelly-carefull to forget this so late
borne son of Ahaziah; of all the rest, his age would not suffer him to be out
of her eye: In all likelihood therefore, she must needs have missed so noted a
corpse, had there not been a substitution of some other dead child in his
room: In that age, the favor is not so distinguishable; especially of a dead
face. Without some pious deceit this work could never have been effected;
Else, had the child been secretly subduced, and missed by his bloody
grandmother, her perpetual jealousy had both expected a suruiuing heir, and
continued a curious, and unavoidable search: both which were now shunned at
once, whilst Athaliah reckons him for dead, whom Iehosheba has preserved.
Mischief sometimes fails of those appointments, wherein it thinks to have
made the surest work; God laughes in heaven at the plots of Tyrans; and
befooles them in their deepest proiects. He had said to David, Of the fruit of
thy body will I set upon thy seat; In vain shall earth and hell conspire to
frustrate it.

Six years has Ioash, and his nurse been hid in a close cell of the Temple:
Those rooms were destined only to the holy Tribe; yet now rejoice to harbor
such a guest; The rigor of the ordinary Law must yield to cases of so
important necessity.

All this could not possibly be done and continued without the priuity of many
faithful Priests and Levites; who were as careful to keep this counsel, as
hopeful of the issue of it: It is not hard for many honest hearts to agree in
a religious secrecy; Needs must those lips be shut, which God has sealed up.

Judah had not been used to such a yoke; long had it groned under the tyranny
not of a woman only, but an Idolatrous Sydonian: If any of that sex might
have claimed that Scepter, none had so much right to it, as Iehosheba her
self; But good Iehoiada the Priest, who had rather to be a loyal guardian to
the King, then an husband to a Queen, now finds time to set on foot the just
title of Ioash; and to put him into the misvsurped throne of his father Ahaziah.

In the seventh year, therefore, he sends for the Captains, and the Guard; and
having sworn them secrecy; by undoubted witnesses makes faith unto them of the
truth of their native Prince, thus happily rescued from the bloody knife of his
merciless Grandmother; marshals the great business of his Inauguration; gives
every one his charge; sets every one his station; and so disposes of his holy
forces, as was most needful for the safety of the King, the revenge of the
Usurper, the prevention of tumults, the establishment of the Crown upon the
owners head in Peace and Joy.

There was none of all these agents who did not hold the business to be his
own; Every true subject of Judah was feelingly interessed in this service;
neither was there any of them, who was not secretly heart-burned all this
while, with the hateful government of this Idolatrous Tyranness: And now this
inward fire is glad to find a vent; How gladly do they address themselves to
this welcome employment? The greatest part of this secret band were Levites,
who might therefore both meet together with least suspicion, and be more
securely trusted by Iehoiada, under whom they served; Even that holy Priest of
God in stead of teaching the Law, sets the guard, orders the Captains, ranges
the troops of Judah; and in stead of a Censer, brings forth the Spears and
Shields of David; the Temple is for the present, a Field, or an Artillery-yard;
and the Ephods are turned into harness. That house, in the rearing whereof not
the noise of an hammer might be heard, now admits of the clashing of armor,
and the secret murmurs of some military atchieuement: No circumstances either
of place, or calling, are so punctual, as that public necessity may not
dispense with their alteration.

All things are now ready for this solemnity: Each man reioyces to fix upon
his own footing; and longs to see the face of their long-concealed Sovereign;
and vows his blood to the vindication of the common liberty, to the punishment
of a cruel intruder: Now Iehoiada brings forth unto them the Kings Son, and
presents him to the Peers, and people; Hardly can the multitude contain it
self from shouting out too soon: One sees in his countenance the features of
his Father, Ahaziah; another of his Grandfather, Iehoram; a third professes to
discern in him some lines, and fashion of his greatgrandfather Iehosaphat; all
find in his face the natural impressions of Majesty; and read in it the
hopes, yea the prophesies of their future happiness. Not with more joy, then
speed, does Iehoiada accomplish all the rites of the Coronation. Before that
young King could know what was done to him, he is anointed, crowned, presented
with the book of the Law: Those ceremonies were instructiue; and, no doubt,
Iehoiada failed not to comment upon them in due time, to that royal Pupil.

The Oil, wherewith he was anointed, signified his designation to that high
service; and those indowments from heaven that might enable him to so great a
function.

The Crown, wherewith he was adorned, signified that glory and majesty which
should both encourage, and attend his Princely cares.

The book of the Testimony signified the divine rules and directions, whereto
he must frame his heart and actions, in the weilding of that Crown, in the
improuement of that oil.

These three, the oil, the Crown the Testimony, that is, inward powers,
outward magnificence, true piety and justice make up a perfect Prince; None of
these may be wanting; If there be not a due calling of God, and abilities meet
for that greatness, the oil fails: If there be not a Maiesticke grace and
royalty, that may command reverence, the Crown is missing; If there be not a
careful respect to the law of God, as the absolute guide of all counsels, and
determinations, the Testimony is neglected; all of them concurring, make both
King and people happy.

Now, it is time for the people to clap their hands, and by their loud
acclamations to witness their joy; which must needs break forth with so much
more force, by how much it was longer, upon fears and policy, suppressed.

The Court and the Temple were near together; Howeuer it was with Athaliah,
and the late revolted Princes of Judah, according to the common word, the
nearer to the Church, the further from God; their religious predecessors held
it the greatest commodity of their house, that it neighboured upon the house of
God; From her palace might Athaliah easily hear the joyful shouts of the
multitude, the loud noise of the Trumpets; and as astonished with this new
tumult of public gratulations, she comes running into the Temple: Never had
her foot trod upon that holy pauement, till now that she came to fetch a just
revenge from that God whose worship she had contemned.

It fell out well, that her sudden amazedness called her forth, without the
attendance of any strong guard; whose side-taking might have made that quarrel
mutually bloody: She soon hears, and sees what she likes not; her ear
meets with, God save the King; her eye meets with the unlooked for heir of the
Kingdom, sitting on his throne, crowned, and robed, in the royal fashion;
guarded with the Captains and soldiers, proclaimed by the Trumpeters,
acclamed and applauded by the people.

Who can say whether this sight drove her more near to frenzy, or death? How
could it be otherwise, when those great spirits of hers, that had been long
used to an uncontrolled sovereignty, find themselves so inexpectedly
suppressed.

She now rends her clothes, and cries, Treason, treason, as if that voice of
hers could still command all hearts, all hands; as if one breath of hers were
powerful enough to blow away all these new designs: Oh Athaliah, to whom do
thou complain thy self? they are thy just executioners wherewith thou art
encompassed; If it be treason to set up the true heir of Ahaziah, thou
appealest to thy Traitors. The treason was thine, theirs is justice; The time
is now come of thy reckoning for all the royal blood of Judah, which thine
ambition shed; wonder rather at the patience of this long forbearance, then the
rigor of this execution.

There needs no formal seat of Justice in so apparent offense, Iehoiada passes
the sentence of death upon her; Have her forth of the ranges; Let her not be
slain in the house of the Lord; and him that follows her, kill with the
sword.

Had not this usurpation been palpable, Iehoiada would not have presumed to
intermedle; Now being both the Priest of God, and Uncle and Protector to the
lawful King, he does that, out of the necessity of the state, which his infant
Sovereign (if he could have been capable of those thoughts) would have
desired.

Violent hands are laid upon Athaliah, whom no doubt a proud and furious
disdain of so quick a charge, and of so rough an usage made miserably
impatient; Now she frowns, and calls, and shrieks and commands, and threatens,
and reuiles, and entreats in vain; and dies with as much ill will from her
self, as she lived with the ill will of her repining subjects.

I see not any one man of all her late flatterers, that follows her, either
for pity, or rescue; Every man willingly gives her up to justice; Not one
sword is drawn in her defense; Not one eye laments her. Such is the issue of a
tyrannical mis-gouernment; that which is obeyed not without secret hate, is
lost not without public joy.

How like is Athaliah to her mother Iezebel, as in conditions and carriage, so
even in death: Both killed violently, both killed under their own walls; both
slain with Treason in their mouths; both slain in the entrance of a changed
government: One trod on by the horses, the other slain in the horse-gate. Both
paid their own blood for the innocent blood of others.

How suddenly, how easily is Judah restored to it self, after so long, and so
fearful a deprauation; The people scarce believe their own eyes, for the
wonder of this happy change; neither know I whether they be more ioyed in the
sight of their new King, thus strangely preserved, or in the sight of Iehoiada,
that had preserved him.

No man can envy the protection of the young King unto him, by whose means he
lives and reigns: That holy man cares only to improve his authority, to the
common good: He makes a covenant between the Lord, and the King, and the
people: and after so long and dangerous a disjunction, reunites them to each
other. Their revived zeal bestirs it self, and breaks down the Temples, and
altars, and images of Baal, and sacrifices his idolatrous Priest; Shortly, both
Ahab, and Baal is destroyed out of Judah.

The Scepter of Judah is changed from a woman, to a child; but, a Child trained
up, and tutored by Iehoiada; This minority so guided was not inferior to the
mature age of many predecessors. Happy is that land, the nonage of whose
Princes falls into holy and just hands. Yet even these holy and just hands came
short of what they might have done; The high places remained still: Those
altars were erected to the true God, but in a wrong place: It is marvel if
there be not some blemishes found in the best government: I doubt Iehoiada
shall once abuy it dear that he did not his utmost.

But for the main, all was well with Judah, in all the days of Iehoiada; even
after that Ioash was grown past his pupillage: He that was the Tutor to his
infancy, was the councellor of his ripe age; and was equally happy in both:
How pleasing was it to that good High Priest, to be commanded by that charge of
his in the business of God? The young King gives order to the Priests, for the
collection of large sums, to the repayring of the breaches of Gods House. It
becomes him well to take care of that, which was the nursery of his infancy:
And now, after three and twenty years he expostulates with his late Guardian,
Iehoiada, and the rest of his coat, Why repair ye not the breaches?

Oh gracious and happy vicissitude; Iehoiada the Priest had ruled the infancy
of King Ioash in matters of state; and now Ioash the King commands aged
Iehoiada the Priest in matter of devotion. In the affairs of God, the action
is the Priests, the oversight and coaction is the Princes: By the careful
endeavor of both, Gods house is repaired, his service flourishes.

But alas, that it may too well appear, that the ground of this motion was not
altogether inward, no sooner does the life of Iehoiada cease, then the devotion
of Ioash begins to languish: and after some languor, dies.

The benefit of a truly religious Prelate, or Statesman, is not known till
his loss.

Now some idolatrous Peers of Judah have soon mis-carryed the King from the
House of the Lord God of their Fathers, to serve Groves, and Idols. Yea,
whither go we wretched men, if we be left by our Maker? King Ioash is turned,
not idolater only, but persecutor; yea, (which is yet more horrible to
consider) persecutor of the son of that Iehoiada to whom he owes his own
life. Zechariah his Cosen german, his foster-brother, the holy issue of those
parents, by whom Ioash lives, and reigns, for the conscionable rebuke of the
idolatry of Prince, and people, is unjustly, and cruelly murdered by that
unthankful hand: How possible is it for fair and Saint-like beginnings to
shut up in monstrous impieties? Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall. When did God ever put up so foul ingratitude to himself, to his
servants? O Ioash, what eye can pity the fearful destruction of thee, and thy
Judah?

If ye have forgotten the kindness of Iehoiada, your unkindness to Iehoiada
shall not be forgotten: A small army of Syrians came up against Judah and
Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the people, and sent all the spoil
of them to Damascus. Now Hazael reuenges this quarrel of God, and his
anointed; and plagues that people which made themselves unworthy to be the
Lords inheritance.

And what becomes of Ioash? He is left in great diseases, when his own
servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Iehoiada, and
slew him on his bed, and he dyed; and they buried him not in the Sepulcher of
the Kings. Dying Zechariah had said in the bitterness of his departing soul,
The Lord look upon it, and require it: I confess I had rather to have heard
him say, The Lord pass it over, and remit it; so said Steven; such difference
there is between a Martyr of the Law, and of the Gospel: although I will hope
the zeal of justice, not the uncharitable heat of revenge drew forth this
word: God hears it, and now gives an account of his notice; Thus does the Lord
require the blood of Iehoiadaes son; even by the like unthankful hand of the
obliged servants of Ioash. He that was guilty of abominable Idolatry, yet (as
if God meant to wave that challenge) is called to reckoning for his cruel
unthankfulness to Iehoiada; This crime shall make him odious alive, and shall
abandon him dead from the sepulcher of his fathers; as if this last royalty
were too good for him, who had forgotten the law of humanity. Some vices are
such, as Nature smiles upon, though frowned at by divine Justice: Others are
such, as even Nature it self abhorres; such is this of Ingratitude, which
therefore caries so much more detestation from God, as it is more odious even
to them that have blotted out the image of God.

IOASH with ELISHA dying.
THe two Kingdoms 2 Kings 13.
of Judah and Israel, how ever divided both in government, and affection, yet
loved to interchange the names of their Kings; Even Israel also had their
Ioash, no better then that of Judah; he was not more the father of a later
Jeroboam, then (in respect of mis-worship) he was the son of the first
Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin; Those Calves of Dan and Bethel, out of a
politic mis-deuotion, besotted all the succession of the ten usurped Tribes:
yet even this Idolatrous King of Israel comes down to visit the sick bed of
Elisha, and weeps upon his face.

That holy Prophet was never any flatterer of Princes, neither spared he
inuectiues against their most plausible sins: yet King Ioash, that was beaten
by his reproves, washes that face with the tears of love, and sorrow, which
had often frowned upon his wickedness.

How much difference there was betwixt the Ioash of Israel, and the Ioash of
Judah? That of Judah having been preserved and nurtured by Iehoiada the
Priest, after all professions of dearnesse shuts up in the unkind murder of
his son; and that merely for the just reproof of his own Idolatry: This of
Israel having been estranged from the Prophet Elisha, and sharply rebuked for
the like offense, makes love to his dying reprouer, and bedewes his pale face
with his tears: Both were bad enough, but this of Israel was, howeuer vicious,
yet good-natured: That of Judah added to his wickedness, an ill disposition, a
dogged humor. There are varieties even of evil men; some are worse at the
root, others at the branch; some more ciuilly harmless, others fouler in
morality. According to the exercise of the restraining grace, natural men do
either rise, or fall in their ill.

The longest day must have his evening: Good Elisha, that had lived some ninety
years, a wonder of Prophets, and had outworne many successions in the thrones
of Israel, and Judah, is now cast upon the bed of his sickness, yea, of his
death: That very age might seem a disease; which yet is seconded with a
languishing distemper: It is not in the power of any holiness to privilege us
from infirmity of body, from final dissolution: He that stretched himself
upon his bed, over the dead carcass of the Shunamites son, and revived it;
must now stretch out his own limbs upon his sick bed, and dye: He saw his
Master Elijah rapt up suddenly from the earth, and fetched by a fiery chariot
from this vale of mortality; himself must leasurely wait for his last pangs,
in a lingering passage to the same glory. There is not one way appointed to us,
by the divine providence, unto one common blessedness: One has more pain,
another has more speed: Violence snatcheth away one, another by an insensible
pace draws every day nearer to his term: The wisdom and goodness of God
magnifies it self in both: Happy is he that after due preparation, is past
through the gates of death, ere he be aware; Happy is he that by the holy use
of long sickness is taught to see the gates of death afar off, and addressed
for a resolute passage: The one dies like Elijah, the other like Elisha, both
blessedly.

The time was, when a great King sent to Elisha to know if he should recover;
now the King of Israel, as knowing that Elisha shall not recover (so had his
consumption spent him) comes to visit the dying Prophet; and when his tears
would give him leave; breaks forth into a passionate exclamation, O my father,
my father, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof. Yet the Calves of Dan
and Bethel have left some goodness in Ioash: As the best man has something in
him worthy of reproof; so the faultiest has something commendable. Had not the
spirit of God himself told us, that Ioash did that which was evil in the
sight of the Lord, we had admired this piety, this reverent respect to the
Prophet. The holiest man could not have said more: It is possible for the
clients of a false worship, to honor (out of another regard) the professors of
Truth; From the hand of Elisha had Iehu the grandfather of Ioash received his
unction to the Kingdom: this favor might not be forgotten.

Visitation of the sick is a duty required both by the law of humanity, and of
religion; Bodily infirmity is sad, and comfortless; and therefore needs the
presence, and counsel of friends to relieve it; Although, when we draw the
curtains of those that are eminently gracious, we do rather fetch (with
Ioash) then bring a blessing.

How sensible should we be of the loss of holy men, when a Ioash spends his
tears upon Elisha? If we be more affected with the forgoing of a natural
friend, or kinsman, then of a noted and useful Prophet, it argues more love to
our selves, then to the Church of God, then to GOD himself.

What use there was of charets and horsemen in those wars of the Ancient, all
Histories can tell us: All the strength of the battle stood in these: There
could be neither defense, nor offense, but by them: such was Elisha unto
Israel; The greatest safeguard to any nation is the sanctity, and faithfulness
of their Prophets; without which, the Church and State lies open to utter
desolation.

The same words that Elisha said of his master Elijah, when he saw him taken up
from the earth, does Ioash now speak of Elisha, near his dissolution: O my
father, my father, the charets of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. The words
were good; the tears were pious; but where are the actions? O Ioash, if the
Prophet were thy father, where was thy filial obedience? he cried down thy
Calves, thou vpheldst them; he counseled thee to good, thou did evil in the
sight of the Lord.

If the Prophet were the charets and horsemen of Israel, why did thou fight
against his holy doctrine? If thou weepest for his loss, why did thou not
weep for those sins of thine, that procured it?

Had thine hand answered thy tongue, Israel had been happy in Elisha; Elisha
had been happy in Israel, and thee; Words are no good trial of profession:
The worst men may speak well: Actions have only the power to descry
hypocrites.

Yet even a Ioash thus complying, shall not go away unblessed: This outward
kindness shall receive an outward retribution; These few drops of warm water
shed upon the face of a Prophet, shall not lose their reward; The spirit of
prophecy forsakes not the deathbed of Elisha; He calls for bow, and arrows,
and puts them into the hand of Ioash, and putting his hands upon the Kings
hand, he bids to shoot Eastward: and whiles the shaft flies, and lights, he
says, The arrow of the Lords deliverance from Syria; for thou shall smite the
Syrians in Aphek, till thou have consumed them: If the weak and withered hand
of the Prophet had not been upon the youthful, and vigorous hand of the King,
this bow had been drawn in vain; the strength was from the hand of the King,
the blessing from the hand of the Prophet: He whose real parable has made the
earth to be Syria, the arrow, revenge, the archer, Ioash, has obtained for his
last boon from God to Israel, that this archer shall shoot this arrow of
revenge, into the heart of Syria, and wound it to death. When the hand of the
King, and of the Prophet draws together, there cannot choose but success must
follow.

How readily does Elisha now make good the words of Ioash? How truly is he the
Charets, and Horsemen of Israel? Israel had not fought without him, much less
had been victorious; If theirs be the endeavor, the success is his: Even the
dying Prophet puts life, and speed into the Forces of Israel, and whiles he is
digging his own grave, is raising Trophies to Gods people.

He had received kindness from the Syrians; amongst them was he harbored in
the dearth; and from some of their Nobles, was presented with rich gifts; but
their enmity to Israel drowns all his private respects; he cannot but profess
hostility to the public enemies of the Church: Neither can he content
himself with a single prediction of their ruin. He bids Ioash to take the
arrows, and smite upon the ground; he sets no number of those strokes; as
supposing the freque^ce of those blows, which Ioash might well (upon his
former parabolicall act) understand to be significant. The slack hand of the
King smites but thrice. So apt we are to be wanting to our selves; so coldly
do we execute the commands of God: The sick Prophet is not more grieved, then
angry at this dull negligence; Doubtless God had revealed to him (for his last
gratification) that upon his fervent prayers, so often as Ioash should
voluntarily (after his general charge) smite the earth, so often should Israel
smite Syria. Elishaes zeal does not languish with his body: with a fatherly
authority he chides him, who had styled him father; not fearing to spend some
of his last wind in a myld reproof, Thou should have smitten five or six
times, then thou had smitten Syria till thou had consumed it, whereas now
thou shall smite Syria but thrice. Not that the unchangeable decree of the
Almighty meant to suspend it self upon the uncertain issue of Ioashes will;
but, he that put this word into the mouth of his Prophet, puts this motion
into the hand of the King, which did not more willingly stay, then necessarily
obey that providence whereby it was stirred. Even whiles we have our freest
choice, we fall upon those actions and circumstances, whereby the just and
holy will of our God is brought about. Our very neglects, our ignorances shall
fulfill his eternal counsels.

Elisha dies, and is buried; his miracles do not cease with his life: Who can
marvel that his living prayers raised the son of the Shunamite, when his
dead bones raise the carcass that touched them. God will be free in his
works; he that must dye himself, yet shall revive another; the same power
might have continued life to him, that gave it by his bones. Israel shall well
see that he lives, by whose virtue, Elisha was both in life, and death,
miraculous: Whiles the Prophet was alive, the impetration might seem to be
his, though the power were Gods; now that he is dead, the bones can challenge
nothing, but send the wondering Israelites to that almighty Agent, to whom it is
all one to work by the quick, or dead. Were not the men of Israel more dead
then the carcass thus buried, how could they choose but see in this revived
corpse, an emblem of their own condition? how could they choose but think, If
we adhere to the God of Elisha, he shall raise our decayed estates, and
restore our nation to the former glory.

The Sadduces had as yet no being in Israel, with what face could that heresy
ever after look into the world, when before the birth of it, it was so
palpably convinced, with an example of the resurrection? Intermission of time,
and degrees of corruption add nothing to the impossibility of our rising: The
body that is once cold in death, has no more aptitude to a reanimation, then
that which is moldred into dust; Only the divine power of the Maker must
restore either, can restore both: When we are dead, and buried in the grave of
our sin; it is only the touch of Gods Prophets, applying unto us the death
and resurrection of the Son of God, that can put new life into us; No less
true, though spiritual, is the miracle of our raising up from an estate of
inward corruption, to a life of grace.

Yet all this preuailes not with Israel: No bones of Elisha could raise them
from their wicked Idolatry: and, notwithstanding their gross sins, Ioash their
King prospers: Whether it were for the sake of Iehu, whose grand-chyld he was;
or for the sake of Elisha, whose face he wept upon, his hand is notably
successful: not only against the son of Hazael, King of Syria, whom he
beats out of the Cities of Israel; but, against Amaziah King of Judah, whom he
took Prisoner, beating down the very walls of Jerusalem, and returning laden
with the sacred, and rich spoil both of the Temple, and Court, to his Samaria.

Oh the depth of the divine Justice, and wisdom in these outward
administrations! The best cause, the best man does not ever fare best: Amaziah
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; Ioash, evil: Amaziah
follows David (though not with equal paces) Ioash follows Jeroboam, yet is
Amaziah shamefully foiled by Ioash; Whether God yet meant to visit upon this
King of Judah, the still-odious unthankfulness of his father to Iehoiada; or, to
plague Judah for their share in the blood of Zechariah, and their late revolt
to Idolatry; or, whether Amaziahs too much confidence in his own strength
(which moved his bold challenge to Ioash) were thought fit to be thus taken
down, or what ever other secret ground of Gods judgment there might be, it is
not for our presumption to inquire: Who so by the event shall judge of love, or
hatred, shall be sure to run upon that woe, which belongs to them that call
good evil, and evil good.

What a savage piece of Justice it is to put the right, whether of inheritance,
or honor, to the decision of the sword, when it is no news for the better to
mis-cary by the hand of the worse?

The race is not to the swift; the battle is not to the strong; no, not to the
good: Perhaps, God will correct his own by a foil; perhaps he will plague his
enemy by a victory. They are only our spiritual combats wherein our faithful
courage is sure of a crown.

VZZIAH Leprous.
EVen the Throne of 2 Chro. 26 And 2 King, 15.
David passed many cha^ges of good, and evil: Good Iehosaphat was followed
with three successions of wicked Princes; and those three, were again succeeded
with three others godly, and virtuous; Amaziah for a long time shone fair, but
at the last, shut up in a cloud; The gods of the Edomites marred him; his
rebellion against God, stirred up his peoples rebellion against him: The same
hands that slew him, crowned his son Vzziah; so as the young King might
imagine it was not their spite, that drew violence upon his father, but his
own wickedness; Both early did this Prince reign, and late; he began at
sixteen; and sat fifty two years in the Throne of Judah: They that mutined in
the declining age of Amaziah, the father; are obsequious to the childhood of
the son, as if they professed to adore souerainty, whiles they hated
lewdness: The unchanged government of good Princes is the happiness, no less
of the subjects then of themselves: The hand knows best to guide those reins
to which it has been inured; and even mean hackneyes go on cheerfully in
their wonted rode; Custom, as it makes evils more supportable, so where it
meets with constant minds, makes good things more pleasing and beneficial.

The wise and holy Prophet Zechariah, was an happy Tutor to the minority of
King Vzziah; That vessel can hardly mis-cary where a skillful steres-man sits
at the helm: The first praise of a good Prince is to be judicious, and just,
and pious, in himself; the next is, to give ear, and way, to them that are
such: Whiles Zechariah has the visions of God, and Vzziah takes the counsels
of Zechariah, it is hard to say whether the Prophet, or the King, or the State
be happier.

God will be in no man's debt; so long as Vzziah sought the Lord, God made him
to prosper. Even what we do out of duty cannot want a reward: Godliness never
disappointed any man's hopes, often has exceeded them. If Vzziah fight against
the Philistims, If against the Arabians, and Mehunims; according to his names,
the Vzziah, Azariah.
strength, the help of the Almighty is with him: The Ammonites come in with
presents, and all the neighbor nations ring of the greatness, of the
happiness of Vzziah; His bounty and care makes Jerusalem both strong, and
proud of her new Towers; yea the very Desert must taste of his munificence.

The outward magnificence of Princes cannot stand firm, unless it be built
upon the foundations of providence and frugality; Vzziah had not been so great
a King, if he had not been so great an husband; he had his flocks in the
deserts, and his herds in the plains; his plowes in the fields, his
vine-dressers upon the mountains, and in Carmel: neither was this more out of
profit, then delight, for he loved husbandry. Who can contemn those callings
for meannesse, which have been the pleasures of Princes?

Hence was Vzziah so potent at home, so dreadful to his neighbors; his wars
had better sinews then theirs; which of his predecessors was able to maintain
so settled an army, of more then of three hundred and ten thousand trained
soldiers, well furnished, well fitted for the suddenest occasion? Thrift is
the strongest prop of power.

The greatness of Vzziah, and the rare devices of his artificial Engines for
war, have not more raised his fame, then his heart: so is he swollen up with
the admiration of his own strength, and glory, that he breaks again; How
easy it is for the best man to dote upon himself; and to be lifted up so
high, as to lose the sight both of the ground, whence he rises, and of the hand
that advanced him: How hard it is for him that has invented strange engines
for the battering of his enemies, to find out any means to beat down his own
proud thoughts? Wise Solomon knew what he did, when he prayed to be delivered
from too much: Lest, said he, I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the
Lord? Upon this Rock did the son of Solomon run, and split himself; His
full sails of prosperity carried him into presumption and ruin: what may he
not now do? what may he not be? Because he found his power otherwise
unlimited; ouer-ruling in the Court, the Cities, the Fields, the Deserts, the
Armies, and Magazins, therefore he thinks he may do so in the Temple too: as
things royal, civil, husbandly, military passed his hands, so why should not
(thinks he) sacred also? It is a dangerous indiscretion for a man not to know
the bounds of his own calling: What confusion does not follow upon this
breaking of ranks?

Upon a solemn day, King Vzziah clothes himself in Pontifical robes, and in
the view of that populous assembly, walks up in state, into the Temple of God,
and boldly approaching to the Altar of Incense, offers to burn sweet odours
upon it, to the God of heaven: Azariah the Priest is sensible of so perilous
an incrochment; he therefore attended with fourscore valiant assistants, of
that holy Tribe, haste^s after the King, and finding him with the censer in his
hand, ready addressed to that sinful devotion, stays him with a free, and
grave expostulation: There is no place wherein I could be sorry to see thee, o
King, but this, where thou art; neither is there any act, that we should
grudge thee so much, as this, which is the most sacred; Is it possible that so
great an oversight should fall into such wisdom? Can a religious Prince,
trained up under an holy Zechariah, after so many years zealous profession of
piety, be either ignorant, or regardlesse of those limits, which God has set
to his own services?

Oh, what means this uncouth attempt? Consider, o dear Sovereign, for Gods
sake, for thy souls sake, consider, where thou art, what thou do; it is
Gods house wherein thou stand, not thine own; Look about thee, and see,
whether these vailes, these Tables, these Pillars, these Walls, these
Pauements, have any resemblance of earth: There is no place in all the world
whence thy God has excluded thee, but only this; this he has reserved for his
own use: And can thou think much to allow one room as proper to him, who
has not grudged all the rest to thee? But if it be thy zeal of a personal
service to God, that has carried thee hither; alas, how can thou hope to
please the Almighty with a forbidden sacrifice? Which of thine holy Progenitors
ever dared to tread, where thy foot now stands? which of the^ ever put forth
their hand to touch this sacred Altar? Thou know that God has set apart,
and sanctified his own attendants; wherefore serves the Priesthood, if this be
the right of Kings? Were it not for the strict prohibition of our God, it could
seem no other then an honor to our profession, that a King should think to
dignifie himself by our employment; but now, knowing the severe charge of the
great King of heaven, we cannot but tremble to see that censer in thine hand;
who ever, out of the holy Tribe, has weilded it unrevenged? This affront is
not to us, it is to the God who^ we serve; In awe of that terrible Majesty, as
thou would avoid some exemplary judgment, O King, withdraw thy self, not
without humble deprecations, from this presence; and lay down that interdicted
handful, with fear and trembling; Be thou ever a King, let us be Priests;
The Scepter is thine, let Censers be ours.

What religious heart could do other then relent at so faithful and just an
admonition? But how hard it is for great persons to yield they have offended?
Vzziah must not be faulty; what is done rashly shall be born out with power; He
was wroth; and thus expresses it: What means this saucy expostulation, O ye
sons of Leui? how dare ye thus malapertly control the well-meant actions of
your Sovereign? If ye be Priests, remember that ye are subjects; or if ye will
needs forget it, how easy is it for this hand to awake your memory? What such
offense can it be for me to come into that house, and to touch that Altar,
which my royal Progenitors have made, beautified, consecrated? Is the God of
this place only yours? Why do ye thus ambitiously ingrosse Religion? If
Princes have not intermedled with these holy affairs, it was because they
would not, not because they might not; When those laws were made for the
Sanctuary, there were no Kings to grace these divine ceremonies; yet even then,
Moses was privileged: The persons of Princes (if ye know not) are no less
sacred then your own. It is your presumption to account the Lords anointed,
profane: Contest with those, whose dry and unhallowed heads are subject to
your power; For me, I will not ask your leave to be devout; Look ye to your
own Censers, presume not to meddle with mine; In the mean time, can ye think
this insolence of yours shall escape unrevenged? Can it stand with the honor
of my sovereignty, to be thus proudly checked by subjects? God do so to me and
more also, if. Whiles Vzziah yet speaks, God strikes: Ere the words of fury
can come forth of his mouth, the leprosy appears in his forhead: Leprosy was
a most loathsome disease; the forhead is the most conspicuous part: Had this
shameful scurfe broken forth upon his hand, or foot, or breast, it might have
been hid from the eyes of men; now the forhead is smitten with this judgment,
that God may proclaim to all beholders, Thus shall it be done to the man whose
arrogance has thrust him upon a sacred charge. Public offenses must have
open shame.

It is a dangerous thing to put our selves into the affairs, into the presence
of God, unwarranted; There cannot be a more foolish mesprision, then, because
we are great on earth, to think we may be bold with heaven: When Gods
messengers cannot prevail by counsels, entreaties, threats, it is time for God
to show his immediate judgments. Wilful offenders can expect nothing but a
fearful revenge.

Now begins Vzziah to be confounded in himself; and shame strives with
leprosy, for a place in his forehead; The hand of God has done that in an
instant, which all the tongues of men had attempted in vain: There needs no
further solicitor of his egresse, the sense of his plague sends him forth
alone: And now he thinks; Wretched man that I am, how have I angered God, and
undone my self? I would needs come in like a Priest, I now go forth a leper:
the pride of my heart made me think my self worthy the presence of a God; Gods
just displeasure has now made me unworthy of the presence of men: whiles I
affected the altar, I have lost my throne; whiles I scornfully rejected the
advice and censures of Gods ministers, I am now becomne a spectacle of horror,
and deformity, to my own servants; I that would be sending up perfumes to
heaven, have made my nastinesse hateful to my own senses. What do I under
this sacred roof? Neither is Gods house now, for me, nor mine own; what
cell, what dungeon is close enough for me, wherein to wear out the residue of
mine unhappy and uncomfortable days? O God thou art just, and I am miserable.

Thus with a dejected countenance, and sad heart, does Vzziah have to retire
himself; and wishes, that he could be no less hid from himself, then from
others: how easy is it for the God of heaven to bring down the highest pitch of
earthly greatness, and to humble the stubbornest pride?

Upon the leisure of second thoughts, Vzziah cannot but acknowledge much favor
in this correction, and confess to have escaped well; Others, he knew, had
been struck dead, or swallowed up quick for so presumptuous an intrusion: It
is happy for him if his forehad may excuse his soul.

Vzziah ceased not to be a King, when he began to be a leper; the disease of
his forhead did not remove his Crown: his son Iotham reigned for him, under
him; and whiles he was not seen, yet he was obeyed. The character of
sovereignty is indeleble, whether by bodily infirmity, or by spiritual
censure: Neither is it otherwise, O God, betwixt thee, and us, if we be once a
royal generation unto thee, our leprosies may deforme us, they shall not
dethrone us: still shall we have the right, still the possession of that
glorious kingdom, wherein we are invested from eternity.

AHAZ with his new Altar.
AFter many unhappy 2 King. 16.
changes of the two thrones; Ahaz succeedes Iotham in the Kingdom of Judah: an
ill son of a good father; not more the heir of David's seat, then of
Ieroboams sin: Though Israel play the harlot, yet who can abide that Judah
should sin? It is hard not to be infected with a contagious neighborhood: who
ever read that the Kingdom of Israel was seasoned with the vicinity of the
true religion of Judah? Goodness (such as our nature is) is not so apt to
spread: A tainted air does more easily affect a sound body, then an wholesome
air can clear the sick: Superstition has ever bin more successful, then
truth; The young years of Ahaz are soon misled to a plausible mis-deuotio^.

A man that is once fallen from truth, knows not where he shall stay: From the
Calves of Jeroboam is Ahaz drawn to the gods of the heathen; yea, now, bulls
and goats are too little for those new deities, his own flesh and blood is
but dear enough; He made his son to pass through their fire. Where do we
find any religious Israelite thus zealous for God? Neither does the holiness
and mercy of our God require so cruel a sacrifice: neither is our dull, and
niggardly hand ready to gratify him with more easy obediences; O God how
gladly should we offer unto thee our souls, and bodies, which we may enjoy
so much the more, when they are thine; since zealous Pagans stick not to leese
their own flesh, and blood in an Idols fire?

He that has thus shamefully cast off the God of his fathers, cannot be long
without a fearful revenge. The King of Israel galls him on the one side; the
King of Syria on the other: To avoid the shocke of both, Ahaz does not betake
himself to the God who^ he had offended; who was able to make his enemies at
peace with him, but to Tiglath Pileser King of Ashur: Him does he woo with
suits, with gifts; and robs God of those presents, which may indeare so strong
an helper. He that thought not his son too dear for an Idol, thinks not Gods
silver and gold too dear for an Idolatrous abettor.

Oh the infinite patience of the Almighty! God gives success a while to so
offensive a riuality: This Assyrian King preuailes against the King of Syria;
kills him, and takes his chief City, Damascus; The quarrel of the King of
Judah has enlarged the territories of his assistant, beyond hope; And now,
whiles this Assyrian victor is inioying the possession of his new-won Damascus:
Ahaz goes up thither to meet him, to congratulate the victory, to add unto
those triumphs, which were drawn on by his solicitation. There he sees a new
fashioned Altar, that pleases his eye; That old form of Salomons, which was
made by the pattern showd to Moses in the Mount, is now grown stale, and
despicable; A model of this more exquisite frame is sent to Vrijah, the
Priest; and must be sampled in Jerusalem. It is a dangerous presumption to make
innouations, if but in the circumstances of Gods worship. Those humane
additions which would seem to grace the institution of God, deprave it; That
infinite wisdom knows best what will please it self, and prescribes
accordingly; The foolishness of God is wiser then the wisdom of men;
Idolatry and falsehood is commonly more gaudy and plausible, then truth; That
heart which can for the outward homeliness despise the ordinances of God, is
already aliened from true religion, and lies open to the grossest superstition.

Never any Prince was so foully idolatrous, at that he wanted a Priest to
second him: An Vrijah is fit to humor an Ahaz. Greatness never could command
any thing, which some servile wits were not ready both to applaud, and justify.

Ere the King can be returned from Damascus, the altar is finished; It were
happy if true godliness could be so forward in the prosecutions of good:
Neither is this strange pile reared only, but thrust up betwixt Gods altar,
and the temple; in an apparent precedence, as if he said, Let the God of Judah
come behind the Deities of Syria.

And now, to make up the full measure of his impiety, this idolatrous King will
himself be sacrificing upon his new altar, to his new gods; the gods of
Damascus: An usurped priesthood well becomes a false Deity. Because (says he)
the gods of the Kings of Syria help them, therefore will Isacrifice to them,
that they may help me.

Oh blind superstition! how did the gods of Syria help their Kings, when both
those Kings, and their gods were vanquished, and taken by the King of Assyria?
Even this Damascus, and this altar were the spoil of a foreign enemy; How
then did the gods of Syria help their Kings, any other, then to their ruin?
what dotage is this to make choice of a foiled protection? But had the Syrians
prospered, must their gods have the thanks? Are there no authors of good but
blocks or Devils? Or is an outward prosperity the only argument of truth, the
only motive of devotion? O foolish Ahaz, it is the God thou have forsaken,
that plagues thee, under whose only arm thou might have prevailed. His
power beats those Pagan stocks, one against other, so, as one while, one seems
victorious, another vanquished; and at last he confounds both, together with
their proudest clients: Thy self shall be the best instance.

Of all the Kings of Judah hitherto, there is none so dreadful an example
either of sin, or judgment, as this son of good Iotham. I abhor to think that
such a monster should descend from the loins of David; where shall be the
period of this wickedness? He began with the hie places, thence he descends
to the Calves of Dan and Bethel; from thence he falls to a Syrian altar, to the
Syrian god; then from a partnership he falls to an utter exclusion of the true
God, and blocking up his Temple; and then to the sacrifice of his own son;
and at last, as if hell were broken loose upon Gods inheritance, every several
City, every hie place of Judah has a new god: No marvel if he be branded by
the Spirit of God, with, This is that King Ahaz.

What a fearful plague did this noisome deluge of sin leave behind it, in the
land of Judah? who can express the horror of Gods revenge upon a people that
should have been his? Pekah the King of Israel, slew an hundred and twenty
thousand of them in one day; amongst whom was Maseiah the son of Ahaz: O just
judgment of the Almighty! Ahaz sheds the blood of one son to an idol: The
true God sheds the blood of another of his sons, in revenge.

Yet, the hand of the Lord is stretched out still:

Two hundred thousand of them were carried away by the Israelites captive to
Samaria:

The Edomites came, and carried away another part of them for bondslaues, to
their country:

The Philistims came up and shared the Cities of the south of Judah, and the
villages thereof; Shortly, what other is miserable Judah, then the prey, and
spoil of all the neighboring Nations? For the Lord brought Judah low because
of Ahaz King of Israel, for he 2 Chr. 28. 19.
made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord: As for the great
King of Ashur, whom Ahaz purchased with the sacrilegious pillage of the house
of God, in stead of an aid, he proves a burden; How ever he sped in his first
onsets; now, he distressed Judah, 2 Chr. 28. 20.
but strengthened it not: The charge was as great, as the benefit small: sooner
shall he eat them out, then rescue them. No arm of flesh can shelter Ahaz
from a vengeance.

Be wise, o ye Kings, be instructed o ye Judges of the earth; serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling: Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and
ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.

His subjects complain, that he died so late, and, as repenting that he ever
was, deny him a room in the sepulchers of Kings: as if they said; the common
earth of Jerusalem is too good for him that degenerated from his Progenitors,
marred his kingdom, depraved his people, forsook his God.

The utter Destruction of the Kingdom of ISRAEL.
IVdah was at a sore 2 King. 17.
heave, yet Israel shall mis-cary before it; such are the sins of both, that
they strive whether shall fall first; but this lot must light upon the ten
Tribes; though the late King of Judah were personally worse then the most of
Ieroboams successors, yet, the people were generally less evil: upon whom the
encroachments of Idolatry were more by obtrusion, then by consent, besides that
the thrones of Judah had some interchanges of good Princes, Israel none at all:
The same justice therefore that made Israel a scourge to Judah, made Assyria a
scorpion to Israel.

It was the quarrel of Judah that first engaged the King of Ashur in this
war against Israel; now he is not so easily fetched off; So we have seen some
eager mastiue, that has been set on by the least clap of the hand, but could
not be loosned by the force of staves.

Salmaneser King of Assyria comes up against Hoshea King of Israel, and subdues
him; and puts him to his Tribute: This yoke was uncouth and unpleasing; The
vanquished Prince was neither able to resist, nor willing to yield; secretly
therefore he treats with the King of Egypt for assistance, as desiring rather
to hazard his liberty by the hand of an equal, then to enjoy a quiet
subjection under the hand of an ouer-ruling power; we cannot blame Princes to
be jealous of their soueraignties; The detaining of his yearly Tribute, and
the whisperings with new confederates, have drawn up the King of Ashur to
perfect his own victories: He returns therefore with a strong power, and after
three years siege, takes Samaria, imprisons Hoshea, and in the exchange of a
woeful captivity, he peoples Israel with Assyrians, and Assyria with
Israelites. Now that abused soil has upon a surfeit of wickedness, cast out
her perfidious owners, and will try how it can fare with heathenish strangers:
Now the Assyrian gallants triumph in the Palaces of Samaria and Iezreel; whiles
the Peers and Captains of Israel are driven manicled through the Assyrian
streets, and billeted to the several places of their perpetual servitude:
Shortly, now the flourishing Kingdom of the ten Tribes is comne to a final
and shameful end; and so vanished in this last dissipation, that, since that
day, no man could ever say, This was Israel.

Oh terrible example of vengeance, upon that peculiar people, whom God has
chosen forhimselfe, out of all the world: All the world were witnesses of the
favors of their miraculous deliverances, and protections; All the world shall
be witnesses of their just confusion.

It is not in the power of slight errors to set off that infinite mercy: What
was it, o God, what was it, that caused thee to cast off thine own
inheritance? What but the same that made thee to cast the Angels out of
heaven? Even their rebellious sins. Those sins dared to emulate the greatness
of thy mercies, no less, then they forced the severity of thy judgments: They
left all the commandments of the Lord their God; and made them molten Images,
even two Calves; and made a grove and worshipped all the host of heaven; and
served Baal; and caused their sons and daughters to pass through the fire,
and used divination, and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the
sight of the Lord to provoke him to anger.

Neither were these slips of frailty, or ignorant mis-takings, but wilful
crimes, obstinate impieties, in spite of the doctrines, reproves, menaces,
miraculous conuictions of the holy Prophets, which God sent amongst them: Thy
destruction is of thy self, o Israel; what could the just hand of the Almighty
do less then consume a nation so incorrigibly flagitious? A nation so
unthankful for mercies, so impatient of remedies, so incapable of repentance:
so obliged, so warned, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked?

What nation under heaven can now challenge an vndefaisible interest in God;
when Israel it self is cast off? what Church in the world can show such dear
loue-tokens from the Almighty as this, now-abhorred, and adulterous spouse? He
that spared not the natural Olive, shall he spare the wild? It is not for us
sinners of the Gentiles to be highminded, but awful.

The Israelites are carried captive into Assyria; those goodly Cities of the ten
tribes may not lie wast, and unpeopled: The wisdom of the victor finds it
fit to transplant his own Colonies thither; that so he may raise profit
thence, with security: From Babylon therefore, and Cuthah, and Aua, and Hamath,
and Sepharuaim, does he send of his own subjects to possess, and inhabit the
Cities of Samaria. The land does not brook her new Tenants: They feared not the
Lord; (how should they, they knew him not?) Therefore the Lord sent Lions
amongst them which slew some of them: Not the veriest Pagan can be excused for
his ignorance of God; Even the deprauedst nature might teach us to tremble at a
Deity; It is just with the Almighty not to put up neglect, where he has
bestowed reason.

The brute creatures are sent to revenge the quarrel of their Maker, upon
worse beasts, then themselves. Still has God left himself Champions in
Israel: Lions tear the Assyrians in pieces; and put them in mind, that, had it
not been for wickedness, that land needed not to have changed masters. The
great Lord of the world cannot want means to plague offenders: If the men be
gone, yet the beasts are there; And if the beasts had been gone, yet so long
as there were stones in the walls, in the quarries God would be sure of
auengers: There is no security but in being at peace with God.

The King of Assyria is sued to, for remedy: Even these Pagans have learned to
know that these Lions were sent from a God; that this punishment is for sin;
They know not the manner of the God of the land, therefore he has sent Lions
among them: These blind Heathen that think every land has a several God;
yet, hold that God, worthy of his own worship; yet, hold that worship must be
grounded upon knowledge; the want of that knowledge, punishable, the punishment
of that want, just, and divine: How much worse then Assyrians are they that are
ready to ascribe all calamities to nature to chance? that acknowledging but one
God of all the world, are yet careless to know him to serve him?

One of the Priests of Israel is appointed to be carried back to Samaria, to
teach the Assyrian Colony the fashions of the God of the land; not for
devotion, but for impunity: vain Politicians think to satisfy God by
patching up religions; any forms are good enough for an unknown deity: The
Assyrian Priests teach, and practice the worship of their own Gods; The
Israelitish Priest prescribes the worship of the true God; The people will
follow both; the one out of liking, the other out of fear: What a prodigious
mixture was here of religions? true with false, Jewish with Paganish, divine
with devilish; Every division of these transplanted Assyrians had their
several deities, high places, sacrifices; this Priest of Israel intercommons
with every of them: So as now these fathers of Samaritanisme, are in at all;
They fear the Lord and serve their idols: No beggars cloak is more peeced then
the religion of these new inhabitants of Israel. I know not how their bodies
sped for the Lions, I am sure their souls fared the worse for this medlie:
Above all things God hates a mungrell devotion; If we be not all Israel, it
were better to be all Ashur; It cannot so much displease God to be unknown
or neglected, as to be consorted with Idols.

HEZEKIAH and SENACHERIB.
ISrael is gone, Judah 2 Kings 18. and 19.
is left standing; or rather some few sprigs of those two Tribes: so we have
seen in the shredding of some large Timber-tree, one or two boughs left at
the top to hold up the sap. Who can but lament the poor remainders of that
languishing kingdom of David?

Take out of the two Tribes of Judah, and Benjamin, one hundred and twenty
thousand, whom Pekah the King of Israel slew in one day. Take out two hundred
thousand that were carried away captive to Samaria; Take out those that were
transported into the bondage of the Edomites; and those that were subdued in
the South parts, by the Philistims; alas, what an handful was left to the king
of Judah; scarce worth the name of a dominion: Yet, even now, out of the gleeds
of Judah, does God raise up a glorious light to his forlorn Church; yea, from
the wretched loins of Ahaz, does God fetch an holy Ezekiah. It had been hard
to conceive the state of Judah worse then it was; neither was it more
miserable, then sinful, and in regard of both, desperate; when beyond hope,
God reuiues this dying stock of David, and out of very ruins builds up his
own house. Ahaz was not more the ill son of a good father, then he was the
ill father of a good son. He was the ill son of good Iotham, the ill father
of good Hezekiah. Good Hezekiah makes amends for his fathers impiety; and puts
a new life into the hartlesse remnant of Gods people.

The wisdom of our good God knows when his aid will be most seasonable,
most welcome; which he then loves to give, when he finds us left of all our
hopes: That merciful hand is reserved for a dead lift; then, he fails us not.

Now, you might have seen this pious Prince busily bestirring himself, in so
late and needful a reformation, removing the high places, battering and
burning the Idols, demolishing their temples, cutting down their groves,
opening the Temple, purging the altars, and vessels, sanctifying the Priests,
rekindling the Lamps, renewing the incense, reinstituting the sacrifices,
establishing the order of Gods service, appointing the courses, settling the
maintenance of the ministers, publishing the decrees for the long-neglected
Pass-ouer; celebrating it, and the other feasts, with due solemnity,
encouraging the people, contributing bountifully to the offerings, and, in one
word, so ordering all the affairs of God, as if he had been sent down from
heaven to restore Religion; as if David himself had been alive again in this
blessed heir, not so much of his Crown, as of his piety. Oh Judah, happy in
thy Ezekiah, Oh Ezekiah happy in the gracious restoration of thy Judah: Ahaz
shall have no thank for such a son; The God that is able of the very stones
to raise children to Abraham, rayses a true seed of David out of the corrupt
loins of an Idolater: That infinite mercy is not tied to the terms of an
immediate propagation: For the space of three hundred years, the man after
Gods own heart had no perfect heir till now; Till now did the high places
stand: the devotions of the best Princes of Judah were blemished with some
weak omissions; Now the zeal of good Ezekiah cleares all those defects, and
works an intyre change.

How seasonably has the providence of God kept the best man for the worst
times? When God has a great work to do, he knows to fit himself with
instruments.

No marvel if the Paganish Idols go to vvracke, when even the brazen
Serpent that Moses had made by Gods own appointment, is broken in pieces: The
Israelites were stung with fiery Serpents, this brazen Serpent healed them,
which they did no sooner see, then they recovered: But now, such was the venom
of the Israelitish Idolatry, that this Serpent of brass, stung worse then the
fiery; That, which first cured by the eye, now by the eye poisoned the soul;
That which was at first, the type of a Savior, is now, the deadly engine of
the Enemy. Whiles it helped, it stood; it stood whiles it hurt not, but when
once wicked abuse has turned it into an Idol; what was it but Nehushtan?

The holiness of the first institution cannot privilege ought from the danger
of a future profanation; nor, as the case may stand, from an utter abolition:
What antiquity, what authority, what primary service might this Serpent have
pleaded? All that cannot keep it out of the dust. Those things which are
necessary in their being, beneficial in their continuance, may still remain
when their abuse is purged; but those things whose use is but temporary, or
whose duration is needless and unprofitable, may cease with the occasion, and
much more perish with an inseparable abuse. Ezekiah willingly forgets who made
the Serpent, when he fees the Israelites make it an idol: It is no less
intolerable for God, to have a rival of his own making.

Since Hezekiah was thus, above all his Ancestors, pright with the Lord; it is
no marvel if the Lord were with him; if he prospered, whither soever he went;
The same God that would have his justice magnified in the confusion of the
wicked Princes of Issrael, and Judah, would have his mercy no less
acknowledged, in the blessings of faithful Hezekiah.

The great King of Assyria had in a sort swallowed up both the Kingdoms of
Judah, and Israel; yet not with an equal cruelty; He made Israel captive,
Judah (upon a willing composition) tributary. Israel is vanished in a
transportation, Judah continues under the homage wherein Ahaz left it: Hezekiah
had reigned but six years when he saw his neighbors of Israel packing into a
miserable captivity; and the proud Assyrians Lording in their Cities; yet, even
then, when he stood alone, in a corner of Judah, durst Hezekiah draw his neck
out of the yoke of the great, and victorious Monarch of Assyria; and, as if one
enemy had not been enough, at the same time, he falls upon the incroaching
Philistims, and preuailes. It is not to be asked, what powers a man can make,
but in what terms he stands with heaven. The unworthy father of Hezekiah had
clogged Judah with this servile fealty to the Assyrian; what the conditions of
that subjection were, it is too late, and needless for us to inquire, If this
payment were limited to a period of time, the expiration acquitted him; If upon
covenants of aid, the cessation thereof acquitted him; If the reforming of
religion, and banishment of Idolatry ran under the censure of rebellion, the
quarrel on Ezekiahs part, was holy, on Senacheribs unjust: but if the
restipulation were absolute, and the withdrawing of this homage upon none but
civil grounds, I cannot excuse the good King from a just offense: It was an
humane frailty in an obliged Prince by force to affect a free and independent
sovereignty.

What do we mince that fact, which holy Ezekiah himself censures? I have
offended, return from me, what thou putst on me will I bear? The comfort of
liberty may not be had with an unwarranted violence. Holiness cannot free us
from infirmity: It was a weakness to do that act, which must be soon undone
with much repentance, and more loss; This revolt shall cost Ezekiah (besides
much humiliation) three hundred yearly talents of silver, thirty talents of
gold: How much better had it been for the Cities of Judah to have purchased
their peace with an easy tribute, then war with an intolerable taxation.

Fourteen years had good Hezekiah fed upon a sweet peace, sauced only with a
set pension; now he must prepare his pallat for the bitter morsels of war.
The King of Assyria is comne up against all the defenced Cities of Judah; and
has taken them: Ezekiah: is feign to buy him out with too many talents; The
poor Kingdom of Judah is exhaust, with so deep a payment; in so much as the
King is forced to borrow of God himself, for Hezekiah gave him all the silver
that was found in the house of the Lord; yea, at that time did Hezekiah cut off
the gold from the doors of the temple of the Lord, and from the pillars which
he had ouer-laid, and gave it to the King of Assyria. How hard was good
Hezekiah driven, ere he would be thus bold with his God? Surely if the mines,
or cofers of Judah could have yielded any supply, this shift had been
hateful; to fetch back for an enemy, that which he had given to his Maker:
Only necessity excuses that from sacrilege in the son, which will, made
sacrilege in the father: That which is once devoted to a sacred use, may not
be called back to a profane: But he whose the earth is, and the fullness of
it, is not so taken with our metals, that he should more regard our gold, then
our welfare: His goodness cannot grudge any outward thing for the price of our
peace: To rob God out of covetousness, or wantonness, or neglect is justly
damnable; we cannot rob him out of our need; for then he gives us all we
take; and bids us ransom our lives, our liberties; The treasures of Gods house
were precious, for his sake, to whom they were consecrated, but more precious
in the sight of the Lord was the life of any one of his Saints.

Every true Israelite was the spiritual house of God; why should not the door
of the material temple be willingly stripped, to save the whole frame of the
spiritual Temple. Take therefore, o Hezekiah what thou have given, no gold is
too holy to redeem thy vexation: It matters not so much how bare the doors of
the Temple be, in a case of necessity, as how well the insides be furnished
with sincere devotion. O the cruel hard hartednesse of those men which will
rather suffer the living Temples of God to be ruined; then they will ransom
their life, with farthings.

It could not be, but that the store of needy Judah must soon be drawn dry
with so deep an exaction; that sum cannot be sent, because it cannot be
raised: The cruel Tyran calls for his brickes whiles he allows no straw; His
anger is kindled because Ezekiahs cofers have a bottom; with amighty host does
he come up a against Jerusalem; therefore shall that City be destroyed by him,
because by him it has bin impouerished; the inhabitants must be slaves,
because they are beggars.

Oh lamentable, and, in sight, desperate condition of distressed Jerusalem:
wealth it had none; strength it had, but a little; all the Country round about
was subdued to the Assyrian; that proud victor has begirt the walls of it, with
an innumerable army, scorning that such a shouell-full of earth should stand
out but one day; Poor Jerusalem stands alone, block't up with a world of
enemies, helpless, friendlesse, comfortless; looking for the worst of an
hostile fury; when Tartan and Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh, the great Captains of
the Assyrians, call to a parlee. Hezekiah sends to them three of his prime
officers, his Steward, his Secretary, his Recorder. Lord; What insolent
blasphemies does that foul mouth of Rabshakeh belch out against the living
God, against his anointed servant?

How plausibly does he discourage the subjects of Ezekiah, how proudly does
he insult upon their impotency, how does he brave them with base offers of
advantage; and lastly, how cunningly does he fore-lay their confidence (which
was only left them) in the Almighty, protesting not to be comne up hither
without the Lord; The Lord said to me, Go up to this land, and destroy it; How
fearful a word was this? The rest were but vain crackes, this was a
thunderbolt to strike dead the heart of Ezekiah; If Rabshakeh could have been
believed, Jerusalem could not but have flowne open; How could it think to stand
out no less against God, then men? Even thus does the great enemy of mankind;
if he can dis-hearten the soul from a dependence upon the God of mercies, the
day is his: Lewd miscreants care not how they be-lye God for their own
purposes.

Eliakim the steward of Hezekiah well knew, how much the people must needs be
affected with this pernicious suggestion; and feign would therefore, if not
stop that wicked mouth, yet divert these blasphemies into a foreign
expression. I wonder that any wise man should look for favor from an enemy:
Speak I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language: What was this but to
teach an adversary how to do mischief? Wherefore came Rabshakeh thither but
to gall Ezekiah, to vvith-dravv his subjects? That tongue is properest for him
which may hurt most; Deprecations of evil to a malicious man are no better
then aduices. An unknown idiome is fit to keep counsel; they are familiar
words that must convey ought to the understanding. Lewd men are the worse for
admonitions.

Rabshakeh had not so strained his throat, to corrupt the citizens of
Jerusalem, had it not been for the humble obtestation of Eliakim; Now he
reares up his voice, and holds his sides, and roares out his double
blasphemies; one while affrighting the people with the great power of the
mighty king of Assyria; another while debasing the contemptible force of
Hezekiah; now smoothly alluring them, with the assurances of a safe and
successful yeeldance; then, discouraging them with the impossibility of their
deliverance; laying before them the fearful examples of greater nations
vanquished, by that sword, which was now shaken over them; triumphing in the
impotency, and mis-cariage of their gods: Who are they among all the Gods of
the countries, that have delivered their Country out of mine hand, that the
Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand? Where are the Gods of Arpad,
and of Hamath? Where, but in that hellish darkness, that is ordained both for
them, and for thee, barbarous Assyrian, that dare thus open thy mouth against
thy Maker: And can those Atheous eyes of thine see no difference of Gods? Is
there no distance betwixt a stock, or stone, and that infinite Deity that made
heaven and earth? It is enough that thou now feel it; thy torments have
taught thee too late, that thou affrontedst a living God.

How did the fingers and tongues of these Jewish Peers and people, itch to be
at Rabshakeh; in a reuengefull answer to those impieties: All is whusht; not a
word sounds from those vvalls: I do not more wonder at Hezekiahs wisdom, in
commanding silence, then at the subjects obedience, in keeping it; This rayler
could not be more spighted, then with no answer; and if he might be
exasperated, he could not be reformed; besides, the rebounding of those
multiplied blasphemies, might leave some ill impressions in the multitude; This
sulphurous flaske, therefore, dies in his own smoke: only leaving an hateful
stench behind it.

Good Hezekiah cannot easily pass over this deuillish oratory; no sooner does
he hear of it, the^ he rends his clothes, and couers himself with sackcloth,
and betakes himself to the house of the Lord, and sends his officers, and the
grauest of the Priests, clad in sackcloth, to Esaias the Prophet of God, with a
doleful and querulous message.

Oh the noble piety of Hezekiah; notwithstanding all the straits of the siege,
and the danger of so powerful an enemy; I find not the garments of this good
King, any otherwise then whole, and unchanged; but now so soon as ever a
blasphemy is uttered against the Majesty of his God, (though by a Pagan dog)
his clothes are torn, and turned into sackcloth: There can be no better
argument of an upright heart, then to be more sensible of the indignities
offered to God, then of our own dangers. Even these desperate reproaches send
Ezekiah to the Temple: The more we see Gods name profaned, the more shall we,
if we be truly religious, love and honor it.

Whither should Hezekiab run but to the Temple, to the Prophet? There, there is
the refuge of all faithful ones, where they may speak with God, where they may
be spoken to from God, and fetch comfort from both: It is not possible that a
believing heart should be disappointed: Isaiah sends that message to the good
King, that may dry up his tears, and cheer his countenance, and change his
suit; Thus says the Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou have heard,
with which the servants of the King of Syria have blasphemed me; Behold I will
send a blast upon him; and be shall hear a rumor, and shall return to his
own Land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own Land.

Lo; even whiles Senacherib was in the height of his iollity and assurance;
Gods Prophet foresees his ruin; and gives him for dead, whiles that Tyran
thought of nothing but life and victory. Proud and secure worldlings little
dream of the near approach of their judgments: whiles they are plotting
their deepest designs, the ouer-ruling justice of the Almighty has contrived
their sudden confusion, and sees, and sets them their day.

Rabshakeh returns, and finding the King of Assyria warring against Libnah,
reports to him the silent, (and therein) contemptuous answer, and firm
resolutions of Hezekiah; In the mean time God pulls Senacherib by the ear,
with the news of the approaching army of Tirhakah King of Ethiopia, which was
coming up to raise the siege; and to succor his confederats: That dreadful
power will not allow the Assyrian King, in person to lead his other forces up
against Jerusalem, nor to continue his former Leaguer long before those walls.
But now, he writes big words to Hezekiah, and thinks with his thundering
menaces to beat open the gates, and level the bulwarks of Jerusalem: Like the
true master of Rabshakeh, he reuiles the God of Heaven; and basely parallels
him with the dunghill deities of the heathen.

Good Ezekiah gets him into his Sanctuary; there he spreads the letters before
the Lord; and calls to the God that dwells between the Cherubims, to revenge
the blasphemies of Senacherib, to protect and rescue himself, and his people.
Every one of those words pierced heaven; which was no less open to mercy unto
Hezekiah; then, vengeance to Senacherib; Now is Isaiah addressed with a second
message of comfort to him, who doubtless distrusted not the first: only the
reiteration of that furious blasphemy made him take faster hold, by his
faithful devotion. Now, the jealous God in a disdain of so blasphemous a
contestation, rises up in a style of Majesty, and gloriously tramples upon this
saucie insolency, Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is comne up into
mine ears, therefore I will put my hook into thy nose, and my beidle into thy
lips: and will turn this back by the way thou came. Lod, Senacherib, the
God of heaven makes a beast of thee, who have so brutishly spurned at his name;
If thou be a ravenous Bear, he has an hook for thy nosthrils: If thou be a
resty horse, he has a bridle for thy mouth; In spite of thee, thou shall
follow his hook, or his bridle; and shall be led to thy just shame by either.

It is not for us to be the Lords of our own actions; Thus says the Lord
concerning the King of Assyria; He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an
arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it; by
the way that he came shall he return; etc. Impotent men, what are we in the
hands of the Almighty? we purpose, he ouerrules; we talk of great matters,
and think to do wonders; he blows upon our proiects, and they vanish with
our selves: He that has set bounds to the Sea, has appointed limits to the
rage of the proudest enemies; yea, even the Devils themselves are confined; Why
boast ye your selves, o ye Tyrans, that ye can do mischief; ye are stinted:
and even within those lists, is confusion.

O the Trophies of divine Justice, That very night the Angel of the Lord went
out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five
thousand; and when they arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead
corpse.

How speedy an execution was this, how miraculous? No humane arm shall have
the glory of this victory; It was God that was defied by that presu^ptuous
Assyrian; It is God that shall right his own wrongs; Had the Egyptian, or
Ethyopian forces been comne up, though the same God had done this work by
them, yet some praise of this slaughter had perhaps cleau'd to their fingers.
Now an invisible hand sheds all this blood; that his very enemies may clear
him from all partnership of revenge. Go now, wicked Senacherib, and tell of the
gods of Hamath and Arpad, and Sepharuaim, and Hena, and Iuah, which thou have
destroyed, and say, that Hezekiahs God is but as one of these: Go, and add
this Deity to the number of thy conquests: Now, say that Ezekiahs God in whom
he trusted has deceived him, and graced thy Tryumphes.

With shame and grief enough is that sneaped Tyran returned to his Niniue,
having left behind him, all the pride and strength of Assyria, for compost to
the Jewish fields. Well were it for thee, o Senacherib, if thou could escape
thus; vengeance waits for thee at home, and welcomes thee into thy place;
whiles thou art worshipping in the house of Nisroch thy god, two of thine own
sons shall be thine executioners. See now, if that false Deity of thine can
preserve thee from that stroke which the true God sends thee by the hand of
thine own flesh; He that slew thine host by his Angel, slayes thee by thy
sons: The same Angel that killed all those thousands, could as easily have
smitten thee; but he rather reserues thee for the further torment of an
unnatural stroke, that thou may see too late, how easy it is for him in
spite of thy God, to arm thine own loins against thee.

Thou art avenged, O God, thou art avenged plentifully of thine enemies*
Whosoever strives with thee, is sure to gain nothing but loss, but shame, but
death, but hell. The Assyrians are slain, Senacherib is rewarded for his
blasphemy: Jerusalem is rescued, Ezekiah reioyces, the nations wonder and
tremble. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the
faithful, and plenteously rewarded the proud doer.

HEZEKIAH sick, recovered, visited.
HEzekiah was freed 2 King. 20.
from the siege of the Assyrians, but he is surprised with a disease: he that
delivered him from the hand of his enemies, smites him with sickness: God does
not let us loose from all afflictions, when he redeemes us from one.

To think that Ezekiah was either not thankful enough for his deliverance, or
too much lifted up with the glory of so miraculous a favor; were an injurious
mis-construction of the hand of God; and an uncharitable censure of an holy
Prince: For, though no flesh and blood can avoid the just desert of bodily
punishment, yet God does not always strike with an intuition of sin;
sometimes he regards the benefit of our trial; sometimes the glory of his
mercy in our cure.

It was no slight distemper, that seized upon Ezekiah, but a disease both
painful, and fierce, and in nature deadly. O God, how thou lashest even those
whom thou love: Had thou ever any such dearling in the throne of Judah, as
Hezekiah? Yet he no sooner breaths from a miserable siege, then he pants
under a mortal sickness: when as yet he had not so much, as the comfort of a
child, to succeed him, thy Prophet is sent to him with the heavy message of his
death, Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye and not live. It is no
small mercy of God that he gives us warning of our end; we shall make an ill
use of so gracious a premonition, if we make not a meet preparation for our
passage. Even those that have not an house, yet have a soul; no soul can want
important affairs to be ordered for a final dissolution; the neglect of this
best thrift is desperate. Set thy soul in order, o man, for thou shall dye,
and not live.

If God had given Ezekiah a son, nature had bequeathed his estate; now, he
must study to find heirs: Even these outward things, (though in themselves
worthless) require our careful disposition, to those we leave behind us; and
if we have delayed these thoughts, till then, our sick beds may not complain
of their importunity; We cannot leave to our families a better legacy, then
Peace.

Never was the Prophet Esaias unwelcome to this good King, until now: Even sad
tidings must be carried by those messengers, which would be faithful: neither
may we regard so much how they will be taken, as by whom they are sent.

It was a bold and harsh word to say to a King, Thou shall dye, and not live: I
do not hear Hezekiah rage, and fret at the message; or threat the bearer, but
he meekly turns his face to the wall, and weeps, and prays: Why to the wall?
Was it for the greater secrecy of his devotion? was is for the more freedom
from all distraction? was it that the passion which accompanied his prayer,
might have no witnesses? Or, was it for that this wall looked toward the
Temple, which his heart and eyes still moved unto, though his feet could not?

Howsoever, the patient soul of good Ezekiah turns it self to that holy God,
from whom he smarts, and bleeds; and poures out it self into a fervent
deprecation, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart; and have done that which is good in thy
sight.

Could thou fear, o Ezekiah, that God had forgotten thine integrity? The
grace that was in thee, was his own work; could he in thee neglect himself?
Or do thou therefore doubt of his remembrance of thy faithfulness, because
he summons thee to receive the crown of thy faithfulness, glory, and
immortality? wherein can thou be remembered, if this be to forget thee? What
challenge is this? Is God a debtor to thy perfection? Has thine holy carriage
merited any thing from that infinite Justice? Far, far were these
presumptuous conceits from that humble and mortified soul: Thou had hated
thine own breast, if it could once have harbored so proud a thought. This
perfection of thine was no other, then an honest soundness of heart, and life,
which thou know God had promised to reward: It was the mercy of the covenant
that thou pleadedst, not the merit of thine obedience.

Every one of these words were steeped in tears: But what meant these words,
these tears? I hear not of any suit moved by Hezekiah; only he wishes to be
remembered, in that which could never be forgotten, though he should have
entreated for an oblivion.

Speak out Hezekiah, what is it that thy tears crave, whiles thy lips
express not? O let me live, and I shall praise thee, O God.

In a natural man none could wonder at this passionate request; who can but
wonder at it, in a Saint? whose happiness does but then begin, when his life
cease: whose misery does but then end, when his death enters: the word of
faith, is, Oh let me dye, that I may enjoy thee. How then does the good King
cry at the news of that death, which some resolute Pagans have entertained
with smiles? Certainly, the best man cannot strip himself of some flesh, and
whiles nature has an undeniable share in him, he cannot but retain some
smatch of the sweetness of life, of the horror of dissolution; Both these were
in Hezekiah, neither of them could transport him into this passion: they were
higher respects that swayed with so holy a Prince; a tender care of the glory
of God, a careful pity of the Church of God; His very tears said; o God,
thou know that the eyes of the world are bent upon me, as one that has
abandoned their idolatry, and restored thy sincere worship; I stand alone in
the midst of a wicked and idolatrous generation, that looks thorough all my
actions, all my events; If now they shall see me snatched away in the midst of
my days, what will these Heathen say; how can thy great name but suffer in
this mine untimely extinction?

Besides, what will become of thy poor Church, which I shall leave feebly
religious, and as yet scarce warm, in the course of a pious reformation? how
soon shall it be miserably over grown with superstition, and heathenisme; how
soon shall the wild Boar of Assyria root up this little vineyard of thine?
What need I beseech thee, o Lord, to regard thy name, to regard thine
inheritance?

What one tear of Hezekiah can run wast? What can that good King pray for,
unheard, unanswered? Senacherib came in a proud confidence to swallow up his
city, and people: prayers and tears send him away confounded: Death comes to
swallow up his person, (and that not without authority) prayers and tears send
him away disappointed. Before Isaiah was gone out into the middle Court, the
word of the Lord came to him, saying; Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the
Captain of my people; Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy father; I have
heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears; behold I will heal thee; On the
third day thou shall go up to the house of the Lord; and I will add to thy
days fifteen years.

What shall we say then, o God, have thou thus soon changed thy purpose? Was
it not thy true message which thy Prophet, even now, delivered to Ezekiah? Is
some what fallen out that thou fore-sawst not? or, do thou now decree
somewhat thou meantst not? The very thought of any of these were no better then
blasphemous impiety. Certainly, Hezekiah could not live one day longer, then
was eternally decreed; The decree of Gods eternal counsel had from
everlasting, determined him fifteen years yet longer: Why then does God say,
by his Prophet, Thou shall dye, and not live? He is not as man that he should
repent; the message is changed, the will is not changed; yea rather the message
is explicated, not changed; For the signified will of God, though it sound
absolutely, yet must be understood with condition; that tells Hezekiah what
he must expect from the nature of his disease, what would befall him, without
his deprecations: There was nothing but death in the second causes; what ever
secret purpose there was in the first; and that purpose shall lie hid for a
time, under a reserved condition: The same decree that says, Niniue shall be
destroyed, means, if Niniue repent, it shall not be destroyed; he that finds
good reason to say, Hezekiah shall dye, yet still means, if the quickened
devotion of Hezekiah shall importune me for life, it shall be protracted. And
the same God that has decreed this addition of fifteen years, had decreed to
stir up the spirit of Hezekiah, to that vehement and weeping importunity,
which should obtain it. O God, thou workest thy good pleasure in us, and with
us; and by thy revealed will mouest us in those ways, whereby thou effectest
thy secret will.

How wonderful is this mercy? Hezekiahs tears are not dry upon his cheeks,
yea his breath is not passed his lips, when God sends him a comfortable answer.
How careful is the God of compassions, that his holy servant should not
languish one hour, in the expectation of his denounced death? What speed was
here, as in the errand, so in the act of recovery? within three days shall
Hezekiah be upon his feet; yea his feet shall stand in the Courts of Gods
house; he that now in his bed sighs, and groans, and weeps out a petition,
shall then sing out a thanksgiving in the Temple. Oh thou that hear the
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come: With what cheerful assurance should we
approach to the throne of that grace, which never failed any suppliant.

Neither was this grant more speedy, then bountiful; we are wont to reckon
seven years for the life of a man; and now, behold, more then two lives has
God added to the age of Hezekiah. How unexampled a favor is this? who ever but
Hezekiah knew his period so long before? the fixednesse of his term, is no
less mercy, then the protraction; we must be content to live or die at
uncertainties; we are not worthy to calculate the date of our own times: Teach
us, O Lord, so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

There is little joy in many days, if they be evil; Ezekiah shall not be
blessed only with life, but with peace; The proud Assyrian threatens an
inuasio^; his late foil still sticks in his stomach, and stirs him to a
revenge; the hook is in his nosthrils, he cannot move whither he lists; The
God of heaven will maintain his own quarrel: I will defend this City for
mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake. Lo; for his life, Ezekiah is
beholden (next under the infinite goodness of God) to his prayers; for his
protection, to the dear memory of his father David; surely, for ought we find,
Ezekiah was no less upright, and less offensive then David; yet both Ezekiah
and Jerusalem shall fare the better for David's sake, above three hundred years
after.

To that man after his own heart, had God engaged himself, by his gracious
promise, to preserve his throne, his seed: God loves to remember his ancient
mercies: How happy a thing it is to be faithful with God; this is the way to
oblige those which are yet unborn; and to intayle blessings upon the
successions of future generations.

It seems it was some pestilent ulcer that thus endangered the life of
Hezekiah. Isaiah is not a Prophet only, but a Physician. And Isaiah said, Take
a lump of figs: He that gave an assurance of recovery, gives a receipt for the
recovery. The decree of God includes the means: neither can the medicine work
without a word; neither will the word work without the medicine; both of them
must meet in the cure: If we so trust the promise, that we neglect the
prescript, we presume to no purpose. Happy is that soul, that so regards the
promise of Gods Prophets, as that withal he receives their counsels.

Nothing could be more proper for the ripening of hard and purulent tumors,
then dried figs; Herein Isaiahs direction was according to nature; Wherefore
should we balke the ordinary road, when it is both fair and near?

The sudden contradiction of the message causes a just difficulty in the
assent. Hezekiah therefore craves a sign; not for that he distrusted, but that
he might trust the more; we can never take too fast hold of those promises of
God, which have not more comfort in the application, then natural
impossibility in the performance. We believe, Lord, help our unbelief.

The sick King has his option; His father was offered a sign and refused it;
he sues for one, and obtaines it: Shall the shadow go for ward ten degrees,
or back ten degrees? As if heaven it self lay open to his choice; and were
ready either to mend this pace, or retire for his confirmation; What creature
is not cheerfully forward to obey the faith of Gods servants?

Hezekiah fastens rather upon that sign which is more hard, more disagreeing
from the course of nature; not without good reason; Every proof must be
clearer then the thing to be proved, neither may there want a meet proportion
betwixt both; now the going forward of the shadow was a motion, no other the^
natural, the recovery of that pestilent disease was against the stream of
nature; the more difficult sign therefore, the surer evidence.

Whether shall we more wonder at the measure of the love of God to Hezekiah, or
at the power of Isaiahs faith in God? Out of both, either the Sun goes back in
heaven that his shadow may go back on earth: or the shadow no less
miraculously goes back on earth, whiles the Sun goes forward in heaven. It
is true that the Prophet speaks of the shadow, not of the Sun; except perhaps
because the motion of the Sun is best discerned by the shadow; and the motion
of the shadow is led by the course of the Sun: besides, that the
demonstration of this miracle is reported to be local in the Dial of Ahaz,
not universal, in the sensible length of the day; withal, the retrait of the
Sun had made a public and noted change in the frame of nature, this
particular alteration of the shadow in places limited, might satisfy no less
without a confusiue mutation in the face of the world; Whethersoeuer; to draw
the Sun back together with the shadow; or to draw the shadow back without the
Sun was the proof of a divine omnipotency; able therefore to draw back the
life of Hezekiah, fifteen degrees, from the night of death; toward which it
was hasting.

O God, thou will rather alter the course of heaven and earth, then the faith
of thy children shall sink for want of supportation.

It should seem the Babylonians finding the Assyrian power abated by the
reuengefull hand of Gods Angel, and their own discord, took this advantage
of a revolt; and now to strengthen their part, fall in with Hezekiah King of
Judah, whom they found the old enemy to the Assyrians, and the great favorite
of heaven: him they woo with gifts; him they congratulate with Ambassages: The
fame of Hezekiahs sickness, recovery, form, and assurance of cure, have
drawn thither messengers, and presents from Berodach Baladan King of Babylon.

The Chaldees were curious searchers into the secrets of nature, especially
into the motions of the celestial bodies; Though there had been no politic
relations, this very Astronomicall miracle had been enough to fetch them to
Jerusalem, that they might see the man, for whose sake the Sun forsook his
place, or the shadow forsook the Sun.

How easily have we seen those holy men mis-caried by prosperity, against whom
no miseries could prevail? He that stood out stoutly against all the Assyrian
onsets, clinging the faster to his God, by how much he was harder assaulted by
Senacherib, melts now with these Babylonian favors, and runs abroad into
offensive weaknesses.

The Babylonian Ambassadors are too welcome to Ezekiah; As a man transported
with the honor of their respective, and costly visitations, he forgets his
tears, and his turning to the wall; he forgets their incompatible Idolatry; so
hugging them in his bosom, as if there had been no cause of strangeness: All
his doors fly open to them; and in a vainglorious ostentation all his
new-gathered treasures, all his strong armoryes entertain their eyes; nothing
in his house, nothing in his Dominion is hid from them.

Oh Ezekiah, what means this impotent ambition? It is not long since thou
tarest off the very plates of the Temple doors, to give unto Senacherib; and
can thy treasures be suddenly so multiplied, that they can be worthy to
astonish foreign beholders? Or, if thy storehouse were as rich as the earth,
can thy heart be so vain as to be lifted up with these heavy metals? Did
thou not see that heaven it self was at thy beck, whilst thou were humbled?
and shall a little earthly dross have power over thy soul? Can the flattering
applause of strangers let thee loose into a proud joy, whom the late message of
Gods Prophet resolved into tears? Oh God, if thou do not keep us, as well in
our sunshine, as in our storm, we are sure to perish: As in all time of our
tribulation, so in all time of our wealth, good Lord deliver us.

Alas, how slight does this weakness seem in our eyes, to rejoice in the
abundance of Gods blessings? to call in foreign friends to be witnesses of our
plenty? to raise our conceits, some little, upon the acclamations of others,
upon the value of our own abilities?

Lay thine hand upon thy mouth, o foolish flesh and blood when thou see the
censure of thy Maker.

Isaiah the Prophet is sent speedily to Hezekiah, with a sharp and
heartbreaking message: Behold the days come that all that is in thine house,
and that which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried
into Babylon; nothing shall be left, says the Lord; And of thy sons that
shall issue from thee, which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they
shall be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of Babylon.

No sin can be light in Hezekiah: the holiness of the person adds to the
unholiness of the act; Eminency of profession doubles both the offense, and
the judgment. This glory shall end in an ignominious loss.

The great and holy God will not digest pride in any, much less, in his own.
That which was the subject of Hezekiahs sin, shall be the matter of his
punishment; those with whom he sinned, shall be his auengers; It was his
treasure and munitio^, wherein he prides himself to these men of Babylon: The
men of Babylon shall carry away his treasure and munition; What now does
Hezekiah but tempt them with a glorious booty; as some fond traueler that would
show his gold to a Thief?

These worldly things are furthest off from the heart; Perhaps Hezekiah might
not be much troubled with their loss: Lo, God comes closer to him, yet.

As yet was Ezekiah childlesse; how much better had it been to continue so
still, then to be plagued in his issue? He shall now beget children to
servitude; his loins shall yield Pages to the Court of Babylon: Whiles he sees
them borne Princes, he shall foresee them made Eunuchs in a foreign Palace:
What comfort can he take in the wishes and hopes of sons, when ere they be
borne, he hears them destined to captivity and bondage?

This rod was smart, yet good Ezekiah kisses it; his heart struck him no
less, then the mouth of the Prophet; meekly therefore does he yield to this
divine correction; Good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken. Thou
have spoken this word, but from the Lord; it is not thine, but his; and being
his, it must needs be, like himself, good: Good because it is just, for I
have deserved more, and worse; Good, because merciful; for I suffer not
according to my deserts. Is it not good, if there be peace and truth in my
days? I have deserved a present payment, O God thou deferrest it; I have
deserved it in person, thou reseruest it for those whom I cannot yet so feel,
because they are not; I have deserved war and tumult, thou fauorest me with
peace; I have deserved to be ouer-run with superstition, and Idolatry, thou
blessest me with truth; should thou continue truth unto me, (though upon the
most unquiet terms) the blessing were too good for me; but now thou have
promised, and wilt not reuerse it, that both truth and peace shall be in my
days; Lord I adore thy justice, I bless thy mercy.

Gods children are neither waspish nor fullen when they are chid or beaten, but
patiently hold their backs to the stripes of a displeased mercy; knowing how
much more God is to be magnified, for what he might have done, then repined at,
for what he has done; resigning themselves over into the hand of that
gracious justice, which in their smart seeks their reformation and glory.

MANASSEH.
AT last, some three years after his recovery, 2 King. 21. And 2 Chor. 33.
Hezekiah has a son; but such a one, as if he could have foreseen, orbity
had been a blessing.

Still in the throne of Judah there is a succession, and interchange of good
and evil: Good Iotham is succeeded by wicked Ahaz; wicked Ahaz is succeed by
good Ezekiah; Good Ezekiah is succeeded by wicked Manasseh: Evil Princes
succeed to good, for the exercise of the Church: and good succeed to evil, for
the comfort of the Church.

The young years of Manasseh give advantage to his mis-cariage; Even, whiles
he might have been under the Ferule, he swayed the Scepter: Whither may not a
child be drawn, especially to a garish, and puppet-like superstition? As
infancy is capable of all impressions, so most of the worst.

Neither did Manasseh begin more early the^ he held out long; He reigned
more years then his good father lived: notwithstanding the miraculous addition
to his age; More then ever any King of Judah, besides, could reach: Length of
days is no true rule of Gods favor; As plants last longer then sensitive
creatures, and brute creatures out-liue the reasonable; so, amongst the
reasonable, it is no news for the wickedly great, to inherit these earthly
glories, longer then the best.

There wants not apparent reason for this difference; Good Princes are fetched
away to a better Crown; They cannot be losers, that exchange a weak and
fading honor, for a perfection and eternity of blessedness: Wicked men live
long to their own disadvantage; they do but carry so many more brands to their
hell: If therefore there be a just man that perishes in his righteousness;
and there be a wicked man that prolongs his life in his wickedness, far be
it from us, either to pity the remouall of the just, or to envy the
continuance of the wicked; This continues to his loss, that departs to an
happy advancement.

It is very like that Ezekiah marrying so late, in the vigor both of his age,
and holiness, made a careful choice of a wife suitable to his own piety;
Neither had his delight been so much in her (according to her name) if her
delight had not been, as his, in God; Their issue swarues from both, so fully
inheriting the vices of his grandfather Ahaz, as if there had been no
interuention of an Ezekiah: So we have seen the kernel of a well fruited
plant degenerate into that crab, or willow, which gave the original to his
stock; yet can I not say that Ezekiah was as free from traducing evil to his
son Manasseh, as Ahaz was free from traducing good to his son Hezekiah:
Evil is incorporated into the best nature, whereas even the least good
descends from above.

We may not measure grace by means: Was it possible that Manasseh having been
trained up in the religious Court of his father Hezekiah, under the eye of so
holy Prophets and Priests, under the shadow of the Temple of God, after a
childhood seasoned with so gracious precepts, with so frequent exercise of
devotion, should run thus wild into all heathenish abominations; as if there
had bin nothing but Idolatry in the seed of his conception, in the milk of his
nourishment, in the rules of his institution, in the practice of his examples?
How vain are all outward helps without the influence of Gods Spirit? and that
spirit breathes where he lists: good educatio^ raises great hopes, but the
proof of them is in the divine benediction.

I fear to look at the outrages of this wicked son of Ezekiah: What
havoc does he make in the Church of God? as if he had been borne to ruin
Religion, as if his only felicity had been to untwist, or tear, in one day,
that holy web which his father had been weauing, nine and twenty years? and
contrarily, to set up in one hour that offensive pile, which had been above
three hundred years in pulling down: so long had the high places stood; the
zeal of Ezekiah in demolishing them honored him, above all his predecessors;
and now the first act of this green head was their reedifiyng: That mischief
may be done in a day, which many ages cannot redress.

Fearful were the presages of these bold beginnings; From the mis-building of
these chapels of the Hills to the true God, Manasseh proceeds to erecting of
altars to a false: even to Baal, the God of Ahab, the stale Idol of the
heathen; yet further, not content with so few Deities; he worships all the
host of heaven; and, that he might despite God yet more, he sets up altas to
these abused riuals of their Maker, in the very house of the Lord; that holy
place does he not fear to defile with the graven Image of the grove, that he
had made: Never Amorite did so wickedly as Manasseh; and, which was yet worse,
it sufficed not to be thus wicked himself, but he seduced Gods people to
these abominations; and, that his example might move the more, he spares not
his own son from the fire of the Idol sacrifices. Neither were his
witcheries less enormious, then his Idolatry; he observed times, he used
enchantments, he dealt with familiar spirits, and with wizards: Neither were
either of these worse then his cruelty; He shed innocent blood till he had
filled Jerusalem from one end to another.

O Manasseh, how no less cruel were thou to thine own soul, the^ to thy
Judah: What an hideous list of monstrous impiety is here; Any one of which were
enough to draw judgment upon a world; but what hell is sufficient for all
together?

What brows are not now lifted up to an attentive expectation of some present,
and fearful vengeance from God, upon such flagitious wickedness? Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem, and Judah,
that whosoever hears of it, both his ears shall tingle: The person of
Manasseh is not capable of revenge enough; as his sin dilated it self by an
infectious diffusion to his people, so shall the punishment. We are sensible
of the least touch of our own miseries, how rarely are we affected with other
men's calamities? yet this evil shall be such, as that the rumor of it shall
beat no ear that shall not glow with an astonishing commiseration: What the^ o
God, what shall that plague be, which thou threatnest with so much preface of
horror? I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of
the house of Ahab; and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it
and turning it vpside down: And I will forsake the remnant of mine
inheritance; and I will deliver them into the hand of their enemies, and they
shall become a prey and a spoil unto all their enemies.

It is enough o God, it is enough: What ear can but tingle? what eye can but
weep? what hair can but start up? what heart can be but confounded at the
mention of so dreadful a revenge? Can there be a worse judgment then
desolation, captivity, desertion, spoil, and torture of prevailing enemies?
but howeuer, other Cities and nations have undergone these disasters, without
wonder, that all this should befall to thy Jerusalem, the place which thou have
chosen to thy self, out of the whole earth, the lot of thine inheritance, the
seat of thine abode, whereof thou have said, Here shall be my rest for ever,
it is able to amaze all eyes, all ears.

No City could fare worse then Samaria, whose inhabitants after a woeful siege,
were driven, like cattle, into a wretched servitude; Jerusalem shall fare no
better from Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon: Jerusalem, the glory of the
earth, the dearling of heaven, See, o ye vain men, that boast of the
privileges of Chaires, and Churches, see, and tremble. There is no place under
heaven to which the presence of God is so wedded as that the sins thereof shall
not procure a disdainful, and final divorce: The height of former favors
shall be but an aggrauation of vengeance.

This total vastation of Jerusalem, shall take time: onwards, God begins with
the person of wicked Manasseh; against whom he stirs up the Captains of the
host of the late friend, and old enemy of Judah: Those thorns amongst which
he had shrouded his guilty head, cannot shelter him from their violence; they
take him, and bind him with fetters of iron, and carry him to Babylon; There
he lies loaded with chains, in an uncomfortable dungeon exercised with
variety of tortures, fed with such coorse pittances of bread, and sips of
water, as might maintain an un willing life, to the punishment of the owner.
What eye can now pity the deepest miseries of Manasseh? What but bondage can
befit him, that has so lawlesly abused his liberty? What but an utter
abdication can befit him that has cast off his God, and doted upon Devils?
What but a dying life, and a tormenting death can be fit for a man of blood?

Who now would not have given this man for lost; and have looked when hell should
claim her own? But oh the height, oh the depth of divine mercy! After all
these prodigies of sin, Manasseh is a convert; When he was in affliction he
besought the Lord his God: and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers. How true is that word of the Prophet, Vexation gives understanding;
The viper when he is lashed, casts up his poison: The traitor when he is
racked, tells that truth which he had else never uttered; If the cross bear
us not to heaven, nothing can: What use were there of the grain, but for the
edge of the sickle, wherewith it is cut down; the stroke of the flayle,
wherewith it is beaten; the weight and attrition of the mill, wherewith it is
crushed; the fire of the oven wherewith it is baken? Say now, Manasseh, with
that grandfather of thine (who was, till now, too good for thee) It is good for
me that I was afflicted: Even thine iron was more precious to thee, then thy
gold; thy Jail was a more happy lodging to thee, then thy palace; Babylon was
a better School to thee, the^ Jerusalem: what fools are we to frown upon
our afflictions? These, how crabbed soever, are our best friends. They are not,
indeed, for our pleasure, they are for our profit: their issue makes them
worthy of a welcome. What do we care how bitter that potion be which brings
health?

How far a man may go, and yet turn? Could there be fouler sins then
these? Lo, here was Idolatry in the height, violation of Gods house, sorceries
of all kinds, bloody cruelty to his own flesh, to the Saints of God; and all
these against the stream of a religious institution, of the zealous counsels
of Gods Prophets, of the checks of his own heart.

Who can complain that the way of heaven is blocked up against him, when he
sees such a sinner enter? Say the worst against thy self, o thou clamorous
foul; Here is one that murdered men, defied God, worshipped Devils; and yet
finds the way to repentance; if thou be worse then he, deny (if thou can)
that to thy self, which God has not denied to thee, capacity of grace: In
the mean time; know that it is not thy sin, but thine impenitence that
bars heaven against thee.

Presume not yet, o man, whosoever thou art, of the liberty of thy conversion;
as if thou could run on lawlesly in a course of sinning, till thou come to
the brim or hell; and then could suddenly stop, and return at leisure: the
mercy of God did never set period to a wilful sinner; neither yet did his own
corrupt desires; so as when he is gone the furthest, he could yet stay himself
from another step: No man that truly repents is refused: but many a one sins so
long, that he cannot repent. His custom of wickedness has obdur'd his heart,
and made it flint to all good impressions. There were Ieroboams, and Abijams,
and Ahabs, and Ioashes, and Ahazes, in these sacred thrones, there was but one
Manasseh: God has not left in any man's hand the reins of his own heart, to
pace, and turn, and stop as he lists; This privilege is reserved to him that
made it; It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy: and that mercy neglected, justly binds over to judgment.

I wonder not at Manasseh, either sinning, or repenting, I wonder at thy
goodness, o Lord; who after thy just permission of his sin, call him thus
graciously to repent, and so graciously receiuest him repenting: So as Manasseh
was not a more loathsome and monstrous spectacle of wickedness, then he is now
a pleasing and useful pattern of conversion; Who can now despair of thy
mercy, o God, that sees the tears of a Manasseh accepted? when we have
debauched our worst; our evil cannot match with thy goodness; rather it is
the praise of thine infinite store, that where sin abounds, grace abounds
much more; O keep us from a presumption of grace, that we may repent; and
raise us from a distrust of grace when we have repented.

No sooner is Manasseh penitent, then he is free; his prayers have at once
loosed him from his sins, and from his chains; and of a captive have made
him a King; and from the dungeon of Babylon have restored him to the palace of
Jerusalem: How easy is it for the same hand that wounds to cure: What cannot
fervent prayers do, either for our rescuing from evil, or for our inuesting
with good?

Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God. Then? and not before? Could his
younger ears escape the knowledge of Gods miraculous deliverance of Jerusalem
from the Assyrians? Could he but know the slaughter that Gods Angel made in
one night, of an hundred fourscore and five thousand? Could he but have heard
the just revenge upon Senacherib? Could he be ignorant of his fathers
supernatural recovery? Could he but see that euer-lasting monument of the
noted degrees in the Dyall of Ahaz? Could he avoid the sense of those fifteen
years, which were super-added to his fathers age? What one of these proofs
does not euince a Deity? Yet, till his own smart, and cure, Manasseh knew not
that the Lord was God.

Foolish sinners pay dear for their knowledge; neither will endure to be
taught good-cheape: so we have seen resty horses that will not move till they
bleed with the spur: So we have seen dull and careless children, that will
learn nothing but what is put into them with the rod.

The Almighty will be sure to be known for what he is: if not by fair means,
yet by foul; If our prosperity, and peace, and sweet experience of his mercy
can win us to acknowledge him, it is more for our ease, but, if we will needs
be taught by stripes, it is no less for his glory.

Manasseh now returns another man to Jerusalem: With what indignation does he
look upon his old follies? and now, all the amends he can make, is to undo
what he did; to do that which he undid: He took away the strange Gods, and
the Idol out of the house of the Lord, and all the altars that he had built in
the mount of the house of the Lord, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the
City. True repentance begins to decline at the ablative; destroying those
monuments of shame which former error had reared; The thorns must first be
stubbed up, ere the ground can be capable of seed; The true method of grace,
is, first, Cease to do evil; then, Learn to do good.

In vain had Manasseh professed a repentance, if the strange gods had still
held possession of Jerusalem, if the Idol had still harbored in Gods Temple,
if foreign altars had still smoked upon the holy mountain; Away with all
this trash, when once Manasseh comes to a true sense of piety.

There is nothing but hypocrisy in that penitent, who after all vows, and
tears, retains his old abominations; It is that poor piece of satisfaction
which we can give to the divine justice, in an hearty indignation, to fling
down that cup of wickedness wherewith we have been bewitched, and to
trample upon the shreads: without which, confession is but wind, and the drops
of contrition, water.

The living God loves to dwell clean, he will not come under the roof of
Idols, nor admit Idols to come under his: First therefore, Manasseh casts out
the strange Gods and Idols, and altars; and then, He repaires the Altar of the
Lord, and sacrifices thereon peace offerings, and thanke-offerings. Not, till
he had pulled down, might he build; and when he had pulled down, he must
build: True repentance is no less active of good. What is it the better, if
when the Idolatrous altars are defaced, the true God has not an Altar erected
to his Name? In many Altars was superstition, in no altars, Atheism.

Neither does penitent Manasseh build God a new Altar, but he repaires the
old, which by long dis-vse lay wast, and was mossie and mouldred with age and
neglect.

God loves well his own institutions; neither can he abide innouations, so
much as in the outsides of his services. It is an happy work to vindicate any
ordinance of God from the injury of times, and to restore it to the original
glory.

What have our pious governors done other in religion? had we gone about to
lay a new foundation, the work had been accursed; now we have only scraped
off some superfluous moss, that was grown upon these holy stones, we have
cemented some broken pieces, we have pointed some crazie corners with wholesome
mortar, in stead of base clay, wherewith it was disgracefully patched up: The
altar is old, it is Gods altar: It is not new, not ours: If we have laid one
new stone in this sacred building, let it fly in our faces, and beat out our
eyes.

On this repaired altar does Manasseh send up the sacrifices of his peace, of
his thankfulness; and doubtless the God of heaven smells a sweet savor of
rest; No perfume is so pleasing to God, as that which is cast in by a penitent
hand.

It had not served the turn that Manasseh had approached alone to this renewed
altar; As his lewd example had withdrawn the people from their God; so now he
commands Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel; Had he been silent, he could
not have been vnfollowed: Every act of greatness is preceptiue; but now that
religion is made Law, what Israelite will not be devout?

The true God has now no competitour in Judah; All the Idols are pulled
down, the high places will not be pulled down; An ill guise is easily taken
up, it is not so easily left. After a common deprauation of religion, it is
hard to return unto the first purity: as when a garment is deeply soiled, it
cannot without many lauers recover the former cleanness.

IOSIAH'S Reformation.
YEt, if we must alter 2 King. 22. And 23.
from our selves, it is better to be a Manasseh, then a Ioash: Ioash began
well, and ended ill: Manasseh began ill, and ended well; his age varied from
his youth, no less, then one man's condition can vary from another; His
posterity succeeded in both; Amnon his son succeeded in the sins of
Manassehs youth; Josiah his grandchild succeeded in the virtues of his age.
What a vast difference does grace make in the same age? Manasseh began his
reign at twelve years; Josiah at eight; Manasseh was religiously bred under
Hezekiah; Josiah was mis-nurtured under Amnon; and yet Manasseh runs into
absurd Idolatries, Josiah is holy and devout. The Spirit of God breathes
freely; not confining it self to times, or means.

No rules can bind the hands of the Almighty; It is in ordinary proof too
true a word, that was said of old, Woe be to thee, O Land, whose King is a
child: the goodness of God makes his own exceptions; Judah never fared
better, then in the green years of a Josiah: If we may not rather measure
youth, and age by government, and disposition, then by years: Surely thus,
Josiah was older with smooth cheeks, then Manasseh with gray hairs. Happy is
the infancy of Princes, when it falls into the hands of faithful Counselors.

A good pattern is no small help for young beginners; Josiah sets his father
David before him, not Amnon, not Manasseh: Examples are the best rules for the
inexperienced; where their choice is good, the directions are easiest: The
laws of God are the ways of David; Those laws were the rule, these ways
were the practice; Good Josiah walks in all the ways of his Father David.

Even the minority of Josiah was not idle; we cannot be good too early: At
eight years it was enough to have his ear open to hear good counsel; to
have his eyes and heart open to seek after God: At twelve, he begins to act: and
shows well that he has found the God he sought: Then he addresses 2. Chro
34. 3.
himself to purge Judah, and Jerusalem, from the high places, groves, images,
altars, wherewith it was defiled; burning the bones of the idolatrous Priests
upon their altars; strawing the ashes of the idols upon the graves of them that
had sacrificed to them, striving by those fires, and mattocks to testify his
zealous detestation of all idolatry.

The house must first be cleansed, ere it can be garnished; no man will cast
away his cost upon unclean heaps; so soon as the Temple was purged, Josiah
bends his thoughts upon the repayring, and beautifying of this house of the
Lord.

What stir was there in Judah, wherein Gods Temple suffered not? Six several
times was it pillaged, whether out of force, or will: First, Iehoash King of
Judah is feign by the spoil of it to stop the mouth of Hazael; Then, Ioash
King of Israel fills his own hands with that sacred spoil, in the days of
Amaziah; after this, Ahaz rifles it for Tiglath Pileser, King of Assyria; then
Hezekiah is forced to ransacke the treasures of it for Senacherib; yet after,
the sacrilege of Manasseh makes that booty of it, which his later times
endeavored to restore; and now lastly, Amnon his son neglects the frame,
embeazels the furniture of this holy place: The very pile began to complain of
age and vnrespect: Now comes good Josiah, and in his eighteenth year (when
other young Gallants would have thought of nothing but pleasure, and iollity)
takes up the latest care of his father David, and gives order for the repayring
of the Temple.

The keepers of the door have received the contribution of all faithful
Jews, for this pious use; the King sends Shaphan the scribe to Hilkijah the
Priest to sum it up, and to deliver it unto Carpenters, and Masons, for so
holy a work.

How well does it beseem the care of a religious Prince, to set the Priests
and Scribes in hand with reedifying the Temple? The command is the Kings, the
charge is the Highpriests, the execution is the workmens; when the laborers
are faithful in doing the work, and the high Priest in directing it, and the
King in inioining it, Gods House cannot fail of an happy perfection; but when
any of these slackens, the business must needs languish.

How God blesses the devout endeavors of his servants? Whiles Hilkijah was
diligently suruaying the breaches and the reparation of the Temple, he lights
upon the book of the Law: The authenticke and original Book of Deuteronomy. 31. 26.
Gods Law was by a special charge appointed to be carefully kept within a safe
shrine, in the Sanctuary: In the depraved times of idolatry, some faithful
Priest (to make sure work) had locked it fast up, in some secret corner of the
Temple, from the reach of all hands, of all eyes: as knowing how impossible it
was, that divine monument could otherwise escape the fury of profane
guiltiness: Some few transcripts there were doubtless, (parcels of this
sacred Book) in other hands; neither doubt I, but as Hilkijah had been formerly
well acquainted with this holy volume (now of long time hid) so the ears of
good Josiah had been inured to some passages thereof; but the whole body of
these awful Records, since the late night of Idolatrous confusion, and
persecution saw no light, till now; This precious treasure does Hilkijah find,
whiles he digs for the Temple: Never man labored to the reparation of Gods
Church, but he met with a blessing more the^ he looked for.

Hilkijah the Priest, and Shaphan the scribe do not ingrosse this invaluable
wealth into their own hands, nor suppress these more then sacred roles, for
their own advantage; but trans-mit them, first to the ears of the King, then
by him, to the people: It is not the praise of a good scribe, to lay up, but to
bring forth, both old and new: And if the Priests lips shall keep knowledge,
they keep it to impart, not to smother: The people shall seek the Law at his
mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

So soon as the good King hears the words of the book of the Law, and in
special, those dreadful threats of judgment, denounced against the
Idolatries of his Judah; he rends his clothes, to show his heart rent with
sorrow, and fearful expectation of those plagues; and washes his bosom with
tears. Oh gracious tenderness of Josiah: he does but once hear the Law read,
and is thus humbled; humbled for his fathers sins, for the sins of his people:
how many of us, after a thousand hammerings of the menaces of Gods Law, upon
our guilty souls, continue yet insensible of our danger? The very reading of
this Law does thus affect him; the preaching of it stirs not us; The sins of
others struck thus deep with him; our own are slighted by us: A soft heart
is the best tempered for God: So Physicians are wont to like those bodies best,
which are easiest to work upon: O God make our clay, wax, and our wax
pliable to thine hand; so shall we be sure to be free either from sin, or from
the hurt of sin.

It is no holy sorrow that sends us not to God; Josiah is not moaped with a
distractiue grief, or an astonishing fear, but in the height of his passion,
sends five choice messengers to Huldah the Prophetess, to enquire of the Lord,
for himself, for Judah: It is an happy trouble that drives us to this refuge.
I do not hear any of these Courtiers reply to this godly motion of their
young King: Alas, Sir, what means this deep perplexity? What needs all this
busy inquisition? If your father were idolatrous, what is that to you, who
have abandoned his sins? If your people were once idolatrous, what is that to
you, yea to them, who have expiated these crimes by their repentance? Have you
not carefully reformed all those abuses? has not your happy reformation made
an abu^dant amends for those wrongs? Spare your tears, and save the labor of
your messengers; All is well, all shall be well; these judgments are for the
obstinate; had we been still guilty, these fears had been just: were we
still in danger, what had we gained by our conversion? Rather, as glad to
second the religious cares of their young King, they feed his holy anxieties
with a just aggrauation of peril; and by their good counsel, whet these his
zealous desires of a speedy resolution: That state cannot but be happy, whose
Priests and Peers are ready as to suggest, so to cherish, and execute the
devout proiects of their Sovereigns.

The grave Priest, the learned scribe, the honorable Courtiers do not
disdain to knock at the door of a Prophetess: Neither does any of them say;
It were hard if we should not have as much acquaintance with God, as a woman;
but in an humble acknowledgement of her Graces, they come to learn the will of
God, from her mouth: True piety is modest, and stands not upon terms of
reputation, in the businesses of God; but willingly honors his gifts in any
subject, least of all in it self.

The sex is not more noted in Huldah, then the condition; As she was a woman,
so a wife; the wife of Shallum: Holy matrimony was no hindrance to her divine
revelations; she was at once a Prophetess in her college, an huswife in her
family; It was never the practice of God to confine his graces to virginity:
At this very time the famous Prophet Jeremy flourished, some years had he
already spent in this public service; why was not he rather consulted by
Josiah? It is not unlike that some prophetical employments called him away, at
this time from Jerusalem: His presence could not have been balked: purposely,
doubtless does God cast this message upon the point of that absence, that he
might honor the weaker vessel with his divine oracle; and exercise the
humility of so great clients: In the answers of God, it is not to be regarded,
who speaks, but from whom: The injury redounds to God, if the weaknesses of
the person cause us to undervalue the authority of the function.

As Josiah and his messengers do not despise Huldah, because she was a woman;
so Huldah does not flatter Josiah, because a King: Go tell the man that sent
you; Thus says the Lord: Behold I will bring evil upon this place. Lo, he
that was as God to his subjects, is but as a man to the Prophetess: neither is
the message ever the sweeter, because it is required by a Prince: No
circumstance may vary the form of divine truth.

Evil must befall Jerusalem and Judah, yea, all the words of that book, must
allight upon the inhabitants of both: In how bad a case we may be, and yet
think our selves not safe only, but happy? These Jews had forgotten their
old reuolts; and now having framed themselves to holy courses; promised
themselves nothing but peace, when the Prophetess foresees, and foretells their
approaching ruin: Even their old score must be paid, after the opinion of a
clear agreement. In vain shall we hope to quit our arrerages by prorogation.
This Prophetess had immediate visions from God, yet she must speak out of
the Book; There was never any revelation from the Lord, that crossed his
writings: His hand, and his tongue agree eternally: If that book have cursed
Judah, she may not absolve it.

Yet, what a gracious mixture was here of mercy, with souerity; severity to
Judah, mercy to Josiah; Judah shall be plagued, and shall become a desolation,
and a curse; Josiah shall be quietly housed in his grave, before this storm
fall upon Judah: His eye shall not see, what his people shall feel: It is
enough that the expectation of these evils afflicts him, the sense shall not.

Whence is this indulgence? Because thine heart was tender, and thou have
humbled thy self before the Lord. How happy a thing it is to be a reed unto
Gods judgments, rather then an oak, the meek and gentle reed stoops and
therefore stands, the oak stands stiffely out against the strongest gust, and
therefore is turned up by the roots: At least, let us lament those sins we
have not avoided; and mourn for the sins of others, whiles we hate our own.

He that found himself exempted from this vengeance, by his repentance and
deep humiliatio^, would feign find the fame way for the deliverance of his
people: The same words of the Law therefore, that had wrought upon his heart,
are by him caused to be publicly read in the ears of Judah, and Jerusalem;
The assembly is universal, of Priests, Prophets, people, both small and great;
because the sin was such, the danger was such: that no man may complain to
want information, the Law of God sou^ds in every ear. If our ear be shut to
the Law, the sin is ours; but if the Law be shut to our ears, the sin is of
our governors: Woe be to them that hide Gods book from the people, as they
would do rats-bane from the eye of children: Ignorant souls cannot perish
without their murder: There is no fear of knowing too much, there is too much
fear of practizing too little: Now, if the people do not imitate their King
in relenting, they are not worthy to partake with him in his impunitie.
Howsoever, they shall not want a great example; as of sorrow, so of amendment.
Good Josiah stands by the pillar, and solemnly renewes his Covenant with his
God; the people cannot for shame refuse to second him: Even they that looked for
a destruction, yet do not withdraw their obedience; Gods Children may not be
sullen under his corrections, but whether they expect or feel smart, are no
other then dutiful to his awful hand. As a man that finds he has done
something that might endanger the forfait of his favor, puts himself into
some deserving action, whereby he may hope to re-indeare himself, so does
Josiah here; No indeauor is enough to testify his zeal to that name of God
which was so profaned by his peoples Idolatry; What ever monuments were yet
remaining of wicked Paganism, he defaces with indignation; he burns the
vessels of Baal, and puts down his Chemarim, destroys the houses of the
Sodomites, strawes the powder of their idols in the brook Kedron, defiles
Topheth, takes away the horses, of the Sun, burns the charets of the Sun with
fire, and omits nothing that might reconcile God, clear Judah, perfect a
reformation.

Neither is this care confined to Jerusalem, and the neighboring Towns, but
stretches it self to the utmost coasts of Iosiahs Kingdom; Bethel was the
infamous seat of the pollution of Israel; it seems the heirs of Jeroboam (who
set up his golden calfe there) inioyed it not long; the Kings of Judah
recovered it to their crown, but, it had not yet recovered it self from that
ancient infection: Thither does good Josiah send the unhallowed ashes of Baals
Relics, to stain that altar first, which he will soon after deface.

The time was, and it was no less then three hundred and fifty years since,
that the man of God, out of Judah, cried against Ieroboams altar;

O Altar, Altar; Thus says the 1 Kin. 13. 2
Lord; Behold a Child shall be borne, unto the House of David, Josiah by name,
and upon thee shall he offer the Priests of the high places, that burn incense
upon thee, and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee.

And now is the hour come, wherein every of those words shall be
accomplished: It could not but be a great confirmation to Josiah, to see that
God had so long ago fore-markt him for his own; and fore-nam'd him to so
zealous a service.

All our names are equally fore-known of that divine providence, though not
fore-spoken: neither can any act pass from us, which was not pre-determined in
that eternal Counsel of the Almighty: neither can any act that is there
pre-determined be unfulfilled upon earth: Interuention of time breaks no
square in the divine decrees: Our pur-blind eyes see nothing, but that which
touches their lidds; the quick sight of Gods prescience sees that, as
present, which is a world off: According to the prediction, the stench of dead
men's bones is a fit perfume to send up from this altar to heaven; whose best
sacrifices sauoured worse in the nosthrils of God. And the blood of the
idolatrous sacrificers was a meet oblation to that God, who had been
dishonored by their burnt-offerings to his base corriualls.

Even that Prophet who foretold this, had his toomb in Bethel, and that toomb
had his inscription; His last weakness might not rob him of the honor of his
sepulture: How palpablie do these Israelites condemn themselves, whiles they
reserve so famous a monument of their own conviction. It was no prejudice to
this holy Prophet, that his bones lay amongst the sepulchers of idolaters. His
Epitaph preserved those bones from burning, upon that altar, which he had
accursed; As the Lion might not tear his carcass, when he died, so now, the
fury of the multitude may not violate his very bones, in the grave.

I do not see Josiah: save them for relics; I hear him command they shall
rest in peace; it is fit the dead bodies of Gods Saints should be as free from
contempt, as from superstition.

After the remouall of these rites of false worship, it is time to bring in the
true: Now a solemn Passover shall be kept unto the Lord, by the charge of
Josiah: That book of the Law sets him, the time, place, circumstances of this
sacrament, his zeal so carefully follows it, that since the days of Samuel,
this feast was never so gloriously, so punctually celebrated. Jerusalem is the
place, the fourteenth day of the first month is the time, the Levites are the
actors, a yearling and spotless Lamb is the provision; no bone of it is
broken, the blood is sprinkled upon the doore-postes, it is roasted whole,
eaten with sour herbs, with bread unleavened; the remainder is consumed by
fire. The law, the sacrifices, had been in vain, if the Passover had been
neglected. No true Israelite might want, whether this monument of their
deliverance past, or this Type of the Messiah to come. Rather then fail,
Iosiahs bounty shall supply to Judah Lambs for their paschall devotion: No
alms is so acceptable, as that whereby the soul is furthered.

JOSIAH 'S Death; with the desolation of the Temple, and Jerusalem.
Josiah has now happily settled the 2 King. 23. verse 29. And 2 Chro. 35. verse
20. 2 Chr. 36.
affairs both of God, and the state: and now has sweet leisure to enjoy
himself, and his people: his conscience does not more cheer him at home, then
his subjects abroad; Never King reigned with more officious piety to God, with
more love, and applause of men: But what stability is there in these earthly
things? how seldom is excellency in any kind long-liu'd? In the very strength
of his age, in the height of his strength, is Josiah withdrawn from the earth;
as not without a merciful intention of his glory, on Gods behalf, so, not
without some weakness, on his own. Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt comes up to
fight against the King of Assyria: What is that to Josiah? Perhaps the
Egiptians attempted to pass through the land of Judah, toward Carchemish the
seat of his war; but, as a neighbor, not as an enemy: Josiah resists him; as
neither holding it safe to admit a foreign power into the bosom of his
Country, nor daring to give so fair an occasion of provoking the Assyrian
hostility against him.

The King of Egypt mildly deprecates this enmity, he sends Ambassadors to
Josiah, saying, What have I to do with thee thou King of Judah, I come not
against thee, this day, but against the house wherewith I have war; for God
commanded me to make have; forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me,
that he destroy thee not.

What friend could have said more? what Prophet could have advised more holily?
why does not good Josiah say with himself; There may be truth in this
suggestion; God may have sent this man, to be a scourge of mine old enemy, of
Ashur: If the hand of the Almighty be in this design, why do I oppose it? The
quarrel is not mine, why do I thrust my finger into this flame, unbidden?
Wherefore should I hazard the effusion of blood, upon an harmless passage? Can
I hear him plead a command from God, and not inquire into it? How easy is it
for me to know the certainty of this pretended commission? Have not I the
Priests, and Prophets of God about me? Let me first go and consult his
oracle; If God have sent him, and forbidden me, why should my courage carry me
against my piety?

It is strange that the good heart of Josiah could escape these thoughts; these
resolutions: Yet, he that upon the general threats of Gods Law against Judah,
sends messengers to inquire of a Prophetess; now, upon these particular
threats of danger to himself, speaks not, stirs not. The famous Prophet Jeremy
was then living, and Zephaniah; besides a whole College of Seers, Josiah does
not so much as send out of doors, to ask, Shall I go up against the King of
Egypt? Sometimes, both grace and wit are asleep in the holiest and wariest
breasts: The best of all Gods Saints may be sometimes miscarried by their
passions, to their cost.

The wise providence of God has mercifully determined to leave Josiah to his
own counsels, that by the weakness of his servant, he might take occasion to
perfect his glory: Even that wherein Josiah was wanting unto God, shall concur
to the making up of Gods promise to Josiah: when we are the most blind-folded,
we run on the ways of Gods hidden decrees; and, what ever our intents be,
cannot, if we would, go out of that unknown path.

Needs will Josiah put himself into arms against an unwilling enemy; and, to
be less noted, disguises himself. The fatal arrow of an Egyptian archer
finds him out, in the throng, and gives him his deaths-wound; Now, too late
he calls to a retrait; his changed Charet is turned to a Biere, to carry his
bleeding corpse to his grave, in Jerusalem.

What eye does not now pity and lament the untimely end of a Josiah? Whom can
it choose but affect, to see a religious, just, virtuous Prince snatched away in
the vigor of his age? After all our foolish moan, the providence that
directed that shaft to his lighting place, intends that wound for a stroke of
mercy: The God who^ Josiah serves, looks through his death, at his glory: and
by this sudden violence will deliver him from the view, and participation of
the miseries of Judah, which had been many deaths; and fetches him to the
participation of that happiness, which could countervaile more deaths, then
could be incident into a Josiah. Oh the wonderful goodness of the Almighty,
whose very judgments are merciful; Oh the safe condition of Gods children,
whom very pain eases, whom death reuiues, whom dissolutio^ unites, whom
lastly their very sin and temptation glorifies.

How happily has Josiah gained by this change? In stead of a froward people,
he now is sorted with Saints and Angels; in stead of a fading, and corruptible
crown, he now inioyes an eternal. The orphane subjects are ready to weep
out their eyes, for sorrow; their loss cannot be so great, as his gain: he is
glorious, they, as their sins had deserved, miserable. If the separated soul
could be capable of passion, could Josiah have seen, after his departure, the
calamities of his sons, of his people, it could not but have laid siege to his
peace.

The sad subjects proclaim his son Iehoahaz, King, in stead of so lamented a
father; He both does ill, and fares ill: By that time he has sat but three
months in the throne, Pharaoh Nechoh King of Egypt seco^ds the fathers death,
with the sons captivity: This victorious enemy puts down the wicked son of
Josiah, and lades him with chains at Riblath, in the land of Hamath; and lades
his people with the tribute of an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of
gold: Yet, as if he that was unwilling to fight with Josiah, were no less
unwilling to root out his posterity, this Egyptian sets Eliakim, the second
son of Josiah, upon the seat of his father; and, that he might be al his,
changes his name to Iehoiakim: oh the woeful and unworthy succession of Josiah;
one son is a prisoner, the other is a tributary; both are wicked. After that
Iehoiakim has been some years Pharaohs Bayliue, to gather, and rack the
dear rents of Judah; Nebuchadnezzar the great King of Babylon comes up, and
sweepes away both the Lord, and his Feodary, Pharaoh, and Iehoiakim.

So far was the ambitious Egyptian from maintaining his incroachment upon the
territories of Judah, that he could not now hold his own: From Nilus to
Euphrates, all is lost: So subject are the lesser powers still to be swallowed
up of the greater; so just it is with God, that they which will be affecting
undue enlargement of their estates, should fall short of what they had.

Iehoiakim is carried in fetters to Babylon: and now in that dungeon of his
captivity, has more leisure, then grace, to bethink himself of all his
abominations; and whiles he inherits the sad lodging of his great grandfather,
Manasseh, inherits not his success.

Whiles he is rotting in this Goal, his young son Iehoiachin starts up in
his throne; like to a mushrom that rises up in a night, and withers in a day:
Within three months, and ten days, is that young Prince (the meet son of such
a father) fetched up in irons to his fathers prison; Neither shall he go alone;
his attendance shall add to his misery; His mother, his wives, his officers,
his peers, his craftsmen, his warriors accompany him, manicled, and chained,
to their perpetual bondage.

Now, according to Isaiahs word, it would have been great preferment for the
fruit of Hezekiahs loins to be Pages in the Court of Babylon.

One only branch yet remains of the unhappy stock of holy Josiah, Mattaniah,
the brother of Iehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezar (changing his name to Zedekiah)
sets up in that forlorn, and tributary throne; There might he have lived
(though an underling) yet peaceable; This man (to make up the measure of Gods
just judgments) as he was ever a rebel to God, so proves rebellious to his
Sovereign master, the King of Babylon: The Prophet Jeremy has forewarned him
in vain; nothing could teach this man, but smart.

Who can look for other then fury from Nebuchadnezzar, against Jerusalem,
which now had affronted him with three several successions of reuolts, and
conspiracies against his government; and thrice abused his bounty, and
indulgence? with a mighty army does he therefore come up against his seditious
deputy; and besieges Jerusalem, and blocks it up with forts round about. After
two years siege, the Chaldees without, and the famine within, have prevailed;
King Zedekiah and his soldiers are fled away by night, as thinking themselves
happy, if they might abandon their walls, and save their lives.

The Chaldees (as caring more for the birds, then for the nest) pursue them,
and overtake Zedekiah, forsaken of all his forces, in the plain of Jericho,
and bring him to Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon. What can so unthankful and
perfidious a vassal expect, but the worst of revenge? The sentence is
fearful: First, the sons of Zedekiah are slain before his eyes; then those
eyes of his (as if they had seen enough, when they had seen him childlesse)
are put out: His eyes are only lent him so long, as to torment him with the
sight of his own utmost discomfort; Had his sons but ouer-liued his eyes,
the grief had been so much the less, as the apprehension of it had been
less lively, and piercing; Now, this woeful object shall shut up his sight,
that, even when his bodily eyes are gone, yet the eyes of his mind might ever
see what he last saw; That thus his sons might be ever dying before him, and
himself in their death ever miserable.

Who does not now wish that the blood of Hezekiah and Josiah could have been
severed from these impure dregs of their lewd issue? no man could pity the
offenders, were it not for the mixture of the interest of so holy progenitors.

No more sorrow can come in at the windows of Zedekiah, more shall come in at
his doors; his care shall receive what more to rue for his Jerusalem:
Nebuzaradan the great Marshall of the King of Babylon comes up against that
deplored City, and breaks down the walls of it, round about, and burns the
Temple of the Lord, and the Kings house, and every fair Palace of Jerusalem,
with fire; drives away the remainder of her inhabitants, into Captivity, caries
away the last spoils of the glorious Temple. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the
wonder of all times, the paragon of nations, the glory of the earth, the
favorite of heaven, how art thou now become heaps of ashes, hills of
rubbish, a spectacle of desolation, a monument of ruin? Iflater, yet no less
deep have thou now pledged that bitter cup of Gods vengeance, to thy sister
Samaria; How carefully had thy God forwarned thee? Though Israel play the
harlot, yet, let not Judah sin: Lo now, as thine iniquities, so thy
judgments have overtaken her: Both lie together in the dust, both are made a
curse to all posterities: Oh God, what place shall thy justice spare, if
Jerusalem have perished? If that delight of thine were cut off for her
wickedness, Let not us be high minded but fear.

What pity it was to see those goodly Cedars of the Temple flaming up higher
then they stood in Lebanon? to see those curious marbles, which never felt the
dint of the pick-axe, or hammer, in the laying, wounded with mattockes, and
wounding the earth in their fall? to see the holy of holies, whereinto none
might enter but the high priest, once a year, thronged with Pagans; the vailes
rent, the sacred Ark of God vilated, and defaced, the Tables ouer-turned, the
altars broke down, the pillars demolished, the pauements dug up, yea, the
very ground, where that famous pile stood, deformed. O God, thou woldst rather
have no visible house upon earth, then endure it defiled with Idolatries.

Four hundred thirty and six years had that Temple stood, and beautified the
earth, and honored heaven, now it is turned into rude heaps; There is no
prescription to be pleaded for the favor of the Almighty: Only that Temple,
not made with hands, is eternal in the heavens. Thither he graciously bring
us, that has ordained us thither, for the sake of that glorious High Priest,
that has once for all entered into that holy of holies,

Amen.
Contemplations ON THE HISTORY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.

The 21th. and last Book.

Wherein are,

1 Zerubbabel and Ezra. 2 Nehemiah building the walls of Jerusalem. 3 Nehemiah
redressing the extortion of the Jews. 4 Abasuerus feasting; Vashti cast off:
Esther chosen. 5 Haman disrespected by Mordecai; Mordecaies message to Esther.
6 Esther suing to Ahasuerus. 7 Mordecai honored by Haman. 8 Haman hanged;
Mordecai advanced.
ZERVBBABEL and EZRA.
THE first transportation into Babylon, under Iehoiakim, (wherein Daniel,
Ezekiel, and many other of the best note, were driven into captivity,) was
(some eleven years after) followed with a second, under Zedekiah; wherein the
remnant of the, nowruined, Jerusalem, and Judah, were swept away. Seventy
years was the period of their longest servitude; whiles Babylon was a Queen,
Judah was her vassal: when that proud Tyranness fell, Gods people began to
rise again: The Babylonian Monarchy was no sooner swallowed up of the
Persian, then the Jews felt the comfort of liberty.

For Cyrus conquering Babylon, and finding the Jews groaning under that
miserable captivity, straight releases them, and sends them, under the conduct
of their Captain Zorobabel, back to their almost-forgotten country.

The world stands upon vicissitudes; Every Nation has her turn, and must make
up her measure: Threescore and ten years ago, it was the course of Judah,
the iniquity of that rebellious people was full. Some hundred and thirty years
before that, was the turn of Samaria, and her Israelites: Now the staff is
come to the doors of Babylon, even that wherewith Judah was beaten: and those
Persians which are now victorious, must have their term also. It is in vain
for any earthly state to promise to it self an immutable condition. At last,
the rod that scourged Gods children, is cast into the fire: Thou have
remembered, O Lord, the Children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, how they said,
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground: O daughter of Babylon wasted
with misery, how happy is he that rewards thee as thou have served them: It
is Cyrus that has wrought this revenge, this rescue.

Doubtless, it did not a little move Cyrus to this favor, that he found
himself honorably forenamed in these Jewish prophesies, and fore appointed to
this glorious service, no less then an hundred and seventy years, before Esaias
44 vlt
he was: Who would not be glad to make good so noble and happy a destiny? O
God, if we hear that thou have ordained us to life, how gladly, how
carefully, should we work out our salvation? if to good works, how should we
abound?

In the first year of his Monarchy, does Cyrus both make proclamations, and
publish them in writing, through all his Kingdom; wherein he both professes
his zealous resolutions, and desires to build up Gods house, in Jerusalem, and
inioynes, and incourages all the Jews, through his dominions, to address
themselves to that sacred work; and incites all his subjects to aid them with
silver, and gold, and goods, and beasts. How gracious was the command of that,
whereof the very allowance was a favor?

Was it Cyrus that did this? was it not thou, O God, in whose hands are the
hearts of Kings, that stirredst up the spirit of this Persian; as if he had
been more then a son of thy Church, a father? How easy is it for thee to
make very Pagans protectors to thy Church; enemies, benefactors?

Not with an empty grace does this great King dismiss the Jews, but with a
royal bounty; He brings forth the vessels of the house of the Lord, which
Nehuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the
house of his gods; and causes them to be numbered by his Treasurer to the hands
of Sheshbazzar the Prince of Judah, for the use of the Temple; no fewer then
five thousand and four hundred vessels of gold and silver.

Certainly, this great Monarch wanted not wit to think; It is a rich booty
that I find in the Temples of Babylon; by the law of conquest it is mine;
having vanquished their gods, I may well challenge their spile; how seasonably
does it now fall into my hands, upon this victory, to reward my soldiers, to
settle my new Empire: what if this treasure came from Jerusalem? the propriety
is now altered; the very place (according to the conceit of Jews) has
profaned it; The true God, I have heard, is curious; neither will abide those
vessels, which have been polluted with idolatrous uses: It shall be enough if
I loose the bonds of this miserable people: If I give liberty, let the next
give wealth: they will think themselves happy in bare walls, in their native
earth: To what purpose should I pamper their penury with a sudden store? But
the Princely heart of Cyrus would admit of no such base sacrilegious thoughts;
Those vessels that he finds stamped with Gods mark, he will return to their
owner; neither his own occasions, nor their abuse shall be any color of their
detention. O Cyrus, how many close-handed, griple-minded Christians shall once
be choked in judgment with the example of thy just munificence? thou
restoredst that which we purloine: woe be to those houses that are stored
with the spoils of Gods Temple: woe be to those fingers that are tainted with
holy treasures.

Kings can hardly do good alone; their laws are not more followed, then their
examples: No sooner do the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and
the Priests, and Levites set their faces toward Jerusalem for the building of
the Temple, then the liberal hands of their Pagan neighbors furnish them with
gold, and silver, and precious things. Ever Persian is glad to be at the charge
of laying a stone, in Gods house. The same God that had given them these
metals, out of his cofers of the earth, gives it out of their cofers to his
Temple. He that took away by the Chaldees, gives by the Persians: Where the
Almighty intends a work, there cannot be any want of means.

Thus hartened, thus laded, do the joyful families of Judah return to their
old home; How many thousands of them were worn out, and lost in that seventy
years servitude? How few of them yet suruiued, that could know the place of
their birth, and habitation; or, say, Here stood the Temple, here the Palace?
Amongst those forty and two thousand, three hundred and threescore Jews, that
returned in this first expedition; there were who^ the confusion of their long
captivity Besides servants 7337.
had robbed of their pedigree; They knew themselves Jews, but could not derive
their line: these were yet admitted, without difficulty; But those of the
Priestly tribe, which could not deduce their genealogy from the register, are
cashiered as unclean. Then, God would be served in a blood, now in a due
succession: If we could not fetch the line of our pedigree from Christ, and his
Apostles, we were not fit for the Evangelical altars. Their calling was by
nature, ours by grace; The grace of inward abilities, of outward ordination; if
we cannot approve both these, we are justly aba^doned; now had the children of
Israel taken down their Harpes from the Willowes, which grew by the waters of
Babylon, and could, unbidden, sing the true so^gs of their recovered Zion: They
are newly settled in their old ma^sions, when upon the first public feast, in
the Autumn, immediately following their return, they flock up to Jerusalem:
their first care is their public sacrifice; That school of their Captivity,
wherein they have been long trained, has taught them to begin with God: A
forced discontinuance, makes devotion more sauoury, more sweet to religious
hearts; whereas in an open freedom, piety does too often languish.

Ieshua the Priest, and Zorobabel the Prince are fitly joined in the building
of the Altar: neither of their hands may be out of that sacred work: no sooner
is that set upon the bases, then it is employed to the daily burnt-offerings:
The Altar may not stay the leisure of the Temple; Gods Church may not want her
oblations; He can be none of the sons of Israel, that does not every day renew
his acknowledgements of God.

How feelingly do these Jews keep their feast of Tabernacles, whiles their
soiourning in Babylon was still in their thoughts; whiles as yet their Te^ts
must supply their ruined houses? The first motions of zeal are commonly
strong, and fervent; How carefully do these Governors and Priests make
preparation for Gods Temple? Carpenters and Masons are hired; Tyrian workmen
are again called for, and Lebanon is now anew solicited for Cedar trees. The
materials are ready; Every Israelite, with such courage addresses himself to
this service, as if his life lay in those stones: And now, whiles the
foundation of the Temple was laying, the Priests stand in their habits, with
Trumpets, the Levites with Cymbals, interchanging their holy Music, and
melodiously singing praises to the God of Israel, who had turned their
captivity as the streams in the South, and honored their eyes and hands with
the first stones of his house: The people second their songs with shouts; The
earth sounds, and heaven rings with the joyful acclamations of the multitude;
It is no small comfort, in a good action, to have begun well; The entrance of
any holy enterprise is commonly encountered with many discouragements, which if
we have once overcome, the passage is smooth.

How would these men have shouted at the laying on of the last stone of the
battlements, who are thus ioyed with laying the first stones of the foundation?
The end of any thing is better then the beginning: that has certainty, this
danger; this labor, that rest: little did these men think that, for all this,
few of them should live to see the roof.

What different affections shall we see produced in men by the same occasion?
The younger Jews shouted at this sight, the elder wept: The younger shouted to
see a new foundation; The elder wept to remember the old: They who had seen no
better, thought this goodly; They who had seen the former, thought this mean,
and homely; more sorrowing for what they had lost, then rejoicing in so unequal
a reparation.

As it may fall out, it is some piece of misery to have been happier; every
abatement of the degrees of our former height lays siege to our thankfulness,
for lesser mercies. Sometimes, it proves an advantage to have known no better;
he shall more comfortably enjoy present benefits, who takes them as they are,
without any other comparisons, then of the weakness of his own deseruings.
It is nothing to me what my self or others have been, so I be now well:
Neither is it otherwise in particular Churches, if one be more gloriously built
then another, yet if the foundation be rightly laid in both; one may not
insult, the other may not repine: Each must congratulate the truth to other,
each must thankfully enjoy it self.

The noise was not more loud, then confused; here was a discordant mixture of
lamentation, and shouting; it was hard to say whether drowned the other.

This assembly of Jews was a true image of Gods Church on earth; one sings,
another cries; never does it all either laugh or mourn at once. It shall be
in our triumph that all tears shall be wipt from our eyes; till then, our
passions must be mixed, according to the occasions.

The Jews are busy at work, not more full of joy, then hopes; and now that
the walls begin to ouerlook the earth; their thoughts seem to ouerlooke the
walls. But what great enterprise was ever set on foot for God, which found not
some crosses?

There was a mungrell brood of Samarit-Assyrians, which ever since the days of
Senacherib dwelt in the land of Israel; whose religion was a patched coat of
several shreds; some little part Jewish, the rest Pagan, not without much
variety of idolatry. These hollow neighbors profer their assistance to the
children of the captivity; Let us build with you, for we seek your God, as ye
do: and do sacrifice to him. Might men be their own judges, there would be
no heresy in the world, no mis-worship. It is true; these men did sacrifice to
the true God; The Lions taught them to seek, and the Israelitish Priest taught
them to find the fashions of the God of the land: Some of these Jews knew
their devotion of old; They served Isreal's God; but with their own: As good no
God, as too many. In a just indignation therefore do these Jewish governors
repel the partnership of such helpers: You have nothing to do with us, to
build an house to our God; but we our selves together will build unto the Lord
God of Israel. The hand of an idolater is contagious. Yet, had it been to the
building of some fortress, or commonhall, perhaps their aid had not been
refused, but when the walls of Gods house are to be raised, this society had
been piacular.

Those that may not be allowed to help the work, will ask no leave to hinder
it: their malicious suggestions weaken the hands of the people of Judah, and
stir up authority to suppress them.

Cyrus was far off; neither lived he long after that gracious commission; and
besides was so taken up the while with his wars, that he could not have leisure
to sift those querulous accusations. Now therefore, during the last years of
Cyrus, and the reign of his son Cambyses, and the long government of Darius
Hystaspides, and of his son Xerxes, or Ahasuerus, and lastly of his son
Artaxerxes, until the days of Darius Nothus, (which was no less then five
successions of Kings, (besides Cyrus) do the walls of the Temple stand still,
yea lie waste; subject to the wrongs of time, and wether: the fit matter of
sorrow to the Jews, insultation to the enemies, derision to passengers.

What a wide gap of time was here betwixt the foundation of Gods house, and the
battlements? How large a trial does God now secondly take of the faith, of the
patience of his people? How large a proof does he give of his own
long-suffering? Oh God, when thou had but one house upon earth, thou were
content to put up delays, yea affronts in the building of it; now thou have
many, it is no marvel if thy longanimity and justice, abide some of them to
lie desolate: They are not stones, or metals, or men that can make thee more
glorious; thou best know when to serve thy self of all these; when to
honor these with thy service.

A small matter hinders the worthiest action; as a little fish (they say)
stays the greatest ship: Before, the Jews were discouraged with words, but
now they are stopped by commands.

These envious Samaritans have corrupted the governors which the Persian Kings
set over those parts; and from their hands have obtained letters of deep
calumniation, to Ahasuerus the King; and after him, to his son Artaxerxes;
wherein Jerusalem is charged with old rebellion to Kings; and for proof,
appellation is made to the records; from which evidence, is spightfully
inferred, that if these walls be once built, the King shall receive no tribute
on this side the river. Never was Gods Church but subject to reproaches.

Princes have reason to be jealous of their rights. The records are searched;
It soon appears that within one Century of years, Jerusalem had rebelled
against Nebuchadnezzar, and held out two years siege of that great Babylonian.
The scandal of disloyalty is perpetual: although indeed they held him rather
a prevailing enemy, then a lawful Sovereign; One act disparages either place,
or person, to all posterities. Therefore shall the walls of Jerusalem lie waste,
because it had once been treacherous; After an hundred years does that City
rue one perfidious act of Zedekiah. Fidelity to our governors is ever both
safe, and honorable.

Command is now sent out from Surnamed Longhand.
Artaxerxes, (even the son of Queen Esther) to restrain the work: All
respects must cease with carnal minds, when their honors, or profits are in
question. Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe, come now armed with
authority: The sword has easily prevailed against the trowell. Still do the
Jews find themselves as it were, captives at home, and in silence, and sorrow,
cease from their labors, until the days of the next successor, Darius Nothus.

As those that had learned to sow after a bad crop, these Jews, upon the
change of the Prince, by the encouragement of the Prophets of God, Haggai, and
Zechariah, take new heart to build again: If others power hinder us in the
work of God, our will may not be guilty.

Their new governors come, as before; to expostulate; Who has commanded you to
build this house, and to make up this wall? and what are your names? They
wisely and modestly plead the service of the God of heaven, the decree of
Cyrus; still persisting to build, as if the prohibition of Artaxerxes had dyed
with the author. The impartial Governors do neither claw, nor exasperate;
but relating the humble and just answer of the Jews, move the King that search
may be made in the rolls of Babylon, whether such an Edict were made by Cyrus;
and require his royal pleasure, concerning the validity of such pretended
decree. Darius searches, finds, ratifies, inlargeth it, not only charging his
officers not to hinder the work, but commanding to levy sums of his own
Tribute, beyond the river, for the expenses of the building, for the furnishing
of sacrifices; threatening utter ruin to the house of that man, and death to
his person, who should offer to impeach this bounty: and shutting up with a
zealous imprecation; The God of heaven that has caused his name to dwell
there, destroy all Kings and people that shall put to their hand to alter, and
to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem: I Darius have made a
decree, let it be done with speed.

Who would have looked for such an edict from a Persian? No Solomon, no David
could have said more.

The ruler of all hearts makes choice of his own instruments, and when he
pleases, can glorify himself by those means, which are least expected: That
sacred work which the husband, and son of an Esther crossed, shall be happily
accomplished by a Darius: In the sixth year of his reign, is the Temple of God
fully finished; and now the Dedication of it, is celebrated, by a joyful
feast: An hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, in a meet
proportion, smoke upon their altars: And now the children of the captivity
think this day a sufficient payment for all their sorrows: We have reason to
think it the fairest day that ever shone forth to us, wherein the spiritual
building of Gods house is raised up in our souls. How should we shout at the
laying of this foundation, and feast at the laying on of the roof? What other,
what better sacrifice can we offer up to God in the sense of our joy, then our
selves? Let our hearts be at once, the Temple, the Altar, the sacrifice; Oh
God, be thou glorified in all these, who have graciously honored all these
with thy self.

Every holy feast is now duly kept, the Priests know their divisions, the
Levites their courses; and the whole service of God is put into a settled order;
But, as there can be no new beginnings without imperfection, nor long
continuance, without corruption; reformation is no less necessary then good
institutions; Ataxerxes The windfull.
Mnemon has learned of his father Darius to befriend Gods people; and strives
to inherit his beneficence: under his government, is Ezra the Priest, and
learned scribe, sent with a large commission from Babylon, to Jerusalem, to
inquire into the wants, and redress the disorders of the Jews; with full
power not only to carry with him all the voluntaries of his nation; and the
treasures contributed in all the province of Babylon; but to raise such sums,
out of the Kings revenues, as should be found requisite; and withal to ordain
Magistrates and Judges, and to crown the Laws with due execution, whether to
death, or banishment, or confiscation; and lastly, with a large exemption of
the Priests and Levites, and all the inferior officers of the Temple, from all
toles, tributes, customs. Nothing wanted here, whether for direction, or
encouragement. It is a sign of Gods great favor to any nation, when the
hearts of Sovereign governors are raised up, both to the choice of worthy
agents, and to the commanding of pious, and restauratiue actions.

Holy and careful Ezra gathers a new colony of Jews, takes view of them, at
the river of Ahaua; and finding a miss of the sons of Leui (without whom no
company, no plantation can be complete) sends for their supply; And now, fully
furnished, he proclaims a fast in the way.

I do not hear him say, The journey is long and dangerous; the people have
need of all their strength. I could well wish us al afflicted with a religious
fast, were it not that the abatement of the courage, and vigor of the
multitude may endanger our success; But without all these carnal
consultations, he begins with this solemn act of humiliation; It is better to
have God strong in our weakness, then to have flesh and blood strong in his
neglect.

Artaxerxes was a Patron of the Jews, yet a Pagan by profession; wise Ezra was
afraid of quenching those sparks of piety which he descryed in this
semi-proselite. Rather therefore then he will seem to imply a distrust in the
providence of that God, in whose service he went by seeking a conuoy of
soldiers from the King; Ezra chooses to put himself upon the hazard of the
way, and the immediate protection of the Almighty. Any death were better then
to hear Artaxerxes say, Is this the man that so confidently told me, The hand
of our God is upon all them for good that seek him; but his power and his
wrath is against all them that forsake him? Does he believe himself that he
thus doubts ere he begin? Dare he not trust his God with his own businesses?

The resolutions of faithful hearts are heroical: No heathen man shall
stumble at Ezraes fear: He can find more assurance in his fast, then in a
Persian band: with a courageous relyance upon the hand of his God he puts
himself into the journey; and finds nothing but safety and success: The
fidelity of the Almighty never disappointed the confidence of his servants. All
the army of Artaxerxes could not have been so strong a guard to the Jews, as
their invisible protection.

In the space of four months is Ezra, and his company happily arrived at
Jerusalem: where he joys to see the new Temple, and his old Colleagues: and
now having delivered up the charge of his treasure, by weight, in the chambers
of the house of the Lord, he applies himself to his work, and delivers the
Kings Commissions to the Lieu-tenants and Governors, for their utmost
assistance.

The Princes of Judah do not (for ought I hear) repine at the large Patent
granted to this Priest, nor say, What does a man of this robe meddle with
placing, or displacing Magistrates? with execution of judgments to death,
bonds, banishment? but rather as congratulating this power to sacred hands,
gladly present unto him all their grieuances. Truly religious hearts cannot
grudge any honor to their spiritual guides.

This holy Commissioner is soon welcomed with a sad Bill of complaint, from
some good Peers of Israel; wherein they charge diverse of the Priests, Levites,
people, not to have separated themselves from the idolatrous inhabitants of the
lands, nor (therefore) from their abominations, even from Canaanites, Hittites,
Perizzites, and the rest of those branded nations; That they have taken of
their daughters for themselves, and for their sons: So that the holy seed
have mingled themselves with those forbidden people; and, (which made the
matter so much more heinous, less remediable) that the hand of the Princes,
and Rulers, has been chief in this trespass.

Oh hypocritical Jews, did ye refuse to suffer your Samaritan neighbors to
join with you in building a liuelesse house unto God, and do ye now join
affinity with a more accursed generation for the building of living houses
unto posterity? for the pulling down of the lively house of God?

How could Ezra hear this with his clothes, his hair, his beard untorn?
What grief, what astonishment must this news needs bring to a zealous heart?
And, were it not that the conscience of his sincere respect to Gods glory
relieved him, how could Ezra choose but repent him of his journey; and say; Am
I comne from Babylon to find Paganism in Judah? Did I leave Persians, to meet
with Canaanites? what do I here, if Jerusalem be removed? How much better
were a clear captiutie, then an idolatrous freedom? Woe is me, that having
left many Jewish hearts in Babylon, I now am forced to find heathen blood in
Jerusalem.

As a man distracted with sorrow, Ezra sits down upon the earth with his
garments rent, with the hair of his head, and beard plucked off, wringing his
hands, knocking his breast, not moving from his place until the evening
sacrifice. It is hard to be too much affected with the public sins of Gods
people. Those who find themselves in the ship of Gods Church, cannot but be
much troubled with every dangerous leake that it takes: Common cases are not
more neglected by the careless, then taken to heart by the wise, and godly.

There, and thus, Ezra sits astonished until the evening sacrifice: others
resorted to him the while; even all that tre^bled at the words of the God of
Israel; but to help on his sorrow, not to relieve it; neither does any man with
a mitigation of his own, or others grief. At last, he rises up from his
heaviness, and casts himself upon his knees, and spreads out his hands unto
the Lord his God: Wherefore was all that pensiveness, fasting, silence,
tearing of hair and clothes, but to serve as a meet preface to his prayers?
wherein he so freely powers out his heart, as if it had been all dissolved into
devotion; professing his shame to lift up his face toward the throne of God;
confessing the iniquities of his people, which were increased over their heads,
and grown up unto heaven; fetching their trespass far, and charging them
deep; feelingly acknowledging the just hand that had followed them, in all
their judgments, and the just confusion wherein they now stand before the face
of their God.

Tears, and sighs, and grouelings accompanied his prayers; the example and
noise whereof drew Israel into a participation of this public mourning, For
the people wept very sore: How can they choose but think, If he thus lament
for us, how should we grieve for our selves?

All Judah went away merrily with their sin, till this check of Ezra, now
they are afflicted: Had not the hands of the Peers been in this trespass,
the people had not been guilty; had not the cheeks of Ezra been first
drenched with tears, the people had not been penitent. It cannot be spoken,
what power there is in a great example, whether to evil, or good.

Prayers and tears are nothing without indeauors. Shechaniah, the son of
Iehiel puts the first life into this business. Having seconded the complaint
of Ezra, he now adds, Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Now
therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the wives, and
such as are borne of them. Arise, for this matter belongs to thee, we also
will be with thee; Be of good courage, and do it.

When mischief is once done, the chief care is how to redress it. The best
way of redress is the deliberate undoing of that which we have rashly
committed; The surest obligation to the undoing of an evil act, is an oath or
covenant made with God for the performance.

There is no man so wise, but he may make use of good counsel; there is no
man so forward, but he may abide incitation. It is no small encouragement to
see an hearty assistance in an envious and difficult service. Then arose Ezra,
and made the chief Priests, the Levites and all Israel to swear that they
should do according to this word.

It is half done that is thus assured. There was need of a strong power to
dissolve a matrimonial, though inordinate love: Doubtless, these men had
married out of affection; their hearts were no less set upon these wives
(though heathenish) then if they had been of their own Tribes; neither were
their children, thus begotten less dear unto them, then if they had lain in
Jewish wombes: Nothing less then an oath of God, therefore could quit these
passions; That is both required and taken

Now begins Ezra to conceive some hope of present redress; the comfort
whereof, yet, cannot turn off his sorrow for the offense passed; He neither
eats bread, nor drinks water; willingly punishing himself, because Israel had
sinned: Now shall his Countrymen easily read in his face their own penance,
and just humiliation; and say; This man takes no joy in our sufferings; he
would not smart thus for us, if he did not descry more danger toward us then
we can apprehe^d.

Proclamation is made through Judah and Ierursalem, under pain of forfaiture
of substance, and excommunication from Gods people; that all the children of
the captivity should gather themselves together unto Jerusalem. They are met
accordingly; The Courts of Gods house are thronged with penitents; and now, as
if the heaven would teach them what to do, the clouds rain down abundance
of tears. What with those sad showers, what with their inward remorse, the
people sit trembling in the open Courts; and humbly wait for the reproof, for
the sentence of Ezra. He rises up; and with a severe countenance, lays before
them their sin, their amends: The sin of their strange wives; the amends of
their confession, of their separation: not sparing to search their wound; not
neglecting the meet plaster for their cure.

The people, as willing to be healed, yield themselves patiently to that rough
hand; not shrinking at the pain, not favoring the sore; As thou have said, so
must we do; Only craving a fit proportion of time, and a due assistance for
the dispatch of so long and important a work. Ezra gladly harkens to this, not
so much request, as counsel of Israel; The charge is divided to men, and
days; For two months space the commissioners sit close; and within that
compass, finish this business, not more thanklesse then necessary: Doubtless
much variety of passion met with the^ in this busy service; Here you should
have seen an affectionate husband bitterly weeping at the dismission of a
loving wife, and drowning his last farewell in sobs: there you might have seen
a passionate wife, hanging upon the arms of her beloved husband, and on her
knees, coniuring him by his former vows, and the dear pledges of their loves;
and profering with many tears, to redeem the loss of her husband with the
change of her religion: Here, you might have seen, the kindred and parents of
the dismissed, shutting up their denied suites with rage and threats. There,
the abandoned children kneeling to their seemingly-cruell father, beseeching
him not to cast off the fruit of his own loins; and expostulating, what they
have offended in being his: The resolved Israelites must be deaf, and blind to
these moving objects; and so far forget nature, as to put off part of
themselves. Personal inconveniences have reason to yield to public mischiefs
Long intertainment makes that sin hard to be eiected; whose first motions
might have been repelled with ease.

Had not the prohibition of these marriages been express, and their danger and
mischief palpable, the care of their separation had not bred so much tumult in
Israel. He that ordained matrimony, had upon fearful curses forbidden an
unequal yoke with Infidels. Besides the marring of the Church by the mixture
of an unholy seed, religion suffered for the present, and all good hearts with
it. Many tears, many sacrifices needed to expiate so foul an offense, and to
set Israel straight again.

All this while even these mesline Jews were yet forward to build the Temple;
The worst sinners may yield an outward conformity to actions of piety: Ezra
has done more service in pulling down, then the Jews in building; without
this act, the temple might have stood, religion must needs have fallen. Bebel
had been translated to Jerusalem; Jews had turned Gentiles. Oh happy
indeauors of devout and holy Ezra that has at once restored Judah to God, and
to it self.

NEHEMIAH building the walls of Jerusalem.
THirteen years were Nehemiah 1, 2, 3, 4, Chapt.
now passed since Ezraes going up to Jerusalem, when Nehemiah the religious
Courtier of Artaxerxes, inquires of the estate of his Country, and brethren of
Iudaea: He might well find that holy scribe had not been idle: The
commission of Artaxerxes had been improued by him to the utmost; Disorders
were reformed, but the walls lay wast; The Temple was built, but the City was
ruinous; and if some streets were repaired, yet they stood unguarded; open to
the mercy of an enemy, to the infestation of ill neighborhood: Great bodies
must have slow motions; As Jerusalem, so the Church of God, whose type it was,
must be finished by leisure.

Nehemiah sat warm in the Court at Shushan, favored by the great King
Artaxerxes; nothing could be wanting to him, whether for pleasure, or state;
what needed he to trouble his head with thoughts for Jerusalem? what if those
remote walls lay on heaps whiles himself dwelt fair? what if his far-distant
countrymen be despised, whiles himself is honored, by the great Monarch of
the world?

It is not so easy for gracious dispositions to turn off the public
calamities of Gods Church; neither can they do other then leese their private
felicities in the common distresses of the universal body. If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; If I do not remember thee,
let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth.

Many Jews went up from Babylon, and Shushan, to Jerusalem, few ever returned
voluntarily from their native home to the region of their captivity: Some
occasion drew Hanani with certain others of Judah, to this voyage. Of them
does Nehemiah carefully inquire the present condition of Jerusalem: It was no
news that the people were afflicted, and reproached, the walls broken down,
the gates burnt with fire. Ever since the furious vastation of Nebuzaradan,
that City knew no better terms: seldom when does the spiritual Jerusalem
fare otherwise in respect of outward estate: External glory and magnificence
is an unsure note of the Church.

Well had Nehemiah hoped that the gracious edict, and benefice^ce of Darius,
and the successiue patronage of his Lord Artaxerxes had by the continuance of
twenty years favor advanced the strength and glory of Jerusalem, but now,
finding the holy City to lie still in the dust of her confusion, neglected of
God, despised of men, he sits down and weeps, and mournes, and fasts, and
prays to the God of heaven. How many saw those ruins, and were little
affected? he hears of them a far off, and is thus passionate? How many were
upon this sight affected with a fruitless sorrow, his mourning is joined with
the endeavors of redress. In vain is that grief which has no other end then
it self.

Nehemiah is resolved to kneel to the King, his master, for the repair of his
Jerusalem; he dares not attempt the suit till he have begun with God; This
good Courtier knew well that the hearts of these earthly Kings are in the
ouer-ruling hand of the King of heaven to incline whither he pleases: Our
prayers are the only true means to make way for our success; If in all our
occasions we do not begin with the first mouer, the course is preposterous and
commonly speeds thereafter.

Who dares censure the piety of Courtiers, when he finds Nehemiah standing
before Artaxerxes? Even the Persian Palace is not incapable of a Saint: No man
that waits on the Altar at Jerusalem can compare for zeal, with him, that
waits on the cup of a Pagan Monarch: The mercies of God are unlimited to
places, to callings.

Thus armed with devotions, does Nehemiah put himself into the presence of his
master Artaxerxes. His face was ouerclouded with a deep sadness, neither was
he willing to clear it. The King easily notes the disparity of the
countenance of the bearer, and the wine that he bears: and in a gracious
familiarity asks the reason of such unwonted change; How well it becomes the
great to stoop unto a courteous affability, and to exchange words of respect,
even with their humble vassalls.

Nehemiah had not been so long in the Court but he knew that Princes like no
other then cheerful attendants; neither was he wont to bring any other face
into that presence, then smooth, and smiling.

Greatness uses to be full of suspicion, and where it sees a deiection, and
sowernesse of the brows, is ready to apprehend some sulle^ thoughts of
disconte^tment, or, at the least, construes it for a disrespect to that
sovereignty, whose beams should be of power to disperse all our inward mists:
Even good manners forbid a man to press into the presence of a Prince, except
he can either lay by these unpleasing passions, or hide them: So had Nehemiah
hitherto done: Now, he purposely suffers his sorrow to look through his eyes,
that it may work both inquiry, and compassion from his master; neither does
he fail of his hopes in either; Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art
not sick. How sensible do we think the father of mercies is of all our
pensive thoughts, when an heathen master is so tender of a servants grief? How
ready should our tongues be to lay open our cares to the God of all comfort,
when we see Nehemiah so quick in the expressions of his sorrow to an
uncertain ear?

Let the King live for ever: Why should not my countenance, be sad when the
City the place of my father sepulphres lies wast, and the gates thereof are
burnt with fire. Not without an humble preface does Nehemiah lay forth his
grieuance; Complaints have ever an unpleasing harshnesse in them which must be
taken off by some disscreet insinuation: Although it could not but sound well
in the generous ear of Artaxerxes, that his servant was so careful for the
honor of his Country; As nature has made us all members of a community and
has given us common interests, so, it is most pleasing to us, to see these
public cares divide us from our own.

The King easily decryes a secret supplication wrapped up in this moanefull
answer, which the modest suitor was afraid to disclose, and therefore he helps
that bashful motion into the light; For what do thou make request? It is the
praise of bounty to draw on the just petitions of fearful suppliants.

Nehemiah dares not open his mouth of the King, till his heart has opened it
self by a sudden eiaculation to his God; No business can be so hasty, but
our prayer may prevent it; the wings whereof are so nimble, that it can fly up
to heaven, and solicit God, and bring down an answer, before ever our words
need to come forth of our lips. In vain shall we hope that any design of ours
can prosper, if we have not first sent this messenger on our erra^d.

After this silent, and insensible preparation; Nehemiah moves his suit to the
King; not yet at once; but by meet degrees; first he craves leave for his
journey, and for the building: then he craves aid for both; Both are granted;
Nehemiah departs furnished with letters to the governors, for a conuoy; with
letters to the keeper of the Kings forest for timber. Not more full of desire,
then hope.

Who ever put his hand to any great work for the behoof of Gods Church,
without opposition? As the walls of the Temple found busy enemies, so shall the
walls of the City; and these so much more; as they promise more security and
strength to Jerusalem: Sanballat the Deputie-Lieutenant of the Moabites, and
Tobiab, the like officer to the Ammonites, and Geshem, to the Arabians, are
galled with envy at the ariuall of a man authorized to seek the welfare of the
children of Israel: There cannot be a greater vexation to wicked hearts, then
to see the spiritual Jerusalem in any likelihood of prosperity. Evil spirits
and men need no other torment, then their own despite.

This wise Courtier has learnt that secrecy is the surest way of any important
dispatch. His errand could not but be known to the governors; their furtherance
was enjoined for the provision of materials; else the walls of Jerusalem had
ouer-lookt the first notice of their heathe^-neighbors. Without any noise does
Nehemiah arise in the dead of night, and taking some few into his company,
none into his counsel, he secretly rounds the decayed walls of Jerusalem, and
viewes the breaches, and observes the gates; and returns home in silence,
ioying in himself to foresee those reparations, which none of the inhabitants
did once dream of: At last, when he had fully digested this great work in
his own breast, he calls the rulers and Citizens together, and having condoled
with them, the common distress, and reproach, he tells them of the hand of
his God, which was good upon him; he shows them the gracious commission of
the King, his master, for that good work. They answer him with a zealous
encouragement of each other, Let us rise up and build* Such an hearty
inuitation countenanced by authority has easily strengthened the hands of the
multitude; with what observance and dearnesse do they now look upon their
unexpected patron? how do they honor him as a man fent from heaven, for the
welfare of Jerusalem? Every man flies to his hodde, and trowell, and reioyces
to second so noble a leader, in laying a stone in that wall of their common
defense.

Those emulous neighbors of theirs, Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem, the chief
commanders of Moab, Ammon, Arabia, have soon espied the first mortar, that is
laid upon that old foundation. Envy is usually more quicke-sighted then love:
And now they scornfully apply themselves to these despised Jews, and think to
scoff them out of their work: The fauourablest persecution of any good cause
is the lash of lewd tongues; whether by bitter taunts or by scurrilous
inuectiues: which it is as impossible to avoid, as necessary to contemn. The
barking of these dogs does not hinder Nehemiah from walking on his way;
professing his confidence in the God of heaven, whose work that was; he shakes
off their impotent malice, and goes on cheerfully to build: Every Israelite
knows his station. Eliashib the high Priest, and the rest of that sacred tribe
put the first hand to this work; they build the sheep-gate, and sanctify it;
and in it, all the rest. As the first fruits of the field, so the first stones
of the wall, are hallowed to God, by the consecration of those devout agents:
That business is like to prosper which begins with God.

No man was idle, no part was intermitted; All Jerusalem was at once
encompassed with busy laborers. It cannot be, but the ioynt-indeauors of
faithful hearts must raise the walls of the Church.

Now Sanballat, and his brethren, find some matter to spend their scoffs upon;
What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they
sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of
the heaps of rubbish which are burnt?

How basely do carnal minds think of the proiects, and actions of Gods
children; therefore vilifying them, because they measure them by no other line,
then outward probability. Oh foolish Moabites, this work is Gods, and
therefore in despite of all your tongues and hands, it shall prosper: He hears
you whom ye have blasphemed, and shall turn your reproach upon your own heads.

And, thou proud Ammonite, that could say, If a Fox go upon their
stone-wall, he shall break it down; shall well find, that all the woluish
troops of your confederats shall not be able to remove one stone of this sure
fortification; Whiles Moab and Ammon repine and bluster in vain this wall shall
rise, and when Moab and Ammon shall lie in the dust, this wall shall stand. The
mortar that has been tempered with so many tears, and laid with so many
prayers, cannot but out-last all the flints, and marbles of humane confidence.

Now the growth of this wall has turned the mirth of the adversaries into
rage: These Moabites, Ammonites, Arabians, Ashdodites conspire all together, to
fight against Jerusalem; and whiles the mortar is yet green, to demolish those
envied heaps.

What has this City offended in desiring to be defenced? what wrong could it
be to wish a freedom from wrongs? Were this people so mighty, that there could
be danger in ouer-powring their neighbors, or in resisting a common soueraign,
there might have appeared some color for this hostile opposition; but, alas;
what could a despised handful do to the prejudice of either? It is quarrel
enough to Jerusalem that it would not be miserable.

Neither is it otherwise with the head of these hellish accomplices; there needs
no other cause of his utmost fury, then to see a poor soul struggling to get
out of the reach of his tyranny. So do savage beasts bristle up themselves,
and make the most fierce assaults when they are in danger of loosing the prey,
which they had once seized on.

In the mean while, what does Nehemiah with his Jews for their common safety?
They pray, and watch; they pray unto God, they watch against the enemy.

Thus, thus shall we happily prevail against those spiritual wickednesses,
which war against our souls: No evil can surprise us if we watch; no evil
can hurt us, if we pray; This is the victory that ouercomes the world, even our
faith.

There was need of a continued vigilance; the enemy was not more malicious,
then subtle, and had said; They shall not know, neither see, till we come in
the midst among them, and slay them. Open force is not so dangerous, as close
dissimulation; They meant to seem Jews, whiles they were Moabites and
Ammonites; and in the clothes of brethren purposed to hide murderers. Never is
Satan so preuailent, as when he comes transformed into an Angel of light.

It was a merciful providence of God, that made these men's tongues the blabs
of their own counsel. Many a fearful design had prospered, if wickedness
could have been silent. Warning is a lawful guard to a wise adversary: Now
does Nehemiah arm his people; and for the time, changes their trowels into
swords, and spears, and bows; raising up their courage with a vehement
exhortation, to remember the Lord, which is great, and terrible, and to fight
for their brethren, their sons, their daughters, their wives, and their
houses. Nothing can so harten us to the encountering of any evil, as the
remembrance of that infinite power and wisdom which can either auert, or
mittigate, or sanctify it: we could not faint if we did not forget God.

Necessity vrges a man to fight for himself, love inables his hand to fight for
those which challe^ge a part in him; where love meets with necessity, there can
want no endeavor of victory; Necessity can make even cowards, valiant; love
makes the valiant, irresistable: Nehemiah does not therefore persuade these
Jews to fight for themselves, but for theirs: The enlargement of the interest,
and danger, cannot but quicken the dullest spirits.

Discovered counsels are already prevented; These serpents dye by being first
seen; When the enemies heard that it was known unto us, they let fall their
plot. Could we descry the enterprises of Satan, that tempter would return
ashamed.

It is a safe point of wisdom to carry a jealous eye over those, whom we
have once found hollow, and hostile: From that time forth Nehemiah divided the
task, betwixt the trowell, and the sword; so disposing of every Israelite,
that whiles one hand was a Mason, the other was a soldier: one is for work,
the other for defense. Oh lively image of the Church militant, wherein every
one labors, weaponed; wherein there is neither an idle soldier, nor a secure
workman: every one so builds, as that he is ready to ward temptations; every
one so wields the sword of the spirit, for defense, that, withal, he builds
up himself in his most holy faith; here is neither a fruitless valor, nor an
unsafe diligence.

But what can our weapons avail us, if there be not means to warn us of an
enemy? Without a Trumpet we are armed in vain. The work is great and large,
and we are separated upon the wall, one far from another: Yea, so far as
the utmost bounds of the earth, are we separated one from another, upon the
walls of the spiritual Jerusalem; only the sacred Trumpets of God, call us,
who are distant in place, to a combination in profession. And who are those
Trumpets, but the public messengers of God, of whom God has said; If the
Watchmen see the Ezee. 33. 6.
sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned, if the
sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at the watchmans hand. Woe be to us if
we sound not; if the sound we give be uncertain: woe be to our people, if when
we premonish them of enemies, of judgments, they sit still unmoved, not
buckling themselves to a resistance, to a prevention.

It is a mutual aid, to which these Trumpets inuit us; we might fight apart,
without the signals of war; In what place ye hear the sound of the Trumpet,
resort ye thither unto us. There can be no safety to the Church, but where
every man thinks his life, and welfare consists in his fellows; Conjoined
forces may prosper, single oppositions are desperare: All hearts and hands must
meet in the common quarrel.

NEHEMIAH redressing the extortion of the Jews.
WIth what difficulty do these miserable Jews settle in their Jerusalem? The
fear of foraine enemies does not more afflict them, then the extortion of
their own: Dearth is added unto war: Miseries do not stay for a mannerly
succession to each other, but in a rude importunity throng in, at once. Babel
may be built with ease, but whosoever goes about to raise the walls of Gods
City, shall have his hands full: The incursion of public enemies may be
prevented with vigilance and power; but there is no defense against the secret
gripes of oppression.

There is no remedy, the Jews are so taken up with their trowel, and sword,
for the time, that they cannot attend their trades; so as, whiles the wall did
rise, their estates must needs impair: Even in the cheapest season they must
needs be poor, that earned nothing but the public safety, how much more in a
common scarcity? their houses, lands, vineyards are therefore morgaged, yea
their very skins are sold, for corn, to their brethren: Necessity forces them
to sell that, which it was cruelty to buy; What will we not, what must we not
part with, for life? The covetous rulers did not consider the occasions of this
want, but the advantage. Sometimes, a bargain may be as unmerciful as a
robbery: Charity must be the rule in all contracts; the violation whereof,
whether in the matter, or the price, cannot but be sinful.

There could not be a iuster ground of expostulation then this of the
oppressed Jews: Our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as
their children; and lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters:
whiles there is no difference in nature, why should there be such an injurious
disproportion in condition. Even the same flesh may bear a just inequality;
Some may be rulers, whiles others are subject; Some wealthy, others poor; but
why those wealthy rulers should tyrannize over those poor inferiors, and
turn brotherhood into bondage no reason can be given but lawless ambition; If
there were one flesh of Peers, another of Peasants, there should be some
color for the proud impositions of the great, as because the flesh of beasts
is in a lower rank then ours, we kill, we devour it at pleasure; but now,
since the large body of mankind consists of the same flesh, why should the
hand strike the foot? And if one flesh may challenge meet respects from us, how
much more one spirit; The spirit is more noble, then the flesh is base; the
flesh is dead without the spirit; the spirit without the flesh, active and
immortal; Our soul, though shapelesse, and immateriall, is more apparently
one, then the flesh; And if the unity of our humane spirit call us to a mutual
care, and tenderness in our carriage, each to other, how much more of the
divine? by that we are men, by this we are Christians: As the soul animates us
to a natural life, so does Gods Spirit animate the soul to an heavenly; which
is so one; that it cannot be divided. How should that one spirit cause us so
far to forget all natural, and civil differences, as not to contemn, not
to oppress any whom it informs?

They are not Christians, not men, that can enjoy the miseries of their
brethren, whether in the flesh or spirit.

Good Nehemiah cannot choose but be much moved at the barbarous extortion of
the people; and now, like an impartial governor, he rebukes the Rulers and
Nobles, whose hand was thus bloody with oppression. As of fishes, so of men,
the lesser are a prey to the great: It is an ill use made of power, when the
weight of it serves only to crush the weak. There were no living amongst men
had not God ordained higher then the highest; and yet higher then they.
Eminency of place cannot be better improued, then by taking down mighty
offenders.

If nobility do embase it self to any foul sin, it is so much more worthy
of coertion, by how much the person is of greater mark.

The justice of this reproof could not but shame impudence it self; We after
our ability have redeemed our brethren the Jews which were sold to the
heathen, and will you sell your brethren, or shall they be sold to us? Shall
they find at home that yoke of bondage which they had put off abroad? whiles
they are still Jews, shall we turn Assyrians? If they must be slaves, why not
rather to enemies, then to brethren? How much more tolerable were a forayne
servitude, then a domestical: Be ashamed, o ye Nobles of Israel, to renew
Babylon in Jerusalem. I marvel not if the offenders be stricken dumb with so
unanswerable an expostulation; Guiltiness, and confusion have stopped their
mouths.

Many of those who have not had grace enough to refrain sin, yet are not so
utterly void of grace as to maintain sin; Our afterwits are able to discern
a kind of unreasonableness in those wicked actions, which the first appearance
represents unto us plausible. Gain leads in sin, but shame follows it out.
There are those that are bold and witty to bear out commodious, or pleasant
evils; neither could these Jewish enormities, have wanted some colors of
defense; Their stock was their own, which might have been otherwise
improued, to no less profit; The offer, the suit of these bargains was from
the sellers; These escheates fell into their hands, unsought; neither did their
contract cause the need of their brethren, but relieve it: But their
conscience will not bear this plea. I know not whether the maintenance of the
least evil be not worse, then the commission of the greatest; This may be of
frailty, that argues obstinacy: There is hope of that man that can blush, and
be silent.

After conviction of the fact, it is seasonable for Nehemiah, to persuade
reformation: No oratory is so powerful, as that of mildness: especially when
we have to do with those, who either through stomach, or greatness, may not
endure a rough reproof: The drops that fall easily upon the corn, ripen, and
fill the ear, but the stormy showers that fall with violence, beat down the
stalks flat to the earth, and lay whole fields, without hope of recovery. Who
can resist this sweet and soueraign reprehension; Ought ye not to walk in the
fear of our God, because of the reproach of the heathen, our enemies? Did we
dwell alone in the midst of the earth, yet the fear of our God should ouer-awe
our ways; but now that we dwell in the midst of our enemies, whose eyes are
bent upon all our actions, whose tongues are as ready to blaspheme God, as we
to offend him, how carefully should we avoid those sins, which may draw shame
upon our profession?

Now, the scandal is worse then the fact; Thus, shall religion suffer more
from the heathen, then our brethren do from us: If justice, if charity cannot
sway with us, yet, let the scornful insultations of the profane Gentiles,
afright us from these pressures. No ingenuous disposition can be so tender of
his own disgrace, as the true Israelite is of the reproach of his God: What is
it that he will not rather refrain, do, suffer, then that glorious name
shall hazard a blemish? They cannot want outward retentiues from sin, that live
either among friends, or enemies; if friends, they may not be grieved, if
enemies, they may not be provoked: Those that would live well, must stand in
awe of all eyes; Even those that are without the Church yet may not be without
our regard: No person can be so contemptible, as that his censure should be
contemned.

In dissuading from sin, reason it self cannot prevail more then example. I
likewise, and my brethren, and my servants might exact of them money, and
corn. But from the time that I was appointed to the charge of Judah, I, and my
brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor. He shall never rule well,
that does all that he may: It is not safe for either part, that a Prince
should live at the height of his power: And if the greatest abate of their
right, is it for inferiors to extort? Had Nehemiah aimed at his own greatness,
no man could have had fairer pretenses for his gain.

The former governors that were before him were chargeable unto the people, and
had taken of them bread and wine, besides forty shekels of silver. His foot
had not first trod in this commodious path; it was beaten by the steps of his
predecessors; neither did any of them walk beside it: How ever it might be
envious to raise new taxations, yet to continue those he found vnrepined at,
had been out of the reach of exception: A good Governor looks not so much
what has been done, as what should be; Precedents are not the rule, whereby
he rules, but justice, but piety. So did not I, because of the fear of the
Lord: Laws are not a straiter curb to subjects, then conscience is to good
Princes.

They dare not do what they cannot do charitably: what advantage can they
think it to be from under the controllment of men, when the God of heaven
notes, and punishes their offenses. Who so walks by this rule, can neither
err, nor mis-cary; It is not trusting to the external remedies of sin,
either they are not always present; or if present, not powerful enough; but
if the fear of God have once taken up the heart, it goes ever with us, and is
strong enough to ouer-maister the forceablest temptation.

Therefore must these Jews follow this example of Nehemiah, because he
followed not the example of his predecessors; because he left their evil, they
must imitate his good. In vain shall rulers advise against their own
practice; when they lead the way, they may well challenge to be followed:
Seldom has it been ever seen that great persons have not been seconded in
evil, why should not their power serve to make patterns of their virtues?

Thus well did it speed with Nehemiah; his merciful carriage, and zealous suit
have drawn the Rulers to a promise of restitution; We will restore them, and
will require nothing of them, so will we do as thou say.

It is no small advantage that these Nobles must forgo, in their releases:
there cannot be a better sign of a sound amendment, the^ that we can be
content to be loosers by our repentance; Many formal penitents have yielded to
part with so much of their sin, as may abate nothing of their profit; as if
these Rulers should have been willing to restore the persons, but withal
should have stood stiffly to require their sums: This whining and partial
satisfaction had been thanklesse. True remorse inlargeth the heart, and opens
the hand to a bountiful redemption of our errors.

Good purposes do too often cool in time, and vanish into a careless
forgetfulness; Nehemiah feared this issue of these holy resolutions; and
therefore he prosecutes them in their first heat; not leaving these promises,
till he had secured them, with an oath; The Priests are called for, that in
their mouths, the adiuration may be more solemn, and sacred; It is the best
point of wisdom to take the first opportunity of fixing good motions, which
otherwise are of themselves light, and sleightie. To make all yet more sure,
their oaths are crosse-barred with his execration. Also I shook my lap, and
said, so God shake out every man from his house, and from his labor that
performs not this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and emptied, and all
the Congregation said, Amen. A promise, an oath, a curse, are passed upon this
act; now, no Israelite dares falter in the execution: When we have a sin in
chase, it is good to follow it home, not slackning our pursuit till we have
fully prevailed; and when it is once fallen under our hands, we cannot kill it
too much.

Now Nehemiah having thus happily delivered his people from a domestical
captivity, comme^ds his service to the gracious remuneration of the Almighty;
Think upon me my God, for good, according to all that I have done for this
people; Therefore does he refuse the bread of the Governor, that he may
receive the reward of the Governor of heaven: Had he taken a temporary
recompense, both he and it had been forgotten, now he has made an happy
change for eternity. Not that he pleades his merit, but sues for mercy; neither
does he pray to be remembered for his work, but according to his work.

Our good deeds as they are well accepted of God, so they shall not go
unrewarded; and what God will give, why may not we crave. Doubtless, as we
may offer up our honest obediences unto God, so we may expect and beg his
promised retributions; not out of a proud conceit of the worth of our earnings,
who at the best are no other then unprofitable servants; but out of a faithful
dependence upon his pact of bounty, who cannot be less then his word: O God,
if we do ought that is good, it is thine act, and not ours; crown thine own
work in us, and take thou the glory of thine own mercies.

Whiles Nehemiah is busy in reforming abuses, at home; the enemy is plotting
against him, abroad; Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the Arabian conspire
against his life, and in him, against the peace of Jerusalem: What open
hostility could not do, they hope to effect by pretense of treaties: Four
several messages call Nehemiah to a friendly meeting. Distrust is a sure guard.
The wise governor has learned to suspect the hollow favors of an enemy; and
to return them, with safe and just excuses. I cannot come down, why should
the work cease whiles I leave it, and come down to you? I do not hear him
say, You intend mischief to me; I will not come forth to you; though this
were the proper cause of his forbearance, but he he turns them off with an
answer, that had as much truth, as reservedness. Fraud is the fitliest
answered with subtlety: Even innocence is allowed a lawful craft; That man is
in an ill case, that conceales no truth from an adversary.

What entreaties cannot do, shall be attempted by threats; Sanballats servant
comes now the fifth time, with an open letter, importing dangerous intimation,
wherein is written, It is reported among the heathen and Gashmu says it, that
the Jews think to rebel; for which cause thou buildest the wall that thou
may be their King. It is reported: and what falsehood may not plead this
warant^^ What can be more lying then report? Among the beathen: and who is more
Ethnic then Sanballat? what Pagan can be worse then a mungrel Idolater? And
Gashmu says it, Ask my fellow else; This Arabian was one of those three heads
of all the hostile combination, against Jerusalem, against Nehemiah; It would
be wide with innoce^ce if enemies might be allowed to accuse.

That the Jews think to rebel: A stale suggestion, but, once, powerful;
Malice has learned to miscall all actions; where the hands cannot be taxed,
very thoughts are preiudged: For which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou
may be their King; He was never true Israelite that has not passed
spightfull slanders, and misconstructions: Artaxerxes knew his servant too
well, to believe any rumor, that should have been so shameless; The ambition
of Nehemiah was well known to reach only to the cup, not to the Scepter of his
Soueraign: And yet, to make up a sound tale, Prophets are suborned to preach,
There is a King in Judah: as if that loyal governor had corrupted the pulpits
also; and had taught them the language of treason.

But what of all this? what if some false tongue have whispered such idle
tales? It is not safe for thee, O Nehemiah, to contemn report: Perhaps this
news shall fly to the Court, and work thee a deadly displeasure ere thou can
know thy self traduced; Come therefore, and let us take counsel together:
Surely that man cannot be sparing of any thing, that is prodigal of his
reputation. If ought under heaven can fetch Nehemiah out of his hold, it is the
care of his fame. But, that wary governor sees a net spread near unto this
stall; and therefore keeps aloof, not without contempt of those sly devises.
There are no such things done as thou say, but thou fainest them out of
thine own heart: Some imputations are best answered with a neglectiue denial:
It falls out often that plain dealing puts craft out of countenance,

Since neither force nor fraud can kill Nehemiah, they will now try to draw him
into a sin, and thereby into a reproach; O God, that any Prophets tongue
should be mercenary! Shemaiah the Seer, is hired by Tobiah, and Sanballat, to
affright the Governor, with the noise of his intended murder; and to advise
him for shelter, to fly to the forbidden refuge of the Temple. The color was
fair. Violence is meant to thy person, no place but one can promise thee
safety; The City has as yet no gates; come therefore, and shut thy self up
in the Temple, there only shall thou be free from all assaults.

And what if Nehemiah had harkened to this counsel? Sin, and shame had
followed; That holy place was for none but persons sacred; such as were
privileged by blood, and function; others should presume, and offend in
entering; and now, what would the people say? What shall become of us whiles our
Governor hides his head for fear? When shall we find a Temple to secure us?
What do we depending upon a cowardly leader?

Well did Nehemiah forecast these circumstances, both of act, and event, and
therefore resolving to distrust a Prophet that persuaded him to the violation
of a Law, he reiects the motion with scorn; Should such a man as I flee?
Should I go into the Temple to save my life? I will not go: It is fit for
great persons to stand upon the honor of their places; Their very stations
should put those spirits into them, that should make them hate to stoop unto
base conditions.

Had God sent this message, we know he has power to dispense with his own
Laws; but well might the contradiction of a Law argue the message not sent of
God. God as he is one, so does he perfitly agree with himself. If any private
spirit cross a written word, let him be accursed.

AHASVERVS Feasting, VASHTI cast off, ESTHER chosen.
WHat bounds can Ester 1, 2.
be set to humane ambition? Ahasuerus, that is, Xerxes, the son of Darius is
already the King of an hundred, and seven and twenty Provinces, and now is
ready to fight for more. He has newly subdued Egypt, and is now addressing
himself for the conquest of Greece. He cannot hope ever to see all the land
that he possesses, and yet he cannot be quiet, whiles he hears of more.
Less then two else of earth shall ere long serve him, whom, for the time, a
whole world shall scarce satisfy; In vain shall a man strive to have that
which he cannot enjoy, and to enjoy ought by mere relation; It is a windy
happiness that is sought in the exaggeration of those titles, which are taken
upon others credit, without the sense of the owner: Nothing can fill the heart
of man, but he that made it.

This great Monarch, partly in triumph of the great victories, that he has
lately won in Egypt, and partly, for the animation of his Princes, and
soldiers, to his future exploits, makes a feast, like himself, royal and
magnificent.

What is greatness if it be not showed? And wherein can greatness be better
shown, then in the atcheiuments of war, and the intertainments of peace?

All other feasts were but hunger to this of Ahasuerus, whether we regard the
number of guests, or the largeness of preparation, or continuance of time:
During the space of a whole half year, all the tables were sumptuously
furnished for all comers from India, to Ethyopia; A world of meat was every
day dressed for a world of men; Every meal was so set on, as if it should have
been the last: Yet all this long feast has an end; and all this glory is shut
up in forgetfulness; What is Ahasuerus the better, that his Peers then said,
he was incomparably great? What are his Peers the better, that they were
feasted? Happy is he that eats bread, and drinks new wine in the Kingdom of
God; this banquet is for eternity, without intermission, without satiety.

What variety of habits, of languages, of manners, met at the boards of
Ahasuerus? What confluence of strange guests was there now to Shushan? And,
lest the glory of this great King might seem, like some coorse picture, only
fair a far off; after the Princes and Nobles of the remote Provinces, all
the people of Shushan are entertained, for seven days with equal pomp and
state; The spacious Court of the Palace is turned into a Royal Hall, the walls
are rich hangings, the pillars of marble, the beds of silver and gold, the
pauement of porphirie curiously checkered; The wine and the vessels strove
whether should be the richer; no man drunk in worse then gold; and whiles the
metal was the same, the form of each cup was diverse; the attendants was
answerable to the cheer; and the freedom matched both: Here was no
compulsion, either to the measure, or quality of the draught; every man's rule
was his own choice. Who can but blush to see forced healths in Christian
banquets, when the ciuility of very pagans commands liberty.

I cannot but envy the modesty of heathen Dames; Vashti the Queen, and her
Ladies, with all the several ranks of that sex, feast apart; intertaining
each other, with a bashful courtesy, without wantonness, without that wild
scurrility, which uses to haunt promiscuous meetings: Oh shameful unchastity
of those loose Christians, who must feed their lust, whiles they fill their
bellies; and think the feast imperfect, where they may not sat their eye no
less then their palate.

The last day of this pompous feast is now come: King Ahasuerus is so much more
cheerful, by how much his guests are nearer to their dismission. Every one is
wont to close up his courtesy with so much more passion, as the last acts use
to make the deeper impression; And now, that he might at once amaze, and
indeare the beholders, Vashti the Queen in all her royalty, is called for; Her
sight shall shut up the feast, that the Princes and people may say, How happy
is King Ahasuerus, not so much in this greatness, as in that beauty.

Seven officers of the chamber are sent to carry the message, to attend her
entrance, and are returned with a denial: Perhaps Vashti thought; What means
this uncouth motion? More then six months has this feast continued; and, all
this while we have inioyed the wonted liberty of our sex; Were the King still
himself, this command could not be sent; it is the wine, and not he, that is
guilty of this errand; Is it for me to humor him in so vain a desire? Will
it agree with our modest reservedness, to offer our selves to be gazed at by
millions of eyes? Who knows what wanton attempts may follow upon this
ungoverned excess? This very message argues that wit, and reason have yielded
their places to that besotting liquor. Nothing but absence can secure us from
some unbeseeming profer; neither doubt I, but the King when he returns to
himself, will give me thanks for so wise a forbearance.

Thus, upon the conceit (as is likely) that her presence would be either
needless, or unsafe. Vashti refuses to come. Although perhaps her great
spirits thought much to receive a command from the hand of officers.

The blood that is once inflamed with wine, is apt to boil with rage:
Ahasuerus is very wroth with this indigne repulse: It was the ostentation of
his glory, and might, that he affected, before those Princes, Peers, people;
and now that seems eclipsed, in the shutting up of all his magnificence, with
the disgraceful affront of a woman. It vexes him to think, that those Nobles,
whom he meant to send away astonished with the admiration of his power, and
majesty, should now say: What boots it Ahasuerus to rule afar off, when he
cannot command at home? In vain does he boast to govern Kings, whiles he is
checked by a woman.

What ever were the intentions of Vashti, surely her disobedience was
inexcusable; it is not for a good wife to judge of her husbands will, but to
execute it: neither wit, nor stomach may carry her into a curious inquisition
into the reasons of an enjoined charge, much less to a resistance: but in an
hood-winkt simplicity she must follow, whither she is led; as one that holds
her chief praise to consist in subjection.

Where should the perfection of wisdom dwell, if not in the Courts of great
Princes? or what can the treasures of Monarchs purchase more invaluably
precious, then learned and judicious attendance? Or who can be so fit for
honor as the wisest.

I doubt how Ahasuerus could have been so great, if his throne had not been
still compassed with them that knew the times, and understood the law, and
judgment. These were his Oracles in all his doubts: These are now consulted in
this difficulty; neither must their advice be secretly whispered, in the Kings
ear, but publicly delivered in the audience of all the Princes. It is a
perilous way that these sages are called to go, betwixt an husband and wife;
especially of such power, and eminency; yet Memucan fears not to pass an
heavy sentence against Queen Vashti. Vashti, the Queen has not done wrong to
the King only, but also to all the Princes, and all the people, that are in
all the Provinces of the King Ahasuerus. A deep and sore commination; injuries
are so much more intolerable, as they are dilated unto more; those offenses
which are of narrow extent, may receive an easy satisfaction; the amends are
not possible, where the wrong is universal: For this deed of the Queen shall
come abroad to all women, so that they shall despise their husbands in their
eyes: Indeed so public a fact must needs fly; That concourse gave fit
opportunity to diffuse it all the world over; The examples of the great are
easily drawn into rules. Bad lessons are apt to be taken out; as honor, so
contempt falls down from the head to the skirts; never ascends from the skirts
to the head.

These wise men are so much the more sensible of this danger, as they saw it
more likely, the case might prove their own. Likewise shall the Ladies of
Persia and Media say this day unto all the Kings Princes. The first precedents
of evil must be carefully avoided, if we care to keep a constant order in
good. Prudence cannot better bestirre it self, then in keeping mischief from
home.

The foundation of this doom of Memucan is not laid so deep for nothing; If it
please the King let there go a royal commandment from him, and let it be
written among the laws of the Persians, and Medians, that it be not altered,
that Vashti come no more before Ahasuerus; and let the King give her royal
estate to another that is better then she. How bold a word was this, and how
hazardous? Had Ahasuerus more loved the beauty of Vashti, then his honor,
Memucan had spoken this against his own life: Howsoever, a Queen of so great
spirit, could not want strength of favor, and faction, in the Persian Court;
which could not but take fire at so desperate a motion. Faithful statesmen,
ouerlooking private respects, must bend their eyes upon public dangers,
laboring to prevent a common mischief, though with the adventure of their
own. Nature had taught these Pagans the necessity of a female subjection; and
the hate and scorn of a proud disobedience. They have unlearned the very
dictates of Nature, that can abide the head to be set below the ribbe.

I cannot say but Vashti was worthy of a sharp censure; I cannot say she was
worthy a repudiation. This plaster drew too hard; It was but heathen justice
to punish the wives disobedience in one indifferent act, with a divorce:
Nothing but the violation of the mariage-bed, can either break, or untie the
knot of marriage. Had she not been a Queen, had not that contemptuous act been
public, the sentence had not been so hard; now the punishment must be
exemplary, lest the sin should be so. Many a one had smarted less, if their
persons, if their places had been meaner.

The King, the Princes approve this heavy judgment of Memucan; It is not in the
power of the fair face of Vashti, to warrant her stomach: No doubt many
messages passed ere the rigor of this execution: That great heart knows not to
rele^t, but will rather break, then yield to an humble deprecation. When the
stone, and the steel meet, fire is stricken; it is a soft answer that
appeaseth wrath. Vashti is cast off, Letters are sent from the King, into all
his Provinces, to command that every man should rule at home; The Court affords
the^ an awful pattern of authority: Had not Ahasuerus doted much upon
Vashties beauty, he had not called her forth at the feast, to be wo^dredat, by
his Peers and people; yet now he so feels the wound of his reputation, that
he forgets he ever felt any wound of his affection. Even the greatest love may
be ouer-strained; It is not safe presuming upon the deepest assurances of
dearnesse: There is no heart that may not be estranged. It is not possible that
great Princes should want soothing up in all their inclinations, in all their
actions: Whiles Ahasuerus is following the chase of his ambition, in the wars
of Greece, his followers are providing for his lust at home; Nothing could
sound more pleasing to a carnal ear, then that all the fair young virgins,
throughout all his dominions, should be gathered into his palace at Shushan,
for his assay, and choice: The decree is soon published; The charge is
committed to Hege, the Kings Chamberlain, both of their purification, and
ornaments.

What strife, what emulation was now, amongst all the Persian damosells, that
either were, or thought themselves fair? Every one hopes to be a Queen; and
sees no reason why any other should be thought more excellent; How happy were
we, if we could be so ambitious of our espousalls to the King of heaven?

Amongst all this throng of Virgins, God has provided a wife for Ahasuerus;
having determined his choice, where most advantage shall rise to his forlorn
people.

The Jews were miserably scattered over the world, in that woeful deportation
under Iechoniah; scarce an handful of them returned to Jerusalem; the rest
remain still dispersed where they may but have leave to live. There are many
thousands of them turned over with the Babylonian Monarchy, to the Persian;
amongst the rest, was Mordecai, the son of Iair, of the tribe of Benjamin; a
man of no mean note, or ability; who, living in Shushan, had brought up
Hadassah, or Esther, his uncles daughter, in a liberal fashion; It was happy
for this orphane, that in a region of captivity, she light into such good
hands; Her wise kinsman finds it fit, that her breeding, and habit should be
Persian-like; In outward and civil forms, there was no need to vary from the
heathen; her religion must be her own; the rest was so altogether theirs,
that her very nation was not discerned.

The same God that had given incomparable beauty to this Iewesse, gave her also
favor in the eyes of Hegai, the keeper of the women; She is not only taken
into the Persian Court, as one of the selected virgins, but observed with more
then ordinary respect; all necessaries for her speedy purification are brought
to her; Seven maids are allowed for her attendance, and the best and most
honorable place in that Seraglio is allotted to her; As if this great officer
had designed her for a Queen, before the choice of his master.

What strange preparation was here for the impure bed of an heathen? Every
Virgin must be six months purified with oil of myrrh, and six other months
perfumed with sweet odors, besides those special receipts, that were allowed to
each, upon their own election: O God, what care, what cost is requisite to
that soul which should be addressed a fit Bride for thine holy and glorious
Majesty?

When we have scoured our selves with the most cleansing oil of our
repentance, and have perfumed our selves with thy best graces, and our
perfectest obedience, it is the only praise of thy mercy, that we may be
accepted.

The other Virgins passed their probation, unregarded; when Esthers turn came,
though she required nothing; but took what was given her; though she affected
nothing, but brought that face, that demeanure, which nature had cast upon her,
no eye sees her without admiration; the King takes such pleasure in her beauty,
that, contemning all the other vulgar forms, his choice is fully fixed upon
her; All things must prosper, where God has intended the suceesse: the most
wise providence of the Almighty fetches his proiects from far; The
preservation and advantage of his own people is in hand; for the contriuing of
this, Vashti shall be abandoned; the virgins shall be chosen; Esther only shall
please Ahasuerus; Mordecai shall displease Haman; Hamans ruin shall raise
Mordecai: The purposes of God cannot be judged by his remote actions; only the
acco^plishment shows his designs; In the mean time, it pleases him to look
another way, then he moves; and to work his own ends, by arbitrary, and
unlikely accidents.

None but Esther shall succeed Vashti; she only caries the heart of Ahasuerus
from all her sex; The royal Crown is set upon her head; And, as Vashti was
cast off at a feast, so, with a solemn feast shall Esther be espoused; Here
wanted no triumph, to express the joy of this great Bridegroom; and that the
world might witness he could be no less loving, then severe, all his
Provinces shall feel the pleasure of this happy match, in their immunities, in
their rich gifts.

With what envious eyes do we think Vashti looked upon her glorious rival?
How does she now (though too late) secretly chide her peevish will, that had
thus stripped her of her royal crown, and made way for a more happy successor?
Little did she think her refusal could have had so heinous a construction:
Little did she fear, that one word (perhaps not ill meant) should have
forfaited her husband, her crown, and all that she was. Who so is not wise
enough to forecast the danger of an offense, or indiscretion, may have leisure
enough of an unseasonable repentance.

That mind is truly great and noble, that is not changed with the highest
prosperity; Queen Esther cannot forget her cozen Mordecai; No pomp can make
her slight the charge of so dear a kinsman: In all her royalty, she casts her
eye upon him, amongst the throng of beholders, but she must not know him; her
obedience keeps her in awe, and will not suffer her to draw him up with her, to
the participation of her honor; It troubles her, not a little, to forbear this
duty; but she must; It is enough for her, that Mordecai has commanded her not
to be acknowne, who, or whose she was.

Perhaps the wise Jew feared, that whiles her honor was yet green, and
unsettled, the notice of her nation, and the name of a despised captive might
be some blemish to her in that proud Court; when as afterward, upon the merit
of her carriage, and the full possession of all hearts, her name might dignifie
her nation, and countermand all reproaches

Mordecai was an officer in the Court of Ahasuerus; his service called him
daily to attend in the Kings gate; Much better might he, being a Jew, serve a
Pagan Master, then his foster-daughter might ascend to a Pagans bed.

If the necessity or conuenience of his occasions called him to serve; his
piety and religion called him to faithfulness in his service: Two of the
Kings Chamberlaines, Bigthana, and Teresh, conspire against the life of their
Sovereign. No greatness can secure from treachery, or violence: He that ruled
over millions of men, through an hundred, and seven and twenty Provinces,
cannot assure himself from the hand of a villain; He that had the power of
other men's lives, is in danger of his own. Happy is that man, that is once
possessed of a crown incorruptible, vnfadable, reserved for him in heaven: no
force, no treason can reach thither, there can be no peril of either violence,
or forfaiture.

The likeliest defense of the person of any Prince, is the fidelity of his
attendants: Mordecai ouer-hears the whispering of these wicked conspirators;
and reueales it to Esther; she (as glad of such an opportunity to commend unto
Ahasuerus the loyalty of him whom she durst but secretly honor) reueales it to
the King; The circumstances are examined, the plot is discovered, the traitors
executed, the service recorded, in the Persian Annalls. A good foundation is
thus laid for Mordecaies advancement, which yet is not ouer-hastened, on either
part; Worthy dispositions labor only to deserve well, leaving the care of
their remuneration, to them, whom it concerns; It is fit that Gods leisure
should be attended in all his designements; The hour is set, when Mordecai
shall be raised: If in the mean time there be an interuention, not only of
neglect, but of fears, and dangers, all these shall make his honor so much
more sweet, more precious.

HAMAN disrespected by MORDECAI. MORDECAIS message to ESTHER.
BEsides the charge of his Ester 3. 4.
office, the care of Esthers prosperity calls Mordecai to the Kings gate; and
fixes him there: With what inward contentment did he think of his so royal
pupil? Here I sit among my fellows; little does the world think, that mine
adopted child sits in the Throne of Persia: that the great Empress of the
world owes her self to me; I might have more honor, I could not have so much
secret comfort, if al Shushan knew what interest I have in Queen Esther.

Whiles his heart is taken up with these thoughts, who should come ruffling by
him, but the new-raised favorite of King Ahasuerus, Haman the son of
Ammedatha the Agagite? Him has the great King inexpectedly advanced, and set
his seat above all the Princes that were with him: The gracious respects of
Princes are not always led by merit, but by their own will; which is ever
affected to be so much the freer, as themselves would be held more great.

When the Sun shines upon the Dial, every passenger will be looking at it;
There needed no command of reverence, where Ahasuerus was pleased to
countenance; All knees will bow alone even to forbidden Idols of honor; how
much more where royal authority inioynes obeisance? All the servants, all the
subjects of King Ahasuerus are willingly prostrate before this great mignon of
their Souerayn; only Mordecai stands stiff, as if he saw nothing more then a
man in that proud Agagite.

They are not observed that do as the most; but if any one man shall vary from
the multitude, all eyes are turned upon him: Mordecaies fellow-officers note
this palpable irreuerence, and expostulate it; Why transgressest thou the Kings
commandments?

Considerest thou not how far this affront reaches? It is not the person of
Haman, whom thou refusest to adore, but the King in him: Neither do we regard
so much the man, as the command; Let him be never so vile whom the King bids to
be honored, with what safety can a subject examine the charge, or resist it?
his unworthiness cannot dispense with our loyalty.

What a dangerous wilfulness should it be to incur the forfaiture of thy
place, of thy life for a courtesy? If thou will not bow with others, expect to
suffer alone; Perhaps (they thought) this omission was vnheedy; In a case of
ignorance, or incogitancie, it was a friendly office to admonish; the sight of
the error had been the remedy.

Mordecai hears their challenge, their advice; and thinks good to answer both,
with silence; as willing they should imagine, his inflexiblenesse proceeded
from a resolution; and that resolution from some secret grounds, which he
needed not impart: at last yet he imparts thus much: Let it suffice, that I am
a Jew, and Haman an Amalekite.

After a private expostulation, the continuance of that open neglect is
construed for a sullen obstinacy; and now, the monitors themselves grow
sensible of the contempt: Men are commonly impatient to lose the thank of
their endeavors, and are prone to hate whom they cannot reform. Partly
therefore to pick a thank, and partly to revenge this contumacy, these
officers turn informers against Mordecai, neither meant to make the matter
fairer then it was; they tell Haman how proud, and stubborn a Jew sat amongst
them, how ill they could brook so saucie an affront to be offered to his
greatness; how seriously they had expostulated, how stomackfully the offender
persisted; and beseech him, that he would be pleased in his next passage, to
cast some glances that way, and but observe the fashion of that intolerable
insolency.

The proud Agagite cannot long endure the very expectation of such an
indignity; On purpose does he stalk thither, with higher then his ordinary
steps; snuffing up the air, as he goes, and would see the man, that durst deny
reverence to the greatest Prince of Persia.

Mordecai holds his old posture; only he is so much more careless, as he
sees Haman more disdainful, and imperious; neither of them goes about to hide
his passion; one looked, as if he said, I hate the pride of Haman; the other
looked, as if he said, I will plague the contempt of Mordecai: how did the eyes
of Hama^ sparkle with fury, and as it were dart our deadly beams in the face
of that despightfull Jew? How did he swell with indignation; and then again
wax pale with anger? shortly, his very brow and his motion bad Mordecai look
for the utmost of revenge.

Mordecai foresees his danger, and contemnes it; no frowns, no threats can
souple those ioints: he may break, he will not bow.

What shall we say then to this obfirmed resolution of Mordecai? What is it,
what can it be, that so stiffens the knees of Mordecai, that death is more
easy to him, then their incuruation? Certainly, if mere ciuility were in
question, this wilful irreuerence to so great a Peer, could not pass without
the just censure of a rude perverseness; It is religion that forbids this
obeisa^ce, and tells him, that such courtesy could not be free from sin;
Whether it were, that more then humane honor was required to this new-erected
image of the great King, as the Persia^s were ever wont to be noted for too
much lavishness in these courtly devotions: Or whether it were, that the
ancient curse wherewith God had branded the blood, and stock of Haman, made it
unlawful for an Israelite to give him any observance: For the Amalekites (of
whose royal line Haman was descended) were the nation, with which God had
sworn perpetual hostility; and whose memory he had straightly charged Ex. 17.
16. Deu. 25. 19.
his people to root out, from under heaven; How may I (thinks he) adore, where
God comma^ds me to detest? How may I profess respect, where God professes
enmity? How may I contribute to the establishment of that seed upon earth,
which God has charged to be pulled up from under heaven? Outward actions of
indifferency, when once they are felt to trench upon the conscience, lay deep
obligations upon the soul; even whiles they are most slighted by careless
hearts.

In what a flame of wrath does Haman live this while? wherewith he could not
but have consumed his own heart, had he not given vent to that rage in his
assured purposes of revenge: Great men's anger is like to themselves, strong,
fierce, ambitious of an excessive satisfaction. Haman scorns to take up with
the blood of Mordecai; This were but a vulgar amends; Poor men can kill where
they hate, and expiate their own wrong, with the life of a single enemy:
Hamans fury shall fly an higher pitch; Millions of threats are few enough to
bleed for this offense: It is a Jew that has despighted him; all the whole
nation of the Jews shall perish for the stomach of this one: The Monarchy of
the world was now in the hand of the Persian, as Iudaea was within this
compass, so there was scarce a Jew upon earth, without the verge of the
Persian dominions: The generation, the name shall now dye at once; Neither
shall there be any memory of them; but this; There was a people, which having
been famous through the world, for three thousand, four hundred, and
fourscore years, were in a moment, extinct by the power of Haman for default
of a courtesy.

Perhaps, that hereditary grudge, and old antipathy, that was betwixt Israel,
and Amalek, stuck still in the heart of this Agagite; he might know that God
had commanded Israel to root out Amalek from under heaven; and now therefore an
Amalekite will be ready to take this advantage against Israel. It is extreme
injustice to dilate the punishment, beyond the offense; and to enwrap thousands
of innocents within the trespass of one: How many that were yet unborn when
Haman was unsaluted, must rue the fact they lived not to know? How many
millions of Jews were then living, that knew not there was a Mordecai? all of
them are fetched into one condition, and must suffer, ere they can know their
offense. Oh the infinite distance betwixt the unjust cruelty of men, and the
just mercies of the Almighty; Even Caiphas himself could say, It is better
that one man dye, then that all the people should perish; and here Haman can
say, It is better that all the people should perish then that one man should
dye. Thy mercy, o God, by the willing death of one that had not sinned, has
defrayed the just death of a world of sinners: Whiles the injurious rigor of a
man, for the supposed fault of one, would destroy a whole nation, that had not
offended: It is true, that by the sin of one, death reigned over all; but it
was, because all sinned in that one: had not all men been in Adam, all had not
fallen in him, all had not dyed in him; It was not the man, but mankind that
fell into sin, and by sin, into death: No man can complain of punishment,
whiles no man can exempt himself from the transgression: Unmerciful Haman
would have imbrued his hands in that blood, which he could not but confess
innocent.

It is a rare thing, if the height of favor cause not presumption; Such is
Hamans: greatness, that he takes his design for granted, ere it can receive a
motion; The fittest days for this great massacre, are determined by the lots
of their common divination; according whereunto, Haman chooses the hour of
this bloody suit; and now, waited on by opportunity, he addresseth himself to
King Ahasuerus. There is a certain people scattered abroad, and dispersed
among the people, in all the Provinces of the Kingdom, and their laws are
diverse from all people; neither keep they the Kings laws, therefore it is not
for the Kings profit to suffer them; If it please the King, let it be written
that they may be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to
the hands of the officers. With what cunning has this man couched his malice?
He does not say, There is a Jew that has affronted me, let me be avenged of
his nation; this rancour was too monstrous to be confessed; perhaps this
suggestion might have bred in the mind of Ahasuerus a conceit of Hamans ill
nature, and intolerable immanity; but his precences are plausible, and such as
drive at no other, then the public good; Every word has his insinuation: It
is a scattered people; were the nation entire, their maintenance could not but
stand with the Kings honor; but now since they are but straglers, as their
loss would be insensible, so their continuance, and mixture cannot but be
prejudicial; It was not the fault, it was the misery of these poor Jews,
that they were dispersed; and now their dispersion is made an argument of their
extirpation; therefore must they be destroyed, from the earth, because they
were scattered over the earth. As good, so evils draw on each other; That which
should plead for pity in the well-affected, is a motive to cruelty in savage
minds. Seldom ever has extremity of mischief seized, where easier
afflictions have not been billeted before.

All faith full Jews had wont to say unto God, Have mercy upon us, O God, and
save us, for our soul is full of contempt, and we are scattered amongst the
heathen; and here this enemy can say of them, to Ahasuerus, Destroy them for
they are scattered; Root them out, for they are contemned; How much better is
it to fall into the hands of God, the^ of men; since that which whets the sword
of men, works commiseration in the Almighty: Besides the dissipation of the
persons, Their laws are diverse from all people: All other people live by thy
laws, they only by their own: and how can this singularity of their
fashions, but breed disorder, and inconvenience? Did they live in some corner
of the earth apart, their difference in religion and government could not
import much; now, that they are dispersed amongst all thy subjects, what do
these uncouth forms of theirs, but teach all the world to be irregular? why
should they live under thy protection, that will not be governed by thy laws?

Wicked Haman! what were the laws of Israel, but the laws of God? if this be
a quarrel, what shall the death of the Jews be other, then martyrdom?

The diversity of judgment, and practice from the rest of the world has been
an old, and envious imputation cast upon Gods Church: What if we be singled
from others, whiles we walk with God? In matters lawful, arbitrary,
indifferent, wisdom teaches us to conform our selves to all others; but,
where God has laid a special imposition upon us, we must either vary, or
sin: The greatest glory of Israel was their laws, wherein they as far
exceeded all other nations, as heaven is above earth; yet, here their laws are
quarrelled, and are made the inducements of their destruction; It is not
possible the Church of God should escape persecution, whiles that which it has
good is maligned; whiles that offe^ds which makes it happy.

Yet, that they have laws of their own, were not so insufferable, if withal,
they did observe thine, o King, but these Jews, as they are uncomfortable; so
they are seditious: They keep not the King laws: Thou slanderest Haman; they
could not keep their own laws, if they kept not the Kings; for their laws
call them to obedience unto their sovereigns; and adiudge hell to the
rebellious: In all those hundred and seven and twenty provinces, King Ahasuerus
has no subjects, but them; They obey out of conscience, others out of fear:
why are they charged with that, which they do most abhor? What can be the
ground of this crimination? Ahasuerus commanded all knees to bow to Haman; A
Jew only refuses; Malicious Haman; He that refused to bow unto thee, had
sufficiently approved his loyalty to Ahasuerus; Ahasuerus had not been, if
Mordecai had not been a good subject; Has the King no laws, but what
concern thine adoration? Set aside religion (wherein the Jew is ready to
present if not active, yet passive obedience) and name that Persian law, which
a Jew dares break.

As I never yet read, or heard of a conscionable Israelite, that has not
passed under this calumniation, so I cannot yield him a true Israelite, that
deserves it.

In vain does he profess to acknowledge a God, in heaven, that denies homage
to his deputy on earth.

It is not for the Kings profit to suffer the^. Worldly hearts are not led by
good, or evil, but by profit, or loss; neither have they grace to know that
nothing is profitable but what is honest, nothing so desperately incommodious,
as wickedness; They must needs offend by rule that measure all things by
profit, and measure profit by their imagination. How easy is it to suggest
strange untruths, when there is no body to give an answer? False Hama^, how is
it not for the Kings profit to suffer the Jews? If thou construe this profit,
for honor, The Kings honor is in the multitude of subjects, and what people
more numerous then they? If for gain, The Kings profit is in the largeness of
his Tributes; and what people are more deep in their payments? If for
services? what people are more officious? How can it stand with the Kings
profit to bereave himself of subjects, his subjects of their lives, his
Exchequer of their tributes, his state of their defense? He is a weak
politician that knows not to guild over the worst project, with a pretense of
public vtility. No name under heaven has made so many fools, so many
villains, as this of profit.

Lastly, as Ahasuerus reapes nothing but disprofit by the lives of the Jews,
so he shall reap no small profit by their deaths: I will pay ten thousand
talents of silver to the Kings treasuries for this execution. If revenge were
not very sweet to the malicious man, he could not be content to purchase it at
so high a rate; How do we see daily that the thirst hereof caries men to a
riotous prodigality of estate, body, soul?

Cruel Haman, if thou could have swim'd in a whole Sea of Jewish blood, if
thou could have raised mountains of their carcasses; if thou could have
made all Persia thy shambles; who would have given thee one farthing for all
those piles of flesh, for all those streams of blood? yea who would not rather
have been at charge for the avoiding of the annoyances of those slaughtered
bodies, which thou offerest to buy at ten thousand talents? It were an happy
thing, if charity could enlarge it self, but so much as malice; if the
preservation of mankind could be so much beholden to our bounty, as the
destruction.

Now when all these are laid together, the baseness and dispersednesse of the
people, the diversity of their laws, the irregularitie of their government,
the rebellion of their practice, the inconvenience of their toleration, the
gain of their extirpation; what could the wit or art of man devise more
insinuatiue, more likely to persuade? How could it be but Ahasuerus must needs
think (since he could not suspect the ground of this suit;) What a zealous
patriot have I raised that can be content to buy off the inco^modity of the
state, at his own charge? How worthy is he rather of the aid both of my
power, and purse? why should I be fee'd to ease my Kingdoms of rebels: The
silver is given to thee, the people also, to do with them as seems good to
thee: Without all delay, the secretaries are called to write the warrants, the
Kings ring is given to seal them, the posts are sent out to carry them into all
Provinces; The day is set wherein all Jews, of all ages, of both sexes,
through the hundred and seven and twenty provinces of the King, shall be
sacrificed to the wrath of Haman.

In all the carriage of Ahasuerus, who sees not too much heddinesse of passion?
Vashti is cast off for a trifle; the Jews are given to the slaughter for
nothing, his rage in the one, his favor in the other is too impotent: He is
not a worse husband then a King; the bare word of Haman is enough to kill so
many subjects: No disposition can be more dangerous in great persons, then
violence of affection mixed with credulity. Oh the seeming inequality of humane
conditions: The King and Haman sat down to drink, but the City of Shushan was
perplexed: It is a woeful thing to see great ones quaffe the tears of the
oppressed; and to hear them make music of shriekes.

With what lamentation do we think all the Synagogues of Jews through the
world received this fatal message of their proclaimed destruction? How do
they bemone themselves, each to other? How do their conjoined cries fill
heaven, and earth? But above all, what sackcloth and ashes could suffice
woeful Mordecai, that found in himself the occasion of all this slaughter?
What soul could be capable of more bitterness, then he felt? Whiles he could
not but think, Wretched man that I am; It is I, that have brought all this
calamity upon my nation; It is I, that have been the ruin of my people: woe is
me that ever I put my self into the Court, into the service of a Pagan; how
unhappy was I to cast my self into these straits, that I must either honor an
Agagite, or draw a vengeance upon Israel? Yet how could I imagine, that the
flame of Hamans rage would have broken out so far? might that revenge have
determined in my blood, how happy should I have been? now, I have brought death
upon many thousands of innocents, that cannot know wherefore they dye; Why did
I not hide my self rather from the face of that proud Amalekite? Why did I
stand out in contestation with so ouer-powerfull an enemy? Alas, no man of
Israel shall so much as live to curse me, only mine enemies shall record my
name, with ignominy, and say, Mordecai was the bane of his nation. Oh, that my
zeal should have reserved me for so heavy a service! Where now are those
vain ambitions, wherewith I pleased my self in this great match of Esther?
How fondly did I hope by this undue means to raise my self, and my people?
Yea, is not this carnal presumption the quarrel that God has against me? Do
I not therefore smart from these Pagans, for that I secretly affected this
uncircumcised alliance? Howsoever it be, yet, o God, what have thy people
done? Oh let it be thy just mercy that I may perish alone!

In these sad thoughts did Mordecai spend his heart, vvhiles he vvalked
mournfully in sackcloth, before that gate, wherein he was wont to sit; now his
habit bars his approach; no sackcloth might come within the Court: Lo, that
which is vvelcomest in the court of heaven, is here excluded from the presence
of this earthly royalty: A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise.

Neither did it a little add to the sorrow of Mordecai, to hear the bitter
insultations of his former monitors: Did we not advise thee better? Did we not
foreadmonish thee of thy danger? see now the issue of thine obstinacy: now see,
what it is for thine earthen pitcher to knock with brass? now, where is the
man that would needs contest with Haman? have thou not now brought thy
matters to a fair pass? Thy stomach had long owed thee a spite, and now it
has paid thee; who can pity thy wilfulness? since thou would needs
deride our counsel, we will take leave to laugh at thy sackcloth. Nothing
but scorns, and griefs, and terrors present themselves to miserable Mordecai:
All the external buffets of adversaries were slight to the vvounds that he
both made, and felt in his own heart.

The perpetual intelligences that were closely held betwixt Esther, and
Mordecai, could not suffer his public sorrow to be long concealed from her;
The news of his sackcloth afflicts her ere she can suspect the cause; her
crown does but clog her head, vvhiles she hears of his ashes; True
friendship transformes us into the condition of those we love; and if it
cannot raise them to our cheerfulness, draws us down to their deiection:
Feign would she uncase her foster-father of these mournful weeds; and
change his sackcloth for tissue; that yet, at least, his clothes might not
hinder his access to her presence, for the free opening of his griefs.

It is but a slight sorrow that abides to take in outward comforts; Mordecai
refuses that kind offer; and would have Esther see that his affliction was
such, as that he might well resolve to put off his sackcloth and his skin at
once; that he must mourn to death rather then see her face to live.

The good Queen is astonished with this constant humiliatio^ of so dear a
friend; and now she sends Hatach, a trusty (though a Pagan) attendant, to
inquire into the occasion of this so irremediable heaviness: It should seem
Esther inquired not greatly into matters of state; that which perplexed all
Shushan, was not yet known to her; her followers, not knowing her to be a
Iewesse, conceived not how the news might concern her, and therefore had
forborne the relation: Mordecai first informs her, by her messenger, of the
decree that was gone out against all her nation, of the day wherein they must
all prepare to bleed, of the sum which Haman had proffered for their heads,
and delivers the copy of that bloody Edict; charging her, now, if ever, to
bestirre her self; and to improve all her love, all her power with King
Ahasuerus, in a speedy and humble supplication for the saving of the life (not
of himself so much, as) of her people.

It was tidings able to confound a weak heart; and hers, so much the more, as
she could apprehe^d nothing but impossibility of redress: she needs but to
put Mordecai in mind of that, which all the Kings servants and subjects knew
well enough, that the Persian law made it no less then death for whom soever,
man, or woman, that should press into the inner court of the king, uncalled.
Nothing but the royal scepter extended, could keep that presumptuous offender
from the grave. For her, thirty days were now passed since she was called in
to the King; an intermission, that might be justly suspicious; Whether the
heat of his first affection were thus soon (:of it self) allayed toward
her; or whether some suggestions of a secret enemy (perhaps his Agagite) may
have set him off; or whether some more pleasing object may have laid hold on
his eyes; what ever it might be, this abse^ce could not but argue some
strangeness, and this strangeness must needs imply a danger in her bold
intrusion: She could bewail therefore, she could not hope to remedy this
dismallday of her people. This answer in the ears of Mordecai sounded truth,
but weakness; neither can he take up with so feeble a return; These occasions
require other spirits, other resplutions, which must be quickened by a more
stirring reply:) Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings
house, more then all the Jews. For if thou altogether hold thy peace at
this time, then shall their enlargement, and deliverance arise to the Jews
from another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed. And who
knows whether thou art comne to the Kingdom for such a time as this.

The expectation of death had not quailed the strong heart of faithful
Mordecai; even, whiles he mournes, his zeal droupes not; there could have
been no life in that breast, which this message could not have rouzed.

What then? is it death that thou fear in this attempt of thy supplication;
what other the^ death awaits thee in the neglect of it? there is but this
difference, sue, and thou may die, sue not, and thou must dye: what blood
have thou but Jewish? and if these unalterable edicts exempt no living soul,
what shall become of thine? and can thou be so vainly timorous, as to die for
fear of death? to prefer certainty of danger, before a possibility of
hopes? Away with this weak cowardice unworthy of an Israelite, unworthy of a
Queen: But if faint heartedness or private respects shall seal up thy
lips, or withold thine hand from the aid of thy people; if thou can so
far neglect Gods Church, know thou that God will not neglect it; it shall not
be in the power of Tyrans to root out his chosen seed; that holy one of Israel
shall rather work miracles from heaven, the^ his inheritance shall perish upon
earth? and how just shall it then be for that jealous God, to take vengeance
upon thee, and thy fathers house for this cold vnhelpfulnesse to his distressed
Church? Suffer me therefore to adjure thee by all that tenderness of love,
wherewith I have trained up thine orphane infancy; by all those dear and
thankful respects which thou have vowed to me again; by the name of the God
of Israel whom we serve, that thou awaken and stir up thine holy courage,
and dare to adventure thy life, for the saving of many; It has pleased the
Almighty to raise thee up to that height of honor, which our progenitors could
little expect; why should thou be wanting to him, that has been so
bountiful to thee? yea why should I not think that God has put this very act
into the intendement of thine exaltation? having on purpose thus seasonably
hoysed thee up to the throne, that thou may rescue his poor Church from an
utter ruin?

Oh the admirable faith of Mordecai, that shines through all these clouds, and
in the thickest of these fogges, descries a cheerful glimpse of deliverance;
He saw the day of their common destruction enacted, he knew the Persian
decrees to be unalterable; but, withal, he knew there was a Messiah to come;
he was so well acquainted with Gods couenanted assurances to his Church, that
he can through the midst of those bloody resolutions foresee indemnity to
Israel; rather trusting the promises of God, then the threats of men. This is
the victory that ouercomes all the fears, and fury of the world, even our
faith.

It is quarrel enough against any person, or community not to have been
aidfull to the distresses of Gods people. Not to ward the blow, if we may, is
construed for little better then striking. Till we have tried our utmost, we
know not whether we have done that we came for.

Mordecai has said enough; These words have so put a new life into Esther,
that she is resolute to hazard the old; Go gather together all the Jews that
are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink, three
days night or day; I also and my maidens will fast likewise, and so will I go
in unto the King, (which is not according to the law) and if I perish, I
perish. Heroical thoughts do well befit great actions. Life can never be
better adventured, then where it shall begaine to leese it.

There can be no law against the humble deprecation of evils; where the
necessity of Gods Church calls to us, no danger, should withold us from all
honest means of releife. Deep humiliations must make way for the success of
great enterprises, we are most capable of mercy, when we are thoroughly empty:
A short hunger does but whet the appetite, but so long an abstinence meets
death half way, to prevent it; Well may they inioyne sharp penances unto
others, who practice it upon themselves.

It was the face of Esther that must hope to win Ahasuerus, yet that shall be
macerated with fasting, that she may prevail. A carnal heart would have
pampered the flesh, that it might allure those wanton eyes; she pines it, that
she may please.

God, and not she, must work the heart of the King; Faith teaches her rather to
trust her devotions, then her beauty.

ESTHER suing to AHASVERVS.
THE Jews are easily Esther. 5.
entreated to fast, who had received in themselves the sentence of death; what
pleasure could they take in meat, that knew what day they must eat their last?
The three days of abstinence are expired; now Esther changes her spirits, no
less then her clothes; Who that sees that face, and that habit, can say she
had mourned, she had fasted? Never did her royal apparel become her so well.
That God before whom she had humbled her self, made her so much more
beautiful, as she had been more dejected; And now, with a winning confidence,
she walks into the inner court of the King, and puts her self into that
forbidden presence: as if she said; Here I am with my life in my hand, if it
please the King to take it, it is ready for him; Vashti, my predecessor,
forfaited her place for not coming when she was called; Esther shall now
hazard the forfaiture of her life, for coming when she is not called: It is
necessity, not disobedience that has put me upon this bold approach; according
to thy construction, O King, I do either live or dye, either shall be welcome.
The inexpectednesse of pleasing objects makes them many times the more
acceptable: the beautiful countenance, the graceful demeanure, and goodly
presence of Esther, have no sooner taken the eyes, then they have ravished the
heart of King Ahasuerus: Love has soon banished all dreadfulnesse; And the
King held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand: Moderate
intermission is so far from cooling the affection, that it inflames it: had
Esther been seen every day, perhaps that satiety had abated of the height of
her welcome; now, three and thirty days retiredness has indeared her more to
the surfeted eyes of Ahasuerus.

Had not the golden Scepter been held out, where had Queen Esther been? The
Persian Kings affected a stern awfulnesse to their subjects; It was death to
solicit them, uncalled; How safe, how easy, how happy a thing it is to have to
do with the King of heaven, who is so pleased with our access, that he
solicits suitors; who, as he is unweariable with our requests, so is infinite in
his beneficences!

How gladly does Esther touch the top of that Scepter, by which she holds her
life? and now, whiles she thinks it well that she may live, she receives
besides pardon, favor: What will thou Queen Esther, and what is thy request?
it shall be given thee, even to the half of the Kingdom. Commonly, when we
fear most, we speed best; God then most of all magnifies his bounty to us,
when we have most afflicted our selves. Ouerconfident expectations are seldom
but disappointed; whiles humble suspicions go laughing away: It was the
benefit and safety of but one piece of the Kingdom that Esther comes to sue
for, and behold, Ahasuerus offers her the free power of the half: He that gave
Haman, at the first word, the lives of all his Jewish subjects, is ready to
give Esther half his Kingdom, ere she ask: Now she is no less amazed at
the loving munificence of Ahasuerus, then she was before afraid of his
austerity; The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water;
he turns it whithersoeuer he will.

It is not good to swallow favors too greedily, lest they either choke us in
the passage, or prove hard of digestion. The wise Queen, howeuer she might
seem to have a fair opportunity offered to her suit, finds it not good to
apprehend it too suddenly; as desiring by this small dilation, to prepare the
ear and heart of the King for so important a request.

Now, all her petition ends in a banquet; If it seem good unto the King, let
the King and Haman come this day unto the banquet, that I have prepared for
him. It is an easy favor to receive a small courtesy, where we offer to give
great. Haman is called, the King comes to Esthers table; and now highly pleased
with his entertainment, he himself solicits her to propound that suit, for
which her modesty would, but durst not solicit him: Bashfulnesse shall leese
nothing at the hand of wel-gouerned greatness.

Yet still Esthers suit sticks in her teeth, and dares not come forth without
a further preface of time, and expectation; Another banquet must pass, ere
this reckning can be given in. Other suitors wait long for the delivery of
their petition; longer for the receipt of their answer: Here the King is feign
to wait for his suit: Whether Esthers heart would not yet serve her to contest
with so strong an adversary, as Haman, without further recollection; or whether
she desired to get better hold of the King, by indearing him with so pleasing
entertainments; or whether she would thus ripen her hopes, by working in the
mind of king Ahasuerus a fore-conceit of the greatness, and difficulty of that
suit, which was so loath to come forth; or, whether she meant thus to give
scope to the pride, and malice of Haman, for his more certain ruin: Howsoever
it were, to morrow is a new day, set for Esthers second banquet, and third
petition.

The King is not invited without Haman; Favors are sometimes done to men, with
a purpose of displeasure; Doubtless Haman tasted of the same cates with his
master; neither could he in the forehead of Esther read any other characters,
then of respect, and kind applause, yet had she then, in her hopes, disigned
him to a just revenge. Little do we know, by outward cariages, in what terms
we stand with either God or men.

Every little wind raises up a bubble; How is Haman now exalted in himself
with the singular grace of Queen Esther; and begins to value himself so much
more, as he sees himself higher in the rate of others opinion.

Only surly, and sullen Mordecai is an allay to his happiness; No edict of
death can bow the knees of that stout Jew: yea the notice of that bloody
cruelty of this Agagite, have stiffned them so much the more: Before, he looked
at Haman as an Amalekite, now, as a persecutor. Disdain and anger look out at
those eyes, and bid that proud enemy do his worst. No doubt, Mordecai had
been listening after the speed of Queen Esther; how she came in to the King,
how she was welcomed with the golden scepter, and with the more precious words
of Ahasuerus; how she had entertained the King, how she pleased; the news
had quit his sackcloth, and raised his courage to a more scornful neglect of
his professed adversary.

Haman comes home, I know not whether more full of pride, or of rage; calls an
inward counsel of his choice friends, together with his wife; makes a glorious
report of all his wealth, magnificence, height of favor, both with the King and
Queen; and at last, after all his sunshine, sets in this cloudy epilogue, Yet
all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the
Kings gate. It is seldom seen that God allows even to the greatest dearlings
of the world, a perfect contentment; something they must have to complain of,
that shall give an unsavory verdure to their sweetest morsels; and make their
very felicity, miserable.

The wit of women has wont to be noted for more sudden and more sharp. Zeresh
the wife of Haman sets on foot that motion of speedy revenge, which is
applauded by the rest. Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to
morrow, speak thou to the King, that Mordecai may be hanged thereon; then go
thou in merrily with the King, unto the banquet. I do not hear the^ say; Be
patient a while, thou have already set Mordecai his last day; the month Adar
will not be long in coming; the determination of his death has made him
desperate, let him in the mean time eat his own heart in envy at thy
greatness; but they rather advise of a quick dispatch. Malice is a thing full
of impatience, and hates delay of execution, next unto mercy. Whiles any grudge
lies at the heart, it cannot be freely cheerful. Forced smiles are but the
hypocrisy of mirth. How happy were it for us, if we could be so zealously
careful to remove the hindrances of our true spiritual joy, those stubborn
corruptions, that will not stoop to the power of grace.

MORDECAI honored by HAMAN.
THe wit of Zeresh had like to have Esther. 6.
gone beyond the wit of Esther; had not the working providence of the Almighty
contrived these events, beyond all hopes, all conceits, Mordecai had been
dispatched, ere Esters second banquet. To morrow was the day pitched for both
their designs; had not the stream been inexpectedly turned, in vain had the
Queen blamed her delays; Mordecaies breakfast had prevented Esthers dinner:
for certainly, he that had given to Haman so many thousand lives, would never
have made dainty, upon the same suit, to anticipate one of those, whom he had
condemned to the slaughter: But, God meant better things to his Church, and
fetches about all his holy purposes, after a wonderful fashion, in the very
instant of opportunity: He that keeps Israel, and neither slumbreth, nor
sleeps, causes sleep to depart that night from him that had decreed to root
out Israel. Great Ahasuerus, that commanded an hundred and seven and twenty
provinces, cannot command an hours sleep. Poverty is rather blessed with the
freedom of rest, then wealth, and power: Cares and surfeit vvith-hold that
from the great, which presses upon the spare diet, and labor of the meanest.
Nothing is more tedious then an eager pursuit of denied sleep: which (like to
a shadow) flies away so much faster, as it is more followed: Experience tells
us, that this benefit is best solicited by neglect; and soonest found when we
have forgotten to seek it.

Whether to deceive the time, or to bestow it well; Ahasuerus shall spend his
restless hours in the Chronicles of his time. Nothing is more requisite for
Princes, then to look back upon their own actions, and events, and those of
their predecessors; The examination of fore-past actions makes them wise, of
events, thankful, and cautelous.

Amongst those voluminous registers of Acts and Monuments, which so many scores
of provinces must needs yield, the book shall open upon Mordecaies discovery
of the late treason of the two Euruches: the reader is turned thither, by an
insensible sway of providence: Our most arbitrary or casual actions are
ouer-ruled by an hand in heaven.

The King now feels afresh the danger of that conspiracy; and (as great
spirits abide not to smother or bury good offices) in quires into the
recompense of so loyal a service, What honor and dignity bath been done to
Mordecai for this? Surely Mordecai did but his duty; he had hainously sinned,
if he had not revealed this wicked treachery; yet Ahasuerus takes thought for
his remuneratio^: How much more careful art thou, o God of all mercies, to
reward the weak obediences of thine (at the best) unprofitable servants?

That which was intended to procure rest, sets it off; King Ahasuerus is
unquiet in himself, to think that so great a merit should lie, but so long,
neglected; neither can he find any peace in himself, till he have given order
for a speedy retribution: hearing therefore by his servants, that Haman was
below in the Court, he sends for him up, to consult with him, What should be
done to the man whom the King delights to honor: O marvelous concurrence of
circumstances, drawn together by the infinite wisdom, and power of the
Almighty: Who but Haman should be the man? And when should Haman be called to
advise of Mordecaies honor, but in the very instant, when he came to sue for
Mordecaies hanging? Had Ahasuerus but slept that night, Mordecai had been that
morning advanced fifty cubits higher then the earth, ere the king could have
remembered to vvho^ he was beholden.

What shall we say then to reconcile these crosse-passions in Ahasuerus?
Before he signed that decree of killing all the Jews, he could not but know
that a Jew had saved his life; and now, after that he has enacted the
slaughter of all Jews, as rebels, he is giving order to honor a Jew, as his
preserver. It were strange if great persons in the multitude of their
distractions should not let fall some incongruities.

Yet, who can but think that king Ahasuerus meant upon some second thoughts to
make amends to Mordecai? neither can he choose but put these two together; The
Jews are appointed to death, at the suit of Haman; This Mordecai is a Jew; how
then can I do more grace to him, that has saved my life, then to command him
to be honored by that man who would spill his?

When Haman heard himself called up to the bedchamber of his master, he
thinks himself too happy in so early an opportunity of presenting his suit; but
yet more in the pleasing question of Ahasuerus; wherein he could not but
imagine that favor forced it self upon him with strange importunity; For how
could he conceive that any intention of more then ordinary honor could fall
besides himself? Self-love, like to a good stomach, draws to it self what
nourishment it likes; and casts off that which offends it. Haman will be sure
to be no niggard in aduising those ceremonies of honor, which he thinks
meant to his own person. Could he have once dreamed that this grace had been
purposed to any under heaven, besides himself, he had not been so lavish in
counselling so pompous a show of excessive magnificence. Now the Kings own
royal apparel, and his own Steed is not sufficient, except the royal Crown
also make up the glory of him, who shall thus triumph in the kings favor. Yet
all this were nothing in base hands: The actor shall be the best part of this
great pageant. Let this apparel, and this horse, be delivered to one of the
Kings most noble Princes, that they may array the man withal, whom the King
delights to honor, and bring him on horse back through the streets of the
City, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King
delights to honor. Honor is more in him that gives, then him that receives
it: To be honored by the unworthy is little better then disgrace; No meaner
person will serve to attend this Agagite, in his supposed greatness, then one
of the noblest Princes. The ambition is too high flowne that seeks glory in
the seruility of equals.

The place adds much to the act; There is small heart in a concealed honor; It
is nothing unless the streets of the city Shushan be witnesses of this pomp,
and ring with that gracious acclamation.

The vain hearts of proud men can easily devise those means, whereby they may
best set out themselves. Oh that we could equally affect the means of true
and immortal glory. The heart of man is never so cold within him, as when from
the height of the expectation of good, it falls into a sudden sense of evil:
So did this Agagites. Then the King said to Haman, make have, and take the
apparel, and the horse, as thou have said, and do even so to Mordecai the
Jew, that sits at the Kings gate; Let nothing fail of all that thou have
said. How was Haman thunderstricken with this killing word? Do thou so to
Mordecai? I dare say all the honors that Ahasuerus had heaped upon Haman,
cannot counteruaile this one vexation: Doubtless, at first, he distrusts his
ear, and then muzes whether the King be in earnest; at last, when he hears
the charge so seriously doubled, and finds himself forced to believe it, he
begins to think, What means this inconceivable alteration? Is there no man
in all the Court of Persia to be picked out for extraordinary honor, but
Mordecai? Is there no man to be picked out for the performance of this honor
to him, but Haman? have I but one proud enemy in all the world, and am I
singled out to grace him? Did it gall me to the heart, and make all my
happiness tedious unto me, to see that this Jew would not bow to me, and must
I now bow to him? That which he would rather dye, and forfait the life of all
his nation, then do to me, notwithstanding the Kings command; shall I be
forced by the Kings command to do unto him? Yea, did he refuse to give but a
cap, and a knee to my greatness; and must I lacquay so base a fellow through
the streets, must I be his herald to proclaim his honor through all Shushan?
Why do I not let the King know the insolent affronts that he has offered me?
Why do I not signify to my Sovereign, that my errand now was for another
kind of advancement to Mordecai? If I obtain not my desired revenge, yet, at
least, I shall prevail so far, as to exempt my self from this officious
attendance upon so unequal an enemy. And yet, that motion cannot be now safe;
I see the Kings heart is (upon what ground so ever) bent upon this action;
should I fly off never so little (after my word so directly passed) perhaps my
coldness, or opposition might be construed as some wayward contestation with
my master: Especially, since the service that Mordecai has done to the King,
is of an higher nature, then the despite which he has done to me. I will, I
must give way for the time; mine humble yeeldance, (when all the carriage of
this business shall be vnderderstood) shall (I doubt not) make way for mine
intended revenge: Mordecai, I will honor thee now, that by these steps, I may
ere long raise thee many cubits higher. I will obey the command of my
sovereign in observing thee, that he may reward the merit of my loyalty, in
thine execution.

Thus resolved, Haman goes forth, with a face and heart full of distraction,
full of confusion; and addresses himself to the attyring, to the attending of
his old adversary, and new master, Mordecai; What looks do we now think were
cast upon each other, at their first greeting? their eyes had not forgotten
their old language; Certainly, when Mordecai saw Haman come into the room
where he was, he could not but think; This man has long thirsted for my
blood, and now he comes to fetch it; I shall not live to see the success of
Esther, or the fatal day of my nation: It was known that morning in the
Court, what a lofty gibbet Haman had provided for Mordecai; and why might it
not have comne to Mordecaies ear? What could he therefore now imagine other,
then that he was called out to that execution? But, when he saw the royal robe
that Haman brought to him; he thinks, Is it not enough for this man to kill
me, but he must mock me too, What an addition is this to the former cruelty?
thus to insult, and play upon my last distress? But, when he yet saw the
royal crown ready to be set on his head, and the Kings own horse richly
furnished, at his gate, and found himself raised by Princely hands, into that
royal seat, he thinks; what may all this mean? Is it the purpose of mine
adversary that I shall dye in state? Would he have me hanged in triumph? At last,
when he sees such a train of Persian Peers attending him, with a grave
reverence; and hears Haman proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the
man whom the King delights to honor; finding this pomp to be serious, and
well meant, he imagines (in all likelihood) that this inexpected change
proceeds from the suit of his Esther; now, he begins to lift up his head, and
to hope well of himself, and his people, and could not but say within
himself, that he had not fasted for nothing. O the wondrous alteration that
one morning has made in the court of Persia; he that was yesternight despised
by Hamans footmen, is now waited on by Haman, and all his fellow-Princes; He
that yester-night had the homage of all knees but one, and was ready to burst
for the lack of that, now does obeisance to that one, by whom he was wilfully
neglected; It was not Ahasuerus that wrought this strange mutation, it was the
ouer-ruling power of the Almighty, whose immediate hand would thus prevent
Esthers suit, that he might challenge all the thank to himself. Whiles
Princes have their own wills, they must do his; and shall either exalt, or
depresse according to divine appointment.

I should commend Hamans obedience in his humble condiscent to so unpleasing,
and harsh a command of his master, were it not, that either he durst do no
other, or that he thus stoopt for an advantage. It is a thanklesse respect
that is either forced, or for ends: True subjection is free and absolute; out
of the conscience of duty, not out of fears, or hopes.

All Shushan is in an amaze at this sudden glory of Mordecai, and studies how
to reconcile this day with the thirteenth of Adar; Mordecai had reason to hope
well; It could not stand with the honor of the King, to kill him whom he saw
cause to advance; neither could this be any other, then the beginning of a
durable promotion; otherwise, what recompense had at hours riding been to so
great a service?

On the other side, Haman droupes, and has changed passions with Mordecai;
Neither was that Jew ever more deeply afflicted with the decree of his own
death, then this Agagite was with that Jews honor. How heavy does it lie at
Hamans heart, that no tongue, but his, might serve to proclaim Mordecai happy:
Even the greatest mignons of the world must have their turns of sorrow.

With a covered head, and a dejected countenance, does he hasten home, and
longs to impart his grief, where he had received his advice: It was but cold
comfort that he finds from his wife Zeresh, and his friends. If Mordecai be of
the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not
prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him: Out of the mouth of
Pagans, O God, have thou ordained strength, that thou may still the enemy,
and the auenger. What credit has thy great name won with these barbarous
nations, that they can out of all experience make maxims of thine undoubted
protection of thy people, and the certain ruin of their adversaries? Men
find no difference in themselves; the face of a Jew looks so like other men's,
that Esther and Mordecai were not (of long) taken for what they were: He that
made them, makes the distinction betwixt them; so as a Jew may fall before a
Persian, and get up, and prevail; but if a Persian (or whosoever of the
Gentiles) begin to fall before a Jew, he can neither stay, nor rise: There is
an invisible hand of omnipotency that strikes in for his own, and confounds
their opposites. O God, neither is thine hand shortened, nor thy bowels
straightened in thee; thou art still and ever thy self; If we be thy true
spiritual Israel, neither earth nor hell shall prevail against us; we shall
either stand sure, or surely rise, whiles our enemies shall lick the dust.

HAMAN hanged. MORDECAI advanced.
HAmans day is now comne; That vengeance Esther 7. 8.
which has hitherto slept, is now awake, and rouzeth up it self to a just
execution; That heavy morning was but the preface to his last sorrow, and the
sad presage of his friends is verified in the speaking; While the word was in
their mouths, the messengers were at the door to fetch Haman to his
funerall-banquet.

How little do we know what is toward us? As the fishes that are taken in an
evil net, and as the Eccles. 9. 12
birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an
evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.

It was (as Haman conceived) the only privilege of his dearnesse, and the
comfort of his present heaviness, that he only was called with the King, to
Esthers banquet, when this only was meant for his bane: The face of this
inuitation was fair, and promised much; and now the ingenuous man begins to
set good constructions upon all events. Surelv (thinks he) the King was tied
in his honor to give some public gratification to Mordecai; so good an office
could deserve no less, then an hours glory; But little does my master know
what terms there are betwixt me, and Mordecai; had he fully understood the
insolences of this Jew, and should notwithstanding have inioined me to honor
him, I might have had just cause to complain of disgrace, and disparagement;
but now, since all this business has been carried in ignorance, and casualty,
why do I wrong my self in being too much affected with that which was not
ill meant? Had either the King, or Queen, abated ought of their favor to me,
I might have dined at home; now this renewed inuitation argues me to stand right
in the grace of both: And why may not I hope, this day, to meet with a good
occasion of my desired revenge? How just will it seem to the King, that the
same man who^ he has publicly rewarded for his loyalty, should now be
publicly punished for his disobedience?

With such like thoughts Haman cheares up himself; and addresses himself to
the royal banquet, with a cou^tena^ce that would fain seem to forget his
mornings task: Esther works her face to an unwilling smile upon that hateful
guest; and the King (as not guilty of any indignity that he has put upon his
favorite) frames himself to as much cheerfulness, as his want of rest would
permit. The table is royally furnished with all delicate confections, with all
pleasing liquors: King Ahasuerus so eats, as one that both knew he was, and
meant to make himself, welcome: Haman so poures in, as one that meant to
drown his cares; And now, in this fullness of cheer, the King hungers for
that long-delayed suit of Queen Esther; Thrice, has he graciously called for
it; and (as a man constant to his own favors) thrice has he, in the same
words vowed the performance of it, though to the half of his Kingdom: It
falls out oftentimes, that when large promises fall suddenly from great
persons, they abate by leisure; and shrink upon cold thoughts; here King
Ahasuerus is not more liberal in his offer, then firm in his resolutions; as
if his first word had been, like his law, unalterable. I am ashamed to miss
that steadiness in Christians, which I find in a Pagan. It was a great word
that he had said, yet he eats it not, as ouer-lauishly spoken: but doubles,
and trebbles it with hearty assurances of a real prosecution; whiles those
tongues which profess the name of the true God, say, and unsay at pleasure;
recanting their good purposes, contradicting their own just engagements upon
no cause, but their own changeableness.

It is not for Queen Esther to drive off any longer, the same wisdom that
taught her to defer her suit, now teaches her to propound it; A well chosen
season is the greatest advantage of any action; which as it is seldom found in
have, so is too often lost in delay: Now therefore with an humble and graceful
obeisance, and with a countenance full of modest fear, and sad gravity, she so
delivers her petition, that the King might see, it was necessity that both
forced it upon her, and wrung it from her. If I have found favor in thy sight
O King, and if it please the King, let my life be given me at my petition, and
my people at my request: Epectation is either a friend or an enemy, according
to the occasion: Ahasuerus looked for some high and difficult boon; now, that he
hears his Queen beg for her life, it could not be, but that the surplusage
of his love to her must be turned into fury against her adversary; and his
zeal must be so much more to her, as her suit was more meek and humble. For
we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish; but
if we had been sold for bondmen, and bondwome, I had held my tongue, although
the enemy could not counteruaile the Kings damage. Crafty men are sometimes
choked with their own plots. It was the profer of ten thousand talents
wherewith Haman hoped both to purchase his intended revenge, and the reputation
of a worthy patriot; that sum is now laid in his dish, for a just argument of
malicious corruption; for, well might Esther plead; If we Jews deserved
death, what needed our slaughter to be bought out? and if we deserved it not,
what horrible cruelty was it to set a price upon innocent blood? It is not any
offense of ours, it is the only despite of an enemy that has wrought our
destruction.

Besides, now it appears the King was abused by misinformation; the adversary
suggested that the life of the Jews could not stand with the Kings profit;
whereas their very bondage should be more damage to the state, the^ all Hamans
worth could counteruaile. Truth may be smothered, but it cannot dye; it may be
disguised, but it will be known; it may be suppressed, but it will triumph.

But what shall we say to so harsh an aggrauation? Could Esther have been
silent in a case of decreed bondage; who is now so vehement in a case of death?
Certainly, to a generous nature, death is far more easy then bondage; why
would she have endured the greater, and yet so abhorres the less? Was it for
that the Jews were already too well inured to captivity; and those evils are
more tolerable wherewith we are acquainted: Or, was it, for that there may be
hopes in bondage, none in death? Surely, either of them were lamentable, and
such as might deserve her humblest deprecation.

The Queen was going on, to have said, But, alas, nothing will satisfy our
bloody enemy, save the utter extirpation of me, and my nation; when the
impatient rage of the King interrupts her sentence in the midst, and (as if he
had heard too much already, and could too easily supply the residue of her
complaint) snatches the word out of her mouth, with a furious demand; Who is
he, and where is he that durst presume in his heart to do so? It was the
interest of Queen Esthers person that raised this storm in Ahasuerus; set
that aside, how quietly, how merrily was the determined massacre of the Jews
formerly digested? Actions have not the same face when we look upon them with
contrary affections.

Now Queen Esther musters up her inward forces, and with an undaunted courage,
fixing her angry eyes upon that hated Agagite, she says, The adversary, and
enemy is this wicked Haman. The word was loath to come forth, but it strikes
home at the last. Never till now did Haman hear his true title; Before some
had styled him, noble; others great; some, magnificent, and some perhaps,
virtuous; only Esther gives him his own, wicked Haman; Ill-deseruing
greatness does in vain promise to it self a perpetuity of applause: If our
ways be foul, the time shall come, when after all vain flattery, after all
our momentanie glory, our sins shall be ripped up; and our iniquities laid before
us to our utter confusion. With what consternation did Haman now stand? How do
we think he looked to hear himself thus enstyled, thus accused, yea, thus
condemned? Certainly, death was in his face, and horror in every of his joints;
no sense, no limme knows his office: Feign would he speak, but his tongue
falters, and his lips tremble; feign would he make apologies upon his knees,
but his heart fails him; and tells him the evidence is too great, and the
offense above all pardon: Only guiltiness, and fear look through his eyes
upon the enraged countenance of his master; which now bodes nothing to him but
revenge, and death.

In what a passionate distemper does this banquet shut up? King Ahasuerus flies
from the table, as if he had been hurried away with a tempest. His wrath is
too great to come forth at his mouth; only his eye tells Haman that he hates to
see him, and vows to see his dispatch: For solitariness, and not for
pleasure, does he now walk into his garden; and thinks with himself; What a
monster have I favored? Is it possible that so much cruelty and presumption
should harbor in a breast that I thought ingenuous? Could I be so bewitched as
to pass so bloody a decree? Is my credulity thus abused by the treacherous
subtilty of a miscreant whom I trusted? I confess it was my weak rashness to
yield unto so prodigious a motion, but it was the villainy of this Agagite, to
circumuent me by false suggestions; He shall pay for my error; the world shall
see, that as I exceeded in grace, so I will not come short in justice. Haman,
thy guilty blood shall expiate that innocent blood, which thy malice might have
shed.

In the mean time, Haman, so soon as ever he could recover the qualme of his
astonishment, finding himself left alone with Queen Esther, loses no time,
spares no breath to mitigate her anger, which had made way to his destruction.
Doubtless, with many vows, and tears, and deierations, he labors to clear
his intentions to her person; bewailing his danger, imploring her mercy,
confessing the unjust extent of his malice, profering indeauors of
satisfaction: Wretched man that I am, I am condemned before I speak, and when
I have spoken, I am condemned: Upon thy sentence, O Queen, I see death awaits
for me, in vain shall I seek to avoid it; It is thy will that I should
perish; but let that little breath I have left, acquit me so far with thee,
as to call heaven and earth to record, that in regard of thee, I dye innocent:
It is true that mine impetuous malice miscarried me against the nation of the
Jews, for the sake of one stubborn offender; but did I know there was the
least drop of Israelitish blood in thy sacred person? could I suspect that
Mordecai, or that people, did ought concern thee? Let not one death be enough
for me if I would ever have entertained any thought of evil against nation, or
man, that should have cost but a frown from thee: All the court of Persia can
sufficiently witness how I have magnified and adored thee, ever since the
royal crown was set on thy head; neither did I ever fail to do thee all
good offices unto that my Sovereign Master, whom thou have now mortally
incensed against me. O Queen, no hand can save my life, but thine, that has
as good as bereaved it: show mercy to him, that never meant but loyalty to
thee: As ever thou would oblige an humble and faithful vassal to thee, as
ever thou would honor thy name, and sex, with the praise of tender
compassion, take pity upon me, and spare that life which shall be vowed to
thy service: and, whereas thy displeasure may justly allege against me that
rancorous plot for the extirpation of that people, whom I, too late, know to
be thine, let it suffice that I hate, I curse mine own cruelty; and only upon
that condition shall beg the repriuall of my life, that I shall work, and
procure by thy gracious aid, a full defeazance of that unjust execution. O let
fall upon thy despairing servant one word of favor to my displeased Master,
that I may yet live.

Whiles he was speaking to this purpose, having prostrate himself (for the
more humility) before the queen, and spread his arms in a vehement
imploration up to her bed; the King comes in, and, as not unwilling to
misconstrue the posture of him, whom he now hated, says, what, will he force
the Queen also before me in the house? That which Haman meant as an humble
suppliant, is interpreted as from a presumptuous offender; How oftmight he have
done so, and more, vvhiles he was in favor, uncensured? Actions are not the
same when the man alters. As charity makes a good sense of doubtful
occurrents, so prejudice and displeasure takes all things (though well-meant)
at the vvorst. It is an easy thing to pick a quarrel, where we intend a
mischief.

The wrath of the King is as a messenger of death: Whiles these words were yet
in the mouth of Ahasuerus, Haman, in turning his head toward the King, is
suddenly muffled for his execution; he shall no more see either face, or Sun:
he shall be seen no more but as a spectacle of shame, and horror: and now he
thinks, Woe is me whose eyes serve me only to foresee the approach of a
dishonorable, and painful death! what am I the better to have been great? O
that I had never been, Oh that I could not be: How too truly have Zeresh and
my friends foretold me of this heavy destiny? Now am I ready to feel what it
is that I meant to thousands of innocents; I shall dye with pain and
ignominy: Oh that the conscience of mine intended murder could die with me. It
is no marvel if wicked men find nothing but utter discomforts in their end:
rather then fail, their former happiness shall join with their imminent
miseries, to torment the^. It is the just judgment of God that presumptuous
sinners should be swallowed up of those evils, which they would not fear;
Happy is that man, who has grace to foresee, and avoid those ways, which
will lead him to a perfect confusion. Happy is he that has so lived that he
can either welcome death as a friend, or defy it as an enemy.

Who was ever the better for favor past? those that had before kissed the
feet, and smiled in the face of Haman, are now as ready to cover his head, and
help him to the gallows. Harbonah one of the Chamberlaines, seasonably tells
the King how stately a gibbet Haman had newly set up for well-deseruing
Mordecai, within his own palace.

I hear not one man open his mouth to intercede for the offender, to pacify
the King, to excuse or less the fact; every one is ready to pull him down that
is falling, to trample on him that is down; yet no doubt, there were some of
these Courtiers whom Haman had obliged; Had the cause been better, thus it
would have been. Every curre is ready to fall upon the dog that he sees
werryed; But here, it was the just hand of God to set off all hearts from a man
that had been so unreasonably merciless; and to raise up enemies (even among
friends) to him, that had professed enmity to Gods Church: So let thine enemies
perish, o Lord, vnsuccored, unpitied. Then the King said, hang him thereon:
There can be no truer justice then in retaliation; who can complain of his
own measure: Behold the wicked trauaileth Psalm. 7. 14.
with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood. He
made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch that he made. His
mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come
down upon his own pate.

There hangs Haman, in more reproach, then ever he stood in honor; and Mordecai
(who is now first known for what he was) succeeds his favor, and changes
inheritances with his enemy; for whiles Haman inherits the gibbet of Mordecai,
Mordecai inherits the house and honor of Haman. O Lord, let the malice of the
wicked come to an end, but establish thou the just.

One hour has changed the face of the Persian Court; what stability is there
in earthly greatness? He who in the morning all knees bowed unto, as more then
a man, now hangs up like a despised vermin, for a prey to the ravens: He, who
this morning was destined to the gallows, now rules over Princes; neither was
it for nothing, that he this day rode in triumph: The Kings ring that was
taken from Haman, is now given to Mordecai, as the pledge of his authority; and
he that even now sat in the gate, is called up next to the throne.
Wickedness, and honest innocence have now paid their debts to both their
clients.

Little joy would it yet have been to Esther, that her enemy was dead, her
kinsman advanced, if still her people must for all this expect their fatal
day: Her next suit therefore is for the safety of her nation, in the countermand
of that bloody decree, which Haman had obtained against them: That which was
surrepticiously gotten, and rashly given, is so much more gladly reuersed; by
how much mercy is more pleasing to a good nature, then cruel injustice.
Mordecai has power to endite, seal, send out letters of favor to the Jews,
which were causlesly sentenced to the slaughter. If a Persian law might not be
reuersed, yet it might be countercharged: Mordecai may not write, Let no Jew be
slain, he may write, Let the Jews meet, and stand for their lives against
those that would slay them. This command flies after the former, so fast, as if
it would ouer-take that, which it cannot recall; The Jews are revived with
this happy tidings, that they may have protection as well as enmity; that
authority will not be their executioner; that their own hands are allowed to
be their auengers.

Who would imagine that after public notice of this alteration at the Court;
when the world could not choose but know the malicious ground of that wrongful
edict, the shameful death of the procurer, the power of the party opposite;
any one should be found, throughout all the provinces, that would once lift up
his hand against a Jew? that, with his own danger, would indeauor to execute a
controlled decree? The Church of God should cease to be it self, if it wanted
malicious persecution; there needs no other quarrel the^ the name, the
religion of Israel.

Notwithstanding the known favor of the King, and the patronage of Mordecai,
the thirteenth of Adar is meant to be a bloody day; Haman has too many
abettors in the Persian dominions; these join together to perform that
sentence, whereof the author repented: The Jews take heart to defend
themselves, to kill their murderers. All the provinces are turned into a field
of civil war; wherein innocence vanquisheth malice. The Jews are victors, and
not only are alive, but are feared; the most resist them not, many assist
them, and some become theirs: The countenance of the great leads the world at
pleasure; fear of authority swayes thousands that are not guilty of a
conscience.

Yea, besides the liberty of defense, the Jews are now made their own
Iusticers; That there may be none left from the loins of that accursed
Agagite, (who would have left none of the Jewish seed) they slay the ten sons of
Haman; and obtain new days of further executions; Neither can death satisfy
their revenge; those ten sons of Haman shall, in their very carcasses bear the
reproach of their father, and hang aloft upon his gallows.

Finally, no man does, no man dares frown upon a Jew; they are now becomne
Lords in the midst of their captivity; no marvel if they ordain, and
celebrate their joyful Purim, for a perpetual memory, to all posterities, of
their happy deliverance. It were pity that the Church of God should not have
sun-shines, as well as storms, and should not meet with interchanges of joy in
their warfare, before they enter upon the unchangeable joy of their endless
triumph.

FINIS.
Postscript to the READER.
I May not but tell my Reader, there was a mistaking in the Postscript of my
late large volume; Wherein the Printer undertook the Authors promise, to
publish no more, till he should finish his whole labor, in a full second Tome.
Whereas I only yielded, for the encouragement of the buyer, to add nothing to
the first. Should these have stayed the leisure of my meditations upon the new
Testament; Some readers would have complained to be held too long fasting;
Even this small intermissio^ has been called on with no small importunity of
many; whose suggestion was no other then just; that, as on the one side I might
provide for the ease of many buyers by an entire publication: So, on the other
side, I should discontent no fewer, who having furnished themselves with the
several volumes of my Contemplations already published, should be forced to
break the suit, and to want the remaining parts. Out of these considerations,
I was not unwilling to send forth these thoughts, after their fellows;
beseeching my reader not to hasten his expectation of my labors upon the
residue of the new Testament, which, upon some private reasons, have resolved
to pace more slowly toward the public light. God make these, and them, as
profitable, as they are well meant to the Common good.

Faults of the Press.
For Read Page Line hostilely holily 74 1 succeed succeeded 248 12 goal jail
314 16 ever every 333 7 with wish 363 4 when where 426 vlt. attendants
attendance 433 14 commination crimination 440 10 threats throats 468 11 at an
534 1


