CONTEMplations Upon the principal passages of the holy History.

THE THIRD VOLVME: IN THREE BOOKS.

BY I. HALL, Doctor of Divinity.

Printed by H. L. for Nathanael Butter, and William Butler. 1615.



Contemplations. THE NINTH BOOK.
Containing The Rescue of Gibeon. The Altar of the Reubenites. Ebud and Eglon.
Iael and Sisera. Gideons calling. Gideons preparation and victory. The revenge
of Succoth and Penuel. Abimelech's usurpation.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, SIR THO: EGERTON KNIGHT, Lord
Ellesmere; Lord Chancelour of England; Chancelour of the University of Oxford;
The sincere and grave Oracle of Equity; The great and sure friend of the
Church; The sanctuary of the Clergy; The bountiful incourager of Learning, J.
H.
With thankful acknowledgement of Gods blessing upon this State, in so worthy
an Instrument, and humble prayers for his happy continuance, Dedicates this
poor and unworthy part of his labors.

CONTEMPLATIONS.
THE RESCVE of Gibeon.
THE life of the Gibeonites, must cost the^ servitude from Israel, and danger
from their neighbors: if Joshua will but sit still, the deceit of the
Gibeonites shall be revenged by his enemies. Five kings are up in Arms against
them, and are ready to pay their fraud with violence: What should these poor
men do? If they make not their peace, they die by strangers; if they do make
their peace with Forrainers, they must die by neighbors. There is no course
that threatens not some danger; We have sped well if our choice has light
upon the easiest inconvenience.

If these Hiuites have sinned against God, against Israel, yet what have they
done to their neighbors? I hear of no treachery, no secret information, no
attempt. I see no sin but their league with Israel, and their life: yet (for
ought we find) they were free men; no way either obliged, or obnoxious. As
Satan, so wicked men cannot abide to lose any of their community: if a Convert
come home, the Angels welcome him with songs, the Devils follow him with uproar
and fury, his old Partners with scorns and obloquy.

I find these neighbor Princes half dead with fear, and yet they can find
time to be sick of envy. Malice in a wicked heart is the king of Passions: all
other veil and bow when it comes in place; even their own life was not so
dear to them as revenge. Who would not rather have looked, that these Kings
should have tried to have followed the Copy of this league? or if their
fingers did itch to fight, why did they not rather think of a defensive war
against Israel, then an offensive against the Gibeonites. Gibeon was strong,
and would not be won without blood; yet these Amorites, which at their best
were too weak for Israel, would spend their forces before hand on their
neighbors. Here was a strong hatred in weak breasts: they feared, and yet
began to fight; they feared Jsrael, yet began to fight with Gibeon. If they had
sat still, their destruction had not been so sudden: the malice of the
wicked, hastens the pase of their own judgment. No rod is so fit for a
mischievous man, as his own.

Gibeon, and these other Cities of the Hiuites, had no King: and none yielded,
and escaped, but they. Their Elders consulted before for their league; neither
is there any challenge sent to the King, but to the City: And now the five
Kings of the Amorits have unjustly compacted against them. Sovereignty abused,
is a great spur to outrage; the conceit of authority in great persons, many
times lies in the way of their own safety, whiles it will not let them stoop
to the ordinary courses of inferiors. Hence it is, that heaven is peopled
with so few Great-ones: hence it is, that true contentment seldom dwells high;
whiles meaner men of humbled spirits, enjoy both earth and heaven.

The Gibeonites had well proved that though they wanted an Head, yet they wanted
not wit; and now the same wit that won Joshua and Israel to their friendship
and protection, teaches them to make use of those they had won. If they had
not more trusted Joshua, then their walls, they had never stolen that league;
and when should they have use of their new Protectors, but now that they were
assailed? Whither should we fly but to our Joshua, when the powers of darkness
(like mighty Amorites) have besieged us? If ever we will send up our prayers
to him, it will be, when we are beleaguered with evils. If we trust to our own
resistance, we cannot stand; we cannot miscary, if we trust to his: in vain
shall we send to our Joshua in these straits, if we have not before come to him
in our freedom.

Which of us would not have thought Joshua had a good pretense for his
forbearance; and have said, You have stolen your league with me; why do you
expect help from him whom ye have deceived? All that we promised you, was a
sufferance to live; enjoy what we promised, we will not take your life from
you; Has your faithfulness deserved to expect more then our covenant; we never
promised to hazard our lives for you, to give you life with the loss of our
own. But that good man durst not construe his own covenant to such an
advantage; He knew little difference betwixt killing them with his own sword,
and the sword of an Amorite: whosoever should give the blow, the murder would
be his. Even permission in those things we may remedy, makes us no less
actors then consent; some men kill as much by looking on, as others by smiting:
We are guilty of all the evil we might have hindered.

The noble disposition of Joshua, besides his engagement, will not let him
forsake his new vassalls: Their confidence in him, is argument enough to draw
him into the Field. The greatest obligation to a good mind, is another trust*
which to disappoint, were mercilesly perfidious. How much less shall our true
Joshua fail the confidence of our faith? Oh my Savior, if we send the
messengers o^ our prayers to thee into thy Gilgal, thy mercy binds thee to
relief: never any soul miscarried that trusted thee; we may be wanting in our
trust, our trust can never want success.

Speed in bestowing, doubles a gift; a benefit deferred, loses the thanks, and
proves unprofitable. Joshua marches all night, and fights all day for the
Gibeonites: They took not so much pains in coming to deceive him, as he in
going to deliver them. It is the noblest victory to overcome evil with good;
if his very Israelites had been in danger he could have done no more: God, and
his Joshua, make no difference betwixt Gibeonites Israelited, and his own
natural people. All are Israelites whom he has taken to league: we strangers
of the Gentiles, are now the true Jews; GOD never did more for the natural
Olive, then for that wild Impe which he has graffed in. And as these Hiuites
could never be thankful enough to such a Joshua; no more can we to so gracious
a Redeemer, who forgetting our vnwoorthiness, descended to our Gibeon, and
rescued us from the powers of hell, and death.

Joshua fought, but God discomfited the Amorites; The praise is to the workman,
not the instrument: Neither did God slay them only with Joshua's sword, but
with his own haile-stones; that now the Amorites may see both these reuenges
come from one hand. These bullets of GOD do not wound, but kill: It is no
wonder that these five Kings fly; They may soon run away from their hope,
never from their horror: If they look behind, there is the sword of Israel,
which they dare not turn upon, because God had taken their heart from them,
before their life: If they look upwards, there is the haile-shot of God
fighting against them, out of heaven; which they can neither resist, nor avoid.

If they had no enemy but Israel, they might hope to run away from death,
since fear is a better footeman, then desire of revenge; but now,
vvhither-soeuer they run, heaven will be above their heads: And now, all the
reason that is left them in this confusion of their thoughts, is to wish
themselves well dead; there is no evasion where GOD intends a revenge. We men
have devised to imitate these instruments of death, and send forth deadly
bullets out of a clowd of smoke; wherein yet, as there is much danger, so much
uncertainty: but this God, that discharges his Ordinance from heaven, directs
every shot to an head, and can as easily kill as shoot. It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God: he has mo ways of vengeance, then
he has creatures. The same heaven that sent forth water to the old world,
fire to the Sodomites, lightning and thunderbolts to the Egyptians, sends out
haile-stones to the Amorites. It is a good care how we may not anger God; it
is a vain study how we may fly from his judgments, when we have angered him;
if we could run out of the world, even there shall we find his reuenges far
greater.

Was it not miracle enough that God did brain their Adversaries from heaven,
but that the Sun and Moon must stand still in heaven? Is it not enough that
the Amorites fly, but that the greatest Planets of heaven must stay their own
course, to witness, and wonder at the discomfiture? For him which gave them
both being and motion, to bid them stand still, it seems no difficulty,
although the rarenes would deserve admiration: but, for a man to command the
chief stars of heaven (by whose influence he lives) as the Centurion would
do his servant, Sun stay in Gibeon, and Moon stand still in Aialon, it is
more then a wonder. It was not Joshua, but his faith that did this; not by way
of precept, but of prayer. If I may not say that the request of a faithful man
(as we say of the great) commands, Gods glory was that which Joshua aimed
at: he knew that all the world must needs be witnesses of that, which the eye
of the world stood still to see. Had he respected but the slaughter of the
Amorites, he knew the haile-stones could do that alone; the Sun needed not
stand still to direct that clowd to persecute them; but the glory of the
slaughter was sought by Joshua, that he might send that up, whence those
haile-stones, and that victory came: All the earth might see the Sun and
Moon; all could not see the cloud of hail, which because of that heavy burden
flew but low. That all Nations might know the same hand commands both in
earth, in the clouds, in heaven, Joshua now prays, that he which dishartned
his enemies upon earth, and smote them from the cloud, would stay the Sun and
Moon in heaven. God never got himself so much honor by one days work
amongst the heathen; and when was it more fit, then now, when five heathen
Kings are banded against him?

The Sun and the Moon were the ordinary Gods of the world: and who would not
but think, that their standing still but one hour, should be the ruin of
Nature? and now, all Nations shall well see, that there is an higher then their
highest; that their Gods are but servants to the GOD whom themselves should
serve, at whose pleasure both they and Nature shall stand at once. If that God
which meant to work this miracle, had not raised up his thoughts to desire it,
it had bin a blameable presumption, which now is a faith worthy of admiration.
To desire a miracle without cause, is a tempting of God. O powerful GOD that
can effect this! O power of faith that can obtain it! What is there that God
cannot do? and what is there which God can do, that faith cannot do?

THE ALTAR of the Reubenites.
REuben, and Gad, were the first that had an inheritance assigned the^; yet
they must enjoy it last: So it falls out often in the heavenly Canaan, the first
in title, are the last in possession. They had their lot assigned them beyond
Jorden; which tho it were allotted them in peace, must be purchased with their
war: that must be done for their brethren, which needed not be done for
themselves: they must yet still fight, and fight for-most, that as they had the
first patrimony, they might endure the first encounter. I do not hear them
say, This is our share, let us sit down, and enjoy it quietly, fight who
will for the rest: but when they knew their own portion, they leave wives and
children to take possession, and march armed before their brethren, till they
had conquered all Canaan. Whether should we more commend their courage, or
their charity? Others were moved to fight with hope, they only with love:
they could not win more, they might lose themselves; yet they will fight, both
for that they had something, and that their brethren might have. Thankfulness
and love can do more with Gods children, then desire to merit, or necessity:
No true Israelite can (if he might choose) abide to sit still beyond Jordan,
when all his brethren are in the field. Now when all this war of God was ended,
and all Canaan is both won and divided, they return to their own; yet not
till they were dismissed by Joshua: all the sweet attractiues of their private
love cannot hasten their pase. If heaven be never so sweet to us, yet may we
not run from this earthen warfare till our great Captain shall please to
discharge us. If these Reubenites had departed sooner, they had been recalled,
if not as cowards, surely as fugitives; now they are sent back with victory
and blessing. How safe and happy it is to attend both the call, and the
dispatch of GOD!

Being returned in peace to their home, their first care is, not for Trophies;
nor for houses, but for an Altar to God; an Altar, not for sacrifice, which had
been abominable, but for a memorial what God they served. The first care of
true Israelites, must be the safety of Religion; the world, as it is inferior
in worth, so must it be in respect: He never knew God aright, that can abide
any competition with his Maker.

The rest of the Tribes no sooner hear news of their new Altar, but they
gather to Shiloh, to fight against them: they had scarce breathed from the
Cananitish war, and now they will go fight with their brethren: if their
brethren will (as they suspected) turn Idolaters, they cannot hold them any
other then Canaanites. The Reubenites and their fellows, had newly settled the
rest of Israel in their possessions, and now ere they can be warm in their
seats, Israel is up in Arms to thrust them out of their own: the hatred of
their suspected Idolatry, makes them forget either their blood, or their
benefits. Israel says, These men were the first in our battles, and shall be
the first in our revenge; They fought well for us, we will try how they can
fight for themselves. What if they were our Champions? Their revolt from God
has lost them the thank of their former labors; their Idolatry shall make
them of brethren, adversaries; their own blood shall give handsell to their new
Altar. O noble and religious zeal of Israel! Who would think these men the
sons of them that danced about the molten Calfe? That consecrated an Altar to
that Idol? Now they are ready to die or kill, rather then endure an Altar
without an Idol. Every ouerture in matter of Religion, is worthy of
suspicion, worthy of our speedy opposition: God looks for an early redress
of the first beginnings of impiety. As in treasons or mutinies, wise
statesmen find it safest to kill the serpent in the egg; so in motions of
spiritual alterations: one spoonefull of water will quench that fire at the
first, which afterward whole buckets cannot abate.

Yet do not these zealous Israelires run rashly and furiously upon their
brethren, nor say, What need we expostulate? The fact is clear: what care we
for words, when we see their Altar? What can this mean, but either service to
a false God, or division in the service of the true? There can be no excuse
for so manifest a crime: Why do we not rather think of punishment, then
satisfaction? But they send ere they go; and consult ere they execute. Phineas
the son of Eleazar the Priest, and ten Princes (for every Tribe one) are
addressed both to inquire, and dissuade; to inquire of the purpose of the fact;
to dissuade from that which they imagined was purposed. Wisdom is a good
guide to zeal, and only can keep it from running out into fury: If
discretion do not hold in the raynes, good intentions will both break their
own necks, and the riders: yea, which is strange, without this, the zeal of
God, may lead us from God.

Not only wisdom, but charity moved them to this message. For, grant they
had been guilty, must they perish vnwarn'd? Peaceable means must first be
used to recall them, ere violence be sent to persecute them. The old rule of
Israel, has been still to inquire of Abel; No good Shepherd sends his dog to
pull out the throat of his strayed sheep, but rather fetches it on his
shoulders to the fold: Sudden cruelty stands not with religion: He which will
not himself break the bruised reed, how will he allow us, either to bruise
the whole, or to break the bruised, or to burn the broken?

Neither yet was here more charity in sending, then incharitableness in the
misconstruction. They begin with a challenge; and charge their brethren deeply
with transgression, apostasy, rebellion. I know not how two contrary qualities
fall into love; it is not naturally suspicious, and yet many times suggests
jealous fears of those we affect. If these Israelites had not loved their
brethren, they would never have sent so far to restrain them; they had never
offered them part of their own patrimony: if they had not been excessiuely
jealous, they had not censured a doubtful action, so sharply. They met at
Shilo, where the Tabernacle was; but if they had consulted with the Ark of God, they had saved both this labor, and this challenge: This case seemed so
plain, that they thought advice needless: Their inconsiderateness therefore
brands their brethren with crimes whereof they were innocent; and makes
themselves the only offenders. In cases which are doubtful and uncertain, it
is safe either to suspend the judgment, or to pass it in favor; otherwise, a
plain breach of charity in us, shall be worse then a questionable breach of
justice in another.

Yet this little gleame of their uncharitable love began at themselves; if they
had not feared their own judgments in the offense of Ruben, I know not
whether they had been so vehement: The fearful reuenges of their bretherens
sin are still in their eye. The wickedness of Peor, stretched not so far as
the plague; Achan sinned, and Israel was beaten: therefore by just induction,
they argue (Ye rebel to day against the Lord, tomorrow will the Lord be wroth
with all the Congregation.) They still tremble at the vengeance passed; and
find it time to prevent their own punishment, in punishing their brethren.
Gods proceedings have then their right use, when they are both carefully
remembered, and made patterns of what he may do.

Had these Reubenites been as hot in their answer, as the Israelites were in
their charge, here had grown a bloody war out of misprision: But now their
answer is mild and moderate, and such as well showed, that though they were
further from the Arc, yet no less near to GOD. They thought in themselves,
This act of ours, though it were well meant by us, yet might well be by
interpretation scandalous; it is reason our mildness should give satisfaction
for that offense, which we have not prevented. Hereupon, their answer was as
pleasing, as their act was dangerous. Even in those actions whereby an offense
may be occasioned (though not given) charity binds us to clear both our own
name, and the conscience of others.

Little did the Israelites look for so good a ground of an action so
suspicious; An Altar without a sacrifice? An Altar and no Tabernacle? An Altar
without a precept, and yet not against God? It is not safe to measure all men's
actions by our own conceit, but rather to think there may be a further
drift, and warrant of their act, then we can attain to see.

By that time the Reubenites have commented upon their own work, it appears
as justifiable, as before offensive. What wisdom and religion is found in
that Altar, which before showed nothing but Idolatry? This discourse of theirs,
is full both of reason and piety; We are severed by the river Jordan from the
other Tribes; perhaps hereafter, our choice may exclude us from Israel:
Posterity may peradventure say, Jordan is the bounds of all natural
Israelites; the streams whereof never gave way to those beyond the River: If
they had been ours, either in blood or religion, they would not have been
sequestered in habitation. Doubtless therefore these men are the offspring of some
Strangers, which by vicinity of abode, have gotten some tincture of our
language, manners, religion; What have we to do with them, what have they to
do with the Tabernacle of God? Since therefore we may not either remove Gods
Altar to us, or remove our Patrimony to the Altar; The Pattern of the Altar
shall go with us, not for sacrifice, but for memorial; that both the posterity
of the other Israelites may know, we are no less derived from them, then this
Altar from theirs; and that our posterity may know, they pertain to that Altar,
whereof this is the resemblance. There was no danger of the present; but
posterity might both offer and receive prejudice, if this Monument were not.
It is a wise and holy care to prevent the dangers of ensuing times, and to
settle religion upon the succeeding generations. As we affect to leave a
perpetuity of our bodily issue, so much more to traduce piety with them. Do
we not see good husbands set and plant those trees, whereof their
grandchildren shall receive the first fruit, and shade? Why are we less
thrifty in leaving true religion entire, to our childrens children?

Ehud and Eglon.
AS every man is guilty of his own sorrow, these Israelites bred mischief to
themselves: It was their mercy that plagued them with those Canaanites, which
their obedience should have rooted out. If foolish pity be a more humane sin,
yet it is no less dangerous then cruelty: Cruelty kills others, unjust pity
kills our selves. They had been Lords alone of the promised Land, if their
commiseration had not ouer-swayed their justice; and now their enemies are too
cruel to them (in the just revenge of God) because they were too merciful:
That God, which in his revealed will had commanded all the Canaanites to the
slaughter, yet secretly gives over Israel to a toleration of some Canaanites,
for their own punishment. He has bidden us cleanse our hearts of all our
corruptions: yet he will permit some of these thorns still in our sides, for
exercise, for humiliation. If we could lay violent hands upon our sins, our
souls should have peace; now our indulgence costs us many stripes, and many
tears: what a continued circle is here of sins, judgments; repentance,
deliverances? The conversation with Idolaters, taints them with sin; their
sin draws on judgments; the smart of the judgment moves them to repentance;
upon their repentance follows speedy deliverance, upon their peace and
deliverance they sin again.

Othniel, Calebs nephew, had rescued them from Idolatry and servitude: his
life, and their innocence and peace ended together. How powerful the presence
of one good man is in a Church or State, is best found in his loss.

A man that is at once eminent in place and goodness, is like a stake in a
hedge; pull that up, and all the rest are but loose and rotten sticks, easily
removed: or like the pillar of a vaulted roof, which either supports, or
ruins the building. Who would not think Idolatry an absurd and unnatural sin?
which as it has the fewest inducements, so had also the most direct
inhibitions from God; and yet after all these warnings, Israel falls into it
again: Neither affliction nor repentance can secure an Israelite from
redoubling the worst sin, if he be left to his own frailty. It is no
censuring of the truth of our present sorrow, by the event of a following
miscariage; The former cries of Israel to God were unfeigned, yet their present
wickedness is abominable: Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he
fall.

No sooner had he said (Israel had rest) but he adds, They committed
wickedness: The security of any people is the cause of their corruption;
standing waters soon grow noysom. Whiles they were exercised with war, how
scrupulous were they of the least intimation of Idolatry? the news of a bare
Altar beyond Jordan, drew them together for a revenge; now they are at peace
with their enemies, they are at variance with God: It is both hard and happy
not to be the worse with liberty; The sedentary life is most subject to
diseases.

Rather then Israel shall want a scourge for their sin, God him self shall
raise them up an enemy: Moab had no quarrel but his own ambition, but God
meant by the ambition of the one part, to punish the Idolatry of the other; his
justice can make one sin the executioner of another, whiles neither shall look
for any other measure from him, but judgment: The evil of the City is so
his, that the instrument is not guiltless. Before, God had stirred up the King
of Syria against Israel; now, the King of Moab; afterward, the King of Canaan:
He has more variety of judgments, then there can be offenses; if we have
once made him our adversary, he shall be sure to make us adversaries enovv;
which shall revenge his quarrel, vvhiles they prosecute their own.

Even those were Idolaters by whose hands God plagued the Idolatries of Israel.
In Moab, the same wickedness prospers, which in Gods own people is punished:
the justice of the Almighty can least brook evil in his own; the same
heathen which provoked Israel to sin, shall scourge them for sinning. Our
very profession hurts us, if we be not innocent.

No less then eighteen years did the rod of Moab rest upon the inheritance
of God: Israel seems as borne to servitude; they came from their bondage in
the Land of Egypt, to serve in the Land of Promise; They had neglected God, now
they are neglected of GOD; Their sins have made them servants, whom the
choice of GOD had made free, yea his first borne. Worthy are they to serve
those men, whose false Gods they had served, and to serve them always in
thraldom, whom they have once served in Idolatry. We may not measure the
continuance of punishment, by the time of the commission of sin; one minutes
sin deserves a torment beyond all time.

Doubtless, Israel was not so insensible of their own misery, as not to
complain sooner then the end of eighteen years; The first hour they sighed
for themselves, but now they cried unto GOD. The very purpose of affliction is
to make us importunate; He that hears the secret murmurs of our grief, yet
will not seem to hear us, till our cries be loud and strong. GOD sees it best
to let the penitent dwell for the time under their sorrows; he sees us
sinking all the while, yet he lets us alone till we be at the bottom: and
when once we can say, Out of the depths have I cried to thee; instantly
follows, The Lord heard me. A vehement suter cannot but be heard of God,
whatsoever he asks. If our prayers want success, they want heart; their
blessing is according to their vigor. We live in bondage to these spiritual
Moabites, our own corruptions. It discontents us; but where are our strong
cries unto the GOD of heaven? where are our tears? If we could passionately
bemone our selves to him, how soon should we be more then conquerours? Some
good motions we have to send up to him, but they faint in the way. We may call
long enough, if we cry not to him.

The same hand that raised up Eglon against Israel, raised up also Ehud for
Israel, against Eglon; When that Tyrant has revenged God of his people, God
will revenge his people of him. It is no privilege to be an instrument of Gods
vengeance by evil means: Though Eglon were an Usurper, yet had Ehud been a
Traitor if God had not sent him; it is only in the power of him that makes
Kings, when they are once settled, to depose them. It is no more possible for
our modern butchers of Princes, to show they are employed by God, then to
escape the revenge of GOD in offering to do this violence, not being employed.

What a strange choice does God make of an Executioner? A man shut of his
right hand; either he had but one hand, or used but one, and that the worse,
and more unready: Who would not have thought both hands too little for such a
work; or, if either might have been spared, how much rather the left? GOD
sees not as man sees; It is the ordinary wont of the Almighty, to make
choice of the vnlik eliest means. The instruments of God must not be measured
by their own power, or aptitude, but by the will of the Agent: Tho Ehud had no
hands, he that employed him, had enabled him to this slaughter. In humane
things, it is good to look to the means; in divine, to the worker; No means
are to be contemned that God will use; no means to be trusted that man will
use without him.

It is good to be suspicious where is least show of danger, and most appearance
of favor. This lefthanded man comes with a present in his hand, but a dagger
under his skirt. The Tyrant, besides service, looked for gifts; and now receives
death in his bribe: Neither God nor men, do always give where they love. How
often does God give extraordinary illumination, power of miracles, besides
wealth and honor, where he hates? So do men too often accompany their curses
with presents; either least an enemy should hurt us, or that we may hurt them.
The intention is the favor in gifts, and not the substance.

Ehuds faith supplies the want of his hand: Where GOD intends success, he lifts
up the heart with resolutions of courage, and contempt of danger. What
indifferent beholder of this project would not have condemned it, as unlikely
to speed; To see a maimed man go alone to a great King, in the midst of all
his troops; to single him out from all witnesses; to set upon him with one
hand in his own Parlor, where his Courtiers might have heard the least
exclamation, and have comne in, if not to the rescue, yet to the revenge. Every
circumstance is full of improbabilities: Faith evermore ouerlookes the
difficulties of the way, and bends her eyes only to the certainty of the end.
In this intestine slaughter of our tyrannical corruptions, when we cast our
eyes upon our selves, we might well despair; Alas, what can our left-hands do
against these spiritual wickednesses? But when we see who has both
commanded, and undertaken to prosper these holy designs, how can we misdoubt
the success? I can do all things through him that strengthens me.

When Ehud has obtained the convenient secrecy both of the weapon and place;
now with a confident forhead he approaches the Tyrant, and salutes him, with a
true and awful preface to so important an act. I have a message to thee from
God. Even Ehuds poynard was Gods message; not only the vocal admonitions, but
also the real judgments of God, are his errands to the world. He speaks to
us in rain and waters, in sicknesses and famine, in unseasonable times and
inundations: These are the secondary messages of God; if we will not hear the
first, we must hear these to our cost.

I cannot but wonder at the devout reverence of this Heathen Prince; He sat
in his Chair of State; The vnweildinesse of his fat body was such, that he
could not rise with readiness and ease; yet no sooner does he hear news of a
message from God, but he rises up from his Throne, and reverently attends the
tenor thereof: Though he had no Superior to control him, yet he cannot abide
to be unmannerly in the business of GOD.

This man was an Idolater, a Tyrant: yet what outward respects does he give to
the true God? External ceremonies of piety, and complements of devotion, may
well be found with falsehood in religion. They are a good shadow of truth where
it is: but where it is not, they are the very body of hypocrisy. He that had
risen up in Arms against Gods people, and the true worship of God, now rises
up in reverence to his Name: GOD would have liked well to have had less of his
courtesy, more of his obedience.

He looked to have heard the message with his ears, and he feels it in his
guts; So sharp a message, that it pierced the body, and let out the soul
through that unclean passage: neither did it admit of any answer, but silence
and death. In that part had he offended by pampering it, and making it his
God; and now his bane finds the same way with his sin. This one hard and
cold morsel, which he cannot digest, pays for all those gluttonous
delicates, whereof he had formerly surfeted. It is the manner of God, to take
fearful reuenges of the professed enemies of his Church.

It is a marvel, that neither any noise in his dying, nor the fall of so gross
a body, called-in some of his attendants: But that GOD, which has intended to
bring about any design, disposes of all circumstances to his own purpose. If
Ehud had not come forth with a calm and settled countenance, and shut the
doors after him, all his project had been in the dust. What had it been better
that the King of Moab was slain, if Israel had neither had a messenger to
inform, nor a Captain to guide them? Now he departs peaceably, and blows a
trumpet in Mount Ephraim, gathers Israel, and falls upon the body of Moab, as
well as he had done upon the head, and procures freedom to his people. He
that would undertake great enterprises, had need of wisdom, and courage;
wisdom to contriue, and courage to execute; wisdom to guide his courage,
and courage to second his wisdom: both which, if they meet with a good cause,
cannot but succeed.

Iael and Sisera.
IT is no wonder if they who ere foure-score days after the Law delivered,
fell to Idolatry alone, now after foure-score years since the Law restored,
fell to Idolatry among the Canaanites: Peace could in a shorter time work
^ooseness in any people: and if for^ie years after Othniels deliue^ance, they
relapsed, what marvel is it that in twice forty after E^ud, they thus
miscarried? What ^re they the better to have killed Eglon the King of Moab, if
the Idolatry of Moab have killed them? The sin of Moab shall be found a worse
Tyrant then their Eglon. Israel is for every market; they sold themselves to
Idolatry, God sells them to the Canaanites; it is no marvel they are slaves,
if they will be Idolaters: After their longest intermission, they have now the
sorest bondage. None of their Tyrants were so potent as Iabin with his 900.
chariots of Iron. The longer the reckoning is deferred, the greater is the
sum: God prouides on purpose mighty Adversaries for his Church, that their
humiliation may be the greater in sustaining, and his glory may be greater in
deliverance.

I do not find any Prophet in Israel during their sin; but so soon as I
hear news of their repentance, mention is made of a Prophetess, and Judge of
Israel. There is no better sign of Gods reconciliation, then the sending of
his holy messengers to any people; He is not utterly fallen out with those
whom he blesses with prophecy. Whom yet do I see raised to this honor? Not
any of the Princes of Israel; not Barac the Captain; not Lapidoth the husband;
but a woman, for the honor of her sex; a wife, for the honor of wedlock:
Deborah, the wife of Lapidoth.

He that had choice of all the millions of Israel, culls out two weak women,
to deliver his people; Deborah shall judge, Iael shall execute. All the Palaces
of Israel, must yield to the Palm Tree of Deborah; The weakness of the
instruments, redounds to the greater honor of the workman. Who shall ask God
any reason of his elections, but his own pleasure? Deborah was to sentence,
not to strike; to command, not to execute: This act is masculine, fit for some
Captain of Israel; She was the Head of Israel, it was meet some other should be
the hand: it is an imperfect and titular government where there is a
commanding power, without correction, without execution. The message of
Deborah finds out Barac the son of Abinoam, in his obscure secrecy, and calls
him from a corner of Nepthali, to the honor of this exploit. He is sent for,
not to get the victory, but to take it; not to overcome, but to kill; to
pursue, and not to beat Sisera. Who could not have done this work, whereto not
much courage, no skill belonged? Yet even for this will God have an instrument
of his own choice: It is most fit that GOD should serve himself where he
list, of his own; neither is it to be inquired, whom we think meet for any
employment, but whom God has called.

Deborah had been no Prophetess, if she durst have sent in her own name;
Her message is from him that sent herself, Has not the Lord God of Israel
commanded? Baracs answer is faithful, tho conditionate; and does not so much
intend a refusal to go without her, as a necessary bond of her presence with
him. Who can blame him that he would have a Prophetess in his company? If
the man had not been as holy as valiant, he would not have wished such society.
How many think it a perpetual bondage to have a prophet of God at their elbow?
God had never sent for him so far, if he could have bin content to go up
without Deborah; He knew that there was both a blessing, and encouragement in
that presence. It is no putting any trust in the success of those men, that
neglect the messengers of God.

To prescribe that to others, which we draw back from doing our selves, is an
argument of hollowness and falsity: Barac shall see that Deborah does not offer
him that cup, whereof she dare not begin; without regard of her sex she
marches with him to Mount Tabor, and reioyces to be seen of the ten thousand
of Israel. With what scorn did Sisera look at these gleanings of Israel? How
unequal did this match seem of ten thousand Israelites against his three
hundred thousand foot, ten thousand horse, nine hundred chariots of Iron? And
now in a bravery, he calls for his troops, and means to kill this handful of
Israel with the very sight of his piked chariots; and only feared it would be
no victory to cut the throats of so few. The faith of Deborah and Barac was
not appalled with this world of Adversaries, which from Mount Tabor they saw
hiding all the Valley below them; they knew whom they had believed, and how
little an arm of flesh could do against the God of Hosts.

Barac went down against Sisera, but it was GOD that destroyed him. The
Israelites did not this day wield their own swords, least they should arrogate
any thing; God told them before hand, it should be his own act. I hear not of
one stroke that any Canaanite gave in this fight; as if they were called
hither, only to suffer. And now proud Sisera, after many curses of the
heaviness of that Iron carriage, is glad to quit his Chariot, and betake
himself to his heels. Who ever yet knew any earthly thing trusted in, without
disappointment? It is wonder if God make us not at last as weary of whatsoever
has stolen our hearts from him, as ever we were fond.

Yet Sisera hopes to have sped better then his followers, in so seasonable an
harbor of Iael. If Heber and Iael had not been great persons, there had been
no note taken of their Tents; There had been no league betwixt King Iabin and
them: now their greatness makes them known, their league makes them trusted. The
distress of Sisera might have made him importunate, but Iael begins the
courtesy, and exceeds the desire of her guest: He asks water to drink, she
gives him milk; he wishes but shelter, she makes him a bed; he desires the
protection of her Tent, she couers him with a mantle. And now Sisera pleases
himself with this happy change, and thinks how much better it is to be here,
then in that whirling of chariots, in that horror of flight, amongst those
shriekes, those wounds, those carcasses. Whiles he is in these thoughts: his
weariness and easy reposall has brought him asleep. Who would have looked
that in this tumult and danger, even betwixt the very jaws of death, Sisera
should find time to sleep? How many worldly hearts do so in the midst of
their spiritual perils?

Now whiles he was dreaming, doubtless, of the clashing of armors, rattling of
chariots, neighing of horses, the clamor of the conquered, the furious pursuit
of Israel; Iael seeing his temples lie so fair, as if they invited the nail
and hammer, entered into the thought of this noble execution; certainly not
without some checks of doubt, and pleas of fear: What if I strike him? And yet
who am I, that I should dare to think of such an act? Is not this Sisera, the
famousest captain of the world, whose name has wont to be fearful to whole
Nations? What if my hand should swerve in the stroke? What if he should awake,
whiles I am lifting up this instrument of death* What if I should be surprised
by some of his followers while the fact is green, and yet bleeding? Can the
murder of so great a Leader be hid, or unrevenged? Or if I might hope so, yet
can my heart allow me to be secretly treacherous? Is there not peace betwixt my
house, and him? Did not I inuit him to my Tent? Does he not trust to my
friendship and hospitality? But what do these vveake fears, these idle
fancies of civility? If Sisera be in league with us, yet is he not at defiance
with God? Is he not a Tyrant to Israel? Is it for nothing that GOD has
brought him into my Tent? May I not now find means to repay unto Israel all
their kindness to my Grandfather Iethro? Does not GOD offer me this day,
the honor to be the Rescuer of his people? Has God bidden me strike, and
shall I hold my hand? No Sisera, sleep now thy last, and take here this fatal
reward of all thy cruelty and oppression.

He that put this instinct into her heart, did put also strength into her hand;
He that guided Sisera to her Tent, guided the nail through his temples; which
has made a speedy way for his soul through those parts, and now has fastened
his ear so close to the earth, as if the body had been listening what was
becomne of the soul. There lies now the great terror of Israel at the foot of
a woman: He that brought so many hundred thousands into the Field, has not
now one Page left, either to auert his death, or to accompany it, or bewail
it: He that had vaunted of his Iron chariots, is slain by one nail of Iron,
wanting only this one point of his infelicity, that he knows not by whose
hand he perished.

Gideons Calling.
THe judgments of God still the further they go, the sorer they are; the
bondage of Israel under Iabin was great, but it was freedom in comparison of
the yoke of the Midianites. During the former tyranny, Deborah was permitted
to Judge Israel under a Palm Tree; Under this, not so much as private
habitations will be allowed to Israel: Then, the seat of judgment was in the
sight of the Sun, now their very dwellings must be secret, under the earth.
They that rejected the protection of God, are glad to seek to the Mountains
for shelter; and as they had sauagely abused themselves, so they are feign to
creep into dens and caves of the rocks, like wild creatures for safeguard:
God had sown spiritual seed amongst them, and they suffered their heathenish
neighbors to pull it up by the roots; and now, no sooner can they sow their
material seed, but Midianites and Amalekites are ready by force to destroy it.
As they inwardly dealt with God; so GOD deals outwardly by them; Their eyes
may tell them what their souls have done: yet that God whose mercy is above
the worst of our sins sends first his Prophet with a message of reproof, and
then his Angel with a message of deliverance. The Israelites had smarted
enough with their servitude, yet God sends them a sharp rebuke. It is a good
sign when God chides us, his round reprehensions are ever gracious forerunners
of mercy: whereas his silent conniuence at the wicked, argues deep and secret
displeasure: The Prophet made way for the Angel, reproof for deliverance,
humiliation for comfort.

Gideon was threshing Wheat by the Wine Press. Yet Israel has both Wheat and
Wine, for all the incursions of their enemies. The worst estate out of hell,
has either some comfort, or at least, some mitigation; in spite of all the
malice of the world, God makes secret provision for his own. How should it be
but he that ownes the earth, and all creatures, should reserve ever a
sufficiency from forrainers (such the wicked are) for his household? In the
worst of the Midianitish tyranny, Gideons field and barn are privileged, as
his fleece was afterward from the shower.

Why did Gideon thresh out his corn? To hide it; Not from his neighbors, but
his enemies: his Granary might easily be more close, then his barn. As then,
Israelites threshed out their corn, to hide it from the Midianites: but now,
Midianites thresh out corn, to hide it from the Israelites. These rural
Tyrants of our time, do not more lay up corn, then curses; he that withdraws
corn, the people will curse him; yea, God will curse him, with them, and for
them.

What shifts nature will make to live? Oh that we could be so careful to lay
up spiritual food for our souls, out of the reach of those spiritual
Midianites, we could not but live, in despite of all Adversaries.

The Angels that have ever God in their face, and in their thoughts, have him
also in their mouths, The Lord is with thee. But this which appeared unto
Gideon, was the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord of Angels. Whiles he was with
Gideon, he might well say, The Lord is with thee. He that sent the Comforter,
was also the true Comforter of his Church; he well knew, how to lay a sure
ground of Consolation, and that the only remedy of sorrow, and beginning of
true joy, is The presence of GOD. The grief of the Apostles for the expected
loss of their Master, could never be cured by any receipt but this, of the same
Angel, Behold, I am with you to the end of the world. What is our glory but the
fruition of Gods presence? The punishment of the damned, is a separation from
the beatifical face of God; needs must therefore his absence in this life, be a
great torment to a good heart: and no cross can be equivalent to this
beginning of heaven in the Elect, The Lord is with thee.

Who can complain either of solitariness, or opposition, that has GOD with
him? With him, not only as a witness, but as a party: Even wicked men and
devils cannot exclude God, not the bars of hell can shut him out; He is
with them perforce, but to judge, to punish them: Yea, God will be ever with
them to their cost; but to protect, comfort, save, he is with none but his.

Whiles he calls Gideon valiant, he makes him so. How could he be but valiant,
that had God with him? The godless man may be careless, but cannot be other
then cowardly. It pleases God to acknowledge his own graces in men, that he
may interchange his own glory, with their comfort; how much more should we
confess the graces of one another? An envious nature is prejudicial to God;
He is a strange man in whom there is not some visible good; yea, in the Devils
themselves we may easily note some commendable parts, of knowledge, strength,
agilitie: Let God have his own in the worst creature; yea, let the worst
creature have that praise, which God would put upon it.

Gideon cannot pass over this salutation, as some fashionable complement, but
lays hold on that part, which was most important; the tenure of all his
comfort; and (as not regarding the praise of his valor) inquires after that
which should be the ground of his valor, the presence of God: God had spoken
particularly to him; He expostulates for all. It had bin possible GOD should be
present with him, not with the rest; as he promised to have been with Moses,
Israel: and yet when God says, The Lord is with thee, he answers, Alas Lord,
if the Lord be with us. Gideon cannot conceive of himself as an exempt
person; but puts himself among the throng of Israel, as one that could not be
sensible of any particular comfort, while the common case of Israel labored.
The maine care of a good heart is still for the public, neither can it enjoy
it self, while the Church of God is distressed. As faith draws home
generalities, so charity diffuses generalities from it self to all.

Yet the valiant man was here weak; weak in faith, weak in discourse;
whiles he argues Gods absence by affliction, his presence by deliverances, and
the unlikelihood of success by his own disabilitie; all gross inconsequences:
Rather should he have inferred Gods presence upon their correction; for
wheresoever God chastises, there he is, yea, there he is in mercy. Nothing
more proves us his, then his stripes; he will not bestow whipping where he
loves not. Fond nature thinks GOD should not suffer the wind to blow upon his
dear ones, because her self makes this use of her own indulgence; but none
out of the place of torment, have suffered so much as his dearest children. He
says not we are Idolaters; therefore the Lord has forsaken us, because we
have forsaken him: This sequel had been as good, as the other was faulty;
(The Lord has delivered us unto the Midianites, therefore he has forsaken
us:) Sins, not afflctions, argue God absent.

Whiles Gideon bewrays weakness, God both gives him might and imployes it;
(Go in this thy might, and save Jsrael.) Who would not have looked that God
should have looked angerly on him, and chid him for his unbelief? But he whose
mercy will not quench the weakest fire of grace, though it be but in flax,
looks upon him with compassionate eyes; and to make good his own word, gives
him that valor he had acknowledged.

Gideon had not yet said, Lord deliver Jsrael: much less had he said, Lord
deliver Israel by my hand. The mercy of God preuents the desire of Gideon: if
God should not begin with us, we should be ever miserable; if he should not
give us till we ask, yet who should give us to ask; if his spirit did not
work those holy groans, and sighs in us, we should never make suit to God.
He that commonly gives us power to crave, sometimes gives us without craving,
that the benefit might be so much more welcome, by how much less it was
expected; and we so much more thankful, as he is more forward. When he bids
us ask, it is not for that he needs to be entreated; but that he may make us
more capable of blessings, by desiring them: And where he sees fervent
desires, he stays not for words; and he that gives ere we ask, how much more
will he give when we ask.

He that has might enough to deliver Israel, yet has not might enough to
keep himself from doubting. The strongest faith will ever have some touch of
infidelity. And yet this was not so much a distrust of the possibility of
delivering Israel, as an inquiry after the means; Whereby shall I save Israel?
The salutation of the Angel to Gideon, was as like to Gabriels salutation of
the blessed Virgin, as their answers were like: Both Angels brought news of
deliverance; both were answered with a question of the means of performance;
with a report of the difficulties in performing: Ah my Lord, whereby shall I
save Israel? How the good man disparages himself! It is a great matter (O
Lord) that thou speak of, and great actions require mighty Agents: As for
me, who am I? My Tribe is none of the greatest in Israel; My Fathers family, is
one of the meanest in his Tribe, and I the meanest in his family; Poverty is a
sufficient bar to great enterprises.

Whereby shall I? Humility is both a sign of following glory, and a way to
it, and an occasion of it: Bragging and height of spirit, will not carry it,
with GOD: None have ever been raised by him, but those which have formerly
dejected themselves; None have been confounded by him, that have been abased in
themselves. Thereupon it is that he adds, I will therefore be with thee; as if
he had answered, Had thou not been so poor in thy self, I would not have
wrought by thee. How should God be magnified in his mercies if we were not
unworthy? How should he be strong, if not in our weakness?

All this while, Gideon knew not it was an Angel that spoke with him; He saw
a man stand before him like a Trauailer, with a staff in his hand. The
vnusualness of those revelations in those corrupted times was such, that Gideon
might think of any thing rather then an Angel: No marvel if so strange a
promise from an unknown messenger, found not a perfect assent; Feign would he
believe, but feign would he have good warrant for his faith. In matters of
faith we cannot go upon too sure grounds. As Moses therefore being sent upon
the same errand, desired a sign, whereby Israel might know that God sent him:
So Gideon desires a sign from this Bearer* to know that his news is from God.

Yet the very hope of so happy news, not yet ratified, stirs up in Gideon
both joy and thankfulness. After all the injury of the Midianites, he was not
so poor, but he could bestow a Kid, and cakes, upon the Reporter of such
tidings. Those which are rightly affected with the glad news of our spiritual
deliverance, study to show their loving respects to the messengers.

The Angel stays for the preparing of Gideons feast. Such pleasure does GOD
take in the thankful endeavors of his servants, that he patiently waits upon
the leisure of our performances. Gideon intended a dinner, the Angel turned it
into a sacrifice. He whose meat and drink it was to do his Fathers will,
calls for the broth and flesh to be poured out upon the stone; And when Gideon
looked he should have blessed, and eaten, he touches the feast with his
staff, and consumes it with fire from the stone, and departed. He did not
strike the stone with his staff (For the attrition of two hard bodies would
naturally beget fire) but he touched the meat, and brought fire from the
stone: And now whiles Gideon saw and wondered at the spiritual act, he lost the
sight of the Agent.

He that came without entreating, would not have departed without taking
leave, but that he might increase Gideons vvonder, and that his wonder might
increase his faith. His salutation therefore was not so strange as his
farewell. Moses touched the rock with his staff, and brought forth water, and
yet a man, and yet continued with the Israelites. This messenger touches the
stone with his staff, and brings forth fire, and presently vanishes, that he
may approve himself a spirit. And now Gideon, when he had gathered up
himself, must needs think, He that can raise fire out of a stone, can raise
courage and power out of my dead breast; He that by this fire has consumed the
broth and flesh, can by the feeble flame of my fortitude consume Midian.

Gideon did not so much doubt before, as now he feared. We that shall once live
with, and be like the Angels, in the estate of our impotencie think we cannot
see an Angel, and live. Gideon was acknowledged for mighty in valor, yet he
trembles at the sight of an Angel. Peter, that durst draw his sword upon
Malchus, and all the train of Judas, yet fears when he thought he had seen a
spirit. Our natural courage cannot be are us out against spiritual objects.
This Angel was homely and familiar, taking upon him for the time, a resemblance
of that flesh whereof he would afterward take the substance; yet even the
valiant Gideon quakes to have seen him: How awful and glorious is the God of
Angels, when he will be seen in the state of heaven!

The Angel that departed for the wonder, yet returns for the comfort of
Gideon; It is not the wont of God to leave his children in a maze, but he
brings them out in the same mercy which led them in, and will magnify his
grace in the one, no less then his power in the other.

Now Gideon grows acquainted with God, and interchanges pledges of
familiarity; He buildes an Altar to God, and God conferres with him; and (as he
uses where he loves) imployes him. His first task must be to destroy the god of
the Midianites, then the Idolaters themselves. Whiles Baals Altar and grove
stood in the hill of Ophrah, Israel should in vain hope to prevail: It is
most just with God that judgment should continue with the sin, and no less
mercy, if it may remove after it. Woldst thou fain be rid of any judgment?
Inquire what false Altars and groves thou have in thy heart; down with them
first.

First must Baals Altar be ruined ere Gods be built, both may not stand
together; The true GOD will have no society with Idols, neither will allow it
us. I do not hear him say, That Altar and grove which were abused to Baal,
consecrate now to me; but as one whose holy jealousy will abide no worship till
there be no idolatry, he first commands down the monuments of superstition,
and then inioynes his own service; yet the wood of Baals grove must be used to
burn a sacrifice unto God: When it was once cut down, Gods detestation, and
their danger ceased. The good creatures of God that have been profaned to
Idolatry, may in a change of their use, be employed to the holy service of
their Maker.

Though some Israelites were penitent under this humiliation, yet still many
of them persisted in their wonted Idolatry. The very household of Gideons father
were still Baalites, and his neighbors of Ophrah were in the same sin: yea if
his father had been free, what did he with Baals grove and Altar? He dares not
therefore take his fathers servants, though he took his bullocks, but commands
his own. The Master is best seen in the servants: Gideons servants (amongst
the Idolatrous retinue of Ioash) are religious, like their Master; yet the
mis-deuotion of Ioash, and the Ophrathites was not obstinate. Ioash is easily
persuaded by his son, and easily persuades his neighbors, how unreasonable
it is to plead for such a god, as cannot speak for himself; to revenge his
cause, that could not defend himself. Let Baal plead for himself. One example
of a resolute onset in a noted person, may do more good then a thousand
seconds in the proceeding of an action.

Soon are all the Midianites in an uproar to lose their god; They need not now
be bidden to muster themselves for revenge: he has no religion that can
suffer an indignity offered to his God.

Gideons Preparation and Victory.
OF all the instruments that GOD used in so great a work, I find none so
weak as Gideon; who yet (of all others) was styled valiant: natural valor
may well stand with spiritual cowardice. Before he knew that he spoke with a
God, he might have just colors for his distrust; but after God had approved
his presence, and almighty power, by fetching fire out of the stone, then to
call for a watery sign of his promised deliverance, was no other then to pour
water upon the fire of the spirit. The former trial God gave vnwished; this,
upon Gideons choice and entreaty: The former miracle was strong enough to carry
Gideon through his first exploit of ruinating the idolatrous grove, and Altar;
but now, when he saw the swarm of the Midianites and Amalekites about his
ears, he calls for new aid; and not trusting to his Abiezrites, and his other
thousands of Israel, he runs to God for a further assurance of victory.

The refuge was good, but the manner of seeking it, savors of distrust. There
is nothing more easy then to be valiant, when no peril appears; but when
evils assail us upon unequal terms, it is hard, and commendable Not to be
dismayed. If GOD had made that proclamation now, which afterward was
commanded to be made by Gideon, Let the timorous depart, I doubt whether
Israel had not wanted a Guide: yet how willing is the Almighty to satisfy our
weak desires!

What tasks is he content to be set by our infirmity? The fleece must be wet,
and the ground dry; the ground must be wet, and the fleece dry: Both are done;
that now Gideon may see whether he would make himself hard earth, or yielding
vvoll. God could at pleasure distinguish betwixt him, and the Midianites, and
pour down either mercies or judgment where he lists, and that he was set on
work by that God, which can command all the Elements, and they obey him;
Fire, Water, Earth, serve both him, and (when he will) his.

And now when Gideon had this reciprocal proof of his ensuing success, he
goes on (as he well may) harnessed with resolution, and is seen in the Head
of his troops, and in the face of the Midianites. If we cannot make up the
match with God, when we have our own asking, we are worthy to sit out.

Gideon had but thirty thousand soldiers at his his heels; the Midianites
covered all the valley, like Grasshoppers: and now whiles the Israelites think,
We are too few; God says, The people are too many. If the Israelites must have
looked for victory from their fingers, they might well have said, The
Midianites are too many for us; but that God, whose thoughts and words are
unlike to men's, says, They are too many for me to give the Midianites into
their hands. If humane strength were to be opposed, there should have needed an
equality; but now God meant to give the victory, his care is not how to get
it, but how not to lose or blemish the glory of it gotten. How ielous God is of
his honor! He is willing to give deliverance to Israel, but the praise of the
deliverance he will keep to himself; and will shorten the means, that he
may have the full measure of the glory. And if he will not allow lawful
means to stand in the light of his honor, how will he endure it to be
crossed so much as indirectly? It is less danger to steal any thing from God,
then his glory.

As a Prince, which if we steal or clip his coin, may pardon it; but if we
go about to rob him of his crown, will not be appeased. There is nothing that
we can give to God, of whom we receive all things; that which he is content to
part with, he gives us; but he will not abide we should take ought from him,
which he would reserve for himself. It is all one with him to save with many,
and with few, but he rather chooses to save by few, that all the victory may
redound to himself. O God, what art thou the better for our praises, to whom
because thou art infinite nothing can be added? It is for our good that thou
would be magnified of us; Oh teach us to receive the benefit of thy merciful
favors, and to return thee the thanks.

Gideons Army must be lessened; Who are so fit to be cashered as the
fearful? God bids him therefore proclaim license for all faint hearts to
leave the field. An ill instrument may shame a good work: God will not glorify
himself by cowards. As the timorous shall be without the gates of heaven; so
shall they be without the lists of of Gods field. Although it was not their
courage that should save Israel, yet without their courage God would not serve
himself of them. Christianity requires men; for if our spiritual difficulties
meet not with high spirits, in steed of whetting our fortitude, they quail it.
David's royal Band of Woorthies, was the type of the forces of the Church; all
valiant men, and able to encounter with thousands.

Neither must we be strong only, but acquainted with our own resolutions; not
out of any carnal presumption, but out of a faithful reliance upon the
strength of God; in whom, when we are weak, then we are strong. Oh thou white
liver! does but a foul word, or a frown scarre thee from Christ? Does the
loss of a little land, or silver disquiet the? Does but the sight of the
Midianites in the valley strike thee? Home then, home to the world; thou art not
then for the conquering Band of Christ: If thou can not resolve to follow him
through infamy, prisons, racks, ^ibbets, flames; Depart to thine house, and
save thy life to thy loss.

Me thinks now, Israel should have complained of indignity, and have said,
Why should thou think, O Gideon, that there can be a cowardly Israelite?
And if the experience of the power and mercy of God, be not enough to make us
fear less, yet the sense of servitude must needs have made us resolute; for
who had not rather to be buried dead, the^ quick? Are we not feign to hide our
heads in the caves of the earth, and to make our graves our houses? Not so much
as the very light that we can freely enjoy; the tyranny of death is but short
and easy, to this of Midian: and yet what danger can there be of that, fith
thou have so certainly assured us of Gods promise of victory, and his
miraculous confirmation? No, Gideon, those hearts that have brought us hither
after thy Colors, can as well keep us from retyring.

But now, who can but bless himself, to find of two and thirty thousand
Israelites, two and twenty thousand cowards? Yet all these in Gideons march
made as fair a flourish of courage as the boldest. Who can trust the faces of
men, that sees in the Army of Israel, above two for one timorous? How many make
a glorious show in the warfaring Church, which when they shall see danger of
persecution, shall shrink from the standard of God? Hope of safety, examples
of neighbors, desire of praise, fear of censures, coaction of laws,
fellowship of friends, draw many into the field; which so soon as ever they
see the Adversary, repent of their conditions: and if they may cleanly escape,
will be gone early from Mount Gilead. Can any man be offended at the number of
these shrinkers, when he sees but ten thousand Israelites left of two and
twenty thousand in one morning.

These men that would have bin ashamed to go away by day, now drop away by
night; And if Gideon should have called any one of them back, and said, Will thou flee? would have made an excuse. The darkness is a fit veil for their
palenesse, or blushing; fearfulness cannot abide the light: None of these
thousands of Israel but would have bin loath Gideon should have seen his face
whiles he said, I am fearful; very shame holds some in their station, whose
hearts are already fled. And if we cannot endure that men should be witnesses
of that fear which we might live to correct, how shall we abide once to show
our fearful heads, before that terrible Judge, when he calls us forth to
the punishment of our fear? Oh the vanity of foolish hypocrites, that run
upon the terrors of GOD, whiles they would avoid the shame of men?

How do we think the small remainder of Israel looked, when in the next
morning-muster they found themselves but ten thousand left? How did they
accuse their timorous Countrymen, that had left but this handful to encounter
the millions of Midian? And yet still, God complains of too many; and upon his
trial, dismisses nine thousand seven hundred more. His first trial was of
the valor of their minds: his next is of the ability of their bodies; Those
which besides boldness are not strong, patient of labor and thirst, willing to
stoop, content with a little (such were those that took up water with their
hand) are not for the select Band of GOD. The Lord of Hosts will serve himself
of none but able Champions; If he have therefore singled us into his combat,
this very choice argues, that he finds that strength in us, which we cannot
confess in our selves. How can it but comfort us in our great trialls, that if
the searcher of hearts did not find us fit, he would never honor us with so
hard an employment?

Now, when there is not scarce left one Israelite to every thousand of the
Midianites, it is seasonable with God to join battle. When God has stripped
us of all our earthly confidence, then does he find time to give us victory;
and not till then, least he should be a loser in our gain: Like as at last he
vnclothes us of our body, that he may clothe us upon with glory.

If Gideon feared when he had two and thirty thousand Israelites at his heels,
is it any wonder if he feared, when all these were shrunk into three hundred?
Though his confirmation were more, yet his means were abated. Why was not
Gideon rather the Leader of those two and twenty thousand runne-awaies, then of
these three hundred soldiers? Oh infinite mercy, and forbearance of God, that
takes not vantage of so strong an infirmity, but in stead of casting,
incourages him. That wise Providence has prepared a dream in the head of one
Midianite, an interpretation in the mouth of another, and has brought Gideon
to be an auditor of both; and has made his enemies Prophets of his victory,
incouragers of the attempt, proclaimers of their own confusion. A Midianite
dreams, a Midianite interprets. Our very dreams many times are not without
God; there is a providence in our sleeping fancies: even the emies of God may
have visions, and power to construe them aright; How usually are wicked men
forwarned of their own destruction? To foreknow and not avoid, is but an
aggrauation of judgment.

When Gideon heard good news (tho from an enemy) he fell down and worshipped.
To hear, himself but a Barly-cake, troubled him not, when he heard withal,
that his roling down the hill should break the Tents of Midian; It matters not
how base we be thought, so we may be victorious. The soul that has received
full confirmation from God, in the assurance of his salvation, cannot but bow
the knee, and by all gestures of body, tell how it is ravished.

I would have thought Gideon should rather have found full confirmation in the
promise, and act of GOD, then in the dream of the Midianite. Dreams may be
full of uncertainty; Gods undertakings are infallible: well therefore might the
miracle of GOD give strength to the dream of a Midianite; but what strength
could a Pagans dream give to the miraculous act of God? yet by this is Gideon
thoroughly settled. When we are going, a little thing drives us on; when we are
come near to the shore, the very tide without sails, is enough to put us
into the harbor. We shall now hear no more of Gideons doubts, but of his
atchieuements: And though God had promised by these three hundred to chase the
Midianites, yet he neglects not wise stratagems to effect it. To wait for Gods
performance in doing nothing, is to abuse that divine Providence, which will so
work, that it will not allow us idle.

Now, when we would look that Gideon should give charge of whetting their
swords, and sharpening their spears, and fitting their Armor, he only gives
order for empty pitchers, and lights, and trumpets. The cracking of these
pitchers shall break in pieces this Midianitish clay: the kindling of these
lights, shall extinguish the light of Midian: these trumpets, sound no other
then a soule-peale to all the host of Midian: there shall need nothing but noise
and light to confound this innumerable Army.

And if the pitchers, and brands, and trumpets of Gideon, did so daunt and
dismay the proud troops of Midian, and Amalecke, Who can we think shall be
able to stand before the last terror, wherein the trumpet of the Archangell
shall sound, and the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements
shall be on a flame about our ears?

Any of the weakest Israelites would have served to have broken an empty
pitcher, to have carried a light, and to have sounded a trumpet, and to strike
a flying adversary. Not to the basest use will God employ an unworthy Agent;
He will not allow so much as a cowardly torch-bearer.

Those two and twenty thousand Israelites that slipped away for fear, when the
fearful Midianites fled, can pursue, and kill them, and can follovv them at
the heels, whom they durst not look in the face. Our flight gives advantage
to the feeblest adversary, whereas our resistance foileth the greatest: How
much more, if we have once turned our backs upon a tentation, shall our
spiritual enemies (which are ever strong) trample us in the dust? Resist, and
they shall flee: stand still, and we shall see the salvation of the Lord.

The Revenge of Succoth and Penuell.
GIdeon was of Manasseh: Ephraim and he were brothers, sons of Joseph; None
of all the Tribes of Jsrael fall out with their victorious Leader, but he: The
agreement of brothers is rare; by how much nature has more endeared them, by
so much are their quarrels more frequent and dangerous. I did not hear the
Ephraimites offering themselves into the front of the Army, before the fight,
and now they are ready to fight with Gideon, because they were not called to
fight with Midian: I hear them expostulating after it; After the exploit done,
cowards are valiant. Their quarrel was that they were not called; It had bin a
greater praise of their valor to have gone unbidden: What need was there to
call them, when God complained of multitude, and sent away those which were
called? None speak so big in the end of the fray, as the fearefullest.

Ephraim flies upon Gideon, vvhiles the Midianites fly from him; when Gideon
should be pursuing his enemies, he is pursued by brethren; and now is glad to
spend that wind in pacifying of his own, which should have been bestowed in the
slaughter of a common Adversary: It is a wonder if Satan suffer us to be quiet
at home, whiles we are exercised with wars abroad. Had not Gideon Iearned to
speak fair, as well as to smite, he had found work enough from the swords of
Joseph's sons; his good words are as victorious as his sword; his
pacification of friends, better then his execution of enemies.

For ought I see, the envy of Israelites was more troublesome to Gideon, then
the opposition of Midian; He has left the envy of Ephraim behind him: before
him, he finds the envy of Succoth and Penuell. The one, enuies that he should
overcome without them; the other, that he should but say he had overcome.
His pursuit leads him to Succoth, there he craves relief, and is repelled.
Had he said, Come forth and draw your sword with me against Zeba and Zalmunna,
the motion had been but equal; A common interest challenges an universal
aid: Now he says, but, Give morsells of bread to my followers; He is turned
off with a scorn; He asks bread, and they give him a stone. Could he ask a
more slender recompense of their deliverance, or a less reward of his victory?
Give morsels of bread. Before this act, all their substance had been too small
an hire of their freedom from Midian; now when it is done, a morsel of bread
is too much: Well might he challenge bread, where he gave liberty, and life.
It is hard, if those which fight the wars of God, may not have necessary
relief; that whiles the enemy dies by them, they should die by famine. If they
had labored for GOD at home in peace, they had been worthy of maintenance; how
much more now, that danger is added to their toil? Even very Executioners
look for fees: but here were not malefactors, but adversaries to be slain;
the sword of power and revenge was now to be wielded, not of quiet justice.
Those that fight for our souls against spiritual powers, may challenge bread
from us, and it is a shameless unthankfulness to deny it. When Abraham had
vanquished the five Kings, and delivered Lot and his family, the King of Salem
met him with bread and wine; and now these sons of Abram, after an equal
victory, ask dry bread, and are denied by their brethren: Craftily yet, and
under pretense of a false title, had they acknowledged the victory of Gideon,
with what forhead could they have denied him bread?

Now, I know not whether their faithlesnesse, or envy lie in their way; Are
the hands of Zeba and Zalmunna in thy hands? There were none of these Princes
of Succoth and Penuel, but thought themselves better men then Gideon; That he
therefore alone, should do that, which all the Princes of Israel durst not
attempt, they hated and scorned to hear. It is never safe to measure events by
the power of the instrument; nor in the causes of God (whose calling makes the
difference) to measure others by our selves: There is nothing more dangerous
then in holy businesses to stand upon comparisons, and our own reputation; since
it is reason GOD should both choose, and bless where he lists.

To have questioned so sudden a victory had bin pardonable: but to deny it
scornfully, was unworthy of Israelites. Carnal men think that impossible to
others, which themselves cannot do: From hence are their censures, hence
their exclamations.

Gideon has vowed a fearful revenge, and now performs it; the taunts of his
brethren may not stay him from the pursuit of the Midianites; Common enmities
must first be opposed, domestical, at more leisure. The Princes of Succoth
feared the tyranny of the Midianitish Kings, but they more feared Gideons
victory. What a condition has their envy drawn them into? that they are sorry
to see Gods enemies captive; that Isreal's freedom must be their death; that
the Midianites and they, must tremble at one and the same Revenger. To see
themselves prisoners to Zeba and Zalmunna, had not been so fearful, as to see
Zeba and Zalmunna prisoners to Gideon. Nothing is more terrible to evil
minds, then to read their own condemnation in the happy success of others:
Hell it self would want one piece of his torment, if the wicked did not know
those whom they contemned, glorious.

I know not whether more to commend Gideons wisdom and moderation in the
proceedings, then his resolution and justice in the execution of this business.
I do not see him run furiously into the City, and kill the next; His sword
had not been so drunken with blood, that it should know no difference: But he
writes down the names of the Princes, and singles them forth for revenge.

When the Leaders of GOD come to a Jericho, or Ai, their slaughter was
impartial; not a woman or child might live to tell news: but now that Gideon
comes to a Succoth, a City of Israelites, the Rulers are called forth to
death, the people are frighted with the example, not hurt with the judgment.
To enwrappe the innocent in any vengeance, is a murderous injustice: Indeed
where all join in the sin, all are worthy to meet in the punishment. It is
like, the Citizens of Succoth could have been glad to succor Gideon, if their
Rulers had not forbidden: they must therefore escape, vvhiles their Princes
perish.

I cannot think of Gideons revenge without horror; That the Rulers of Succoth
should have their flesh torn from their backs with thorns and briers; that
they should be at once beaten, and scratcht to death. What a spectacle it was
to see their bare bones looking some-where through the bloody rags of their
flesh and skin, and every stroke worse then the last; death multiplied by
torment! Justice is sometimes so severe, that a tender beholder can scarce
discern it from cruelty.

I see the Midianites fare less ill; the edge of the sword makes a speedy and
easy passage for their lives, whiles these rebellious Israelites die
lingringly under thorns and briars, envying those in their death, whom their
life abhorred. Howsoever men live or die without the pale of the Church, a
wicked Israelite shall be sure of plagues. How many shall vnwish themselves
Christians, when Gods reuenges have found them out? The place where Jacob
wrestled with GOD Peni-el.
and prevailed, now has wrestled against God, and takes a fall; they see God
auenging which would not believe him delivering.

It was now time for Zeba and Zalmunna to follow those their troops to the
grave, whom they had led in the field: Those which the day before, were
attended with an hundred thirty five thousand followers, have not so much as a
Page now left to weep for their death; and have lived only to see all their
friends, and some enemies, die for their sakes. Who can regard earthly
greatness, that sees one night change two of the greatest Kings of the world
into captives? It had been both pity and sin, that the heads of that
Midianitish tyranny, into which they had drawn so many thousands, should have
escaped that death.

And yet, if private revenge had not made Gideon just, I doubt whether they had
died; The blood of his brothers calls for theirs, and awakes his sword to their
execution; He both knew and complained of the Madianitish oppression, under
which Israel groned: yet the cruelty offered to all the thousands of his
Fathers sons, had not drawn the blood of Zeba and Zalmunna, if his own
mothers sons had not bled by their hands. He that slew the Rulers of Succoth
and Penuel, and spared the people, now has slain the people of Midian, and
would have spared their Rulers: but that God which will find occasions to wind
wicked men into judgment, will have them slain in a private quarrel, which had
more deserved it for the public; If we may not rather say, that Gideon
revenged these as a Magistrate, not as a brother: For Governors to respect
their own ends in public actions, and to wear the sword of justice in their
own sheath, it is a wrongful abuse of authority. The slaughter of Gideons
brethren, was not the greatest sin of the Midianitish Kings; this alone shall
kill them, when the rest expected an unjust remission. How many lewd men has
God paid with some one sin for all the rest? Some that have gone away with
unnatural filthiness, and capital thefts, have clipped off their own days
with their coin; Others, whose bloody murders have been punished in a mutinous
word; Others, whose suspected felony has paid the price of their unknown
rape. O GOD, thy judgments are just, even when men's are unjust!

Gideons young son is bidden to revenge the death of his Uncles; His sword had
not yet learned the way to blood, especially of Kings, though in irons: Deadly
executions require strength both of heart and face. How are those aged in
evil, that can draw their swords upon the lawfully Anointed of God? These
Tyrants plead not now for continuance of life, but for the haste of their
death; Fall thou upon us. Death is ever accompanied with pain, which it is no
marvel if we wish short: We do not more affect protraction of an easefull
life, then speed in our dissolution; for here every pang that tends toward
death, renewes it: To lie an hour under death, is tedious; but to be dying a
whole day, we think above the strength of humane patience. Oh what shall we
then conceive of that death, which knows no end? As this life is no less
frail then the body which it animates; so that death is no less eternal
then the soul which must endure it: For us to be dying so long as we now have
leave to hue, is intolerable; and yet one only minute of that other tormenting
death, is worse then an age of this. Oh the desperate infidelity of careless
men, that shrink at the thought of a momentany death, and fear not eternal.
This is but a killing of the body: that is a destruction of body and soul.

Who is so worthy to wear the Crown of Israel, as he that won the Crown
from Midian. Their Usurpers were gone, now they are headless; It is a doubt
whether they were better to have had no Kings, or Tyrants; They sue to Gideon
to accept of the Kingdom, and are repulsed; There is no greater example of
modesty, then Gideon. When the Angel spoke to him, he abased himself below
all Israel; when the Ephraimites contended with him, he prefers their
gleanings to his vintage, and casts his honor at their feet: and now when
Israel profers him that kingdom which he had merited, he refuses it. He that
in ouercomming would allow them to cry, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon,
in governing, will have none but The sword of the Lord. That which others
plotte, and sue, and swear, and bribe for, Dignity and superiority, he
seriously reiects; whether it were, for that he knew God had not yet called
them to a Monarchy; or rather, for that he saw the Crown among thorns? What
do we ambitiously affect the command of these mole-hils of earth, when wise
men have refused the profers of Kingdoms? Why do we not rather labor for that
Kingdom which is free from all cares, from all uncertainty?

Yet he that refuses their Crown, calls for their earings, although not to
enrich himself, but religion. So long had God bin a stranger to Israel, that
now superstition goes current for devout worship. It were pity that good
intentions should make any man wicked; here they did so: Never man meant better
then Gideon in his rich Ephod; yet this very act set all Israel on whoring: God
had chosen a place, and a service of his own. When the wit of man will be
ouerpleasing God with better devises then his own, it turns to madness, and
ends in mischief.

Abimelechs Usurpation.
GIdeon refused the kingdom of Israel when it was offered; his seventy sons
offered not to obtain that Scepter, which their fathers victory had deserved
to make hereditary: only Abimelec the concubines son, sues and ambitiously
plots for it. What could Abimelec see in himself that he should ouer-looke
all his brethren? If he looked to his father, they were his equals; if to his
mother, they were his betters. Those that are most unworthy of honor, are
horest in the chase of it, whiles the conscience of better deserts bids men
sit still, and stay to be either importuned, or neglected; There can be no
greater sign of unfitness, then vehement suit: It is hard to say, whether
there be more pride, or ignorance in Ambition. I have noted this difference
betwixt spiritual and earthly honor, and the Clients of both; we cannot be
worthy of the one without earnest prosecution; nor with earnest prosecution
worthy of the other: The violent obtain heaven; only the meek are worthy to
inherit the earth.

That which an aspiring heart has proiected, it will find both argument and
means to effect; If either bribes or favor will carry it, the proud man will
not sit out; The Shechemites are fit brokers for Abimelec; That City which
once betrayed it self to utter depopulation in yielding to the suit of Hamor,
now betraies it self, and all Israel in yielding to the request of Abimelec;
By them has this Usurper made himself a fair way to the throne: It was an
easy question, Whether will ye admit of the sons of Gideon for your
Rulers, or of Strangers? If of the sons of Gideon, whether of all, or one? If
of one, whether of your own flesh and blood, or of others unknown? To cast off
the sons of Gideon for Strangers, were unthankful; To admit of seauentie
Kings in one small Country, were unreasonable; To admit of any other rather
then their own kinsman, were unnatural. Gideons sons therefore must rule
amongst all Israel; One of his sons amongst those seventy: and who should be
that one but Abimelec? Natural respects are the most dangerous corrupters of
all elections; What hope can there be of worthy Superiors in any free people,
where neereness of blood carries it from fitnes of disposition? Whiles they
say, He is our brother, they are enemies to themselves, and Israel.

Fair words have won his brethren; they the Sechemites; the Sechemites furnish
him with money, money with men; His men begin with murder, and now Abimelec
reigns alone; Flattery, bribes and blood, are the usual stayres of the
Ambitious: The money of Baal is a fit hire for murderers; that which Idolatry
has gathered, is fitly spent upon Treason: One devil is ready to help another
in mischief; Seldom ever is ill-gotten riches better employed. It is no wonder
if he that has Baal his Idol, now make an Idol of Honor. There was never any
man that worshipped but one Idol; Woe be to them that lie in the way of the
Aspiring: Tho they be brothers, they shall bleed; yea the nearer they are, the
more sure is their ruin. Who would not now think that Abimelec should find
an hell in his breast, after so barbarous and unnatural a massacre; and yet
behold he is as senseless as the stone upon which the blood of his seauenty
brethren was spilt. Where Ambition has possessed it self thoroughly of the
soul, it turns the heart into steel, and makes it incapable of a conscience;
All sins will easily down with the man that is resolved to rise.

Only Iotham fell not at that fatal stone with his brethren; It is an hard
battle where none escapes. He escapes, not to reign, not to revenge; but to
be a Prophet, and a witness of the vengeance of GOD upon the Usurper, upon the
Abettors; He lives to tell Abimelec he was but a bramble, a weed rather then
a tree. A right bramble indeed, that grew but out of the base hedg-row of a
Concubine, that could not lift up his head from the earth, unless he were
supported by some bush or pale of Shechem, that had laid hold of the fleece of
Israel, and had drawn blood of all his brethren; and lastly, that had no
substance in him, but the sap of vainglory, and the pricks of cruelty. It
was better then a kingdom to him, out of his obscure Beer, to see the fire out
of this bramble to consume those trees; The view of Gods revenge, is so much
more pleasing to a good heart, then his own, by how much it is more just and
full.

There was never such a pattern of unthankfulness, as these Israelites: They
which lately thought a Kingdom too small recompense for Gideon and his sons,
now think it too much for his seed to live; and take life away from the
sons of him, that gave the^ both life and liberty. Yet if this had bin some
hundred of years after, when time had worn out the memory of Ierub-baal, it
might have borne a better excuse. No man can hope to hold pase with Time; The
best names may not think scorn to be unknown to following generations: but
ere their Deliverer was cold in his coffin, to pay his benefits (which
deserved to be everlasting) with the extirpation of his Posterity, it was more
then savage. What can be looked for from Idolaters? If a man have cast off
his God, he will easily cast off his friends: When religion is once gone,
humanity will not stay long after.

That, which the people were punished afterward for but desiring, he inioyes.
Now is Abimelec seated in the throne which his Father refused, and no rival is
seen to envy his peace: But how long will this glory last? Stay but three
years, and ye shall see this bramble withered, and burnt. The prosperity of
the wicked is short and fickle; a stolen Crown (tho it may look fair) cannot
be made of any but brittle stuff. All life is uncertain: but wickedness
ouer-runnes nature.

The evil spirit thrust himself into the plot of Abimelechs usurpation and
murder, and wrought with the Sechemites for both: and now God sends the evil
spirit betwixt Abimelec and the Sichemites, to work the ruin of each other.
The first could not have been without God; but in the second, GOD challenges a
part: Revenge is his, where the sin is ours. It had bin pity that the
Sichemites should have been plagued by any other hand then Abimelecs; They
raised him unjustly to the Throne, they are the first that feel the weight of
his scepter. The foolish Bird limes herself with that which grew from her own
excretion: who wonders to see the kind Peasant stung with his own snake?

The breach begins at Shechem; His own Countrymen fly off from their promised
allegiance; Tho all Israel should have fallen of from Abimelec, yet they of
Shechem should have stuck close: It was their act, they ought to have made it
good. How should good Princes be honored, when even Abimelecs once settled
cannot be opposed with safety? Now they begin the revolt to the rest of
Israel. Yet, if this had been done out of repentance, it had bin praiseworthy;
but to be done out of a treacherous inconstancy, was unworthy of Israelites.
How could Abimelec hope for fidelity of them, whom he had made and found
Traitors to his fathers blood? No man knows how to be sure of him that is
unconscionable; He that has bin unfaithful to one, knows the way to be
perfidious, and is only fit for his trust, that is worthy to be deceived;
whereas faithfulness, besides the present good, lays a ground of further
assurance. The friendship that is begun in evil, cannot stand; wickedness, both
of it own nature, and through the curse of God, is ever unsteady: and though
there be not a disagreement in hell (being but the place of retribution, not of
action) yet on earth, there is no peace among the wicked; whereas that
affection which is knit in God, is indissoluble.

If the men of Shechem had abandoned their false God, with their false King,
and out of a serious remorse, and desire of satisfaction for their idolatry and
blood, had opposed this Tyrant, and preferred Iotham to his throne, there might
have bin both warrant for their quarrel, and hope of success: but now, if
Abimelec be a wicked Usurper, yet the Shechemites are Idolatrous Traitors. How
could they think, that God would rather revenge Abimelecs bloody intrusion by
them, then their treachery and Idolatry by Abimelec? When the quarrel is betwixt
God and Satan, there is no doubt of the issue; but when one devil fights with
another, what certenty is there of the victory? Though the cause of God had bin
good, yet it had bin safe for them to look to themselves: the unworthiness of
the agent many times, curses a good enterprise.

No sooner is a secret dislike kindled in any people against their Governors,
then there is a Gaal ready to blow the coals: It were a wonder if ever any
faction should want an Head; As contrarily, never any man was so ill, as not to
have some favorers: Abimelec has a Zebul in the midst of Shechem; Lightly, all
treasons are betrayed even with some of their own; His intelligence brings the
sword of Abimelec upon Shechem, who now has demolished the City, and sown it
with salt. Oh the just successions of the reuenges of God! Gideons Ephod is
punished with the blood of his sons; the blood of his sons is shed by the
procurement of the Shechemites; the blood of the Shechemites is shed by
Abimelec: the blood of Abimelec is spilt by a woman. The retaliations of God,
are sure and just, and make a more due pedigree, then descent of nature.

The pursued Shechemites, fly to the house of their god Berith; now they are
safe: that place is at once a fort, and a sanctuary. Whether should we fly in
our distress but to our GOD? And now this refuge shall teach them what a God
they have served: The jealous God whom they had forsaken, has them now where
he would, and reioyces at once to be revenged of their god, and them: Had they
not made the house of Baal their shelter, they had not died so fearfully. Now,
according to the prophecy of Iotham, a fire goes out of the bramble, and
consumes these Cedars, and their eternal flames begin in the house of their
Berith: the confusion of wicked men, rises out of the false Deities which they
have doted on.

Of all the Conspirators against Gideons sons, only Abimelec yet suruiues,
and his day is now coming. His success against Shechem, has filled his heart
with thoughts of victory; He has caged up the inhabitants of Tebez within
their tower also; and what remains for them, but the same end with their
neighbors? And behold, while his hand is busy in putting fire to the door of
their tower, which yet was not hie (for then he could not have discerned a
woman to be his Executioner) a stone from a vvomans hand strikes his head; His
pain in dying, was not so much as his indignation to know by whom he died: and
rather will he die twice, then a woman shall kill him. If God had not known his
stomach so big, he had not vexed him with the impotency of his Victor: God
finds a time to reckon with wicked men for all the arrerages of their sins.
Our sins are not more our debts to God, then his judgments are his debts to
our sins, which at last he will be sure to pay home. There now lies the
greatness of Abimelec; upon one stone had he slain his seventy brethren, and
now a stone slaies him; His head had stolen the Crown of Israel, and now his
head is smitten: And what is Abimelec better that he was a King? What
difference is there betwixt him, and any of his seauenty brethren whom he
murdered, save only in guiltiness? They bear but their own blood; he, the
weight of all theirs. How happy a thing is it to live well! that our death, as
it is certain, so may be comfortable: What a vanity it is to insult in the
death of them, whom we must follow the same way?

The Tyran has his payment, and that time which he should have bestowed in
calling for mereie to GOD, and washing his bloody soul with the last tears
of contrition, he vainly spends in deprecating an idle reproach; Kill me, that
it may not be said, He died by a woman: A fit conclusion for such a life. The
expectation of true and endless torment, does not so much vex him, as the
frivolous report of a dishonor; neither is he so much troubled with, Abimelec
is frying in hell, as, Abimelec is slain by a woman. So, vain fools are
niggardly of their reputation, and prodigal of their souls; Do we not see
them run wilfully into the field, into the grave, in^o hell? and all, least
it should be said, They have but as much fear, as wit.

Contemplations.

THE TENTH BOOK.

Containing Ieptha. Sampson conceived. Sampsons marriage. Sampsons victory.
Sampsons end. Michaes Idolatry.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, SIR Henry Danuers, Knight;
Baron of Dantesey: A worthy pattern of all true Nobility, accomplished both
for war and peace; A munificent favorer of all learning and virtue; I. H.
With humble apprecation of all true happiness, Dedicates this part of his
poor Labors.

CONTEMPLATIONS.
Jeptha.
ISrael, that had now long gone a whoring from GOD, has bin punished by the
regiment of the Concubines son, and at last seeks protection from the son
of an harlot: It is no small misery to be obliged unto the unworthy. The
concubines son made suit to them; They make suit to the son of the harlot. It
was no fault of Ieptha that he had an ill mother, yet is he branded with the
indignity of his bastardie; neither would God conceal this blemish of nature,
which Ieptha could neither avoid, nor remedy. God, to show his detestation of
whoredom, reuenges it not only upon the actors, but upon their issue: Hence he
has shut out the base-son from the congregation of Israel, to the tenth
generation, that a transient evil might have a durable reproach attending it;
And that after the death of the Adulterer, yet his shame might live. But, that
God who justly ties men to his laws, will not abide that we should tie him to
our laws, or his own; He can both rectify and ennoble the blood of Ieptha.
That no man should be too much discouraged with the errors of his propagation,
even the base son of man may be the lawfully begotten of God; and though he be
cast out from the inheritance of his brethren upon earth, may be admitted to
the kingdom of Israel.

I hear no praise of the lawful issue of Gilead; only this mis-begotten
son is commended for his valor, and set at the stern of Israel: The common
gifts of God respect not the parentage or blood, but are indifferently
scattered where he pleases to let them fall. The choice of the Almighty, is not
guided by our rules; As in spiritual, so in earthly things, it is not in him
that wills: If GOD would have men glory in these outward privileges, he
would bestow upon them none but the worthy.

Now, who can be proud of strength or greatness, when he sees him that is not
so honest, yet is more valiant, and more advanced? Had not Ieptha been base,
he had not been thrust out; and if he had not been thrust out from his
brethren, he had never been the Captain of Israel. By contrary pases to
ours, it pleases GOD to come to his own ends: and how usually does he look
the contrary way, to that he moves? No man can measure the conclusion of Gods
act by his beginning: He that fetches good out of evil, raises the glory of
men out of their ruin. Men love to go the nearest way, and often fail: GOD
commonly goes about, and in his own time comes surely home.

The Gileadites were not so forward to expel Ieptha, as glad to recall him;
No Ammonite threatened them when they parted with such an helper: Now, whom
they cast out in their peace, they fetch home in their danger and misery. That
God who never gave ought in vain, will find a time to make use of any gift
that he has bestowed upon men; The valor of Ieptha shall not rust in his
secrecy, but be employed to the common preservation of Israel: Necessity
will drive us to seek up all our helps, even those whom our wantonness has
despised.

How justly are the suits of our need up braided with the errors of our
prosperity? The Elders of Gilead now hear of their ancient wrong, and dare
not find fault with their exprobration; Did ye not hate me, and expel me
out of my Fathers house? How then come ye now to me in time of Tribulation?
The same expostulation that Ieptha makes with Gilead, GOD also at the same time
makes with Israel; Ye have for saken me, and served other Gods; wherefore
should I deliver you any more: Go and cry unto the gods whom ye have served.
As we, so God also finds it seasonable to tell his children of their faults,
whiles he is whipping them. It is a safe and wise course, to make much of
those in our peace, whom we must make use of in our extremity; else it is but
just, that we should be rejected of those, whom we have rejected. Can we look
for any other answer from God then this? Did ye not drive me out of your
houses, out of your hearts, in the time of your health and iollitie? Did ye not
plead the strictness of my charge, and the weight of my yoke? Did not your
wilful sins expel me from your souls? What do you now crowching and
creeping to me in the evil day? Surely, O God, it is but justice, if thou be
not found of those, which were glad to lose thee; it is thy mercy, if after
many checks, and delays, thou will be found at last. Where an act cannot be
reuersed, there is no amends, but confession; and if God himself take up with
this satisfaction, He that confesses, shall find mercy; how much more should
men hold themselves well paid with words of humility, and deprecation?

Iepthaes wisdom had not bin answerable to his valor, if he had not made his
match before hand; He could not but know how trecherously Israel had dealt with
Gideon. We cannot make too sure work, when we have to do with unfaithful
men: It has been an old policy to serve our selves of men; and after our
advantage, to turn them up. He bargains therefore for his Soueraignttie ere he
win it, Shall I be your Head? We are all naturally ambitious, and are ready
to buy honor even with hazard. And if the hope of a troublesome superiority
encouraged Ieptha to fight against the forces of Ammon, what heart should we
take in the battles of God against spiritual wickednesses, when the God of
heaven has said, To him that ouercomes, will I give power over nations, and to
sit with me in my Throne? Oh that we could bend our eyes upon the recompense
of our reward; how willingly should we march forward against these mighty
Ammonites! Ieptha is noted for his valor, and yet he intreates with Ammon, ere
he fights. To make war any other then our last remedy, is not courage, but
cruelty and rashness: And now, when reason will not prevail, he betakes
himself to his sword.

As God began the war with Ieptha, in raising up his heart to that pitch of
fortitude; so Ieptha began his war at GOD, in craving victory from him, and
pouring out his vow to him: His hand took hold of his sword; his heart, of God:
therefore he, whom the old Testament styles valiant, the new, styles
faithful; He who is commended for his strength, dares trust in none, but the
arm of God: If thou will give the Ammonites into my hand. If Ieptha had not
looked upward for his victory, in vain had the Gileadites looked up to him: This
is the disposition of all good hearts, they look to their sword, or their bow,
as servants, not as Patrons; and whiles they use them, trust to God. If we
could do so in all our businesses, we should have both more joy in their
success, and less discomfort in their miscariage.

It was his zeal to vow: it was his sin to vow rashly. Jacob his
fore-father, of whom he learned to vow, might have taught him a better form;
If GOD will be with me, then shall the Lord be my God. It is well with vows,
when the thing promised makes the promise good: But when Ieptha says,
Whatsoever thing comes out of the doors of my house, shall be the Lords, or
I will offer it for a burnt sacrifice; his devotion is blind, and his good
affection ouer-runnes his judgment: For what if a dog, or a swine, or an ass
had met him, where had been the promise of his consecration?

Vows are as they are made; like unto sents, if they be of ill composition,
nothing offends more; if well tempered, nothing is more pleasant: Either
certainty of evil, or uncertainty of good, or impossibility of performance,
makes vows no service to GOD. When we vow what we cannot, or what we ought not
do, we mock God instead of honoring him: It is a vain thing for us, to go
about to catch God hood-winkt; The conscience shall never find peace in any
way, but that which we see before us, and which we know safe both in the kind,
and circumstances. There is no comfort in (peradventure I may please GOD.) What
good child will not take part of the Parents joy? If Ieptha return with
Trophies, it is no marvel if his daughter meet him with Timbrels: Oh that we
could be so affected with the glorious acts of our heavenly Father! Thou
subduest thine enemies, and mightily deliuerest thy people. O GOD, a song
waits for thee in Sion.

Who would have suspected danger in a dutiful Triumph? Well might Iepthaes
daughter have thought; My sex forbad me to do any thing toward the help of
my Fathers victory; I can do little, if I cannot applaud it; If nature have
made me weak, yet not unthankful; nothing forbids my joy to be as strong as
the Victors; Though I might not go out with my father to fight, yet I may meet
him with gratulations; A Timbrel may become these hands which were unfit for a
sword; This day has made me the daughter of the Head of Israel; This day has
made both Israel free, my father a Conqueror, and my self in him noble: and
shall my affection make no difference? What must my father needs think, if he
shall find me sitting sullenly at home, whiles all Israel strives who shall
run first to bless him with their acclamations? Should I only be insensible
of his, and the common happiness?

And now, behold when she looks for most thanks, her father answers the
measures of her feet, with the knockings of his breast, and weeps at her
music, and tears his clothes to look upon her, whom he best loved, and gives
no answer to her Timbrels, but Alas my daughter, thou art of them that trouble
me: Her joy alone has changed the day, and lost the comfort of that victory,
which she inioyed to see won. It falls out often, that those times and
occasions, which promise most contentment, prove most doleful in the issue:
The heart of this Virgin was never lifted up so hie as now, neither did any day
of her life seem happy but this; and this only, proves the day of her solemn,
and perpetual mourning: As contrarily the times and events which we have
most distrusted, prove most beneficial. It is good in a fair morning, to
think of the storm that may rise ere night, and to enjoy both good and evil
fearfully.

Miserable is that devotion which troubles us in the performance; Nothing is
more pleasant then the acts of true piety: Ieptha might well see the wrong of
this religion, in the distaste of it; yet whiles himself had troubled his
daughter, he faies, Alas my daughter, thou art of them that trouble me. She
did but her duty, he did what he should not; yet he would be rid of the
blame, tho he cannot of the smart. No man is willing to own a sin; the first
man shifted it from himself, to his wife; this, from himself to his daughter:
He was ready to accuse another, which only committed it himself. It were
happy if we could be as loath to commit sin, as to acknowledge it.

The inconsideration of this vow was very tough, and settled; I have opened my
mouth, and cannot go back. If there were just cause to repent, it was the
weakness of his zeal, to think that a vow could bind him to evil; An
unlawful vow is ill made, but worse performed. It were pity this constancy
should light upon any, but an holy object: No lone can make a truer debt, then
our vow; which if we pay not in our performance, God will pay us with
judgment. We have all opened our mouths to God in that initiall, and solemn
vow of Christianity; Oh that we could not go back! So much more is our vow
obligatory, by how much the thing vowed is more necessary.

Why was the soul of Ieptha thus troubled, but because he saw the entaile of
his new honor thus suddenly cut off? He saw the hope of posterity
extinguished, in the virginity of his daughter. It is natural to us, to affect
that perpetuity in our succession, which is denied us in our persons; Our very
bodies would emulate the eternity of the soul. And if GOD have built any of us
an house on earth, as well as prepared us an house in heaven, it must be
confessed a favor, worth our thankfulness: but as the perpetuity of our
earthly houses is uncertain; so let us not rest our hearts upon that, but make
sure of the house which is eternal in the heavens.

Doubtless, the goodness of the daughter added to the fathers sorrow: She was
not more loving, then religious; neither is she less willing to be the Lords,
then her fathers: and as provoking her father to that which he thought piety,
though to her own wrong, she says, If thou have opened thy mouth unto the
Lord, do with me as thou have promised. Many a daughter would have dissuaded
her father with tears, and have wished rather her fathers impiety, then her
own prejudice; She sues for the smart of her fathers vow. How obsequious
should children be to the will of their careful Parents, even in their final
disposition in the world, when they see this holy maid willing to abandon the
world upon the rash vow of a father? They are the living goods of their
Parents, and must therefore wait upon the bestowing of their owners: They
mistake themselves, which think they are their own; If this maid had vowed
herself to God without her Father, it had been in his power to abrogate it;
but now that he vowed her to GOD without her self, it stands in force. But
what shall we say to those children, whom their Parents vow and care, cannot
make so much as honest; that will be no other then godless in spite of their
Baptism, and education? What, but that they are given their Parents for a
curse, and shall one day find what it is to be rebellious.

All her desire is, that she may have leave to bewail that which she must be
forced to keep, Virginity: If she had not held it an affliction, there had
been no cause to bewail it; it had bin no thank to undergo it, if she had
not known it to be a cross. Tears are no argument of impatience; we may
mourn for that we repine not to bear: How comes that to be a meritorious
virtue under the Gospel, which was but a punishment under the Law? The
daughters of Israel had been too lavish of their tears, if virginity had bin
absolutely good: What injury should it have been to lament that spiritual
preferment, which they should rather have emulated?

While Iepthaes daughter was two months in the mountains, she might have
had good opportunity to escape her fathers vow; but as one, whom her obedience
tied as close to her father, as his vow tied him to God, she returns to take up
that burden, which she had bewailed to foresee: If we be truly dutiful to our
father in heaven, we would not slip our necks out of the yoke tho we might,
nor fly from his commands, though the door were open.

Sampson conceived.
OF extraordinary persons, the very birth and conception is extraordinary; God
begins his wonders betimes, in those who^ he will make wonderful: There was
never any of those which were miraculously conceived, whose lives were not
notable, and singular. The presages of the womb, and the cradle, are commonly
answered in the life; It is not the use of GOD to cast away strange beginnings.
If Manoahs wife had not been barren, the Angel had not been barren, the Angel
had not been sent to her: Afflictions have this advantage, that they occasion
GOD to show that mercy to us, whereof the prosperous are incapable; It would
not beseem a mother to be so indulgent to an healthful child, as to a sick.
It was to the woman that the Angel appeared, not to the husband; whether for
that the reproach of barrenness lay upon her more heavily, then on the father;
or for that the birth of the child should cost her more dear then her husband;
or lastly, for that the difficulty of this news was more in her conception,
then in his generation: As Satan lays his batteries ever to the weakest; so
contrarily, God addresseth his comforts to those hearts that have most need; As,
at the first, because Eve had most reason to be dejected, for that her sin had
drawn man into the Transgression, therefore the Cordial of GOD most
respects her; The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head.

As a Physician first tells the state of the disease with his Symptoms, and
then prescribes; so does the Angel of God, first tell the wife of Manoah her
complaint, then her remedy; Thou art barren. All our afflictions are more noted
of that GOD which sends them, then of the Patient that suffers them: how can it
be but less possible to endure any thing that he knows not, than that he
inflicteth not? He says to one, Thou art sick; to an other, Thou art poor;
to a third, Thou art defamed; Thou art oppressed, to another: That all-seeing
Eye, takes notice from heaven of every man's condition, no less then if he
should send an Angel to tell us he knew it; His knowledge compared with his
mercy, is the just comfort of all our sufferings. O GOD, we are many times
miserable, and feel it not; Thou know eue^ those sorrows which we might
have; Thou know what thou have done: do what thou will.

Thou art barren. Not that the Angel would upbraid the poor woman with her
affliction; but therefore he names her pain, that the mention of her cure
might be so much more welcome; Comfort shall com unseasonably to that heart which
is not apprehensiue of his own sorrow: We must first know our evils, ere we
can quit them. It is the just method of every true Angel of GOD, first to let
us see that whereof either we do, or should complain, and then to apply
comforts. Like as a good Physician, first pulls down the body, and then raises
it with cordialls. If we cannot abide to hear of our faults, we are not
capable of amendment.

If the Angel had first said, Thou shall conceive, and not premised, Thou art
barren; I doubt whether she had conceived faith in her soul, of that infant
which her body should conceive; Now, his knowledge of her present estate, makes
way for the assurance of the future. Thus ever it pleases our good God, to
leave a pawn of his fidelity with us; that we should not distrust him in
what he will do, when we find him faithful in that which we see done.

It is good reason that he which gives the son to the barren mother, should
dispose of him, and diet him both in the womb first, and after, in the world.
The mother must first be a Nazarite, that her son may be so. Whiles she was
barren, she might drink what she would: but now that she shall conceive a
Sampson, her choice must be limited; There is an holy austerity that ever
follows the special calling of GOD; The worldling may take his full scope,
and deny his back and belly nothing; but he that has once conceived that
blessed burden, whereof Sampson was a type, must be strict and severe to
himself; neither his tongue, nor his palate, nor his hand may run riot; Those
pleasures which seemed not unseemly for the multitude, are now debarred him. We
borrow more names of our Savior then one; As we are Christians, so we are
Nazarites, the consecration of our God is upon our heads; and therefore our very
hair should be holy. Our appetite must be curbed, our passions moderated, and
so estranged from the world, that in the loss of parents, or children, nature
may not make us forget grace. What does the loosenes of vain men persuade them
that God is not curious, when they see him thus precisely ordering the very
diet of his Nazarites? Nature pleades for liberty; religion for restraint: Not
that there is more uncleanness in the grape, then in the fountain; but that
wine finds more uncleanness in us, then water, and that the hie feed is not
so fit for devotion, as abstinence. Who sees not a ceremony in this command?
Which yet carries with it this substance of everlasting use, that God and the
belly will not admit of one servant; that quaffing and cramming is not the way
to heaven: A drunken Nazarite is a monster among men. We have now more scope
then the ancient; not drinking of wine, but drunkenness with wine is
forbidden to the Evangelical Nazarite; wine, wherein is excess. Oh that ever
Christian should quench the spirit of GOD, with a liquor of Gods own making;
That they should suffer their hearts to be drowned with wine, and should so
live, as if the practice of the Gospel, were quite contrary to the rule of the
law.

The mother must conceive the only Giant of Israel, and yet must drink but
water; neither must the child touch any other cup. Never wine made so strong a
Champion as water did here: The power of nourishment, is not in the creatures,
but in their Maker. Daniel and his three companions kept their complexion,
with the same diet wherewith Sampson got his strength; he that gave that
power to the grape, can give it to the stream. O God, how justly do we
raise our eyes from our tables unto thee, which can make water nourish, and
wine enfeeble us!

Sampson had not a better mother, then Manoah had a wife; she hides not the
good news in her own bosom, but imparts it to her husband: That wife has
learned to make a true use of her Head, which is ever read to consult with
him, about the messages of God. If she were made for his helper, he is much
more hers. Thus should good women make amends for their first offense; that as
Eve no sooner had received an ill motion, but she delivered it to her husband;
so they should no sooner receive good, then they should impart it.

Manoah (like one which in those lend times had not lost his acquaintance with
God) so soon as he hears the news, falls down upon his knees: I do not
hear him call forth and address his servants to all the coasts of heaven (as
the children of the prophets did in the search of Elias) to find out the
messenger; but I see him rather look straight up, to that GOD which sent him;
My Lord, I pray thee let that man of God come again. As a straight line is the
shortest, the nearest cut to any blessing is to go by heaven; As we may not
sue to God, and neglect means, so we must sue to GOD for those means which
we shall use.

When I see the strength of Manoahs faith, I marvel not that he had a Sampson
to his son; he saw not the messenger, he heard not the errand, he examined
not the circumstances; yet now he takes thought, not whether he shall have a
son, but how he shall order the son which he must have; and sues to God,
not for the son which as yet he had not, but for the direction of governing
him, when he should be. Zachariah heard the same message, and craving a sign,
lost that voice wherewith he craved it: Manoah seeks no sign for the promise,
but counsel for himself; and yet, that Angel spoke to Zachary himself, this
only to the wife of Manoah; that, in the Temple like a glorious spirit; this,
in the house, or field, like some Prophet, or Traveler; that to a Priest,
this to a woman. All good men have not equal measures of faith; The bodies of
men have not more differences of stature, then their graces: Credulity to men
is faulty and dangerous; but in the matters of GOD, is the greatest virtue of a
Christian; Happy are they that have not seen, yet believed: True faith takes
all for granted, yea for performed, which is once promised.

He that before sent his Angel unasked, will much more send him again, upon
entreaty; those heavenly messengers are ready both to obey their Maker, and
to relieve his children. Never any man prayed for direction in his duties to
God, and was repulsed: rather will God send an Angel from heaven to instruct
us, then our good desires shall be frustrate.

Manoah prayed, the Angel appeared again; not to him, but to his wife. It had
been the shorter way, to have come first to the man whose prayers procured his
presence: But as Manoah went directly, and immediately to GOD, so God comes
mediatly and about to him; and will make her the means to bear the message to
her husband, who must bear him the son: Both the blessing and the charge are
chiefly meant to her. It was a good care of Manoah, when the Angel had given
order to his wife alone, for the governing of the child's diet, to profer
himself to this charge; How shall we order the child? As both the Parents have
their part in the being of their children, so should they have in their
education; it is both unreasonable and unnatural in husbands, to cast this
burden upon the weaker vessel alone: it is no reason that she which alone has
had the pain of their birth, should have the pain of their breeding. Though the
charge be renewed to the wife, yet the speech is directed to the husband; the
act must be hers, his must be the ouer-sight; Let her observe all that I have
commanded her. The head must ouer-look the body; it is the duty of the husband
to be careful that the wife do her duty to GOD.

As yet, Manoah saw nothing but the outside of a man, and therefore offers the
Angel an answerable entertainment, wherein there is at once Hospitality and
Thankfulness. No man shall bring him good news from GOD, and go away
unrecompensed; How forward he is to feast him, whom he took for a Prophet:
their feet should be so much more beautiful, that bring us news of salvation,
by how much their errand is better.

That Manoah might learn to acknowledge God in this man, he sets off the
proffer of his thankfulness from himself, to God; and (as the same Angel which
appeared to Gideon) turns his feast into a sacrifice: And now he is Manoahs
solicitor to better thanks than he offered. How forward the good Angels are to
incite us unto piety! Either this was the Son himself, which said It was his
meat and drink to do his Fathers will, or else one of his spiritual
attendance of the same diet. We can never feast the Angels better, then with
our hearty sacrifices to God; Why do not we learn this lesson of them, whom we
propound to our selves as the patterns of our obedience? We shall be once like
the Angels in condition, why are we not in the mean time in our dispositions?
If we do not provoke, and exhort one another to godliness, and do care more
for a feast, then a sacrifice, our appetite is not Angelical, but brutish.

It was an honest mind in Manoah, whiles he was addressing a sacrifice to
God, yet not to neglect his messenger; feign would he know whom to honor; True
piety is not uncivil, but whiles it magnifies the author of all blessings,
is thankful to the means: Secondary causes are worthy of regard: neither
need it detract any thing from the praise of the agent, to honor the
instrument. It is not only rudeness, but injustice in those, which can be
content to hear good news from God, with contempt of the bearers.

The Angel will neither take nor give, but conceales his very name from Manoah.
All honest motions are not fit to be yielded to; good intentions are not
always sufficient grounds of condiscent. If we do sometimes ask what we know
not, it is no marvel if we receive not what we ask. In some cases, the
Angel of God tells his name unasked, as Gabriel to the Virgin; here, not by
entreaty: If it were the Angel of the covenant, he had as yet no name but
Jehovah; if a created Angel, he had no commission to tell his name; and a
faithful messenger has not a word beyond his charge: Besides that, he saw it
would be of more use for Manoah, to know him really, then by words. Oh the
bold presumption of those men, which (as if they had long soiourned in heaven,
and been acquainted with all the holy Legions of spirits) discourse of their
orders; of their titles, when this one Angels stoppes the mouth of a better man
then they, with Why do thou ask after my name, which is secret? Secret
things to God; revealed, to us and our children. No word can be so significant
as actions; The act of the Angel tells best who he was; He did wonderfully:
wonderful therefore was his name. So soon as ever the flame of the sacrifice
ascended, he mounted up in the smoke of it; that Manoah might see the
sacrifice, and the messenger belonged both to one God; and might know, both
whence to acknowledge the message, and whence to expect the performance.

Gideons Angel vanished at his sacrifice, but this in the sacrifice; that
Manoah might at once see both the confirmation of his promise, and the
acceptance of his obedience, whiles the Angel of God vouchsafed to perfume
himself with that holy smoke, and carry the sent of it up into heaven. Manoah
believed before, and craved no sign to assure him; God voluntarily confirms
it to him above his desire: To him that has, shall be given. Where there are
beginnings of faith, the mercy of GOD will add perfection.

How do we think Manoah and his wife looked to see this spectacle? They had
not spirit enough left to look one upon another: but in steed of looking up
cheerfully to heaven, they fall down to the earth, on their faces; as weak
eyes are dazeled with that which should comfort them. This is the infirmity of
our nature, to be afflicted with the causes of our joy; to be astonished with
our confirmations; to conceive death in that vision of God, wherein our life
and happiness consists. If this homely sight of the Angel did so confound good
Manoah, what shall become of the enemies of God, when they shall be brought
before the glorious Tribunal of the God of Angels?

I marvel not now, that the Angel appeared both times rather to the wife of
Manoah; her faith was the stronger of the two. It falls out sometimes, that the
weaker vessel is fuller; and that of more precious liquor: that wife is no
helper which is not ready to give spiritual comfort to her husband; The reason
was good, and irrefragable, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not
have received a burnt offering from us; God will not accept gifts, where he
inte^ds punishment, and professes hatred. The sacrifice of the wicked, is an
abomination to the Lord: If we can find assurance of Gods acceptance of our
sacrifices, we may be sure he loves our persons. If I incline to wickedness in
my heart, the Lord will not hear me; but the Lord has heard me.

Sampsons marriage.
OF all the Deliuerers of Israel, there is none of whom are reported so many
weaknesses, or so many miracles, as of Sampson: The news which the Angel
told of his conception and education, was not more strange, then the news of
his own choice; he but sees a daughter of the Philistims, and falls in love;
All this strength begins in infirmity; One maid of the Philistims,
ouer-comes that Champion which was given to overcome the Philistims: Even he
that was dieted with water, found heat of unfit desires: As his body was
strong notwithstanding that fare, so were his passions; without the gift of
continency, a low feed may impair nature, but not inordination. To follow
nothing but the eye in the choice of his wife, was a lust unworthy of a
Nazarite; This is to make the sense not a Counselor, but a Tyran.

Yet was Sampson in this very impotencie, dutiful; He did not in the
presumption of his strength ravish her forceably; He did not make up a
clandestine match without consulting his Parents, but he makes suit to them for
consent; Give me her to wife: As one that could be master of his own act, tho
not of his passion; and as one that had learned so to be a suitor, as not to
forget himself to be a son. Even in this deplored state of Israel, children
durst not presume to be their own caruers; how much less is this tolerable in a
welguided and Christian Commonwealth? Whosoever now dispose of themselves
without their Parents, they do wilfully vn-child themselves, and change
natural affection for violent.

It is no marvel if Manoah and his wife were astonished at this unequal
motion of their son; Did not the Angel (thought they) tell us that this child
should be consecrated to God, and must he begin his youth in unholy wedlock?
Did not the Angel say that our son should begin to save Israel from the
Philistims, and is he now captiued in his affections by a daughter of the
Philistims? Shall our deliverance from the Philistims begin in an alliance?
Have we bin so scrupulously careful, that he should eat no unclean thing,
and shall we now consent to an heathenish match? Now therefore they gravely
endeavor to cool this intemperate heat of his passion, with good counsel; as
those which well knew the inconveniences of an unequal yoke; corruption in
religion, alienation of affections, distraction of thoughts, conniuence at
Idolatry, death of zeal, dangerous underminings, and lastly, an unholy seed:
Who can blame them if they were unwilling to call a Philistim, daughter?

I wish Manoah could speak so loud that all our Israelites might hear him; Is
there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all Gods
people, that thou go to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistims? If
religion be any other then a cipher, how dare we not regard it in our most
important choice? Is she a fair Philistim? Why is not this deformity of the
soul more powerful to dissuade us, then the beauty of the face, or of metal
to allure us? To dote upon a fair skin when we see a Philistim under it, is
sensual and brutish.

Affection is not more blind, the^ deaf. In vain do the Parents seek to
alter a young man, not more strong in body, then in will; Tho he cannot defend
his desires, yet he pursues them; Get me her, for she pleases me. And
although it must needs be a weak motion that can plead no reason, but
appetite; yet the good Parents, since they cannot bow the affection of their
son with persuasion, dare not break it with violence. As it becomes not
children to be forward in their choice; so Parents may not be too peremptory
in their denial; It is not safe for children to overrun Parents in settling
their affections; nor for Parents (where the impediments are not very
material) to come short of their children, when the affections are once
settled: The one is disobedience; the other may be tyranny.

I know not whether I may excuse either Sampson in making this suit, or his
Parents in yielding to it, by a divine dispensation in both: For on the one
side, whiles the spirit of God notes, that as yet his parents knew not this was
of the Lord, it may seem that he knew it; and is it likely he would know and
not impart it? This alone was enough to win, yea to command his Parents; It is
not mine eye only, but the counsel of God, that leads me to this choice; The
way to quarrel with the Philistims, is to match with them; If I follow mine
affection, mine affection follows God, in this project. Surely, he that
commanded his Prophet afterward to marry an harlot, may have appointed his
Nazarite to marry with a Philistim: On the other side, whether it were of God
permitting, or allowing, I find not; It might so be of God, as all the evil in
the City; and then the interposition of Gods decree, shall be no excuse of
Sampsons infirmity. I would rather think, that God meant only to make a
Treacle of a Viper; and rather appointed to fetch good out of Sampsons evil,
then to approve that for good in Sampson, which in it self was evil.

When Sampson went on wooing, he might have made the sluggards excuse, There is
a Lion in the way: but he that could not be stayed by persuasion, will not by
fear. A Lion, young, wild, fierce, hungry, comes roaring upon him when he had
no weapon but his hand, no fence but his strength; the same Providence that
carried him to Timnah, brought the Lion to him. It has been ever the fashion
of God, to exercise his Champions with some initiatory incounters: Both Sampson
and David must first fight with Lions, then with Philistims; and he whose type
they bore, meets with that roaring Lion of the wilderness, in the very
threshold of his public charge. The same hand that prepared a Lion for
Sampson, has proportionable matches for every Christian; God never gives
strength, but he imployes it: Poverty, meets one like an armed man; Infamy,
like some furious mastiue, comes flying in the face of another; the wild Bore
out of the forest, or the bloody Tiger of persecution sets upon one; the
brawling curres of heretical prauitie or co^tentious neighborhood, are ready
to bait another: and by all these meaner and brutish adversaries, will God fit
us for greater conflicts: It is a pledge of our future victory over the
spiritual Philistims, if we can say, My soul has been among Lions. Come
forth now thou weak Christian, and behold this preparatorie battle of Sampson;
Do thou think GOD deals hardly with thee in matching thee so hard, and
calling thee forth to so many fraies? What do thou but repine at thine own
glory? How should thou be victorious, without resistance?

If the Parents of Sampson had now stood behind the hedge and seen this
encounter, they would have taken no further care of matching their son with
a Philistim; For who that should see a strong Lion ramping upon an unarmed man,
would hope for his life and victory? The beast came bristling up his fearful
mane, wafting his raised stern, his eyes sparkling with fury, his mouth
roaring out knells of his last passage, and breathing death from his nostrills,
and now rejoiced at so fair a prey. Surely, if the Lion had had no other
adversary then him whom he saw, he had not lost his hope; but now he could not
see that his Maker was his enemy; The spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson;
What is a beast in the hand of the Creator? He that struck the Lions with the
awe of Adam, Noah, and Daniel, subdued this rebellious beast to Sampson; What
marvel is it, if Sampson now tore him, as if it had bin a young Kid? If his
bones had been brass, and his skin plates of iron, all had been one: The right
hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass.

If that roaring Lion, that goes about continually seeking whom he may devour,
find us alone among the vineyards of the Philistims, where is our hope? Not in
our heels; he is swifter then we: not in our weapons; we are naturally
unarmed: not in our hands, which are weak and languishing; but in the spirit of
that GOD, by whom we can do all things: if God fight in us, who can resist him?
There is a stronger Lion in us, then that against us.

Sampson was not more valiant then modest; he made no words of this great
exploit: the greatest performers ever make the least noise; He that works
wonders alone, could say, See thou tell no man; where as those, whose hands are
most impotent, are busiest of their tongues. Great talkers show that they
desire only to be thought eminent, whereas the deepest waters are least heard.

But, whiles he concealed this event from others, he pondred it in himself;
and when he returned to Timnath, went out of the way to see his dead
Adversary, and could not but recall to himself his danger, and deliverance;
Here the beast met me, thus he fought, thus I slew him. The very dead Lion
taught Sampson thankfulness: there was more honey in this thought, then in the
carcass. The mercies of GOD are ill bestowed upon us, if we cannot step
aside to view the monuments of his deliverances; Dangers may be at once past,
and forgotten. As Sampson had not found his honeycomb, if he had not turned
aside to see his Lion; so we shall lose the comfort of Gods benefits, if we do
not renew our perils by meditation.

Least any thing should befall Sampson, wherein is not some wonder, his Lion
does more amaze him dead, then alive; For lo, that carcass is made an Hiue;
and the bitterness of death, is turned into the sweetness of honey. The Be, a
nice and dainty creature, builds her cells in an unsavory carcass; the carcass
that promised nothing but strength, and annoyance, now offers comfort and
refreshing; and in a sort, pays Sampson for the wrong offered. Oh the
wonderful goodness of our GOD, that can change our terrors into pleasure, and
can make the greatest evils beneficial! Is any man, by his humiliation under
the hand of GOD, grown more faithful, and conscionable? there is honey out of
the Lion. Is any man by his temptation or fall become more circumspect? there
also is honey out of the Lion: there is no Sampson to whom every Lion does not
yield honey: Every Christian is the better for his evils; yea, Satan himself,
in his exercise of Gods children, aduantageth them.

Sampson does not disdain these sweets, because he finds them uncleanly laid;
His diet was strict, and forbad him any thing that sauour'd of legal impurity;
yet he eats the hony-combe out of the belly of a dead beast; Good may not be
refused, because the means are accidentally evil; Honey is honey still, tho in a
dead Lion. Those are less wise, and more scrupulous then Sampson, which
abhor the graces of God, because they find them in ill vessels: One cares
not for the Preachers true doctrine, because his life is evil; Another will
not take a good receipt from the hand of a Physician, because he is given to
unlawful studies; A 3d, will not receive a deserved contribution from the hands
of a Usurer. It is a weak neglect not to take the honey, because we hate the
Lion: Gods children have right to their fathers blessings, wheresoever they
find them.

The match is now made; Sampson (tho a Nazarite) has both a wedding, and
afeast; God never misliked moderate solemnities in the seuerest life; and yet
this Bridall-feast was long, the space of seven days. If Sampson had matched
with the best Israelite, this celebration had been no greater; neither had this
perhaps been so long, if the custom of the place had not required it. Now I
do not hear him plead his Nazaritisme, for a color of singularity: It is
both lawful and fit, in things not prohibited, to conform our selves to the
manners and rites of those with whom we live.

That Sampson might think it an honor to match with the Philistims, he whom
before the Lion found alone, is now accompanied with thirty attendants; They
called them companions, but they meant them for spies: The courtesies of the
world are hollow and and thanklesse; neither does it ever purpose so ill, as
when it shows fairest. None are so near to danger, as those whom it
entertains with smiles; whiles it frowns, we know what to trust to; but the
favors of it are worthy of nothing but fears and suspicion: Open defiance is
better then false love.

Austeritie had not made Sampson uncivil; he knows how to entertain
Philistims with a formal familiarity: And that his intellectual parts might
be approved answerable to his arms, he will first try maisteries of wit, and
set their brains on work with harmless thoughts; His riddle shall appose
them, and a deep wager shall hind the solution; Thirty shirts, and thirty
suits of raymem; neither their loss, nor their gain could be much, besides
the victory, being divided unto thirty partners: but Sampsons must needs be
both ways very large, who must give or receive thirty alone. The seven days
of the feast are expiring, and yet they which had been all this while devouring
of Sampsons meat, cannot tell who that cater should be from whence meat should
come. In course of nature, the strong feeder takes-in meat, and sends out
filthiness; but, that meat and sweetness should come from a devouring stomach,
was beyond their apprehension.

And as fools and dogs use to begin in jest, and end in earnest, so did
these Philistims; and therefore they force the Bride to entice her husband to
betray himself. Covetousness and Pride have made them impatient of loss: and
now they threat to fire her, and her fathers house, for recompense of their
entertainment, rather then they will lose a small wager to an Israelite.
Somewhat of kin to these savage Philistims, are those choleric Gamesters,
which if the dice be not their friend, fall out with GOD, curse (that which is
not) Fortune; strike their fellows, and are ready to take vengeance upon
themselves: Those men are unfit for sport, that lose their patience together
with their wager.

I do not wonder that a Philistim woman loved herself and her fathers family,
more then an Israelitish Bridegroom; and if she bestowed tears upon her
husband, for the ransom of them. Sampson himself taught her this difference,
I have not told it my father or my mother, and should I tell it thee? If she
had not been as she was, fhee had neither done this to Sampson, nor heard this
from him; Matrimonial respects are dearer then natural; It was the law of him
that ordained marriage (before ever Parents were) that Parents should be
forsaken, for the husband or wife: But now, Israelitish Parents are worthy of
more entireness, then a wife of the Philistims; And yet, whom the Lion could
not conquer, the tears of a woman have conquered. Sampson never bewrayed
infirmity but in vxoriousnes; What assurance can there be of him that has a
Philistim in his bosom? Adam, the perfectest man, Sampson, the strongest man,
Solomon, the wisest man, were betrayed with the flattery of their helpers. As
there is no comfort comparable to a faithful yokefellow, so woe be to him that
is matched with a Philistim.

It could not but much disco^tent Sampson, to see that his adversaries had
plowed with his heifer, and that upon his own back; now therefore he pays his
wager to their cost. Ascalon the City of the Philistims is his wardrobe, he
fetches thence thirty suits, lined with the lives of the owners: He might
with as much ease have slain these thirty companions, which were the Authors
of this evil; but his promise forbad him whiles he was to clothe their bodies,
to unclothe their souls; and that spirit of GOD, which stird him up to
revenge, directed him in the choice of the subjects. If we wonder to see
thirty throats cut for their suits, we may easily know, that this was but
the occasion of that slaughter, whereof the cause was their oppression, and
tyranny. David slew two hundred Philistims for their fore-skinnes: but the
ground of his act was their hostility. It is just with God to destine what
enemies he pleases, to execution: It is not to be expostulated why this man is
stricken rather then another, when both are Philistims.

Sampsons victory.
I Can no more justify Sampson in the leaving of his wife, then in the choosing
her; He chose her because she pleased him; and because she despised him, he
left her: Though her fear made her false to him in his Riddle, yet she was
true to his bed; That vveake treachery was worthy of a check, not a desertion.
All the passions of Sampson were strong, like himself: but (as vehement motions
are not lasting) this vehement wind is soon allayd; and he is now returning
with a Kid to win her that had offended him, and to renew that feast which
ended in her unkindness. Slight occasions may not break the knot of
matrimonial love; and if any just offense have slackned it on either part, it
must be fastened again by speedy reconciliation.

Now Sampsons father in law shows himself a Philistim, the true Parent of her
that betrayed her husband; for no sooner is the Bridegroom departed, then he
changes his son: what pretense of friendship soever he made, a true
Philistim will soon be weary of an Israelite. Sampson has not so many days
liberty to enjoy his wedding, as he spent in celebrating it: Marriage has
been ever a sacred institution, and who but a Philistim would so easily violate
it? One of his thirty companions enioyes his wife, together with his suit; and
now laughes to be a partner of that bed, whereon he was an attendant. The good
nature of Sampson, having forgotten the first wrong, carried him to a proffer
of familiarity, and is repulsed; but with a gentle violence, I had thought
thou had hated her. Lawful wedlock may not be dissolved by imaginations, but
by proofs.

Who shall stay Sampson from his own wife? He that slew the Lion in the way
of his wooing, and before whom thousands of the Philistims could not stand, yet
suffers himself to be resisted, by him that was once his father in law,
without any return of private violence.

Great is the force of duty once conceived, even to the most unworthy; This
thought, I was his son, binds the hands of Sampson: Else how easily might
he that slew those thirty Philistims for their suits, have destroyed this
family for his wife? How unnatural are those mouths, that can curse the
loins from which they are proceeded; and those hands that dare lift up
themselves against the means of their life and being?

I never read that Sampson slew any but by the motion and assistance of the
spirit of GOD: and the Divine wisdom has reserved these offenders to another
revenge; Judgment must descend from others to the^, since the wrong proceeded
from others, by them. In the very marriage God foresaw and intended this
parting, and in the parting this punishment upon the Philistims. If the
Philistims had not bin as much enemies to God, as to Sampson; enemies to Israel
in their oppression, no less then to Sampson, in this particular injury, that
purpose and execution of revenge, had been no better then wicked: Now he to
whom vengeance belongs, sets him on work, and makes the act justice: when he
commands, even very cruelty is obedience.

It was a busy and troublesome project of Sampson, to use the foxes for his
revenge: for not without great labor and many hands could so many wild
creatures be got together, neither could the wit of Sampson want other
devises of hostility; But he meant to find out such a punishment, as might in
some sort answer the offense, and might imply as much contempt, as trespass.
By wiles, seconded with violence, had they wronged Sampson, in extorting his
secret, and taking away his wife: and what other Emblem could these foxes tied
together present unto them, then wiliness combined by force, to work mischief?

These foxes destroy their corn, before he which sent them, destroy the
persons. Those judgments which begin in outward things, end in the owners; A
stranger that had been of neither side, would have said, What pity it is to
see good corn thus spoiled: If the creature be considered apart from the
owners, it is good; and therefore if it be misspent, the abuse reflects upon
the maker of it; but if it be looked upon, with respect to an ill master, the
best use of it, is to perish. He therefore that slew the Egyptian cattle with
murrain, and smote their fruit with haile-stones; he that consumed the vines
of Israel with the Palmer-worme, and Caterpiller, and Canker-worme; sent also
foxes by the hand of Sampson, into the fields of the Philistims. Their corn
was too good for them to enjoy, not too good for the foxes to burn up; God had
rather his creature should perish any way, then serve for the lust of the
wicked.

There could not be such secrecy in the catching of three hundred foxes, but it
might well be known who had procured them: Rumor will swiftly fly of things
not done: but of a thing so notoriously executed, it is no marvel if Fame be a
blab. The mention of the offense draws in the provocation: and now the wrong
to Sampson is scanned and revenged; Because the fields of the Philistims, are
burned for the wrong done to Sampson by the Timnite in his daughter, therefore
the Philistims burn the Timnite and his daughter. The tying of the firebrand
between two foxes, was not so witty a policy, as the setting of a fire of
dissension betwixt the Philistims: What need Sampson be his own executioner,
when his enemies will undertake that charge? There can be no more pleasing
prospect to an Israelite, then to see the Philistims together by the ears.

If the wife of Sampson had not feared the fire for herself, and her fathers
house, she had not betrayed her husband, her husband had not thus plagued the
Philistims, the Philistims had not consumed her and her father with fire: now
she leapes into that flame which she meant to avoid. That evil which the
wicked feared, meets them in their flight: How many in a fear of poverty,
seek to gain unconscionably, and die beggars? How many to shun pain and
danger have yielded to evil, and in the long run have been met in the teeth
with that mischief which they had hoped to have left behind them? How many, in
a desire to eschew the shame of men, have fallen into the confusion of God?
Both good and evil are sure paymasters at the last.

He that was so soon pacified toward his wife, could not but have thought
this revenge more then enough, if he had not rather wielded Gods quarrel then
his own; He knew that GOD had raised him up on purpose, to be a scourge to the
Philistims, whom as yet he had angered more then punished: As if these therefore
had been but florishes before the fray, he stirs up his courage, and strikes
them both hip and thigh, with a mighty plague. That God which can do nothing
imperfecty, where he begins either mercy or judgment, will not leave till he
have happily finished: As it is in his favors, so in his punishments; One
stroke draws on another.

The Israelites were but slaves, and the Philistims were their masters: so much
more indignely threfore must they needs take it, to be thus affronted by one of
their own vassals: yet shall we commend the moderation of these Pagans;
Sampson, being not mortally wronged by one Philistim, falls foul upon the
whole Nation; the Philistims hainously offended by Sampson, do not fall upon
the whole Tribe of Judah, but being mustered together, call to them for
satisfaction from the person offending: the same hand of God which wrought
Sampson to revenge, restrained them from it; It is no thank to themselves,
that sometimes wicked men cannot be cruel.

The men of Judah, are by their fear made friends to their Tyrans, and traitors
to their friend; it was in their cause that Sampson had shed blood, and yet
they conspire with ^he Philistims, to destroy their own flesh and blood. So
shall the Philistims be quit with Israel, that as Sampson by Philistims,
revenged himself of Philistims; so they of an Israelite, by the hand of
Israelites. That which open enemies dare not attempt, they work by false
brethren; and these are so much more perilous, as they are more entire.

It had been no less easy for Sampson to have slain those thousands of Judah
that came to bind him, then those other of the Philistims, that meant to kill
him bound: And what if he had said; Are ye turned Traitors to your Deliverer?
your blood be upon your own heads. But the spirit of God (without whom he
could not kill either beast, or man) would never stir him up to kill his
brethren, tho degenerated into Philistims; they have more power to bind him,
then he to kill them: Israelitish blood was precious to him, that made no more
scruple of killing a Philistim, then a Lion: That bondage and usury that was
allowed to a Jew from a Pagan, might not be exacted from a Jew.

The Philistims that had before plowed with Sampsons heifer in the case of the
Riddle, are now plowing a worse furrow with an heifer more his own. I am
ashamed to hear these cowardly Jews say, Know thou not that the Philistims
are Lords over us? Why have thou done thus unto us? We are therefore come to
bind thee: Whereas they should have said; We find these tyrannical
Philistims to vsurp dominion over us; thou have happily begun to shake off
their yoke, and now we are come to second thee with our service; the valor of
such a Captain shall easily lead us forth to liberty; We are ready either to
die with thee, or to be freed by thee: A fearful man can never be a true
friend; rather then incur any danger, he will be false to his own soul. Oh
cruel mercy of these men of Judah! We will not kill thee, but we will bind
thee, and deliver thee to the hands of the Philistims, that they may kill thee.
As if it had not been much worse to die an ignominious and tormenting death, by
the hands of Philistims, then to be at once dispatched by them, which wished
either his life safe, or his death easy.

When Saul was pursued by the Philistims upon the mountains of Gilboa, he
could say to his Armorbearer, Draw forth thy sword, and kill me, least the
uncircumcised come and thrust me thorough, and mock me; and at last, would
rather fall upon his own sword, then theirs: And yet these cosins of Sampson,
can say, We will not kill thee, but we will bind thee, and deliver thee. It
was no excuse to these Israelites, that Sampsons binding had more hope, then
his death; It was more in the extraordinary mercy of God, then their will,
that he was not tied with his last bonds: Such is the goodness of the
Almighty, that he turns the cruel intentions of wicked men to an advantage.

Now these Jews that might have let themselves loose from their own bondage,
are binding their Deliverer, whom yet they knew able to have resisted. In the
greatest strength, there is use of patience; There was more fortitude in this
suffering, then in his former actions; Sampson abides to be tied by his own
countrymen, that he may have the glory of freeing him self victoriously. Even
so, O Savior, our better Nazarite, thou which could have called to thy
Father, and have had twelve legions of Angels for thy rescue, would be bound
voluntarily, that thou might triumph; So the blessed Martyrs were racked, and
would not be losed, because they expected a better resurrection: If we be not
as well ready to suffer ill, as to do good, we are not fit for the
consecration of God.

To see Sampson thus strongly manicled, and exposed to their full revenge,
could not but be a glad spectacle to these Philistims; and their joy was so
full, that it could not but fly forth of their mouths in shouting and
laughter; whom they saw loose with terror, it is pleasure to see bound. Is is
the sport of the spiritual Philistims, to see any of Gods Nazarites fettered
with the cords of iniquity; and their Imps are ready to say, Aha, so would we
have it. But the event answers their false joy, with that clause of triumph,
Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy: tho J fall, yet I shall rise again. How
soon was the countenance of these Philistims changed, and their shouts turned
into shriekings? The spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson, and then, what are
cords to the Almighty? His new bonds are as flax burnt with fire; and he rouzes
up himself, like that young Lion whom he first incountred, and flies upon
those cowardly adversaries, who if they had not seen his cords, durst not have
seen his face. If they had been so many devils, as men, they could not have
stood before that spirit, which lifted up the heart and hand of Sampson. Wicked
men never see fairer prospect, then when they are upon the very threshold of
destruction; Security and Ruin, are so close bordering upon each other, that
where we see the face of the one, we may be sure the other is at his back.
Thus did thou, O blessed Savior, when thou were fastened to the Cross, when
thou layest bound in the grave with the cords of death; thus did thou
miraculously raise up thy self, and vanquish thine enemies, and lead
captivity captive; Thus do all thy holy ones when they seem most forsaken, and
laid open to the insultation of the world, find thy spirit mighty to their
deliverance, and the discomfiture of their malicious adversaries.

Those three thousand Israelites were not so ill advised, as to come up into
the rock unweaponed, to apprehend Sampson; Sampson therefore might have had his
choice of swords, or spears, for this skirmish with the Philistims; yet he
leaves all the munition of Israel, and finding the new iaw-bone of an Ass,
takes that up in his hand, and with that base instrument of death, sends 1000
Philistimes to their place. All the swords and shields of the armed Philistims,
cannot resist that contemptible Engine, which has now left a thousand bodies,
as dead as the carcass of that beast, whose bone it was. This victory was not
in the weapon, was not in the arm: it was in the spirit of God, which moved
the weapon in the arm. O God, if the means be weak, yet thou art strong:
Through God we shall do great acts; Yea, I can do all things through him that
strengthens me. See thou a poor Christian, which by weak counsel has
obtained to overcome a tentation, there is the Philistim vanquished with a sorry
iaw-bone.

It is no marvel, if he were thus admirably strong, and victorious, whose
bodily strength God meant to make a type of the spiritual power of Christ: And
behold, as the three thousands of Judah stood still gazing with their weapons in
their hands, while Sampson alone subdued the Philistims; so did men and Angels
stand looking upon the glorious atchieuements of the Son of God, who might
justly say, I have trod the wine press alone.

Both the Sampsons complained of thirst; The same GOD which gave his Champion
victory, gave him also refreshing; and by the same means; The same bone yields
him both conquest, and life; and is of a weapon of offense, turned into a well
of water: He that fetched water out of the flint for Israel, fetches it out of a
bone for Sampson. What is not possible to the infinite power of that Almighty
Creator, that made all things of nothing? He can give Sampson honey from the
mouth of the Lion, and water from the mouth of the Ass. Who would not
cheerfully depend upon that God, which can fetch moisture out of dryness, and
life out of death?

Sampsons End.
I Cannot wonder more at Sampsons strength then his weakness; He that began
to cast away his love upon a wife of the Philistims, goes on to misspend
himself upon the harlots of the Philistims: He that did not so much overcome
the men, as the women overcome him. His affections blinded him first, ere the
Philistims could do it: would he else, after the effusion of so much of their
blood, have suffered his lust to carry him within their walls, as one that
cared more for his pleasure, then his life? Oh strange debauchednesse, and
presumption of a Nazarite: The Philistims are up in Arms to kill him; he
offers himself to their City, to their stews, and dares expose his life to
one of their harlots, who^ he had slaughtered. I would have looked to have
seen him betake himself to his stronger rock, then that of Etam, and by his
austere devotion, to seek protection of him, of whom he received strength: but
now, as if he had forgotten his consecration, I find him turned Philistim for
his bed, and of a Nazarite, scarce a man. In vain does he nourish his hair,
whiles he feeds these passions. How usually do vigor of body, and infirmity
of mind lodge under one roof? On the contrary, a wearish outside is a strong
motive to mortification: Sampsons victories have subdued him, and have made him
first a slave to lewd desires, and then to the Philistims. I may safely say,
that more vessels miscarrie with a fair gale, then with a tempest.

Yet was not Sampson so blinded with lust, as not at all to look before him;
he foresaw the morning would be dangerous, the bed of his fornication therefore
could hold him no longer the^ midnight; then he rises, and in a mock of those
ambushes which the Azabites laid for him, he carries away the gates wherein
they thought to have incaged him. If a temptation have drawn us aside, to lie
down to sin, it is happy for us if we can arise ere we be surprised with
judgment. Sampson had not left his strength in the bed of an harlot; neither
had that God which gave it him, stripped him of it with his clothes, when he laid
him down in uncleanness: His mercy uses not to take vantage of our
unworthiness, but even when we cast him off, holds us fast. That bountiful
hand leaves us rich of common graces, when we have misspent our better store:
Like as our first Parents, when they had spoiled themselves of the image of
their Creator, yet were left vvealthie of noble faculties of the soul.

I find Sampson come off from his sin with safety; he runs away lightly
with an heavier weight then the gates of Azzah, the burden of an ill act.
Present impunity argues not an abatement of the wickedness of his sin, or of
the dislike of God; nothing is so worthy of pity, as a sinners peace: Good is
not therefore good because it prospers, but because it is commanded; Evil is
not evil because it is punished, but because it is forbidden.

If the holy Parents of Sampson, lived to see these outrages of their Nazarite,
I doubt whether they did not repent them of their joy ^o hear news of a
son. It is a ^hame to see how he that might not drink wine, is drunk with
the cup of fornications; His lust carries him from Azzah to the plain of Sorek,
and now has found a Dalilah, that shall pay him for all his former
vncleaneness. Sin is steep and slippery; and if after one fall we have found
where to stand, it is the praise, not of our footing, but of the hand of God.

The Princes of the Philistims knew already where Sampsons weakeness lay,
though not his strength; and therefore they would entise his harlot by gifts, to
entise him by her daliance, to betray him self. It is no marvel, if she
which would be filthy, would be also perfidious. How could Sampson choose but
think, if lust had not bewitched him, She whose body is mercenary to me,
will easily sell me to others; She will be false, if she will be an harlot? A
wide conscience will swallow any sin: Those that have once thrall'd themselves
to a known evil, can make no other difference of sins, but their own loss,
or advantage: A liar will steal; a thief can kill; a cruel man can be a
Traitor; a drunkard can falsify; wickedness once entertained, can put on any
shape: Trust him in nothing, that makes not a conscience of every thing.

Was there ever such another motion made to a reasonable man? Tell me wherein
thy great strength lies, and wherewith thou may be bound to do thee hurt.
Who would not have spurned such a suitor out of doors? What will not impudency
ask, or stupiditie receive? He that killed the thousand Philistims for
coming to bind him, indures this harlot of the Philistims to consult with
himself of binding him; and when upon the trial of a false answer, he saw so
apparent treachery, yet wilfully betrays his life by her, to his enemies: All
sins, all passions have power to infatuate a man; but lust most of all. Never
man that had drunk flagons of wine, had less reason, then this Nazarite; Many
a one loses his life: but this casts it away; not in hatred of himself, but in
love to a strumpet. We wonder that a man could possibly be so sottish, and yet
we our selves by tentation become no less insensate; Sinful pleasures like a
common Dalilah, lodge in our bosoms, we know they aim at nothing but the
death of our soul; we will yield to them, and die: Every willing sinner is a
Sampson; let us not inuey against his senselesnes, but our own: Nothing is so
gross and unreasonable to a well disposed mind, which tentation will not
represent fit, and plausible: No soul can out of his own strength, secure
himself from that sin which he most detesteth.

As an hood-winkt man sees some little glimmering of light, but not enough to
guide him; so did Sampson, who had reason enough left him to make trial of
Dalilah, by a crafty misinformation; but not enough upon that trial, to
distrust, and hate her; he had not wit enough to deceive her thrice; not
enough to keep himself from being deceived by her. It is not so great wisdom
to prove the^ whom we distrust, as it is folly to trust them whom we have
found treacherous: Thrice had he seen the Philistims in her chamber, ready to
susprise him, upon her bonds; and yet will needs be a slave to his Traitor.
Warning not taken, is a certain presage of destruction; and if once neglected
it receive pardon, yet thrice is desperate.

What man would ever play thus with his own ruin? His harlot binds him, and
calls-in her executioners to cut his throat; he rises to save his own life,
and suffers them to carry away theirs, in peace. Where is the courage of
Sampson? Where his zeal? He that killed the Philistims for their clothes; He
that slew a thousand of them in the field at once; in this quarrel, now
suffers them in his chamber unrevenged. Whence is this? His hands were strong,
but his heart was effeminate; his harlot had diuerted his affection. Whosoever
slackens the raines to his sensual appetite, shall soon grow unfit for the
calling of GOD. Sampson has broke the green withies, the new ropes, the woofe
of his hair, and yet still suffers himself fettered with those invisible
bonds of an harlots love; and can endure her to say, How can thou say, I love
thee, when thy heart is not with me; thou have mocked me these three times:
Whereas he should rather have said to her; How can thou challenge any love
from me, that have this thrice sought my life? Or can thou think my mocks a
sufficient revenge of this treachery? But contrarily, he melts at this fire;
and by her importunate insinuations, is wrought against himself. Weariness of
solicitation, has won some to those actions, which at the first motion they
despised; like as we see some suitors are dispatched, not for the equity of the
cause, but the trouble of the prosccution; because it is more easy to yield,
not more reasonable. It is more safe to keep our selves out of the noise of
suggestions, then to stand upon our power of denial.

Who can pity the loss of that strength which was so abused? who can pity
him the loss of his locks, which after so many warnings can sleep in the lap
of Dalilah? It is but just that he should rise up from thence, shaven and
feeble; not a Nazarite, scarce a man. If his strength had lain in his hair, it
had been out of himself; it was not therefore in his locks, it was in his
consecration, whereof that hair was a sign. If the razor had come sooner upon
his head, he had ceased to be a Nazarite; and the gift of God had at once
ceased, with the calling of GOD; not for the want of that excretion, but for
the want of obedience. If God withdraw his graces, when he is too much
provoked, who can complain of his mercy? He that sleeps in sin, must look to
wake in loss, and weakeness. Could Sampson think, Though I tell her my
strength lies in my hair, yet she will not cut it; or though she do cut my
hair, yet shall I not lose my strength; that now he rises and shakes himself
in hope of his former vigor? Custom of success, makes men confident in their
sins, and causes them to mistake an arbitrary tenure for a perpetuity.

His eyes were the first offenders, which betrayed him to lust: and now they
are first pulled out; and he is led a blind captive to Azzah, where he was
first captiued to his lust. The Azzahites, which lately saw him not without
terror, running lightly away with their gates at midnight, see him now in his
own perpetual night, struggling with his chains: and that he may not want
pain, together with his bondage, he must grind in his prison.

As he passed the street, every boy of the Philistims could throw stones at
him, every woman could laugh, and shout at him; and what one Philistim does not
say, whiles he lashes him unto blood, There is for my brother, or my kinsman,
whom thou slewest. Who can look to run away with a sin, when Sampson a
Nazarite is thus plagued? This great heart could not but have broken with
indignation, if it had not pacified it self with the conscience of the just
desert of all this vengeance.

It is better for Sampson to be blind in prison, then to abuse his eyes in
Sorek: yea, I may safely say, he was more blind when he saw licentiously,
then now, that he sees not; He was a greater slave when he served his
affections, then now in grinding for the Philistims. The loss of his eyes
shows him his sin; neither could he see how ill he had done, till he saw
not.

Even yet, still the God of mercy looked upon the blindness of Sampson, and in
these fetters enlarges his heart from the worse prison of his sin; His hair
grew together with his repentance, and his strength with his hair. Gods
merciful humiliations of his own, are sometimes so severe, that they seem to
differ little from desertions; yet at the worst, he loves us bleeding: and when
we have smarted enough, we shall feel it.

What thankful Idolaters were these Philistims? They could not but know,
that their bribes, and their Dalilah, had delivered Sampson to them, and yet
they sacrifice to their Dagon; and, as those that would be liberal in casting
favors upon a senseless Idol (of whom they could receive none) they cry out,
Our God has delivered our enemy into our hands. Where was their Dagon, when a
thousand of his clients were slain with an asses iaw? There was more strength
in that bone, then in all the makers of this God; and yet these vain Pagans
say, Our God. It is the quality of Superstition to mis-interpret all events,
and to feed it self with the conceit of those favors, which are so far from
being done, that their Authors never were. Why do not we learn zeal of
Idolaters? And if they be so forward in acknowledgeme^t of their deliverances
to a false deity; how cheerfully should we ascribe ours to the true? O God,
whatsoever be the means, thou art the Author of all our success: Oh that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and tell the wonders that he does for
the sons of men!

No Musician would serve for this feast, but Sampson; he must now be their
sport, which was once their terror; that he might want no sorrow, scorn is
added to his misery: Every wit, and hand plays upon him; Who is not ready to
cast his bone, and his jest at such a captive? So as doubtless he wished
himself no less deaf, then blind, and that his soul might have gone out
with his eyes. Oppression is able to make a wise man mad: and the greater the
courage is, the more painful the insultation.

Now Sampson is punished, shall the Philistims escape? If the judgment of God
begin at his own, what shall become of his enemies? This advantage shall
Sampson make of their tyranny, that now death is no punishment to him, his
soul shall fly forth in this bitterness, without pain; and that his dying
revenge shall be no less sweet to him, then the liberty of his former life: He
could not but feel God mocked through him; and therefore whiles they are
scoffing, he prays; his seriousness hopes to pay them for all those jests. If
he could have bin thus earnest with God, in his prosperity, the Philistims had
vvanted this laughing stock: No devotion is so fervent, as that which arises
from extremity; O Lord God, I pray thee think upon me; O God I beseech thee
strengthen me at this time only. Tho Sampsons hair were shorter, yet he knew
Gods hand was not; as one therefore that had yet eyes ^ow to see him that was
invisible, and whose faith was recovered before his strength, he sues to that
God, which was a party in this indignity, for power to revenge his wrongs,
more then his own: It is zeal that moves him, and not malice; his renewed
faith tells him, that he was destined to plague the Philistims: and reason
tells him, that his blindness puts him out of the hope of such another
opportunity. Knowing therefore, that this play of the Philistims must end in his
death, he recollects all the forces of his soul and body, that his death may
be a punishment in steed of a disport; and that his soul may be more
victorious in the parting, then in the animation: and so addresses himself
both to die, and kill; as one, whose soul shall not feel his own dissolution,
whiles it shall carry so many thousand Philistims with it to the pit. All the
acts of Sampson are for wonder, not for imitation: So did thou, O blessed
Savior, our better Sampson, conquer in dying; and triumphing upon the chariot
of the Cross, did lead captivity captive; The law, sin, death, hell, had
never bin vanquished, but by thy death; All our life, liberty, and glory,
springs out of thy most precious blood.

Michaes Idolatry.
THE mother of Micha has lost her silver, and now she falls to cursing: She
did afterward but change the form of her God; her silver was her God, ere it
did put on the fashion of an Image: Else she had not so much cursed to lose it,
if it had not too much possessed her in the keeping. A carnal heart cannot
forgo that wherein it delights, without impatience; cannot be impatient,
without curses: whereas the man that has learned to enjoy GOD, and use the
world, smiles at a shipwreck, and pitties a thief, and cannot curse, but pray.

Micha had so little grace, as to steal from his mother; and that out of
wantonness, not out of necessity; for, if she had not been rich, so much
could not have been stolen from her; and now, he has so much grace as to
restore it; her curses have fetched again her treasures; He cannot so much love
the money, as he fears her imprecations; Wealth seems too dear bought with a
curse; Tho his fingers were false, yet his heart was tender. Many that make not
conscience of committing sin, yet make conscience of facing it: It is well
for them, that they are but nouices in evil; those whom custom has fleshed
in sin, can either deny and forfweare, or excuse and defend it: their seared
hearts cannot feel the gnawing of any remorse; and their forhead has learned
to be as impudent, as their heart is senseless.

I see no argument of any holiness in the mother of Micha; Her curses were
sin to her self, yet Micha dares not but fear them. I know not whether the
causeless curse be more worthy of pity, or derifion; it hurts the author, not
his adversary: but the deserved curses, that fall even from unholy mouths, are
worthy to be feared: How much more should a man hold himself blasted with the
just imprecations of the godly? What metal are those made of, that can
applaude themselves in the bitter curses which their oppressions have wrung
from the poor, and rejoice in these signs of their prosperity?

Neither yet was Micha more stricken with his mothers curses, then with the
conscience of sacrilege: so soon as he finds there was a purpose of devotion
in this treasure, he dares not conceal it, to the prejudice (as he thought) of
GOD, more then of his mother. What shall we say to the palate of those men,
which as they find no good relish but in stolen waters; so best in those, which
are stolen from the fountain of God? How soon has the old woman changed her
note? Even now she passed an indefinite curse upon her son for stealing; and
now she blesses him absolutely, for restoring, Blessed be my son of the
Lord. She has forgotten the theft, when she sees the restitution; How much
more shall the God of mercies be more pleased with our confession, then
provoked with our sin?

I doubt not but this silver, and this superstition came out of Egypt, together
with the mother of Micha. This history is not so late in time, as in place; for
the Tribe of Dan was not yet settled in that first division of the promised
land; so as this old woman had seen both the Idolatry of Egypt, and the golden
calfe in the wilderness; and no doubt contributed some of her earings to that
Deity; and after all the plagues which she saw inflicted upon her brethren,
for that Idol of Horeb, and Baal-Peor, she still reserues a secret love to
superstition, and now shows it. Where mis-religion has once possessed it
self of the heart, it is very hardly cleansed out; but (like the plague) it will
hang in the very clothes, and after long lurking, break forth in an unexpected
infection; and old wood is the aptest to take this fire: After all the ayring
in the Desert, Michaes mother will smell of Egypt.

It had been better the silver had been stolen then thus bestowed; for now they
have so employed it, that it has stolen away their hearts from GOD; and yet,
while it is molten into an Image, they think it dedicated to the Lord; If
Religion might be judged according to the intention, there should scarce be any
idolatry in the world. This woman loved her silver enough; and if she had not
thought this costly piety, worth thanks, she knew which way to have employed
her stock to advantage: Even evil actions have oft-times good meanings, and
those good meanings are answered with evil recompenses; Many a one bestows
their cost, their labor, their blood, and receives torment in steed of thanks.

Behold a superstitious son of a superstitious mother; She makes a God, and he
harbors it; Yea, (as the stream is commonly broader then the head) he
exceedes his mother in evil: He has an house of Gods, an Ephod, Teraphin; and
that he might be complete in his devotion, he makes his son his Priest, and
feoffes that sin upon his son, which he received from his mother. Those
sins which nature conuayes not to us, we have by imitation; Every action
and gesture of the Parents, is an example to the child; and the mother, as she
is more tender over her son, so by the power of a reciprocal love, she can
work most upon his inclination; Whence it is that in the history of the
Israelitish Kings, the mothers name is commonly noted: and as ciuilly, so also
morally, The birth follows the belly; Those sons may bless their second
birth, that are delivered from the sins of their education.

Who cannot but think how far Micha ouer-lookt all his fellow Israelites, and
thought them profane and godless in comparison of himself? How did he
secretly clap himself on the breast, as the man, whose happiness it was to
ingross religion from all the tribes of Israel, and little can imagine, that
the further he runs, the more out of the way. Can an Israelite be thus
Paganish? O Micha! how has superstition bewitched thee, that thou can not
see rebellion in every of these actions, yea in every circumstance, rebellion?
What, more Gods then one? An house of Gods, beside Gods house? An Image of
silver to the invisible GOD? An Ephod, and no Priest? A Priest besides the
family of Leui? A Priest of thine own begetting, of thine own consecration?
What monsters does man's imagination produce when it is forsaken of God? It is
well seen there is no King in Israel; If God had been their King, his laws had
ruled them: If Moses or Joshua had been their King, their sword had awed them;
If any other, the courses of Israel could not have been so headless. We are
beholden to Government for order, for peace, for religion; Where there is no
King, every one will be a King, yea a God to himself; We are worthy of
nothing but confusion, if we bless not GOD for authority.

It is no marvel if Levites wandered for maintenance, whiles there was no King
in Israel; The tithes and offerings were their due: if these had been paid,
none of the holy Tribe needed to shift his station. Even where royal power
seconds the claim of the Leuite, the injustice of men shortens his right. What
should become of the Levites if there were no King? And what of the Church if no
Levites? No King therefore, no Church; How could the impotent child live
without a Nurse? Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nurses,
says God. Nothing more argues the disorder of any Church, or the decay of
religion, then the forced straggling of the Levites. There is hope of growth,
when Micha rides to seek a Leuite; but when the Leuite comes to seek a service
of Micha, it is a sign of gasping devotion.

Micha was no obscure man; all Mount Ephraim could not but take notice of his
domestical Gods. This Leuite could not but hear of his disposition, of his
misdeuotion; yet want of maintenance, no less then conscience, draws him on,
to the danger of an idolatrous patronage: Holiness is not tied to any
profession; Happy were it for the Church, if the Clergy could be a privilege
from lewdness. When need meets with vnconscionableness, all conditions are
easily swallowed, of unlawful entrances, of wicked executions: Ten shekels,
and a suit of apparel, and his diet, are good wages for a needy Leuite. He
that could bestow eleven hundred shekels upon his puppets, can afford butten to
his Priest: so has he at once a rich Idol, and a beggarly Priest. Whosoever
affects to serve God, good cheap, shows, that he makes GOD but a stale to
Mammon.

Yet was Micha a kind Patron, tho not liberal; He calls the young Leuite his
father, and uses him as his son; and what he wants in means, supplies in
affection. It were happy, if Christians could imitate the love of Idolaters,
toward them which serve at the Altar. Micha made a shift with the Priesthood
of his own son; yet that his heart checks him in it, appears, both by the
change, and his contentment in the change; Now I know that the Lord will be
good to me, seeing I have a Leuite to my Priest: Therefore, whiles his Priest
was no Leuite, he sees there was cause, why GOD should not be good to him. If
the Leuite had not comne to offer his service, Michaes son had been a lawful
Priest; Many times the conscience runs away smoothly with an unwarrantable
action, and rests it self upon those grounds, which afterward it sees cause to
condemn. It is a sure way therefore to inform our selves thoroughly ere we
settle our choice, that we be not driven to reuerse our acts with late shame,
and unprofitable repentance.

Now did Micha begin to see some little glimpse of his own error; He saw his
Priesthood faulty, he saw not the faults of his Ephod, of his Images, of his
Gods, and yet (as if he thought all had been well, when he had amended one)
he says, Now I know the Lord will be good to me. The carnal heart pleases it
self with an outward formalitie; and so delights to flatter it self, as that
it thinks, if one circumstance be right, nothing can be amiss.

Israel was at this time extremely corrupted; yet the spies of the Danites had
taken notice even of this young Leuite, and are glad to make use of his
Priesthood. If they had but gone up to Shilo, they might have consulted with
the Ark of God: but worldly minds are not curious in their holy services; If
they have a God, an Ephod, a Priest, it suffices them; They had rather enjoy a
false worship with ease, then to take pains for the true: Those that are
curious in their diet, in their purchases, in their attire, in their contracts,
yet in Gods businesses are very indifferent.

The author of lies sometimes speaks truth for an advantage: and from his
mouth, this flattering Leuite speaks what he knew would please, not what he
knew would fall out; The event answers his prediction, and now the spies
magnify him to their fellows: Michaes Idol is a God, and the Leuite is his
Oracle. In matter of judgment, to be guided only by the event, is the way to
error; Falsehood shall be truth, and Satan an Angel of light, if we follow this
rule; Even very conjectures sometimes happen right; A Prophet, or Dreamer may
give a true sign, or wonder, and yet himself say, Let us go after other
Gods. A small thing can win credit with weak minds, which where they have
once sped, cannot distrust.

The idolatrous Danites are so besotted with this success, that they will rather
steal, the^ want the gods of Micha; and because the Gods without the Priest
can do them less service, then the Priest without the Gods, therefore they
steal the Priest with the gods. O miserable Israelites! that could think that
a God, which could be stolen; that could look for protection from that, which
could not keep it self from stealing; which was won by their theft, not their
devotion: Could they worship those Idols more devoutly then Micha that made
them? And if they could not protect their maker from robbery, how shall they
protect their thieves? If it had been the holy Arc of the true God, how could
they think it would bless their violence, or that it would abide to be
translated by rapine, and extortion? Now their superstition has made them mad
upon a God, they must have him; by what means they care not, tho they offend
the true God, by stealing a false. Sacrilege is fit to be the first service of
an Idol. The spies of Dan had bin courteously entertained by Micha: thus they
reward his hospitality. It is no trusting the honesty of Idolaters: if they
have once cast off the true God, whom will they respect?

It seems, Levites did not more want maintenance, then Israel wanted Levites;
Here was a tribe of Israel without a spiritual guide. The withdrawing of due
means, is the way to the utter desolation of the Church; Rare offerings make
cold Altars. There needed small force to draw this Leuite to change his charge;
Hold thy peace, and come, and be our father, and Priest; Whether is it better,
etc. Here is not patience, but joy; He that was won with ten shekels, may
be lost with eleven: When maintenance and honor calls him, he goes vndriuen;
and rather steals himself away, then is stolen. The Leuite had too many Gods,
to make conscience of pleasing one: There is nothing more in constant, then a
Leuite that seeks nothing but himself.

Thus the wild fire of Idolatry, which lay before couched in the private ball
of Micha, now flies furiously through all the Tribe of Dan; who (like to
Thieves that have carried away plaguie clothes) have insensibly infected
themselves, and their posterity, to death: Heresy and superstition have small
beginnings, dangerous proceedings, pernicious co^clusions. This contagion is
like a canker, which at the first is scarce visible; afterward it eats away
the flesh, and consumes the body.

Contemplations.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK.

Containing The Levites Concubine. The Desolation of Benjamin. Naomi and Ruth.
Boaz and Ruth. Anna and Peninna. Anna and Eli. Eli and his sons.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Fulke Greuille, Knight; Chancelour of the
Exchequer, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsailours; A most
wise, learned, judicious, ingenuous Censor of Schollership; a worthy example of
Benefactors to Learning, I. H.
With his unfeigned prayers for the happy success of all his honorable
designements, humbly Dedicates this mean piece of his studies.

CONTEMPLATIONS.
THE LEVITES Concubine.
THere is no complaint of a publicly disordered State, where a Leuite is not
at one end of it; either as an agent, or a patient. In the Idolatry of Micha,
and the Danites, a Leuite was an actor; In the violent vncleaneness of Gibeah,
a Leuite suffers; No Tribe shall sooner feel the want of government, then that
of Leui.

The law of God allowed the Leuite a wife; humane conniuence, a concubine;
neither did the Jewish concubine differ from a wife, but in some outward
complements; Both might challenge all the true essence of marriage; so little
was the difference, that the father of the concubine, is called the father in
law to the Leuite. She whom ill custom had of a wife made a concubine, is now
by her lust, of a concubine made an harlot: Her fornication, together with the
change of her bed, has changed her abode. Perhaps her own conscience thrust
her out of doors, perhaps the just severity of her husband. Dismission was
too easy a penalty for that which GOD had sentenced with death: She that had
deserved to be abhorred of her husband, seeks shelter from her father. Why
would her father suffer his house to be defiled with an adulteress, tho out of
his own loins? Why did he not rather say; What? Do thou look to find
my house an harbor for thy sin? Whiles thou were a wife to thine husband,
thou were a daughter to me; Now, thou art neither; Thou art not mine, I gave
thee to thy husband; Thou art not thy husbands, thou have betrayed his bed; Thy
filthiness has made thee thine own, and thine adulterers; Go seek thine
entertainment, where thou have lost thine honesty; Thy lewdness has brought
a necessity of shame upon thine abettors; How can I countenance thy person, and
abandon thy sin? I had rather be a just man, then a kind father; Get thee home
therefore to thy husband, crave his forgiueness upon thy knees, redeem his love
with thy modesty, and obedience; when his heart is once open to thee, my
doors shall not be shut: In the mean time, know I can be no father to an
harlot; Indulgence of Parents is the refuge of vanity, the band of
wickedness, the bane of children. How easily is that Thief induced to steal,
that knows his Receiver: When the lawlesnesse of youth knovves where to find
pity and toleration, what mischief can it forbear?

By how much better this Leuite was, so much more injurious was the concubines
sin: What husband would not have said; She is gone, let shame and grief go
with her, I shall find one no less pleasing, and more faithful: Or if it be
not too much mercy in me to yield to a return, let her that has offended,
seek me; What more direct way is there to a resolved looseness, then to let
her see I cannot want her? The good nature of this Leuite casts off all these
terms; and now after 4 months absence, sends him to seek for her, that had
run away from her fidelity: And now he thinks, She sind against me: perhaps
she has repented; Perhaps, shame and fear have withheld her from returning;
Perhaps she will be more loyal, for her sin; If her importunity should
win me, half the thanks were lost; but now, my voluntary offer of favor
shall oblige her for ever. Love procures truer servitude then necessity:
Mereie becomes well the heart of any man, but most of a Leuite. He that had
helped to offer so many sacrifices to God for the multitude of every
Israelites sins, saw how proportionable it was, that man should not hold one
sin unpardonable: He had served at the Altar to no purpose, if he (whose
trade was to sue for mercy) had not at all learned to practice it.

And if the reflection of mercy wrought this in a servant, what shall we
expect from him, whose essence is mercy? O God, we do every day break the
holy covenant of our love; We prostitute our selves to every filthy tentation,
and then run, and hide our selves in our fathers house, the world; If thou
did not seek us up, we should never return; If thy gracious proffer did
not prevent us, we should be incapable of forgiueness; It were abundant
goodness in thee to receive us, when we should entreat thee: but lo, thou
intreatest us that we would receive thee. How should we now adore, and imitate
thy mercy, since there is more reason, we should sue to each other, then that
thou should sue to us; because we may as well offend, as be offended.

I do not see the woman's father make any means for reconciliation: but when
remission came home to his doors, no man could entertain it more thankfully.
The nature of many men is forward to accept, and negligent to sue for; they can
spend secret wishes upon that, which shall cost them no endeavor.

Great is the power of love, which can in a sort undo evils past, if not for
the act, yet for the remembrance. Where true affection was once conceived, it
is easily peeced again, after the strongest interruption; Here needs no
tedious recapitulation of wrongs, no importunity of suit; The unkindness are
forgotten, their love is renewed; and now the Leuite is not a stranger, but a
son; By how much more willingly he came, by so much more unwillingly he is
dismissed. The four months absence of his daughter is answered with four
days feasting; Neither was there so much joy in the former wedding feast, as
in this; because then he delivered his daughter entire; now, desperate: then he
found a son; but now, that son has found his lost daughter, and he found
both: The recovery of any good, is far more pleasant then the continuance.

Little do we know what evil is toward us; Now did this old man, and this
restored couple promise themselves all joy, and contentment after this unkind
storm; and said in themselves, Now we begin to live: And now this feast, which
was meant for their new nuptials, proves her funeral. Even when we let our
selves loosest to our pleasures, the hand of God (though inuisibly) is writing
bitter things against us: since we are not worthy to know, it is wisdom to
suspect the worst, whilst it is least seen.

Sometimes it falls out, that nothing is more injurious then curresie; If this
old man had thrust his son and daughter early out of doors, they had avoided
this mischief; now, his loving importunity detaines them to their hurt, and
his own repentance. Such contentment does sincere affection find in the
presence of those we love, that death it self has no other name, but
departing; The greatest comfort of our life, is the fruition of friendship, the
dissolution whereof, is the greatest pain of death: As all earthly pleasures,
so this of love, is distasted with a necessity of leaving. How worthy is that
only love to take up our hearts, which is not open to any danger of
interruption; which shall out-liue the date even of faith and hope, and is as
eternal, as that GOD, and those blessed spirits whom we love? If we hang never
so importunately upon one another sleeves, and shed floods of tears to stop
their way, yet we must be gone hence; no occasion, no force, shall then
remove us from our fathers house.

The Leuite is stayed beyond his time by importunity; the motions whereof are
boundless, and infinite; one day draws on another; neither is there any
reason of this days stay, which may not serve still for to morrow. His
resolution at last breaks through all those kind hindrances; rather will he
venture a benighting, then an unnecessary delay. It is a good hearing that the
Leuite makes haste home; An honest man's heart is where his calling is; Such a
one, when he is abroad, is like a fish in the air; whereinto if it leap for
recreation, or necessity, yet it soon returns to his own element. This
charge, by how much more sacred it is, so much more attendance it expects;
Even a day breaks square with the conscionable.

The Sun is ready to lodge before them; His servant aduises him to shorten
his journey, holding it more fit to trust an early In of the Iebusites, then to
the mercy of the night. And if that counsel had been followed, perhaps they,
which found Iebusites in Israel, might have found Israelites in Iebus: No wise
man can hold good counsel disparaged, by the meandness of the author: If we
be glad to receive any treasure from our servant, why not precious
admonitions?

It was the zeal of this Leuite that shut him out of Iebus; We will not lodge
in the City of strangers. The Iebusites were strangers in religion, not
strangers enough in their habitation; The Leuite will not receive common
courtesy from those which were aliens from God, though home-borne in the heart
of Israel. It is lawful enough in terms of civility to deal with Infidels;
the earth is the Lords, and we may enjoy it in the right of the Owner, while
we protest against the wrong of the Usurper; yet the less communion with Gods
enemies, the more safety. If there were another air to breathe in from theirs,
another earth to tread upon, they should have their own: Those that affect a
familiar entireness with Iebusites, in conversation, in leagues of amity, in
matrimonial contracts, bewray either too much boldness, or too little
conscience.

He has no blood of an Israelite, that delights to lodge in Iebus: It was the
fault of Israel, that an heathenish town stood yet in the navel of the
Tribes, and that Iebus was no sooner turned to Jerusalem; Their lenity and
neglect, were guilty of this neighborhood, that now no man can pass from
Bethlee^ Judah, to mount Ephraim, but by the City of Iebusites. Seasonable
justice might prevent a thousand evils, which afterward know no remedy but
patience.

The way was not long betwixt Iebus and Gibeah: for the Sun was stooping when
the Leuite was over against the first, and is but now declined, when he comes
to the other. How his heart was lightened, when he was entered into an Israelitish
City! and can think of nothing, but hospitality, rest, security. There is
no perfume so sweet to a Traveler, as his own smoke. Both expectation and
feate, do commonly disappoint us; for seldom ever do we enjoy the good we
look for, or smart with a feared evil. The poor Leuite could have found but
such entertainment with the Iebusites. Whither are the posterity of Benjamin
degenerated, that their Gibeah should be no less wicked then populous? The
first sign of a settled godlesnesse, is, that a Leuite is suffered to lie
without doors. If God had been in any of their houses, his servant had not
been excluded: Where no respect is given to Gods messengers, there can be no
Religion.

Gibeah was a second Sodom; eue^ there also is another Lot: which is therefore
so much more hospital to strangers, because himself was a stranger. The Host
as well as the Leuite is of mount Ephraim; Each man knows best to commiserate
that evil in others, which him self has passed thorough; All that profess
the Name of Christ, are Countrymen, and yet strangers here below; how
cheerfully should we entertain each other, when we meet in the Gibeah of this
inhospitall world?

This good old man of Gibeah, came home late from his work in the fields; the
Sun was set ere he gave over; And now, seeing this man a stranger, an
Israelite, a Leuite, an Ephraimite, and that in his way to the house of GOD, to
take up his lodging in the street, he proffers him the kindness of his
house-roome. Industrious spirits are the fittest receptacles of all good
motions; whereas those which give themselves to idle and loose courses, do not
care so much as for themselves. I hear of but one man at his work, in all
Gibeah: the rest were quaffing and reuelling. That one man ends his work in a
charitable entertainment; the other, end their play in a brutish beastliness,
and violence. These villains had learned both the actions, and the language of
the Sodomites; One unclean devil was the prompter to both: and this honest
Ephraimite, had learnt of righteous Lot, both to entreat, and to proffer. As a
perplexed Mariner, that in a storm must cast away something, although
precious; so this good Host, rather will prostitute his daughter, a virgin,
together with the concubine, then this prodigious villainy should be offered to
a man, much more to a man of God.

The detestation of a foul sin drew him to ouer-reach in the motion of a
lesser; which if it had been accepted, how could he have escaped the
partnership of their uncleanness, and the guilt of his daughters rauishment?
No man can wash his hands of that sin, to which his will has yielded. Bodily
violence may be inoffensiue in the patient; voluntary inclination to evil (tho
out of fear) can never be excusable: yet behold this wickedness is too little
to satisfy these monsters.

Who would have looked for so extreme abomination from the loins of Jacob,
the womb of Rachel, the sons of Benjamin? Could the very Iebusites their
neighbors be ever accused of such unnatural outrage? I am ashamed to say it,
Even the worst Pagans were Saints, to Israel. What auailes it that they have
the Ark of GOD in Shiloh, while they have. Sodom in their streets? that the
law of God is in their sringes, whiles the devil is in their hearts? Nothing
but hell it self can yield a worse creature then a depraved Israelite; the
very means of his reformation, are the fuel of his wickedness.

Yet Lot sped so much better in Sodom, then this Ephraimite did in Gibeah, by
how much more holy guests he entertained. There the guests were Angels; here a
sinful man. There the guests saved the host; here the host could not save the
guest from brutish violence; Those Sodomites were stricken with outward
blindness and defeated; These Beniamites are only blinded with lust, and
prevail. The Leuite comes forth, perhaps his coat saved his person from this
villainy; who now thinks himself well, that he may have leave to redeem his
own dishonor with his concubines. If he had not loved her dearly, he had
never sought her so far, after so foul a sin; Yet now his hate of that
unnatural wickedness overcame his love to her; She is exposed to the furious
lust of barbarous ruffians, and (which he misdoubted not) abused to death.

Oh the just and even course which the Almighty Judge of the world holds in
all his retributions! This woman had shamed the bed of a Leuite, by her former
wantonness; she had thus far gone smoothly away with her sin; her father
harbourd her, her husband forgave her, her own heart found no cause to
complain, because she smarted not: now, when the world had forgotten her
offense, GOD calls her to reckoning and punishes her with her own sin. She
had voluntarily exposed herself to lust; now is exposed forceably. Adultery
was her sin, adultery was her death. What smiles soever wickedness casts
upon the heart, vvhiles it solicites; it will owe us a displeasure, and prove
it self a faithful Debtor.

The Leuite looked to find her humbled with this violence, not murdered; and
now, indignation moves him to add horror to the fact: Had not his heart been
raised up with an excess of desire to make the crime as odious, as it was
sinful, his action could not be excused. Those hands that might not touch a
carcass, now carue the corpse of his own dead wife, into morsels; and send
these tokens to all the Tribes of Israel; that when they should see these
gobbets of the body murdered, the more they might detest the murderers.
Himself puts on cruelty to the dead, that he might draw them to a just
revenge of her death; Actions notoriously vilanous, may justly countenance an
extraordinary means of prosecution: Every Israelite has part in a Leuits
wrong; No Tribe has not his share in the carcass, and the revenge.

The Desolation of Benjamin.
THese morsels could not choose but cut the hearts of Israel with horror, and
compassion; horror of the act, and compassion of the sufferer: and now their
zeal draws them together, either for satisfaction, or revenge. Who would not
have looked that the hands of Benjamin should have been first upon Gibeah; and
that they should have readily sent the heads of the offenders, for a second
service after the gobbets of the concubine: But now, instead of punishing the
sin, they patronize the actors; and will rather die in resisting justice,
then live and prosper in furthering it.

Surely, Israel had one Tribe too many: all Benjamin is turned into Gibeah, the
sons not of Benjamin, but of Belial. The abetting of evil, is worse then the
commission; This may be upon infirmity, but that must be upon resolution:
Easy punishment is too much favor to sin: conniuence is much worse: but the
defense of it (and that unto blood) is intolerable. Had not these men been
both wicked, and quarrellous, they had not drawn their swords in so foul a
cause. Peaceable dispositions are hardly drawn to fight for innocence: yet
these Beniaminites (as if they were in love with villainy, and out of charity
with GOD) will be the wilful. Champions of lewdness. How can Gibeah repent
them of that wickedness, which all Benjamin will make good; in spite of their
consciences? Even where sin is suppressed, it will rise; but, where it is
encouraged, it insults and tyrannizes.

It was more just that Israel should rise against Benjamin, then that Benjamin
should rise for Gibeah; by how much it is better to punish offenders, then to
shelter the offenders from punishing; And yet the wickedness of Benjamin, sped
better for the time, then the honesty of Israel; Twice was the better part
foiled by the less, and worse; The good cause was sent back with shame: the
evil returned with victory, and triumph. O GOD! their hand was for thee in the
fight, and thy hand was with them in their fall; They had not fought for thee,
but by thee; neither could they have miscarried in the fight, if thou had not
fought against them; Thou art just and holy in both. The cause was thine: the
sin in managing of it, was their own; They fought in an holy quarrel, but
with confidence in themselves; for, as presuming of victory, they ask of GOD,
not what should be their success, but who should be their Captain. Number and
innocence made them too secure; It was just therefore with GOD, to let them
feel, that even good zeal cannot bear out presumption: And that victory lies
not in the cause, but in the God that ownes it.

Who cannot imagine how much the Beniaminites insulted in their double field,
and day? And now began to think, God was on their side; Those swords which
had bin taught the way into forty thousand bodies of their brethren, cannot
fear a new encounter. Wicked men cannot see their prosperity a piece of their
curse, neither can examine their actions, but the events: Soon after, they
shall find what it was to add blood unto filthiness, and that the victory of
an evil cause, is the way to ruin and confusion.

I should have feared least this double discomfiture should have made Israel,
either distrustful, or weary of a good cause: but still I find them no less
courageous, with more humility. Now they fast, and weep, and sacrifice; these
weapons had been victorious in their first assault; Benjamin had never been in
danger of pride for over coming, if this humiliation of Israel had prevented
the fight. It is sildom seen, but that which we do with fear, prospers;
whereas confidence in undertaking, lays even good endeavors in the dust.

Wickedness could never brag of any long prosperity; nor complain of the
lack of payment: Still GOD is even with it at the last; Now he pays the
Beniaminites both that death which they had lent to the Israelites, and that
wherein they stood indebted to their brotherhood of Gibeah: And now that both
are meter in death, there is as much difference betwixt those Israelites, and
these Beniaminites, as betwixt Martyrs, and malefactors: To die in a sin is a
fearful revenge of giving patronage to sin; The sword consumes their
bodies, another fire their Cities, vvhat-soeuer became of their souls.

Now might Rachel have justly wept for her children, because they were not;
For, behold the men, women, and children of her wicked Tribe, are cut off;
only some few scattred remainders, ran away from this vengeance, and lurked in
caves, and rocks, both for fear, and shame; There was no difference, but life,
betwixt their brethren and them; the earth covered them both: yet unto them,
does the revenge of Israel stretch it self* and vows to destroy, if not their
persons, yet their succession; as holding them unworthy to receive any comfort
by that sex, to which they had bin so cruel, both in act, and maintenance. If
the Israelites had not held marriage and issue a very great blessing, they had
not thus revenged themselves of Benjamin; Now they accounted the vvith-holding
of their wives, a punishment second to death: The hope of life in our
posterity, is the next contentment to an inioying of life in our selves.

They have sworn, and now upon cold blood repent them. If the oath were not
just, why would they take it? and if it were just, why did they recant it? If
the act were lustifiable, what needed these tears? Even a just oath may be
rashly taken: not only injustice, but temerity of swearing ends, in
lamentation. In our very civil actions, it is a weakness, to do that which we
would after reuerse; but in our affairs with GOD, to check our selves too
late, and to steep our oaths in tears, is a dangerous folly; He does not
command us to take voluntary oaths; he commands us to keep them. If we
bind our selves to inconvenience, we may justly co^plain of our own fetters:
Oaths do not only require justice, but judgment; wise deliberation, no less
then equity.

Not conscience of their fact, but commiseration of their brethren, led them to
this public repentance. O God, why is this come to pass, that this day one
Tribe of Israel shall want? Even the iustest revenge of men is capable of
pity; Insultation in the rigor of justice, argues cruelty; Charitable minds
are grieved to see that done, which they would not wish undone; the smart of
the offender does not please the^, which yet are thoroughly displeased with the
sin, and have given their hands to punish it. GOD himself takes no pleasure in
the death of a sinner, yet loves the punishment of sin: As a good Parent whips
his child, yet weeps himself; There is a measure in victory, and revenge, if
never so just; which to exceed, leeses mercy in the suit of Justice.

If there were no fault in their severity, it needed no excuse; and if there
were a fault, it will admit of no excuse: yet, as if they meant to shift off
the sin, they expostulate with God; O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to
pass this day? GOD gave them no command of this rigor; yea he twice crossed
them in the execution; and now, in that which they entreated of God with
tears, they challenge him. It is a dangerous injustice to lay the burden of
our sins upon him, which tempts no man, nor can be tempted with evil;
whiles we would so remove our sin, we double it.

A man that knew not the power of an oath, would wonder at this contrariety in
the affections of Israel; They are sorry for the slaughter of Benjamin, and yet
they slay those that did not help them in the slaughter. Their oath calls them
to more blood; The excess of their revenge upon Benjamin, may not excuse the
men of Gilead; If ever oath might look for a dispensation, this might plead
it; Now, they dare not but kill the men of Iabesh Gilead, least they should
have left upon themselves a greater sin of sparing, then punishing. Iabesh
Gilead came not up to aid Israel, therefore all the inhabitants must die. To
exempt our selves (whether out of singularity, or stubbornness) from the
common actions of the Church, when we are lawfully called to them, is an
offense worthy of judgment: In the maine quarrels of the Church, neutralls
are punished. This execution shall make amends for the former; of the spoil of
Iabesh Gilead, shall the Beniaminites be stored with wives: that no man may
think these men slain for their daughters, they plainly die for their sin; and
these Gileadites might not have lived, without the perjury of Israel: and now,
since they must die, it is good to make benefit of necessity. I inquire not into
the rigor of the oath; If their solemn vow did not bind them to kill all of
both sexes in Benjamin, why did they not spare their virgins? and if it did so
bind them, why did they spare the virgins of Gilead? Favors must be enlarged
in all these religious restrictions; where breath may be taken in them, it is
not fit nor safe they should be strainted.

Foure-hundred virgins of Gilead have lost parents, and brethren, and kindred,
and now find husbands in lieu of them. An enforced marriage, was but a
miserable comfort for such a loss: like wards, or captives they are taken, and
choose not. These suffice not, their friendly adversaries consult for more, upon
worse conditions. Into what troublesome and dangerous straits do men thrust
themselves, by either unjust, or inconsiderate vows?

In the midst of all this common lawlesnes of Israel, here was conscience made
on both sides, of matching with Infidels; The Israelites can rather be content
their daughters should be stolen by their own, then that the daughters of aliens
should be given them. These men which had not grace enough to detest and punish
the beastliness of their Gileadites, yet are not so graceless, as to choose them
wives of the Heathen: All but Atheists (howsoever they let themselves loose)
yet in some things, find themselves restrained, and show to others that they
have a conscience. If there were not much danger, and much sin in this
unequal yoke, they would never have persuaded to so heavy an inconvenience;
Disparitie of religion in matrimonial contracts, has so many mischiefs, that
it is worthy to be redeemed with much prejudice.

They which might not give their own daughters to Benjamin, yet give others,
whiles they give leave to steal them. Stolen marriages, are both unnatural,
and full of hazard; for love (whereof marriage is the knot) cannot be forced:
this was rather rape, then wedlock. What vnlikeness (perhaps contrariety) of
disposition, what auersenesse of affection, may there be in not only a sudden,
but a forceable meeting? If these Beniaminites had not taken liberty of giving
themselves ease by diuorcement, they would often have found leisure to rue this
stolen booty. This act may not be drawn to example; and yet here was a kind of
indefinite consent; Both deliberation, and good liking, are little enough for a
during estate, and that which is once done for ever.

These virgins come up to the feast of the Lord; and now, out of the midst of
their daunces are carried to a double captivity. How many virgins have lost
themselves in daunces? and yet this sport was not immodest. These virgins
danced by themselves, without the company of them which might move toward
unchastity; for if any men had bin with the^, they had found so many rescuers,
as they had assaulters; now, the exposing of their weak sex to this injury,
proves their innocence. Our usual daunces are guilty of more sin; Wanton
gestures, and unchaste touches, looks, motions, draw the heart to folly; The
ambushes of evil spirits, carry away many a soul from daunces, to a
fearful desolation.

It is supposed, that the Parents thus robbed of their daughters, will take it
heavily: There cannot be a greater cross, then the miscarriage of children;
They are not only the living goods, but pieces of their Parents; that they
should therefore be torn from them by violence, is no less injury, then the
dismembring of their own bodies.

Naomi and Ruth.
BEtwixt the reign of the Judges, Israel was plagued with tyranny; and whiles
some of them reigned, with famine; Seldom did that rebellious people want
somewhat to humble them; One rod is not enough for a stubborn child: The
famine must needs be great, that makes the inhabitants to run their country;
The name of home is so sweet, that we cannot leave it for a little; Behold that
Land, which had wont to flow with milk and honey, now abounds with want and
penury, and Bethleem in stead of an house of bread, is an house of famine; A
fruitful land does God make barren, for the wickedness of them, that dwell
therein; The earth bears not for it self, but for us; God is not angry with
it, but with men; For our sakes, it was first cursed to thorns and thistles,
after that, to moisture, and since that (not seldom) to drought; and by all
these to barrenness. We may not look always for plenty; It is a wonder
whiles there is such superfluity of wickedness, that our earth is no more
sparing of her fruits.

The whole earth is the Lords, and in him, ours; It is lawful for the owners
to change their houses, at pleasure; Why should we not make free use of any
part of our own possessions? Elimelech and his family remove from Bethleem
Judah unto Moab; Nothing but necessity can dispense with a local relinquishing
of Gods Church; Not pleasure, not profit, not curiosity; Those which are
famished out, God calls, yea drives from thence. The creator and possessor of
the earth, has not confined any man to his necessary destruction.

It was lawful for Elimelech to make use of Pagans, and Idolaters, for the
supply of all needful helps; There cannot be a better employment of Moabites,
then to be the treasurers and purueyours of Gods children; Wherefore serve they
but to gather for the true owners? It is too much niceness in them, which
forbear the benefit they might make of the faculties of profane, or heretical
persons; They consider not that they have more right to the good such men can
do, then they that do it, and challenge that good for their own.

But I cannot see, how it could be lawful for his Sons to match with the
daughters of Moab; Had these men heard how far, and under how solemn an
oath, their father Abraham sent for a wife of his own tribe, for his son
Isaac? Had they heard the earnest charge of holy Isaac, to the son he
blessed, Thou shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan? Had they
forgotten the plagues of Israel for but a short conversation with the Moabitish
women? If they plead remoteness from their own people; Did they not remember
how far Jacob walked to Padan-Aram? Was it further from Moab to Bethleem,
then from Bethleem to Moab? and if the care of themselves led them from
Bethleem to Moab; should not their care of obedience to God have as well carried
the^ back from Moab to Bethleem? Yet if their wives would have left their
Idolatry with their maidenhead, the match had been more safe; but now, even
at the last farewell, Naomi can say of Orpah, that she is returned to her gods.
These men have sinned in their choice, and it speeds with them accordingly:
Where did ever one of these unequal matches prosper? The two sons of
Elimelech are swept away childlesse in the prime of their age, and in steed of
their seed they leave their carcasses in Moab; their wives widows, their
mother childlesse, and helpless amongst Infidels, in that age which most
needed comfort. How miserable do we now find poor Naomi? which is left
destitute of her country, her husband, her children, her friends; and turned
loose, and solitary to the mercy of the world: Yet even out of these
hopeless ruins, will God raise comfort to his servant. The first good news
is, that God has visited his people with bread; now therefore, since her
husband and sons were unrecoverable, she will try to recover her country, and
kindred; If we can have the same conditions in Judah, that we have in Moab, we
are no Israelites* if we return not; Whiles her husband and sons lived, I
hear no motion of retiring home, now these her earthly stays are removed,
she thinks presently of removing to her country; Neither can we so heartily
think of our home above, whiles we are furnished with these worldly
contentments; when God strips us of them, straight-waies our mind is homeward.

She that came from Bethleem, under the protection of an husband, attended with
her sons, stored with substance; resolves now to measure all that way alone:
Her adversity had stripped her of all, but a good heart; that remains with her,
and bears up her head, in the deepest of her extremity: True Christian
fortitude wades through all evils; and, tho we be up to the chin, yet keeps
firm footing against the stream: where this is, the sex is not discerned;
neither is the quantity of the evil read in the face; How well does this
courage become Israelites, when we are left comfortless in the midst of the
Moab of this world, to resolve the contempt of all dangers, in the way to our
home; As contrarily, nothing does more misbeseeme a Christian, then that his
spirits should flagge with his estate, and that any difficulty should make him
despair of attayning his best ends.

Goodness is of a winning quality wheresoever it is; and even amongst Infidels,
will make it self friends; The good disposition of Naomi carries away the
hearts of her daughters in law with her; so as they are ready to forsake their
kindred, their country, yea their own mother, for a stranger, whose affinity
died with her sons: Those men are worse then Infidels, and next to Devils that
hate the virtues of Gods Saints; and could love their persons well if they were
not conscionable.

How earnestly do these two daughters of Moab plead for their continuance with
Naomi; and how hardly is either of them dissuaded from partaking of the misery
of her society; there are good natures even among Infidels, and such as for
moral disposition, and civil respects cannot be exceeded by the best
professors: Who can suffer his heart to rest in those qualities, which are
common to them that are without God?

Naomi could not be so insensible of her own good, as not to know how much
comfort she might reap to the so litarinesse, both of her voyage, and her
widdowhood, by the society of these two younger widows, whose affections she
had so well tried; even very partnership is a mitigation of evils; yet so
earnestly does she dissuade from accompanying her, as that she could not have
said more, if she had thought their presence irksome, and burdenous: Good
dispositions love not to pleasure themselves with the disadvantage of others;
and had rather be miserable alone, then to draw in partners to their sorrow;
for the sight of another calamity does rather double their own; and if
themselves were free, would affect them with compassion; As contrarily, ill
minds care not how many companions they have in misery, nor how few consorts
in good; If themselves mis-carry, they could be content all the world were
enwrapped with them in the same distress.

I marvel not that Orpah is by this seasonable importunity persuaded to
return; from a mother in law, to a mother in nature; from a toylesome journey
to rest, from strangers to her kindred, from an hopeless condition, to
likelihoods of contentment. A little entreaty will serve to move nature to be
good unto it self: Every one is rather a Naomi to his own soul, to persuade
it to stay still, and enjoy the delights of Moab, rather then to hazard our
entertainment in Bethleem: Will religion allow me this wild liberty of my
actions, this loose mirth, these carnal pleasures? Can I be a Christian, and
not live sullenly? None but a regenerate heart can choose rather to suffer
adversity with Gods people, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

The one sister takes an unwilling farewell, and moistens her last kisses with
many tears; the other cannot be driven back but repells one entreaty, with
another; Entreat me not to leave thee; for whither thou go, I will go; where
thou dwell I will dwell, thy people shall be my people, thy God my God,
where thou die I will die, and there will I be buried; Ruth saw so much upon
ten years trial, in Naomi, as was more worth then all Moab; and in comparison
whereof, all worldly respects deserved nothing but contempt: The next degree
unto goodness is the love of goodness: He is in a fair way to grace, that
can value it; If she had not been already a proselite, she could not have set
this price upon Naomies virtue. Love cannot be separated from a desire of
fruition; In vain had Ruth protested her affection to Naomi, if she could have
turned her out to her journey alone; Love to the saints does not more argue our
interest in God, then society argues the truth of our love.

As some tight vessel that holds out against wind and water, so did Ruth
against all the powers of a mothers persuasions; The impossibility of the
comfort of marriage in following her (which drew back her sister in law)
cannot move her; She hears her mother, like a modest matrone (contrary to the
fashion of these times) say, I am too old to have an husband, and yet she
thinks not on the contrary, I am too young to want an husband: It should seem
the Moabites had learned this fashion of Israel to expect the brothers raising
of seed to the deceased; The widdowhood and age of Naomi cuts off that hope;
neither could Ruth then, dream of a Boaz that might advance her; It is no love
that cannot make us willing to be miserable for those we affect; The hollowest
heart can be content to follow one that prospers: Adversity is the only
furnace of friendship; If love will not abide both fire and anuile, it is but
counterfeit; so in our love to God we do but crack and vaunt in vain if we
cannot be willing to suffer for him.

But if any motive might hope to speed, that which was drawn from example, was
most likely; Behold thy sister in law, is gone back unto her people, and to
her Gods; return thou after her: This one art-lesse persuasion has prevailed
more with the world, then all the places of reason: How many millions miscarry
upon this ground; Thus did my forefathers; Thus do the most; I am neither the
first, nor the last; Do any of the rulers; We straight think that, either
safe, or pardonable, for which we can plead a precedent. This good woman has
more warrant for her resolution, then another practice; The mind can never be
steady, whiles it stands upon others feet, and till it be settled upon such
grounds of assurance, that it will rather lead, then follow; and can say with
Joshua, whatsoever become of the world, I and my house will serve the Lord.

If Naomi had not been a person of eminent note; no knowledge had been taken at
Bethleem, of her return; Poverty is ever obscure; and those that have little,
may go and come without noise: If the streets of Bethleem had not before used
to say, There goes Naomi; they had not now asked, Is not this Naomi? She that
had lost all things, but her name, is willing to part with that also; Call me
not Naomi, but call me Marah; Her humility cares little for a glorious name, in
a dejected estate; Many a one would have set faces upon their want, and in the
bitterness of their condition, have affected the name of beauty; In all forms
of good, there are more that care to seem, then to be; Naomi hates this
hypocrisy, and since God has humbled her, desires not to be respected of
men: Those which are truly brought down, make it not dainty, that the world
should think them so; but are ready to be the first proclaimers of their own
vileness.

Naomi went full out of Bethleem to prevent want; and now she brings that want
home with her, which she desired to avoid: Our blindness often times carries
us into the perils we seek to eschew; God finds it best many times to cross
the likely proiects of his dearest children; and to multiply those afflictions,
which they feared single.

Ten years have turned Naomi into Marah; what assurance is there of these
earthly things, whereof one hour may strip us? What man can say of the years
to come, Thus I will be? How justly do we contemn this uncertainty, and look
up to those riches that cannot but endure, when heaven and earth are dissolved?

Boaz and Ruth.
WHiles Elimelech shifted to Moab to avoid the famine; Boaz abode still at
Bethleem, and continued rich, and powerful; He staide at home, and found that,
which Elimelech went to seek, and missed: The judgment of samme does not
lightly extend it self to all; Pestilence and the sword spare none; but dearth
commonly plagueth the meaner sort, and balketh the mighty; When Boaz his
storehouse was empty, his fields were full; and maintain the name of
Bethleem.

I do not hear Ruth stand upon the terms of her better education, or wealthy
Parentage, but now that God has called her to want, she scorns not to lay her
hand unto all homely services; and thinks it no disparagement to find her
bread in other men's fields; There is no harder lesson to a generous mind, nor
that more beseemes it, then either to bear want, or to prevent it; Base
spirits give themselves over to idleness, and misery, and because they are
crossed, will sullenly perish.

That good woman has not been for nothing in the school of patience; she
has learned obedience to a poor stepmother; she was now a widow, past he
reach of any danger of correction, besides, that penury might seem to
dispense with awe* Even children do easily learn to contemn the poverty of
their own Parents; Yet has she so inured her self to obedience, that she
will not so much as go forth into the field to gleane, without the leave of
her mother in law, and is no less obsequious to March, then she was to Naomi;
What shall we say to those children, that in the maine actions of their life,
forget they have natural Parents: It is a shame to see that in mean families
want of substance causes want of duty; and that children should think
themselus privileged for irreverence, because the Parent is poor.

Little do we know, when we go forth in the morning, what God means to do
with us ere night; There is a providence that attends on us in all our ways;
and guides us insensibly to his own ends; That divine hand leads Ruth
blindfolded to the field of Boaz: That she meets with his reapers, and falls
upon his land amongst all the fields of Bethleem, it was no praise to her
election, but the gracious disposition of him, in whom we move; His thoughts
are above ours; and do so order our actions, as we, if we had known, should
have wished.

No sooner is she come into the field, but the reapers are friendly to her; no
sooner is Boaz come into his field, but he inuites her to more bounty then
she could have desired; now God begins to repay into her bosom, her love and
duty to her mother in law; Reverence and loving respects to Parents, never yet
went away unrecompensed; God will surely raise up friends amongst strangers, to
those that have been officious at home.

It was worth Ruthes journey from Moab, to meet with such a man as Boaz, whom
we find thriftie, religious, charitable; Tho he were rich yet he was not
careless; he comes into the field to ouersee his reapers; Even the best
estate requires careful menaging of the owner; He wanted not officers to take
charge of his husbandry, yet he had rather be his own witness: After all the
trust of others, the Masters eye feeds the horse: The Master of this great
household of the world gives us an example of this care, whose eye is in every
corner of this his large possession; Not civility only, but religion bind us
to good husbandry; We are all stewards, and what account can we give to our
master, if we never look after our estate? I doubt whether Boaz had been so
rich, if he had not been so frugall: Yet was he not more thriftie, then
religious: He comes not to his reapers, but with a blessing in his mouth: The
Lord be with you, as one that knew, if he were with them, and not the Lord,
his presence could avail nothing; All the business of the family speeds the
better, for the masters benediction; Those affairs are likely to succeed, that
take their beginning at God.

Charity was well matched with his religion; without which, good words, are
but hypocrites; no sooner does he hear the name of the Moabitesse, but he
seconds the kindness of his reapers; and still he rises in his favors* First,
she may gleane in his field; then she may drink of his vessels; then, she
shall take her meal with his reapers; and part of it, from his own hand;
Lastly, his worke-men must let fall sheaues for her gathering: A small thing
helps the needy: an handful of gleanings, a lap-full of parched corn, a
draught of the servants bottles, a loose sheafe was such a favor to Ruth, as
she thought was above all recompense; This was not seen in the estate of Boaz,
which yet makes her for the time, happy. If we may refresh the soul of the
poor with the very offalls of our estate, and not hurt our selves, woe be to
us if we do it not; Our barnes shall be as full of curses as of corn, if we
grudge the scattered ears of our field to the hands of the needy.

How thankfully does Ruth take these small favors from Boaz: perhaps some rich
Jewel in Moab would not have been so welcome; Even this was a presage of her
better estate; those which shall receive great blessings, are ever thankful
for little; and if poor souls be so thankful to us, for but an handful, or
a sheafe; how should we be affected to our God, for whose fieldsfull, for full
barnes, full garners?

Doubtless, Boaz, having taken notice of the good nature, dutiful carriage,
and the near affinity of Ruth, could not but purpose some greater
beneficence, and higher respects to her; Yet now onwards he fits his kindness to
her condition, and gives her that, which to her meandness seemed much, tho he
thought it little: Thus does the bounty of our God deal with us; It is not
for want of love, that he gives us no greater measure of grace, but for want of
our fitness and capacity; He has reserved greater preferments for us, when
it shall be seasonable for us to receive them.

Ruth returns home wealthy with her Ephah of barley, and thankfully magnifies
the liberality of Boaz, her new benefactor: Naomi repayes his beneficence with
her blessing; Blessed be he of the Lord. If the rich can exchange their alms
with the poor for blessings, they have no cause to complain of an ill
bargain Our gifts cannot be worth their faithful prayers: Therefore it is
better to give then to receive, because he that receives, has but a worthless
alms, he that gives, receives an invaluable blessing.

I cannot but admire the modesty and silence of these two women; Naomi had not
so much as talked of her kindred in Bethleem, nor till now, had she told Ruth
that she had a wealthy kinsman; neither had Ruth inquired of her husbands great
alliance; but both sat down meekly with their own wants, and cared not to
know any thing else save that themselves were poor: Humility is ever the way
to honor.

It is a discurtesie where we are beholden, to alter our dependencie; Like as
men of trade take it ill, if customers which are in their books, go for their
wares to another shop; Wisely does Naomi advise Ruth not to be seen in any
other field, whiles the harvest lasted. The very taking of their favors is a
contentment to those that have already well deserved; and it is quarrel enough
that their courtesy is not received; How shall the God of heaven take it, that
whiles he gives and proffers largely, we run to the world that can afford us
nothing but vanity and vexation?

Those that can least act, are oft-times the best to advise: Good old Naomi
sits still at home, and by her counsel pays Ruth all the love she owes her.
The face of that action, to which she directs her, is the worst piece of it;
the heart was sound; Perhaps, the assurance, which long trial had given her of
the good government, and firm chastity of her daughter in law, together with
her persuasion of the religious gravity of Boaz, made her think that design
safe, which to others had been perilous, if not desperate; But besides that,
holding Boaz next of blood to Elimelech, she made account of him, as the
lawful husband of Ruth; so as there wanted nothing but a challenge, and
consummation; Nothing was abated but some outward solemnities, which (tho
expedient for the satisfaction of others) yet were not essential to marriage:
And if there were not these colors for a project so suspicious, it would not
follow, that the action were warrantable, because Naomies: Why should her
example be more safe in this then in matching her sonues with Insidels; then in
sending back Orpah to her fathers Gods? If every act of an holy person should
be our rule, we should have crooked lives: Every action that is reported, is
not straight-waies allowed; Our courses were very uncertain, if God had not
given us rules, whereby we may examine the examples of the best Saints, and as
well censure, as follow them. Let them that stumble at the boldness of Ruth,
imitate the continence of Boaz.

These times were not delicate; This man (though great in Bethleem) lays him
down to rest upon a pallet, in the floor of his barn; when he awakes at
midnight, no marvel if he were amazed to find himself accompanied; yet,
though his heart were cheared with wine, the place solitary, the night silent,
the person comely, the inuitation plausible, could he be drawn to a rash act
of lust* His appetite could not get the victory of reason, tho it had wine and
opportunity to help it; Herein Boaz showd himself a great master of his
affections, that he was able to resist a fit tentation; It is no thank to
many that they are free of some evils; perhaps they wanted not will, but
conuenience; But if a man when he is fitted with all helps to his sin, can
repel the pleasure of sin, out of conscience; this is true fortitude.

In steed of touching her as a wanton, he blesses her as a father, incourageth
her as a friend, promises her as a kinsman, rewards her as a patron, and sends
her away lade with hopes, and gifts, no less chaste, more happy then she
came: Oh admirable temperance worthy the progenitor of him, in whose lips and
heart was no guile.

If Boaz had been the next kinsman, the marriage had needed no protraction, but
now that his conscience told him, that Ruth was the right of another, it had
not been more sensuality then injustice, to have touched his kinswoman; It was
not any bodily impotencie, but honesty and conscience that restrained Boaz,
for the very next night she conceived by him; that good man wished his marriage
bed holy, and durst not lie down in the doubt of a sin: Many a man is honest
out of necessity, and affects the praise of that, which he could not avoid;
but that man's mind is still an adulterer, in the forced continence of his
body; No action can give us true comfort, but that which we do out of the
grounds of obedience.

Those which are fearful of sinning, are careful not to be thought to sin;
Boaz, though he knew himself to be clear, would not have occasion of
suspicion given to others; (Let no man know that a woman came into the floor:)
A good heart is no less afraid of a scandal, then of a sin; whereas those
that are resolved not to make any scruple of sin, despise others constructions,
not caring whom they offend, so that they may please themselves. That Naomi
might see her daughter in law was not sent back in dislike; she comes home
laden with corn; Ruth has gleaned more this night, then in half the harvest;
The care of Boaz was, that she should not return to her mother empty: Love
wheresoever it is, cannot be niggardly; We measure the love of God by his
gifts; How shall he abide to send us away empty from those treasures of
goodness.

Boaz is restless in the prosecution of this suit; and hies him from his
threshing floor, to the gate; and there conuents the nearer kinsman before the
Elders of the City; what was it that made Boaz so ready to intertaine, so
forward to urge this match? Wealth she had none, not so much as bread, but what
she gleaned out of his field: Friends she had none, and those she had else
where, Moabites; Beauty she could not have much, after that scorching in her
travel, in her gleanings, Himself tells her what drew his heart to her, (All
the City of my people does know that thou art a virtuous woman:) Virtue in
whomsoever it is found, is a great dowry, and where it meets with an heart
that knows how to value it, is accounted greater riches then all that is hid
in the bowels of the earth: The corn heap of Boaz was but chafe to this, and
his money, dross.

As a man that had learned to square all his actions to the law of God, Boaz
proceeds legally with his rival; and tells him of a parcel of Elimelecs land
(which, it is like upon his remouall to Moab, he had alienated;) which he (as
the next kinsman) might have power to redeem; yet so, as he must purchase the
wife of the deceased, with the land; Every kinsman is not a Bonz, the man could
listen to the land, if it had been free from the clog of a necessary marriage;
but now he will rather leave the land, then take the wife; Least, whiles he
should preserve Elimelecs inheritance, he should destroy his own; for the next
seed, which he should have by Ruth, should not be his heir, but his deceased
kinsmans; How knew he whether God might not by that wife, send heirs enough for
both their estates? rather had he therefore incur a manifest injustice, then
hazard the danger of his inheritance; The law of God bound him to raise up
seed to the next in blood; the care of his inheritance draws him to a neglect
of his duty, tho with infamy and reproach, and now he had rather his face should
be spit upon, and his name should be called, The house of him whose shoe was
pulled off, then to reserve the honor of him, that did his brother right, to
his own prejudice; How many are there that do so ouer-loue their issue, as
that they regard neither sin, nor shame in advancing it? and that will rather
indaunger their soul then leese their name? It is a woeful inheritance that
makes men heirs of the vengeance of God.

Boaz is glad to take the advantage of his refusal; and holds that shoe
(which was the sign of his tenure) more worth then all the land of Elimelec.
And whereas other Wives purchase their husbands, with a large dowry, this man
purchases his wife, at a dear rate, and thinks his bargain happy; All the
substance of the earth, is not worth a virtuous and prudent wife; which Boaz
does now so rejoice in, as if he this day only began to be wealthy.

Now is Ruth taken into the house of Boaz; she, that before had said, she was
not like one of his maidens, is now become their mistress; This day she has
gleaned all the fields and barnes of a rich husband; and (that there might be
no want in her happiness) by a gracious husband she has gained an happy
seed; and has the honor, above all the dames of Israel, to be the great
grandmother of a King, of David, of the Messiah.

Now is Marah turned back again to Naomi; and Orpah, if she hear of this in
Moab, cannot but envy at her sisters happiness: Oh the sure and bountiful
payments of the Almighty; Who ever came under his wing in vain? Who ever lost
by trusting him? Who ever forsook the Moab of this world for the true Israel,
and did not at last rejoice in the change.

Anna and Peninna.
ILL customs where they are once entertained are not easily discharged;
Polygamie besides carnal delight might now plead age and example: so as even
Elkanah (though a Leuite) is tainted with the sin of Lamech; Like as fashions
of attire, which at the first were disliked as uncomely, yet when they are once
grown common, are taken up of the grauest: Yet this sin (as then current
with the time) could not make Elkanah, not religious; The house of God in Shilo
was duly frequented of him; oftentimes, alone, in his ordinary course of
attendance; with all his males, thrice a year; and once a year, with all his
family; The continuance of an unknown sin cannot hinder the vprightnes of a
man's heart with God; as a man may have a mole upon his back, and yet think
his skin clear; the least touch of knowledge, or wilfulnes marres his
sincerity.

He that by virtue of his place was employed about the sacrifices of others,
would much less neglect his own; It is a shame for him that teaches Gods
people that they should not appear before the Lord empty, to bring no
sacrifice for himself. If Levites be profane, who should be religious?

It was the fashion when they sacrificed, to feast; so did Elkanah; the day of
his devotion is the day of his triumph; he makes great cheer for his whole
family, even for that wife which he loved less; There is nothing more comely,
then cheerefulnes in the services of God; What is there in all the world,
wherewith the heart of man should be so lift up, as with the conscience of his
duty done to his maker? Whiles we do so, God does to us, as our glass,
smile upon us, while we smile on him.

Love will be seen by entertainment; Peninnah and her children shall not
complain of want, but Anna shall find her husbands affection in her portion;
as his love to her was double, so was her part; She fared not the worse,
because she was childlesse; no good husband will dislike his wife for a fault
out of the power of her redress: yea rather, that which might seem to loose
the love of her husband, wins it, her barrenness; The good nature of Elkanah
labored by his dear respects, to recompense this affliction; that so she
might find no less contentment in the fruit of his hearty love, then she had
grief from her own fruitlesnesse; It is the property of true mercy, to be
most favorable to the weakest; Thus does the gracious spouse of the Christian
soul pity the barrenness of his servants; O Savior, we should not find
thee so indulgent to us, if we did not complain of our own unworthiness:
Peninnah may have the more children but barren Annah has the most love; How
much rather could Elkanah have wished Peninnah barren; and Annah fruitful; but
if she should have had both issue, and love, she had been proud, and her rival
despised; God knows how to disperse his favors so, that every one may have
cause both of thankfulness and humiliation; whiles there is no one that has
all, no one but has some; If envy and contempt were not thus equally
tempered, some would be over hauty, and others too miserable; But now, every
man sees that in himself which is worthy of contempt, and matter of emulation
in others, and contrarily sees what to pity and dislike in the most eminent,
and what to applaud in himself, and out of this contrariety, arises a sweet
mean of contentation.

The love of Elkanah is so unable to free Anna from the wrongs of her rival,
that it procures them rather; The unfruitfulness of Anna had never with so
much despite been laid in her dish, if her husbands heart had been as barren
of love to her; Envy though it take advantage of our weaknesses, yet is ever
raised upon some grounds of happiness, in them whom it emulates; It is ever an
ill effect of a good cause: If Abels sacrifice had not been accepted, and if
the acceptance of his sacrifice had not been a blessing, no envy had
followed upon it.

There is no evil of another, wherein it is fit to rejoice, but his Envy; and
this is worthy of our joy, and thankfulness, because it shows us the price of
that good, which we had, and valued not; The malignitie of envy is thus well
answered, when it is made the evil cause of a good effect to us; when God and
our souls may gain by another sin. I do now find that Anna insulted upon
Peninnah, for the greater measure of her husbands love, as Peninna did upon
her, for her fruitfulness; Those that are truly gracious, know how to receive
the blessings of God, without contempt of them that want; and have learned to
be thankful, without ouerlinesse.

Envy when it is once conceived in a malicious heart, is like fire in billers
of Juniper, which (they say) continues more years then one; Every year was
Anna thus vexed with her emulous partner; and troubled, both in her prayers and
meals; Amidst all their feastings, she fed on nothing but her tears: Some
dispositions are less sensible, and more careless of the dispight and ^^^ties
of others, and can turn over unkind vsages, with contempt; By how much more
tender the heart is, so much more deeply is it ever affected with discurtesies*
As wax receives and retains that impression, which in the hard clay cannot be
seen; or, as the eye feels that mote, which the skin of the eie-lid could not
complain of: Yet the husband of Anna (as one that knew his duty) labors by
his love, to comfort her against these discontentments, Why weepest thou? Am
not I better to thee then ten sons? It is the weakness of good natures, to
give so much advantage to an enemy; what would malice rather have then the
vexation of them whom it persecutes? We cannot better please an adversary,
then by hurting our selves; This is no other, then to humor envy, to serve the
turn of those, that malign us; and to draw on that malice, whereof we are
weary; whereas carelessness puts ill will out of countenance; and makes it
withdraw it self in a rage, as that which does but shame the author, without
the hurt of the patient: In causeless wrongs the best remedy is contempt.

She that could not find comfort in the loving persuasions of her husband,
seeks it in her prayers; She rises up hungry from the feast, and hyes her to
the Temple; there she powers out her tears, and supplications; Whatsoever the
complaint be, here is the remedy; There is one universal receipt for all
evils, prayer; When all helps fail us, this remains, and whiles we have an
heart, comforts it.

Here was not more bitterness in the soul of Anna, then feruencie; she did
not only weep and pray, but vow unto God; If God will give her a son, she
will give her son to God back again; Even nature it self had consecrated
her son to God; for he could not but be borne a Leuite; But if his birth make
him a Leuite, her vow shall make him a Nazarite, and dedicate his minority to
the Tabernacle; The way to obtain any benefit, is to deuote it in our hearts,
to the glory of that God, of whom we ask it; by this means shall God both
pleasure his servant, and honor himself; Whereas, if the scope of our desires
be carnal, we may be sure either to fail of our suite, or of a blessing.

Ely and Anna.
OLd Ely sits on a stool, by one of the posts of the Tabernacle; where should
the Priests of God be but in the Temple? whether for action or for ouer-sight;
Their very presence keeps Gods house in order, and the presence of God keeps
their hearts in order.

It is often found that those which are themselves conscionable, are too forward
to the censuring of others; Good Ely, because he marks the lips of Annah to
move without noise, chides her as drunken, and uncharitably misconstrues her
devotion; It was a weak ground whereon to build so heavy a sentence; If she
had spoken too loud, and incomposedly, he might have had some just color for
this conceit, but now to accuse her silence (notwithstanding all the tears
which he saw) of drunkenness, it was a zealous breach of charity.

Some spirit would have been enraged with so rash a censure; when anger meets
with grief, both turn into furie^; but this good woman had been inured to
reproaches, and besides, did well see the reproof arose from mesprison, and the
mesprison from zeal; and therefore answers meekly, as one that had rather
satisfy, then expostulate, Nay my Lord, but I am a woman troubled in spirit;
Hely may now learn charity of Annah: If she had been in that distemper,
whereof he accused her, his just reproof had not been so easily digested;
Guiltiness is commonly clamorous, and impatient, whereas innocence is silent,
and careless of misreports; It is natural unto all men to wipe off from their
name all aspersions of evil, but none do it with such violence, as they which
are faulty; It is a sign the horse is galled, that stirs too much when he is
touched.

She that was censured for drunken, censures drunkenness more deeply then her
reprouer; Count not thine handmaid, for a daughter of Belial; The drunkards
style begins in lawlesuesse, proceeds in unprofitableness, ends in misery;
and all shut up in the denomination of this pedigree; A son of Belial.

If Hannah had been tainted with this sin, she would have denied it with more
favor, and have disclaimed it with an extenuation; What if I should have been
merry with wine, yet I might be devout? If I should have ouer-ioyed in my
sacrifice to God, one cup of excess had not been so heinous; now her freedom
is seen in her severity; Those which have clear hearts from any sin,
prosecute it with rigor; whereas the guilty are ever partial; their
conscience holds their hands, and tells them that they beat themselves, whiles
they punish others.

Now Hely sees his error, and recants it; and to make amends for his rash
censure, prays for her; Even the best may err, but not persist in it; When
good natures have offended, they are unquiet till they have hastened
satisfaction; This was within his office, to pray for the distressed; Wherefore
serves the Priest but to sacrifice for the people; and the best sacrifices are
the prayers of faith.

She that began her prayers with fasting, and heaviness, rises up from them
with cheerfulness, and repast: It cannot be spoken, how much ease and joy
the heart of man finds in having unloaded his cares, and powered out his
supplications into the ears of God; since it is well assured, that the suite
which is faithfully asked, is already granted in heaven: The conscience may
well rest, when it tells us, that we have neglected no means of redressing
our affliction; for then it may resolve to look either for amendment, or
patience.

The sacrifice is ended, and now Elkanah, and his family rise up early, to
return unto Ramah; but they dare not set forward, till they have worshipped
before the Lord; That journey cannot hope to prosper, that takes not God with
it; The way to receive blessings at home, is to be devout at the Temple.

She that before conceived faith in her heart, now conceiues a son in her
womb; God will rather work miracles then faithful prayers shall return
empty: I do not find that Peninna asked any son of God, yet she had store;
Anna begged hard for this one; and could not till now obtain him: They which
are dearest to God do oft-times with great difficulty work out those
blessings, which fall into the mouths of the careless: That wise disposer of
all things knows it fit to hold us short of those favors which we sue for;
whether for the trial of our patience, or the exercise of our faith, or the
increase of our importunity, or the doubling of our obligation.

Those children are most like to prove blessings, which the Parents have begged
of God; and which are no less the fruit of our supplications, then of our
body; As this child was the son of his mothers prayers, and was consecrated
to God ere his possibility of being; so now himself shall know, both how he
came, and whereto he was ordained; and lest he should forget it, his very
name shall teach him both; (She called his name Samuel); He cannot so much as
hear himself named, but he must needs remember both the extraordinary
mercy of God in giving him to a barren mother; and the vow of his mother in
restoring him back to God by her zealous dedication; and by both of them
learn holiness, and obedience: There is no necessity of significant names;
but we cannot have too many monitors to put us in mind of our duty.

It is wont to be the fathers privilege to name his child; but because this
was his mothers son, begotten more by her prayers, then the seed of Elkanah, it
was but reason, she should have the chief hand both in his name* and
disposing; It had been indeed in the power of Elkanah, to have changed both his
name, and profession, and to abrogate the vow of his wife; that wives might
know, they were not their own; and that the rib might learn to know the head;
but husbands shall abuse their authority, if they shall wilfully cross the
holy purposes, and religious endeavors of their yoke-fellowes; How much more
fit is it for them to cherish all good desires in the weaker vessels; and as
we use, when we carry a small light in a wind, to hide it with our lap, or
hand, that it may not go out; If the wife be a Vine, the husband should be an
Elm to uphold he^ in all worthy enterprises; Els^ she falls to the ground,
an^ proves fruitless.

The year is now come about; and Elkanah calls his family to their holy
journey; to go up to Jerusalem, for the aniuersarie solemnity of their
sacrifice; Annaes heart is with them, but she has a good excuse to stay at
home, the charge of her Samuel; her success in the Temple, keeps her happily
from the Temple; that her devotion may be doubled, because it was respited:
God knows how to dispense with necessities; but, if we suffer idle and
needless occasions to hold us from the Tabernacle of God, our hearts are but
hollow to religion.

Now at last, when the child was weaned from her hand, she goes up, and pays
her vow, and with it, pays the interest of her intermission: Never did Anna go
up with so glad an heart to Shilo, as now that she carries God this reasonable
present, which himself gave to her, and she vowed to him; accompanied with the
bounty of other sacrifices, more in number and measure, then the Law of God
required of her; and all this, is too little for her God, that so mercifully
remembered her affliction, and miraculously remedied it; Those hearts which are
truly thankful, do no less rejoice in their repayment, then in their receipt;
and do as much study, how to show their humble and fervent affections, for
what they have, as how to compass favors when they want them; Their debt is
their burden, which when they have discharged, they are at ease.

If Anna had repented of her vow, and not presented her son to the Tebernacle,
Ely could not have challenged him; He had only seen her lips stir, not hearing
the promise of her heart; It was enought, that her own soul knew her vow, and
God which was greater then it; The obligation of a secret vow is no less, then
if it had ten thousand witnesses.

Old Hely could not choose but much rejoice to see this fruit of those lips,
which he thought moved with wine; and this good proof, both of the merciful
audience of God, and the thankful fidelity of his handmaide; this sight calls
him down to his knees (He worshipped the Lord); We are unprofitable witnesses
of the mercies of God, and the graces of men, if we do not glorify him for
others sakes, no less then for our own.

Hely and Anna grew now better acquainted; neither had he so much cause to
praise God for her, as she aftewards for him; For if her own prayers obtained
her first child; his blessing enriched her with five more; If she had not
given her first son to God, ere she had him; I doubt, whether she had not
been ever barren; or if she had kept her Samuel at home, whether ever she had
conceived again; now that piety which stripped her of her only child, for
the service of her God, has multiplied the fruit of her womb, and gave her
five for that one, which was still no less hers, because he was Gods: There is
no so certain way of increase, as to lend, or give unto the owner of all
things.

Ely and his Sons.
IF the conueyances of grace were natural; holy parents would not be so ill
suited with children: What good man would not rather wish his loins dry, then
fruitful of wickedness? Now, we can neither traduce goodness, nor choose but
traduce sin; If virtue were as well intailed upon us, as sin, one might serve
to check the other in our children; but now since grace is derived from heaven
on whomsoever it pleases the giver, and that evil which ours receive
hereditarily from us, is multiplied by their own corruption, it can be no
wonder that good men have ill children, it is rather a wonder that any children
are not evil: The sons of Ely are as lewd, as himself was holy; If the
goodness of examples, precepts, education, profession could have been
preservatives from extremity of sin, these sons of an holy father had not
been wicked; now, neither parentage, nor breeding, nor priesthood can keep
the sons of Hely from sons of Belial; If our children be good, let us
thank God for it; this was more then we could give them; if evil they may
thank us, and themselves; us, for their birth-sinne, themselves for the
improuement of it to that height of wickedness.

If they had not been sons of Ely, yet being Priests of God, who would not
have hoped their very calling should have infused some holiness into them; but
now, even their white Ephod couers foul sins; yea rather, if they which
serve at the alter degenerate, their wickedness is so much more above others,
as their place is holier; A wicked Priest is the worst creature upon earth; Who
are Devils but they which were once Angels of light? Who can stumble at the
sins of the Evangelical Levites, that sees such inpuritie even before the
Ark of God? That God which promised to be the Levites portion, had set forth
the portion of his Ministers; he will feast them at his own altar; The breast
and the right shoulder of the peace offering was their morsel; these bold and
covetous Priests will rather have the flesh-hock their arbiter, then God;
whatsoever those three teeth fasten upon, shall be for their tooth; They were
weary of one joint, and now their delicacy affects variety; God is not worthy
to carue for these men, but their own hands; And this they do not receive, but
take; and take violently, unseasonably; It had been fit God should be first
served; their presumption will not stay his leisure; ere the fat be burned,
ere the flesh be boiled, they snatch more then their share from the altar; as
if the God of heaven should wait on their palate; as if the Israelites had
come thither to sacrifice to their bellies; and (as commonly a wanton tooth is
the harbinger to luxurious wantonness) they are no sooner fed, then they neigh
after the dames of Israel; Holy women assemble to the door of the Tabernacle;
these varlets tempt them to lust, that came thither for devotion; they had
wives of their own, yet their unbridled desires roue after strangers, and
fear not to pollute even that holy place with abominable filthiness, O
sins, to shameful for men; much more for the spiritual guides of Israel! He
that makes himself a servant to his tooth, shall easily become a slave to all
inordinate affections: That altar which expiated other men's sins, added to the
sins of the sacrificers; Doubtless many a soul was the cleaner for the
blood of the sacrifices, which they shed, whiles their own were more impure;
And as the altar cannot sanctify the Priest, so the uncleanness of the minister
cannot pollute the offering; because the virtue thereof is not in the agent,
but in the institution; in the representation his sin is his own; the
comfort of the sacrament is from God; Our clergy is no charter for heaven; Even
those whose trade is devotion, may at once show the way to heaven by their
tongue, and by their foot lead the way to hell; It is neither a coule, nor an
Ephod that can privilege the soul.

The sin of these men was worthy of contempt, yea perhaps their persons; but
for the people therefore to abhor the offerings of the Lord, was to add their
evil unto the Priests; and to offend God, because he was offended; There can
no offense be justly taken, even at men; much less at God for the sake of men:
No man's sins should bring the service of God into dislike; this is to make
holy things guilty of our profaneness: It is a dangerous ignorance not to
distinguish betwixt the work, and the instrument; whereupon it often comes to
pass, that we fall out with God, because we find cause of offense from men;
and give God just cause to abhor us, because we abhor his service
unjustly. Although it be true (of great men especially) that they are the last
that know the evils of their own house, yet either it could not be, when all
Israel rung of the lewdness of Elyes sons, that he only should not know it,
or if he knew it not, his ignorance cannot be excused; for a seasonable
restraint might have prevented this extremity of debauchednesse. Complaints
are long muttered of the great, ere they dare break forth to open
contestation; public accusations of authority argues intolerable
extremities of evil; nothing but age can plead for Ely, that he was not the
first accuser of his sons; now when their enormities came to be the voice of
the multitude, he must hear it perforce; and doubtless he heard it with
grief enough, but not with anger enough; he that was the judge of Israel,
should have impartially judged his own flesh, and blood; never could he have
offered a more pleasing sacrifice, then the depraved blood of so wicked sons;
In vain do we rebuke those sins abroad, which we tolerate at home; That man
makes himself but ridiculous, that leaving his own house on fire, runs to
quench his neighbors.

I heard Ely sharp enough to Annah, upon but a suspicion of sin; and now,
how mild I find him to the notorious crimes of his own? Why do you so my
sons: it is no good report; my sons do no more so; The case is altered with
the persons; if nature may be allowed to speak in judgment, and to make
difference, not of sins but offenders, the sentence must needs savor of
partiality; Had these men but some little slackened their duty, or heedlesly
omitted some rite of the sacrifice, this censure had not been unfit; but to
punish the thefts, rapines, sacriledges, adulteries, incests of his sons,
with Why do ye so, was no other then to s^aue that head, which had deserved
cutting off; As it is with ill humors, that a weak dose does but stir, and
anger them, not purge them out; so it fares with sins; An easy reproof
does but encourage wickedness, and makes it think it self so slight, as
that censure imports; A vehement rebuke to a capital evil, is but like a
strong shower to a ripe field; which lays that corn which were worthy of a
sickle. It is a breach of justice not to proportionate the punishment to the
offense; To whip a man for a murder, or to punish the purse for incest, or to
burn treason in the hand, or to award the stocks to burglairy, is to patronize
evil, in steed of auenging it; Of the two extremes, rigor is more safe for the
public weal, because the ouer-punishing of one offender frights many from
sinning: It is better to live in a common-welth where nothing is lawful, then
where every thing.

Indulgent Parents are cruel to themselves, and their posterity Ely could not
have devised which way to have plagued himself, and his house so much, as by
his kindness to his childrens sins; what variety of judgments does he now
hear of from the messenger of God? First, because his old age (which uses to
be subject to choler), inclined now to misfauor his sons, therefore, there
shall not be an old man left of his house for ever; and because it vexed him
not enough, to see his sons enemies to God in their profession, therefore he
shall see his enemy in the habitation of the Lord; and because himself
forbore to take vengeance of his sons, and esteemed their life above the glory
of his Master, therefore God will revenge himself, by killing them both in one
day; and because he abused his sovereignty by conniuence at sin, therefore
shall his house be stripped of this honor, and see it translated to another;
and lastly, because he suffered his sons to please their own wanton
appetite, in taking meat off from Gods trencher, therefore, those which remain
of his house shall come to his successors, to beg a piece of silver, and a
morsel of bread; in a word, because he was partial to his sons, God shall
execute all this severely upon him, and them: I do not read of any fault Ely
had, but indulgence; and which of the notorious offenders were plagued more?
Parents need no other means to make them miserable, then sparing the rod.

Who should be the bearer of these fearful tidings to Ely, but young Samuel,
whom himself had trained up; He was now grown past his mothers cotes, fit for
the message of God; Old Ely rebuked not his young sons, therefore young Samuel
is sent to rebuke him; I marvel not whiles the Priesthood was so corrupted, if
the word of God were precious, if there were no public vision; It is not the
manner of God to grace the unworthy; The ordinary ministration in the Temple
was too much honor for those that robbed the Altar, though they had no
extraordinary revelations; Hereupon it was, that God lets old Hely sleep (who
slept in his sin) and awakes Samuel, to tell him what he would do with his
master: He which was wont to be the mouth of God to the people, must now
receive the message of God, from the mouth of another; As great persons will
not speak to those, with whom they are highly offended, but send them their
checks by others

The lights of the Temple were now dim, and almost ready to give place to the
morning, when God called Samuel; to signify perhaps, that those which should
have been the lights of Israel, burned no less dimly, and were near their
going out, and should be succeeded with one, so much more lightsome then they,
as the Sun was more bright then the lamps: God had good leisure to have
delivered this message by day, but he meant to make use of Samuels mistaking;
and therefore so speaks, that Ely may be asked for an answer, and perceive
himself both omitted, and censured; He that meant to use Samuels voice to Ely,
imitates the voice of Ely to Samuel; Samuel had so accustomed himself to
obedience, and to answer the call of Ely, that lying in the further cells of
the Levites, he is easily raised from his sleep; and even in the night runs
for his message, to him, who was rather to receive it from him: Thrice is the
old man disquieted with the diligence of his servant, and, tho visions were
rare in his days, yet is he not so unacquainted with God, as not to attribute
that voice to him, which himself heard not; Wherefore like a better Tutor then
a Parent, he teaches Samuel what he shall answer, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears.

It might have pleased God at the first call to have delivered his message to
Samuel, not expecting the answer of a nouice unseen in the visions of a God;
yet does he rather defer it till the fourth summons, and will not speak till
Samuel confessed his audience: God loves ever to prepare his servants for his
employments, and will not commit his errands, but to those, whom he has
addressed both by wonder, and attention, and humility.

Ely knew well the gracious fashion of God, that where he intended a favor,
prorogation could be no hinderance; and therefore after the call of God, thrice
answered with silence, he instructs Samuel to be ready for the fourth: If
Samuels silence had been wilful, I doubt whether he had been again solicited;
now God does both pity his error, and requite his diligence by redoubling his
name at the last.

Samuel had now many years ministered before the Lord, but never till now heard
his voice; and now hears it with much terror; for the first word that he
hears God speak, is threatening, and that of vengeance to his master; What
were these menaces but so many premonitions to himself that should succeed
Ely? God begins early to season their hearts with fear, whom he means to make
eminent instruments of his glory; It is his mercy to make us witnesses of the
judgments of others, that we may be forewarned, ere we have the occasions of
sinning.

I do not hear God bid Samuel deliver this message to Ely; He that was but
now made a Prophet, knows, that the errands of God intend not silence; and
that God would not have spoken to him of another, if he had meant the news
should be reserved to himself: Neither yet did he run with open mouth unto
Ely, to tell him this vision, unasked; No wise man will be hasty to bring ill
tidings to the great; rather does he stay till the importunity of his Master
should wring it from his unwillingness; and then, as his concealment showd
his love, so his full relation shall approve his fidelity: If the heart of Ely
had not told him this news, before God told it Samuel, he had never been so
instant with Samuel, not to conceal it; His conscience did well presage that
it concerned himself; Guiltiness needs no Prophet to assure it of punishment:
The mind that is troubled proiecteth terrible things; and though it cannot
single out the judgment allotted to it, yet it is in a confused expectation of
some grievous evil: Surely, Ely could not think it worse then it was; The
sentence was fearful, and such as I wonder the neck, or the heart of old Ely
could hold out the report of; That God swears he will judge Elyes house; and
that with beggerie, with death, with desolation; and that the wickedness of his
house shall not be purged with sacrifice, or offerings for ever; And yet, this
which every Israelites ear should tingle to hear of, when it should be done,
old Ely hears with an unmoved patience, and humble submission, It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good; Oh admirable faith, and more then humane
constancy and resolution, worthy of the aged presisident of Shiloh, worthy of
an heart sacrificed to that God, whose justice had refused to expiate his sin
by sacrifice: If Ely have been an ill father to his sons, yet he is a good
son to God, and is ready to kiss the very rod he shall smart withal; It is
the Lord, whom I have ever found holy, and just, and gracious, and he cannot
but be himself; Let him do what seems him good; for whatsoever seems good
to him, cannot but be good; howsoever it seems to me: Every man can open his
hand to God while he blesses; but to expose our selves willingly to the
afflicting hand of our maker, and to kneel to him whiles he scourges us, is
peculiar only to the faithful.

If ever a good heart could have freed a man, from temporal punishments, Ely
must needs have escaped; Gods anger was appeased by his humble repentance, but
his justice must be satisfied; Elyes sin and his sons, was in the eye and
mouth of all Israel, his glory therefore should have been much wronged by
their impunitie: Who would not have made these spiritual guides an example of
lawlesnes? and have said; What care I how I live, if Elyes sons go away
unpunished? As not the tears of Ely, so not the words of Samuel may fall to
the ground; We may not measure the displeasure of God by his stripes; many
times, after the remission of the sin, the very chastisements of the
Almighty are deadly; No repentance can assure us that we shall not smart with
outward afflictions: That, can prevent the eternal displeasure of God; but
still it may be necessary and good we should be corrected: Our care and suite
must be, that the evils which shall not be auerted, may be sanctified.

If the prediction of these evils were fearful, what shall the execution be?
The presumption of the ill-taught Israelites shall give occasion to this
judgment; for being smitten before the Philistims, they send for the Arc into
the field; Who gave them authority to command the Ark of God at their
pleasure? Here was no consulting with the Arc, which they would fetch; no
inquiry of Samuel whether they should fetch it; but an heddie resolution of
presumptuous Elders to force God into the field, and to challenge success: If
God were not with the Arc, why did they send for it, and rejoice in the
coming of it? If God were with it, why was not his allowance asked that it
should come? How can the people be good where the Priests are wicked? When the
Arc of the covenant of the Lord of hosts that dwells between the Cherubims,
was brought into the host (tho with mean and wicked attendance) Israel does,
as it were, fill the heaven, and shake the earth with shoutes; as if the Arc
and victory were no less inseperable, then they and their sins; Even the
leudest men will be looking for favor from that God, whom they cared not to
displease, contrary to the conscience of their deseruings; Presumption does the
same in wicked men, which faith does in the holiest; Those that regarded not
the God of the Arc, think themselves safe and happy in the Ark of God;
vain men are transported with a confidence in the outsides of religion, not
regarding the substance and soul of it, which only can give them true peace;
But rather then God will humor superstition in Israelites, he will suffer his
own Arc to fall into the hands of Philistims; Rather will he seem to
slacken his hand of protection, then he will be thought to have his hands
bound by a formal mis-confidence. The slaughter of the Israelites was no
plague to this; It was a greater plague rather to them that should survive, and
behold it. The two sons of Ely which had helped to corrupt their brethren,
die by the hands of the uncircumcised, and are now too late separated from the
Ark of God by Philistims, which should have been before separated by their
father; They had lived formerlie to bring Gods altar into contempt, and now
live to carry his Arc into captivity, and at last, as those that had made up
the measure of their wickedness are slain in their sin.

Ill news does ever either run, or fly; The man of Benjamin, which ran from
the host, has soon filled the City with outcries; and Elyes ears with the
cry of the City; The good old man after ninety and eight years, sits in the
gate, as one that never thought himself too aged to do God service; and hears
the news of Isreal's discomfiture, and his sons death, though with sorrow,
yet with patience; but, when the messenger tells him of the Ark of God taken,
he can live no longer, that word strikes him down backward from his throne,
and kills him in the fall; no sword of a Philistim could have slain him more
painefully, neither know I, whether his neck, or his heart were first broken:
Oh fearful judgment, that ever any Israelites ear could tingle withal; The
Arc lost; what good man would wish to live without God? Who can choose but
think he has lived too long, that has ouerliued the Testimonies of Gods
presence with his Church? Yea the very daughter in law of Ely, a woman, the
wife of a lewd husband, when she was at once traveling (upon that tidings) and
in that travel, dying (to make up the full sum of Gods judgment upon that
wicked house) as one insensible of the death of her father, of her husband, of
her self, in comparison of this loss, calls her (then unseasonable) son,
Ichabod; and with her last breath says, The glory is departed from Israel;
The Arc is taken: what cares she for a posterity, which should want the Arc?
What cares she for a son, come into the world of Israel, when God was gone
from it? and how willingly does she depart from them, from whom God was
departed? Not outward magnificence, not state, not wealth, not favor of the
mighty, but the presence of God in his Ordinances, are the glory of Israel;
the subducing whereof is a greater judgment, then destruction.

Oh Israel, worse now then no people; a thousand times more miserable then
Philistims; Those Pagans went away triumphing with the Ark of God, and
victory; and leave the remnants of the chosen people to lament, that they once
had a God:

Oh cruel and wicked indulgence, that is now found guilty of the death, not
only of the Priests, and people, but of Religion. Unjust mercy can never end
in less then blood, and it were well if only the body should have cause to
complain of that kind cruelty.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 97. lin. 19. for wool god, read wool. God: p. 169 l. 19. for entreats,
read treats. p* 175. 15. for inioyed, read ioyed. p. 222. l. 18. for may be,
read may not be. p. 223. l. 15. for strength, read stench. p 268. for had not
wit, read had wit p. 346. vlt. for strainted, read straightened. p. 434. l. 3. for
representation his. r. representation: his.


