Contemplations, THE SIXTH VOLVME.

By Ios. HALL D. of D.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Nathaniel Butter. 1622.



Contemplations. THE SIXTEENTH BOOK. Containing Shimei Cursing. Achitophel.
The death of Absalom. Shebaes Rebellion. The Gibeonites revenged. The numbering
of the people.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVLY NOBLE LORD, FRANCIS, Lord RVSSELL, Baron of
THORNHAVGH all increase of Honor and Happiness.
RIGHT HO:
You shall not need to impute it to any other reason besides your virtues, that
I have presumed to shroud this piece of my labors under your Noble Patronage.
The world has taken just notice how much the Gospel is graced by your real
profession; whom neither honor has made ouerlie, nor wealth lavish, nor charge
miserable, nor greatness licentious. Go on happily in these safe and gainful
steps of goodness; and still honor the God that has honored you; In the
mean time, accept from my unworthy hands these poor Meditations, more hie for
their subject, then mean for their author; Wherein SHIMEIES curses shall teach
you how unable either greatness, or innocence is to bear off the blows of
ill tongues; and how baseness ever molds it self according to the advantage
of times. ACHITOPHELS depth compared with his end shall show how witless, and
insensate craft is, when it strives against honesty; and how justly they are
forsaken of their reason, that have abandoned God; The blood of ABSALOM and
SHEBA proclaim the inevitable revenge of rebellion, which neither in woods nor
walls can find safety. The late famine of Israel for the forgotten violence
offered to the Gibeonites, shows what note God takes of our oaths, and what
sure vengeance of their violation. DAVID'S muster seconded with the plague of
Israel teaches, how highly God may be offended with sins of the least
appearance, how severe to his own, how merciful in that severity. If these
my thoughts shall be approved beneficial to any soul, I am rich. I shall vow
my prayers to their success; and to the happiness of your Honorable Family,
both in the root, and branches; Whereto I am in all

Humble duty devoted, IOS: HALL.

Contemplations.
SHIMEI cursing.
WITH an heavy heart, and a covered head, and a weeping eye, and bare feet, is
David gone away from Jerusalem; never did he with more joy come up to his
city, then now he left it with sorrow: how could he do otherwise, whom the
insurrection of his own Son drove out from his house, from his throne, from
the Ark of God? and now, when the depth of this grief deserved nothing but
compassion, the foul mouth of Shimei entertaines David with curses: There is
no small cruelty in the picking out of a time for mischief; That word would
scarce gall at one season, which at another kills. The same shaft flying with
the wind pierces deep, which against it, can hardly find strength to stick
upright. The valor, and justice of children condemns it for injuriously
cowardly to strike their adversary when he is once down. It is the murder of
the tongue to insult upon those, whom God has humbled, and to draw blood of
that back, which is yet blew from the hand of the Almighty. If Shimei had not
presumed upon David's deiection, he durst not have been thus bold; now he that
perhaps durst not have looked at one of those Worthies single, defies them all
at once, and does both cast, and speak stones against David, and all his
army. The malice of a base spirits sometimes carries them further then the
courage of the valiant.

In all the time of David's prosperity, we heard no news of Shimei; his
silence and colorable obedience made him pass for a good subject; yet all
that while was his heart unsound, and traiterous. Peace and good success hides
many a false heart; (like as a snow-drift couers an heap of dung) which once
melting away descryes the rottenness that lay within: Honor and welfare are
but flattering glasses of men's affections; adversity will not deceive us; but
will make a true report as of our own powers, so of the dispositions of others.

He that smiled on David in his throne, curses him in his flight; if there be
any quarrels, any exceptions to be taken against a man, let him look to have
them laid in his dish when he fares the hardest. This practice have wicked men
learnt of their master to take the utmost advantages of our afflictions; He
that suffers had need to be double armed, both against pain, and censure.

Every word of Shimei was a slander; He that took Saul's spear from his head,
and repented to have but cut the lap of his garment, is reproched as a man of
blood; The man after Gods own heart is branded for a man of Belial. He that
was sent for out of the fields to be anointed, is taxed for an usurper; If
David's hands were stained with blood, yet not of Saul's house; it was his
servant, not his master that bled by him; yet is the blood of the Lords
anointed cast in David's teeth, by the spite of a false tongue. Did we not see
David (after all the proofs of his humble loyalty) shedding the blood of that
Amalakite who did but say he shed Saul's? Did we not hear him lament
passionately for the death of so ill a master, chiding the mountains of Gilboa
on which he fell; and angerly wishing that no dew might fall where that blood
was powered out; and charging the daughters of Israel to weep over Saul, who
had clothed them in scarlet? Did we not hear and see him inquiring for any
remainder of the house of Saul, that he might show him the kindness of God?
Did we not see him honoring lame Mephibosheth with a princely seat at his own
table? Did we not see him revenging the blood of his rival Ishbosheth, upon
the heads of Rechab and Baanah? What could any living man have done more to
wipe off these bloody aspersions? Yet is not a Shimei ashamed to charge
innocent David with all the blood of the house of Saul.

How is it likely this clamorous wretch had secretly traduced the name of
David, all the time of his government, that dares thus accuse him to his face,
before all the mighty men of Israel, who were witnesses of the contrary? The
greater the person is, the more open do his actions lie to mis-interpretation,
and censure. Every tongue speaks partially according to the interest he has
in the cause, or the patient. It is not possible that eminent persons should be
free from imputations; Innocence can no more protect them, then power.

If the patience of David can digest this indignity, his train cannot; their
fingers could not but itch to return iron for stones. If Shimei rail on
David, Abishai railes on Shimei; Shimei is of Saul's family, Abishai of David's;
each speaks for his own; Abishai most justly bends his tongue against Shimei,
as Shimei against David, most unjustly; Had Shimei been any other then a dog,
he had never so rudely barked at an harmless passenger; neither could he
deserve less then the loss of that head which had uttered such blasphemies
against Gods anointed; The zeal of Abishai does but plead for justice, and is
checked; What have I to do with you ye sons of Zeruiah? David said not so
much to his reuiler, as to his abettor: He well saw that a revenge was just,
but not seasonable; he found the present a fit time to suffer wrongs, not to
right them: he therefore gives way rather meekly to his own humiliation, then
to the punishment of another; There are seasons wherein lawful motions are not
fit to be cherished; Anger does not become a mourner; One passion at once is
enough for the soul. Unadvised zeal may be more prejudicial, then a cold
remissness.

What if the Lord for the correction of his servant have said unto Shimei,
Curse David; yet is Shimeies curse no less worthy of Abishaies sword; the
sin of Shimeies curse was his own, the smart of the curse was Gods; God wills
that as David's chastisement, which he hates as Shimeies wickedness; That lewd
tongue moved from God, it moved lewdly from Satan. Wicked men are never the
freer from guilt, or punishment, for that hand which the holy God has in their
offensive actions; Yet David can say, Let him alone, and let him curse, for the
Lord has bidden him; as meaning to give a reason of his own patience, rather
then Shimeies impunitie; the issue showd how well David could distinguish
betwixt the act of God, and of a traitor; how he could both kiss the rod, and
burn it; There can be none so strong motive of our meek submission to evils,
as the acknowledgement of their original; He that can see the hand of God
striking him by the hand or tongue of an enemy, shall more awe the first mouer
of his harm, then malign the instrument.

Even whiles David laments the rebellion of his son, he gains by it; and
makes that the argument of his patience, which was the exercise of it. Behold,
my son which came forth of my bowels seeks my life; how much more now may
this Beniamite do it? The wickedness of an Absalom may rob his father of
comfort, but shall help to add to his fathers goodness; It is the advantage
of great crosses, that they swallow up the less; One man's sin cannot be
excused by another, the lesser by the greater; If Absalom be a traitor, Shimei
may not curse and rebel: But the passion conceived from the indignity of a
stranger may be abated by the harder measure of our own; If we can therefore
suffer because we have suffered, we have profited by our affliction. A weak
heart faints with every addition of succeeding trouble; the strong recollects
it self, and is grown so skillful that it bears off one mischief with
another.

It is not either the unnatural insurrection of Absalom, nor the unjust curses
of Shimei, that can put David quite out of heart. It may be that the Lord will
look on mine affliction, and will requite good for his cursing, this day. So
well was David acquainted with the proceedings of God, that he knew cherishing
was ever wont to follow stripes; after vehement euacuation, cordialls; after a
dark night, the clear light of the morning: Hope therefore does not only
uphold, but cheer up his heart, in the midst of his sorrow; If we can look
beyond the cloud of our affliction, and see the Sunshine of comfort on the
other side of it, we cannot be so discouraged with the presence of evil, as
hartened with the issue; As on the contrary, let a man be never so merry within,
and see pain and misery waiting for him at the door, his expectation of
evil shall easily daunt all the sense of his pleasure; The retributions of
temporal favors go but by Peraduentures, It may be the Lord will look on
mine affliction; of eternal, are certain and infallible; If we suffer, we
shall reign; why should not the assurance of reigning make us triumph in
suffering?

David's patience draws on the insolence of Shimei. Evil natures grow
presumptuous upon forbearance: In good dispositions, injury unanswered grows
weary of it self, and dies in a voluntary remorse; but in those dogged
stomachs, which are only capable of the restraints of fear, the silent
digestion of a former wrong prouokes a second; Mercy had need to be guided with
wisdom, lest it prove cruel to it self.

Oh the base minds of inconstant-Time-seruers! Stay but a while, till the
wheel be a little turned; you shall see humble Shimei fall down on his face
before David, in his return over Jordan; now his submission shall equal his
former rudeness; his prayers shall requite his curses, his tears make amends
for his stones, Let not my Lord impute iniquity unto me; neither do thou
remember that which thy servant did peruersly, the day that my Lord the King
went out of Jerusalem, that the King should take it to heart; for thy servant
does know that I have sinned; False-hearted Shimei, had Absalom prospered, thou
had not sinned, thou had not repented; then had thou braggd of thine
insultation over his miseries, whose pardon thou now beggest with tears. The
changes of worldly minds are thanklesse; since they are neither wrought out of
conscience, nor love, but only by a slavish fear of a just punishment.

David could say no more to testify his sorrow (for his heinous sins against
God) to Nathan, then Shimei says of himself to David; whereto may be added
the advantage of a voluntary confession in this offender, which in David was
extorted by the reproof of a Prophet; yet is David's confession seriously
penitent, Shimeies craftily hypocritical; Those alterations are justly
suspected, which are shaped according to the times, and outward occasions; the
true penitent looks only at God, and his sin, and is changed when all other
things are themselves.

Great offenses had need of answerable satisfactions; As Shimei was the only
man of the house of Benjamin that came forth and cursed David in his flight, so
is he the first man (even before those of the house of Joseph, though nearer in
situation) that comes to meet David in his return with prayers and
gratulation: Notorious offenders may not think to sit down with the task of
ordinary services; The retributions of their obedience must be proportionable
to their crimes.

Achitophel.
SO soon as David heard of Achitophels hand in that conspiracy, he falls to
his prayers, O Lord, I pray thee turn the counsel of Achitophel into
foolishness; The known wisdom of his revolted counselor made him a
dangerous and dreadful adversary: Great parts mis-imployed cannot but prove
most mischievous: when wickedness is armed with wit, and power, none but a God
can defeat it; when we are matched with a strong and subtle enmity, it is hie
time (if ever) to be devout; If the bounty of God have thought good to furnish
his creatures with powers to war against himself, his wisdom knows how to
turn the abuse of those powers to the shame of the owners, and the glory of
the giver.

Oh the policy of this Machiauell of Israel, no less deep, then hell it
self: Go in to thy fathers concubines, which he has left to keep the house;
and when all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father, the hands
of all that are with thee shall be strong. The first care must be to secure the
faction: There can be no safety in siding with a doubtful rebel; if Absalom
be a Traitor yet he is a son; Nature may return to it self; Absalom may
relent, David may remit; where then are we that have helped to promote the
conspiracy: the danger is ours, whiles this breach may be peeced; There is no
way but to engage Absalom in some further act, incapable of forgiveness;
Besides the throne, let him violate the bed of his father; unto his treason let
him add an incest, no less unnatural; now shall the world see that Absalom
neither hopes, nor cares for the reconciliation of a father; Our quarrel can
never have any safe end but victory; the hope whereof depends upon the
resolution of our followers; they cannot be resolute, but upon the unpardonable
wickedness of their leader; Neither can this villainy be shameful enough, if
it be secret. The closeness of evil argues fear, or modesty; neither of
which can beseem him that would be a succesfull traitor; Set up a tent on the
top of the house, and let all Israel be witnesses of thy sin, and thy fathers
shame; Ordinary crimes are for vulgar offenders; Let Absalom sin eminently;
and do that which may make the world at once to blush, and wonder.

Who would ever have thought that Achitophel had lived at the Court, at the
Councell-table of a David? Who would think that mouth had ever spoken well?
Yet had he been no other then as the Oracle of God to the religious Court of
Israel; even whiles he was not wise enough to be good: Policy and grace are
not always lodged under one roof; This man whiles he was one of David's deep
Counselors, was one of David's fools that said in their hearts, There is no
God; Else he could not have hoped to make good an evil with worse, to build
the success of treason upon incest.

Profane hearts do so contriue the plots of their wickedness, as if there
were no ouerruling power to cross their designs, or to revenge them: He that
sits in heaven laughs them to scorn, and so far gives way to their sins,
as their sins may prove plagues unto themselves.

These two sons of David met with pestilent counsel: Amnon is advised to
incest with his sister; Absalom is advised to incest with his fathers
Concubines; That by Ionadab, this by Achitophel: Both prevail: It is as easy
at least to take ill counsel, as to give it: Pronenesse to villainy in the
great cannot want either proiectors to devise, or parasites to execute the most
odious and unreasonable sins.

The tent is spread (lest it should not be conspicuous enough) on the top of the
house, The act is done; in the sight of all Israel: The filthiness of the
sin was not so great, as the impudency of the manner: When the prophet
Nathan came with that heavy message of reproof, and menace to David, after
his sin with Bathsheba, he could say from God, Behold I will raise up evil
against thee, out of thine own house, and will take thy wives before thine
eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives, in the
sight of this Sun: For thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing
before all Israel, and before this Sun. The counsel of Achitophel, and the
lust of Absalom have fulfilled the judgment of God. Oh the wisdom of the
Almighty, that can use the worst of evils, well; and most justly make the
sins of men his executioners!

It was the sin of Reuben that he defiled his fathers bed; yet not in the
same height of lewdness: what Reuben did in a youthful wantonness, Absalom
did in a malicious despite; Reuben sinned with one; Absalom with ten; Reuben
secretly, Absalom in the open eyes of heaven and earth; yet old Jacob could say
of Reuben, Thou shall not excel; thy dignity is gone; Whiles Achitophel says
to Absalom, Thy dignity shall arise from incest; Climb up to thy fathers bed,
if thou will sit in his throne; If Achitophel were a politician, Jacob was a
Prophet; if the one spoke from carnal sense, the other from divine revelation.
Certainly, to sin is not the way to prosper; what ever vain fools may
promise to themselves, there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel
against the Lord.

After the rebellion is secured for continuance, the next care is that it may
end in victory; this also has the working head of Achitophel proiected. Wit
and experience told him that in these cases of assault, celeritie uses to bring
forth the happiest dispatch: whereas protraction is no small advantage to the
defendant. Let me (says he) choose out now twelve thousand men, and I will up,
and follow after David this night; and I will come upon him while he is weary,
and weak-handed. No advice could be more pernicious: For, besides the
weariness, and unreadiness of David and his army, the spirits of that worthy
leader were daunted, and dejected with sorrow, and offered way to the violence
of a sudden assault. The field had been half won ere any blow stricken.
Achitophel could not have been reputed so wise, if He had not learned the due
proportion betwixt actions and times: He that observes every wind shall never
sow; but he that observes no Wind at all, shall never reap.

The likeliest devices do not always succeed; The God that had appointed to
establish David's throne, and determined Solomon to his succession, finds
means to cross the plot of Achitophel, by a lesse-probable advice: Hushai was
not sent back for nothing: where God has in his secret will decreed any
event, he inclines the wills of men to approve that which may promote his own
purposes: Neither had Hushai so deep an head; neither was his counsel so
sure, as that of Achitophel, yet his tongue shall refell Achitophel, and divert
Absalom: The pretenses were fairer; though the grounds were unsound; First, to
sweeten his opposition, he yields the praise of wisdom to his adversary in
all other counsels, that he may have leave to deny it in this; His very
contradiction in the present insinuates a general allowance. Then, he suggests
certain apparent truths concerning David's valor, and skill, to give
countenance to the inferences of his improbabilities; Lastly, he cunningly
feeds the proud humor of Absalom, in magnifying the power and extent of his
commands, and ends in the glorious boasts of his fore-promised victory; As it
is with faces, so with counsel, that is fair that pleases. He that gives the
vttrance to words, gives also their speed: Favor both of speech and men is not
ever according to desert, but according to fore-ordination: The tongue of
Hushai, and the heart of Absalom is guided by a power above their own; Hushai
shall therefore prevail with Absalom, that the treason of Absalom may not
prevail; He that works all in all things, so disposes of wicked men and
spirits, that whiles they do most oppose his revealed will, they execute his
secret, and whiles they think most to please, they overthrow themselves.

When Absalom first met Hushai returned to Jerusalem, he vpbraided him
pleasantly with the scoff of his professed friendship to David; Is this thy
kindness to thy friend? Sometimes there is more truth in the mouth then in the
heart, more in jest then in earnest; Hushai was a friend, his stay was his
kindness; and now he has done that for which he was left at Jerusalem,
disappointed Achitophel, preserved David; Neither did his kindness to his
friend rest here, but (as one that was justly jealous of him, with whom he was
allowed to temporize) he mistrusts the approbation of Absalom; and not daring
to put the life of his master upon such an hazard, he gives charge to Zadok,
and Abiathar of this intelligence unto David: we cannot be too suspicious when
we have to do with those that are faithless: We cannot be too curious of the
safety of good Princes.

Hushai fears not to descry the secrets of Absaloms counsel; To betray a
traitor is no other then a commendable work; Zadok and Abiathar are fast
within the gates of Jerusalem; their sons lay purposely abroad in the
fields; this message that concerned no less then the life of David, and the
whole kingdom of Israel, must be trusted with a maid: Sometimes it pleases
the wisdom of God, who has the variety of heaven and earth before him, to
single out weak instruments for great services; and they shall serve his
turn, as well as the best; No counsailour of state could have made this
dispatch more effectually; Jonathan and Ahimaaz are sent, descried, pursued,
preserved; The fidelity of a maid instructed them in their message, the
suttletie of a woman saved their lives. At the well of Rogel they received
their message, in the Well of Bahurim was their life saved; The sudden wit of a
woman has choked the mouth of her Well with dried corn, that it might not
bewray the messengers; and now David hears safely of his danger, and preuents
it; and though weary with travel, and laden with sorrow, he must spend the
night in his remove. Gods promises of his deliverance, and the confirmation of
his kingdom may not make him neglect the means of his safety: If he be
faithful, we may not be careless; since our diligence and care are appointed
for the factors of that divine providence; The acts of God must abate nothing
of ours; rather must we ^abour, by doing that which he requires, to further
that which he decrees.

There are those that have great wits for the public, none for themselves:
Such was Achitophel, who whiles he had powers to govern a state, could not
tell how to rule his own passions: Never till now do we find his counsel
balked; neither was it now rejected as ^ll, only Hushaies was allowed for
better; he can live no longer now that he is beaten at his own weapon: this
alone i^ cause enough to saddle his Asse^ and to go home, and put the halter
about his own neck Pride causes men both to misinterpret disgraces, and to
ouerrate them; Now is David's praie^ heard, Achitophels counsel is turned into
foolishness; Desperat^ Achitophel, what if thou be no^ the wisest man of all
Israel^ Even those that have not attained to the hiest pitch of wisdom, have
found contentment in a mediocritie; what (...) thy counsel were despised?
(...) wise man knows to live happily in spite of an unjust contempt: what
madness is this (...) revenge another man's reputation upon thy self? And
whiles thou striuest for the hiest room of wisdom, to run into the grossest
extremity of folly? Worldly wisdom is no protection from shame and ruin. How
easily may a man, though naturally wise, be made weary of life: A little
pain, a little shame, a little loss, a small affront can soon rob a man of
all comfort, and cause his own hands to rob him of himself; If there were not
hier respects then the world can yield, to maintain us in being, it should be
a miracle if indignation did not kill more then disease: now, that God by whose
appointment we live here, for his most wise and holy purposes, has found
means to make life sweet, and death terrible.

What a mixture do we find here of wisdom and madness? Achitophel will
needs hang himself, there is madness; He will yet set his house in order;
there is an act of wisdom; And could it be possible, that he who was so wise
as to set his house in order, should be so mad as to hang himself? That he
should be careful to order his house, who regarded not to order his impotent
passions? That he should care for his house, who cared not for either body or
soul? How vain it is for a man to be wise, if he be not wise in God? How
preposterous are the cares of idle worldlings that prefer all other things to
themselves, and whiles they look at what they have in their cofers, forget
what they have in their breasts.

The Death of Absalom.
THE same God that raised enmity to David from his own loins, procured him
favor from forrainers; Strangers shall relieve him, whom his own son
persecutes; Here is not a loss, but an exchange of love: Had Absalom been a
son of Ammon, and Shobi a son of David; David had found no cause of
complaint: If God take with one hand, he gives with another: whiles that divine
bounty serves us in, good meat, though not in our own dishes, we have good
reason to be thankful. No sooner is David come to Mahanaim, then Barzillai,
Machir, and Shobi refresh him with provisions; Who ever saw any child of God
left utterly destitute? Whosoever be the messenger of our aid, we know whence
he comes; Heaven shall want power, and earth means, before any of the household
of faith shall want maintenance.

He that formerly was forced to employ his arms for his defense against a
tyrannous father in law, must now buckle them on against an unnatural son:
Now therefore he musters his men, and ordaines his commanders, and marshalls
his troops, and, since their loyal importunity will not allow the hazard of
his person, he at once incourages them by his eye, and restraines them with his
tongue, Deal gently with the young man Absalom, for my sake: How unreasonably
favorable are the wars of a father? O holy David, what means this
ill-placed love, this unjust mercy? Deal gently with a traitor? but of all
traitors with a son? of all sons with an Absalom, the graceless dareling
of so good a father; and all this for thy sake, whose crown, whose blood he
hunts after? For whose sake should Absalom be pursued, if he must be forborne
for thine? He was still courteous to thy followers, affable to suitors,
plausible to all Israel, only to thee he is cruel: Wherefore are those arms,
if the cause of the quarrel must be a motive of mercy? Yet thou say, Deal
gently with the young man Absalom, for my sake: Even in the holiest Parents
nature may be guilty of an injurious tenderness, of a bloody indulgence.

Or, whether shall we not rather think this was done in type of that
unmeasurable mercy of the true king, and redeemer of Israel, who prayed for his
persecutors, for his murderers; and even whiles they were at once scorning and
killing him, could say, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do? If
we be sons, we are ungracious, we are rebellious, yet still is our heavenly
Father thus compassionately regardfull of us: David was not sure of the
success; there was great inequality in the number; Absaloms forces were more
then double to his; It might have come to the contrary issue, that David should
have been forced to say, Deal gently with the father of Absalom; but, in a
supposition of that victory, which only the goodness of his cause bade him
hope for, he says, Deal gently with the young man Absalom; as for us, we are
never but under mercy; our God needs no advantages to sweep us from the earth,
any moment, yet he continues that life, and those powers to us, whereby we
provoke him, and bids his Angels deal kindly with us, and bear us in their
arms, whiles we lift up our hands, and bend our tongues against heaven. O
mercy past the comprehension of all finite spirits, and only to be conceived
by him whose it is: Never more resembled by any earthly affection then by this
of his Deputy and Type, Deal gently with the young man Absalom, for my sake.

The battle is joined; David's followers are but an handful to Absaloms? How
easily may the fickle multitude be transported to the wrong side? What they
wanted in abettors, is supplied in the cause. Unnatural ambition draws the
sword of Absalom, David's, a necessary and just defense. They that in
simplicity of heart followed Absalom, cannot in malice of heart, persecute the
father of Absalom: with what courage could any Israelite draw his sword against
a David? or on the other side, who can want courage to fight for a righteous
Sovereign, and father, against the conspiracy of a wicked son? The God of
hosts, with whom it is all one to save with many or with few, takes part with
justice, and lets Israel feel, what it is to bear arms for a traitorous
usurper. The sword deuoures twenty thousand of them, and the wood deuoures
more then the sword, It must needs be a very universal rebellion, wherein so
many perished; What virtue or merits can assure the hearts of the vulgar, when
so gracious a Prince finds so many reuolters? Let no man look to prosper by
rebellion; the very thickets, and stakes, and pits, and wild beasts of the wood
shall conspire to the punishment of traitors; Amongst the rest, see how a
fatal oak has singled out the ringleader of this hateful insurrection; and
will at once serve for his hangman and gallows; by one of those spreading
arms snatching him away to speedy execution. Absalom was comely, and he knew
it well enough; His hair was no small piece of his beauty, nor matter of his
pride: It was his wont to cut it once a year; not for that it was too long,
but too heavy; his heart could have borne it longer, if his neck had not
complained; And now, the justice of God has platted an halter of those locks;
Those tresses, had formerly hanged loosely disheueld on his shoulders, now he
hangs by them; He had wont to weigh his hair, and was proud to find it so
heavy; now his hair poyseth the weight of his body, and makes his burden his
torment: It is no marvel if his own hair turned traitor to him, who durst
rise up against his father. That part which is misused by man to sin, is
commonly employed by God to revenge; The revenge that it works for God, makes
amends for the offense, whereto it is drawn against God; The very beast whereon
Absalom sat, as weary to bear so unnatural a burden, resignes over his lode
to the tree of Justice; There hangs Absalom between heaven and earth, as one
that was hated, and abandoned both of earth, and heaven: As if God meant to
prescribe this punishment for traitors, Absalom, Achitophel, and Judas die all
one death: So let them perish that dare lift up their hand against Gods
anointed.

The honest soldier sees Absalom hanging in the Oak, and dares not touch him;
his hands were held with the charge of David, Beware that none touch the young
man Absalom; Ioab, upon that intelligence, sees him, and smites him, with no
less then three darts; What the soldier forbore in obedience, the Captain
does in zeal: not fearing to prefer his Sovereigns safety, to his command;
and more tendering the life of a King, and peace of his Country, then the
weak affection of a father; I dare not sit Judge betwixt this zeal and that
obedience; betwixt the captain and the Soldier; the one was a good subject,
the other a good Patriot: the one loved the King, the other loved David; and
out of love disobeyed; the one meant as well, as the other sped: As if God
meant to fulfill the charge of his Anointed, without any blame of his subjects,
it pleased him to execute that immediate revenge upon the rebel, which would
have dispatched him without hand, or dart: only the Mule and the Oak conspired
to this execution; but that death would have required more leisure, then it was
safe for Israel to give; and still life would give hope of rescue; to cut off
all fears, Ioab lends the Oak three darts to help forward so needful a work
of justice: All Israel did not afford so firm a friend to Absalom, as Ioab had
been; who but Ioab had suborned the witty widow of Tekoah, to sue for the
recalling of Absalom, from his three years exile? Who but he went to fetch him
from Geshur to Jerusalem? Who but he fetched him from his house at Jerusalem
(whereto he had been two years confined) to the face, to the lips of David?
Yet now he that was his solicitour for the Kings favor, is his executioner
against the Kings charge: With honest hearts all respects either of blood or
friendship cease in the case of treason; well has Ioab forgotten himself to
be friend to him who had forgotten himself to be a son. Even ciuilly, the
King is our common father; our country our common mother; nature has no
private relations which should not gladly give place to these; He is neither
father, nor son, nor brother, nor friend that conspires against the common
parent* Well does he who spoke parables for his masters son, now speak darts
to his Kings enemy; and pierces that heart which was false to so good a
father: Those darts are seconded by Ioabs followers; each man tries his weapon
upon so fair a mark. One death is not enough for Absalom; he is at once
hanged, shot, mangled, stoned: Justly was he lift up to the Oak, who had lift
up himself against his father, and sovereign; Justly is he pierced with
darts, who had pierced his fathers heart with so many sorrows; Justly is he
mangled, who had dismembered and divided all Israel; Justly is he stoned, who
had not only cursed, but pursued his own parent.

Now Ioab sounds the retrait; and calls off his eager troops from execution;
howeuer he knew what his rebellious countrymen had deserved in following an
Absalom; Wise commanders know how to put a difference betwixt the heads of a
faction, and the misguided multitude; and can pity the one, whiles they take
revenge on the other.

So did Absalom esteem himself, that he thought it would be a wrong to the
world, to want the memorial of so goodly a person. God had denied him sons;
How just it was that he should want a son, who had robbed his father of a
son, who would have robbed himself of a father, his father of a Kingdom? It
had been pity so poisonous a plant should have been fruitful; His pride
shall supply nature, he reares up a stately pillar in the Kings dale, and calls
it by his own name, that he might live in dead stones, who could not survive
in living issue; and now, behold this curious pile ends in a rude heap, which
speaks no language, but the shame of that carcass which it couers: Hear this
ye glorious fools, that care not to perpetuate any memory of your selves to
the world, but of il-deseruing greatness; the best of this affectation is
vanity; the worst, infamy and dishonor; whereas the memorial of the just
shall be blessed; and if his humility shall refuse an Epitaph, and chose to
hide himself under the bare earth, God himself shall ingraue his name upon
the pillar of eternity.

There now lies Absalom in the pit, under a thousand grauestones, in every of
which is written his everlasting reproach; well might this heap ouer-liue that
pillar; for when that ceased to be a pillar, it began to be an heap; neither
will it cease to be a monument of Absaloms shame, whiles there are stones to
be found upon earth; Even at this day very Pagans and Pilgrims that pass that
way, cast each man a stone unto that heap, and are wont to say in a solemn
execration; Cursed be the paricide Absalom, and cursed be all unjust
persecutors of their parents, for ever; Fasten your eyes upon this woeful
spectacle, o all ye rebellious and ungracious children, which rise up against
the loins and thighs from which ye fell: and know that it is the least part
of your punishment, that your carcasses rot in the earth, and your name in
ignominy; these do but shadow out those eternal sufferings, of your souls,
for your foul and unnatural disobedience.

Absalom is sped; who shall report it to his father? Surely Ioab was not so
much afraid of the fact, as of the message; There are busy spirits that love
to carry news, though thanklesse, though purposelesse; such was Ahimaaz, the
son of Zadock; who importunately thrusts himself into this service; wise
Ioab, who well saw, how unwelcome tidings must be the burden of the first post,
disswades him in vain; he knew David too well to employ a friend in that
errand. An Ethiopian servant was a fitter bearer of such a message, then the
son of the Priest. The entertainment of the person does so follow the quality
of the news, that David could argue afar off, He is a good man, he comes
with good tidings. Oh how welcome deserve those messengers to be that bring us
the glad tidings of salvation; that assure us of the foil of all spiritual
enemies, and tell us of nothing but victories, and Crowns, and Kingdoms; If
we think not their feet beautiful, our hearts are foul with infidelity, and
secure worldliness.

So wise is Ahimaaz grown by Ioabs intimation, that though he out-went Cushi
in his pace, he suffers Cushi to out-goe him in his tale, cunningly suppressing
that part, which he knew must be both necessarily delivered, and vnpleasingly
received.

As our care is wont to be where our love is; David's first word is not, how
fares the host, but how fares the young man Absalom: Like a wise, and faithful
messenger, Cushi answers by an honest insinuation, The enemies of my Lord the
King, and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is;
implying both what was done, and, why David should approve it being done; How
is the good King thunder-strooke with that word of his Black-moore? who, as if
he were at once bereaved of all comfort, and cared not to live, but in the name
of Absalom, goes and weeps, and cries out, O my son Absalom, my son, my
son Absalom; Would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son.
What is this we hear? that he whose life Israel valued at ten thousand of
theirs, should be exchanged with a traitors? that a good King, whose life was
sought, should wish to lay it down for the preservation of his murderer? The
best men have not wont to be the least passionate; But what shall we say to
that love of thine, o Savior, who have said of us wretched traitors, not,
Would God I had died for you; But I will dye, I do dye, I have died for you;
Oh love, like thy self, infinite, incomprehensible, whereat the Angels of
Heaven stand yet amazed; wherewith thy Saints are ravished, Turn away thine
eyes from me, for they overcome me* Oh thou that dwell in the Gardens, the
companions hearken to thy voice, cause us to hear it; that we may in our
measure answer thy love, and enjoy it for ever.

Shebaes Rebellion.
IT was the doom which God passed upon the man after his own heart by the
mouth of Nathan, that the sword should never depart from his house, for the
blood of Vriah; After that wound healed by remission, yet this scarre remains;
Absalom is no sooner cast down into the pit, then Sheba the son of Bichri is
up in arms; If David be not plagued, yet he shall be corrected; First by the
rod of a son, then of a subject: He had lift up his hand against a faithful
subject; now a faithless dares to lift up his hand against him; Malice like
some hereditarie sickness runs in a blood; Saul and Shimei, and Sheba were all
of an house; That ancient grudge was not yet dead; The fire of the house of
Iemini was but raked up, never thoroughly out; and now, that which did but smoke
in Shimei, flames in Sheba; Although even through this chastisement it is not
hard to discern a Type, of that perpetual succession of enmity, which should
be raised against the true King of Israel. O Son of David, when did thou
ever want enemies? How were thou designed by thine eternal father, for a sign
that should be spoken against? How did the Gentiles rage, and the people
imagine vain things? The Kings of the earth assembled, and the Rulers came
together against thee? Yea, how do the subjects of thine own kingdom daily
conspire against thee? Even now whiles thou inioyest peace, and glory at thy
Fathers right hand, as soon shall thou want friends, as enemies upon earth.

No eye of any traitor could epsy a just quarrel in the government of David,
yet Sheba blows the trumpet of rebellion; and whiles Israel and Judah are
striving who should have the greatest part in their reestablished Sovereign,
he sticks not to say, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in
the son of Ishai; and whiles he says, Every man to his tents O Israel, he
calls every man to his own; So in proclaiming a liberty from a just and
loyal subjection, he inuites Israel to the bondage of an usurper.

That a lewd conspirator should breath treason, it is no wonder; but is it not
wonder and shame, that upon every mutinous blast Israel should turn traitor to
Gods anointed? It was their late expostulation with David, why their brethren
the men of Judah should have stolen him from them; now might David more justly
expostulate, why a rebel of their brethren should have stolen them from him:
As nothing is more unstable then the multitude, so nothing is more subject to
distastes, then Sovereignty; for as weak minds seek pleasure in change; so
every light conceit of irritation seems sufficient color of change; Such as
the false dispositions of the vulgar are, love cannot be security enough for
Princes, without the awfulnesse of power; What hold can there be of
popularitie, when the same hands that even now fought for David to be all
theirs, now fight against him, under the son of Bichri, as none of theirs? As
Bees when they are once up in a swarm, are ready to light upon every bow, so
the Israelites, being stirred by the late commotion of Absalom, are apt to
follow every Sheba; It is unsafe for any State, that the multitude should once
know the way to an insurrection; the least track in this kind is easily made a
path* Yet, if Israel rebel, Judah continues faithful* Neither shall the son
of David ever be left destitute of some true subjects in the worst of
Apostasies: He that could command all hearts, will ever be followed by some;
God had rather glorify himself by a remnant.

Great commanders must have active thoughts; David is not so taken up with the
embroiled affairs of his state, as not to intend domesticke justice; His ten
concubines, which were shamelesly defiled by his incestuous son, are
condemned to ward, and widow-hood; Had not that constupration been partly
violent, their punishment had not been so easy; had it not also been partly
voluntary, they had not been so much punished; But how much so ever the act
did partake of either force, or will, justly are they sequestered from David's
bed; Absalom was not more unnatural in his rebellion, then in his lust; If now
David should have returned to his own bed, he had seconded the incest: How
much more worthy of separation are they, who have stained the marriage bed with
their wilful sin?

Amasa was one of the witnesses, and abettors of Absaloms filthiness, yet is
he (out of policy) received to favor and employment, whiles the concubines
suffer; Great men yield many times to those things, out of reasons of state,
which if they were private persons could not be easily put over; It is no small
wisdom to engage a new reconciled friend, that he may be confirmed by his own
act: Therefore is Amasa commanded to levy the forces of Judah: Ioab after many
great merits and atchieuements lies rusting in neglect: he that was so entire
with David as to be of his counsel for Vriahs blood; and so firm to David, as
to lead all his battles against the house of Saul, the Ammonites, the Aramites,
Absalom is now cashiered, and must yield his place to a stranger, late an
enemy: Who knows not that this son of Zeruiah had shed the blood of war
in peace? But if the blood of Absalom had not been louder then the blood of
Abner, I fear this change had not been; Now Ioab smarteth for a loyal
disobedience; How slippery are the stations of earthly honors, and subject to
continual mutability? Happy are they who are in favor with him, in whom there
is no shadow of change.

Where men are commonly most ambitious to please with their first employments,
Amaza slackens his pace; The least delay in matters of rebellion is perilous,
may be irrecouerable; The sons of Zeruiah are not sullen; Abishai is sent,
Ioab goes unsent to the pursuit of Sheba. Amasa was in their way; whom no
quarrel but their envy had made of a brother an enemy; Had the heart of Amasa
been privy to any cause of grudge, he had suspected the kiss of Ioab; now
his innocent eyes look to the lips, not to the hand of his secret enemy; The
lips were smooth, Art thou in health, my brother; the hand was bloody, which
smote him under the fifth ribbe; That unhappy hand knew well this way unto
death; which with one wound has let out the Souls of two great Captains,
Abner and Amasa; Both they were smitten by Ioab, both under the fifth ribbe,
both under a pretense of friendship. There is no enmity so dangerous as that
which comes masked with love; Open hostility calls us to our guard; but there is
no fence against a trusted treachery: we need not be bidden to avoid an
enemy, but who would run away from a friend? Thus spiritually deals the
world with our souls; it kisses us, and stabs us at once; If it did not
embrace us with one hand, it could not murder us with the other; Only God
deliver us from the danger of our trust, and we shall be safe.

Ioab is gone, and leaves Amasa wallowing in blood; That spectacle cannot but
stay all passengers; The death of great persons draws ever many eyes; Each man
says, Is not this my Lord Amasa? Wherefore do we go to fight, whiles our
General lies in the dust? What a sad presage is this of our own miscarriage?
The wit of Ioabs followers has therefore soon both removed Amasa out of the
way, and covered him; not regarding so much the loss, as the eyesore of
Israel. Thus wicked Politics care not so much for the commission of villainy,
as for the notice; Smothered evils are as not done; If oppressions, if murders,
if treasons may be hid from view, the obdured heart of the offender complains
not of remorse.

Bloody Ioab, with what face, with what heart can thou pursue a traitor to
thy King, whiles thy self art so foul a traitor to thy friend, to thy
cozen-german, and (in so unseasonable a slaughter) to thy Sovereign, whose
cause thou professest to revenge? If Amasa were now in an act of loyalty,
justly (on Gods part) paid for the arerages of his late rebellion, yet that it
should be done by thy hand, then, and thus, it was flagitiously cruel; Yet,
behold Ioab runs away securely with the fact, hasting to plague that in
another, whereof himself was no less guilty; So vast are the gorges of some
consciences, that they can swallow the greatest crimes, and find no strain in
the passage.

It is possible for a man to be faithful to some one person, and perfidious to
all others; I do not find Ioab other then firm and loyal to David, in the
midst of all his private falsehoods; whose just quarrel he pursues against
Sheba, through all the Tribes of Israel. None of all the strong Forts of
revolted Israel can hide the Rebel from the zeal of his revenge* The City of
Abel lends harbor to that conspirator, whom all Israel would, and cannot
protect; Ioab casts up a Mount against it, and having environed it with a
siege, begins to work upon the wall; and now, after long chase, is in hand to
dig out that Vermin, which had eathed himself in this borough of
Bethmaachah. Had not the City been strong and populous, Sheba had not cast
himself for succor within those walls; yet of all the inhabitants, I see not
any one man move for the preservation of their whole body: Only a woman
undertakes to treat with Ioab, for their safety: Those men whose spirits were
great enough to maintain a traitor against a mighty King, scorn not to give
way to the wisdom of a matrone; There is no reason that Sex should disparage,
where the virtue and merit is no less then masculine: Surely the soul
acknowledges no Sex, neither is varied according to the outward frame; How
often have we known female hearts in the breasts of Men* and contrarily manly
powers in the weaker vessels? It is injurious to measure the act by the person,
and not rather to esteem the person for the act.

She, with no less prudence then courage challenges Ioab for the violence of
his assault; and lays to him that law which he could not be an Israelite, and
disauow; the Law of the God of peace; whose charge it was, that when they
should come near to a City to fight against it, they should offer it peace;
and if this tender must be made to forrainers, how much more to brethren? So as
they must inquire of Abel, ere they battered it; War is the extreme act of
vindicatiue justice; neither does God ever approve it for any other then a
desperate remedy; and if it have any other end then peace, it turns into
public murder. It is therefore an inhumane cruelty to shed blood, where we
have not proffered fair conditions of peace: the refusal whereof is justly
punished with the Sword of revenge.

Ioab was a man of blood, yet when the wise woman of Abel charged him with
going about to destroy a mother in Israel; and swallowing up the inheritance of
the Lord, with what vehemency does he deprecate that challenge, God forbid,
God forbid it me, that I should devour, or destroy it; Although that city
with the rest had engaged it self in Shebaes sedition, yet how zealously does
Ioab remove from himself the suspicion of an intended vastation? How fearful
shall their answer be, who upon the quarrel of their own ambition have not
spared to waste whole tribes of the Israel of God? It was not the fashion of
David's Captains to assault any city ere they summond it; here they did; There
be some things that in the very fact carry their own conviction; So did Abel
in the entertaining, and abetting a known conspirator; Ioab challenges them
for the offense, and requires no other satisfaction then the head of Sheba;
This Matrone had not deserved the name of Wife, and faithful in Israel, if she
had not both apprehended the justice of the condition, and commended it to her
Citizens; whom she has easily persuaded to spare their own heads, in not
sparing a Traitors; It had been pity those walls should have stood if they
had been too hie to throw a Traitors head over.

Spiritually, the case is ours: Every man's breast is as a city enclosed; Every
sin is a traitor, that lurkes within those walls; God calls to us for Shebaes
head; neither has he any quarrel to our person, but for our sin: If we love
the head of our Traitor, above the life of our soul, we shall justly perish in
the vengeance: we cannot be more willing to part with our sin, then our
merciful God is to withdraw his judgments.

Now is Ioab returned with success, and hopes by Shebaes head to pay the
price of Amasaes blood; David hates the murder, entertaines the man, defers the
revenge; Ioab had made himself so great, so necessary, that David may neither
miss, nor punish him: Policy led the King to conniue at that which his heart
abhorred; I dare not commend that wisdom which holds the hands of Princes from
doing justice; Great men have ever held it a point of worldly state, not
always to pay where they have been conscious to a debt of either favor, or
punishment; but to make Time their servant for both; Solomon shall once defraie
the arerages of his father; In the mean time Ioab commands and prospers; and
David is feign to smile on that face, whereon he has in his secret destination
written the characters of Death.

The Gibeonites revenged.
THE reign of David was most troublesome toward the shutting up; wherein both
war and famine conspire to afflict him; Almost forty years had he sat in
the throne of Israel, with competencie, if not abundance of all things; now at
last are his people visited with a long dearth; we are not at first sensible of
common evils; Three years drought and scarcity are gone over ere David
consults, with God, concerning* the occasion of the judgment, now he found it
hie time to seek the face of the Lord; The continuance of an affliction sends
us to God, and calls upon us to ask for a reckoning; Whereas like men stricken
in their sleep, a sudden blow cannot make us to find our selves; but rather
astonisheth, then teaches us.

David was himself a Prophet of God, yet had not the Lord all this while
acquainted him with the grounds of his proceedings against Israel; this secret
was hid from him, till he consulted with the Vrim; Ordinary means shall
reveal that to him, which no vision had discryed; And if God will have
Prophets to have recourse unto the Priests, for the notice of his will; how
much more must the people? Even those that are the inwardest with God must have
use of the Ephod.

Justly is it presupposed by David that there was never judgment from God,
where has not been a provocation from men; therefore when he sees the plague,
he inquires for the sin. Never man smarted causelessly from the hand of divine
justice; Oh that when we suffer, we could ask what we have done; and could
guide our repentance to the root of our evils.

That God whose counsels are secret, even where his actions are open, will not
be close to his Prophet, to his Priest: without inquiry we shall know nothing;
upon inquiry nothing shall be concealed from us, that is fit for us to know.

Who can choose but wonder at once both at David's slacknesse in consulting with
God, and Gods speed in answering so slow a demand? He that so well knew the way
to Gods Oracle, suffers Israel to be three years pinched with famine, ere he
asks why they suffer; Even the best hearts may be overtaken with dullness in
holy duties; But oh the marvelous mercy of our God, that takes not the
advantage of our weaknesses; David's question is not more slow, then his answer
is speedy, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the
Gibeonites. Israel was full of sins, besides those of Saul's house; Saul's
house was full of sins besides those of blood; Much blood was shed by them
besides that of the Gibeonites; yet the justice of God singles out this one
sin of violence offered to the Gibeonites (contrary to the league made by
Joshua, some four hundred years before) for the occasion of this late
vengeance. Where the causes of offense are infinite, it is just with God to
pitch upon some; it is merciful not to punish for all: Welneere forty years
are past betwixt the commission of the sin, and the reckoning for it. It is a
vain hope that is raised from the delay of judgment; No time can be any
prejudice to the ancient of days; When we have forgotten our sins, when the
world has forgotten us, he sues us afresh for our arerages. The slaughter of
the Gibeonites was the sin not of the present, but rather the former
generation; and now posterity paies for their forefathers; Even we men hold it
not unjust to sue the heirs and executors of our debtors* Eternal paiments
God uses only to require of the person, temporary ofttimes of succession.

As Saul was higher by the head and shoulders then the rest of Israel, both in
stature and dignity, so were his sins more conspicuous then those of the
vulgar. The eminence of the person makes the offense more remarkable to the
eyes both of God and men.

Neither Saul nor Israel were faultlesse in other kinds; yet God fixes the eye
of his revenge upon the massacre of the Gibeonites, Every sin has a tongue,
but that of blood over cries* and drownes the rest. He who is mercy it self
abhorres cruelty in his creature above all other inordinatenesse; That holy
soul which was heavy pressed with the weight of an heinous adultery, yet
cries out, Deliver me from blood, O God, the God of my salvation, and my tongue
shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness.

If God would take account of blood, he might have entered the action upon the
blood of Vriah spilt by David; or (if he would rather insist in Saul's house)
upon the blood of Ahimelech the Priest; and fourscore and five persons that
did wear a linen Ephod; but it pleased the wisdom and justice of the
Almighty rather to call for the blood of the Gibeonites, though drudges of
Israel, and a remnant of Amorites; Why this? There was a perjury attending
upon this slaughter; It was an ancient oath, wherein the Princes of the
Congregation had bound themselves (upon Iosua^s league) to the Gibeonites, that
they would suffer them to live; an oath extorted by fraud, but solemn, by no
less name, then the Lord God of Israel; Saul will now thus late either not
acknowledge it; or not keep it; out of his zeal therefore to the children of
Israel, and Judah, he roots out some of the Gibeonites, whether in a zeal of
revenge of their first imposture, or in a zeal of enlarging the possessions of
Israel, or in a zeal of executing Gods charge upon the brood of Canaanites, he
that spared Agag whom he should have smitten, smites the Gibeonites whom he
should have spared: Zeal and good intention is no excuse, much less a warrant
for evil; God holds it an hie indignity that his name should be sworn by,
and violated. Length of time cannot dispense with our oaths, with our vows;
The vows and oaths of others may bind us, how much more our own?

There was a famine in Israel; a natural man would have ascribed it unto the
drought; and that drought perhaps to some constellations; David knows (...)
look higher; and sees a divine hand scourging Israel for some great offense;
and ouerruling those second causes to his most just executions. Even the most
quick-sighted worldling is pore-blinde to spiritual objects; and the weakest
eyes of the regenerate pierce the Heavens, and espy God in all earthly
occurrences.

So well was David acquainted with Gods proceedings, that he knew the remouall
of the judgment must begin at the satisfaction of the wronged; At once
therefore does he pray unto God, and treat with the Gibeonites; What shall I
do for you, and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that I may bless the
inheritance of the Lord? In vain should David (though a Prophet) bless
Israel, if the Gibeonites did not bless them: Injuries done us on earth give
us power in heaven; The oppressor is in no man's mercy but his whom he has
trampled upon.

Little did the Gibeonites think that God had so taken to heart their wrongs,
that for their sakes all Israel should suffer. Even when we think not of it,
is the righteous Judge auenging our unrighteous vexations; Our hard measures
cannot be hid from him, his returns are hid from us; It is sufficient for us,
that God can be no more neglectiue then ignorant of our sufferings. It is now
in the power of these despised Hiuites to make their own terms with Israel;
Neither Silver, nor Gold will savor with them toward their satisfaction;
Nothing can expiate the blood of their fathers, but the blood of seven sons
of their deceased persecutor; Here was no other then a just retaliation; Saul
had punished in them the offense of their predecessors* they will now revenge
Saul's sin in his children. The measure we mete unto others, is with much
equity re-measured unto our selves. Every death would not content them, of
Saul's sons, but a cursed and ignominious, hanging on the Tree; Neither would
that death content them, unless their own hands might be the executioners;
Neither would any place serve for the execution but Gibeah, the Court of Saul;
neither would they do any of this for the wreaking of their own fury, but for
the appeasing of Gods wrath, We will hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of
Saul.

David might not refuse the condition: He must deliver, they must execute: He
chooses out seven of the sons, and grandchildren of Saul; That House had
raised long an unjust persecution against David; now God pays it upon another
score. David's love and oath to Jonathan, preserues lame Mephibosheth* How much
more shall the Father of all mercies do good unto the children of the
faithful, for the covenant made with their Parents?

The five sons of Adriel the Meholathite, David's ancient rival in his first
love, which were borne to him by Merab, Saul's Daughter, and brought up by her
barren sister Michol, the wife of David, are yielded up to death; Merab was
after a promise of marriage to David, unjustly given away by Saul, to Adriel;
Michol seems to abet the match in breeding the children; now in one act (not
of David's seeking) the wrong is thus late avenged upon Saul, Adriel, Merab,
Michol, the children: It is a dangerous matter to offer injury to any of Gods
faithful ones; If their meekness have easily remitted it, their God will not
pass it over without a severe retribution.

These five, together with two sons of Rizpah, Saul's concubine, are hanged up
at once before the Lord; yea and before the eyes of the World; No place but an
Hill will serve for this execution; The acts of justice as they are intended
for example, so they should be done in that eminent fashion that may make them
both most instructiue, and most terrifying; Unwarrantable courses of private
revenge seek to hide their heads in secrecy; The beautiful face of justice
both affects the light, and becomes it.

It was the general charge of Gods Law that no corpse should remain all night
upon the gibbet; The Almighty has power to dispense with his own command; so
doubtless he did in this extraordinary case; these carcasses did not defile,
but expiate. Sorrowful Rizpah spreads her a Tent of Sackcloth upon the rock,
for a sad attendance upon those sons of her womb; Death might bereave her of
them, not them of her love; This spectacle was not more grievous to her, then
pleasing to God, and happy to Israel; Now the clouds drop fatness, and the
earth runs forth into plenty. The Gibeonites are satisfied, God reconciled,
Israel relieved.

How blessed a thing it is for any Nation that justice is impartially executed
even upon the mighty. A few drops of blood have procured large showers from
Heaven. A few carcasses are a rich compost to the earth; The drought and dearth
remove away with the breath of those pledges of the offender; Judgments cannot
tyrannize where justice reigns: as contrarily, there can be no peace where
blood cries unheard, unregarded.

The Numbering of the people.
ISRAEL was grown wanton and mutinous; God pulls them down first by the
sword, then by famine, now by pestilence; Oh the wondrous, and yet just ways
of the Almighty! Because Israel has sinned, therefore David shall sin that
Israel may be punished; Because God is angry with Israel, therefore David
shall anger him more, and strike himself in Israel, and Israel through
himself.

The spirit of God elsewhere ascribes this motion to Satan, which here it
attributes to God; Both had their hand in the work; God by permission, Satan
by suggestion; God as a Judge, Satan as an enemy: God as in a just punishment
for sin, Satan as in an act of sin; God in a wise ordination of it to good;
Satan in a malicious intent of confusion; Thus at once God moved, and Satan
moved; Neither is it any excuse to Satan or David, that God moved; neither is
it any blemish to God, that Satan moved; The rulers sin is a punishment to a
wicked people: though they had many sins of their own, whereon God might
have grounded a judgment, yet as before he had punished them with dearth for
Saul's sin, so now he will not punish them with plague, but for David's sin; If
God were not angry with a people, he would not give up their governors to
such evils as whereby he is provoked to vengeance; and if their governors be
thus given up, the people cannot be safe; The body drownes not whiles the head
is above the water; when that once sinkes* death is near, Justly therefore ere
we charged to make prayers and supplications, as for all, so especially for
those that are in eminent authority* when we pray for our selves, we pray not
always for them, but we cannot pray for them, and not pray for our selves; the
public weal is not comprised in the private, but the private in the public.

What then was David's sin? He will needs have Israel and Judah numbered:
Surely there is no malignitie in numbers; Neither is it unfit for a Prince to
know his own strength; this is not the first time that Israel has gone under
a reckoning* The act offends not, but the mis-affection; The same thing had
been commendably done out of a Princely providence, which now through the
curiosity, pride, mis-confidence of the doer proves hainously vicious; Those
actions which are in themselves indifferent, receive either their life, or
their bane from the intentions of the agent. Moses numbreth the people with
thanks, David with displeasure: Those sins which carry the smoothest
forheads, and have the most honest appearances, may more provoke the wrath of
God, then those which bear the most abomination in their faces. How many
thousand wickednesses passed through the hands of Israel, which we men would
rather have branded out for a judgment, then this of David's? The righteous
Judge of the world censures sins, not by their ill looks, but by their soul
hearts.

Who can but wonder to see Ioab the Saint, and David the trespasser? No Prophet
could speak better then that man of blood; The Lord thy God increase the
people an hundred fold more then they be; and that the eyes of my Lord the King
may see it; But why does my Lord the King desire this thing? There is no man so
lewd as not to be sometimes in good moods, as not to dislike some evil;
contrarily no man on earth can be so holy, as not sometimes to ouerlash, It
were pity that either Ioab or David should be tried by every act; How
commonly have we seen those men ready to give good advice to others for the
avoiding of some sins; who in more gross* outrages have not had grace to
counsel their own hearts? The same man that had deserved death from David for
his treacherous cruelty, disswades David from an act that carried but a
suspicion of evil; It is not so much to be regarded who it is that admonishes
us, as what he brings; Good counsel is never the worse for the* foul
carriage* There are some dishes that we may eat even from sluttish hands.

The purpose of sin in a faithful man is odious, much more the resolution:
Notwithstanding Ioabs discreet admonition David will hold on his course; and
will know the number of the people, only that he may know it; Ioab and the
Captains address themselves to the work: In things which are not in
themselves evil, it is not for subjects to dispute but to obey; That which
authority may sin in commanding, is done of the inferior, not with safety
only, but with praise. Nine months and twenty days is this general muster
in hand; at last the number is brought in; Israel is found eight hundred
thousand strong, Judah five hundred thousand; the ordinary companies which
served by course for the royal guard (four and twenty thousand each month)
needed not be reckoned; the addition of them with their several Captains
raises the sum of Israel to the rate of eleven hundred thousand. A power able
to puff up a carnal heart; but how can an heart that is more then flesh trust
to an arm of flesh? Oh holy David, whither has a glorious vanity transported
thee? Thou which once did sing so sweetly, Put not your trust in Princes, nor
in the son of man, for there is no help in him. His breath departs, and he
returns to his earth, then his thoughts perish; Blessed is he that has the
God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God; How can thou
now stoop to so unsafe and unworthy a confidence?

As some stomackfull horse that will not be stopped in his career with the
sharpest bit, but runs on heddily till he come to some wall, or ditch, and then
stands still and trembles; so did David; All the disswasions of Ioab could not
restrain him from his intended course; almost ten months does he run on
impetuously, in a way of his own, rough and dangerous, at last his heart
smites him; the conscience of his offense, and the fear of judgment have
fetched him upon his knees, O Lord I have sinned exceedingly in that I have
done; therefore now* Lord, I beseech thee take away the trespass of thy
servant, for I have done very foolishly. It is possible for a sin not to
bait only, but to soiourne in the holiest soul; but though it soiourne there
as a stranger, it shall not dwell there as an owner. The renewed heart after
some rouings of error will once (ere ouer-long) return home to it self, and
fall out with that ill guide, wherewith it was misled, and with it self for
being misled; and now it is resolved into tears, and breathes forth nothing
but sighs, and confessions, and deprecations.

Here needed no Nathan by a parabolicall circumlocution to fetch in David to a
sight, and acknowledgement of his sin; The heart of the penitent supplied the
Prophet; no others tongue could smite him so deep as his own thoughts; But
though his reins chastisd him in the night, yet his Seer scourges him in the
morning, Thus says the Lord, I offer thee three things, choose thee which of
them I shall do unto thee. But what shall we say to this? When upon the
Prophets reproof for an adultery cloked with murder, David did but say, I
have sinned, it was presently returned, God has put away thy sin; neither
did any smart follow, but the death of a mis-begotten infant; and now when he
voluntarily reproved himself for but a needless muster, and sought for pardon
unbidden with great humiliation, God sends him three terrible scourges, famine,
sword, or pestilence; that he may choose with which of them he had rather to
bleed* he shall have the favor of an election, not of a remission. God is more
angered with a spiritual, and immediate affront offered to his Majesty, in our
pride, and false confidence in earthly things, then with a fleshly crime though
hainously seconded.

It was an hard and woeful choice; of three years famine added to the three
fore-past; or of three months flight from the sword of an enemy, or three
days pestilence; The Almighty that had fore determined his judgment,
referres it to David's will as fully, as if it were utterly undetermined, God
has resolved, yet David may choose; That infinite wisdom has foreseen the
very will of his creature; which whiles it freely inclines it self to what it
had rather, unwittingly wills that which was fore-appointed in heaven.

We do well believe thee, o David, that thou were in a wonderful strait;
this very liberty is no other then fetters* Thou needst not have famine, thou
needst not have the sword, thou needst not have pestilence; one of them thou
must have; There is misery in all, there is misery in any; thou and thy
people can die but once; and once they must die, either by famine, war, or
pestilence. Oh God, how vainly do we hope to pass over our sins with
impunitie, when all the favor that David and Israel can receive is to choose
their bane?

Yet behold, neither sins, nor threats, nor fears can bereave a true
penitent of his faith, Let us fall now into the hands of the Lord, for his
mercies are great. There can be no evil of punishment wherein God has not an
hand; there could be no famine, no sword without him; but some evils are more
immediate from a divine stroke; such was that plague into which David is
unwillingly willing to fall, He had his choice of days, months, years in the
same number; and though the shortness of time prefixed to the threatened
pestilence might seem to offer some advantage for the leading of his election,
yet God meant (and David knew it) herein to proportion the difference of time
to the violence of the plague; neither should any fewer perish by so few days
pestilence, then by so many years famine: The wealthiest might avoid the
dearth, the swiftest might run away from the Sword; no man could promise
himself safety from that pestilence: In likelihood Gods Angel would rather
strike the most guilty; How ever therefore David might well look to be in
wrapped in the common destruction, yet he rather chooses to fall into that mercy
which he had abused, and to suffer from that justice which he had provoked; Let
us now fall into the hands of the Lord.

Humble confessions, and devout penance cannot always auert temporal
judgments; Gods Angel is abroad, and within that short compass of time
sweepes away seventy thousand Israelites; David was proud of the number of his
subjects, now they are abated; that he may see cause of humiliation in the
matter of his glory; In what we have offended, we commonly smart; These
thousands of Israel were not so innocent, that they should only perish for
David's sin; Their sins were the motives both of this sin, and punishment;
besides the respect of David's offense, they die for themselves.

It was no ordinary pestilence that was thus suddenly and universally mortal;
Common eyes saw the botch, and the marks, saw not the Angel; David's clearer
sight has espied him (after that killing peragration through the Tribes of
Israel) shaking his sword over Jerusalem, and houering over Mount Sion; and now
he who doubtless had spent those three dismal days in the saddest
contrition, humbly casts himself down at the feet of the auenger, and lays
himself ready for the fatal stroke of justice; It was more terror that God
intended in the visible shape of his Angel, and deeper humiliation; and what
he meant, he wrought; Never Soul could be more dejected, more anguished with
the sense of a judgment; in the bitterness whereof he cries out, Behold I
have sinned, yea I have done wickedly; But these Sheep what have they done?
Let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my fathers house. The
better any man is, the more sensible he is of his own wretchedness; Many of
those Sheep were Wolves to David; What had they done? They had done that which
was the occasion of David's sin, and the cause of their own punishment; But
that gracious penitent knew his own sin, he knew not theirs; and therefore
can say, I have sinned, What have they done? It is safe accusing, where we may
be boldest, and are best acquainted, our selves.

Oh the admirable charity of David, that would have engrossed the plague to
himself, and his house, from the rest of Israel; and sues to interpose
himself betwixt his people and the vengeance; He that had put himself upon
the paws of the Bear, and Lion, for the rescue of his Sheep, will now cast
himself upon the sword of the Angel, for the preservation of Israel; There
was hope in those conflicts; in this yeeldance there could be nothing but
death; Thus did thou, O son of David, the true and great Shepherd of thy
Church, offer thy self to death for them who had their hands in thy blood; who
both procured thy death, and deserved their own. Here he offered himself that
had sinned, for those whom he professes to have not done evil; thou that
did no sin, vouchsauedst to offer thy self for us, that were all sin; He
offered and escaped, thou offeredst, and diedst; and by thy death we live, and
are freed from everlasting destruction.

But, O Father of all mercies, how little pleasure do thou take in the blood
of sinners? it was thine own pity that inhibited the destroyer; Ere David
could see the Angel, thou had restrained him; It is sufficient, hold now
thine hand; If thy compassion did not both withhold and abridge thy judgments,
what place were there for us out of hell?

How easy and just had it been for God to have made the shutting up of that
third evening red with blood? His goodness repents of the slaughter; and calls
for that Sacrifice wherewith he will be appeased; An Altar must be built in the
threshing-floore of Araunah the Iebusite; Lo, in that very Hill where the Angel
held the sword of Abraham from killing his Son, does God now hold the Sword
of the Angel from killing his people; Upon this very ground shall the Temple,
after, stand; here shall be the holy Altar, which shall send up the acceptable
oblations of Gods people in succeeding generations.

O God, what was the threshing-floore of a Iebusite to thee above all other
soyles? What virtue, what merit was in this earth? As in places, so in persons,
it is not to be heeded what they are, but what thou will; That is worthiest
which thou please to accept.

Rich and bountiful Araunah is ready to meet David in so holy a motion; and
munificently offers his Sion for the place, his Oxen for the Sacrifice, his
Carts and Ploughes, and other Vtensils of his Husbandry for the wood; Two
frank hearts are well met; David would buy, Araunah would give; The Iebusite
would not sell, David will not take: Since it was for God, and to David,
Araunah is loath to bargain: Since it was for God, David wishes to pay dear,
I will not offer burnt Offering to the Lord my God, of that which does cost me
nothing; Heroical spirits do well become eminent persons; He that knew it
was better to give then receive, would not receive but give; There can be no
devotion in a niggardly heart; As unto dainty palates, so to the godly soul,
that tastes sweetest that costs most; Nothing is dear enough for the Creator
of all things. It is an heartlesse piety of those base-minded Christians, that
care only to serve God good cheap.

Contemplations. THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK. Adonijah defeated. David's end and
Salomons beginning. The execution of Ioab and Shimei. Salomons choice, with his
judgment upon the two Harlots. The Temple. Solomon with the Queen of Sheba.
Salomons Defection.


TO MY WORTHILY MVCH HONORED FRIEND Sr HENRY MILDMAY Knight, Master of the
Iewell-house; all grace and peace.
SIR,
Besides all private obligations, your very name challenges from me all due
services of love, and honor; If I have received mercy to bear any fruit, next
under heaven, I may thank the stock wherein I was ymped; which was set by no
other then the happy hand of your right Honorable Grandfather; How have I so
long forborne the public Testimony of my just gratulations, and thankful
respects to so true an heir of his noble virtues. Pardon me that I pay this
debt so late; and accept of this parcel of my well-meant labors; Wherein you
shall see SOLOMON both in his rising and setting; his rising hopeful and
glorious, his declination fearful; You shall see the proofs of his early
graces; of mercy, in sparing ADONIIAH, and ABIATHAR; of justice, in punishing
that rival of his, with IOAB, and SHIMEI; of wisdom, in his award betwixt the
two harlots, and the administration of his Court, and state: of piety, in
building and hallowing the Temple; all dashed in his fall, repaired in his
repentance. I have no cause to misdoubt either the acceptance, or use of these
mine hie pitched thoughts; which, together with your self, and your worthy and
virtuous Lady, I humbly commend to the care and blessing of the hiest; who am
bound by your worth and merits to be ever

Your syncerely, and thankfully devoted in all observance, IOS: HALL.

Contemplations.
ADONIJAH Defeated.
DAVID had not so carefully husbanded his years, as to maintain a vigorous
age; he was therefore what through wars, what with sorrows, what with
sickness, decrepit betimes; By that time he was seventy years old, his
natural heat was so wasted, that his clothes could not warm him; how many
have we known of more strength, at more age? The holiest soul dwells not in
an inpregnable fort; If the revenging Angel spared David, yet age and Death
will not spare him; Neither his new altar, nor his costly sacrifice can be of
force against decay of nature; Nothing but death can prevent the weaknesses of
age.

None can blame a people if when they have a good King, they are desirous to
hold him; David's servants and subjects have commended unto his bed a fair
young virgin; not for the heat of lust, but of life; that by this means they
might make an outward supply of fuel for that vital fire which was
well-neere extinguished with age.

As it is in the market, or the stage, so it is in our life; One goes in,
another comes out; when David was withering, Adonijah was in his blossom; That
son, as he was next to Absalom both in the beauty of his body, and the time
of his birth, so, was he too like him in practice; He also taking advantage of
his fathers infirmity, will be caruing himself of the kingdom of Israel;
That he might no whit vary from his pattern, he gets him also Charets and
horsemen, and fifty men to run before him: These two, Absalom and Adonijah
were the darlings of their father; Their father had not displeased them from
their childhood, therefore they both displeased him in his age; Those children
had need to be very gracious, that are not marred with pampering; It is more
then God owes us, if we receive comfort in those children whom we have
ouer-loued; The indulgence of parents at last paies them home in crosses.

It is true that Adonijah was David's* eldest son now remaining, and therefore
might seem to challenge the iustest title to the Crown; But the kingdom of
Israel (in so late an erection) had not yet known the right of succession: God
himself that had ordained the government, was as yet the immediate elector; He
fetched Saul from among the stuff, and David from the sheepfold; and had now
appointed Solomon from the ferule, to the Scepter.

And if Adonijah (which is unlike) had not known this, yet it had been his
part to have taken his father with him in this claim of his succession; and
not so to prevent a brother, that he should shoulder out a father; and not so
violently to preoccupate the throne, that he should rather be a rebel, then an
heir.

As Absalom, so Adonijah wants not furtherers in this usurpation, whether
spiritual, or temporal; Ioab the General, and Abiathar the Priest give both
counsel, and aid to so unseasonable a challenge; These two had been firm to
David in all his troubles, in all insurrections; yet now finding him fastened to
the bed of age, and death, they show themselves thus slipperie in the loose;
Outward happiness and friendship are not known till our last act. In the
impotencie of either our revenge or recompense, it will easily appear who
loved us for our selves, who for their own ends.

Had not Adonijah known that Solomon was designed to the kingdom both by God,
and David, he had never invited all the rest of the Kings sons, his brethren,
and left out Solomon; who was otherwise the most unlikely to have been his
rival in this honor; all the rest were elder then he; and might therefore
have had more pretense for their competition: Doubtless the Court of Israel
could not but know, that immediately upon the birth of Solomon, God sent him by
Nathan the Prophet, a name and message of love; neither was it for nothing that
God called him Iedidiah; and fore-promised him the honor of building an house
to his Name; and (in return of so glorious a service) the establishment of the
throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever; Notwithstanding all which,
Adonijah backed by the strength of a Ioab, and the gravity of an Abiathar,
will vnderworke Solomon, and iustle into the not-yet-vacant seat of his father
David. Vain men, whiles like proud and yet brittle clay, they will be knocking
their sides against the solid, and eternal decree of God, break themselves in
pieces.

I do not find that Adonijah sent any message of threats, or unkindness to
Zadok the Priest, or Nathan the Prophet, or Benaiah the son of Iehoiada, and
the other worthies; only he invited them not to his feast with the Kings
sons, and servants; Sometimes a very omission is an affront, and a menace.
They well knew that since they were not called as guests, they were counted as
enemies; Ceremonies of courtesy, though they be in themselves slight, and
arbitrarie, yet the neglect of them in some cases may undergo a dangerous
construction.

Nathan was the man by whom God had sent that errand of grace to David,
concerning Solomon, assuring him both to reign, and prosper; yet now when
Adonijahs plot was thus on foot, he does not sit still, and depend upon the
issue of Gods decree, but he bestirres him in the business, and consults with
Bathsheba how at once to save their lives, and to advance Solomon, and defeat
Adonijah; Gods pre-determination includes the means as well as the end; the
same providence that had ordained a crown to Solomon, a repulse to Adonijah,
preservation to Bathsheba and Nathan, had fore-appointed the wise and
industrious endeavors of the Prophet to bring about his just, and holy
purposes; If we would not have God wanting to us, we must not be wanting to our
selves: Even when we know what God has meant to us, we may not be negligent.

The Prophets of God did not look for revelation in all their affairs, in
some things they were left to the counsel of their own hearts; the policy of
Nathan was of use as well as his prophecy: that alone has turned the stream
into the right channel; Nothing could be more wisely contrived then the
sending in of Bathsheba to David, with so seasonable and forceable an
expostulation, and the seconding of hers with his own.

Though lust were dead in David, yet the respects of his old matrimonial love
lived still; the very presence of Bathsheba pleaded strongly; but her speech
more; the time was, when his affection offended in excess toward her being
then another; he cannot now neglect her being his own; and if either his age,
or the remorse of his old offense should have set him off; yet she knew his
oath was sure; My Lord thou swarest by the Lord thy God unto thine handmaid,
saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit
upon my throne; His word had been firm, but his oath was inviolable; we are
engaged if we have promised, but if we have sworn, we are bound.

Neither heaven nor earth has any gieues for that man that can shake off the
fetters of an oath; for he cares not for that God whom he dares inuoke to a
falsehood; and he that cares not for God, will not care for man.

Ere Bathsheba can be over the threshold, Nathan (upon compact) is knocking at
the door. Gods Prophet was never but welcome to the bedchamber of King David;
In a seemiug strangeness he falls upon the same suit, upon the same complaint
with Bathsheba: Honest policies do not mis-become the holiest Prophets; She
might seem to speak as a woman, as a mother, out of passion; the word of a
Prophet could not be misdoubted; He therefore that had formerly brought to
David that chiding and bloody message concerning Bathsheba, comes now to David,
to sue for the life and honor of Bathsheba, and he that was sent from God (to
David) to bring the news of a gracious promise of favor unto Solomon, comes
now to challenge the execution of it from the hands of a father; and he whose
place freed him from suspicion of a faction, complains of the insolent
demeanure and proclamation of Adonijah; What he began with an humble obeisance,
shutting up in a lowly and loving expostulation, Is this thing done by my Lord
the King, and thou have not showed thy servant who should sit on the Throne of
my Lord the King after him? As Nathan was of Gods counsel unto David, so was
he of David's Counsel both to God, and the State; As God therefore upon all
occasions told Nathan what he meant to do with David, so had David wont to
tell Nathan what he meant to do in his holy and most important civil
affairs. There are cases wherein it is not unfit for Gods Prophets to meddle
with matters of State; It is no disparagement to religious Princes to impart
their counsels unto them, who can requite them with the counsels of God.

That wood which a single iron could not riue, is soon splitted with a double
wedge; The seasonable importunity of Bathsheba and Nathan, thus seconding each
other, has so wrought upon David, that now his love to Adonijah gives place to
indignation, nature to an holy fidelity; and now he renewes his ancient oath
to Bathsheba with a passionate solemnity; As the Lord lives, who has
redeemed my soul out of all adversity, even as I swear unto thee by the Lord
God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and
he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; so will I certainly do this day; In
the decay of David's body I find not his intellectiue powers any whit impaired:
As one therefore that from his bed could with a perfect (if weak) hand stere
the government of Israel; he gives wise and full directions for the
inauguration of Solomon; Zadok the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, and Benaiah
the Captain receive his grave and Princely charge for the carriage of that so
weighty a business. They are commanded to take with them the royal guard, to
set Solomon upon his fathers Mule, to carry him down in state to Gihon, to
anoint him with the holy oil of the Tabernacle, to sound the trumpets and
proclaim him in the streets, to bring him back with triumph and magnificence
to the Court, and to set him in the royal Throne with all the due ceremonies
of Coronation.

How pleasing was this command to them who in Salomons glory saw their own
safety? Benaiah applauds it, and not fearing a fathers envy, in David's
presence wishes Salomons throne exalted above his; The people are ravished
with the joy of so hopeful a succession; and break the earth, and fill the
heaven with the noise of their Music and shoutings.

Salomons guests had now at last better cheer then Adonijahs; whose feast (as
all wicked men's) ended in horror; No sooner are their bellies full of meat,
then their ears are full of the sound of those trumpets, which at once
proclaim Salomons triumph, and their confusion; Ever after the meal is ended
comes the reckoning; God could as easily have prevented this iollitie, as
marred it; But he willingly suffers vain men to please themselves for the time
in the conceited success of their own proiects, that afterward their
disappointment may be so much more grievous; No doubt, at this feast there was
many an health drunk to Adonijah, many a confident boast of their prospering
design, many a scorn of the despised faction of Solomon; and now for their
last dish is served up astonishment, and fearful expectation of a just
revenge. Jonathan, the son of Abiathar the Priest, brings the news of
Salomons solemn and joyful enthronization; now all hearts are cold, all faces
pale; and every man has but life enough to run away; How suddenly is this
brauing troop dispersed? Adonijah their new Prince flies to the horns of the
Altar, as distrusting all hopes of life, save the Sanctity of the place, and
the mercy of his rival.

So does the wise and just God befoole proud and insolent sinners in those
secret plots, wherein they hope to undermine the true son of David, the
Prince of peace; he suffers them to lay their heads together and to feast
themselves in a iocund security, and promise of success; at last, when they
are at the height of their joys, and hopes, he confounds all their devices,
and lays them open to the scorn of the world, and to the anguish of their
own guilty hearts.

David's end, and Salomons beginning.
IT well became Solomon to begin his reign in peace. Adonijah receives pardon
upon his good behavior, and finds the throne of Solomon, as safe as the Altar.
David lives to see a wise son warm in his seat, and now he that had yielded
to succession yields to nature. Many good counsels had David given his heir;
now he sums them up in his end. Dying words are wont to be weightiest; The
Soul when it is entering into glory breathes nothing but divine. I go the way
of all the earth; How well is that princely heart content to subscribe to the
conditions of humane mortality; as one that knew Sovereignty does not reach
to the affairs of nature? Though a King, he neither expects, nor desires an
immunity from dissolution; making not account to go in any other then the
common tracke, to the universal home of mankind, the house of age; Whither
should earth but to earth? and why should we grudge to do that, which all
do? Be thou strong therefore, and show thy self a man, Even when his spirit
was going out, he puts spirit into his Son; Age puts life into youth, and the
dying animates the vigorous. He had well found that strength was requisite to
government; that he had need to be no less then a man that should rule over
men; If greatness should never receive any opposition, yet those worlds of
cares, and businesses that attend the chair of State, are able to ouer-lay any
mean powers; A weak man may obey, none but the strong can govern. Graceless
courage were but the whet-stone of tyranny; Take heed therefore to the charge
of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes. The best
legacy that David bequeathes to his heir, is the care of piety; himself had
found the sweetness of a good conscience, and now he commends it to his
successor. If there be any thing that in our desires of the prosperous
condition of our children, takes place of goodness, our hearts are not
upright. Here was the father a King, charging the King his son to keep the
Statutes of the King of Kings; as one that knew greatness could neither exempt
from obedience, nor privilege sin; as one that knew the least deuiation in
the greatest and hiest Orb, is both most sensible, and most dangerous: Neither
would he have his son to look for any prosperity, save only from
well-doing; That happiness is built upon sands or Ice, which is raised upon
any foundation besides virtue. If Solomon were wise, David was good; and if old
Solomon had well remembered the counsel of old David, he had not so foulely
mis-carried.

After the precepts of piety, follow those of justice; distributing in a due
recompense, as revenge to Ioab and Shimei, so favor to the house of Barzillai.
The bloudinesse of Ioab had lien long upon David's heart; the hideous noise of
those treacherous murders, as it had pierced heaven, so it still filled the
ears of David; He could abhor that villainy, though he could not revenge
it; What he cannot pay, he will owe, and approve himself at last a faithful
debtor: Now he will defray it by the hand of Solomon. The slaughter was of
Abner, and Amasa, David appropriates it; Thou know what Ioab did to me: The
Sovereign is smitten in the Subject; Neither is it other then just, that the
arraignement of mean malefactors runs in the stil^ of wrong to the Kings
Crown and dignity: How much more do thou, O son of David, take to thy
self those insolences which are done to thy poorest subjects, servants,
sons, members here upon earth? No Saul can touch a Christian here below, but
thou feel it in heaven, and complainest.

But, what shall we think of this? David was a man of war, Solomon a King of
peace; yet David referres this revenge to Solomon, How just it was that he who
shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle that
was about his loins, should have his blood shed in peace, by a Prince of
peace; Peace is fittest to rectify the outrages of War; Or whether is not
this done in type of that divine administration, wherein thou, O Father of
heaven, have committed all judgment unto thine eternal son? Thou who
could immediately either plague, or absolve sinners, wilt do neither but by
the hand of a Mediator.

Solomon learned betimes what his ripeness taught afterward, Take away the
wicked from the King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousness;
Cruel Ioab, and malicious Shimei, must be therefore upon the first opportunity
removed; The one lay open to present justice, for abetting the conspiracy of
Adonijah; neither needs the help of time for a new advantage; The other went
under the protection of an oath from David, and therefore must be fetched in
upon a new challenge. The hoare head of both must be brought to the grave with
blood; else David's head could not be brought to his grave in peace; Due
punishment of malefactors is the debt of authority; If that holy King have run
into arerages; yet as one that hates and fears to break the bank, he gives
order to his play master; It shall be defraid, if not by him, yet for him.

Generous natures cannot be unthankful: Barzillai had showed David some
kindness in his extremity; and now the good man will have posterity to
inherit the thanks. How much more bountiful is the Father of mercies, in the
remuneration of our poor unworthy services? Even successions of generations
shall fare the better for one good parent.

The dying words and thoughts of the man after Gods own heart did not confine
themselves to the straites of these particular charges, but enlarged themselves
to the care of Gods public service; As good men are best at last, David did
never so busily, and carefully marshall the affairs of God, as when he was
fixed to the bed of his age and death. Then did he lode his son Solomon with
the charge of building the house of God; then did he lay before the eyes of his
son the model and pattern of that whole sacred work whereof if Solomon
bear the name, yet David no less merits it: He now gives the platform of the
Courts, and buildings; He gives the gold and silver for that holy use; an
hundred thousand talents of Gold, a thousand thousand talents of Silver;
besides brass and iron passing weight; He weighes out those precious mettalls
for their several designements; Every future vessel is laid out already in
his poise, if not in his form; He excites the Princes of Israel to their
assistance, in so high a work; He takes notice of their bountiful offerings;
He numbers up the Levites for the public service; and sets them their taskes.
He appoints the Singers, and other Musicians to their stations; the Porters to
the Gates that should be; And now when he has set all things in a desired
order, and forwardness, he shuts up with a zealous blessing of his Solomon,
and his people, and sleep with his fathers. Oh blessed soul, how quiet a
possession have thou now taken (after so many tumults) of a better Crown! Thou
that have prepared all things for the house of thy God, how happily art thou
now welcomed to that house of his, not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens! Who now shall envy unto good Princes the honor of ouerseeing the
businesses of God, and his Church; when David was thus punctual in these
divine provisions? What fear can be of usurpation where they have so glorious
a precedent?

Now is Solomon the second time crowned King of Israel; and now in his own
right (as formerly in his fathers) sits peaceably upon the Throne of the Lord;
His awe and power come on faster then his years; Envy and ambition where it
is once kindled, may sooner be hid in the ashes, then quite put out; Adonijah
yet hangs after his old hopes; He remembers how sweet he found the name of a
King; and now has laid a new plot for the setting up of his cracked title; He
would make the bed a step to the throne; His old accomplices are sure enough; His
part would gather much strength, if he might enjoy Abishag the relict of his
father, to wife; If it were not the Jewish fashion (as is pretended) that a
Kings widow should mary none but a King; yet certainly the power both of the
alliance, and friendship of a Queen must needs not a little advance his
purpose; The crafty rival dare not either move the suit to Solomon, or effect
the marriage without him; but would cunningly undermine the son by the suit of
that mother, whose suit had undermined him. The weaker vessels are commonly
used in the most dangerous suggestions of evil.

Bathsheba was so wise a woman that some of her counsels are canonized for
divine, yet she saw not the depth of this drift of Adonijah; therefore she both
entertaines the suit, and moves it: But what ever were the intent of the
suitor, could she choose but see the unlawfulness of so incestuous a match? It
is not long since she saw her late husband David abominating the bed of those
his Concubines, that had been touched by his son Absalom; and can she hold
it lawful that his son Adonijah should climb up to the bed of his fathers
wife? Sometimes even the best eyes are dim, and discern not those things
which are obuious to weaker sights: Or whether did not Bathsheba well see the
foulness of the suit, and yet in compassion of Adonijahs late repulse
(wherein she was the chief agent) and in a desire to make him amends for the
loss of the kingdom, she yields even thus to gratify him. It is an injurious
weakness to be drawn upon any by-respects to the furtherance of faulty
suits, of unlawful actions.

No sooner does Bathsheba come in place, then Solomon her son rises from his
chair of State and meets her and bows to her, and sets her on his right hand;
as not so remembering himself to be a King, that he should forget he was a
son. No outward dignity can take away the rights and obligations of nature;
Had Bathsheba been as mean, as Solomon was mighty, she had carried away this
honor from a gracious son: Yet for all these due complements, Bathsheba goes
away with a denial, Reverence she shall have, she shall not have a condescent.

In the acts of Magistracy, all regards of natural relations must give way;
That which she propounded as a small request, is now, after a general and
confused engagement rejected as unreasonable. It were pity we should be heard
in all our suits. Bathsheba makes a petition against her self, and knows it
not; her safety and life depends upon Salomons reign, yet she unwittingly
moves for the advancement of Adonijah.

Solomon was too dutiful to check his mother, and too wise to yield to her:
In unfit supplications we are most heard when we are repelled. Thus does our
God many times answer our prayers with merciful denials and most blesses us
in crossing our desires.

Wise Solomon does not find himself perplexed with the scruple of his
promise; he that had said Ask on, for I will not say thee nay, can now swear,
God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against
his own life* His promise was according to his supposition; his supposition
was of no other then of a suit, honest, reasonable, expedient; now he holds
himself free from that grant, wherein there was at once both sin and danger.
No man can be entangled with general words against his own just and honest
intentions.

The policies of wicked men befoole them at last; this intercession has undone
Adonijah, and in stead of the Throne, hastens his grave: The sword of Benaiah
puts an end to that dangerous riualitie. Ioab and Abiatbar still held Champerty
with Adonijah; Their hand was both in his claim of the kingdom, and in the
suit for Abishag; There are crimes wherein there are no accessories, such is
this of treason. Abiathar may thank his burden that he lives; Had he not borne
the Ark of the Lord before David, he had not now carried his head upon his
shoulders; Had he not been afflicted with David, he had perished with
Adonijah; now though he were, in his own merit, a man of death, yet he shall
furuiue his partners, Get thee to Anathoth unto thine own fields; The
Priesthood of Abiathar, as it aggrauated his crime, so it shall preserve his
life: Such honor have good Princes given to the Ministers of the Sanctuary,
that their very coat has been defense enough against the sword of justice;
how much more should it be of proof against the contempt of base persons?

Besides his function, respect is had to his sufferings; The father and
brethren of Abiathar were slain for David's sake, therefore for David's sake
Abiathar (though worthy of death) shall live; He had been now a dead man, if
he had not been formerly afflicted; Thus does our good God deal with us; by
the rod he preuents the sword; and therefore will not condemn us for our
sins, because we have suffered. If Abiathar do not forfait his life, yet his
office he shall; he must change Jerusalem for Anathoth, and the Priesthood for
a retired priuacie. It was fourscore years ago since the sentence of
judgment was denounced against the house of Eli; now does it come to
execution; This just quarrel against Abiathar (the last of that line) shall
make good the threatened judgment; The wickedness of Elies house was neither
purged by sacrifice, nor obliterated by time: If God pay slowly, yet he paies
sure; Delay of most certain punishment is neither any hindrance to his
justice, nor any comfort to our miseries.

The execution of Joab, and Shimei.
ABiathar shall live though he serve not; It is in the power of Princes to
remit (at least) those punishments which attend the breach of humane Laws;
good reason they should have power to dispense with the wrongs done to their
own persons; The news of Adonijahs death, and Abiathars remouall cannot but
affright Ioab; who now runs to Gibeon, and takes sanctuary in the Tabernacle
of God; all his hope of defense is in the horns of the Altar; Fond Ioab had
thou formerly sought for counsel from the Tabernacle, thou had not now
needed to seek to it for refuge; if thy devotions had not been wanting to
that Altar, thou had not needed it for a shelter: It is the fashion of our
foolish presumption to look for protection, where we have not cared to yield
obedience.

Even a Ioab clings fast to Gods Altar in his extremity; which in his ruff and
welfare he regarded not; The worst men would be glad to make use of Gods
ordinances, for their advantage; Necessity will drive the most profane and
lawless man to God; But what do those bloody hands touching the holy Altar of
God? Miserable Ioab, what help can thou expect from that sacred pile? Those
horns that were besprinkled with the blood of beasts, abhor to be touched by
the blood of men; that Altar was for the expiation of sin by blood; not for
the protection of the sin of blood. If Adonijah fled thither and escaped, it is
murder that pursues thee more then conspiracy; God has no sanctuary for a
wilful Homicide.

Yet such respect does Benaiah give to that holy place, that his Sword is
unwilling to touch him that touches the Altar: Those horns shall put off death
for the time; and give protraction of the execution, though not preservation of
life; How sweet is life even to those who have been prodigal of the blood of
others? that Ioab shifts thus to hold it but some few hours? Benaiah returns
with Ioabs answer, in stead of his head; Nay, but I will die here; as not
daring to vnsheath his Sword against a man sheltered in Gods Tabernacle,
without a new commission. Young Solomon is so well acquainted with the Law of
God, in such a case, that he sticks not at the sentence: He knew that God had
enacted, If a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor, to slay him with
guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar, that he may die: He knew Ioabs
murders had not been more presumptuous, then guilefull, and therefore he sends
Benaiah to take away the offender, both from God, and men, from the Altar, and
the world.

No Subject had merited more then Ioab; When proclamation was made in Israel,
that who ever should smite the Iebusites first, he should be the Chief and
Captain; Ioab was the man; When David built some part of Jerusalem, Ioab built
the rest; so as Jerusalem owes it self to Ioab, both for recovery, and
reparation; No man held so close to David; no man was more intent to the weal
of Israel, none so succesfull in victories; yet now is he called to reckon for
his old sins, and must repay blood to Amasa, and Abner: It is not in the
power of all our deserts to buy off one sin, either with God, or man: where
life is so deeply forfaited, it admits of no redemption.

The honest simplicity of those times knew not of any infamy in the execution
of justice. Benaiah, who was the great Marshall under Solomon, thinks not his
fingers defiled with that fatal stroke. It is a foolish niceness to put more
shame in the doing of justice, then in the violating of it.

In one act Solomon has approved himself both a good Magistrate, and a good
son; fulfilling at once the will of a father, and the charge of God;
concluding upon this just execution, that, upon David, and upon his seed, and
upon his house, and upon his Throne there shall be peace for ever from the
Lord; and inferring, that without this there could have been no peace.

Blood is a restless suitor, and will not leave clamoring for judgment, till
the mouth be stopped with revenge. In this case favor to the offender, is
cruelty to the favorer.

Now has Ioab paid all his arerages by the sword of Benaiah; there is no suit
against his corpse; that has the honor of a burial fit for a Peer of Israel,
for the near cozen to the King. Death puts an end to all quarrels; Solomon
strikes off the skore, when God is satisfied; The revenge that suruiues death
and will not be shut up in the Coffin, is barbarous, and unbeseeming true
Israelites.

Only Shimei remains upon the file; his course is next, yet so, as that it
shall be in his own liberty to hasten his end; Upon David's remission, Shimei
dwells securely in Bahurim, a town of the tribe of Benjamin; Doubtless, when
he saw so round justice done upon Adonijah, and Ioab, his guilty heart could
not think Solomon message portended ought but his execution; and now he cannot
but be well pleased with so easy conditions, of dwelling at Jerusalem, and not
passing over the brook Kidron; What more delightful place could he choose to
live in, then that city, which was the glory of the whole earth? What more
pleasing bounds could he wish then the sweet banks of Kidron? Jerusalem could
be no prison to him, whiles it was a Paradise to his betters; and if he had a
desire to take fresh air, he had the space of six furlongs to walk from the
city to the brook; He could not complain to be so delectably confined; And
besides, thrice every year he might be sure to see all his friends without
stirring his foot.

Wise Solomon whiles he cared to seem not too severe an exactor of that, which
his father had remitted; prudently lays insensible twigs for so foul an
offender; Besides the old grudge, no doubt Solomon saw cause to suspect the
fidelity of Shimei; as a man who was ever known to be hollow to the house of
David; The obscurity of a Country life would easily afford him more safe
oportunities of secret mischief; Many eyes shall watch him in the city; he
cannot look out unseen, he cannot whisper, unheard: Upon no other terms
shall he enjoy his life, which the least straying shall forfait.

Shimei feels no pain in this restraint; How many Nobles of Israel do that
for pleasure, which he does upon command? Three years has he lived within
compass; limited both by Salomons charge and his own oath; It was still in
his power (notwithstanding David's Caveat) to have laid down his hoare-head in
the grave, without blood; The just God infatuates those whom he means to
plague; Two of Shimeies servants are fled to Gath; and now he saddles his Ass
and is gone to fetch them back; Either (he thinks) this word of Solomon is
forgotten, or in the multitude of greater affairs, not heeded; or this so
small an occurrence will not come to his ear: Covetousness and presumption of
impunitie are the destruction of many a soul; Shimei seeks his servants, and
loses himself; How many are there who cry out of this folly, and yet imitate
it; These earthly things either are our servants, or should be; How commonly
do we see men run out of the bounds, set by Gods law, to hunt after them, till
their souls incur a fearful judgment?

Princes have thousands of eyes, and ears; If Shimei will for more secrecy
saddle his own Ass, and take (as is like) the benefit of night, for his
passage; his journey cannot be hid from Solomon; How wary had those men need
to be which are obnoxious? Without delay is Shimei complained of, conuented,
charged with violation both of the oath of God, and the iniunction of Solomon;
and that all these might appear to be but an occasion of that punishment,
whose cause was more remote, now is all that old venom laid before him, which
his malice had long since spit at Gods anointed: Thou know all the
wickedness, whereto thine heart is privy, that thou did to David my father.

Had this old tallie been stricken off; yet could not Shimei have pleaded ought
for his life; For, had he said; Let not my Lord the King be thus mortally
displeased for so small an offense: Who ever died for passing over Kidron? What
man is the worse for my harmless journey? It had soon been returned, If the
act be small, yet the circumstances are deadly; The commands of Sovereign
authority make the sleightest duties weighty; If the journey be harmless,
yet not the disobedience; It is not for subjects to poyse the Princes charge in
the scales of their weak constructions; but they must suppose it ever to be of
such importance, as is pretended by the Commander. Besides the precept, here
was a mutual adiuration; Shimei swore not to go, Solomon swore his death if
he went; the one oath must be revenged, the other must be kept: If Shimei were
false in offending; Solomon will be just in punishing. Now therefore, that
which Abishai the son of Zeruiah wished to have done in the greenenesse of
the wound, and was repelled; after long festering Benaiah is commanded to do,
The stones that Shimei threw at David, struck not so deep, as Benaiahs sword;
The tongue that cursed the Lords anointed has paid the head to boot. Vengeance
against rebels may sleep, it cannot die; A sure, if late, judgment attends
those that dare lift up either their hand, or tongue against the sacred persons
of Gods Vicegerents. How much less will the God of heaven suffer unrevenged
the insolences, and blasphemies against his own divine Majesty? It is a
fearful word, he should not be just, if he should hold these guiltless.

Salomons Choice, with his judgment upon the two harlots.
AFter so many messages and proofs of grace, Solomon begins doubtfully, both
for his match, and for his devotion: If Pharaohs daughter were not a Proselyte,
his early choice was (besides unwarrantable) dangerous: The hie places not only
stood, but were frequented, both by the people, and King; I do not find David
climbing up those mis-hallowed hills, in an affectation of the variety of
Altars; Solomon does so, and yet loves the Lord, and is loved of God again:
Such is the mercy of our God, that he will not suffer our well-meant weaknesses
to bereave us of his favors: he rather pitties, then plagues us for the
infirmities of upright hearts.

Gibeon was well worthy to be the chief, yea the only hie-place; There was the
allowed Altar of God, there was the Tabernacle, though (as then) severed from
the Arc; thither did young Solomon go up; and, as desiring to begin his
reign with God, there he offers no less then a thousand sacrifices.

Solomon worships God by day; God appears to Solomon by night; Well may we
look to enjoy God, when we have served him; The night cannot but be happy
whose day has been holy.

It was no unusual course with God to reveal himself unto his servants by
dreams; So did he here to Solomon; who saw more with his eyes shut, then ever
they could see open, even him that was invisible: The good King had offered
unto God a thousand burnt-sacrifices, and now God offreth him his option, Ask
what I shall give thee: He whose the beasts are on a thousand mountains
graciously accepts a small return of his own. It stands not with the
munificence of a bountiful God to be indebted to his creature, we cannot give
him ought vnrecompensed; There is no way wherein we can be so liberal to our
selves, as by giving to the possessor of all things. And art thou still, o God,
less free unto us thy meaner servants under the Gospel? Have thou not said,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, it shall be given you? Only
give us grace not to be wanting unto thee, and we know thou can not suffer
any thing to be wanting unto us.

The night follows the temper of the day; and the heart so uses to sleep, as
it wakes: Had not the thoughts of Solomon bin intent upon wisdom by day, he
had not made it his suit in his dream: There needs no leisure of deliberation;
The heart was so fore-stalled with the love, and admiration of wisdom, that
not abiding the least motion of a competition, it fastens on that grace it had
longed for; Give unto thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people.
Had not Solomon been wise before, he had not known the worth of wisdom, he
had not preferred it in his desires; The dunghill cocks of the World cannot
know the price of this pearl; those that have it, know that all other
excellencies are but trash, and rubbish unto it. Solomon was a great King, and
saw that he had power enough, but withal, he found that royalty, without
wisdom, was no other then eminent dishonor; There is no trade of life whereto
there belongs not a peculiar wisdom; without which there is nothing but a
tedious unprofitableness: much more to the hiest, and busiest vocation, the
regiment of men; As God has no reason to give his best favors unasked; so
has he no will to withhold them where they are asked.

He that in his cradle had the title of Beloved of God, is now beloved more in
the Throne for the love and desire of wisdom; This soil could never have
borne this fruit alone; Solomon could not so much as have dreamed of wisdom,
if God had not put it into him; and now God takes the suit so well, as if he
were beholden to his creature for wishing the best to it self: and because
Solomon has asked what he should, he shall now receive both what he asked,
and what he asked not: Riches and honor shall be given him in to the match. So
does God love a good choice, that he recompenses it with ouer-giuing; Could
we but first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, all these
earthly things should be super-added to us; Had Solomon made wealth his boon,
he had failed both of riches and wisdom; now he asks the best, and speeds
of all; They are in a fair way of happiness that can pray well; It was no
dis-comfort to Solomon, that he awaked and found it a dream; for he knew this
dream was divine, and oracular; and he already found in his first waking, the
real performance of what was promised him sleeping: Such illumination did he
sensibly find in all the rooms of his heart, as if God had now given him a
new soul: No marvel if Solomon now returning from the Tabernacle to the Arc,
testified his joy and thankfulness by burnt-offerings, and peace offerings,
and public feastings; The heart that has found in it self the lively
testimonies of Gods presence, and favor, cannot contain it self from outward
expressions.

God likes not to have his gifts lie dead where he has conferred them; Israel
shall soon witness that they have a King enlightened from heaven; in whom
wisdom did not stay for heirs; did not admit of any parallel in his
predecessors; The all-wise God will find occasions to draw forth those graces to
use, and light, which he has bestowed on man. Two Harlots come before young
Solomon with a difficult plea; It is not like the Princes ear was the first
that heard this complaint; there was a subordinate course of justice for the
determination of these meaner incidences: the hardness of this decision brought
the matter, through all the benches of inferior judicature, to the Tribunal
of Solomon; The very Israelitish Harlots were not so unnatural as some now
adays that counterfeit honesty; These strive for the fruit of their womb,
ours to put them off; One son is yet alive, two mothers contend for him. The
children were alike for features, for age; the mothers were alike for
reputation, here can be no evidence from others eyes; Whethers now is the
living Child, and whethers is the dead? Had Solomon gone about to wring forth
the truth by tortures, he had perhaps plagued the innocent, and added pain to
the misery of her loss; the weaker had been guilty, and the more able to
bear, had carried away both the Child, and the victory: The countenance of
either of the mothers bewraied an equality of passion; Sorrow possessed the
one, for the son she had lost; and the other, for the son she was in
danger to leese: Both were equally peremptory, and importunate in their claim;
It is in vain to think that the true part can be discerned by the vehemence of
their challenge; Falsehood is oft-times more clamorous then truth; No witnesses
can be produced; They two dwelt apart under one roof; and if some neighbors
have seen the children at their birth, and circumcision; yet how little
difference, how much change is there in the favor of infants? how does death
alter more confirmed lines?

The impossibility of proof makes the guilty more confident, more impudent;
the true mother pleads that her child was taken away at midnight by the other;
but in her sleep; She saw it not, she felt it not; and if all her senses could
have witnessed it, yet, here was but the affirmation of the one, against the
denial of the other, which in persons alike credible do but counterpoise.
What is there now to lead the Judge, since there is nothing either in the act,
or circumstances, or persons, or plea, or evidence that might sway the
sentence? Solomon well saw that when all outward proofs failed, there was an
inward affection, which if it could be fetched out, would certainly bewray the
true mother; He knew sorrow might more easily be dissembled then natural love;
both sorrowed for their own; both could not love, one, as theirs; To draw
forth then this true proof of motherhood, Solomon calls for a sword;
Doubtless, some of the wiser hearers smiled upon each other; and thought in
themselves, What, will the young King cut these knottie causes in pieces? Will
he divide justice with edge-tooles? will he smite at hazard before conviction?
The actions of wise Princes are riddles to vulgar constructions; neither is it
for the shallow capacities of the multitude to fadome the deep proiects of
Sovereign authority: That sword which had served for execution, shall now
serve for trial; Divide ye the living child in twain, and give the one half
to the one, and the other half to the other; Oh divine oracle of justice,
commanding that which it would not have done, that it might find out that
which could not be discovered; Neither God, nor his Deputies may be so taken at
their words, as if they always intended their commands for action, and not
sometimes for probation.

This sword has already pierced the breast of the true mother; and divided her
heart with fear, and grief, at so killing a sentence; There needs no other
rack to discover nature; and now she thinks, woe is me that came for justice,
and am answered with cruelty; Divide ye the living child? Alas, what has
that poor infant offended that it suruiues, and is sued for? How much less
miserable had I been, that my child had been smothered in my sleep, then
mangled before mine eyes? If a dead carcass could have satisfied me, I needed
not to have complained; What a woeful condition am I fallen into, who am accused
to have been the death of my supposed child already, and now shall be the
death of my own? If there were no loss of my child, yet how can I endure
this torment of mine own bowels? How can I live to see this part of my self
sprawling under that bloody sword? And whiles she thinks thus, she sues to
that suspected mercy of her just Judge, Oh my Lord, give her the living
child, and slaie him not: as thinking, if he live, he shall but change a
mother; if he die, his mother loses a son; Whiles he lives, it shall be my
comfort that I have a son, though I may not call him so; dying, he perishes
to both; it is better he should live to a wrong mother, then to neither:
Contrarily, her envious competitor as holding her self well satisfied that her
neighbor should be as childlesse, as her self, can say, Let it be neither
mine, nor thine, but divide it; Well might Solomon, and every hearer conclude,
that either she was no mother, or a monster, that could be content with the
murder of her child; and that if she could have been the true mother, and yet
have desired the blood of her infant, she had been as worthy to be stripped of
her child for so foul unnaturalness, as the other had been worthy to enjoy
him for her honest compassion. Not more justly then wisely therefore does
Solomon trace the true mother by the footsteps of love, and pity; and
adiudgeth the child to those bowels that had yearned at his danger.

Even in morality it is thus also; Truth as it is one, so it loves
entireness; falsehood, division: Satan that has no right to the heart, would
be content with a piece of it; God that made it all, will have either the
whole, or none; The erroneous Church strives with the true, for the living
child of saving doctrine; each claims it for her own; Heresy conscious of
her own injustice, could be content to go away with a leg, or an arm of
sound principles, as hoping to make up the rest with her own mixtures; Truth
cannot abide to part with a joint; and will rather endure to leese all by
violence, then a piece through a willing conniuencie.

The Temple.
IT is a weak and injurious censure that taxes Salomons slacknesse in
founding the house of God; Great bodies must have but slow motions; He was wise
that said, the matters must be all prepared without, ere we build within; And
if David have laid ready a great part of the metals and timber; yet many a
tree must be felled and squared, and many a stone hewne and polished, ere this
foundation could be laid; neither could those large Cedars be cut, sawne,
seasoned in one year; Four years are soon gone in so vast a preparation:
David had not been so entire a friend to Hiram, if Hiram had not been a
friend to God; Salomons wisdom has taught him to make use of so good a
neighbor, of a fathers friend; he knows that the Tyrians skill was not given
them for nothing; Not Jews only, but Gentiles must have their hand in
building the Temple of God; Only Jews meddled with the Tabernacle, but the
Temple is not built without the aid of Gentiles; They, together with us, make
up the Church of God.

Even Pagans have their Arts from heaven; how justly may we improve their
graces to the service of the God of Heaven; If there be a Tyrian that can work
more curiously in gold, in silver, in brass, in iron, in purple, and blew
silk, then an Israelite, why should not he be employed about the Temple? Their
heathenisme is their own; their skill is their makers; Many a one works for
the Church of God, that yet has no part in it.

Solomon rayses a tribute for the work; not of money, but of men: Thirty
thousand Israelites are levied for this service; yet not continuedly, but with
intermission; their labor is more generous, and less pressing; it is enough
if they keep their courses one month in Lebanon, two at home; so as ever ten
thousand work, whiles twenty thousand breathe. So favorable is God to his
creature, that he requires us not to be ouertoyled in the works of his own
service. Due respirations are requisite in the holiest acts. The maine stresse
of the work lies upon Proselytes; whose both number, and pains was herein
more then the Natives: An hundred and fifty thousand of them are employed in
bearing burdens, in hewing stones; besides their three thousand, three hundred
ouer-seers; Now were the despised Gibeonites of good use, and in vain does
Israel wish that the zeal of Saul had not robbed them of so serviceable
drudges.

There is no man so mean but may be some way useful to the house of God;
Those that cannot work in gold, and silver, and silk, yet may cut and hew;
and those that can do neither, yet may carry burdens; Even the services that
are more homely, are not less necessary: Who can dis-hearten himself in the
conscience of his own insufficiency, when he sees God can as well serve
himself of his labor, as of his skill.

The Temple is framed in Lebanon, and set up in Sion; Neither hammer nor axe
was heard in that holy structure; There was nothing but noise in Lebanon,
nothing in Sion but silence and peace; What ever tumults are abroad, it is fit
there should be all quietness and sweet concord in the Church; Oh God, that
the axes of schism, or the hammers of furious contentions should be heard
within thy Sanctuary! Thine house is not built with blows, with blows it is
beaten down: Oh knit the hearts of thy servants together in the unity of the
spirit, and the bond of peace; that we may mind and speak the same things,
that thou who art the God of peace, may take pleasure to dwell under the
quiet roof of our hearts.

Now is the foundation laid, and the walls rising of that glorious fabric,
which all Nations admired, and all times have celebrated; Even those stones
which were laid in the Base of the building were not ragged and rude, but hewne
and costly; the part that lies covered with earth from the eyes of all
beholders, is no less precious, then those that are most conspicuous: God is
not all for the eye, he pleases himself with the hidden value of the living
stones of his spiritual Temple; How many noble graces of his feruants have
been buried in obscurity; not discerned so much as by their own eyes? which
yet as he gave, so he crowns: Hypocrites regard nothing but show; God nothing
but truth.

The matter of so goodly a frame strives with the proportion, whether shall
more excel; Here was nothing but white Marble without; nothing but Cedar and
Gold within; Upon the Hill of Sion stands that glittering and snowy pile, which
both inuiteth and dazeleth the eyes of passengers a far off; so much more
precious within, as Cedar is better then stone, Gold then Cedar; No base thing
goes to the making up of Gods house; If Satan may have a dwelling, he cares not
though he patch it up of the rubbish of stone, or rotten sticks, or dross of
metals; God will admit of nothing that is not pure and exquisite; His Church
consists of none but the faithful, his habitation is in no heart but the
gracious.

The fashion was no other then that of the Tabernacle; only this was more
costly, more large, more fixed; God was the same that dwelt in both, he varied
not, the same mystery was in both; Only it was fit there should be a
proportion betwixt the work and the builder; The Tabernacle was erected in a
popular estate, the Temple in a Monarchy; it was fit this should favor of the
munificence of a King, as that of the zeal of a multitude; That was erected in
the flitting condition of Israel in the desert; this, in their settled residence
in the promised Land; it was fit therefore that should be framed for motion,
this for rest. Both of them were distinguished into three remarkable divisions,
whereof each was more noble, more reserved then other.

But what do we bend our eyes upon stone, and wood, and metals? God would
never have taken pleasure in these dead materials for their own sakes, if they
had not had a further intendment: Me thinks I see four Temples in this one.
It is but one in matter, as the God that dwells in it is but one; three yet more
in resemblance: according to the division of them in whom it pleases God to
inhabit; For where ever God dwells, there is his temple; Oh God, thou
vouchsafest to dwell in the believing heart: as we thy silly creatures have
our being in thee, so thou the Creator of heaven and earth have thy dwelling in
us. The heaven of heavens is not able to contain thee, and yet thou disdainest
not to dwell in the strait lodgings of our renewed soul. So then, because Gods
children are many, and those many divided in respect of themselves, though
united in their head, therefore this Temple which is but one in collection as
God is one, is manifold in the distribution, as the Saints are many; each man
bearing about him a little shrine of this infinite Majesty; And for that the
most general division of the Saints is in their place and estate; some
struggling, and toyling in this earthly warfare, others triumphing in heavenly
glory, therefore has God two other, more universal Temples; One the Church
of his Saints on earth, the other, the hiest heaven of his Saints glorified. In
all these, o God, thou dwell for ever, and this material house of thine is
a clear representation of these three spiritual; Else what were a temple made
with hands unto the God of spirits? And tho one of these was a true type of
all, yet how are they all exceeded each by other? This of stone, though most
rich and costly, yet what is it to the living Temple of the holy Ghost, which
is our body? What is the Temple of this body of ours, to the Temple of Christ's
body which is his Church? And what is the Temple of Gods Church on earth, to
that which triumphs gloriously in heaven?

How easily do we see all these in this one visible Temple? which as it had
three distinctions of rooms; the Porch, the Holy-place, the Holy of Holies; so
is each of them answered spiritually; In the porch we find the regenerate
soul entering into the blessed societic of the Church; In the holy place, the
Communion of the true visible Church on earth, selected from the world; In the
holy of holies (whereinto the hie-Priest entered once a year) the glorious
heaven, into which our true hie-Priest, Christ Jesus, entered once for all to
make an atonement betwixt God, and man. In all these what a meet
correspondence there is both in proportion, matter, situation?

In proportion; The same rule that skillful caruers observe in the dutting out
of the perfect statue of a man, that the height be thrice the breadth, and the
breadth one third of the height, was likewise duly observed in the fabrike of
the Temple; whose length was double to the height, and treble to the breadth;
as being sixty cubits long, thirty hie, and twenty broad; How exquisite a
symmetrie have thou ordained (o God) betwixt the faithful heart, and thy
Church on earth, with that in heaven; how accurate in each of these, in all
their powers and parts compared with other; So has God ordered the believing
soul that it has neither too much shortness of grace, nor too much height of
conceit, nor too much breadth of passion; So has he ordered his visible
Church, that there is a necessary inequality, without any disproportion; an
height of government, a length of extent, a breadth of jurisdiction duly
answerable to each other; So has he ordered his triumphant Church above, that
it has a length of eternity, answered with an height of perfection, and a
breadth of incomprehensible glory.

In matter; All was here of the best; The wood was precious, sweet, lasting;
The stone beautiful, costly, insensible of age; The gold pure and glittering;
So are the graces of Gods children, excellent in their nature* dear in their
acceptance, eternal in their use: So are the ordinances of God in his Church,
holy, comfortable, irrefragable. So is the perfection of his glorified saints
incomparable, inconceivable.

In Situation; the outer parts were here more common, the inner more holy, and
peculiarly reserved: I find one Court of the Temple open to the unclean, to
the uncircumcised; Within that; another open only to the Israelites, and of
them, to the clean; within that, yet another, proper only to the Priests and
Levites; where was the Brazen Altar for sacrifice, and the Brazen sea for
washings; The eyes of the Laity might follow their oblations in hither, their
feet might not.

Yet more, in the covered rooms of the Temple, there is, whither the Priests
only may enter, not the Levites; there is, whither the hie-priest only may
enter, not his brethren.

It is thus in every renewed man, the individual temple of God; the outward
parts are allowed common to God and the world; the inwardest and secretest,
which is the heart, is reserved only for the God that made it. It is thus in
the Church visible, the false and foule-hearted hypocrite has access to the
holy ordinances of God, and treads in his Courts; only the true Christian has
entire and private conversation with the holy one of Israel. He only is
admitted into the Holy of holies, and enters within the glorious veil of
heaven.

If from the walls we look unto the furniture; What is the Altar whereon our
sacrifices of prayer and praises are offered to the Almighty but a contrite
heart? What the golden Candlesticks, but the illumined understanding, wherein
the light of the knowledge of God, and his divine will shines for ever? What
the Tables of Shewbread, but the sanctified memory, which keeps the bread
of life continually? Yea, if we shall presume so far as to enter into the
very closet of Gods oracle; Even there, o God, do we find our unworthy hearts
so honored by thee, that they are made thy very Arc, wherein thy Royal law,
and the pot of thine heavenly Manna is kept for ever; and from whose
propitiatory, shaded with the wings of thy glorious Angels, thou give the
gracious Testimonies of thy good spirit, witnessing with ours, that we are the
children of thee the living God.

Behold, if Solomon built a Temple unto thee, thou have built a Temple unto thy
self in us; We are not only through thy grace living stones in thy Temple, but
living Temples in thy Sion: Oh do thou ever dwell in this thine house; and in
this thy house let us ever serve thee: Wherefore else have thou a Temple, but
for thy presence with us, and for our worshipping of thee? The time was, when,
as thy people, so thy self; did lodge in flitting Tents, ever shifting, ever
moving; thence thou thoughtest best to soiourne both in Shilo; and the roof of
Obed-Edom; After that, thou condescendedst to settle thine abode with men, and
would dwell in an house of thine own, at thy Jerusalem. So did thou in the
beginning lodge with our first Parents as in a Tent; Soiourne with Israel under
the law; and now make a constant residence under the Gospel, in the hearts
of thy chosen children; from whence thou will remove no more; they shall remove
from the world, from themselves, thou shall not remove from them.

Wheresoever thou art, o God, thou art worthy of adoration; Since thou ever
wilt dwell in us, be thou ever worshipped in us; Let the Altars of our clean
hearts send up ever to thee the sweetly-perfumed smokes of our holy
meditations, and faithful prayers, and cheerful thanks-giuings; Let the pure
lights of our faith, and godly conversation shine ever before thee, and men,
and never be put out; Let the bread of life stand ever ready upon the pure,
and precious tables of our hearts. Lock up thy Law, and thy Manna within us;
and speak comfortably to us from thy mercie-seat. Suffer nothing to enter in
hither that is unclean; Sanctify us unto thy self, and be thou sanctified in
us.

Solomon, and the Queen of Sheba.
GOD has no use of the dark lanternes of secret, and reserved perfections; We
our selves do not light up candles to put them under bushels. The great lights
whether of heaven, or earth are not intended to obscurity; but as to give
light unto others, so to be seen themselves; Dan and Beersheba were too strait
bounds for the fame of Solomon; which now has flowne over all lands and seas,
and raised the world to an admiration of his more then humane wisdom. Even so,
o thou everlasting King of peace, thy Name is great among the Gentiles; There
is no speech, nor language, where the report of thee is not heard; The sound of
thee is gone forth through all the earth; Thy name is an ointment powered out,
therefore the virgins love thee.

No doubt many from all coasts came to learn and wonder; none with so much
note as this noble daughter of Cham: Who her self deserves the next wonder to
him whom she came to hear, and admire; That a woman, a Princess, a rich and
great Queen, should travel from the remotest south, from Saba, a region
famous for the greatest delicacies of nature, to learn wisdom, is a
matchless example. We know Merchants that venture to either Indies for wealth;
Others we know daily to cross the seas for wanton curiosity; Some few
Philosophers we have known to have gone far for learning, and amongst
Princes it is no unusual thing to send their Ambassadors to farre-distant
kingdoms, for transaction of businesses either of State, or commerce; but that
a royal Lady should in person undertake and overcome so tedious a journey,
only to observe, and inquire into the mysteries of nature, art, religion, is a
thing past both parallel, and imitation; Why do we think any labor great, or
any way long to hear a greater then Solomon? How justly shall the Queen of
the South rise up in judgment, and condemn us, who may hear wisdom crying
in our streets, and neglect her?

Certainly so wealthy a Queen, and so great a lover of wisdom could not want
great scholars at home; them she had first apposed with her enigmaticall
demands; and now finding her self unsatisfied she betakes her self to this
Oracle of God; It is a good thing to doubt, better to be resolved: The mind
that never doubts shall learn nothing; the mind that always doubts shall
never profit by learning; Our doubts only serve to stir us up to seek truth;
Our resolutions settle us in the truth we have found. There were no pleasure in
resolutions if we had not been formerly troubled with doubts; There were
nothing but discomfort and disquietnesse in doubts, if it were not for the hope
of resolution; It is not safe to suffer doubts to dwell too long upon the
heart; there may be good use of them as passengers, dangerous as inmates:
Happy are we if we can find a Solomon to remove them.

Fame as it is always a blab, so oft-times a liar. The wise Princess found
cause to distrust so uncertain an informer, whose reports are still either
doubtful, or fabulous; and like winds, or streams, increase in passing: If
very great things were not spoken of Solomon, fame should have wronged him; and
if but just rumors were spread of his wisdom, there needed much credulity to
believe them. This great Queen would not suffer her self to be lead by the
ears; but comes in person to examine the truth of foreign relations. How much
more unsafe is it in the most important businesses of our souls, to trust the
opinions and reports of others? Those ears and eyes are ill bestowed that do
not serve to choose and judge for their owners.

When we come to a rich treasure, we need not be bidden to carry away what we
are able. This wise Lady as she came far for knowledge, so finding the plenty
of this vein, she would not depart without her full lode: There was nothing
wherein she would leave her self unsatisfied: she knew that she could not
every day meet with a Solomon; and therefore she makes her best use of so
learned a master; Now she empties her heart of all her doubts, and fills it with
instruction. It is not good neglecting the oportunities of furnishing our
souls with profitable, with saving knowledge. There is much wisdom in moving
a question well, though there be more in assoyling it: What use do we make of
Salomons teacher, if sitting at the feet of Christ we leave our hearts either
ignorant, or perplexed?

As if the errand of this wealthy Queen had been to buy wisdom, she came
with her Camels laden with Gold, and precious stones, and rich odors: Though to
a mighty King she will not come to school emptie-handed; If she came to fetch
an inualuable treasure, she finds it reason to give thanks unto him that kept
it. As he is a fool that has a price in his hand to get wisdom, and wants an
heart; So is he unthankful that has an heart to get wisdom, and has no
price in his hand; A price, not counteruailable to what he seeks, but
retributorie to him of whom he seeks. How shameful is it to come always with
close hands to them that teach us the great mysteries of salvation.

Expectation is no better then a kind enemy to good deserts. We leese those
objects which we ouer-looke. Many had been admired if they had not been
overmuch befriended by fame; who now in our judgment are cast as much below
their rank, as they were fore-imagined above it. This disadvantage had wife
Solomon with this stranger; whom rumor had bid to look for incredible
excellencies; yet so wonderful were the graces of Solomon, that they overcame
the hiest expectation, and the liberallest belief: So as when she saw the
architecture of his buildings, the provisions of his tables, the order of his
attendants, the religion of his sacrifices, she confessed both her iniust
incredulity in not believing the report of his wisdom, and the injury of
report in vnderrating it. I believed not the words till I came, and mine eyes
had seen it; and lo the one half was not told me. Her eyes were more sure
informers then her ears. She did not so much hear as see Salomons wisdom in
these real effects. His answers did not so much demonstrate it, as his prudent
government. There are some whose speeches are witty, whiles their carriage is
weak, whose deeds are incongruities, whiles their words are Apothegmes. It is
not worth the name of wisdom that may be heard only, and not seen; Good
discourse is but the froth of wisdom; the pure and solid substance of it is in
well-framed actions; if we know these things, happy are we if we do them.

And if this great person admired the wisdom, the buildings, the domesticke
order of Solomon, and chiefly his stately ascent into the House of the Lord;
how should our souls be taken up with wonder at thee* O thou true son of
David, and Prince of euer-lasting peace, who receiuedst the spirit not by
measure? who have built this glorious house, not made with hands, even the
heaven of heavens? whose infinite providence has sweetly disposed of all the
family of thy creatures, both in heaven and earth; and who lastly did ascend
up on hie, and ledst captivity captive, and gave gifts to men?

So well had this studious Lady profited by the Lectures of that exquisite
Master, that now she enuies, she magnifies none but them who may live within
the air of Salomons wisdom: Happy are thy men, and happy are thy servants,
which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom; As if she
could have been content to have changed her Throne for the footstool of
Solomon. It is not easy to conceive how great a blessing it is to live under
those lips, which do both preserve knowledge, and utter it: If we were not
glutted with good counsel, we should find no relish in any worldly
contentment in comparison hereof; But, he that is full, despises an
hony-combe.

She, whom her own experience had taught how happy a thing it is to have a
skillful Pilote sitting at the stern of the State, blesses Israel for
Solomon, blesses God for Israel, blesses Solomon and Israel mutually in
each-other; Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in thee, to set thee on
the Throne of Israel. Because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made
he the King to do judgment and justice. It was not more Salomons advancement
to be King of Israel, then it was the advancement of Israel to be governed by a
Solomon. There is no earthly proof of Gods love to any Nation comparable to
the substitution of a wise, and pious governor: to him we owe our peace, our
life, and which is deservedly dearer, the life of our souls, the Gospel. But,
oh God, how much have thou loved thine Israel for ever, in that thou have set
over it that righteous Branch of Iesse, whose name is Wonderful, Counselor,
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace: in whose days
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely? Sing O heaven, and
rejoice, O earth, and break forth into singing, O mountains, for God has
comforted his people, and will have everlasting mercy upon his afflicted.

The Queen of Sheba did not bring her gold and precious stones to look on, or
to re-carry, but to give to a wealthier then her self. She gives therefore to
Solomon an hundred and twenty talents of Gold, besides costly stones and odors.
He that made silver in Jerusalem as stones, is yet richly presented on all
hands. The rivers still run into the Sea; To him that has shall be given:
How should we bring unto thee, O thou King of Heaven, the purest gold of thine
own graces, the sweetest odors of our obediences? Was not this withal a type
of that homage which should be done unto thee, O Savior, by the heads of the
Nations? The Kings of Tarshish and the Isles bring presents; the Kings of Sheba
and Saba bring gifts; yea all Kings shall worship thee, all Nations shall serve
thee: They cannot enrich themselves but by giving unto thee.

It could not stand with Salomons magnificence to receive rich courtesies
without a return; The greater the person was, the greater was the obligation
of requital; The gifts of mean persons are taken but as tributes of duty; it
is dishonorable to take from equals, and not to retribute: There was not
therefore more freedom in her gift, then in her receipt; Her own will was the
measure of both; She gave what she would, she received what soever she would
ask; And she had little profited by Salomons school, if she had not learned
to ask the best: She returns therefore more richly laden then she came; she
gave to Solomon as a thankful Client of wisdom; Solomon returns to her as a
munificent Patron, according to the liberality of a King; We shall be sure to
be gainers by whatsoever we give unto thee, o thou God of wisdom and peace: Oh
that we could come from the remote regions of our infidelity, and
worldliness, to learn wisdom of thee, who both teach and give it
abundantly, without vpbraiding, without grudging; and could bring with us the
poor presents of our faithful desires, and sincere services; how would thou
receive us with a gracious acceptance, and sends us away laden with present
comfort, with eternal glory?

Salomons defection.
SInce the first man Adam, the world has not yielded either so great an
example of wisdom, or so fearful an example of Apostasy as Solomon: What
humane knowledge Adam had in the perfection of nature by creation, Solomon had
by infusion; both fully, both from one fountain; If Adam called all creatures
by their names, Solomon spoke from the Cedars of Lebanon, to the moss that
springs out of the wall; and besides these vegetables, there was no Beast, nor
Foul, nor Fish, nor creeping thing that escaped his discourse. Both fell, both
fell by one means; as Adam, so might Solomon have said, The woman deceived
me; It is true indeed, that Adam fell as all; Solomon as one; yet so as that
this one is the pattern of the frailty of all. If knowledge could have given
an immunity from sin, both had stood: Affections are those feet of the soul,
on which it either stands, or falls; Solomon loved many outlandish women; I
wonder not if the wise King mis-carried; Every word has bane enough for a man;
Women, many women, outlandish, idolatrous, and those not only had, but doted
on; Sex, multitude, nation, condition, all conspired to the ruin of a
Solomon; If one woman undid all mankind, what marvel is it if many women undid
one? yet had those many bin the daughters of Israel, they had tempted him only
to lust, not to misdeuotion; now they were of those Nations, whereof the Lord
had said to the children of Israel, Go not ye in to them, nor let them come
in to you, for surely they will turn your hearts after their Gods; to them did
Solomon join in love; who can marvel if they disioyned his heart from God?
Satan has found this bait to take so well, that he never changed it since he
crept into Paradise. How many have we known whose heads have bin broken with
their own ribbe?

In the first world the sons of God saw the daughters of men, and took them
wives of all they liked; they multiplied not children, but iniquities; Balaam
knew well if the dames of Moab could make the Israelites wantons, they should
soon make them Idolaters: All lies open where the covenant is not both made
with the eye, and kept.

It was the charge of God to the Kings of Israel, before they were, that they
should not multiply Wives. Solomon has gone beyond the stakes of the law, and
now is ready to leese himself amongst a thousand bed-fellowes: Who so lays
the reins in the neck of his carnal appetite, cannot promise where he will
rest. Oh Solomon, where was thy wisdom, whiles thine affections run away with
thee into so wild a voluptuousnes? What boots it thee to discourse of all
things, whiles thou misknowest thy self? The perfections of speculation do
not argue the inward powers of selfe-gouernment; The eye may be clear whiles
the hand is palsied. It is not so much to be heeded how the soul is informed,
as how it is disciplined; The light of knowledge does well, but the due order
of the affections does better: Never any mere man since the first, knew so
much as Solomon* many that have known less have had more command of
themselves; A competent estate well husbanded, is better then a vast patrimony
neglected.

There can be no safety to that soul where is not a strait curb upon our
desires; If our lusts be not held under as slaves, they will rule as tyrans.
Nothing can prevent the extremity of our mis-carriage but early and strong
denials to our concupiscence: Had Solomon done thus, delicacie and lawless
greatness had not led him into these bogs of intemperance.

The ways of youth are steep and slipperie, wherein as it is easy to fall, so
it is commonly relieved with pity; but the wanton inordinations of age are
not more unseasonable then odious; yet behold Salomons younger years were
studious, and innocent, his ouer-hastened age was licentious and misgouerned;
For, when Solomon was old, his wives turned away his heart after other Gods; If
any age can secure us from the danger of a spiritual fall, it is our last; and
if any man's old age might secure him, it was Salomons; the beloved of God, the
Oracle, the miracle of wisdom; who would have looked but that the blossoms of
so hopeful a spring, should have yielded a goodly and pleasant fruit, in the
Autumn of age? yet behold even Salomons old age vicious. There is no time
wherein we can be safe, whiles we carry this body of sin about us; Youth is
impetuous, mid-age stubborn, old age weak, all dangerous; Say not now; The
fury of my youthful flashes is over; I shall henceforth find my heart calm
and impregnable; whiles thou see old Solomon doting upon his concubines, yea
upon their Idolatry.

It is no presuming upon time* or means, or strength; how many have begun and
proceeded well, who yet have shamed themselves in their last stage? If God
uphold us not, we cannot stand; If God uphold us, we cannot fall; when we are
at our strongest, it is best to be weak in our selves; and when at our
weakest, strong in him, in whom we can do all things.

I cannot yet think so hardly of Solomon, that he would project his person to
Ashtaroth the Goddess of the Sidonians, or Milchom the Idol of the Ammonites,
or Chemosh the abomination of Moab: He that knew all things from the shrub, to
the Cedar, could not be ignorant that these statues were but stocks, or stones,
or metals, and the powers resembled by them, Devils. It is not like he could
be so insensate to adore such deities; but so far was the vxorious King
blinded with affection, that he gave not passage only to the Idolatry of his
heathenish wives, but furtherance.

So did he dote upon their persons, that he humord them in their sins: Their
act is therefore his, because his eyes winkt at it; his hand advanced it; He
that built a Temple to the living God, for himself and Israel in Sion, built a
Temple to Chemosh in the mount of Scandal, for his mistresses of Moab, in the
very face of Gods house: No hill about Jerusalem was free from a Chapel of
Devils; Each of his dames had their Puppets, their altars, their incense;
Because Solomon feeds them in their superstition, he draws the sin home to
himself, and is branded for what he should have forbidden. Even our very
permission appropriates crimes to us; We need no more guiltiness of any sin
then our willing toleration.

Who can but yearne, and fear to see the woeful wrack of so rich and goodly a
vessel? O Solomon, were not thou he whose younger years God honored with a
message and style of love? To whom God twice appeared; and in a gracious vision
renewed the covenant of his favor? Whom he singled out from all the generation
of men to be the founder of that glorious Temple which was no less clearly
the Type of heaven, then thou were of Christ the Son of the everliving God?
Were not thou that deep Sea of wisdom which God ordained to send forth rivers
and fountains of all divine, and humane knowledge to all nations, to all ages?
Were not thou one of those select Secretaries, whose hand it pleased the
Almighty to employ in three pieces of the divine monuments of sacred
Scriptures? Which of us dares ever hope to aspire unto thy graces? Which of us
can promise to secure our selves from thy ruins? We fall, o God, we fall to
the lowest hell, if thou prevent us not, if thou sustain us not: Uphold thou
me according to thy word that I may live, and let me not be ashamed of my hope.
Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
All our weakness is in our selves, all our strength is in thee. O God be thou
strong in our weakness, that our weak knees may be ever steddie in thy
strength.

But in the midst of the horror of this spectacle (able to affright all the
sons of men) behold some glimpse of comfort: was it of Solomon that David his
father prophesied; Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; for the
Lord vpholdeth him with his hand? If sensible grace, yet final mercy was not
taken from that beloved of God; In the hardest of this winter* the sap was
gone down to the root, though it showed not in the branches: Even whiles
Solomon removed, that word stood fast, He shall be my Son, and I will be his
Father. He that foresaw his sin, threatened and limited his correction. If he
break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit his
transgression with a rod, and his iniquity with stripes; Nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail; My Covenant will I not break; nor alter the thing that is gone out
of my mouth; Behold the favor of God does not depend upon Salomons obedience;
If Solomon shall suffer his faithfulness to fail toward his God; God will
not requite him with the failing of his faithfulness to Solomon; If Solomon
break his covenant with God; God will not break his Covenant with the father
of Solomon, with the Son of David; He shall smart, he shall not perish. Oh
gracious word of the God of all mercies, able to give strength to the
languishing, comfort to the despairing, to the dying, life. Whatsoever we are,
thou will be still thy self, O holy one of Israel, true to thy Covenant,
constant to thy Decree; The sins of thy chosen can neither frustrate thy
counsel, nor outstrip thy mercies.

Now I see Solomon of a wanton lover, a grave Preacher of mortification; I see
him quenching those inordinate flames with the tears of his repentance. Me
thinks I hear him sighing deeply betwixt every word of that his solemn
penance which he would needs inioyne himself before all the world, I have
applied my heart to know the wickedness of folly, even the foolishness of
madness; and I find more bitter then death the woman whose heart is as nets
and snares, and her hands as bands; Who so pleases God shall be delivered from
her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.

Solomon was taken as a sinner, delivered as a penitent. His soul escaped as a
bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare was broken, and he delivered;
It is good for us that he was both taken, and delivered; Taken, that we might
not presume; and that we might not despair, delivered. He sinned, that we
might not sin; he recovered, that we may not sink under our sin.

But, oh the justice of God inseparable from his mercy; Salomons sin shall
not escape the rod of men; Rather then so wise an offender shall want enemies,
God shall raise up three adversaries unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite, Rezon the
King of Aram, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, whereof two were foreign, one
domestical: Nothing but love and peace sounded in the name of Solomon; nothing
else was found in his reign, whiles he held in good terms with his God; But
when once he fell foul with his maker, all things began to be troubled. There
are whips laid up against the time of Salomons foreseen offense, which are
now brought forth for his correction; On purpose was Hadad the son of the
King of Edom hid in a corner of Egypt from the sword of David and Ioab, that he
might be reserved for a scourge to the exorbitant son of David: God would
have us make account that our peace ends with our innocence: The same sin
that sets debate betwixt God and us, arms the creatures against us; It were
pity we should be at any quiet whiles we are fallen out with the God of peace.

Contemplations UPON THE PRINCIPAL HISTORIES OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. The third
Book. Containing The Widows son raised. The Rulers son healed. The dumb
Devil eiected. Matthew called. Christ among the Gergesens; or Legion, and the
Gadarene heard.


TO MY RIGHT WORTHY AND WORSHIPFVLL FRIEND, Master JOHN GIFFORD of Lancrasse in
Deuon, Esquire, All Grace and Peace.
SIR,
I hold it (as I ought) one of the rich mercies of GOD, that he has given me
favor in some eyes which have not seen me; but none, that I know, has so
much demerited me, unknown, as your worthy Family: Ere therefore you see my
face, see my hand willingly professing my thankful Obligations: Wherewith may
it please you to accept of this parcel of thoughts, not unlike those fellows
of theirs, whom you have entertained above their desert. These shall present
unto you our bountiful Savior, magnifying his mercies to men, in a sweet
variety; healing the diseased, raising the dead, casting out the Devil,
calling in the Publican, and shall raise your heart to adore that infinite
goodness; Every help to our devotion deserves to be precious; So much more,
as the decrepit age of the world declines to an heartlesse coldness of piety:
That GOD, to whose honor these poor labors are meant, bless them in your
hands, and from them, to all Readers. To his protection I heartily commend you,
and the right virtuous Gentlewoman, your worthy wife, with all the pledges of
your happy affection, as whom you have deserved to be

Your truly thankful and officious friend, IOS: HALL.

The Widows Son raised.
THE favors of our beneficent Savior were at the least contiguous. No sooner
has he raised the Centurions servant from his bed, then he raises the Widows
son from his Beer.

The fruitful clouds are not ordained to fall all in one field; Nain must
partake of the bounty of Christ as well as Cana, or Capernaum: And if this
Sun were fixed in one Orb, yet it diffuseth heat, and light to all the
world; It is not for any place to ingrosse the messengers of the Gospel, whose
errand is universal; This immortal seed may not fall all in one furrow.

The little city of Nain stood under the hill of Hermon, near unto Tabor; but
now it is watered with better dewes from above, the doctrine and miracles of a
Savior.

Not for state, but for the more evidence of the work, is our Savior attended
with a large train; So entering into the gate of that walled City, as if he
meant to besiege their faith by his power, and to take it; His providence has
so contrived his journey, that he meets with the sad pomp of a funeral; A
woeful widow attended with her weeping neighbors is following her only son
to the grave; There was nothing in this spectacle that did not command
compassion.

A young man in the flower, in the strength of his age swallowed up by death;
Our decrepit age both expects death, and solicites it; but vigorous youth,
looks strangely upon that grim sergeant of God; Those mellow apples that fall
alone from the tree we gather up with contentment; we chide to have the unripe
unseasonably beaten down with cudgells.

But more, a young man, the only son, the only child of his mother: No
condition can make it other then grievous for a well-natu'rd mother to part
with her own bowels; yet surely store is some mitigation of loss: Amongst
many children one may be more easily missed; for still we hope the suruiuing
may supply the comforts of the dead; but when all our hopes and joys must
either live or die in one, the loss of that one admits of no consolation.

When God would describe the most passionate expression of sorrow that can fall
into the miserable, he can but say, Oh daughter of my people gird thee with
sackcloth, and wallow thy self in the ashes, make lamentation and bitter
mourning, as for thine only son; Such was the loss, such was the sorrow of
this disconsolate mother; neither words, nor tears can suffice to discover it.

Yet more; had she been aided by the counsel and supportation of a loving
yoke fellow, this burden might have seemed less intolerable; A good husband
may make amends for the loss of a son; had the root been left to her
entire, she might better have spared the branch; now both are cut up, all the
stay of her life is gone; and she seems abandoned to a perfect misery. And
now when she gave her self up for a forlorn mourner, past all capacity of
redress, the God of comfort meets her, pitties her, relieues her; Here was no
solicitor but his own compassion; In other occasions he was sought, and sued
to; The Centurion comes to him for a servant, the Ruler for a son* Iairus for
a daughter, the neighbors for the Paralyticke; here he seeks up the patient,
and offers the cure unrequested; Whiles we have to do with the Father of
mercies, our afflictions are the most powerful suitors. No tears, no prayers
can move him so much as his own commiseration. Oh God, none of our secret
sorrows, can be either hid from thine eyes, or kept from thine heart: and when
we are past all our hopes, all possibilities of help; then art thou nearest to
us for deliverance.

Here was a conspiration of all parts to mercy. The heart had compassion, the
mouth said, Weep not, the feet went to the Beer, the hand touched the coffin,
the power of the Deity raised the dead: What the heart felt was secret to it
self, the tongue therefore expresses it in words of comfort, Weep not; Alas
what are words to so strong and just passions? To bid her not to weep that had
lost her only son, was to persuade her to be miserable, and not feel it; to
feel, and not regard it: to regard, and yet to smother it; Concealment does
not remedy but aggrauate sorrow: That with the counsel of not weeping
therefore, she might see cause of not weeping; his hand seconds his tongue: He
arrests the coffin, and frees the Prisoner; Young man I say unto thee arise;
The Lord of life, and death, speaks with command; No finite power could have
said so without presumption, or with success: That is the voice that shall one
day call up our vanished bodies from those elements, into which they are
resolved, and raise them out of their dust; Neither sea, nor death, nor hell
can offer to detain their dead, when he charges them to be delivered:
Incredulous nature, what do thou shrink at the possibility of a
resurrection, when the God of nature undertakes it? It is no more hard for that
almighty Word which gave being unto all things, to say, Let them be repaired,
then, Let them be made.

I do not see our Savior stretching himself upon the dead corpse, as Elias,
and Elisha, upon the sons of the Sunamite, and Sareptan, nor kneeling down,
and praying by the Beer, as Peter did to Dorcas, but I hear him so speaking
to the dead, as if he were alive, and so speaking to the dead that by the word
he makes him alive, I say unto thee, arise; Death has no power to bid that man
lie still, whom the Son of God bids Arise. Immediately he that was dead sat
up. So at the sound of the last trumpet by the power of the same voice, we
shall arise out of the dust, and stand up glorious; this mortal shall put on
immortality, this corruptible, incorruption; This body shall not be buried,
but sown; and at our day shall therefore spring up with a plentiful increase
of glory; How comfortless, how desperate should be our lying down, if it
were not for this assurance of rising? And now, behold, lest our weak faith
should stagger at the assent to so great a difficulty, he has already by
what he has done, given us tastes of what he will do; The power that can
raise one man, can raise a thousand, a million, a world; no power can raise one
but that which is infinite; and that which is infinite admits of no limitation;
Under the old Testament, God raised one by Elias, another by Elisha living, a
third by Elisha dead; By the hand of the Mediator of the new Testament he
raised here the son of the widow, the daughter of Iairus, Lazarus, and, in
attendance of his own resurrection he made a gaole-deliuery of holy prisoners,
at Jerusalem. He raises the daughter of Iairus from her bed; this widows son
from his coffin; Lazarus from his grave, the dead saints of Jerusalem from
their rottenness, that it might appear no degree of death can hinder the
efficacy of his ouerruling command; He that keeps the keys of death cannot
only make way for himself through the common hall, and outer-roomes, but
through the inwardest, and most reserved closets of darkness.

Me thinks I see this young man who was thus miraculously awaked from his
deadly sleep, wiping and rubbing those eyes that had been shut up in death;
and descending from the Beer, wrapping his winding sheet about his loins,
cast himself down in a passionate thankfulness, at the feet of his Almighty
restorer; adoring that divine power which had commanded his soul back again
to her forsaken lodging; and though I hear not what he said, yet I dare say
they were words of praise and wonder, which his returned soul first uttered;
It was the mother whom our Savior pitied in this act, not the son; (who now
forced from his quiet rest must twice pass through the gates of death.) As for
her sake therefore he was raised, so to her hands was he delivered; that she
might acknowledge that soul given to her, not to the possessor: Who cannot
feel the amazement, and ecstasy of joy that was in this revived mother, when
her son now salutes her from out of another world? And both receives and
gives gratulations of his new life? How suddenly were all the tears of that
mournful train dried up with a joyful astonishment? How soon is that
funeral banquet turned into a new Birthday feast? What striving was here to
salute the late carcass of their returned neighbor? What awful and admiring
looks were cast upon that Lord of life, who seeming homely, was approved
omnipotent? How gladly did every tongue celebrate both the work, and the
author? A great Prophet is raised up amongst us, and God has visited his
people. A Prophet was the hiest name they could find for him whom they saw
like themselves in shape, above themselves in power; They were not yet
acquainted with God manifested in the flesh; This miracle might well have
assured them of more then a Prophet; but he that raised the dead man from the
Beer would not suddenly raise these dead hearts from the grave of Infidelity;
they shall see reason enough to know that the Prophet who was raised up to
them, was the God that now visited them, and at last should do as much for
them as he had done for the young man, raise them from death to life, from dust
to glory.

The Rulers Son Cured.
THE bounty of God so exceeds man's, that there is a contrariety in the
exercise of it; We shut our hands because we have opened them; God therefore
opens his, because he has opened them: Gods mercies are as comfortable in
their issue, as in themselves; Seldom ever do blessings go alone; where our
Savior supplied the Bridegroomes wine, there he heales the Rulers son; He had
not in all these coasts of Galilee done any one miracle but here; To him that
has shall be given.

We do not find Christ often attended with Nobility; here he is; It was some
great Peer, or some noted Courtier that was now a suitor to him for his dying
son: Earthly greatness is no defense against afflictions: We men forbear
the mighty; Disease and death know no faces of Lords, or Monarkes; Could these
be bribed, they would be too rich; why should we grudge not to be priueledged,
when we see there is no spare of the greatest?

This noble Ruler, listens after Christ's return into Galile; The most eminent
amongst men will be glad to harken after Christ in their necessity: Happy was
it for him that his son was sick; he had not else been acquainted with his
Savior, his soul had continued sick of ignorance, and unbelief; Why else
does our good God send us pain, losses, opposition, but that he may be
sought to? Are we afflicted, whither should we go but to Cana, to seek
Christ? whither but to the Cana of heaven, where our water of sorrow is turned
to the wine of gladness, to that omnipotent Physician, who heals all our
infirmities; that we may once say, It is good for me that I was afflicted.

It was about a days journey from Capernaum to Cana; Thence hither did this
Courtier come for the cure of his sons fever; What pains even the greatest
can be content to take for bodily health? No way is long, no labor tedious to
the desirous: Our souls are sick of a spiritual fever, laboring under the
cold fit of infidelity, and the hot fit of self-love; and we sit still at
home, and see them languish unto death.

This Ruler was neither faithless, nor faithful; Had he been quite
faithless, he had not taken such pains to come to Christ. Had he been
faithful, he had not made this suit to Christ, when he was come, Come down,
and heal my son, ere he die.

Come down, as if Christ could not have cured him absent; Ere he die, as if
that power could not have raised him being dead; how much difference was here
betwixt the Centurion, and the Ruler; That came for his servant, this for his
son. This son was not more above that servant, then the faith which sued
for the servant surpassed that which sued for the son; The one can say,
Master come not under my roof, for I am not worthy, only speak the word; and
my servant shall be whole; The other can say, Master, either come under my
roof, or my son cannot be whole. Heal my son, had been a good suit, for
Christ is the only Physician for all diseases; but, Come down, and heal him,
was to teach God how to work.

It is good reason that he should challenge the right of prescribing to us, who
are every way his own; it is presumption in us to stint him unto our forms:
An expert workman cannot abide to be taught by a nouice; how much less shall
the all-wise God endure to be directed by his creature? This is more then if
the patient should take upon him to give a Recipe to the Physician: That God
would give us grace is a beseeming suit, but to say, Give it me by prosperity,
is a saucie motion.

As there is faithfulness in desiring the end, so modesty and patience in
referring the means to the author. In spiritual things God has acquainted us
with the means whereby he will work, even his own sacred ordinances; Upon
th^se, because they have his own promise, we may call absolutely for a
blessing; In all others, there is no reason that beggars should be choosers; He
who does whatsoever he will, must do it how he will; It is for us to receive,
not to appoint.

He who came to complain of his sons sickness, hears of his own, Except
ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. This noble man was (as is
like) of Capernaum; There had Christ often preached; there was one of his
chief residences: Either this man had heard our Savior often, or might have
done; yet because Christ's miracles came to him only by hearsay (for as yet we
find none at all wrought where he preached most) therefore the man believes
not enough; but so speaks to Christ as to some ordinary Physician, Come down
and heal; It was the common disease of the Jews, incredulity; which no
receipt could heal but wonders; A wicked and adulterous generation seeks
signs. Had they not been wilfully graceless; there was already proof
enough of the Messiah; the miraculous conception and life of the forerunner;
Zacharies dumbness; The attestation of Angels, the apparition of the Star,
the journey of the Sages, the vision of the Shepherds, the testimonies of Anna
and Simeon, the prophesies fulfilled, the voice from heaven at his baptism,
the divine words that he spoke; and yet they must have all made up with
miracles; which though he be not unwilling to give at his own times, yet he
thinks much to be tied unto, at theirs; Not to believe without signs, was a
sign of stubborn hearts.

It was a foul fault, and a dangerous one; Ye will not believe: What is it
that shall condemn the world but unbelief? What can condemn us without it?
No sin can condemn the repentant, Repentance is a fruit of faith; where true
faith is then, there can be no condemnation; as there can be nothing but
condemnation without it. How much more foul in a noble Capernaite, that had
heard the Sermons of so divine a Teacher? The greater light we have, the more
shame it is for us to stumble.

Oh what shall become of us, that reele and fall in the cleerest Sunshine that
ever looked forth upon any Church? Be merciful to our sins, o God, and say
any thing of us, rather, then, Ye will not believe.

Our Savior tells him of his unbelief; he feels not himself sick of that
disease; All his mind is on his dying son; As easily do we complain of
bodily griefs, as we are hardly affected with spiritual. Oh the meekness and
mercy of this Lamb of God; When we would have looked that he should have
punished this suitor for not believing, he condescends to him, that he may
believe: Go thy way, thy son lives. If we should measure our hopes by our
own worthiness, there were no expectation of blessings, but if we shall
measure them by his bounty, and compassion, there can be no doubt of
prevailing. As some tender mother that gives the breast to her unquiet child,
in stead of the rod, so deals he with our peruersnesses.

How God differences men according to no other conditions, then of their faith!
The Centurions servant was sick, the Rulers son; The Centurion does not sue
unto Christ to come; only says, My servant is sick of a Palsy; Christ
answers him, I will come, and heal him: The Ruler sues unto Christ that he
would come, and heal his son, Christ will not go; only says, Go thy way,
thy son lives; Outward things carry no respect with God; The Image of that
divine Majesty shining inwardly in the graces of the soul, is that which wins
love from him in the meanest estate; The Centurions faith therefore could do
more then the Rulers greatness; and that faithful man's servant has more
regard then this great man's son.

The Rulers request was, Come and heal; Christ's answer was, Go thy way, thy
son lives; Our merciful Savior meets those in the end, whom he crosses in
the way: How sweetly does he correct our prayers, and whiles he does not give
us what we ask, gives us better then we asked.

Justly does he forbear to go down with this Ruler, lest he should confirm
him in an opinion of measuring his power by conceits of localitie, and
distance; but he does that in absence, for which his presence was required with
a repulse; Thy son lives; giving a greater demonstration of his omnipotency
then was craved; How often does he not hear to our will; that he may hear us
to our advantage? The chosen vessel would be rid of tentations, he hears of a
supply of grace; The sickeman asks release, receives patience: life, and
receives glory: Let us ask what we think best, let him give what he knows
best.

With one word does Christ heal two Patients, the son, and the father, the
sons fever, the fathers unbelief; That operative word of our Savior was not
without the intention of a trial; Had not the Ruler gone home satisfied with
that intimation of his sons life, and recovery, neither of them had been
blessed with success: Now the news of performance meets him one half of the
way; and he that believed somewhat ere he came, and more when he went, grew to
more faith in the way; and when he came home, enlarged his faith to all the
skirts of his family; A weak faith may be true, but a true faith is growing:
He that boasts of a full stature in the first moment of his assent, may
presume, but does not believe.

Great men cannot want clients; their example swaies some, their authority
more; they cannot go to either of the other worlds alone; In vain do they
pretend power over others, who labor not to draw their families unto God.

The dumb Devil eiected.
THAT the Prince of our peace might approve his perfect victories, wheresoever
he met with the Prince of darkness he foiled him, he eiected him; He found
him in heaven, thence did he throw him headlong; and verified his Prophet, I
have cast thee out of mine holy mountain; And if the Devils left their first
habitation, it was because (being Devils) they could not keep it; Their estate
indeed they might have kept, and did not; their habitation they would have
kept, and might not; How art thou fallen from heaven o Lucifer? He found him in
the heart of man; (for in that closet of God did the evil spirit after his
exile from heaven shroud himself; Sin gave him possession, which he kept
with a willing violence) thence he casts him by his word, and spirit; He found
him tyrannizing in the bodies of some possessed men, and with power commands
the unclean spirits to depart.

This act is for no hand but his: When a strong man keeps possession, none but
a stronger can remove it: In voluntary things the strongest may yield to the
weakest; Sampson to a Dalilah; but in violent, ever the mightiest carries it; A
spiritual nature must needs be in rank above a bodily; neither can any power
be above a spirit, but the God of spirits.

No otherwise is it in the mental possession; Where ever sin is, there Satan
is; As on the contrary, whosoever is borne of God, the seed of God remains in
him; That evil one not only is, but rules in the sons of disobedience: in
vain shall we try to eiect him, but by the divine power of the Redeemer; For
this cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil; Do we find our selves haunted with the familiar Devils of Pride,
self-love, sensual desires, unbelief? None but thou, o Son of the
everliving God, can free our bosoms of these hellish guests; Oh cleanse thou
me from my secret sins, and keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not
over me. O Savior, it is no Paradox to say that thou castest out more Devils
now, then thou did whiles thou were upon earth; It was thy word, When I am
lifted up, I will draw all men unto me; Satan weighes down at the feet, thou
pullest at the head, yea at the heart; In every conversion which thou workest,
there is a dispossession. Convert me, o Lord, and I shall be converted; I know
thy means are now no other then ordinary; if we expect to be dispossessed by
miracle, it would be a miracle if ever we were dispossessed; Oh let thy Gospel
have the perfect work in me, so only shall I be delivered from the powers of
darkness.

Nothing can be said to be dumb, but what naturally speaks; nothing can
speak naturally, but what has the instruments of speech; which because
spirits want, they can no otherwise speak vocally, then as they take voices to
themselves, in taking bodies; This devil was not therefore dumb in his
nature, but in his effect; The man was dumb by the operation of that devil,
which possessed him; and now the action is attributed to the spirit, which was
subiectiuely in the man; It is not you that speak, says our Savior, but the
spirit of your Father that speaks in you.

As it is in bodily diseases, that they do not infect us alike, some seize
upon the humors, others upon the spirits; some assault the brain, others the
heart, or lungs; so in bodily and spiritual possessions; In some the evil
spirit takes away their senses, in some their limms, in some, their inward
faculties; like as spiritually they affect to move us unto several sins; One
to lust, another to covetousness, or ambition, another to cruelty, and their
names have distinguished them according to these various effects: This was a
dumb devil; which yet had possessed not the tongue only of this man, but his
ear; nor that only, but (as it seems) his eyes too.

O subtle and tyrannous spirit, that obstructs all ways to the soul: that
keeps out all means of grace both from the doors, and windows of the heart;
yea that stops up all passages whether of ingresse, or egresse; Of ingresse at
the eye, or ear; of egresse at the mouth; that there might be no capacity of
redress.

What holy use is thereof our tongue but to praise our Maker, to confess our
sins, to inform our brethren? How rife is this dumb Devil euery-where,
whiles he stops the mouths of Christians from these useful and necessary
duties?

For what end has man those two priueledges above his fellow creatures,
Reason, and Speech, but, that, as by the one he may conceive of the great
works of his Maker, which the rest cannot, so by the other he may express
what he conceiues, to the honor of the Creator, both of them, and himself;
And why are all other creatures said to praise God, and bidden to praise him,
but because they do it by the apprehension, by the expression of man? If the
heavens declare the glory of God, how do they it but to the eyes, and by the
tongue of that man, for whom they were made? It is no small honor whereof the
envious spirit shall rob his Maker, if he can close up the mouth of his only
rational, and vocal creature; and turn the best of his workmanship into a
dumb Idol, that has a mouth and speaks not; Lord open thou my lips, and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Praise is not more necessary then complaint; praise of God, then complaint of
our selves, whether to God, or men; The only amends we can make to God, when we
have not had the grace to avoid sin, is to confess the sin we have not
avoided: This is the sponge that wipes out all the blots and blurrs of our
lives; If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

That cunning manslayer knows there is no way to purge the sick soul, but
upward by casting out the vicious humor wherewith it is clogged; and therefore
holds the lips close, that the heart may not disburden it self by so wholesome
euacuation. When I kept silence, my bones consumed; For day and night thy hand,
o Lord, was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer; O
let me confess against my self my wickedness unto thee, that thou may
forgive the punishment of my sin.

We have a tongue for God, when we praise him; for our selves, when we pray,
and confess; for our brethren, when we speak the truth for their information;
which if we hold back in unrighteousness, we yield unto that dumb Devil:
where do we not see that accursed spirit? He is on the Bench, when the mute,
or partial Judge speaks not for truth, and innocence: He is in the pulpit,
when the Prophets of God smother, or halue, or adulterate the message of their
master; He is at the bar, when irreligious Jurors dare lend an oath to fear,
to hope, to gain: He is in the market, when godless chapmen for their penny
sell the truth, and their soul; He is in the common conversation of men, when
the tongue belies the heart, flatters the guilty, balketh reproves even in
the foulest crimes: O thou, who only art stronger then that strong one, cast
him out of the hearts, and mouths of men; It is time for thee, Lord, to work,
for they have destroyed thy law.

That it might well appear this impediment was not natural; so soon as the
man is freed from the spirit, his tongue is free to his speech: The effects of
spirits as they are wrought, so they cease at once. If the Son of God do but
remove our spiritual possession, we shall presently brake forth into the
praise of God, into the confession of our vileness, into the profession of
truth.

But, what strange variety do I see in the spectators of this miracle, some
wondering, others censuring, a third sort tempting, a fourth applauding; There
was never man, or action, but was subject to variety of constructions: What
man could be so holy, as he that was God? What act could be more worthy then
the dispossession of an evil spirit? yet this man, this act passes these
differences of interpretation: What can we do to undergo but one opinion? If
we give alms, and fast; some will magnify our charity, and devotion, others
will tax our hypocrisy: If we give not, some will condemn our
hard-heartednesse, others will allow our care of justice; If we preach plainly,
to some it will savor of a careless slubbering, to others of a mortified
sincerity; Elaborately, some will tax our affectation, others will applaud our
diligence in dressing the delicate viands of God; What marvel is it, if it be
thus with our imperfection, when it fared no otherwise with him that was
purity, and righteousness it self? The austere forerunner of Christ came
neither eating nor drinking, they say, He has a Devil; The son of man came
eating and drinking, they say, This man is a glutton, a friend of Publicans and
sinners: and here one of his holy acts carries away at once wonder, censure,
doubt, celebration. There is no way safe for a man but to square his actions by
the right rule of justice, of charity; and then let the world have leave to
spend their glosses at pleasure. It was an heroical resolution of the chosen
vessel, I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's day.

I marvel not if the people marvelled; for here were four wonders in one; The
blind saw, the deaf heard, the dumb spoke, the demoniacke is delivered;
Wonder was due to so rare, and powerful a work, and, if not this, nothing; We
can cast away admiration upon the poor devices, or actiuities of men, how much
more upon the extraordinary works of omnipotency? Whosoever knows the frame of
heaven and earth shall not much be affected with the imperfect effects of
frail humanity; but shall with no less rauishment of soul acknowledge the
miraculous works of the same almighty hand. Neither is the spiritual
eiection worthy of any meaner intertainment; Raritie and difficulty are wont
to cause wonder; There are many things which have wonder in their worth, and
leese it in their frequence; there are some which have it in their
strangeness, and leese it in their facility; Both meet in this. To see men
haunted, yea possessed with a dumb Devil is so frequent, that it is a just
wonder to find a man free; but to find the dumb spirit cast out of a man,
and to hear him praising God, confessing his sins, teaching others the sweet
experiments of mercy, deserves just admiration. If the Cynick sought in the
market for a man amongst men, well may we seek amongst men, for a convert.
Neither is the difficulty less then the rareness: The strong man has the
possession, all passages are blockt up, all helps barred, by the treachery of
our nature; If any soul be rescued from these spiritual wickednesses, it is
the praise of him that does wonders alone.

But whom do I see wondering? The multitude; The unlearned beholders follow
that act with wonder, which the learned Scribes entertain with obloquie: God
has revealed those things to babes, which he has hid from the wise, and
prudent. With what scorn did those great Rabbis speak of these sons of the
earth, This people that knows not the Law is accursed? Yet the mercy of God
makes an advantage of their simplicity; in that they are therefore less
subject to cauillation, and incredulity; as contrarily, his justice causes the
proud knowledge of the other to lie as a block in their way, to the ready
assent unto the divine power of the Messiah; Let the pride of glorious
adversaries disdain the poverty of the clients of the Gospel; it shall not
repent us to go to heaven with the vulgar, whiles their great ones go in
state to perdition.

The multitude wondered; Who censured but Scribes great Doctors of the law, of
the divinity of the Jews? What Scribes, but those of Jerusalem, the most
eminent Academie of Judea? These were the men, who out of their deepe-reputed
judgment cast these foul aspersions upon Christ. Great wits ofttimes mis-lead
both the owners and followers; How many shall once wish they had been borne
dullards, yea idiots, when they shall find their wit to have barred them out
of heaven? Where is the Scribe, where is the disputer of this world? Has not
God made the wisdom of the world foolishness? Say the world what it will, a
dram of holiness is worth a pound of wit; Let others censure with the
Scribes, let me wonder with the multitude.

What could malice say worse, He casts out Devils through Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils? The Jews well knew that the Gods of the heathen were no
other then Devils; Amongst whom for that the Lord of Files (so called, whether
for the concourse of flies to the abundance of his sacrifices, or for his aid
implored against the infestation of those swarms) was held the chief,
therefore they style him, The Prince of Devils. There is a subordination of
spirits; some hier in degree, some inferior to others; Our Savior himself
tells us of the Devil, and his Angels; Messengers are inferior to those that
send them: The seven Devils that entered into the swept, and garnished house,
were worse then the former; Neither can Principalities, and Powers, and
Governors, and Princes of the darkness of this world design other then
several ranks of evil Angels; There can be no being, without some kind of
order, there can be no order in paritie; If we look up into heaven, there is
The King of Gods, The Lord of Lords; hier then the hiest. If to the earth,
There are Monarchs, Kings, Princes, Peers, people; If we look down to hell,
There is the Prince of Devils; They labor for confusion that call for paritie;
What should the Church do with such a form, as is not exemplified in heaven,
in earth, in hell?

One devil (according to their supposition) may be used to cast out another:
How far the command of one spirit over another may extend, it is a secret of
infernal state, too deep for the inquiry of men: The thing it self is
apparent; upon compact, and precontracted composition, one gives way to other
for the common advantage; As we see it in the Commonwealth of Cheaters, and
Cut-purses; one does the fact, another is feed to bring it out, and to procure
restitution: both are of the trade; both conspire to the fraud; the actor falls
not out with the reuealer; but diuides with him that cunning spoil.

One malicious miscreant sets the Devil on work to the inflicting of disease,
or death; another upon agreement, for a further spiritual gain, takes him
off; There is a Devil in both; And if there seem more bodily favor, there is
no less spiritual danger in the latter; In the one Satan wins the agent, the
suitor in the other; It will be no cause of discord in hell, that one devil
gives ease to the body which another tormented, that both may triumph in the
gain of a soul. O God, that any creature which bears thine Image, should not
abhor to be beholden to the powers of hell for aid, for advice? Is it not
because there is not a God in Israel, that men go to inquire of the god of
Ekron? Can men be so sottish to think that the vowed enemy of their souls
can offer them a bait, without an hook? What evil is there in the city
which the Lord has not done, what is there which he cannot as easily redress:
He wounds, he heales again; And if he will not, it is the Lord, let him do
what seems good in his eyes; If he do not deliver us, he will crown our
faithfulness in a patient perseverance. The wounds of a God are better then
the salues of Satan.

Was it possible that the wit of Envy could devise so hie a slander? Beelzebub
was a God of the heathen; therefore herein they accuse him for an Idolater;
Beelzebub was a Devil to the Jews, therefore they accuse him for a coniurer;
Beelzebub was the chief of Devils, therefore they accuse him for an
Archexorcist, for the worst kind of Magician; Some professors of this black
Art, though their work be deuillish, yet they pretend to do it in the name of
Jesus, and will presumptuously seem to do that by command, which is secretly
transacted by agreement; the Scribes accuse Christ of a direct compact with the
Devil; and suppose both a league and familiarity, which by the law of Moses
(in the very hand of a Saul) was no other then deadly; Yea so deep does this
wound reach, that our Savior, searching it to the bottom, finds no less in
it then the sin against the Holy Ghost; inferring hereupon that dreadful
sentence of the irremissiblenesse of that sin unto death: And if this
horrible crimination were cast upon thee, o Savior, in whom the Prince of this
world found nothing, what wonder is it if we thy sinful servants be branded on
all sides with evil tongues?

Yea (which is yet more) how plain is it that these men forced their tongue to
speak this slander against their own heart? Else, this blasphemy had been
only against the son of man, not against the holy Ghost; but now, that the
searcher of hearts finds it to be no less then against the blessed spirit of
God, the spite must needs be obstinate; their malice does wilfully cross
their conscience. Envy never regards how true, but how mischievous; So it may
gall, or kill, it cares little, whether with truth, or falsehood; For us,
Blessed are we when men revile us, and say all manner of evil of us, for the
name of Christ; For them: What reward shall be given to thee, thou false
tongue? Even sharp arrows with hot burning coals; Yea those very coals of
hell from which thou were enkindled.

There was yet a third sort that went a midway betwixt wonder, and censure;
These were not so malicious as to impute the miracle to a Satanicall operation;
they confess it good, but not enough; and therefore urge Christ to a further
proof; Though thou have cast out this dumb Devil, yet this is no sufficient
argument of thy divine power; We have yet seen nothing from thee like those
ancient miracles, of the times of our forefathers. Joshua caused the Sun to
stand still; Elias brought fire down from heaven; Samuel astonished the people
with thunder and rain in the midst of harvest; If thou would command our
belief, do somewhat like to these; The casting out of a Devil, shows thee
to have some power over hell; show us now, that thou have no less power over
heaven. There is a kind of unreasonableness of desire, and insatiablenesse in
infidelity; it never knows when it has evidence enough; This which the Jews
ouer-looked, was a more irrefragable demonstration of divinity, then that
which they desired. A Devil was more then a Meteor, or a parcel of an
element; to cast out a Devil by command, more then to command fire from
heaven: Infidelity ever loves to be her own caruer.

No son can be more like a father, then these Jews to their progenitors in
the desert; that there might be no fear of degenerating into good, they also
of old tempted God in the Wilderness: First, they are weary of the Egyptian
bondage, and are ready to fall out with God, and Moses, for their stay in
those fornaces: By ten miraculous plagues they are freed, and going out of
those confines; the Egyptians follow them, the sea is before them; now they are
more afflicted with their liberty, then their servitude; The sea yields way,
the Egyptians are drowned; and now, that they are safe on the other shore, they
tempt the providence of God for water; The rock yields it them; then, no less
for bread and meat; God sends them Manna, and Quails, they cry out of the
food of Angels; Their present enemies in the way are vanquished, they whine at
the men of measures, in the heart of Canaan; Nothing from God but mercy;
nothing from them but Temptation.

Their true brood both in nature and sin had abundant proofs of the Messiah;
if curing the blind, lame, diseased, deaf, dumb, eiecting devils, ouerruling
the elements, raising the dead could have been sufficient* yet still they must
have a sign from heaven; and shut up in the style of the Tempter, If thou be
the Christ. The gracious heart is credulous; Even where it sees not, it
believes; and where it sees but a little, it believes a great deal; Neither
does it presume to prescribe unto God what, and how he shall work; but takes
what it finds, and immovably rests in what it takes. Any miracle, no miracle
serves enough for their assent, who have built their faith upon the Gospel of
the Lord Jesus.

Matthew called.
THE number of the Apostles was not yet full, One room is left void for a
future occupant; who can but expect, that it is reserved for some eminent
person? and behold, Matthew the Publican is the man: Oh the strange election of
Christ; Those other disciples, whose calling is recorded, were from the
Fisher-boat, this from the Tole-booth, They were unlettered, this infamous; The
condition was not in it self sinful, but as the taxes, which the Romans
imposed on Gods free people, were odious, so the Collectors, the Farmers of
them abominable; Besides, that it was hard to hold that seat without
oppression, without exaction; One that best knew it, branded it with poling,
and sycophancie: And now, behold a griping Publican called to the family, to
the Apostle-ship, to the Secretary-ship of God; Who can despair in the
conscience of his unworthiness; when he sees this pattern of the free bounty
of him that calls us? Merits do not carry it in the gracious election of
God, but his mere favor. There sat Matthew the Publican busy in his
Counting House, reckoning up the sums of his Rentalls; raking up his
arerages, and wrangling for denied duties, and did so little think of a
Savior, that he did not so much as look at his passage, but, Jesus, as he
passed by, saw a man sitting at the receipt of custom, named Matthew; As if
this prospect had been sudden and casual, Jesus saw him in passing by; Oh
Savior, before the world was, thou sawst that man sitting there, thou sawst
thine own passage; thou sawst his call in thy passage; and now thou go
purposely that way, that thou might see, and call: Nothing can be hid from
that piercing eye; one glance whereof has discerned a Disciple in the clothes
of a Publican; That habit, that shop of extortion cannot conceal from thee a
vessel of election; In all forms thou know thine own; and in thine own
time shall fetch them out of the disguises of their foul sins, or unfit
conditions; What sawst thou, o Savior, in that Publican, that might either
allure thine eye, or not offend it? What but an hateful trade, an evil eye, a
griple hand, bloody tables, heaps of spoil? yet now thou said, Follow me;
Thou that said once to Jerusalem, Thy birth and nativity is of the land of
Canaan; Thy father was an Amorite, thy mother an Hittite; Thy navel was not
cut, neither were thou washed in water, to supple thee, thou wast not salted at
all; thou wast not swadled at all; None eye pitied thee, but thou wast cast
out in the open fields, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou
wast borne; And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee, Live, yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy
blood, Live; Now also, when thou passedst by, and sawst Matthew sitting at the
receipt of custom, saidest to him, Follow me; The life of this Publican was so
much worse, then the birth of that forlorn Amorite, as, Follow me, was more
then, Live; What can thou see in us, o God, but ugly deformities, horrible
sins, despicable miseries, yet does it please thy mercy to say unto us, both,
Live, and, Follow me?

The just man is the first accuser of himself; whom do we hear to blazon the
shame of Matthew, but his own mouth? Matthew the Evangelist tells us of
Matthew the Publican; His fellows call him Leui, as willing to lay their
finger upon the spot of his unpleasing profession; himself will not smother,
nor blanch it a whit, but publishes it to all the world, in a thankful
recognition of the mercy that called him; as liking well that his baseness
should serve for a fit foil to set off the glorious luster of his grace by
whom he was elected; What matters it how vile we are, o God, so thy glory may
rise in our abasement?

That word was enough, Follow me; spoken by the same tongue, that said to the
corpse, at Nain, Young man I say to thee, Arise; He that said, at first, Let
there be light, says now, Follow me: That power sweetly inclines which could
forceably command; the force is not more irresistable, then the inclination;
When the Sun shines upon the Isicles, can they choose but melt, and fall? When
it looks into a dungeon, can the place choose but be enlightened? Do we see
the Iet drawing up strawes to it, the Lodestone iron, and do we marvel if
the omnipotent Savior, by the influence of his grace, attract the heart of a
Publican? He arose and followed him. We are all naturally auerse from thee, o
God; do thou but bid us Follow thee; draw us by thy powerful word, and we
shall run after thee. Alas, thou speak, and we sit still; thou speak by
thine outward word to our ear, and we stir not, speak thou by the secret, and
effectual word of thy spirit, to our heart; The world cannot hold us down,
Satan cannot stop our way, we shall arise, and follow thee.

It was not a more busy then gainful trade that Matthew abandoned to follow
Christ into poverty; and now he cast away his counters, and struck his
tallies, and crossed his books, and contemned his heaps of cash in comparison
of that better treasure, which he foresaw lie open in that happy attendance.
If any commodity be valued of us too dear to be parted with, for Christ, we
are more fit to be Publicans, then Disciples; Our Savior inuites Matthew to a
Disciple-ship; Matthew inuites him to a feast. The joy of his call makes him to
begin his abdication of the world, in a banquet.

Here was not a more cheerful thankfulness in the inuiter, then a gracious
humility in the guest: The new servant bids his master, the Publican his
Savior, and is honored with so blessed a presence. I do not find where
Jesus was ever bidden to any table, and refused; If a Pharisee, if a Publican
invited him, he made not dainty to go; Not for the pleasure of the dishes;
what was that to him who began his work in a whole Lent of days? But (as it
was his meat and drink to do the will of his Father,) for the benefit of so
winning a conversation. If he sat with sinners, he converted them; If with
conuerts, he confirmed and instructed them; If with the poor, he sed them; If
with the rich in substance, he made them richer in grace. At whose board did he
ever sit, and left not his host a gainer? The poor Bridegroom entertaines
him, and has his water-pots filled with wine: Simon the Pharisee entertaines
him, and has his table honored with the public remission of a penitent
sinner, with the heavenly doctrine of remission: Zacheus entertaines him,
salvation came that day to his house, with the author of it; that presence made
the Publican a son of Abraham; Matthew is recompensed for his feast with an
Apostle-ship: Martha, and Mary entertain him, and besides divine instruction
receive their brother from the dead; O Savior, whether thou feast us, or we
feast thee, in both of them is blessedness.

Where a Publican is the Feastmaster, it is no marvel if the guests be
Publicans, and sinners; whether they came alone out of an hope of that mercy,
which they saw their fellow had found; or whether Matthew invited them to be
partners of that plentiful grace, whereof he had tasted, I inquire not:
Publicans and sinners will flock together; the one, hateful for their trade,
the other for their vicious life. Common contempt has wrought them to an
unanimity; and sends them to seek mutual comfort in that society, which all
others held loathsome and contagious. Moderate correction humbles, and shameth
the offender; whereas a cruel severity makes men desperate; and drives them
to those courses, whereby they are more dangerously infected; How many have
gone into the prison faulty, and returned flagitious? If Publicans were not
sinners, they were no whit beholden to their neighbors.

What a table full was here? The Son of God beset with Publicans, and
sinners: O happy Publicans, and sinners, that had found out their Savior; Oh
merciful Savior, that disdained not Publicans and sinners.

What sinner can fear to kneel before thee, when he sees Publicans and
sinners sit with thee? Who can fear to be despised of thy meekness, and
mercy, which did not abhor, to converse with the outcasts of men? Thou
did not despise the thief confessing upon the cross, nor the sinner weeping
upon thy feet, nor the Cananite crying to thee in the way, not the blushing
adulteress, nor the odious Publican, nor the forswearing Disciple, nor the
persecutor of Disciples, nor thine own executioners, how can we be unwelcome
to thee, if we come with tears in our eyes, faith in our hearts, restitution
in our hands? Oh Savior, our breasts are too often shut upon thee, thy bosom is
ever open to us; we are as great sinners as the consorts of these Publicans,
why should we despair of a room at thy Table?

The squint-eid Pharisees look a-crosse at all the actions of Christ; where
they should have admired his mercy, they cavil at his holiness; They said to
his Disciples; why eats your master with Publicans, and sinners? They durst
not say thus to the Master, whose answer (they knew) would soon have convinced
them; This wind (they hoped) might shake the weak faith of the Disciples;
They speak where they may be most likely to hurt; All the crew of Satanicall
instruments have learnt this craft of their old Tutor in Paradise: We cannot
reverence that man, whom we think unholy; Christ had lost the hearts of his
followers, if they had entertained the least suspicion of his impuritie; which
the murmur of these envious Pharisees would feign insinuate; He cannot be
worthy to be followed that is unclean; He cannot but be unclean that eats
with Publicans and sinners: Proud and foolish Pharisees, ye fast whiles Christ
eats; ye fast in your houses, whiles Christ eats in other men's; ye fast
with your own, whiles Christ feasts with sinners; but if ye fast in pride,
whiles Christ eats in humility; if ye fast at home, for merit, or popularitie,
whiles Christ feasts with sinners for compassion, for edification, for
conversion, your fast is unclean, his feast is holy, ye shall have your
portion with hypocrites, when those Publicans, and sinners shall be glorious.

When these censurers thought the Disciples had offended, they speak not to
them, but to their Master; Why do thy Disciples that which is not lawful?
now, when they thought Christ offended, they speak not to him, but to the
Disciples; Thus, like true make-bates they go about to make a breach in the
family of Christ, by setting off the one from the other; The quick cie of our
Savior has soon espied the pack of their fraud, and therefore he takes the
words out of the mouths of his Disciples, into his own; They had spoke of
Christ to the Disciples; Christ answers for the Disciples concerning himself,
The whole need not the Physician, but the sick. According to the two qualities
of pride; scorn, and ouer-weening, these insolent Pharisees ouer-rated their
own holiness, contemned the noted unholiness of others; As if themselves
were not tainted with secret sins, as if others could not be cleansed by
repentance; The searcher of hearts meets with their arrogance, and finds those
iusticiaries sinful, those sinners just; The spiritual Physician finds the
sickness of those sinners wholesome, the health of those Pharisees desperate:
that, wholesome, because it calls for the help of the Physician, this,
desperate, because it needs not. Every soul is sick; those most, that feel
it not; Those that feel it, complain, those that complain, have cure; those
that feel it not, shall find themselves dying ere they can wish to recover.
Oh blessed Physician, by whose stripes we are healed, by whose death we live,
happy are they that are under thy hands, sick, as of sin, so of sorrow for
sin; it is as impossible they should die, as it is impossible for thee to want
either skill, or power, or mercy; Sin has made us sick unto death, make thou
us but as sick of our sins, we are as safe, as thou art gracious.

Christ among the Gergesens, or Legion, and the Gadarene heard*
I Do not any where find so furious a Demoniacke, as amongst the Gergesens;
Satan is most tyrannous, where he is obeyed most. Christ no sooner sailed over
the lake, then he was met with two possessed Gadarenes; The extreme rage of the
one has drowned the mention of the other; Yet in the midst of all that
cruelty of the evil spirit, there was sometimes a remission, if not an
intermission, of vexation; If, Oft-times Satan caught him, then, sometimes, in
the same violence, he caught him not. It was no thank to that malignant one,
who as he was indefatigable in his executions, so unmeasurable in his malice;
but* to the merciful ouer-ruling of God, who in a gracious respect to the
weakness of his poor creatures, limits the spightfull attempts of that
immortal enemy; and takes off this Mastiue, whiles we may take breath: He
who in his justice gives way to some onsets of Satan, in his mercy restraines
them; so regarding our deseruings, that withal he regards our strength: If way
should be given to that malicious spirit, we could not subsist; no violent
thing can endure; and if Satan might have his will, we should no moment be
free; He can be no more weary of doing evil to us, then God is of doing good:
Are we therefore preserved from the malignitie of these powers of darkness,
Blessed be our strong helper that has not given us over to be a prey unto
their teeth: Or if some scope have been given to that envious one, to afflict
us, has it been with favorable limitations, it is thine only mercy, o God,
that has* chained and muzzled up this band-dog, so as that he may scratch us
with his paws, but cannot pierce us with his fangs. Far, far is this from
our deserts, who had too well merited a just abdication from thy favor, and
protection, and an interminable seizure by Satan, both in soul and body.

Neither do I here see more matter of thanks to our God, for our immunitie
from the external injuries of Satan, then occasion of serious inquiry into
his power over us, for the spiritual. I see some that think themselves safe
from this ghostly tyranny, because they sometimes find themselves in good
moods, free from the suggestions of gross sins, much more from the commission;
Vain men, that feed themselves with so false and frivolous comforts; will they
not see Satan, through the just permission of God, the same to the soul, in
mental possessions, that he is to the body, in corporal? The worst demoniack
has his lightsome respites; not ever tortured; not ever furious; betwixt
whiles he might look soberly, talk sensibly, move regularly; It is a woeful
comfort that we sin not always: There is no master so barbarous as to
require of his slave a perpetual vnintermitted toil; yet, though he sometimes
eat, sleep, rest, he is a vassal still; If that wicked one have drawn us to
a customarie perpetration of evil, and have wrought us to a frequent iteration
of the same sin, this is gage enough for our servitude, matter enough for his
tyranny, and insultation; He that would be our tormentor always, cares only
to be sometimes our Tempter.

The possessed is bound, as with the invisible fetters of Satan, so with the
material chains of the inhabitants; What can bodily force prevail against a
spirit? Yet they endeavor this restraint of the man, whether out of charity,
or justice; Charity, that he might not hurt himself; Justice, that he might
not hurt others; None do so much befriend the Demoniacke as those that bind
him; Neither may the spiritually possessed be otherwise handled; for though
this act of the enemy be plausible, and, to appearance, pleasant, yet there is
more danger in this dear, and smiling tyranny; Two sorts of chains are fit
for outrageous sinners; Good laws, impartial executions; That they may not
hurt, that they may not be hurt to eternal death.

These iron chains are no sooner fast, then broken; There was more then an
humane power in this disruption; It is not hard to conceive the utmost of
nature, in this kind of actions; Sampson does not break the cords, and ropes
like a thread of towe, but God by Sampson; The man does not break these
chains, but the spirit. How strong is the arm of these evil angels, how
far transcending the ordinary course of nature? They are not called Powers
for nothing; what flesh and blood could but tremble at the palpable inequality
of this match, if herein the merciful protection of our God did not the rather
magnify it self, that so much strength, met with so much malice, has not
prevailed against us: In spite of both we are in safe hands; He that so
easily brake the iron fetters, can never break the adamantine chain of our
faith; In vain do the chafing billows of hell beat upon that rock, whereon
we are built; And though these brittle chains of earthly metal be easily
broken by him, yet the sure-tempered chain of Gods eternal decree, he can
never break; that almighty Arbiter of heaven, and earth, and hell, has
chained him up in the bottomless pit, and has so restrained his malice, that
(but, for our good) we cannot be tempted; we cannot be foiled, but for a
glorious victory.

Alas it is no otherwise with the spiritually possessed; The chains of
restraint are commonly broken by the fury of wickedness; What are the
respects of civility, fear of God, fear of men, wholesome laws, careful
executions to the desperately licentious, but as cobwebs to an harnet? Let
these wild Demoniacks know, that God has provided chains for them, that will
hold, even everlasting chains under darkness; these are such as must hold the
Devils themselves (their masters) unto the judgment of the great day, how much
more those impotent vassals? Oh that men would suffer themselves to be bound to
their good behavior, by the sweet, and easy recognizances of their duty to
their God, and the care of their own souls, that so they might rather be
bound up in the bundle of life.

It was not for rest, that these chains were torn off, but for more motion;
This prisoner runs away from his friends, he cannot run away from his Iaylor;
He is now carried into the wilderness; Not by mere external force, but by
internal impulsion; Carried by the same power that unbound him, for the
opportunity of his Tyranny, for the horror of the place, for the affamishment
of his (...) for the auoidance of all means of resistance. Solitary deserts
are the delights of Satan* It is an unwise zeal that moves us to do that to
our selves, in an opinion of merit, and holiness, which the Devil wishes to
do to us for a punishment, and conueniencie of tentation. The evil spirit is
for solitariness; God is for society; He dwells in the assembly of his
Saints, yea, there he has a delight to dwell; Why should not we account it our
happiness that we may have leave to dwell, where the author of all happiness
loves to dwell?

There cannot be any misery incident into us, whereof our gracious Redeemer is
not both conscious, and sensible; without any entreaty therefore of the
miserable Demoniack, or suit of any friend; the God of spirits takes pity of
his distress; and, from no motion but his own, commands the ill spirit to
come forth of the man: O admirable precedent of mercy, preventing our requests,
exceeding our thoughts, forcing favors upon our impotence; doing that for us,
which we should, and yet cannot desire. If men upon our instant solicitations
would give us their best aid, it were a just praise of their bounty, but it
well became thee, o God of mercy, to go without force, to give without suit;
And do we think thy goodness is impaired by thy glory? If thou were thus
commiseratiue upon earth, art thou less in heaven? How do thou now take
notice of all our complaints, of all our infirmities? How does thine infinite
pity take order to redress them? What evil can befall us which thou know
not, feel not, relieuest not? How safe are we that have such a Guardian,
such a Mediator in heaven?

Not long before had our Savior commanded the winds, and waters, and they
could not but obey him; now, he speaks in the same Language to the evil
spirit; he entreats not, he persuades not, he commands; Command argues
superiority, He only is infinitely stronger then the strong one in possession;
Else, where powers are matched, though with some inequality, they tugge for the
victory; and without a resistance yield nothing. There are no fewer sorts of
dealing with Satan, then with men; Some have dealt with him by suit, as the old
Satanian heretics, and the present Indian Savages, sacrificing to him, that
he hurt not: Others by covenant, condicioning their service upon his
assistance, as Witches and Magicians, Others by insinuation of implicit
compact, as charmers and Figure-casters; Others by adiuration, as the sons of
Sceua, and modern Exorcists, vnwarrantably charging him by an hier name then
their own; None ever offered to deal with Satan by a direct and primarie
command, but the God of spirits; The great Archangel, when the strife was about
the body of Moses, commanded not, but imprecated rather, The Lord rebuke thee,
Satan; It is only the God that made this spirit an Angel of light, that can
command him, now that he has made himself the Prince of darkness. If any
created power dare to usurp a word of command, he laughs at their presumption;
and knows them his vassals whom he dissembles to fear as his Lords; It is
thou only, o Savior, at whose beck those stubburne Principalities of hell
yield, and tremble: no wicked man can be so much a slave to Satan, as Satan is
to thee; the interposition of grace may defeat that dominion of Satan; thy rule
is absolute, and capable of no let. What need we to fear, whiles we are under
so omnipotent a commander? The waves of the deep rage horribly, yet the Lord
is stronger then they; Let those Principalities and powers do their worst;
Those mighty adversaries are under the command of him, who loved us so well as
to bleed for us, What can we now doubt of? His power, or his will? How can we
profess him a God, and doubt of his power? How can we profess him a Savior,
and doubt of his will? He, both can, and will command those infernal powers;
we are no less safe, then they are malicious.

The Devil saw Jesus by the eyes of the Demoniack; For the same saw, that
spoke; but it was the ill spirit, that said, I beseech thee torment me not; It
was sore against his will that he saw so dreadful an object; The ouerruling
power of Christ dragged the foul spirit into his presence. Guiltiness would
feign keep out of sight; The limbs of so woeful an head shall once call to
the hills, and rocks to hide them from the face of the Lamb; such Lyon-like
terror is in that mild face, when it looks upon wickedness: Neither shall it
be one day the least part of the torment of the damned, to see the most lovely
spectacle that heaven can afford: He, from whom they fled in his offers of
grace, shall be so much more terrible, as he was, and is more gracious; I
marvel not therefore that the Devil, when he saw Jesus, cried out; I could
marvel that he fell down, that he worshipped him: That which the proud spirit
would have had Christ to have done to him, in his great duel, the same he now
does unto Christ, fearfully, seruilely, forcedly; Who shall henceforth brag
of the external homage he performs to the Son of God, when he sees Satan
himself fall down, and worship? What comfort can there be in that, which is
common to us with Devils; who as they believe, and tremble, so they tremble,
and worship? The outward bowing is the body of the action, the disposition of
the soul is the soul of it; therein lies the difference from the counterfeit
stoopings of wicked men, and spirits: The religious heart serves the Lord in
fear, and reioyces in him with trembling; What it does is in way of service;
In service to his Lord, whose soueraintie is his comfort, and protection; In
the fear of a son, not of a slave; In a fear tempered with joy; In a joy,
but allaied with trembling; whereas the prostration of wicked men, and devils
is only an act of form, or of force; as to their Judge, as to their tormentor,
not as to their Lord; in mere seruilitie, not in reverence, in an
uncomfortable dullness, without all delight; in a perfect horror, without
capacity of joy; These worship without thanks, because they fall down
without the true affections of worship.

Who so maruells to see the Devil upon his knees, would much more marvel to
hear what came from his mouth; Iesa the son of the most high God; A
confession, which if we should hear without the name of the author, we should
ask, from what Saint it came. Behold, the same name given to Christ by the
Devil, which was formerly given him by the Angel, Thou shall call his name
Jesus; That awful name, whereat every knee shall bow, in heaven, in earth, and
under the earth, is called upon, by this prostrate Devil: and lest that should
not import enough, (since others have been honored by this name in Type,) he
adds, for full distinction, The Son of the most hie God, The good
Syrophenician, and blind Bartimeus could say, The Son of David; It was well
to acknowledge the true descent of his pedigree, according to the flesh; but
this infernal spirit looks aloft, and fetches his line out of the most
heavens, The Son of the most hie God; The famous confession of the prime
Apostle (which honored him with a new name to immortality,) was no other
then, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God; and what other do I
hear from the lips of a fiend? None more divine words could fall from the
hiest Saint; Nothing hinders but that the veriest miscreant on earth, yea the
foulest Devil in hell may speak holily: It is no passing of judgment upon
loose sentences; So Peter should have been cast for a Satan, in denying,
forswearing, cursing; and the Devil should have been set up for a Saint, in
confessing, Jesus the Son of the most hie God; Fond hypocrite, that please
thy self, in talking well, hear this Devil, and when thou can speak
better then he; look to fare better; but in the mean time know, that a smooth
tongue, and a foul heart, carries away double judgments.

Let curious heads dispute whether the Devil knew Christ to be God; In this I
dare believe himself, though in nothing else; he knew what he believed, he
believed what he confessed, Jesus the Son of the most hie God; To the
confusion of those semi-Christians, that have either held doubtfully, or
ignorantly misknowne, or blasphemously denied what the very Devils have
professed. How little can a bare speculation avail us in these cases of
Divinity? So far this Devil has attained, to no ease, no comfort.
Knowledge alone does but puff up; it is our love that edifies; If there be not
a sense of our sure interest in this Jesus, a power to apply his merits, and
obedience, we are no whit the safer, no whit the better; only we are so much
the wiser, to understand who shall condemn us.

This piece of the clause was spoken like a Saint, Jesus the Son of the most
hie God; the other piece, like a Devil, What have I to do with thee? If the
disclamation were universal, the latter words would impugn the former; for
whiles he confesses Jesus to be the Son of the most hie God, he withal
confesses his own inevitable subjection; Wherefore would he beseech, if he
were not obnoxious; He cannot, he dare not say, What have thou to do with
me; but, What have I to do with thee; Others indeed I have vexed, thee I
fear; in respect then of any violence, of any personal provocation, What have
I to do with thee? And do thou ask, o thou evil spirit, what thou have to
do with Christ, whiles thou vexest a servant of Christ? Have thou thy name
from knowledge, and yet so mistakest him whom thou confessest, as if nothing
could be done to him, but what immediately concerns his own person? Hear
that great, and just Judge sentencing upon his dreadful Tribunal; In as much
as thou did it unto one of these little ones, thou did it unto me; It is
an idle misprision to sever the sense of an injury done to any of the members,
from the head.

He that had humility enough to kneel to the Son of God, has boldness
enough to expostulate, Art thou come to torment us before our time? Whether it
were, that Satan, who uses to enjoy the torment of sinners, whose music it
is to hear our shriekes, and gnashings, held it no small piece of his torment,
to be restrained in the exercise of his tyranny; Or, whether the very presence
of Christ were his rack: For, the guilty spirit proiecteth terrible things,
and cannot behold the Judge, or the executioner without a renouation of horror,
Or, whether (as himself professes) he were now in a fearful expectation of
being commanded down into the deep, for a further degree of actual torment,
which he thus deprecates.

There are tortures appointed to the very spiritual natures of evil Angels;
Men, that are led by sense, have easily granted the body subject to torment,
who yet, have not so readily conceived this incident to a spiritual substance:
The holy Ghost has not thought it fit to acquaint us with the particular
manner of these invisible acts, rather willing that we should herein fear,
then inquire; but, as all matters of faith, though they cannot be proved by
reason (for that they are in an hier sphere) yet afford an answer able to stop
the mouth of all reason, that dares bark against them, (since truth cannot be
opposite to it self) so, this of the sufferings of spirits; There is therefore
both an intentionall torment incident to spirits, and a real: For, as in
blessedness the good spirits find themselves joined unto the chief good;
and, hereupon feel a perfect love of God, and unspeakable joy in him, and rest
in themselves, so contrarily, the evil spirits perceive themselves eternally
excluded from the presence of God, and see themselves settled in a woeful
darkness; and, from the sense of this separation arises an horror not to be
expressed, not to be conceived; How many men have we known to torment
themselves with their own thoughts? There needs no other gibbet then that,
which their troubled spirit has erected in their own heart: and if some
pains begin at the body, and from thence afflict the soul in a copartnership
of grief, yet others arise immediately from the soul, and draw the body into
a participation of misery; Why may we not therefore conceive mere and
separate spirits capable of such an inward excruciation?

Besides which, I hear the Judge of men and Angels say, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels; I hear the Prophet
say, Tophet is prepared of old; If with fear, and without curiosity we may
look upon those flames; Why may we not attribute a spiritual nature to that
more then natural fire? In the end of the world, the elements shall be
dissolved by fire: and if the pure quintessentiall matter of the sky, and the
element of fire it self, shall be dissolved by fire, then that last fire shall
be of another nature, then that which it consumes; what hinders then but that
the omnipotent God has from eternity created a fire of another nature
proportionable even, to spiritual essences? Or why may we not distinguish of
fire, as it is it self, a bodily creature, and, as it is an instrument of Gods
justice, so working, not by any material virtue, or power of it own, but by a
certain height of supernatural efficacy, to which it is exalted by the
omnipotence of that supreme and righteous Judge? Or lastly, why may we not
conceive that though spirits have nothing material in their nature, which that
fire should work upon, yet by the judgment of the almighty Arbiter of the
world, justly willing their torment, they may be made most sensible of pain,
and, by the obedible submission of their created nature, wrought upon
immediately by their appointed tortures; Besides, the very horror, which
arises from the place, whereto they are everlastingly confined: For if the
incorporeall spirits of living men may be held in a loathed, or painful body,
and conceive sorrow to be so imprisoned; Why may we not as easily yield that
the evil spirits of Angels, or men may be held in those direful flames, and
much more abhor therein to continue for ever? Tremble rather, o my soul, at
the thought of this woeful condition of the evil Angels; who, for one only act
of Apostasy from God, are thus perpetually tormented, whereas we sinful
wretches multiply many, and presumptuous offenses against the Majesty of our
God; And withal admire, and magnify that infinite mercy to the miserable
generation of man; which, after this holy severity of justice to the revolted
Angels, so graciously forbeares our heinous iniquities, and both suffers us to
be free for the time, from these hellish torments, and gives us opportunity of
a perfect freedom from them for ever; Praise the Lord, o my soul, and all
that is within me, praise his holy name, who forgiueth all thy sins, and
heals all thine infirmities; Who redeemeth thy life from destruction, and
crowns thee with mercy and compassions.

There is no time wherein the evil spirits are not tormented; there is a time,
wherein they expect to be tormented yet more; Art thou come to torment us
before our time? They knew that the last Assizes are the prefixed term of
their full execution; which they also understood to be not yet come; For though
they knew not when the day of Judgment should be; (a point concealed from the
glorious Angels of heaven) yet they knew when it should not be; and therefore
can say, Before the time. Even the very evil spirits confess, and fearfully
attend a set day of universal Sessions; They believe less then Devils, that
either doubt of, or deny that day of final retribution.

Oh the wonderful mercy of our God, that both to wicked men, and spirits,
respites the utmost of their torment; He might upon the first instant of the
fall of Angels, have inflicted on them the hiest extremity of his vengeance;
He might upon the first sins of our youth (yea of our nature) have swept us
away, and given us our portion in that fiery lake; he stays a time for both;
Though, with this difference of mercy to us men, that here, not only is a
delay, but, may be, an utter prevention of punishment, which to the evil
spirits is altogether impossible; They do suffer, they must suffer; and though
they have now deserved to suffer all they must, yet they must once suffer more
then they do.

Yet, so does this evil spirit expostulate, that hesues; I beseech thee
torment me not. The world is well changed, since Satan's first onset upon
Christ; Then, he could say, If thou be the Son of God; now, Jesus, the Son
of the most hie God; then, All these will I give thee if thou will fall down,
and worship me; now, I beseech thee torment me not; The same power, when he
lists, can change the note of the Tempter, to us; How happy are we that have
such a Redeemer as can command the Devils to their chains? Oh consider this ye
lawless sinners, that have said, Let us break his bonds, and cast his cords
from us; How ever the Almighty suffers you, for a judgment to have free scope
to evil, and ye can now impotently resist the revealed will of your Creator,
yet the time shall come, when ye shall see the very masters, whom ye have
served, (the powers of darkness) unable to avoid the reuenges of God; How
much less shall man strive with his Maker; man, whose breath is in his
nosthrills, whose house is clay, whose foundation is in the dust?

Nature teaches every creature to wish a freedom from pain: the foulest
spirits cannot but love themselves; and this love must needs produce a
deprecation of evil; Yet, what a thing is this, to hear the Devil at his
prayers? I beseech thee torment me not; Devotion is not guilty of this, but
fear; There is no grace in the suit of Devils, but nature* no respect of glory
to their Creator, but their own ease; They cannot pray against sin, but
against torment for sin. What news is it now, to hear the profanest mouth,
in extremity, imploring the sacred name of God, when the Devils do so? The
worst of all creatures hates punishment, and can say, Lead me not into pain;
only the good heart can say, Lead me not into temptation* If we can as heartily
pray against sin, for the avoiding of displeasure, as against punishment,
when we have displeased, there is true grace in the soul: Indeed, if we could
fervently pray against sin, we should not need to pray against punishment;
which is no other then the inseparable shadow of that body; but if we have not
labored against our sins, in vain do we pray against punishment; God must
be just; and the wages of sin is death.

It pleased our holy Savior, not only to let fall words of command upon this
spirit, but to interchange some speeches with him: All Christ's actions are not
for example: It was the error of our Grandmother to hold chat with Satan; That
God, who knows the craft of that old Serpent, and our weak simplicity, has
charged us not to inquire of an evil spirit; surely, if the Disciples
returning to Jacobs Well, wondered to see Christ talk with a woman, well may we
wonder to see him talking with an unclean Spirit; Let it be no presumption, o
Savior, to ask upon what grounds thou did this, wherein we may not follow
thee: We know, that sin was excepted in thy conformity of thy self to us;
we know there was no guile found in thy mouth, no possibility of taint in thy
nature, in thine actions; Neither is it hard to conceive how the same thing may
be done by thee without sin, which we cannot but sin in doing. There is a
vast difference in the Intention, in the Agent; For, on the one side, thou
did not ask the name of the spirit, as one that knew not, and would learn
by inquiring; but, that by the confession of that mischief, which thou
pleasedst to suffer, the grace of the cure might be the more conspicuous, the
more glorious; so, on the other, God and man might do that safely, which mere
man cannot do, without danger; thou might touch the leprosy, and not be
legally unclean, because thou touchedst it to heal it, did not touch it
with possibility of infection; So might thou, who by reason of the
perfection of thy divine nature, were incapable of any stain, by the
interlocution with Satan, safely confer with him, whom corrupt man,
predisposed to the danger of such a pearl, may not meddle with, without sin,
because not without peril; It is for none but God to hold discourse with
Satan; Our surest way is to have as little to do with that evil one, as we
may; and if he shall offer to maintain conference with us by his secret
tentations, to turn our speech unto our God, with the Archangell, The Lord
rebuke thee Satan.

It was the presupposition of him that knew it, that not only men but spirits
have names; This then he asks; not out of an ignorance, or curiosity; nothing
could be hid from him who calls the stars, and all the hosts of heaven by
their names; but, out of a just respect to the glory of the miracle he was
working; whereto the notice of the name would not a little avail: For, if
without inquiry, or confession, our Savior had eiected this evil spirit, it
had passed for the single dispossession of one only Devil, whereas now, it
appears there was a combination and hellish champertie in these powers of
darkness, which were all forced to veil unto that almighty command.

Before, the Devil had spoken singularly of himself, What have I to do with
thee; and, I beseech thee torment me not; Our Savior yet, knowing that there
was a multitude of Devils lurking in that breast, who dissembled their presence,
wrests it out of the Spirit by this interrogation, What is thy name? Now can
those wicked ones no longer hide themselves; He that asked the question, forced
the answer, My name is Legion. The author of discord has borrowed a name of
war: from that military order of discipline (by which the Jews were
subdued) does the Devil fetch his denomination; They were many, yet they say,
My name, not, Our name; though many, they speak as one, they act as one, in
this possession: There is a marvelous accordance even betwixt evil spirits;
that Kingdom is not divided, for then it could not stand; I wonder not that
wicked men do so conspire in evil; that there is such unanimity in the
brochers, and abettors of errors, when I see those devils, which are many in
substance, are one in name, action, habitation; Who can brag too much of
unity, when it is incident into wicked spirits? All the praise of concord is
in the subject; if that be holy, the consent is Angelical, if sinful,
deuillish.

What a fearful advantage have our spiritual enemies against us? If armed
troops come against single straglers, what hope is there of life, of victory?
How much does it concern us to band our hearts together, in a communion of
Saints? Our enemies come upon us like a torrent; Oh let not us run asunder like
drops in the dust; All our united forces will be little enough, to make head
against this league of destruction.

Legion imports Order, number, conflict. Order, in that there is a distinction
of regiment, a subordination of Officers; Though in hell there be confusion of
faces, yet not confusion of degrees; Number; Those that have reckoned a Legion
at the lowest, have counted it six thousand; others, have more then doubled it;
though here it is not strict, but figurative, yet the letter of it implies
multitude; How fearful is the consideration of the number of Apostate-Angels?
And if a Legion can attend one man, how many must we needs think are they,
who, all the world over, are at hand to the punishment of the wicked, the
exercise of the good, the tentation of both; It cannot be hoped there can be
any place, or time, wherein we may be secure from the onsets of these enemies;
Be sure, ye lewd men, ye shall want no furtherance to evil, no torment for
evil; Be sure, ye godly, ye shall not want combatants to try your strength,
and skill; Awaken your courages to resist, and stir up your hearts to make
sure the means of your safety; There are more with us then against us; The
God of heaven is with us, if we be with him; and our Angels behold the face of
God; If every devil were a Legion, we are safe: Though we walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, we shall fear no evil; Thou, o Lord, shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of our enemies, and thy right hand
shall save us.

Conflict; All this number is not for sight, for rest; but for motion, for
action; Neither was there ever hour, since the first blow given to our first
parents, wherein there was so much as a truce betwixt these adversaries. As
therefore strong frontier-Townes, when there is a peace concluded on both
parts, break up their garrison, open their gates, neglect their Bull-warkes;
but, when they hear of the enemy mustering his forces, in great and unequal
numbers, then they double their guard; keep Sentinel, repair their Sconces,
so must we, upon the certain knowledge of our numerous, and deadly enemies, in
continual array against us, address our selves always to a wary and strong
resistance. I do not observe the most to think of this gostly hostility;
Either they do not find there are tentations, or those tentations hurtful;
they see no worse then themselves; and if they feel motions of evil, arising
in them, they impute it to fancy, or unreasonable appetite; to no power, but
natures; and; those motions they follow, without sensible hurt; neither see
they what harm it is to sin: Is it any marvel that carnal eyes cannot
discern spiritual objects? That the world who is the friend, the vassal of
Satan, is in no war with him? Elishaes servant, when his eyes were opened saw
troops of spiritual soldiers, which before he discerned not; If the eyes of
our souls be once enlightened by supernatural knowledge, and the clear
beams of faith, we shall as plainly descrie the invisible powers of
wickedness, as now our bodily eyes see heaven, and earth. They are, though we
see them not, we cannot be safe from them, if we do not acknowledge, not
oppose them.

The Devils are now become great suitors to Christ; That he would not command
them into the deep; that he would permit their entrance into the swine. What
is this deep but hell? both for the utter separation from the face of God; and
for the impossibility of passage to the region of rest and glory? The very
evil spirits, then, fear, and expect a further degree of torment; they know
themselves reserved in those chains of darkness for the judgment of the
great day; There is the same wages due to their sins, and to ours; neither
are the wages paid till the work be done; they, tempting men to sin, must
needs sin grievously in tempting; as with us men those that mislead into
sin, offend more then the actors; not till the vpshot therefore of their
wickedness shall they receive the full measure of their condemnation: This
day, this deep they tremble at; what shall I say* of those men that fear it
not? It is hard for men to believe their own unbelief: If they were persuaded
of this fiery dungeon, this bottomless deep, wherein every sin shall
receive an horrible portion with the damned, durst they stretch forth their
hands to wickedness? No man will put his hand into a fiery crucible to fetch
gold thence, because he knows it will burn him; Did we as truly believe the
everlasting burning of that infernal fire, we durst not offer to fetch
pleasures, or profits, out of the midst of those flames.

This degree of torment they grant in Christ's power to command; they knew his
power irresistable; had he therefore but said, Back to hell, whence ye came,
they could no more have staid upon earth, then they can now climb into heaven.
O the wonderful dispensation of the Almighty; who though he could command all
the evil spirits down to their dungeons in an instant; so as they should have
no more opportunity of temptation, yet thinks fit to retain them upon earth;
It is not out of weakness, or improuidence of that divine hand, that wicked
spirits tyrannzie here upon earth, but out of the most wise, and most holy
ordination of God, who knows how to turn evil into good; how to fetch good
out of evil; and by the worst instruments, to bring about his most just
decrees: Oh that we could adore that awful, and infinite power, and
cheerfully cast our selves upon that providence, which keeps the Keys even
of hell it self, and either lets out, or returns the Devils to their places.

Their other suit has some marvel in moving it, more in the grant; That they
might be suffered to enter into the heard of Swine. It was their ambition of
some mischief, that brought forth this desire; that since they might not vex
the body of the man, they might yet afflict men in their goods; The malice of
these envious spirits reaches from us, to ours; It is sore against their
wills, if we be not every way miserable: If the Swine were legally unclean for
the use of the table, yet they were naturally good; Had not Satan known them
useful for man, he had never desired their ruin; But as Fencers will seem to
fetch a blow at the leg, when they intend it at the head; so does this
devil; whiles he drives at the Swine, he aims at the souls of these
Gadarens; by this means, he hoped well (and his hope was not vain) to work
in these Gergesens a coffeehouse at Christ, an unwillingness to entertain
him, a desire of his absence; he meant to turn them into Swine, by the loss
of their Swine: It was not the rafters, or stones of the house of Jobs
children, that he bore the grudge to, but to the owners; nor to the lives of
the children so much, as the soul of their father; There is no affliction
wherein he does not strike at the heart; which, whiles it holds free, all other
damages are light; but a wounded spirit (whether with sin or sorrow) who can
bear? What ever becomes of goods, or limbs, happy are we if (like wise
soldiers) we guard the vital parts; whiles the soul is kept sound from
impatience, from distrust, our enemy may afflict us, he cannot hurt us.

They sue for a sufference; not daring other then to grant that without the
permission of Christ, they could not hurt a very swine; If it be fearful to
think how great things evil spirits can do with permission; it is
comfortable to think how nothing they can do without permission: We know they
want not malice to destroy the whole frame of Gods work; but of all, man; of
all men, Christians; but if without leave they cannot set upon an hog, what
can they do to the living Images of their Creator? They cannot offer us so
much as a suggestion, without the permission of our Savior; And can he that
would give his own most precious blood for us, to save us from evil, wilfully
give us over to evil?

It is no news that wicked spirits wish to do mischief, it is news that
they are allowed it; If the owner of all things should stand upon his absolute
command, who can challenge him for what he thinks fit to do with his
creature? The first Fool of the Ass is commanded, under the law, to have his
neck broken, what is that to us? The creatures do that they were made for, if
they may serve any way to the glory of their Maker; But, seldom ever does God
leave his actions unfurnished with such reasons, as our weakness may reach
unto. There were sects amongst these Jews that denied spirits, they could not
be more evidently, more powerfully convinced then by this event: Now shall the
Gadarens see from what a multitude of Devils they were delivered; and how easy
it had been for the same power to have allowed those spirits to seize upon
their persons, as well as their Swine; Neither did God this without a just
purpose of their castigation; His judgments are righteous, where they are most
secret; though we cannot accuse these inhabitants of ought, yet he could; and
thought good thus to mulct them: And if they had not wanted grace to
acknowledge it, it was no small favor of God, that he would punish them in
their Swine, for that, which he might have avenged upon their bodies, and
souls: Our goods are furthest off us; If but in these we smart, we must
confess to find mercy.

Sometimes it pleases God to grant the suits of wicked men, and spirits, in no
favor to the suitors: He grants an ill suit, and withholds a good; He grants
an ill suit in judgment, and holds back a good one, in mercy; The Israelites
ask meat; he gives Quails to their mouths, and leanenesse to their souls;
The chosen vessel wishes Satan taken off, and hears only, My grace is
sufficient for thee: We may not evermore measure favor by condescent; These
Devils doubtless receive more punishment for that harmefull act, wherein they
are heard. If we ask what is either unfit to receive, or unlawful to beg,
it is a great favor of our God to be denied.

Those spirits which would go into the Swine by permission, go out of the man
by command; they had stayed long, and are eiected suddenly; The immediate
works of God are perfect in an instant, and do not require the aid of time
for their maturation.

No sooner are they cast out of the man, then they are in the Swine; They will
leese no time, but pass without intermission from one mischief to another; If
they hold it a pain not to be doing of evil; Why is it not our delight to be
ever doing good? The impetuousnesse was no less, then the speed, The heard was
carried with violence from a steep-downe place into the lake, and was choked.
It is no small force that could do this; but if the Swine had been so many
mountains, these spirits, upon Gods permission, had thus transported them: How
easily can they carry those souls (which are under their power,) to
destruction? Unclean beasts that wallow in the mire of sensuality, brutish
drunkards, transforming themselves by excess, even they, are the swine, whom
the Legion carries headlong to the pit of perdition.

The wicked spirits have their wish; The Swine are choked in the waves; What
ease is this to them? Good God; that there should be any creature that seeks
contentment in destroying, in tormenting the good creatures of their Maker!
This is the diet of hell; Those fiends feed upon spite; toward man so much
more, as he does more resemble his Creator: Toward all other living
substances, so much more as they may be more useful to man.

The Swine ran down violently, what marvel is it if their keepers fled;
that miraculous work which should have drawn them to Christ, drives them from
him: They run with the news; the country comes in with clamor; The whole
multitude of the country about, besought him to depart; The multitude is a
beast of many heads; every head has a several mouth, and every mouth has a
several tongue, and every tongue a several accent; Every head has a several
brain, and every brain thoughts of their own; so as it is hard to find a
multitude, without some division: At least seldom ever has a good motion
found a perfect accordance; it is not so infrequent for a multitude to conspire
in evil; Generality of assent is no warrant for any act; Common error carries
away many; who inquire not into the reason of ought, but the practice: The way
to hell is a beaten road through the many feet that tread it; when vice grows
into fashion, singularity is a virtue.

There was not a Gadarene found, that either dehorted their fellows, or
opposed the motion; it is a sign of people given up to judgment, when no man
makes head against proiects of evil. Alas, what can one strong man do against
a whole throng of wickedness? Yet this good comes of an vnpreuailing
resistance, that God forbeares to plague, where he finds but a sprinkling of
faith: Happy are they, who (like unto the celestial bodies, which being
carried about, with the sway of the hiest sphere, yet creep on their own
ways) keep on the courses of their own holiness, against the swinge of
common corruptions: They shall both deliver their own souls, and help to
withhold judgment from others.

The Gadarenes sue to Christ for his departure; It is too much favor to
attribute this to their modesty, as if they held themselves unworthy of so
divine a guest; Why then did they fall upon this suit in a time of their loss?
Why did they not tax themselves, and intimate a secret desire of that, which
they durst not beg? It is too much rigor to attribute it to the love of their
hoggs, and an anger at their loss; then, they had not entreated, but expelled
him; It was their fear that moved this harsh suit: A servile fear of danger
to their persons, to their goods, Least he that could so absolutely command
the Devils, should have set these tormentors upon them; Least their other
Demoniacks should be dispossessed with like loss. I cannot blame these
Gaderens that they feared; This power was worthy of trembling at; Their fear
was just, the use of their fear was unjust; They should have argued, This man
has power over men, beasts, Devils, it is good having him to our friend; his
presence is our safety and protection; Now they contrarily mis-inferre, Thus
powerful is he, it is good he were further off; What miserable and pernicious
misconstructions do men make of God; of divine attributes, and actions? God is
omnipotent, able to take infinite vengeance of sin, Oh that he were not; He
is provident, I may be careless; He is merciful, I may sin; He is holy, Let
him depart from me, for I am a sinful man; How witty sophisters are natural
men to deceive their own souls, to rob themselves of a God? Oh Savior, how
worthy are they to want thee that wish to be rid of thee? Thou have just cause
to be weary of us, even whiles we sue to hold thee; but when once our wretched
unthankfulness grows weary of thee, who can pity us to be punished with
thy departure? Who can say it is other then righteous, that thou should
regest one day upon us, Depart from me ye wicked.

FINIS.

