A SERMON OF Public Thanksgiving for the wonderful mitigation of the late
Mortality; Preached before his Matie; upon his gracious command, at his Court
of Whitehall, Jan. 29. 1625.

AND Upon the same command Published By Jos. Hall Deane of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for Nath. Butter. 1626.

Psalm. 68. verse. 19, 20. Blessed be the Lord, who loadeth us daily with
benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah.

He that is our God, is the God of salvation, and unto God the Lord belong the
issues from death.


YEa, blessed be the Lord, who has added this unto the load of his other
mercies to his unworthy servant, that the same tongue, which was called, not
long since, to chatter out our public mournings, in the solemn Fast of this
place, is now employed in a song of praise; and the same hand, which was here
lifted up for supplication, is now lift up in tha^ksgiuing; Ye that the^
accompanied me with your tears and sighs, accompany me now, I beseech you, (in
this happy change of note, and time) with your joyful smiles, and acclamations
to the God that has wrought it.

It is not more natural for the sun, when it looks upon a moist, and well
fermented earth, to cause vapors to ascend thence, the^ it is for greatness, and
goodness, when they both meet together upon an honest heart, to draw up holy
desires of gratulation. The worth of the agent does it not alone, without a fit
disposition in the subject; Let the Sun cast his strongest beams upon a flint,
a pumice, he fetches out no steame: Even so the greatness and goodness of the
Almighty, beating upon a dry and hard heart, preuailes nothing: Here all three
are happily met: In God, infinite greatness, infinite goodness; such greatness,
that he is attended with thousand thousands of Angels; (a guard fit for the
King of heaven) such goodness, that he receives gifts even for the rebellious:
In David, a gracious heart, that in a sweet sense of the great goodness of his
God, breathes out this divine Epiphonema, Blessed be the Lord, who loadeth us
daily with benefits, even the God of our salvation, etc.

Wherein me thinks, the sweet singer of Israel seems to raise his note to the
emulatio^ of the quier of heaven, in the melody of their Alleluiahs; yea, let
me say, now that he sings above in that blessed consort of glorious spirits,
his ditty cannot be better then this, that he sung here upon earth, and wherein
we are about to bear our parts at this time: Prepare, I beseech you, both your
ears for David's song, and your hearts and tongues for your own. And first in
this Angelical strain, your thoughts cannot but observe, without me, the
Descant, and the Ground; The descant of Gratulation, Blessed be the Lord;
wherein is both applause and excitation; an applause given to Gods goodness, and
an excitation of others to give that applause. The ground is a threefold
respect. Of what God is in himself, God and Lord. Of what God is, and does to
us, which loadeth us daily with benefits. Of what he is both in himself, and
to us; The God of our salvation; which last, (like to some rich stone) is set
off with a dark foil, To God the Lord belong the issues from death. So in the
first, for his own sake; in the second, for our sakes, in the third for his
own, and ours; as God, as Lord, as a Benefactor, as a Savior, and deliverer,
Blessed be the Lord.

It is not hard to observe that David's Alleluiahs are more the^ his Hosannaes;
his thanks more then his suites. Oft-times does he praise God when he begs
nothing: Seldom ever does he beg that favor, for which he does not raise up
his soul to an anticipation of thanks; neither is this any other then the
universal vnder-song of all his heavenly ditties, Blessed be the Lord;
Praised (as our former translation has it) is too low; Honor is more then
praise; blessing is more then honor; neither is it for nothing, that from this
word ( Barac) to bless, is derived Berec, the knee which is bowed in blessing;
and the crier before Joseph, proclaimed Abrech, calling for the honor of the
knee from all beholders. Genesis 41.43. Every slight triuiall acknowledgement of
worth is a praise; Blessing is in a higher strain of gratitude, that caries
the whole sway of the heart with it, in a kind of divine rapture: praise is in
matter of complement, blessing, of devotion.

The Apostles rule is that the less is blessed of the greater, Abraham of the
King of Salem; the Prophets charge is, that the greater should be blessed of
the less; yea the greatest of the least, God of man: This agrees well; Blessing
is an act that will bear reciprocation; God blesses man, and man blesses
God; God blesses man imparatiuely, man blesses God optatiuely; God blesses
man in the acts of mercy; Man blesses God in the notions, in the expressions
of thanks. God blesses man when he makes him good and happy; man blesses God
when he confesses how good, how gracious how glorious he is: So as the
blessing is wholly taken up in agnition, in celebration; in the one we
acknowledge the bounty of God to us; in the other we magnify him, vocally,
really, for that bounty.

Oh see then what high account God makes of the affections and actions of his
poor, silly, earth-creeping creatures; that he gives us in them power to
bless himself, and takes it as an honor to be blessed of us: David wonders
that God should so vouchsafe to bless man, how much more must we needs wonder
at the mercy of God that will vouchsafe to be blessed by man, a worm, an
atome, a nothing? Yet, both S. James tells us that with the tongue we bless
God; and the Psalmist calls for it here, as a service of dear acceptance;
Blessed be the Lord; Even we me^ live not ( Camelion-like) with the air of
thanks; nor feed ere the fatter with praises, how much less our maker? O God,
we know well that whatsoever men or Angels do, or do not, thou can not but be
infinitely blessed in thy self; before ever any creature was, thou did
equally enjoy thy blessed self, from all eternity; What can this worthles
loose filme of flesh either add to, or detract from thine infiniteness? Yet,
thou that humblest thy self to behold the things that are done in heaven, and
earth, humblest thy self also, to accept the weak breath of our praises, that
are sent up to thee from earth to heaven. How should this encourage the vows,
the endeavors of our hearty thankfulness, to see the^ graciously taken? Would men
take up with good words, with good desires, and quit our bo^ds for thanks, who
would be a debtor? With the God of mercy this cheap payment is current; if he
the^ will honor us so far as to be blessed of us, Oh let us honor him so far as
to bless him; Quare verbis parca^? gratuita sunt: Why do we spare thanks that
cost us nothing, as that wise Heathen; O give unto the Lord, ye mighty, give
unto the Lord the praises due to his name, offer to God the sacrifice of
thanksgiving: and still let the foot of our song, be, Blessed be the Lord.

This for the descant of gratulation; the ground follows; His own sake has
reason to be first; God will be blessed both as Iah, and Adonai; the one the
style of his Essence, the other of his Sovereignty. Even the most accursed
Deist would confess, that as a pure, simple, infinite, absolute being, God is
to be blessed; for if being be good, and these two be co^uertible, nature must
needs teach him, that an absolute and infinite being must needs be absolutely
and infinitely good: but what do I blur the glory of this day with mention of
those monsters, whose Idol is nature, whose religion is secondary atheism,
whose true region is the lowest hell; these damned Ethnicks cannot, will not
conceive of God, as he is, because they impiously sever his essence from his
inward relations; We Chrstians can never be so heavenly affected to God, as we
ought, till we can rise to this pitch of piety, to bless God for what he is in
himself, without the external beneficial relations to the creature; Else our
respects reflect too much homeward, and we do but look through God, at our
selves.

Neither is it for us only to bless him as an absolute God, but as a
Sovereign Lord too; whose power has no more limit then his essence; the great
moderator of heaven and earth, giving laws to his creature, ouer-ruling all
things, marshalling all events, crushing his enemies, maintaining his Church,
adored by Angels, trembled at by devils; Behold here a Lord worthy to be
blessed. We honor, as we ought, your conspicuous greatness, o ye eminent
Potentates of the earth; but alas, what is this to the great Lord of heaven?
When we look up thither, we must crave leave to pity the breath of your
nosthrills, the rust of your coronets, the dust of your graves, the sting of
your felicities, and (if ye take not good heed) the blots of your memories: As
ye hold all in fee from this great Lord, so let it be no disparagement to you,
to do your lowliest homage to his footstool; homage, I mean, in action; give
me the real benediction; I am sure that is the best; they bless God that
praise him, they bless him more, and praise him best, that obey him. There are
that crouch to you great ones, who yet hate you: Oh let us take heed of
offering these hollow obseruances to the searcher of hearts, if we love not
our own confusion. They that proclaimed Christ at Jerusalem, had not only
Hosanna in their mouths, but palms in their hands too; so must we have: Let
me say then, If the hand bless not the Lord, the tongue is an hypocrite. Away
with the waste complements of our vain formalities; Let our loud actions
drown the language of our words, in blessing the name of the Lord.

Neither must we bless God as a sovereign Lord only, but (which is yet a
more feeling relation) as a munificent Benefactor, Who loadeth us daily with
benefits. Such is man's self-love, that no inward worth can so attract his
praises, as outward beneficence; Whiles thou make much of thy self, every
one shall speak well of thee, how much more whiles thou make much of them?
Here God has met with us also. Not to perplexe you with scanning the variety
of senses, wherewith I have observed this Psalm above all other of David's, to
abound; see here, I beseech you, a fourfold gradation of divine bounty.
First, here are benefits; the word is not expressed in the original, but
necessarily employed in the sense; for there are but three loads whereof man is
capable from God, favors, precepts, punishments; the other two are out of the
road of gratulation; when we might therefore have expected judgments, behold
Benefits: And those secondly, not sparingly handfulld out to us, but dealt to
us by the whole load; loadeth with benefits. Who^, thirdly, does he load, but
us? Not worthy and well deserving subjects, but us (...) Rebels: And lastly,
this he does, not at one doale and no more, (as even churles rare feasts use to
be plentiful,) but (...) successively, vnweariedly, perpetually. One favor
were too much, here are benefits; a sprinckling were too much, here is a load;
once were too often, here is daily largition. Cast your eyes therefore, a little
upon this threefold exaggeration of beneficence, the measure, a load of
benefits; the subject, unworthy us; the time, daily: Who daily loadeth us with
benefits.

Where shall we begin to survey this vast load of mercies? were it no more, but
that he has given us a world to live in, a life to enjoy, air to breathe in,
earth to tread on, fire to warm us, water to cool and cleanse us, clothes to
cover us, food to nourish us, sleep to refresh us, houses to shelter us,
variety of creatures to serve and delight us; here were a just load: But now,
if we yet add to these, civility of breeding, dearnesse of friends,
competency of estate, degrees of honor, honesty or dignity of vocation, favor
of Princes, success in employments, domestique comforts, outward peace, good
reputation, preservation from dangers, rescue from evils, the load is well
mended: If yet, ye shall come closer, and add, due proportion of body,
integrity of parts, perfection of senses, strength of nature, mediocritie of
health, sufficiency of appetite, vigor of digestion, wholesome temper of
seasons, freedom from cares, this course must needs heighten it yet more; If
still, ye shall add to these, the order, and powers, and exercise of our
inward faculties, enriched with wisdom, art, learning, experience, expressed
by a not-vnhandsome elocution: and shall, now, lay al these together, that
concern estate, body, mind; how can the axeltree of the soul but crack under
the load of these favors? But, if from what God has done for us as men, we
look to what he has done for us, as Christians; that he has embraced us
with an everlasting love, that he has molded us anew, enliued us by his
Spirit, fed us by his word and Sacraments, clothed us with his merits, bought
us with his blood, becoming vile to make us glorious, a curse to inuest us
with blessedness; in a word, that he has given himself to us, his Son for
us: Oh the height, and depth, and breadth of the rich mercies of our God; Oh
the boundless, to please, bottomless load of divine benefits, whose immensity
reaches from the center of this earth, to the unlimited extent of the very
empyreall heavens. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare the wonders that he does for the children of men.

These mercies are great in themselves, our unworthiness does greaten them
more: To do good to the well deserving were but retribution; He ladeth us, who
are no less rebellious to him, the^ he is beneficial to us. Our strait and
shallow bounty picks out the worthiest, and most capable subject; The greatest
gift that ever God gave, he gives us, whiles we are enemies. It was our
Saviors charge to his Disciples, Interrogate quis dignus; Ask who is worthy,
that is, (as Hierom interprets it) of the honor to receive such guests; Should
God stand upon those terms with us, what should become of us? See, and wonder,
and be ashamed o ye Christian hearers; God loads us, and we load him; God
loads us with benefits, we load him with our sins. Behold, I am pressed under
you, says God, as a cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues, Amos. 2.13. He
should go away laden with our thanks, with the presents of our duty, and we
shamefully clogge him with our continual prouocations: Can there be here any
danger of selfe-sacrificing with Seianus, and not rather the just danger of our
shame and confusion in our selves? How can we but hate this unkind, and unjust,
vnanswerablenesse; Yet herein shall we make an advantage of our foulest sins,
that they give so much more luster to the glorious mercies of our God, who
ouercoms our evil with good, and loads even, Us.

The ouer-long interruption of favors loses their thanks; and the best
benefits languish in too much disuse. Our God takes order for that, by a
perpetuation of beneficence; He ladeth us daily; Every day, every minute
renues his favors upon us; Semper largitor, semper donator, as Hierom. To
speak strictly, there is no time present; nothing is present but an instant,
and that, can no more be called time, then a prick can be called a line;
yet, how swift soever the wings of time are, they cannot cut one instant, but
they must carry with them a successiue renouation of Gods gracious kindness to
us.

This Sun of his does not rise once in an age, or once in a year, but every
minute since it was created, rises to some parts of the earth, and every day
to us; Neither does he once hurl down upon our heads some violent drops, in a
storm, but he plyes us with the sweet showers of the former, and the latter
rain; Wherein the mercy of God condescends to our impotency, who are ready to
perish under uncomfortable intermissions. Non mihi sufficit? says that father;
it is not enough that he has given me once, if he give me not always; To
days ague makes us forget yesterdaies health; Former meals do not relieve
our present hunger. This cotage of ours ruins straight, if it be not new
daubed every day; new repaired: The liberal care of our God therefore tiles
over one benefit with another, that it may not rain through. And if he be so
unwearied in his favors, why are we weary of our thanks? Our bonds are
renewed every day to our God; Why not our payments? Not once in a year, or
moon, or week, but every day once (without fail) were the legal sacrifices
reiterated; and that, of all those creatures which were necessary for
sustentation; a Lamb, flower, wine, oil, that is, meat, bread, drink, sauce;
Why? but that in all these we should still daily re-acknowledge our new
obligations to the giver? Yea, ex plenitudine, and lachrymis, as it is in the
original, Exodus 22.29. of our plenty and tears, that is, (as Caietan) of a
dear, or cheap year must we return; More, or less may not miss our
thanks; We need daily, we beg daily, (Give us this day) we receive daily, why
do we not daily retribute to our God, and act, as some read it, Blessed be the
Lord daily, who loadeth us with his benefits.

It is time now to turn your eyes to that mixed respect, that reaches both to
God, and us; Ye have seen him a benefactor, see him a Savior, and Deliverer;
The God of our salvation; The vulgars salutaria, following the Septuagint,
differs from our [ Saluation] but as the means from the end. With the
Hebrews, Salvation is a wide word, comprising all the favors of God, that may
tend to preservation; and therefore the Psalmist, elsewhere, extends this act
both to man, and beast; and as if he would comment upon himself, expounds
(...) save, by (...) prosper, Psalm. 118.25. It is so dear a title of God, that
the Prophet cannot have enough of it; the interposition of a Selah cannot bar
the redoubling of it in my Text.

Every deliverance, every preservation fathers it self upon God, yet, as the
soul is the most precious thing in the world, and life is the most precious
thing that belongs to the soul, and eternal life is the best of lives, and
the danger and loss of this life is the fearfullest and most horrible, chiefly
is this greatest salvation here meant; wherein God intends most to bless, and
be blessed.

Of this Salvation is he the God, by preordination, by purchase, by gift. By
preordination; in that he has decreed it to us, from eternity, (...) Romans
8.30. By purchase, in that he has bought it for us, and us to it, by the
price of his blood, (...) 1 Cor. 6. the last. By gift, in that he has feoft
us in it (...), The gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6.23. Since therefore,
he decreed it, he bought it, he bestows it, justly is he the God of our
salvation: Who can, who dares arrogate to himself any partnership in this
great work? What power can dispose of the souls final condition, but the
same that made it? Who can give eternity, but he that only has it? What but
an infinite merit can purchase an infinite glory? Cursed be that spirit that
will offer to share with his maker. Down with your Crowns, o ye glorious
Elders, at the foot of him that sits on the Throne, with a, Non nobis Domine,
Not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the praise. Away with
the proud incroachment of the merits of the best Saints, of papal largesses:
Only our God, is the God of our salvation.

How happy are we the while? All actions are according to the force of the
agent; Weak causes produce feeble effects, contingent, casual; necessary,
certain; Our salvation therefore, being the work of an infinitely powerful
cause, cannot be dis-appointed; Lo the beauty of Salomons, Al-chum; who has
resisted his will? When we look to our own fleshie hands here is nothing but
discouragement; when we look to our spiritual enemies, here is nothing but
terror; but when we cast up our eyes to the mighty God, here is nothing but
confidence, nothing but comfort; Comfort ye, comfort ye therefore, O ye
feeble souls, and send your bold defiances to the prince of darkness; heaven
is high and hard to reach, hell is steep and slipperie, our flesh is earthie
and impotent, Satan strong and rancorous, sin subtle, the world alluring, all
these, yet, God is the God of our Salvation; Let those infernal Lions roar,
and rampe upon us; let the gates of hell do their worst; Let the world be a
cheater, our flesh a traitor, the devil a tyrant, Faithful is he that has
promised, who will also do it, God is the God of our Salvation.

How much more then in these outward temporal occasions, when we have to do
with an arm of flesh? Do the enemies of the Church rage and snuff, and
breathe nothing but threats, and death? Make sure of our God, he shall be sure
to make them lick our dust. Great Benhadad of the Syrians shall come with his
hempen collar, to the King of Israel; The very winds and waves shall undertake
those Mahumetan, or Marran powers that shall rise up against the inheritance of
the God of Salvation;

Salvation is rateable according to the danger from which we are delivered;
since death therefore is the utmost of all terribles, needs must it be the
highest improuement of Salvation, that to our God belong the issues from death:
Death has here a double latitude, of kind of extent; the kind is either
temporal, or eternal; the extent reaches not only to the last complete act
of dissolution, but to all the passages that lead toward it. Thus, the issues
from death belong to our God, whether by way of preservation, or by way of
rescue: How gladly do I meet in my text with the dear and sweet name of our
Jesus, who conquered death by dying, and triumphed over hell by suffering, and
carries the keys both of death, and hell. Revel. 1.18. He is the God, the
Author and Finisher of our Salvation, to whom belong the issues from death.

Look first at the temporary, he keeps it from us, he fetches us from it;

It is true, there is a Statutum est, upon it, dye we must; Death knocks
equally at the hatch of a Cottage, and gate of a Palace; but our times are in
Gods hand; the Lord of life has set us our period; Whose omnipotence so
contriues all events, that neither enemy, nor casualtie, nor disease can
prevent his hour, Were Death suffered to run loose and wild, what boot were
it to live? now it is tetherd up short by that almighty hand, what can we
fear? If envy repine, and villainy plot against sacred Sovereignty, God has
well proved upon all the Poisons, and Pistols, and Poynards, and Gun-powders of
the two late memorable Successions, that to him alone belong the issues from
death.

Go on then blessed Sovereign, go on courageously in the ways of your God,
the invisible guard of heaven shall secure your Royal head, the God of our
Salvation shall make you a third glorious instance to all posterities, that
unto him belong the issues from death.

Thus, God keeps death from us; it is more comfort yet, that he fetches us
from it. Even the best head must at last lie down in the dust and sleep in
death. Oh vain cracks of valor; thou bragst thy self able to kill a man; a
worm has done it, a fly has done it. Every thing can find the way down
unto death, none but the omnipotent can find the way up out of it; He finds,
he makes these issues for all his; As it was with our head, so it is with the
members.

Death might seize, it cannot hold: Gustauit, non deglutiuit, It may nibble at
us, it shall not devour us. Behold the only Sovereign Antidote against the
sorrows, the frights of death. Who can fear to lay himself down, and take a
nappe in the bed of death, when his heart is assured, that he shall awake
glorious in the morning of his resurrection; Certainly, it is only our
infidelity that makes death fearful; Rejoice not over me, O my last enemy,
though I fall, I shall rise again: O death where is thy sting, O grave where
is thy victory.

Cast yet one glance of your eyes upon the second, and eternal death; the
issues where from belong to our God; not by way of rescue, as in the former,
but of preservation: ( Exinferno nulla redemtio) is as true, as if it were
Canonical; Father Abraham tells the damned glutton in the parable, there is
((...)) a great gulf, that bars all return. These black gates of hell are
barred without, by the irreuersible decree of the Almighty:

Those bold Fabulists, therefore, whose impious legends have devised Traian
fetched thence by the prayers of Gregory, and Falcon^lla by T^claes; suspending
the final sentence upon a ( secundum praesentem iniustitiam) take a course to
cast themselves into that pit, whence they have presumptuously feigned the
deliverance of others.

The reseue is not more hopeless, then the prevention is comfortable; There is
none of us but is naturally walking down to these chambers of death; Every
sin is a pace thitherwards; only the gracious hand of our GOD stays us; In
our selves, in our sins we are already no better then brands of that hell;
Blessed be the God of our salvation, that has found happy issues from this
death: What issues? Even those bloody issues that were made in the hands, and
feet, and side of our blessed Savior; that invaluablie precious blood of the
Son of God is that, whereby we are redeemed, whereby we are justified,
whereby we are saved. Oh that our souls might have had leisure to dwell
awhile upon the meditation of those dreadful torments we are freed from, of
that infinite goodness that has freed us, of that happy exchange of a
glorious condition to which we are freed. But the public occasion of this
day calls off my speech, and inuites me to the celebration of the sensible
mercy of God, in our late temporal deliverance.

Wherein let me first bless the God of our salvation, that has put it into
the heart of his chosen servant, to set up an Altar in this sacred threshing
floor, and to offer up this days sacrifice to his name, for the stay of our
late mortal contagion. How well it becomes our Gideon, to be personally
exemplarie, as in the beating of this Earthen pitcher, in the first public
act of humiliation, so, in the lighting of this Torch of public joy, and
sounding the Trumpet of a thankful iubilation, and how well will it become us
to follow so pious, so gracious an example. Come therefore, all ye that fear
the Lord, and let us recount what he has done for our souls. Come, let us
bless the Lord, the God of our salvation, that loadeth us daily with benefits;
the God to whom belong the issues of death: Let us bless him in his infinite
essence, and power, bless him in his unbounded and just Souerainty, bless him
in his marvelous beneficence, large, continual, undeserved, bless him in his
preseruations, bless him in his deliverances: We may but touch at the two
last.

How is our Earth ready to sink under the load of his mercies? What nation
under heaven has not envied, and wondered at our blessings? I do not carry
back your eyes to the ancient favors of our God; to the memorable
frustrations of foreign Invasions, to the miraculous discoueries of Treasons,
to the succesfull maintenance of oppressed neighborhood; That one mercy I may
not forget; that in the shutting up of blessed Queen ELIZABETH, the Pope and
the then-King of Spain were casting Lots for the Crown, and palpably plotting
for their seuerally-designed successors, as appears in the public Posthume
Letters of Cardinal D' Ossat, a witness beyond exception, Three several
Briefes were addressed hither by that inclement shaueling of Rome for the
defeating of the Title and succession of our late Sovereign, of dear and
blessed memory, and his Royal issue; Yet in spite of Rome and hell, God
brought him in, and set him peaceably upon this just throne of his forefathers;
and may He perpetuate it to the fruit of those loins, till world and time
shall be no more, AMEN.

If I must follow the times, let me rather balke that hellish Sulpher-mine,
then not search it, and yet, who can look at that, any otherwise then the
Jews do at the Rainbow, with horror and astonishment? What do I tell you
of our long Peace, our full plenty, our wholesome Laws, our easefull
Government, wirh a world of of these common favors; it is for poor men to
reckon. Those two late blessings (if no more) were worthy of immortal memory,
The Prince out of Spain, Religion out of the dust; For the one; what a winter
was there in all good hearts, when our Sun was gone so far Southward? How
cheerful a Spring in his return? For the other, who saw not how Religion
began (during those purposely protracted Treaties) to droope and languish, her
friends to sigh, her enemies to insult, daring to brave us with challenges, to
threaten our ruin; The Lord looked down from heaven, and visited this poor
Vine of his, and has shaken off these Caterpillars from her then-wasting
leaves; Now we live, and it flourishes.

These would have been great favors of God, even to the best nation, but more
to us: Who have answered mercies with rebellions. O God, if proud disguises,
if gluttonous pamperings, if drunken healths, if wanton dalliances, if bloody
oaths, if merciless oppressions may earne blessings from thee, too many of us
have supererogated; VVoe is me, these are the measures thou have had from too
many hands; That thou should therefore enlarge thy bounty to an unworthy,
unkind, disobedient generation, it is more then we can wonder at, and we
could almost be ready to say with Peter, Lord depart from us, for we are
sinful men.

Yet, the wise justice of the Almighty meant not to cockney us up with mere
dainties, with a loose indulgence, but has thought fit to temper our sweetes
with tartnes, and to stricke our backs, whiles he strokes our heads, Ecce in
pace amaritudo amarissima, the comfort of our peace, was allayed with the
bitterness of death: He saw that in this common Plethorie it was fit for us
to bleed; he saw us Eeles that would not be caught, but when the waters were
troubled; He therefore sent his destroying Angel abroad; who laid about him
on all sides; What slaughter, what lamentation, what horror was there in the
streets of our mother City? More then twenty thousand families run from
their houses, as if those had been on fire over their heads; and seek shelter
in Zoar, and the mountains. Some of them are ouer-taken by the pursuer, and
drop down in the way, and lie there as woeful spectacles of mortality, till
necessity, and not charity, could find them a grave: Others pass on, and for
friends find strangers: Danger made men wisely, and unwillingly vnhospitall;
The Cozen, the Brother forgets his own blood; and the Father looks shiely upon
his own child, and welcoms him with frowns, if not with repulses* There were
that repaid their grudged harbor with infection; and those that sped best* what
with care for their abandoned houses, and estate; what with grief for the
misery of their forsaken neighbors what with the rage of those Epidemiall
diseases, which they found abroad, (as it is well observed by one, that in a
contagious time all sicknesses have some tincture of Pestilence) wore out their
days in the deepest sorrow and heaviness: there leave we them and return to
the miserable Metropolis of this kingdom, which they left. Who can express
the doleful condition of that time and place. The arms of London are the Red
Cross, and the Sword; what house almost wanted these? Here was the Red-crosse
upon the door, the Sword of Gods judgment within doors, and the Motto was,
Lord have mercy upon us,

What could we hear but alarums of death, what could we see but Trophies of
death? Here was nothing but groaning, and crying, and dying and burying: Carts
were the Beeres, wide pits were the graves, men's clothes were their coffins,
and the very Exequies of friends were murderous. The carcasses of the dead
might say, with the sons of the Prophets; Behold the place where we lie is too
strait for us; new dormitories are bought for the dead, and furnished; neither
might the corpses be allowed to lie single in their earthen beds, but are pyled
up like fagots in a stack, for the society of their future resurrection. No man
suruiued, but he might say with the Psalmist, that thousands fell at his side
and 10000. at his right hand; And if we take all together, (the mother and the
daughters) surely the number was not much short of David's, though his time were
shorter. It is not without reason, that from the Hebrew word (...) which
signifies the Plague, is derived (...) which signifies a desert; Certainly the
plague turns the most populous City into a desert. Oh the woeful desolation
of this place, it was almost come to Herba tegit Troiam; And if some infrequent
passenger crossed our streets, it was not without his medicated Posie at his
nose, and his Zedoary or Angelica in his mouth: Every room seemed a
Pesthouse, every scent mortal; here should he meet one pale ghost muffled up
under the throat; another dragging his legs after him for the tumor of his
groyne; another be-spotted with the tokens of instant death: here might he
hear one shrieking out in a frantik distraction, there, another breathing out
his soul in his last groans: What should I say more? This glorious chamber of
the Kingdom seemed no other then a dreadful dungeon to her own, a very
Golgotha to all beholders; and this proud Queen of our British Cities sat in
the dust of her compassion; howling in the rags of her sackcloth; not mourning
more then mourned for, pitied no less then forsaken; When the GOD of our
salvation looked down upon her deep afflictions and miraculously approved
unto us, that unto him belong the issues from death.

It was he that put it into the heart of his Gracious servant to command a
Niniue-like humiliation, what pithie, what passionate prayers were enjoined to
his disconsolate Church? With what holy eagerness did we devour those
fasts? How well were we pleased of the austeritie of that pious penitence?

What loud cries did beat on all sides at the gates of heaven, and with what
inexpectable, vn-conceiueable mercy were they answered? How suddenly were
those many thousands brought down to one poor unity; not a number? Other
evils were wont to come on horseback, to go away on foot; this mortality
did not post but fly away, Me thought like unto the great y^e, it sunk at
once; Only so many are stricken as may hold us awful, and so few as may leave
us thankful;

Oh, how soon is our fasting and mourning turned into laughter and joy? how
boldly do we now throng into this house of God, and fearelesly mix our
breaths in a common devotion? This is the Lords doing, and it is maruailous in
our eyes; Oh thou that hear the prayer, to thee shall all flesh come; And
let all flesh come to thee with the voice of Praise and Thanksgiving.

It might have been just with thee O God, to have swept us away in the common
destruction; what are we better then our brethren? thou have let us live that
we may praise thee. It might have been just with thee to have enlarged the
commission of thy killing Angel, and to have rooted out this sinful people
from under heaven; But in the midst of judgment thou have remembered mercy: Our
sins have not made thee forget to be gracious, nor have shut up thy loving
kindness in displeasure; Thou have wounded us, and thou have healed us again,
thou have delivered us, and been merciful to our sins for thy names sake.

Oh that we could duly praise thy name in the great Congregation, Oh that our
tongues, our hearts, our lives might bless and glorify thee, that so thou
may take pleasure to perfect this great work of our full deliverance, and to
make this Nation a dear example of thy mercy, of peace, victory, prosperity
to all the world.

In the mean time, let us call all our fellow creatures to help us bear a
part in the Praise of our God; Let the heavens, the stars, the winds, the
waters, the dewes, the frosts, the nights, the days; Let the Earth and Sea,
the mountains, wels, trees, fishes, fowls, beasts; Let men, let Saints, let
Angels bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever; blessed, blessed
for ever be the Lord who loadeth us daily with benefits; even the God of our
salvation, to whom belong the issues from death: Oh blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who only does wondrous things; And blessed be his glorious name for
ever, and ever; and let all the earth be filled with his glory. AMEN. Amen.

FINIS.

