THE CHARACTER OF MAN: Laid forth In a SERMON Preached at the COURT, March, 10.
1634.

BY The L. Bishop of EXCETER.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for NOT: BUTTER. M.DC.XXXV.



VERA EFFIGIES REVERENDI DONI ^OSEPHI HALL NORWICI EPISCOPI.

This Picture represents the Form, where dwells
(...) Mind, which nothing but that Mind excells*
There Is Wisdom, Learning, Wit; there Grace and Love
Rule over all the rest: enough to prove,
Against the froward Conscience of this Time,
The Reverend Name of BISHOP is no Crime.


(...)

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and my ever most worthily honored Lord; EDWARD, LORD
DENNY, Baron of WALTHAM, Earl of Norwich.
Right Honorable,
AS one that has no power to stand out against the importunity of him, whose
least motion is justly wont to pass with me, for a command, I have here sent
your Lo: the copy of my Sermon, lately preached at the Court; which partly the
distance, and partly the inconvenience of the place, and season would not
suffer you to hear; that now your ear may be supplied by your eye; though not
without some disadvantage on my part: Let it lie by you, as a private and
faithful Monitor instead of

Your Lops. truly and sincerely devoted in all observance, JOS. EXON.

THE CHARACTER OF MAN.
PSALM. 144. 3. Lord what is man that thou take knowledge of him; or the son
of man that thou make account of him?

Man is like unto vanity, etc.


MY Text, and so my Sermon too, is the just character of man; A common, and
stale theme, you will say; but a needful one: we are all apt to misknow or to
forget what we are; No blacks, nor soule-bells, nor deaths heads on our rings,
nor funeral sermons, nor tombs, nor Epitaphes can fix our hearts enough upon
our frail, and miserable condition; And if any man have condescended to see
his face in the true looking glass of his wretched frailty, so soon as his
back is turned he forgets his shape straight; Especially at a Court where
outward glory would seem to shoulder out the thoughts of poor despicable
mortality; Give me leave therefore, (Honorable and beloved) to ring my own
knell in your ears this day, and to call home your eyes a little, and to show
you that which I fear you too seldom see, your selves. Lent and funerals are
wont still to go both in one Livery: There is no book so well worthy reading as
this living one; Even now David spoke as a King of men, Of people subdued under
him; now he speaks as an humble vassal to God: Lord what is man that thou
take knowledge of him?

In one breath is both sovereignty and subjection; An absolute sovereignty over
his people; My people are subdued under me; An humble subjection to the God of
Kings; Lord, what is man? Yea, in the very same word wherein is the profession
of that sovereignty, there is an acknowledgement of subjection; Thou have
subdued my people; In that he had people, he was a King; that they might be his
people, a subjugation was requisite; and that subjugation was Gods, and not his
own; Thou have subdued; Lo David had not subdued his people, if God had not
subdued them for him; He was a great King, but they were a stiff people; The
God that made them swayed them to a due subjection; The great Conquerors of
worlds, could not conquer hearts, if he that molded hearts did not temper
them: By me Kings reign says the Eternal wisdom; and he that had courage
enough to encounter a Bear, a Lion, Goliath, yet can say: Thou have subdued my
people.

Contrarily, in that lowliest subjection of himself, there is an
acknowledgement of greatness; though he abaseth himself with a What is man,
yet withal, he adds, thou take knowledge of him, thou make account of
him; And this knowledge, this account of God, does more exalt man, then his own
vanity can depresse him.

My Text then, ye see, is David's rapture, expressed in an extaticall question
of sudden wonder; a wonder at God, and at man; Man's vileness: What is man?
Gods mercy and favor, in his knowledge, in his estimation of man: Lo, there
are but two lessons that we need to take out here, in the world, God, and man;
and here they are both: Man in the notion of his wretchedness; God, in the
notion of his bounty: Let us (if you please) take a short view of both, and in
the one see cause of our humiliation, of our joy and thankfulness in the
other, and if in the former, there be a sad Lent of mortification, there is in
the latter, a cheerful Easter of our raising and exaltation.

Many a one besides David, wonders at himself, one wonders at his own honor,
and though he will not say so, yet thinks What a great man am I? Is not this
great Babel which I have built? This is Nebuchadnezars wonder: Another wonders
at his person, and finds either a good face, or a fair eye, or an exquisite
hand, or a well shaped leg, or some gay fleece to admire in himself: This was
Absalous wonder: Another wonders at his wit, and learning: How came I by all
this? Turba haec. This vulgar that knows not the law, is accursed. This was
the Pharisees wonder. Another wonders at his wealth, Soul, take thine ease, as
the Epicure in the Gospel. David's wonder is as much above, as against all
these; he wonders at his vileness: Like as the chosen vessel would boast of
nothing, but his infirmities: Lord what is man?

How well this hangs together? No sooner had he said, Thou have subdued my
people under me, then he adds, Lord what is man?

Some vain heart would have been lifted up with a conceit of his own
eminence; Who I? I am not as other men; I have people under me; and people of
my own; and people subdued to me; This is to be more then a man; I know who
has said, I said ye are Gods. Besides Alexander the great, how many of the
Roman Cesars have been transported with this self-admiration, and have
challenged Temples, Altars, Sacrifices. How have they shared the months of the
year among them; April must be Neronius, May Claudius, June Germanicus,
September Antoninus, Domitian will have October, November is for Tiberius, by
the same token, that when it was tendered to him, he asked the Senate wittily (as
Xiphiline reports it) what they would do when they should have more then
twelve Cesars; But if there were not months enough for them, in the year; there
were stars enough in the Sky, there was elbow-room enough in their imaginary
heaven for their deification. What tell I you of these* a sorry Clearchus of
Pontus, as Suidas tells us, would be worshipped, and have his son called
Lightning; Menecrates the Physician (though not worthy to be Esculapius his
Apothecaries boy) yet would be Jupiter: Empedocles the Philosopher, if it had
not been for his shoo would have gone for Immortal. Sejanus will be
sacrificing to himself. I could tire you with these prodigies of pride. I could
tell you of a Xerxes that will be correcting the Hellespont, and writing
letters of threat to the mountain Athos: of one of his proud Sultan successors
Sapores that writ himself Brother to the Sun, and Moon: of his great
neighbor of China that styles himself Heir apparent to the living Sun: and
the wise Cham of Tartary, Son of the highest God; Caligula would (...) as Dio,
counter-thunder to God; and will be no less then Jupiter Latialis; And the
Scythian Roylus can say; It is easy for him to destroy all that the Sun looks
upon; Lord God! how can the vain pride of man befoole him, and carry him away
to ridiculous affectations? The man after Gods own heart is in another vain;
when he looks downward, he sees the people crouching under him, and confesses
his own just predominancy, but when he looks either upward to God, or inward
to himself, he says, Lord what is man? It should not be, it is not in the
power of earthly greatness to raise the regenerate heart above it self, or to
make it forget the true grounds of his own humiliation. Avolet, quantum volet
palea, as he said: Let the light chafe be hoised into the air, with every
wind (as Psalm. 1.) the solid grain lies close, and falls so much the lower, by
how much it is more weighty. It is but the smoke that mounts up in the furnace,
it is but the dross that swells up in the lump, the pure metal sinkes to the
bottom, if there be any part of the crucible lower then other, there you shall
find it. The proud mountains shelve off the rain, and are barren; the humble
valleys soak it up, and are fruitful. Set this pattern before you ye great
ones whom God has raised to the height of worldly honor: Oh be ye as humble as
ye are great: the more high you are in others eyes, be so much more lowly in
your own, as knowing that he was no less then a King that said, Lord what is
man?

The time was when David made this wonder upon another occasion. Psalm. 8. 3, 4.
When I see the heavens, the moon and the stars that thou have ordained, Lord
what is man? When looking over that great night-piece, and turning over the
vast volume of the world (as Gerson terms it) he saw in that large folio,
amongst those huge capital letters, what a little inse^sible daghespoint man
is, he breaks forth into an amazed exclamation Lord what is man? Indeed, how
could he do other? To compare such a mite, a mote, a nothing with that goodly
and glorious vault of heaven, and with those worlds of light, so much bigger
then so many globes of earth, hanging, and moving regularly in that bright and
spacious contignation of the firmament, it must needs astonish humane reason,
and make it ashamed of its own poorness: Certainly, if there could be any
man that when he knows the frame of the world could wonder at any thing in
himself, save his own nothingnesse, I should as much wonder at him, as at the
world it self.

There David wondered to compare man with the world; here he wonders too to
compare man, with a world of men, and to see that God had done so much for him
above others in his advancement, deliverances, victories. But if any man had
rather to take this Psalm as a sacred Rhapsody, gathered out of the 18. and 8.
and 39. Psalms; and this sentence as universal; I oppose not; Let this wonder
be general, not so much of David, a man selected, as of David, a man. These
two are well joined, Lord, What? For however man when he is considered in
himself, or compared with his fellow creatures, may be something; yet when he
comes into mention with his maker, he is less then nothing. Match him with the
beast of the field, yea of the desert; even there, however, as Chrysostom,
every beast has some one ill quality, but man has all; yet, in regard of
rule, what a jolly Lord he is; here is omnia subjecisti, thou have put all
things in subjection to him; Not the fiercest Lion, not the hugest Elephant, or
the wildest Tiger, but, either by force, or wile man becomes his master; and
though they have left that original awe, which they bare to him so soon as
ever he forsook his loyalty to his King; yet still they do, (not without
regret) acknowledge the impressions of Majesty in that upright face of his;
Wherefore are they but for man? Some for his labor as the ox; some for his
service as the horse: some for his pleasure as the dog, or the ape: some for
his exercise, as the beasts of the forest, all for man: But when we look up at
his infinite Creator, Lord what is man? O God, thou art an intelligible sphere,
whose center is every where, whose circumference is no where but in thy self:
Man is a mere center without a circumference. Thou, O God, in una essentia
omnia praehabes, in one essence forecomprisest all things, as Aquinas out of
Dionysiw; man, in a poor imperfect composition holds nothing. Thou art light,
have light, dwell in light inaccessible; Man of himself is as dark as
earth, yea as hell. Thou art God alsufficient, the very heathen could say,
((...)); It is for none but God to want nothing: Man wants all but evil;
Shortly, thou art all holiness, power, justice, wisdom, mercy, truth,
perfection: Man is nothing but defect, error, ignorance, injustice, impotence,
corruption; Lord then, what is man to thee but a fit subject for thy wrath, yet
let it be rather a meet object of thy commiseration; Behold we are vile, thou
art glorious; let us adore thine infiniteness, do thou pity our
wretchedness. Lord what is man?

Leave we comparisons; Let us take man as he is himself; It is a rule of our
old country man of Hales, the acute master of Bonaventure, that a man should
be rigidus sibi, pius aliis, rigorous to himself, kind to others: Surely, as
Nazianzen observes, in one kind, that nothing is more pleasing to talk of then
other men's businesses, so, there is nothing more easy, then for a man to be
wittily bitter in invectives against his own condition; who has not brain,
and gall enough to be a Timon, depreciari carnem hanc (as Tertullian speaks,)
to disparage humanity; and like an angry Lion to beat himself to blood with
his own stern; Neither is it more rife for dogs to bark at men, then men at
themselves. Alas, to what purpose is this currish clamor? We are miserable
enough though we would flatter our selves; To whose insultation can we be thus
exposed but to our own? I come not hither to sponge you with this vinegar, and
gall, but give me leave a little, though not to aggravate, yet to deplore our
wretchedness; There can be no ill blood in this: Amaritudo sermonum medicina
animaru^, this bitterness is medicinal, says S. Ambrose; I do not fear we
shall live so long as to know our selves too well. Lord then what is man? What
in his being? What in his depravation? How miserable in both?

What should I fetch the poor wretched infant out of the blind cavernes of
nature, to shame us with our conceptions, and to make us blush at the
substance, nourishment, posture of that which shall be a man; There he lies,
senseless for some months (as the heathen Orator truly observes,) as if he
had no soul. When he comes forth into the large womb of the world, his first
greeting of his mother is with cries and lamentations, (and more he would cry
if he could know into what a world he comes) recompencing her painful
throws with continual unquietnes; what sprawling, what wringing, what
impote^ce is here? There lies the poor little Lording of the world, not able
to help himself; whiles the new yeaned Lamb rises up on the knees, and seeks
for the teates of her damme, knowing where and how to find relief, so soon
as it begins to be. Alas, what can man do, if he be let alone, but make
faces, and noyses, and dye? Lord what is man? This is his ingresse into the
world; his progress, in it, is no better. From an impotent birth, he goes on
to a silly childhood; if no body should teach him to speak what would he do?
Historians may talk of, Bec, that the untaught infant said; I dare say he
learned it of the goats, not of nature; I shall as soon believe that Adam
spoke Dutch in Paradise according to Goropius Becanus his idle fancy, as that
the child meant to speak an articulate word unbidden: And if a mother or nurse
did not tend him, how soon would he be both noisome, and nothing; Where other
creatures stand upon their own feet and are wrapped in their own natural
mantles, and tend upon their dams for their sustenance, and find them out
amongst ten thousand.

Yea the very spider weaves so soon as ever it comes out of the egg: As Soon
as age and nurture can feoffe him in any wit, he falls to shifts; all his
ambition is to please himself in those crude humors of his young vanity: If
he can but elude the eyes of a nurse or Tutor, how safe he is? Neither is he
yet capable of any other care, but how to decline his own good, and to be a
safe truant; It is a large time that our Casuists give him, that, at seven
years, he begins to lie; Upon time and tutorage, what devises he has to
feed his appetite? what fetches to live? And if, now, many successions of
experiments have furnished him with a thousand helps, yet, as it is in the text
((...)) What is Adam, and the son of Enosh? How was it with the first man? how
with the next? Could we look so far back as to see Adam and Eve, when they were
new turned out of Paradise; in dignam exilio terram (as Nazianzen speaks of
his Pontick habitation) Oh that hard-driven, and miserable pair! The
perfection of their invention and judgment was lost in their sin; their
soul was left no less naked then the body. How woefully do we think they did
scramble to live? they had water and earth before them, but fire, an active and
useful element, was yet unknown; Plants they had, but metalls whereby they
might make use of those plants, and redact them to any form, for instruments
of work, were yet (till Tubal-cain) to seek. Here was Adam delving with a
jawbone, and harrowing with sticks tied uncouthly together, and paring his
nails with his teeth: there Eve making a comb of her fingers; and tying her
raw-skin'd breeches together with rindes of trees, or pinning them up with
thorns. Here was Adam tearing off some arm of a tree, to drive in those
stakes which he has pointed with some sharp flint; there Eve fetching in her
water in a shell; Here Adam the first mid* wife to his miserable consort, and
Eve wrapping her little one in a skin, lately borrowed from some beast; and
laying it on a pillow of leaves, or grass; Their fist was their hammer, their
hand their dish, their arms and legs their ladder, heaven their Canopy, and
earth their fetherbed; and now ((...)) What is Adam? In time Art began to
improve nature; Every days experiments brought forth something; and now, man
durst affect to dwell, not safe, but fair; to be clad, not warm but fine; and
the palate waxt by degrees, wanton, and wild; the back and the belly strove
whether should be more luxurious; and the eye affected to be more prodigal then
they both; and ever since, the ambition of these three has spent, and wearyed
the world; so as in the other extreme we may well cry out, Lord what is man?

For, to rise up with his age and the worlds now, when man is grown ripe in all
professions, an exquisite artist, a learned Philosopher, a stout champion, a
deep politician, whither does he bend all his powers, but to attain his own
ends, to cross another? to greaten himself, to supplant a rival, to kill an
enemy, to embroile a world; Man's heart (as Bernard well) is a mill, ever
grinding some grist, or other, of his own devise; and I may add, if there be
no grain to work upon, sets it self on fire. Lord what is man? (even after the
accession of a professed Christianity) but a butcher of his own kind? Seneca
told his Lucilius (the same that Job has) that vivere militare est; It is true
now not morally but literally: What a woeful shambles is Christendom it self
ever since the last Comet becomne. Friar Dominick was according to his mothers
dream a dog with a fire brand in his mouth, sure ever since, religion has been
fiery and bloody. Homicida cucurbitarum, was the style that S. Austin gave to
Manicheus; now every man abroad strives to be bomicida Christianorum: As if men
were grown to the resolution of the old Tartars, of who^ Haytonus; they
thought it no sin to kill a man, but not to pull off their horses bridle when
he should feed, this they held mortal. What hills of carcasses are here? What
rivers of blood; At tu domine usquequo? How long Lord, how long shall men play
the men in killing? and seek glory in these ambitious murders. Oh stay, stay
thou preserver of men, these impetuous rages of inhumane mankind, and scatter
the people that delight in war: And blessings be upon the anointed head of
the King of our peace, under whose happy scepter we enjoy these calm and
comfortable times, whiles all the rest of the world is weltring in blood, and
scorching in their mutual flames; May all the blessings of our peace return
upon him, who is (under God) the author of these blessings, and upon his seed
for ever, and ever.

How willingly would I now forget (as an old man easily might) to turn back to
the dispositions, studies, courses of man, commonly bent upon the prosecution
whether of his lust, or malice: Woe* is me, how is his time spent? In hollow
visits, in idle courtings, in Epicurean pamperings, in fantastic dressings, in
lawless disports, in deep plots, crafty conveyances, quarrelous lawsuits,
spightfull underminings, corrading of riches, coze^ing in co^tracts, revenging
of wrongs, suppressing the emulous, oppressing inferiors, mutining against
authority, eluding of laws, and what shall I say? in doing all but what he
should, so as in this, man approves Polybius his word too true, that he is both
the craftiest of all creatures, and most vicious; and in the best and all his
ways makes good the word in my text (even in this sense) Man is like unto
vanity; yea like is not the same; Man is altogether vanity. Psalm. 39. 6. Indeed
so more then vanity that we may rather say vanity is like to man; What a deal
of variety of vanity here is; Ones is a starved vanity, another a pamperd one;
ones a loviall vanity, another a sullen one; ones a silken vanity, another a
ragged one; ones a careless vanity, another a carking; and all these rivulets
run into one common Ocean of vanity, at last, universa vanitas omnis homo; In
this busy variety does he wear out the time and himself, till age or
sickness summon him to his dissolution; But the whiles, in the few minutes of
our life, how are our drams of pleasure lost in our pounds of gal; Anguish of
soul, troubles of mind, distempers of body, losses of estate, blemishes of
reputation, miscariages of children, mis-casualties, unquietness, pains,
griefs, fears take up our hearts, and forbid us to enjoy, not happiness, but
our very selves; so as our whole life sits like Augustus, inter suspiria and
lachrymas betwixt sighs and tears; and all these hasten us on to our end; and
woe is me, how soon is that upon us? I remember Gerson brings in an Englishman
asking a Frenchman Quot annos habes? (how many years are you?) a usual latin
phrase when we ask after a man's age; his answer is Annos non habeo; I am of no
years at al, but death has forborne me these fifty; Surely we cannot make
account of one minute: besides the vanity of unprofitablenesse, here is the
vanity of transitorinesse. How does the momentaninesse of this misery add to
the misery; what a flower, a vapor, a smoke, a bubble, a shadow, a dream of a
shadow our life is? We are going, and then a careless life is shut up in a
disconsolate end, and God thinks it enough to threat, Ye shall die like men:
Alas, this wormeaten apple soon falls; vitreum hoc corpusculum (as Erasmus
terms it) is soon cracked, and broken. It is not for every one to have his
soul sucked out of his mouth with a kiss as the Jews say of Moses. He that
came into the world with cries, goes out with groans; The pangs of death, the
anguish of conscience, the shrieking of friends, the frights of hell meet now
together to render him perfectly miserable, and now, Lord, what is man? Well,
he dies, says the Psalmist, and then all his thoughts perish; Lo what a word
here is? All his thoughts perish. What is man but for his thoughts? Those are
the only improvement of reason, and that in an infinite variety: One bends his
thoughts upon some busy controversies, perhaps nec gemino ab ovo; another,
upon some deep plot of State to be molded up (like to China clay) some hundred
years after, another, has cast models in his brain of some curious fabric
wherewith he will enrich the surface of the earth; another has in his active
imagination hookt in his neighbors inheritance, and takes care to convey it;
one studies Art, another fraud, another the art of fraud; one is laying a
foundation for future greatness, as low as hell; another, is laying on a
gilded roof where is no firm foundation, each one is taken up with several
thoughts, when he dies all those thoughts perish; all those castles in the
air ((...), as Aristophanes his word is) vanish to nothing; only his ill
thoughts stick by him, and wait on his soul to his hell: But I have not yet
done with the body: Rameses which signifies worms, is our last station in
this wilderness; yet one step lower e corpore vermes, e vermibus faetor, as
Bernard well: He that was rotted with disorder, would be sweetened with odors;
but it is more then all Arabia can do, neither is there more horror in the
face of death, then in his breath, noisomeness. Lord what is man? But alas, it
is well for this part that it is for the time senseless; the living Spirit
pays the while for all, which if it be but a mere man's, is hurried by devils
immediately, into the dreadful regions of horror, and death, and there lies for
ever, and ever, and ever in unsufferable, unutterable, unconceivable torments,
without all possibility of intermission, of mitigation. Oh woe woe woe to those
miserable souls that ever they were created. And now, Lord what is man?

Ye have seen man divided by his times, in his ingresse, progress, egresse;
or, in Lactantius his terms, in his original, state, dissolution: See him
now, at one glance, divided in his parts, Bernards two mites, A body and a
soul; What is man then? A goodly creature he is: When I look upon this
stirring pile, I can say, I am fearfully, and wonderfully made. Lord, I can
admire thee in me, and yet abase my self: thou art so much more wonderful in
thy works, by how much I am viler: What is this body of mine but a piece of
that I tread upon, a sack of dust (if not saccus stercorum as Bernard) a sewer
of ill humors, a magazine of diseases, a feast of worms; And as for that
better part, the inmate of this ragged cottage, though as it proceeds from
thee, it is a pure immortal spirit, a spark of thine heavenly fire, a glimpse
of thy divine light, yet as it is mine, how can I pity it? Alas, how dark it
is with ignorance? For what have I here but that cognitionem nocturnam, which
Aquinas yields to worse creatures, how foul and muddy with error, nec quis
error turpitudine caret, there is no error that is not nasty as Austin truly;
how earthly and gross with mis-affections; praecedit carnem in crimine, it
ushers the flesh in sinful courses, as Bernard; how as unlike thee, as like
him that marred it? And, if both parts in their kind were good, yet put
together they are naught; Earth is good, and water is good, yet put together
they make mudd and mire. Lord then what is man?

Such is nature now in her best dress, but if ye look upon her in the worst of
her depravation, ye shall not more wonder at her misery, then her ugly
deformity; (Materia vilis, operatio turpis as Bernard) and in a detestation
(more then pity) of her loathlinesse, shall cry out, Lord what is man? I do
not tell you of bloody Turks, man-eating Canniballs, mungrell Troglodites
feeding upon buried carcasses, Patavian pandarisme of their own daughters, or
of miserable Indians idolatrously adoring their divellish Pagodes, I meddle not
with these remote prodigies of lost humanity; Yet these go for men too, I
speak of more civil wickedness, incident to the ordinary courses of men. It
is sweetly said of S. Chrysostom; Alas, what is sickness, what is blindness,
nihil sunt ista o homo; These are nothing, unum duntaxat malum est peccare,
there is no evil to sin: If then man be such, as man, what is he as a sinner?
when his eyes are the burning glasses of concupiscence, his tongue a razor of
detraction, his throat an open sepulcher of good names or patrimonies, his
heart a mint of treasons, and villainies, his hands the engines of fraud and
violence; Shortly, when he is debaucht with lust, with riot, with intemperance;
transported with pride, insolence, fury; pardon me, now, man is a beast, Psalm.
74. that is yet too easy, a monster; yet once more pardon me, a devil; if
the word seem too harsh, it is my Saviors unus vestrum diabolus, one of you
is a devil; In this case, his best is vanity, his next wickedness, his worst
is despair and damnation. Is there any of you now that hears me this day,
that finds cause to be in love with, or proud of himself as a man? Let me see
him, and bless my self: Surely, if there be glory in shame, power in
impotence, pleasure in misery, safety in danger, beauty in deformity, he has
reason. I remember the learned Chancellor of Paris, when in his tract upon the
Magnificat, he describes beauty, to be conformitas exemplaris; he instances
that if we see a toad well and lively pictured, We say Ecce pulchre pictum
bufonem; Oh the loathly beauty of our conformity, to the natural condition of
man, yea of Satan in him. The philosopher did well to thank God that he was a
man, but, if I had been by him, I should have bidden him to bewail himself
that he was but a man; and, I say to every of you, whom I now see, and speak
unto; that if ye be but men, it had been better ye had never been; If men, ye
are but (...). 1 Cor. 3. 3. so the vulgar turns it, men are but flesh, and
flesh is a title given to the Egyptian horses, by way of disparagement too;
Their horses are but flesh Esa. 31. 3. and flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God, it can, it does, it must inherit misery, sorrow, corruption,
torment; It cannot claim, it cannot hope, for more, for other patrimony. Oh
then, as you tender your own eternal safety, be not quiet till ye be more
then men; till ye have passed a new birth; It was wise Zenoes word, Difficile
est hominem exuere; it is hard to put off the man; hard, but necessary, off he
must, Nisi me mutassem was Socrates his word; till then, your condition, (what
ever it may be in civil and secular regards) is unexpressibly woeful. That
same interior cordis homo, the inner man of the heart (the phrase whereof S.
Ambrose does so much wonder at in S. Peter) is that, which ye must both find,
and look to; Otherwise, let your outside be never so beautiful, never so
glorious, ye are no better then misery it self. Down then, dust and ashes,
down with those proud plumes of the vainmisco^ceits of thine own goodlinesse,
beauty, glory: Think thy self but so vile as thou art, there will be more
danger of thy self contempt: Would our vain dames bestow so much curious cost
on this woeful piece, if they could see themselves, as well as their glasses?
Who is so foolish to cast away gilding upon a clay wall, or a cracked pitcher;
yea to enamell a bubble? would our gallants so overpamper this worms meat, if
they could be sensible of their own vileness? The Chancellor of Paris tells
us of King Jews the Saint, that he regarded not, quam delicato cibo stercus
conficeretur, nec coquus vermium esse volebat; he would be no cook for the
worms; such would be our resolution, if we knew our selves. Oh seasonable
and just prayer of David! Let them know they are but men! Could they know this,
how many insolences, and proud outrages would be spared? how many good
hours, how many useful creatures would escape their luxurious wast?

It is out of mere ignorance that man is so over-glad of himself, so puffed up
above his brethren; There are but two things, as one notes well, that the
natural man is most proud of, Knowledge, and Power; Surely if he had one of
these to purpose, he could be proud of neither, know thy self, O man, and be
proud if thou can. Why then does the rich Landlord grate upon his poor
scraping Tenant? Why does the silken courtier brow-beat his russet countriman?
Why do potent Lords (decepti floridate purpurae as Ambrose speaks) trample
upon that peasantly mold, which nature has, not in kind, differenced from
their own; since, if great ones could be more men, they would be more
miserable. Why do we, how dare we insult on each other since we are all under
one common doom of miserable mortality? Why do we fix our thoughts upon
these cottages of clay, which are every hour going into dust, and not make
sure work for those glorious and eternal mansions wherein dwells our
interminable, and incomprehensible blessedness, longing that this mortal may
put on immortality, this corruptible incorruption, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

Do not think now that I have all this while done, as I have seen some in a
throng, or as hood-winkt boys in their sport struck my friends. The regenerate
man is an Angelical creature; And man, what ever he be in other regards, yet,
as he comes out of Gods mold, is the great masterpiece of his Creator, ((...))
thou have taken knowledge of him: and ((...)) reputasti eum; thou make
account of him: Turn your eyes then from man's vileness, to the more pleasing
object of Gods mercy; and, as you have seen man in the dust of his abasement,
so now, see him in the throne of his exaltation: This grain after a little
frost-biting will sprout up the more; If elsewhere, the Psalmist say, Elevans
allisisti; here it is allisum elevasti.

It is a great word; thou take knowledge of him; Alas, what knowledge do we
take of the gnats, that play in the sun, or the Ants, or worms, that are
crawling in our grounds? yet the disproportion betwixt us and them is but
finite; infinite betwixt God and us. Thou the great God of heaven to take
knowledge of such a thing as man? If a mighty Prince shall vouchsafe to spy
and single out a plain homely swain in a throng (as the great Sultan did lately
a Tankerd-bearer) and take special notice of him, and call him but to a kiss
of his hand, and nearenesse to his person, he boasts of it, as a great favor;
For thee, then, O God, who abasest thy self to behold the things in heaven it
self, to cast thine eye, upon so poor a worm, as man, it must needs be a
wonderful mercy: Exigua pauperibus magna, as Nazianzene to his Amphilochius.
But God takes knowledge of many that he regards not; he knows the proud
afar off, but he hates him; That of S. Austins is right, we are sometimes
said not to know that which we approve not, it is therefore added,
reputastieum, thou make account of him; An high account indeed; David learned
this of Job; whose word is, Thou magnifiest him, and set thy heart upon
him. Job 7. 17. Now this knowledge, this account is by David here, either
appropriated to himself as a King, or diffused, and communicated to him as a
man. The fore-text appropriates it; the subtext communicates it. In the
immediate words before, had David reported what God did for him as a King, that
he was his tower for safety, his deliverer from danger, his shield for
protection, his subduer of his enemies, for rule; and now he adds, Lord what
is man that thou take knowledge of him; and the son of man that thou make
account of him; intimating, that this knowledge, this account is of David, as a
man of men ((...)) a King of men; as the Grecians title had wont to be. It is
Gods truth, it can be neither paradoxe, nor parasitisme, to say that God takes
special knowledge, and makes special account of Kings; especially the Kings
of his Israel. I have found David my servant; (...)
with my holy oil have I anointed him. Psalm. 88. 21. See what a peculiarity
here is: My servant, first, by a propriety, by a supereminence. My servant
found out or singled from the rest of mankind, for public administration; My
anointed, when other heads are dry; Anointed with holy oil, yea Gods holy
oil, whiles other heads with common. What should I tell you of their special
ordination, Romans 13. 1. Immediate deputation, Psalm. 2. Communication of titles,
Exodus 22. 28. (...) specially of charge and protection; 2 Samuel 22. 44. Thus
then being chosen, thus anointed, thus ordained, thus deputed, thus entitled,
thus protected, well may they acknowledge more then common knowledge and
account. What will follow hence, but that they owe more to God then other men;
since more respect calls for more duty; and, that we owe unto them, those
respects, and observances, which Gods estimation calls for from us. Homage,
obedience, tribute, prayers, lives, are due from us to Gods Vicegerents; There
are nations of whom God may say Dedi eis regem in ira: Even such yet must have
all these duties; But when the influences of sovereignty are sweet and gentle,
Sicut ros super herbam, we cannot too much pour out our selves, into gratitude
to God for them, to them under God. Even so, O thou God of Kings, still, and
ever double this knowledge and dear account of thine, upon that thy Servant,
whom thou have chosen, anointed, ordained, protected, to be the great
instrument of our peace, and thy glory.

Let us now see the favor diffused, to David, not as a King, but as a man: A
subject not more large, then pleasing; what can be more pleasing then to hear
our own praises? what more ample then Gods mercies to man? we must but
((...)); and like skillful limmers, draw up this large face, in a
penny-breadth; or like good market men, carry but an handful to sell the whole
sack. O God, what a goodly creature have thou made man? Even this very outside
wants not his glory: The matter cannot disparage it. If thou made this body
of earth, thou made the heavens of nothing; what a perfect symmetry is here
in this frame? what an admirable variety (as Zeno noted of old) even of faces,
all like, all unlike each other? what a Majesty in that erected countenance?
what a correspondence to heaven? How does the head of this microcosme resemble
that round celestial globe, and the eyes the glittering stars in that
firmament, and the intellectual powers in it those Angelical, and spiritual
natures which dwell there? What should I stand courting of man in all the rest.
There is not one limme, or parcel in this glorious fabric, wherein there is
not both use, and beauty, and wonder. The superior members give influence, and
motion to the lower, the lower, supportation to the superior, the middle
contribute nourishment to both: Was it heresy; or frenzy, or blasphemy, or all
these, in the Paternians of old; revived of late times, by Postellus at Paris,
that man's lower parts were of a worse author? Away with that mad misanthropy:
there is no inch of this living pile, which does not bewray steps of an allwise
and holy omnipotence.

But oh the inside of this exquisite piece. As Socrates, Cleanthes, and
Anaxarchus, though heathens, truly said; That is the man, this is but the case.
Surely this reasonable soul is so divine a substance, and the faculties of it
invention, memory, judgment so excellent; that it self has not power enough
to admire its own worth, what corner of earth, what creek of sea, what span of
heaven is unsearcht by it? how has it surrounded this globe, and calculated
the stars, and motions of the other? what simple, or what metal, or mineral
can be hid from it? what eclipse or conjunction, or other postures of those
celestial bodies can escape its certain prediction? Yea, O Lord, it can
aspire, and attain to know thee the God of spirits, the wonderful mysteries
of thy salvation; to apprehend I mean, never (oh never) to comprehend the
wonderful relations of thy blessed, and incomprehensible essence; Divinae
particula aurae. Lord what is man that thou thus make account of him?

I fear I shall make this Topaze but so much the darker by polishing; but, as
we may, shortly; Next to that the tongue has not skill enough to tell the
wonders of it self. That little filme the interpreter of the soul how sweet
notes, how infinite varieties of expressions can it form; and wel-neare utter
what ever the mind can conceive; where other creatures ca^ but bleat, or
bellow, or bray, or grunt, not exceeding the rude uniformity of their own
natural sound: By this, we can both understa^d our selves, and bless our
maker; whence it is that David justly styles his tongue, his glory.

Besides his person, how have thou, o God, ennobled him with privileges of his
condition? How have thou made him the sole survayor of heaven, the Lord of the
creatures, the commander of the earth, the charge of Angels? Lord, what is man
that thou make this high account of him?

But, what is all this, yet, in comparison of what thou have done for our
souls? I am now swallowed up, O God, with the wonder, and astonishment of thy
unconceiveable mercies. What shall I say, that ere the world was, thou lovedst
man that should be; with an everlasting love have thou embraced him, who^ thou
madst happy, and foresawest forlorn, and miserable. The Angels fell, thou
lettedst them go; Man fell; and, oh thou blessed Son of the eternal Father,
thou would rather divest thy self of the robes of heavenly glory, and come
down, and put on these rags of our flesh, and therein endure the miseries of a
servile life, the scorns of wretched men, the pains of a bitter, and accursed
death, the wrath of thy blessed, and coessentiall Father, then men should not
be recovered; By thy stripes are we healed, by thy blood we are redeemed, by
thy death we are quickened, by thy Spirit we are renewed, by thy merits we are
saved; and now Lord, what an account is this thou have made of man?

What a wonderful honor is this to which thou have advanced us? By thee, O
Savior, we are not only reconciled to God, but of strangers are become
servants of the high God. Acts 16. 17. Servants? yea friends. James 2. 23. yea
sons; the sons of the highest. Luc. 6. 35. Sons? yea heirs, Haeredes cum re as
S. Ambrose; coheires with Christ, Romans 8. coinheritors of immortal glory. 1
Pet. 3. 22.

Yea, that, which all the Angels of heaven stand still amazed at, and can never
be satisfied with admiring, thou have carried up this humane nature of ours
into the inseparable union with the ever glorious, and blessed Godhead, to be
adored of all principalities, and powers, and thrones, and dominions of heaven.

Lo I, that even now could have been sorry that I was a man, begin now to be
holily proud of my condition; and know not whether I may change the man for the
Angel. Pardon me, ye glorious Spirits; I durst not speak thus big of my self,
but in the right of my Savior, I dare, and must; non assumpsit Angelum sed
hominem; Howsoever man is lower then you; (Alas what should dust and ashes talk
of comparing with spiritual and heavenly powers?) yet I am sure the Son of man
is above you; In him will I glory: In it self your nature is so much above
ours, as it is more spiritual, and nearer to your infinite Creator: but if the
Son of God has advanced our nature above yours in uniting it to the deity,
we cannot so much praise his mercy as you do for us. Yea O ye blessed Angels
(whose greatness though we must not adore, yet we cannot but awfully
acknowledge with due veneration) I may boldly say, ye hold it in no scorn to be
((...),) serviceable spirits to the behoof of us weak and sinful men. Heb. 1.
ult. Ye behold the face of our heavenly father for us. Mat. 18. Ye bear us in
your arms that we dash not our feet against the stones of offense. Ps. 91. Ye
pitch your tents about us for our defense: Ye rejoice in heaven at our
conversion; Ye carry up our parting souls into the bosom of Abraham. As this
is a wonderful joy and honor to us; so can it be no derogation from your
celestial glory and magnificence, since he whom ye profess to serve with us
professes that he the Son of man came not to be served; but to serve. Oh now
what can we want when we have such purveiors? What can we fear whiles we have
such Gardians? whiles we have such conveyance what can let us from ascending
into our heaven?

How justly do we now exult in the glory of manhood, thus attended, thus
united? But, soft, that our rejoicing be not vain, whiles our nature is thus
glorious, our person may be miserable enough. Except we be in Christ, united
to the Son of God, we are never the better for the uniting of this manhood to
God: Where should ambition dwell but at a Court? Oh, be ye ambitious of this
honor, which will make you everlastingly happy. What ever become of your
earthly greatness, strive to be found in Christ, to be partakers of the divine
nature, to be favorites of heaven. It is a great word that Zozomen speaks of
Apollonius, that he never asked any thing in all his life, of God, that he
obtained not; if we follow his rule, we shall be sure to be no less happy.
And now being thus dignified by the knowledge, by the account of God, how
should we strive to walk worthy of so high favors, both in the duty of
selfe-estimation, and of gratitude.

Selfe-estimation. For if God make such account of us, why do not we make high
account of our selves? I know I do now spur a free horse, when I wish every
man to think well of one; but there is an holy pride, that I must commend unto
you, with S. Ierom; a pride as good, as the other is sinful; that, since God
has so advanced you, you should hold your selves too good to be the drudges of
sin, the pack-horses of the world, the vassals of satan; and think these
sublunary vanities too base to carry away your hearts; It was a brave word of
the old Jewish Courtier Nehemiah, Should such a man as I flee? Say ye so, ye
regenerate souls. Should such a man as I debauch and sin? should such a man as
I play the beast? Is it for my upright face to grovell? Is it for my affections
to walk on all four? No, let beasts be sensual, let devils be wicked, let my
heart be as upright as my face. I will hate to shame my pedigree; and scorn
all the base and misbecomming pleasures of sin, and will bear my self worthy
of the favorite of heaven.

Gratitude. In retribution of praise, and obedience. O God, thou might have
made made me a beast, yea the ugliest of crawling vermin, that I run away
from; I could not have challe^ged thee; thy will and thy works are free, thy
power absolute; and lo, thou have made me thy darling, the quintessence of thy
Creation, man. I will praise thee for I am fearfully and wonderfully made.

Thou might have past by me as an outcast reprobate soul; and so, it had
bin a thousand times better for me never to have been; But thou have bought me
with a price. I will praise thee, for I am no less wonderfully redeemed; O
God, nothing but man, and man regenerate, of all the visible works of thy
hands, is capable to give thee the glory of thy mighty creation, of thy
gracious redemption. The lowest rank of creatures have not life, the next have
not sense, the third have not reason; None but the last has grace to return
thee the praise of thy blessed power, and mercy: Oh let not us be wanting unto
thee, who have thus superabounded unto us.

But this is not all. Thanks is a poor windy payment. Our returns to God
must be real; Quid retribuam? what should we render to our God less then all?
Yea, all is too little for one mercy. We owe our selves to thee, O God, as our
Creator. What have we to give to thee as our bounteous redeemer, as our
gracious sanctifier? Thou that owe all, take all. Oh that our bodies, souls,
lives, actions could be wholly consecrated to thee; Oh that we could really,
and constantly begin here those Alleluiahs, which we shall ever continue above,
amids the Quire of Saints and Angels giving all praise and honor, and glory,
and immortality to thee O blessed Father our Creator, to thee O blessed and
coeternall Son our Redeemer, to thee O blessed and coessentiall Spirit our
sanctifier, one infinite God, in three most glorious and incomprehensible
persons now and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

