THE PASSION SERMON, PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS on Good Friday. Apr. 14. 1609.

By I. H.

LONDON Printed by W. S. for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Bull-head.

ANNO. 1609.

TO THE ONLY HONOR AND GLORY OF GOD MY DEAR AND BLESSED SAVIOVR (WHICH HAS
DONE AND SVFFERED ALL THESE THINGS FOR MY SOVLE.)
HIS WEAK AND UNWORTHY SERVANT HVMBLIE DESIRES TO CONSECRATE HIMSELF AND HIS
POOR LABOVRS: BESEECHING HIM TO ACCEPT AND BLESS THEM TO THE PVBLIKE GOOD,
AND TO THE PRAISE OF HIS OWN GLORIOUS NAME.

To the Reader.
I Desire not to make any Apology for the Edition of this my Sermon: It is
motive enough, that herein I affect a more public and more enduring good.
Spiritual niceness, is the next degree to unfaithfulness: This point cannot
be too much urged, either by the tongue, or press. Religion and our souls
depend upon it, yet are our thoughts too much beside it. The Church of Rome, so
fixes her self (in her adoration) upon the Cross of Christ, as if she forgot
his glory: Many of us so conceive of him glorious, that we neglect the
meditation of his Cross, the way to his glory and ours. If we would proceed
aright, we must pass from his Golgotha, to the mount of Olives, and from
thence to heaven, and there seek and settle our rest. According to my weak
ability, I have led this way in my speech, beseeching my Readers to follow me
with their hearts, that we may overtake him which is entered into the true
sanctuary, even the highest heavens, to appear now in the sight of God for us.

THE PASSION SERMON.
JOHN. 19. VERSE 30. When Jesus therefore had received the Vinegar, he said; It
is finished: and bowing the head, he gave up the ghost.


THE bitter and yet victorious Passion of the Son of GOD (right Honorable
and beloved Christians) as it was the strangest thing that ever befell the
earth: So, is both of most sovereign use, and looks for the most frequent and
careful meditation. It is one of those things, which was once done, that it
might be thought of for ever. Every day therefore must be the Good Friday of a
Christian* who, with that great Doctor of the Gentiles, must desire to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

There is no branch or circumstance in this wonderful business, which yeeldes
not infinite matter of discourse. According to the solemnity of this time and
place, I have chosen to commend unto your Christian attention, our Saviors
Farewell to Nature (for his reviving was above it) in his last word in his last
act. His last word, It is finished, his last act, He gave up the ghost: That
which he said, he did. If there be any theme that may challenge and command
our ears and hearts, this is it; for, behold; the sweetest word that ever
Christ spoke, and the most meritorious act that ever he did, are met together
in this his last breath. In the one ye shall see him triumphing; yielding in
the other, yet so as he ouercomes. Imagine therefore, that you saw Christ
jesus, in this day of his passion (who is every day here crucified before your
eyes) advanced upon the chariot of his Cross, and now, after a weary conflict,
cheerfully ouerlooking the despite and shame of men, the wrath of his Father,
the law, sin, death, hell; which all lie gasping at his foot: and then you
shall conceive, with what spirit he says, Consummatum est, It is finished.
What is finished? Shortly; All the prophesies, that were of him; All legal
observations, that prefigured him; his own sufferings; Our salvation. The
prophesies are accomplished, the ceremonies abolisht, his sufferings ended, our
salvation wrought: these four heads shall limit this first part of my speech,
only let them find and leave you attentive.

Even this very word is prophesied of; All things that are written of me have
an end, says Christ. What end? this, It is finished: this very end has his
end here. What therefore is finished? not this prediction only of his last
draught, as Augustine, that were too particular. Let our Savior himself say,
All things that are written of me by the Prophets. It is a sure and
conuertible rule; Nothing was done by Christ, which was not for told, nothing
was ever foretold by the Prophets of Christ, which was not done. It would take
up a life to compare the Prophets and Evangelists, the predictions and the
history, and largely to discourse how the one foretells, and the other
aunsweres; let it suffice to look at them running. Of all the Evangelists, S.
Matthew has been most studious, in making these references and
correspondences; with whom, the burden or vndersong of every event, is still
(vt impleretur) That it might be fulfilled. Thus has he noted (if I have
reckoned them aright) two and thirty several prophesies concerning Christ,
fulfilled in his birth, life, death.

Esaias 7.14. Mat. 1.23. Zach. 9.9. Mat. Ibidem. Mich. 5.2. Mat. 2.6. Iere. 7.11.
Mat. 21.13. Esaias. 11.1. Mat. 2.15. Psalm. 8.2. Mat. 21.16. Ier. 31.15. Mat.
2.18. Esaias. 5.8. Mat. 21.33. Judge. 13.5. Mat. 2. vlt. Psalm. 118.22. Mat. 21.44.
Esa. 40.3. Mat. 3.2. Psalm. 110.1. Mat. 22.44. Esaias 9.1. Mat. 4.15. Esaias. 8.14.
Mat. 21.44. Leu. 14.4. Mat. 8.4. Psalm. 41.9. Mat. 26.31. Esaias 53.4. Mat. 8.17.
Esaias. 53.10. Mat. 26.54. Esaias 61.1. Mat. 11.4. Zach. 13.7. Mat. 26.31. Esaias
42.1. Mat. 12.17, Lam. 4.20. Mat. 26.56. Iona. 1.17. Mat. 12.40. Esaias. 50.6.
Mat. 26.67. Esaias 6.9. Mat. 13.14. Zac. 11.13. Mat. 27.9. Psalm. 78.2. Mat.
13.35. Psalm. 22.18. Mat. 27.35. Es. 35.5.6. Mat. 15.30. Psalm. 22.2. Mat. 27.46.
Es. 62.11. Mat. 21.5. Psalm. 69.22. Mat. 27.48.

To which Saint John adds many more. Our speech must be directed to his
Passion; omitting the rest, let us insist in those.

He must be apprehended: it was fore-prophesied; The Anointed of the Lord was
taken in their nets, says Jeremy: but how? he must be sold: for what? thirty
silver pieces, and what must those do? buy a field, all foretold; And they
took thirty silver pieces, the price of him that was valued, and gave them for
the Potters field, says Zachary (miswritten Jeremy, by one letter mistaken in
the abbreuiation, by whom? that child of perdition, that the Scripture might
be fulfilled. Which was he? It is foretold; He that eats bread with me,
says the Psalmist. And what shall his Disciples do? Run away, so says the
prophecy: I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered,
says Zachary. What shall be done to him? he must be scourged and spit upon:
behold, not those filthy excrements could have light upon his sacred face,
without a prophecy; I hid not my face from shame and spitting, says Esaias.
what shall be the issue? In short, he shall be led to death: it is the
prophecy, the Messiah shall be slain, says Daniel: what death? he must be
lift up* Like as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wildenesse, so shall the
son of man be lift up. Chrysostom says well, that some actions are
parables; so may I say, some actions are prophesies, such are all types of
Christ, and this with the foremost. Lift up, whither? to the Cross, (...).
it is the prophecy, hanging upon a tree, says Moses, how lift up? nailed to
it, so is the prophecy, foderunt manus, they have pierced my hands and my
feet, says the Psalmist: with what company? two thieves, with the wicked was
he numbered, says Esaias: where? without the gates says the prophecy: what
becomes of his garments? they cannot so much as cast the dice for his coat,
but it is prophesied, They divided my garments, and on my vestures cast lots,
says the Psalmist: he must die then on the Cross, but how? voluntarily. Not
a bone of him shall be broken: what hinders it? lo, there he hangs, as it were
neglected, and at mercy, yet all the raging Jews, no, all the Devils in hell
cannot stir one bone in his blessed body: It was prophesied in the
Easter-Lambe, and it must be fulfilled in him, that is the true Passover, in
spite of fiendes and men: how then? he must be thrust in the side: behold not
the very spear could touch his precious side being dead, but it must be
guided by a prophecy; They shall see him whom they have thrust thorough,
says Zachary: what shall he say the while? not his very words but are
forespoken: his complaint, Eli Eli lamma sabactani, as the Chalde, or (...) as
the Hebrew, Psalm 22.2. his resignation: In manus tuas, Into thy bands I
commend my spirit, Psalm 31.5. His request, Father forgive them: He prayed
for the transgressors, says Esaias. And now when he saw al these prophesies were
fulfilled, knowing that one remained, he said, I thirst, Domine, quid sitis?
says one, O LORD, what thirstest thou for? A strange hearing, that a man, yea
that GOD and MAN dying should complain of thirst.

Could he endure the scorching flames of the wrath of his Father, the curse of
our sins, those tortures of body, those horrors of soul, and does he shrink
at his thirst? no, no: he could have borne his drought, he could not bear the
Scripture not fulfilled. It was not necessity of nature, but the necessity of
his Fathers decree, that drew forth this word, I thirst. They offered it
before, he refused it: whether it were an ordinary potion for the condemned
to haste^ death (as in the story of M. Anthony) which is the most received
construction, or whether it were that Jewish potion, whereof the Rabbines
speak; whose tradition was, that the malefactor to be executed, Sit mors mea
in remissio nem omnium iniquitatum mearum.
should after some good counsel from two of their Teachers, be taught to say;
Let my death be to the remission of all my sins; and then, that he should
have given him a boule of mixed wine, Vt vsus rationis tollatur.
with a grain of Frankincense, to bereave him both of reason and pain.

I durst be confident in this latter; the rather for that Saint Mark calls
this draught, (...), Myrrh wine, mingled (as is like) with other ingredients.
And Montanus agrees with me in the end, ad stupore^ and mentis alienationem; A
fashion which Galatine observes out of the Sannedrim, to be grounded upon
Proverbs, 31.6. Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, I leave it
modestly in the midst; let the learneder judge* whatsoever it were, he would
not die till he had complained of thirst, and in his thirst tasted it: Neither
would he have thirsted for, or tasted any but this bitter draught; that the
Scripture might be fulfilled; They gave me vinegar to drink: And lo, now
Consu^matum est; all is finished.

If there be any Jew amongst you, that like one of John's unseasonable
Disciples, shall ask, Art thou he, or shall we look for another? He has
his answer; ye men of Israel, why stand you gazing and gaping for another
Messiah? In this alone, all the Prophesies are finished; and of him alone, all
was prophesied, that was finished. Paul's old rule holds still. To the Jews a
stumbling block; and that more ancient Curse of David, Let their table be
made a snare; And Steuens two brands sticks still in the flesh of these
wretched men: One in their neck, (...).
stiffenecked, the other in their heart; uncircumcised; the one, Obstinacy,
(...)
the other Unbelief: stiff necks indeed, that will not stoop and relent
with the yoke of sixeteen hundred years judgment and seruility; uncircumcised
hearts, the fi^me of whose unbelief, would not be cut off with so infinite
conuictions. Oh mad and miserable nation: let them show us one prophecy that
is not fulfilled, let them show us one other in whom all the prophesies can be
fulfilled, and we will mix pity with our hate: If they cannot, and yet
resist; their doom is past; Those mine enemies, that would not have me to
reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. So let thine
enemies perish, O Lord.

But what go I so far? even amongst us (to our shame) this riotous age has
bred a monstrous generation (I pray God I be not now in some of your bosoms,
Aug. ad Hie. Dum volunt and Iudaei esse and Christiani, nec Iudaei sunt, nec
christiani.
that hear me this day) compounded, much like to the Turkish Religion, of one
part* Christian; another, lew; a third, worldling, a fourth, Atheist: a
Christians face; a Jews heart, a worldlings life; and therefore Atheous in the
whole; that acknowledge a God, and know him not; that profess a Christ, but
doubt of him; yea, believe him not: The fool has said in his heart, there is
no Christ. What shall I say of these men? they are worse then Devils: that
yielding evil spirit, could say, Jesus I know: and these miscreants are still
in the old tune of that tempting Devil; Si tu es filius Dei, if thou be the
Christ: Oh God that after so clear a Gospel, so many miraculous
confirmations, so many thousand martyrdomes, so many glorious victories of
truth, so many open confessions of Angels, men, devils, friends, enemies; such
conspirations of heaven and earth, such universal contestations of all ages
and people; there should be left any spark of this damnable infidelity in
the false hearts of men. Behold then, ye despisers, and wonder, and vanish
away: whom have all the Prophets foretold? or what have the prophesies of so
many hundreds, yea thousands of years foresaid, that is not with this word
finished? who could foretell these things, but the spirit of God? who could
accomplish them, but the Son of God? He spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, says Zachary: he has spoken, and he has done; one true God in
both: none other spirit could foresay these things should be done, none other
power could do these things, thus fore showed this word therefore, can fit
none but the mouth of God our Savior, It is finished. We know whom we have
believed; Thou art the Christ the Son of the living GOD. Let him that loves
not the Lord Jesus, be accursed to the death.

Thus the prophesies are finished: Of the legal observations, with more
breuity. Christ is the end of the Law: what law? Ceremonial, Moral. Of the
Moral, it was kept perfectly by himself, satisfied fully for us: Of the
Ceremonial, it was referred to him, observed of him, fulfilled in him,
abolisht by him. There were nothing more easy, then to show you how all those
Jewish Ceremonies looked at Christ, how Circumcision, Passover, the Tabernacle,
both outer and inner, the Temple, the Lauer, both the Altars, the tables of
Shewbread, (...).
the Candlestickes, the Veil, the Holy of holies, the Arc, the Propitiatory,
the pot of Manna, Aarons rod, the high Priest, his order and line, his
habites, his inaugurations, his washings, annointings, sprincklings, offerings,
the sacrifices, (...), and what ever Jewish rite; had their virtue from Christ,
relation to him, and their end in him. This was then their last gasp; for, now
straight they dyed with Christ, now the veil of the Temple rent: Ex quo
apparet, tunc scissum esse, cum Christus emisit spiritu^.
As Austen well notes out of Mathewes order; It tore then, when Christ's last
breath passed: That conceit of Theophilact is witty; that as the Jews were
wont to rend their garments, when they heard blasphemy: so the Temple not
enduring these execrable blasphemies against the Son of God, tore his veil
in pieces. But that is not all, the veil rent, is the obligation of the
rituall law cancelled; the way into the heavenly Sanctuary opened; the shadow
giving room to the substance: in a word, it does that which Christ says;
Ceremoniae sicut defuncta corpora necessarioru^ officijs deducenda erant ad
sepulturam, non simulate, sed religiose, nec deserenda continuo. Augustine.
Consummatum est. Even now then the law of ceremonies died: It had along and
solemn burial, as Augustine says well, perhaps figured in Moses, who died
not lingringly, but was thirty days mourned for: what means the Church of
Rome to dig them up, now rotten in their graves? and that, not as if they had
been buried, but sown, with a plenteous increase; yea, with the inuerted usury
of too many of you Citizens; ten for one. Ego e contrario loquar, and
reclamante mundo libera voce pronu^ciem, ceremonias Iudaeoru^ perniciosas esse,
et mortiferas, and quicunque eas obseruauerit, sieve ex Gentibus, in barathrum
diaboli deuolutum. Hier.
It is a grave and deep censure of that resolute Hierome; Ego e contrario
loquar. etc. I say, says he, and in spite of all the world dare maintain,
that now the Jewish ceremonies are pernicious and deadly, and whosoever shall
observe them, whether he be Jew or Gentile, in barathrum Diaboli deuolutum;
shall fry in hell for it. Still Altars? Still Priests? sacrifices still? still
washings? still unctions? sprinkling, shauing, purifying? still all, and more
then all? Let them hear but Augustines censure, Quisquis nunc etc. Quisquis
nunc ea celebrare voluerit, tanquam sopitos cineres eruens, non erit pius, etc.
Whosoever shall now use them, as it were, raking them up out of their dust; he
shall not be Pius deductor corporis, sed impius sepulturae violator; an impious
and sacrilegious wretch, that ran sackes the quiet tombs of the dead.

I say not that all Ceremonies are dead; but the Law of Ceremonies, and of
Jewish. It is a sound distinction of them, that profound Peter Martyr has in
his Epistle, to that worthy Martyr, Father, Bishop Hooper: Some are typical,
fore-signifying Christ to come: some, of order and decency. Those are
abrogated, not these: the Jews had a fashion of prophesying in the Churches;
so the Christians from them, as Ambrose: the Jews had an eminent pulpit of
wood; so we: they gave names at their Circumcision; so we at Baptism: they
sung Psalms melodiously in Churches, so do we, they paid and received
tithes, so do we, they wrapped their dead in linen, with odors; so we; the Jews
had sureties at their admission into the church; so we: these Instances might
be infinite: the Spouse of Christ cannot be without her laces, and chains, and
borders. Christ came not to dissolve order. But thou Lord, how long? how long
shall thy poor Church find her ornaments, her sorrows? and see the dear
sons of her womb, bleeding about these apples of strife, let me so name them
not for their value (eue^ small things, when they are commanded, look for no
small respect) but for their event: the enemy is at the gates of our Syracuse;
how long will we suffer our selves, taken up with angles and circles in the
dust: ye men brethren, and fathers, help; for Gods sake put to your hands, to
the quenching of this common flame* the one side by humility and obedience; the
other, by compassion; both by prayers and tears: who am I, that I should
revive to you the sweet spirit of that divine Augustine, who when he heard and
saw the bitter contentions betwixt two grave and famous Divines, Jerome and
Ruffine; Heu mihi, says he, qui vos ali cubi simul inuenire non possum, Alas
that I should never find you two together, how I would fall at your feet, how
I would embrace them and weep upon them, and beseech you, either of you for
other, and each for himself, both of you for the Church of God, but
especially, for the weak, for whom Christ died, who not without their own
great danger, see you two fighting in this Theater of the world. Yet let me do
what he said he would do; beg for peace, as for life: by your filial piety
to the Church of GOD, whose ruins follow upon our divisions; by your love of
Gods truth; by the graces of that one blessed Spirit, whereby we are all
informed and quickened, by the precious blood of that son of God, which this
day, and this hour, was shed for our redemption, be inclined to peace and
love, and though our brains be different, yet let our hearts be one. It was,
as I heard, the dying speech of our late reverend, worthy and gracious
Diocesan; Modo me moriente viuat ac floreat Ecclesia; Oh, yet if, when I am
dead, the Church may live and flourish.

What a spirit was here? what a speech? how worthy never to die? how worthy of
a soul so near to his heaven? how worthy of so happy a succession? Ye
whom God has made inheritors of this blessed care, who do no less long for
the prosperity of Sio^, live you to effect, what he did but live to wish; all
peace with our selves, and war with none but Rome and Hell. And if there be
any weyward Seperatist, whose soul professes to hate peace; I fear to tell
him Paul's message, yet I must: Would to God those were cut off that trouble
you. How cut off? As good Theodosius said to Demophilus, a contentious
Prelate; Si tu pacem fugis, etc. Si tu pacem fugis, ego te ab Ecclesia fugere
mando.
If thou fly peace, I will make thee fly the Church. Alas, they do fly it:
that which should be their punishment, they make their contentment, how are
they worthy of pity? As Optatus of his Donatists; they are Brethren, might be
companions, and will not. Oh wilful men; whither do they run? from one
Christ to another? Is Christ divided? we have him, thanks be to our good God,
and we hear him daily; and whither shall we go from thee? thou have the
words of eternal life.

Thus the Ceremonies are finished,: now hear the end of his sufferings, with
like patience and devotion: his death is here included; it was so near, that
he spoke of it as done; and when it was done, all was done. How easy is it to
lose our selves in this discourse: how hard, not to be overwhelmed with matter
of wonder; and to find either beginning or end: his sufferings found an end,
our thoughts cannot. Lo, with this word, he is happily waded out of those
deepes of sorrows, whereof our conceits can find no bottom: yet let us with
Peter, gird our coat, and cast our selves a little into this sea.

All his life was but a perpetual Passion: In that he became man, he
suffered more then we can do, either while we are men, (...).
or when we cease to be men; he humbled, yea, he emptied himself. We, when
we cease to be here, are clothed upon. 2. Cor. 5. We both win by our
being, and gain by our loss; he lost, by taking our more or less to
himself, that is, manhood. For, though ever as God, J and my Father are one:
yet as man, My Father is greater then I. That man should be turned into a
beast, into a worm, into dust, into nothing; is not so great a disparagement,
as that GOD should become man: and yet it is not finished; it is but begun.
But what man? If, as the absolute Monarch of the world, he had commanded the
vassalage of all Emperors and Princes, and had trod on nothing but Crowns and
Scepters, and the necks of Kings, and bidden all the Potentates of the earth
to attend his train; this had carried some port with it; suitable to the
heroical Majesty of Gods Son. No such matter, here is neither Form nor
Beauty; unless perhaps ((...)) the form of a servant: you have made me to
serve, with your sins. Behold, he is a man to God; a servant to man; and, be
it spoken with holy reverence, a drudge to his servants. He is despised and
rejected of men; yea (as himself, of himself) a worm, and no man, the shame
of men, and contempt of the people. Who is the King of glory? the Lord of
hoastes, Psalm. 24.10.
he is the King of glory. Set these two together; the King of glory; the shame
of men: the more honor, the more abasement. Look back to his Cradle, there
you find him re^ected of the Bethlemites; borne and laid, alas, how homely, how
unworthily; sought for by Herod, exiled to Egypt, obscurely brought up in
the Cottage of a poor Foster-Father, transported and tempted by Satan,
derided of his kindred, blasphemously traduced by the Jews, pinched with
hunger, restless, harbourlesse, sorrowful, persecuted by the Elders, and
Pharisees, sold by his own servant, apprehended, arraigned, scourged,
condemned, and yet it is not finished. Let us, with that Disciple, follow him a
far off; and passing over all his contemptuous usage in the way, see him
brought to his Cross. Still the further we look, the more wonder: every
thing adds to this ignominy of suffering, and triumph of ouercomming: where
was it? not in a corner, as Paul says to Festus, (...). Act. 26.27.
but in Jerusalem, the eye, the heart of the world. Obscurity abateth shame:
public notice heightens it: Before all Israel and before this Sun, says
GOD to David, when he would thoroughly shame him: In Jerusalem, which he had
honored with his presence; taught with his preachings, astonished with his
miracles, bewailed with his tears; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I,
and thou would not: O yet, if in this thy day. Cruelty and unkindness,
after good desert, afflict so much more, as our merit has been greater.
Where abouts? without the gates: in Caluary, among the stinking bones of
execrable Malefactors. Before, the glory of the place, bred shame, now the
vileness of it. When? but in the Passover; a time of greatest frequence, and
concourse of all Jews and Proselites: An holy time, when they should receive
the figure, they reject the substance: when they should kill and eat the
Sacramental Lamb, in faith, in thankfulness, they kill the Lamb of GOD,
our true Passover, in cruelty and contempt. With whom? The quality of our
company, and In medio la tronum tanquam latronum ^mmanissimus. Luther.
either increases or lessens shame. In the midst of thieues (says one) as the
Prince of thieues: there was no guile in his mouth, much less in his hands:
yet behold he that thought it no robbery to be equal with God, is made equal
to robbers and murderers; yea superior in evil. What suffered he? As all
lives are not alike pleasant, so all deaths are not equally fearful* there
is not more difference betwixt some life and death, then betwixt one death and
another. See the Apostles gradation? He was made obedient to the death, even
the death of the Cross. The Cross, a lingering, tormenting, ignominious death.
The Jews had four kinds of death for malefactors; the towell, the sword,
fire, stones; each of these above other in extremity. Strangling with the
towel, they accounted easiest* the sword worse then the towell; the fire worse
then the sword: stoning worse then the fire, but this Roman death was worst
of all. Cursed is every one that hangs on Tree. Yet (as Jerome well) he is
not therefore accursed, because he hangs; but therefore he hangs, because
he is accursed. He was made ((...)) a Curse for us. The curse was more then
the shame: yet the shame is unspeakable; and yet not more then the pain. Yet
all that die the same death, are not equally miserable: the very thieues fared
better in their death then he. I hear of no irrision, no inscription, no
taunts, no insultation on them: they had nothing but pain to encounter, he
pain and scorn. An ingenuous and Noble nature, can worse brook this then the
other; any thing rather then disdainfulnesse and derision: especially, from a
base enemy. I remember, that learned Father begins Isreal's affliction, with
Ismaels persecuting laughter. The Jews, the Soldiers, yea, the very Thieues
flouted him, and triumphed over his misery; his blood cannot satisfy them,
without his reproach. Which of his senses now was not a window to let in
sorrow? his eyes saw the tears of his Mother, and friends, the unthankful
demeanure of Mankind, the cruel despite of his enemies, his ears heard the
reuilings and blasphemies of the multitude; and (whether the place were noisome
to his sent) his touch felt the nails, his taste the gall. Look up O all ye
beholders, look upon this precious body, and see what part ye can find free?
that head which is adored and trembled at by the Angelical spirits, Caput
Angelicis spiritibus ^^emebundii spinis coronatur, etc.
is all raked and harrowed with thorns: that face, of whom is said; Thou art
fairer then the children of men, is all besmeared with the filthy spet^le of
the Jews, and furrowed with his tears; those eyes, clearer then the Sun,
are darkened with the shadow of death; those ears that hear the heavenly
consorts of Angels, now are filled with the cursed speakings and scoffs of
wretched men: those lips that spoke as never man spoke, that command the
spirits both of light and darkness, are scornfully wet with vinegar and gall:
those feet that trample on all the powers of hell ( his enemies are made his
footstool) are now nailed to the footstool of the Cross: those hands that
freely sway the scepter of the heavens, now carry the reed of reproach, and
are nailed to the tree of reproach: that whole body, which was conceived by the
holy Ghost, was all scourged, wounded, mangled: This is the outside of his
sufferings. Was his heart free? Oh no, the inner part or soul of this pain,
which was unseen, is as far beyond these outward and sensible, as the soul
is beyond the body; Gods wrath beyond the malice of men: these were but
loue-tricks to what his soul endured. O all ye that pass by the way, behold
and see, if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow: Alas, Lord, what can we see
of thy sorrows? we cannot conceive so much as the hainousnes and desert of one
of those sins, which thou barest: we can no more see thy pain, then we
could undergo it; only this we see, that what the infinite sins, of almost
infinite men, committed against an infinite Majesty, deserved in infinite
continuance; all this thou in the short time of thy passion have sustained. We
may behold and see; but all the glorious spirits in Heaven, cannot look into
the depth of this suffering. Do but look yet a little into the passions of
this his Passion: for, by the manner of his sufferings, we shall best see, what
he suffered. Wise and resolute men do not complain of a little; holy Martyrs
have been racked, and would not be loosed; what shall we say, if the author
of their strength, God and man, bewray passions? what would not have
overwhelmed men, would not have made him shrink; and what made him complain,
could never have been sustained by men* What shall we then think, if he were
affrighted with terrors, perplexed with sorrows, and distracted with both
these? And lo, he was all these: for, first, here was an amazed fear; for
millions of men to despair, was not so much as for him to fear: and yet it
was no slight fear: he began ((...)) to be astonished with terror. Which
in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers and supplications, with strong
cries and tears, to him that was able to help him, and was heard in that he
feared. Never man was so afraid of the torments of hell, as Christ (standing
in our room) of his fathers wrath. Fear is still suitable to apprehension.
Never man could so perfectly apprehend this cause of fear; he felt the
chastisements of our peace, yea, the curse of our sins; and therefore might
well say with David; I suffer thy terrors with a troubled mind; yea, with Job,
The arrows of God are in me, and the terrors of God fight against me. (...).
With fear, there was a deiecting sorrow ((...)) My soul is on all sides
heavy to the death: his strong cries; his many tears are witnesses of this
Passion: he had formerly shed tears of pity, and tears of love, but now of
anguish: he had before sent forth cries of mercy; never of complaint til now:
when the Son of God weeps and cries, what shall we say or think? yet further,
betwixt both these and his love, what a conflict was there? It is not amiss
distinguished, that he was always in Agone; but now in (...), in a struggling
passion of mixed grief. Behold, this field was not without sweat and blood;
yea a sweat of blood. Oh what man or Angel can conceive the taking of that
heart, that without all outward violence, merely, out of the extremity of his
own Passion, bled (thorough the flesh and skin) not some faint dew, but
solid drops of blood? No thorns, no nails, fetched blood from him, with so
much pain as his own thoughts: he saw the fierce wrath of his Father, and
therefore feared: he saw the heavy burden of our sins to be undertaken; and
thereupon, besides fear, justly grieved; he saw the necessity of our eternal
damnation, if he suffered not: if he did suffer, of our redemption, and
therefore his love incountered both grief and fear. In it self, he would
not drink of that cup: in respect of our good, and his decree, he would and
did; and while he thus strives, he sweates and bleedes. There was never such
a combat, never such a bloodshed, and yet it is not finished; I dare not say
with some Schoolmen, that the sorrow of his Passion, was not so great as the
sorrow of his compassion: yet that was surely exceeding great. To see the
ungracious carelessness of mankind, the slender fruit of his sufferings, the
sorrows of his mother, Disciples, friends; to foresee from the watchtower of
his Cross, the future temptations of his children, desolations of his Church;
all these must needs strike deep into a tender heart. These he still sees and
pitties, but without passion; then he suffered in seeing them.

Can we yet say any more? Lo, al these sufferings are aggrauated by his fulness
of knowledge, and want of comfort* for, he did not shut his eyes, as one says,
when he drunk this cup: he saw how dreggish, and knew how bitter it was.
Sudden evils afflict, if not less, shorter. He foresaw, and foresaid every
particular he should suffer: so long as he foresaw, he suffered: the
expectation of evil, is not less then the sense: to look long for good, is a
punishment; but for evil is a torment. No passion works upon an unknown
object: as no love, so no fear is of what we know not. Hence men fear not
hell, because they foresee it not: if we could see that pit open before we come
at it, it would make us tremble at our sins, and our knees to knock together,
as Baltazars, and perhaps, without faith, to run mad at the horror of
judgment. He saw the burden of all particular sins to be laid upon him;
every dram of his fathers wrath, was measured out to him, ere he touched this
potion; this cup was full, and he knew that it must be wringd, not a drop
left: it must be finished. Oh yet, if as he foresaw all his sorrows, so he
could have seen some mixture of refreshing. But I found none to comfort me,
no, none to pity me. And yet it is a poor comfort that arises from pity.
Even so, O Lord, thou treadest this wine press alone, none to accompany, none
to assist thee. I remember, Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical story reports,
that one Theodorus a Martyr, told him, that when he was hanging ten hours
upon the rack for religion, under Iulians persecution, his joints distended
and distorted, his body exquisitely tortured with change of Executioners; Vt
nulla vnquam aetas similem meminerit.
so as never age (says he) could remember the like: he felt no pain at all,
but continued indeed, all the while in the sight of all men, singing and
smiling* for there stood a comely young man by him on his libbet (an Angel
rather, in form of a man) which with a clean towell, still wipt off his sweat,
and powered cool water upon his racked limbs* wherewith he was so refreshed,
that it grieved him to be let down. Even the greatest torments are easy,
when they have answerable comforts: but a wounded and comfortless spirit, who
can bear? If yet but the same Messenger of GOD, might have attended his
Cross, that appeared in his agony; and might have given ease to their Lord, as
he did to his servant. And yet, what can the Angels help, where God will
smite? Against the violence of men, against the fury of Satan, they have
prevailed in the Cause of GOD, for men: they dare not, they cannot comfort,
where God will afflict. When our Savior had bin wrestling with Satan in the
end of his Lent, then they appeared to him, and served; but now, while about
the same time; he is wrestling with the wrath of his Father for us, not an
Angel dare be seen, to look out of the windows of heaven to relieve him;
for men, much less could they, if they would; but what did they? Miserable
comforters are ye all: the Soldiers, they stripped him, scorned him with his
purple, crown, reed, spat on him, smote him; the passengers, they reui^ed
him, and insulting, wagging their heads and hands at him; Hey, thou that
destroyest the Temple, come down, etc The Elders and Scribes; alas, they have
bought his blood, suborned witnesses, incensed Pilate preferred Barabbas,
undertook the guilte of his death, cried out, Crucify, crucify: Ho, thou
that sauedst others. His Disciples, alas: they forsook him, one of them
forsweares him; another runs away naked, rather then he will stay and confess
him. His mother and other friends: they look on indeed, and sorrow with him;
but to his discomfort. Where the grief is extreme, and respects near,
partnership does but increase sorrow. Paul chides this love: what do you
weeping and breaking my heart? The tears of those we love, do either slacken
out hearts, or wound them. Who then shall comfort him? himself? Sometimes our
own thoughts find a way to succor us, unknown to others: no, not himself.
Doubtless (as Aquinas) the influence of the higher part of the soul, was
restrained from the aid of the inferior: My soul is filled with evils. Psalm.
87.4. Who then? his Father? here, here; was his hope: If the Lord had not
helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in silence: I and my Father are one. But
now (alas,) he, even he, delivers him into the hands of his enemies; when he
has done, turns his back upon him as a stranger; yea; he wounds him as an
enemy. The Lord would break him. Esaias, 53. 10. Yet any thing is light to the
Soul, whiles the comfortes of God sustain it: who can dismay, where God will
relieve? But here, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? What a word was
here, to come from the mouth of the Son of GOD? My Disciples are men, weak
and fearful; No marvel, if they forsake me. The Jews are themselves,
cruel and obstinate. Men are men, graceless, and unthankful. Devils are
according to their nature, spightfull and malicious. All these do but their
kind; and let them do it: but thou, O Father, thou that have said; This is my
well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: thou of whom I have said, It is
my father that glorifies me, what? forsaken me? Not only brought me to this
shame, smitten me, unregarded me; but, as it were, forgotten, yea, forsaken me?
What, even me, my Father? How many of thy constant servants have suffered
heavy things: yet in the multitudes of the sorrows of their hearts, thy
presence and comforts have refreshed their souls. Have thou relieved them, and
do thou forsake me? me, thine only, dear, natural, eternal son. O ye
heavens and earth, how could you stand, whiles the Maker of you thus
complained. Ye stood; but partaking after a sort of his Passion: the earth
trembled and shook, her rocks tore, her graves opened, the heavens withdrew
their light, as not daring to behold this sad and fearful spectacle.

Oh dear Christians, how should these earthen and rocky hearts of ours shake,
and rend in pieces at this Meditation? how should our faces be covered with
darkness, and our joy be turned into heaviness? All these voices and tears,
and sweats, and pangs are for us, yea, from us. Shall the Son of God thus
smart for our sins, yea with our sins and shall not we grieve for our own?
shall he weep to us in this Market place, and shall not we mourn? Nay, shall
^e sweat and bleed for us, and shall not we weep for our selves? Shall he thus
lamentably shrieke out, under his Fathers wrath, and shall not we tremble?
Shall the heavens and earth suffer with him, and we suffer nothing? I call you
not to a weak and idle pity of our glorious Savior: to what purpose? His
injury was our glory. No, no; Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me;
but weep for your selves: for our sins, that have done this; not for his
sorrow that suffered it: not for his pangs, that were; but for our own, that
should have been, and (if we repent not) shall be. Oh how grievous, how deadly
are our sins, that cost the son of God (besides blood) so much torment? how
far are our souls gone, that could not be ransomed with any easier price?
that that took so much of this infinite Redeemer of men, God and man, how can
it choose but swallow up and confound thy soul, which is but finite and
sinful? If thy soul had been in his souls stead, what had become of it? it
shall be, if his were not in stead of thine. This weight that lies thus heavy
on the Son of God, and wrung from him these tears, sweat, blood, and these
inconceivable groans of his afflicted spirit, how should it choose but press
down thy soul to the bottom of hell? and so it will do, if he have not
suffered it for thee, thou must and shall suffer it for thy self. Go now thou
lewd man, and make thy self merry with thy sins; laugh at the vncleanenesses,
or bloodinesse of thy youth: thou little know the price of a sin: thy
soul shall do, thy Savior did, when he cried out, to the amazement of Angels,
and horror of men; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But now no more
of this; It is finished: the greater conflict, the more happy victory. Well
does he find and feel of his Father, what his type said before, He will not
chide always, nor keep his anger for ever. It is fearful; but in him,
short: eternal to sinners; short to his Son, in whom the Godhead dwelt
bodily. Behold; this storm, wherewith all the powers of the world were shaken,
is now over. The Elders, Pharisees, Judas, the soldiers, Priests, witnesses,
Judges, thieues, Executioners, devils, have all tired them selves in vain,
with their own malice; and he triumphs over them all, upon the throne of his
Cross: his enemies are vanquished, his father satisfied, his soul with this
word at rest and glory; It is finished. Now there is no more betraying,
agonies, araignements, scourgings, scoffing, crucifying, conflicts, terrors;
all is finished. Alas beloved, and will we not yet let the son of God be at
rest? do we now again go about to fetch him out of his glory, to scorn and
crucify him? I fear to say it: Gods spirit dare and does; They crucify
again to themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him. To themselves,
not in himself: that they cannot, it is no thank to them; they would do it.
See and consider, the notoriously-sinfull conuersations of those, that should
be Christians, offer violence unto our glorified Savior, they stretch their
hands to heaven, and pull him down from his throne, to his Cross: they tear
him with thorns, pearce him with nails, load him with reproaches. Thou hate
the Jews, spittest at the name of Judas, railest on Pilate, condemnest the
cruel butchers of Christ; yet, thou can blaspheme, and swear him quite over,
curse, swagger, lie, oppress, boil with lust, scoff, riot, and live like a
debauched man; yea, like an human Beast; yea, like an unclean Devil. Cry
Hosanna as long as thou will; thou art a Pilate, a Jew, a Judas, an Executioner
of the Lord of life; and so much greater shall thy judgment be, by how much
thy light and his glory, is more. Oh, beloved, is it not enough that he died
once for us? Were those pains so light, that we should every day redouble
them? Is this the entertainment that so gracious a Savior has deserved of us
by dying? Is this the recompense of that infinite love of his, that thou
should thus cruelly vex and wound him with thy sins? Every of our sins
is a thorn; and nail, and spear to him: while thou pourest down thy drunken
carowses, thou give thy Savior a potion of gall; while thou despisest his
poor servants, thou spittest on his face, while thou put on thy proud
dresses, and liftest up thy vain heart with high conceits, thou s^ttest a
Crown of thorns on his head: while thou wringest and oppressest his poor
children, thou whippest him, and drawest blood of his hands and feet. Thou
hypocrite, how dare thou offer to receive the Sacrament of GOD, with that
hand, which is thus imbrued with the blood of him whom thou receiuest? In
every Ordinary, thy profane tongue walks, in the disgrace of the religious and
conscionable. Thou make no scruple of thine own sins, and scornest those
that do: Not to be wicked, is crime enough: hear him that says, Saul, Saul
why persecutest thou me? Saul strikes at Damascus: Christ suffers in heaven.
Thou strikest; Christ Jesus smarteth, and will revenge. These are the ((...))
afterings of Christ's sufferings: in himself it is finished; in his members it
is not, till the world be finished. We must toil, and groan, and bleed; that
we may reign; if he had not done so, It had not been finished. This is our
warfare; this is the region of our sorrow and death. Now are we set upon the
sandy pauement of our Theater, and are matched with all sorts of evils;
evil men, evil spirits, evil accidents; and (which are worst) our own evil
hearts; tentations, crosses, persecutions, siknesses, wants, infamies, death;
all these must in our courses, be incountered by the law of our profession.
What should we do but strive and suffer, as our General has done; that we
may reign as he does, and once triumph in our Consummatum est? God and his
Angels sit upon the Scaffolds of heaven, and behold us: our Crown is ready;
our day of deliverance shall come; yea, our redemption is near: when all
tears shall be wipt from our eyes; and we that have sown in tears, shall
reap in joy. In the mean time, let us possess our souls, not in patience
only, but in comfort: let us adore and magnify our Savior in his sufferings,
and imitate him in our own: our sorrows shall have an end; our joys shall
not: our pains shall soon be finished; our glory shall be finished, but
never ended.

Thus his sufferinges are finished; now together with them, Man's salvation. Who
knows not, that man had made himself a deep debtor, a bankrupt, an outlaw
to GOD? Our sins are our debts, and by sins, death. Now, in this word and
act, our sins are discharged, death endured, and therefore we cleared: the
debt is paid, the score is crossed, the Creditor satisfied, the Debtors
acquitted, and since there was no other quarrel saved: we are all sick and
that mortally: Sin is the disease of the soul: Quot vitia, ^^t febres, says
Chrysostom; so many sins, so many Feauers, and those pestilent. What wonder
is it, that we have so much plague, while we have so much sin? Our Savior
is the Physician? The whole need not the Physician, but the sick: wherein? He
heals all our infirmities: he heals them after a miraculous manner; not by
giving us receites, but by taking our receites for us. A wonderful Physician;
a wonder full course of cure One while he would cure us by abstinence; our
superfluity, by his forty days emptiness* according to that old Rule; Hunger
cures the diseases of Gluttony. Another while, by Exercise: He went up* and
down from City to City, and in the day was preaching in the Temple, in the
night, praying in the Mount. Then, by diet; Take, eat, this is my body: and,
Let this cup pass. After that yet, by sweat; such a sweat as never was; a
bloody one: yet more by incision; they pierced his hands, feet, side: and yet
again by potion; a bitter potion of vinegar and gall. And lastly, which is
both the strangest, and strongest receipt of all, by dying: Which dyed for us;
that whether we wake or sleep, ^. These. 5, 10
we should live together with him. We need no more, we can go no further;
there can be no more physic of this kind* there are cordials after these, of
his Resurrection and Ascension; no more penal receites. By this blood we have
redemption, Ephesians, 1.7. Justification, Romans 3.24. Reconciliation, Colos. 1 20.
Sanctification, 1. Pet. 1.2. Entrance into glory, Heb. 10.19. Is it not now
finished? Woe were us, if he had left but one mite of satisfaction upon our
score, to be discharged by our souls: and woe be to them that derogate from
Christ, that they may charge themselves; that botch up these al-sufficiently
meritorious sufferinges of Christ, as imperfect with the superfluities of flesh
and blood. Maledictus homo, qui spem ponit in homine. We may not with patience
see Christ wrongde by his false friends: As that heroical Luther said in the
like; Cursed be the silence that here forbeareth. To be short, Maledictu^
silentium, quod hic conniuet.
here be two injuries intolerable; both give Christ the lie upon his Cross:
It is finished. No, somewhat remains: the fault is discharged, not the
punishment. Of punishments, the eternal is quit, not the temporal. It is
finished by Christ: No, there wants yet much; the satisfactions of Saints
applied by his Vicar; add men's sufferings to Christ's, then the treasure is
full; till then, It is not finished.

Two qualities strive for the first place in these two opinions; Impiety and
absurdity; I know not whither to prefer. For impiety; here is GOD taxed of
injustice, unmercifulness, insufficiency, falsehood. Of injustice, that he
forgiues a sin, and yet punishes for that which he has forgiven:
unmercifulness, that he forgiues not while he forgiues, but does it by
halfes; insufficiency, that his ransom must be supplied by men: Falsehood,
in that he says, It is finished, when it is not. For Absurdity, how gross
and monstrous are these Positions? that at once the same sin should be
remitted and retained; that there should be a punishment, where there is no
fault: that, what could strike off our eternal punishment, did not wipe off
the temporal; that he which paid our pounds, sticks at our farthings, that
God will retain what man may discharge, that it is, and is not finished.

If there be any opinions, whose mention confutes them, these are they. None
can be more vain, none had more need of soliditie: for, this proppe bears
up alone, the weight of all those millions of Indulgences, which Rome creates
and selles to the world. That Strumpet would well near go naked, if this
were not. These spiritual Treasures, fetch in the Temporal: which yet our
reverend and learned Fulke, justly calls a most blasphemous and beggarly
principle: it bringes in whole chests, yea mines of gold, like the Popes
Indies: and has not so much as a ragge of proof to cover it, whether of
Antiquity, of Reason, of Scripture. Not of Antiquity, for, these Jubilee
Proclamations began but about three hundred years ago. Not of Reason, how
should one mere man pay for another, dispense with another, to another, by
another? Not of Scripture, which has flatly said, The blood of Jesus Christ
his son, purges us from all sin: and yet I remember, that acute Sadeel
has taught me, that this practice is according to Scripture: Negotiatores
terrae sunt ipsi Sacerdotes, qui vendunt orationes and missas pro denarijs:
Facientes domum orationis, Apothecam negotionis. Jn Revel. l. 10. p. 5.
what Scripture? He cast the money changers out of the Temple, and said; Ye
have made my house a den of thieues. Which also Joachim, their prophetical
Abbot, well applies to this purpose. Some modest Doctors of Louan, would feign
have minced this Antichristian blasphemy; who began to teach, that the
passions of the Saints are not so by Indulgences applied, that they become true
satisfactions; but that they only serve to move God, by the sight of them, to
apply unto us Christ's satisfaction. But these meal-mouthed Divines, were soon
charmed; four several Popes (as their Cardinal confesses) fell upon the
neck of them, Bellar. l. 1. de Indulgent.
and their opinion; Leo the tenth, Pius the fifth, Gregory the thirteenth, and
Clemens the sixth: and with their furious Bulls, bellow out threats against
them, and toss them in the air for heretics, and teach them, upon pain of a
Curse, to speak home with Bellarmine, Passionibus sanctorum expiari delicta:
and straight, Applicari nobis sanctorum passiones ad redimendas poenas, quas
pro peccatis Deo de bemus: that by the sufferinges of Saints, our sins are
expiated; and that, by them applied; we are redeemed from those punishments,
which we yet owe to God. Blasphemy, worthy the tearing of garments: how is it
finished by Christ, if men must supply? Oh blessed Savior, was every drop of
thy blood enough to redeem a world, and do we yet need the help of men? How
art thou a perfect Savior, if our Brethren also must be our redeemers? Oh ye
blessed Saints, how would you abhor this sacrilegious glory? and with those
holy Apostles, yea, that glorious Angel, say, Vide ne feceris; and with those
wise Virgins: lest there will not be enough for us, and you, go to them that
sell, and buy for your selves. For us, we envy not their multitude; Let them
have as many Saviors as Saints, and as many Saints as men: we know with
Ambrose, Christi passio adiutore non eguit; Christ's passion needs no helper:
and therefore, with that worthy Martyr, dare say, None but Christ, none but
Christ. Let our souls die, if he cannot save them; let them not fear their
death or torment; if he have finished. Hear this, thou languishing and
afflicted soul: There is not one of thy sins, but it is paid for; not one of
thy debtes in the s^roll of God, but it is crossed; not one farthing of all
thine infinite ransom is unpaid. Alas, thy (...) prosperity of fools
destroys them; yea, the confidence of prosperity: Thou say, God is
merciful, thy Savior bounteous, his passion absolute: All these, and yet thou
may be condemned. Merciful, not unjust; bountiful, not lavish; absolutely
sufficient for all, not effectual to all. Whatsoever God is, what art thou?
Here is the doubt: thou say well; Christ is the good Shepherd. wherein? He
gives his life, but for whom? for his sheep. What is this to thee?? while
thou art secure, profane, impenitent, thou art a Wolf, or a Goat: My sheep
hear my voice: what is his voice, but his precepts? where is thine obedience
to his commandments? If thou will not hear his law, never hearken to his
gospel: here is no more mercy for thee, then if there were no Savior. He has
finished, for those in whom he has begun. If thou have no beginnings of
grace as yet, hope not for ever finishing of salvation; Come to me all ye that
are heavy laden, says Christ: thou shall get nothing, if thou come when he
calls thee not. Thou art not called, and can not be refreshed, unless thou
be laden, not with sin (this alone keeps thee away from God) but with
conscience of sin: A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise. Is thy heart wounded with thy sin? does grief and hatred strive
within thee, whether shall be more? are the desires of thy soul with God? do
thou long for holiness, complain of thy imperfections, struggle against thy
corruptions? Thou art the man, fear not, It is finished. that law which thou
would have kept and could not; thy Savior could, and did keep for thee,
that salvation which thou could never work out alone (alas poor impotent
creatures, what can we do toward heaven without him, which cannot move on
earth but in him:) he alone for thee has finished. Look up therefore boldly
to the throne of GOD, and, upon the truth of thy repentance and faith, know,
that there is no quarrel against thee in heaven, nothing but peace and joy:
All is finished: he would be spitted on, that he might wash thee, he would
be covered with scornful robes, that thy sins might be covered: he would
be whipped, that thy soul might not be scourged eternally: he would thirst,
that thy soul might be satisfied: he would bear all his Fathers wrath, that
thou might bear none; he would yield to death, that thou might never
taste of it: he would be in sense for a time as forsaken of his father, that
thou might be received for ever.

Now bid thy Soul return to her rest, and enjoin it David's task. Praise the
Lord, O my soul; and, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? I
will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. And, as
ravished from thy self with the sweet apprehension of this mercy, call all the
other creatures to the fellowshippe of this joy, with that divine Esaias:
Rejoice, O ye heavens, for the Lord has done it, showte ye lower parts of
the earth, burst forth into praises ye mountains. for, the Lord has redeemed
Jacob, and will be glorified in Israel. And even now, begin that heavenly
Song, Revel. 5.
which shall never end with those glorified Saints; Praise and honor; and
glory, and power, be to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for
evermore.

Thus, our speech of Christ's last words is finished. His last act accompanied
his words; our speech must follow it: let it not want your devout and careful
attention; He bowed and gave up the ghost.

The Cross was a slow death, and had more pain then speed; whence a second
violence must dispatch the crucified; their bones must be broken, that their
hearts might break. Our Savior stays not deaths leisure, but willingly and
courageously meets him in the way, and like a Champion that scorns to be
overcome, yea, knows he cannot be, yields in the midst of his strength,
that he might by dying, vanquish death. He bowed and gave up: Not bowing,
because he had given up, but because he would. He cried with a loud voice,
says Matthew. Nature was strong, he might have lived; but he gave up the
Ghost, and would die, to show him self Lord of life and Death. Oh wondrous
example, he that gave life to his enemies, gave up his own: he gives them
to live, that persecute and hate him; and himself will die the whiles, for
those that hate him. He bowed and gave up: not they; they might crown his
head, they could not bow it: they might vex his spirit; not take it away:
they could not do that without leave; this they could not do, because they
had no leave. He alone would bow his head, and give up his Ghost: I have power
to lay down my life: Man gave him not his life; man could not bereave it. No
man takes it from me. Alas, who could? The high-Priestes forces, when they came
against him armed; he said but, I am he, they flee and fall backward. How easy
a breath dispersed his enemies? whom he might as easily have bidden the earth,
yea, hell to swallow, or fire from heaven to devour. Who commanded the Devils
and they obeyed: could not have been attached by men: he must give not only
leave, but power to apprehend himself, else they had not lived to take him:
he is laid hold of; Peter fights: Put up says Christ, Think thou that I
cannot pray to my Father, and he will give me more then 12. Legions of
Angels? What an Army were here? more then threescore and twelve thousand
Angels, and every Angel able to subdue a world of men: he could, but would
not be rescued; he is led by his own power, not by his enemies; and stands
now before Pilate, like the scorn of men; crowned, robbed, scourged, with an
Ecce homo; Yet thou could have no power against me, unless it were given
thee from above.

Behold, he himself must give Pilate power against himself, else he could
not be condemned: he will be condemned, lifted up, nailed; yet no death without
himself. Quod emittitur voluntarium est: quod amittitur necessarium. Ambr.
He shall give his soul an offering for sin. Esaias, 53.10. No action, that
savors of constraint, can be meritorious, he would deserve, therefore he
would suffer and die. He bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost, O gracious and
bountiful Savior, he might have kept his soul within his teeth, in spite
of all the world, the weakness of God is stronger then men: and if he had but
spoken the word, the heavens and earth should have vanished away before him: but
he would not. Behold, when he saw that impotent man could not take away his
soul, he gave it up, and would die, that we might live. See here a Savior,
that can contemn his own life for ours: and cares not to be dissolved in
himself, that we might be united to his Father. Skin for skin, says the
Devil, and all that he has, a man will give for his life. Lo here to prove
Satan a liar, skin and life and all, has Christ Jesus given for us. We are
besotted with the earth, and make base shifts to live; one with a maimed body,
another with a perjured soul, a third with a rotten name: and how many had
rather neglect their soul, then their life, and will rather renounce and curse
GOD, then die? It is a shame to tell; many of us Christians dote upon life, and
tremble at death; and show our selves fools in our excess of love, Cowards in
our fear. Peter denies Christ thrice, and forsweares him; Marcellinus twice
casts grains of incense into the Idolles fire; Ecebolius turns thrice; Spira
reuolts and despaires: Oh let me live, says the fearful soul. Whither do
thou reserve thy self, thou weak and timorous Creature? or what would thou
do with thy self? Thou have not thus learned Christ: he dies voluntarily for
thee, thou will not be forced to die for him: he gave up the Ghost for thee:
thou will not let others take it from thee for him, thou will not let him take
it for himself.

When I look back to the first Christians, and compare their zealous
contempt of death with our backewardnesse: I am at once amassed and ashamed: I
see there even women (the feebler sex) running with their little ones in their
arms, for the preferment of martyrdom, and ambitiously striving for the next
blow. I see holy and tender virgins, choosing rather a sore and shameful death,
then honorable Espousals. I hear the blessed Martyrs, entreating their
Tyrants and tormentors for the honor of dying: Jgnatius, amongst the rest,
Quod si venire noluerint, ego vim faciam vt deuorer.
fearing least the beasts will not devour him: and vowing the first violence
to them, that he might be dispatched. And, what less courage was there, in
our memorable and glorious forefathers of the last of this age? and do we,
their cold and feeble offspring, look pale at the face of a fair and natural
death; abhor the violent, though for Christ? Alas, how have we gathered rust
with our long peace? Our unwillingness is from inconsideration, from distrust.
Look but up to Christ Jesus upon his Cross, and see him bowing his head, and
breathing out his soul, and these fears shall vanish: he died, and would
thou live? he gave up the Ghost, and would thou keep it? whom would
thou follow, if not thy Redeemer? If thou die not, if not willingly, thou go
contrary to him, and shall never meet him. Though thou should every day die
a death for him, Si per singulos dies pro eo moreremur, qui nos dilexit, non
sic debitum exol^eremus. Chrysostom.
thou could never requite his one death, and do thou stick at one? Every
word has his force, both to him and thee: he died, which is Lord of life, and
commander of death; thou art but a tenant of life, a subject of death; And yet
it was not a dying, but a giving up, not of a vanishing and aerie breath, but
of a spiritual soul, which after separation, has an entire life in it self.
He gave up the Ghost: he died, that has both overcome and sanctified, and
sweetened death. What fear thou? he has pulled out the sting and malignity of
death. If thou be a Christian, carry it in thy bosom, it hurts thee not.
Dare thou not trust thy Redeemer? If he had not dyed, death had been a
Tyrant, now he is a slave. O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy
victory? Yet the Spirit of God says not, he dyed, but gave up the Ghost. The
very Heathen Poet says: He durst not say, that a good man dies. It is worth
the noting (me thinks) that when Saint Luke would describe to us the death of
Ananias and Sapphira, he says ((...)) he expired: Act. 5.5.
but when Saint John would describe Christ's death, he says, (...) he gave up
the Ghost: how? how gave he it up, and whither? so, as after a sort he
retained it: his soul parted from his body; his Godhead was never distracted
either from soul or body: this union is not in nature, but in person. If the
natures of Christ could be divided, each would have his subsistence; so there
should be more persons. God forbid, one of the natures therefore may have a
separation in it self: the soul from the body: one nature cannot be separate
from other, or either nature from the person. If you cannot conceive, wonder:
the Son of GOD has wedded unto himself our humanity, without all
possibility of divorce; the body hangs on the Cross, the soul is yielded, the
Godhead is euiternally united to them both; acknowledges, sustaines them both.
The soul in his agony feels not the presence of the God head; the body upon
the Cross feels not the presence of the soul. Yet as the Fathers of
Chalcedon say truly, ((...),) indiuisibly, inseparably is the Godhead, with
both of these, still and ever, one and the same person. The Passion of Christ
(as Augustine) was the sleep of his Divinity: so I may say: The death of
Christ, was the sleep of his humanity. If he sleep, he shall do well, said
that Disciple, of Lazarus* Death was too weak to dissolve the eternal bonds
of this heavenly conjunction. Let not us Christians go too much by sense; we
may be firmly knit to God, and not feel it: thou can not hope to be so
near to thy God as Christ was, united personally: thou can not fear,
Quantumcunque te deieceris, humilior non eris Christo. Hieron.
that God should seem more absent from thee, then he did from his own Son;
yet was he still one with both body and soul, when they were divided from
themselves: when he was absent to sense; he was present to faith; when absent
in vision, yet in union one, and the same: so will he be to thy soul, when it
is at worst. He is thine, and thou art his: if thy hold seem loosened, his is
not. When temptations will not let thee see him, he sees thee, and possesses
thee; only believe thou against sense, above hope; and though he kill thee, yet
trust in him. Whither gave he it up? Himself expresses* Father, into thy
hands, and, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. It is justice to
restore whence we receive; Into thy hands. He knew where it should be both
safe and happy: true; he might be bold (thou say) as the Son with the
father. The servants have done so; David before him, Steven after him. And
least we should not think it our common right; Father says he, I will that
those thou have given me, may be with me, even where I am: he wills it,
therefore it must be. It is not presumption, but faith, to charge God with thy
spirit; neither can there ever be any believing soul so mean, that he
should refuse it: all the fear is in thy self, how can thou trust thy
jewel with a stranger? What sudden familiarity is this? God has been with
thee, and gone by thee; thou have not saluted him: and now in all the have,
thou bequeathest thy soul to him* On what acquaintance? how desperate is this
carelessness. If thou have but a little money, whither thou keep it, thou
layest it up in the Temple of trust; or whether thou let it; thou art sure of
good assurance, sound bonds; if but a little land; how carefully do thou make
firm conueyances to thy desired heirs? If goods, thy will has taken secure
order, who shall enjoy them; we need not teach you Citizens to make sure work
for your estates: if Children, thou disposest of them in trades, with portions,
only of thy soul (which is thy self) thou know not what shall become. The
world must have it no more; thy self would keep it, but thou know thou
can not: Satan would have it; and thou know not whether he shall: thou
would have God have it; and thou know not whether he will; yea, thy
heart is now ready with Pharaoh to say; Who is the Lord? O the fearful and
miserable estate of that man, that must part with his soul, he knows not
whither: which, if thou would avoid, (as this very warning shall judge thee
if thou do not) be acquainted with GOD in thy life, that thou may make him
the Guardian of thy soul in thy death. Given up it must needs be; but to him
that has governed it: if thou have given it to Satan in thy life; how can
thou hope God will in thy death entertain it? Did you not hate me, and expel
me out of my fathers house; how then come ye to me now in this time of your
tribulation, said Ieptha, to the men of Gilead. No, no, either give up thy
soul to God while he calls for it in his word, in the prouocations of his
love, in his afflictions, in the holy motions of his spirit to thine: or else
when thou would give it, he will none of it, but as a Judge to deliver it
to the Tormentor.

What should God do with an unclean, drunken, profane, proud, covetous
soul? without holiness, it is no seeing of God: Depart from me, ye wicked, I
know ye not; go to the gods you have served. See how God is even with men:
they had in the time of the Gospel, said to the holy one of Israel, Depart
from us; now in the time of judgment, he says to them; Depart from me, They
would not know God when they might; now God will not know them, when they would.

Now therefore (beloved) if thou would not have God scorn the offer of thy
deathbed, fit thy soul for him in thy health; furnish it with grace, inure it
to a sweet conversation with the God of heaven: then may thou boldly give it
up, and he shall as graciously receive it, yea fetch it by his Angels to his
glory^

He gave up the Ghost. We must do as he did: not all with the same success.
Giving up, supposes a receiving, a returning. This inmate that we have in our
bosom, is sent to lodge here for a time; may not dwell here always. The right
of this tenure, is the Lords, not ours. As he said of the hatchet: It is but
lent, it must be restored: It is ours to keep, his to dispose and require. See
and consider both our privilege and charge. It is not with us as with brute
Creatures: we have a living ghost to inform us, which yet is not ours, (and,
alas, what is ours, if our souls be not?) but must be given up, to him that
gave it.

Why do we live, as those that took no keep of so glorious a guest? as those
that should never part with it, as those that think it given them to spend,
not to return with a reckoning?

If thou had no soul, if a mortal one, if thine own, if never to be
required; how could thou live but sensually? Oh remember but who thou art,
what thou have, and whether thou must; and thou shall live like thy self,
while thou art, and give up thy ghost confidently, when thou shall cease to
be. Neither is there here more certainety of our departure then comfort* Carry
this with thee to thy deathbed, and see if it can refresh thee, when all the
world cannot give thee one dram of comfort. Our spirit is our dearest
riches: if we should lose it, here were just cause of grief. Howl and
lament, if thou think thy soul perishes: it is not forfeited, but
surrendered. How safely does our soul pass through the gates of death,
without any impeachment, while it is in the hands of the Almighty? Woe were us,
if he did not keep it while we have it; much more when we restore it. We
give it up to the same hands that created, infused, redeemed, renewed, that do
protect; preserve, establish, and will crown it: I know whom I have believed,
and am persuaded that he is able to keep that, which I have committed to him
against that day. O secure and happy estate of the godly: O blessed exchange of
our condition: while our soul dwells in our breast, how is it subject to
infinite miseries? distempred with passions, charged with sins, vexed with
tentations; above none of these: how should it be otherwise? This is our
pilgrimage; that our home: this our wilderness, that our land of promise, this
our bondage, that our kingdom: our impotency causes this our sorrow.

When our soul is once given up, what evil shall reach unto heaven; and
wrestle with the Almighty? Our loathnes to give up, comes from our ignorance
and infidelity. No man goes unwillingly to a certain preferment, I desire to
be dissolved, says Paul; I have served thee, I have believed thee, and now J
come to thee, says Luther: The voices of Saints, not of men. If thine heart
can say thus, thou shall not need to entreat with old Hilarion, Egredere mea
anima, egredere, quid times? Go thy ways forth my soul, go forth, what
fear thou? but it shall fly up alone cherefully from thee; and give up it
self, into the arms of God, as a faithful Creator, and Redeemer. This earth
is not the element of thy soul, it is not where it should be: It shall be no
less thine, when it is more the owners. Think now seriously of this point;
Gods Angel is abroad, and strikes on all sides? we know not which of our
turns shall be the next: we are sure, we carry deaths enough within us. If we
be ready, our day can not come too soon. Stir up thy soul to an heavenly
cherefulnesse, like thy Savior: Know but whither thou art going; and thou
can not but with divine Paul, say from our Saviors mouth, Vt contra: Nullam
animam recipio quae me nolente seperatur a corpore. Hieron.
even in this sense: It is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive God
cannot abide an unwilling guest: give up that spirit to him, which he has
given thee, and he will both receive what thou give, and give it thee again
with that glory and happiness, which can never be conceived, and shall never
be ended. Even so Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

Gloria in excelsis DEO.

