THE REMEDY OF PROFANENESS.

OR, OF The true sight and fear of the ALMIGHTY.

A needful Tractate.

In two Books.

BY IOS. EXON.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Nathanael Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the pyde-Bull, at S. Austins Gate, 1637.

Imprimatur.

SA. BAKER.
October. 11. 1637.
The Contents.
THe Remedy of Profaneness. A Sermon Preached in the City of Excester, at the
consecration of a new Buriall-place there, Genesis 23.19.20.

Reader,
I Had meant to take leave of the Press, as one that repented to be guilty of
this common surfeit. Yet once again my zeal urges me to break silence. I
find so little fear of God in this world which I am shortly leaving, that I
could not forbear, after my tears, to bestow some ink upon it. Every man can
bewail it, I have studied to redress it. We may endeavor that which GOD
only can effect. I humbly leave this to the work of no less then an
omnipotent grace. In the mean time it is both holy and laudable to project the
remedies; and it shall be the no-small comfort of my deathbed, that I have
left behind me this seasonable advice of better thoughts; which, when I am
gone, may survive to the benefit of many: Know withal that this Treatise
entered the Press under the honored name of my dear Lord, the Earl of
Norwich, whose death preventing the publication, has sent it forth
Patron-lesse; Me thought I should not endure that what was once his, in my
destination, should ever be any others; Let this blanke be as my last
memorial of the honor that I justly bear to that incomparable friend, both
alive and dead, serve to profess unto the world, that these papers yield
themselves not unwilling Orphans upon his loss: But why do I so mis-name his
glory? That blessed soul not staying the leisure of my present directions,
hasted up to the free view of the face of his God, which I could only show
dimly, and aloof. There will be more use of the imitation of his practice,
then of the honor of his protection; Let us go cheerfully on in the steps of
true piety, and conscionable obedience, until our faith likewise shall shut up
in an happy fruition.

The Contents of the several Sections.
BOOK I.
Proem. THe occasion, need and use of the Treatise ensuing. Sect. 1. No one
word can express that grace which we treat of; what it includes and intimates.
Fear is no fit term for it: Affections well employed, turn virtues. Wherein
holy fear consists: What is required to the attaining of it: The sight of God.
The sight of our selves.
Sect. 2. Of the sight of the Invisible: Moses a fit pattern for it. Two ways
wherein he saw the Invisible. Our felicity consists in the sight of God: the
degrees of our spiritual sight: how sight and invisibility may consist
together. Sect. 3. How we may not think to see God: Not by any fained
representation; Not by the work of improved reason; Not in a full
comprehention; Not here in his divine essence, or height of resplendence. How
Moses desired to see the face of God. Sect. 4. How we must endeavor to s^e the
Invisible: 1. That our eyes must be cleared from all hindrances of sight. 2.
That blessed object must be set before our eyes.
Sect. 5. 3. There must be an exaltation, and fortification of our sight. 4.
There must be a trajection of the visuall beams of the soul through all
earthly occurrences. 5. A divine irradiation of the mind must follow: what
light we must conceive.
Sect. 6. 6. The eye must be fixed upon this blessed object unremoveably.

How this may be effected, and how far.

Three ways of our apprehention of God.


Sect. 7. 7. There will follow a delight and complacency in that God whom we
see. Reprobates do rather see Gods anger, than himself.
Sect. 8. Motives to stir us up to strive to this happy sight: The act is
reward enough to it self: 1. This sight frees us from being transported with
earthly vanities.
Sect. 9. 2. It is a prevalent means to restrain us from sinning. 3. It
upholds us in the constant suffering of evil.
Sect. 10. 4. It enters us into our heaven. This vision is not without a
fruition: not so in other objects.
Sect. 11. Of the casting down our eyes to see our own wretchedness. How
frail we are; how sinful; in how woeful condition by our sin.
BOOK II.
Sect. 1. WHat the fear of God is. A double stamp or signature in this
impression of fear. 1. An inward adoration of God. 2. A filial care of being
approved to God.
Sect. 2. What inward adoration is; wherein it consists, and how to be wrought.
Of Gods infinite greatness, shown in the Creation of the world, and the
government thereof, in the frame of the heaven, earth, sea, man himself. Sect.
3. Of Gods infinite mercy shown in the redemption of mankind. Sect. 4. Of the
holy mixture of this fear: Of the continuation and perpetuily of it. Sect. 5.
Religious adoration diffused through our whole outward carriage, in our
respects. 1. To the holy name of God. The Jews scruples; our carelessness.
Sect. 6. 2. To the word of God.
Sect. 7. 3. To the services of God, Prayer, Preaching, Administration of
Sacraments.
Sect. 8. 4. To the house of God.
Sect. 9. 5. To the messengers of God.
Sect. 10. Of the humble subjection of our selves to the hand of God. 1. In
suffering from him meekely, and patiently: The good examples thereof. 2. In all
changes of estates.
Sect. 11. Of our child-lik care of a secret approving our selves to God, and
avoiding his displeasure: How we are affected after we have been miscarried.
The holy jelousy and suspicion of Gods children: This fear a retentive from
sin. Rifenesse of sin, an argument of the want of this fear. Wicked hearts
must have terrible remedies. The misplaced fear of profane men. Sect. 12. Of
the filial endeavor of obedience; in particular callings, arising from this
fear. The happy effects and issue of this fear. Sect. 13. Of the extremes of
this fear, on both sides. 1. Whereof the first is Security: whence it arises.
Of the abuse of Gods mercy, in giving and forgiving. 2. Of the custom of
sinning.
Sect. 14. Of the remedies of Security.

Means to keep the heart tender.

Meditations of Gods judgments, and of our own frailties.

A resolution to repel the first motions of sin.

Care of speedy recovery after our fall.

Due heed not to check the conscience.

A right estimation of worldy things.

Sect. 15. Of Presumption, another opposite to fear. Presumption of the way.
Presumption of the end.
1. In matter of event. 2. In matter of ability.
Sect. 16. The remedies of Presumption, in the several kinds of it. 1. In
respect of outward events; of our due valuation of them.
Sect. 17. 2. In respect of abilities.

An exact survay of our graces.

The differences betwixt counterfeit virtues and true.


Sect. 18. The remedy of our presumption of the end, which is salvation.

Of our modest consideration of the ways and counsels of God.

Sect. 19. The extremes on the other hand. 1. Of the fear of horror; how to
be remdyed.
Sect. 20. 2. Of the fear of distrust; with the remedy thereof.

Conclusion.

A recapitulation of the whole.



OF THE SIGHT and FEAR of the ALMIGHTY. The First Book.
The Proem.
NOthing is more easy to observe, than that the mind of man (being ever prone
to extremities) is no sooner fetched off from Superstition, than it is apt to
fall upon Profaneness: finding no mean betwixt excess of devotion, and an
irreligious neglect. No wise Christian, who has so much as sojourned in the
world, can choose but feel, and (with grief of heart) confess this truth: We
are ready to think of Gods matters, as no better than our own: And a saucy
kind of familiarity, this way, has bred a palpable contempt; so as we walk
with the great God of Heaven, as with our fellow; and think of his sacred
Ordinances, as either some common employment, or fashionable superfluity. Out
of an earnest desire therefore to settle in my self, and others, right
thoughts, and meet dispositions of heart, toward the glorious and infinite
Majesty of our God, and his holy services (wherein we are all apt to be too
defective) I have put my pen upon this seasonable task; beseeching that
Almighty God, (whose work it is) to bless it both in my hand, and in the
perufall of all Readers; whom I beseech to know, that I have written this, not
for their eyes, but for their hearts; and therefore charge them as they tender
the good of their own souls, not to rest in the bare speculation, but to work
themselves to a serious, and sensible practice of these holy prescriptions, as
without which, they shall never have either true hold of God, or found peace,
and comfort in their own souls. Psalm. 34.11
Come then ye children, hearken unto me, and I shall teach you the fear of
the Lord; There cannot be a fitter lesson for me, in the improvement of my age,
to read, nor for your spiritual advantage to take out: One glance of a
thought, of this kind, is worth a volume of quarrelsome litigation.

SECT. II.
AS above we shall need no words; when we shall be all spirit, and our language
shall be all thoughts, so, below, we cannot but want words, wherein to cloth
the true notions of our hearts. I never yet could find a tongue, that yielded
any one term to notify the awful disposition of the heart toward God; we
are wont to call it Fear; but this appellation comes far too short; for this
signifies an affection; whereas this, which we treat of, is no other than an
excellent virtue, yea a grace rather; yea rather a precious composition of many
divine graces, and virtues.

Genesis 42.18 Deu 6.13. Psa. 25.12. Eccl. 12.13 Psalm. 128.1.
It is no marvel therefore, if the Spirit of God have wont under this one word,
to comprehend all that belongs either to the apprehension, or adoration of a
God; For this alone includes all the humble constitution of an holy soul, and
all the answerable demeanure of a mortified creature: neither is there any
thing so well becoming an heart sensible of infiniteness, as this which we
are feign to mis-name Fear.

To speak properly, there is no fear but of evil, and that which we justly call
servile: which is a doubtful expectation of something that may be hurtful to
us: and this, when it prevails, is horror, and dreadful confusion; an
affection (or perturbation rather) fit for the galleys, or hell it self; Love
casts it out, as that which is ever accompanied with a kind of hate; and so
will we; we are meditating of such a temper of the heart, Psa. 103.17 128.4
Eccl. 8.11.
as in the continuance of it is attended with blessedness; as in the exercise
of it, is fixed upon infinite greatness, and infinite goodness, and in the
mean time is accompanied with unspeakable peace, and contentment in the Soul.

And yet, who so had a desire to retain the word (if our Ethick Doctors would
give him leave) might say, that affections well employed upon excellent
objects, turn virtues; so love though commonly marshelled in those lower ranks
of the soul, yet when it is elevated to the All-glorious God, is justly styled
the highest of Theological virtues, yea, when it rises but to the level of
our brethren, it is Christian charity; so, grief for sin, is holy penitence;
and what more heavenly grace can be incident into the soul, than joy in the
holy Ghost? Neither is it otherwise with Fear, when it is taken up with
worldly occurrents of pain, loss, shame, it is no better than a troublesome
passion, but when we speak of the fear of God, the case and style is so
altered, that the breast of a Christian is not capable of a more divine grace.
But not to dwell in syllables, nor to examine curious points of morality: That
which we speak of, is no other than a reverentiall awe of the holy and infinite
majesty of God, constantly and unremovably settled in the soul; A disposition
so requisite, that he who has it, cannot but be a Saint, and he that has it
not, is in a sort without God in the world. To the producing whereof there is
need of a double apprehension; The one of an incomprehensible excellence, and
inseparable presence of God; The other of a most miserable vileness, and, as
it were, nothingnesse of our selves. The former is that which the spirit of God
calls the sight of the Invisible: For sight is a sense of the quickest, and
surest perception; so as in seeing of God, we apprehend him infinitely glorious
in all that he is, in all that he has, in all that he does; and intimately
present to us, with us, in us.

SECT. II.
LEt us then first see what that Sight is; wherein we cannot have a more meet
pattern than Moses; that exposed infant, who in his cradle of Bulrushes was
drawn out of the flagges of Nilus, is a true emblem of a regenerate soul,
taken up out of the mercy of a dangerous world, in whose waves he is naturally
sinking: He that was saved from the waters saw God in fire; and in an holy
curiosity hasted to see the Bush that burned, and consumed not; Let our godly
zeal carry us as fast to see what he saw; and make us eagerly ambitious of his
eyes, of his Art. Surely Moses, as St. Stephen tells us, was learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians; He was not a greater Courtier, than a Scholar:
But, Moses his Opricks were more worth than all the rest of his skill. All
Egypt, and Chaldea to boot, though they were famous of old for Mathematick
Sciences, could not teach him this Art of seeing the Invisible: As only the
Sun gives us light to see it self, so only the Invisible God gives a man
power to see himself that is Invisible.

There is a threefold world objected to humane apprehension; A sensible world,
an intelligible, a spiritual or divine; and accordingly man has three sorts
of eyes, exercised about them; The eye of sense, for this outward and material
world; of reason, for the intelligible; of faith, for the spiritual: Moses had
all these; By the eye of sense he saw Pharaohs Court, and Isreal's servitude; By
the eye of reason he saw the mysteries of Egyptian learning; By the eye of
faith he saw him that is invisible. In the eye of sense, even brute creatures
partake with him, In the eye of reason men, In the faculty of discerning
spiritual and divine things only Saints and Angels. Doubtless Moses was
herein privileged above other men, Two ways therefore did he see the
Invisible, First, By viewing the visible signs, and sensible representations
of Gods presence; as in the Bush of Horeb (the hill of visions:) in the Fire
and Cloud in the Mount of Sinai; Secondly, By his own spiritual apprehension:
That first was proper to Moses, as an eminent favorite of God: This other must
be common to us with him. That we may then attain to the true fear and
fruition of God, we must see him that is invisible, as travelers here, as
comprehensors hereafter; How we shall see him in his, and our glorious home, we
cannot yet hope to comprehend; When we come there ^o see him, we shall see and
know how, and how much we see him; and not till then. In the mean time it must
be our maine care to bless our eyes with Moses object, and even upon earth to
aspire to the sight of the Invisible. This is an act wherein indeed our chief
felicity consists. It is a curiously witty disquisition of the Schools, since
all beatitude consists in the fruition of God, Whether we more essentially,
primarily, and directly enjoy God in the act of understanding, (which is by
seeing him,) than in the act of will, which is by loving him; and the greatest
Masters (for ought I see) pitch upon the understanding in the full sight of
God; as whose act is more noble, and absolute, and the union wrought by it more
perfect. If any man desire to spend thoughts upon this divine curiosity, Johan.
de Neapoli. qu. 14.
I refer him to the ten reasons which the Doctor Solennis gives and rests in,
for the decision of this point. Surely these two go so close together, in the
separated soul, that it is hard, even in thought, to distinguish them. If I
may not rather say, that as there is no imaginable composition in that
spiritual essence; so its fruition of God is made up of one simple act alone,
which here results out of two distinct faculties. It is enough for us to know,
that if all perfection of happiness and full union with God consist in the
seeing of him, in his glory, then it is, and must be our begun happiness, to
see him (as we may) here below: he can never be other than he is; our
apprehension of him varies: Here we can only see him darkly, as in a glass,
there clearly, and as he is. Even here below there are degrees, as of bodily,
so of spiritual, sight: The newly recovered blind man saw men like trees, the
eyes of true sense see men like men; The illuminated eyes of Elisha, and his
servant, saw Angels, invironing them; Act. 7.56.
Saint Stephens eyes saw heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God: The clear eyes of Moses see the God of Angels: Saint Paul's eyes saw the
unutterable glories of the third heaven: still, the better eyes the brighter
vision.

But what a contradiction is here, in seeing the Invisible? If invisible, how
seen? and if seen, how invisible? Surely God is a most purely and simply
spiritual essence. Here is no place for that, not so much heresy, as stupid
conceit, of Anthropomorphisme: A bodily eye can only see bodies like it self;
the eye must answer the object: A spiritual object therefore (as God is) must
be seen by a spiritual eye: Moses his soul was a spirit, and that saw the
God of spirits: so he that is in himself invisible, was seen by an invisible
eye: and so must be. If we have no eyes but those that are seen, we are as
very beasts as those that we see; but if we have invisible and spiritual eyes,
we must improve them to the sight of him that is invisible.

SECT. III.
LEt us then, to the unspeakable comfort of our souls, inquire, and learn how
we may here upon earth, see the invisible God.

And surely, as it was wisely said of him of old, that it is more easy to know
what God is not, than what he is, so it may be justly said also, of the vision
of God, it is more obvious to say how God is not seen, than how he is; Let us
(if you please) begin with the negative, we may not therefore think to see God
by any fancied representation; he will admit of no image of himself; no not
in thought; All possibly conceiveable Ideas, and similitudes, as they are
infinitely too low, so they are clean contrary to his spiritual nature, and
his express charge; and the very entertainment of any of them is no other than
a mental idolatry. In the very holy of holyes, where he would most manifest
his presence, there was nothing to be seen but a cloud of smoke, Nil preter
nubes. Iuv.
as the Poet scoffingly; and as that great King professed to see there; Alex.
Mag.
to teach his people that he would not be conceived any way, but in an absolute
immunity from all forms.

Secondly, we may not hope to see God by the working of our improved reason;
for as intelligible things are above the apprehension of sense, so divine
matters are no less above the capacity of understanding. Justly is Durand
exploded here, who held that a created understanding was of it self,
sufficient for the vision of God, without supernatural aid; for what ever our
soul understands here, it does it by the way of those phantasmes which are
represented unto it; by which it is not possible there should be any
comprehension of this infinite essence: every power works within the compass
of his own sphere; even from the lowest of sense, to the highest of faith: If
the eye should encroach upon the ear, in affecting to discern the delicate
air of pleasant sounds; and the ear should usurp upon the eye, in professing
to judge of a curious picture, or pleasant prospect; it were an absurd ambition
of both. It is all one for a beast to take upon him to judge of matter of
discourse; and for a Philosopher to determine of matters of faith: Reason was
not given to man for naught, even that can impart unto us something concerning
God, but not enough. I remember Gerson, Io. Gers: de distinctione verarum
visionum a falsis.
a great Master of Contemplation, professes that he knew one, (which is, in
Saint Paul's phrase, himself) who after many temptations of doubt, concerning a
maine article of faith, was suddenly brought into so clear a light of truth,
and certitude; that there remained no relics at all of dubitation; nothing
but confidence, and serenity, which (says he) was wrought by an hearty
humiliation, and captivation of the understanding to the obedience of faith;
neither could any reason be given of that quiet, and firm peace in believing,
but his own feeling and experience: And surely, so it is in this great
business of seeing God; the less we search, and the more we believe, the
cleerer vision do we attain of him that is invisible.

Neither, thirdly, may we hope here to aspire to a perfect sight, or a full
comprehension of this blessed object; the best of all earthly eyes does but
look through a scarf at this glorious Sight, and complains of it is own
weakness and obscurity; and what hope can we have to compass this infinite
prospect? The cleerest eye cannot, at once, see any round body, if it be but of
a small bullet, or ring; And when we say, we see a man, we mean, that we see
but his outside; for surely, his heart, or lungs, or brain, are out of our
sight; much less can we see his soul, by which he is: What speak I of the
poor narrow conceit of us mortals? I need not fear to say, that the glorified
Saints and glorious Angels of Heaven, being but of a finite (though spiritual)
nature, hold it no disparagement to disclaim the capacity of this infinite
object; much less may we think to draine this Ocean with our egg shell.

Lastly, we may not make account here to see the face of God in his divine
essence, or in the height of the resplendence of his glory: This, even Moses
himself did not; he desired it indeed, but it might not be yielded, ( Exodus
33) and God tells him, this was no object for mortal eyes; A man must die to
see it, as Austen well. Indeed it is said, Moses spoke to God, face to face;
the word in the original is ((...)) faces to faces:) but ye never read that he
saw God face to face; he still conferred with that Oracle which was ever
invisible. It is a poor conceit of Cornelius a Lapide, that Moses longed so
much to see the face of God in some assumed form; for then that face should
not have been his: And if God should have been pleased to assume such a form,
it had been no less easy for him, to have made the face aspectable, as the
back; In this sense, Gen 32.30
old Jacob calls his Altar Penu-el, the face of God, and professes to have
seen God, face to face; his face saw that face which God had for the present
assumed, without a present death: Doubtless Moses, having seen diverse vayles
of Gods presence, (that is, sensible testimonies of his being there) desires
now to see that glorious Majesty of God open-faced, without those maskes of
outward representation, (so he interprets himself whiles he expresses (...)
by (...) verse. 19. Thy face, by thy glory. Exo. 33.18
) the desire was zealously ambitious; too high, even for him, that had been
twice blessed with forty days conference with the God whom he longed to see;
much less may we think of aspiring to this Sight, who must know our distance,
even from the foot of the Mount. It is abundantly enough, for us, if out of
some small loop hole of the rock, we may be allowed, in his passage, to see
some after-glimpses of that incomprehensible Majesty; to see him, both as we
can be capable, and as he will be visible; that is, as he has revealed
himself to us in his word, in his works, in his wonderful attributes. In his
word as a most glorious spiritual substance, in three equally glorious
subsistences. In his works, as the most mighty Creator, and munificent
Preserver, as the most merciful Redeemer of the world, as the most gracious
Comforter, and Sanctifier of the world of his Elect. In his attributes, as the
God of spirits, whose infinite power, wisdom, mercy, justice, truth,
goodness is essential; so as he is all these abstractedly, uncompoundedly,
really, infinitely. Shortly therefore, we may not look here to see him by the
eye of fancy, or by the eye of reason, or in a full view, or in the height of
his glory.

Let us then in the next place see how we may and must see him.

SECT. IIII.
WOuld we therefore see him that is invisible? In the first place we must have
our eyes cleared from the natural indisposition, to which they are subject; we
have all, in nature, many both inward, and ambient hindrances of this sight;
there is a kind of earthlinesse in the best eye; whereby it is gouled up, that
it cannot so much as open it self, to see spiritual things; these are our
carnal affections: There is a dimnesse and duskinesse in the body of the eye,
when it is opened; which is our natural ignorance of heavenly things: There
is, besides these, a filme, which is apt to grow over our eye, of natural
infidelity; which makes it incapable of this divine vision; and after all
these, (when it is at the clearest) the moats and dust of worldly thoughts, are
apt to trouble our sight: Lastly, every known sin, wherein a man willingly
continues, is a beam in the eye, that bars all sight of God: (...) Wisd. 1.4.
Wickedness blinds the understanding.
Jn malevolam animam, etc. Wisdom enters not into an ill-doing soul, and
Malitia occaecat intellectum, as the wise man of old; There must be a removal
and remedy of all these, ere we can attain to a comfortable vision of the
Invisible. The goule of our eyes must be washed off; and if we cannot by our
utmost endeavors, lift up our eyelids, as we ought, we must sue to him that
can do it, ( Aperioculos:) Open thou mine eyes that I may see the wonderful
things of thy Law. The dimnesse and duskinesse of our eyes must be cleared, by
that eye salve of the Spirit. ( Revel. 3.) The filme of our infidelity must be
scoured off by the clensing waters of Siloam, the fountain of divine truth,
welling out of the holy Scriptures; The moates and dust of worldly cares must
be wipt out, by a contemptuous, and holy resolution; The beam of sin,
lastly, must be pulled out by a serious repentance. So then, if there be any of
us that makes account to see God, whiles he is taken up with sensual
affections, whiles he is blinded with his natural ignorance, and infidelity,
whiles he is seized upon by worldly cares, and distractions, whiles he harbors
any known sin in his bosom, he does but deceive his own soul; away with
all these impediments, that we may be capable of the vision of God.

In the second place, we must set this blessed object before our eyes;
resolving of the certainty of his presence, with us; Or, rather, we must set
our selves before him, who is ever unremovably before us, with us, in us;
acknowledging him with no less assurance of our faith, than we acknowledge the
presence of our own bodies, by the assurance of sense: For, how shall we
suppose we can see him that is absent from us? No man will say, he sees the
Sun, when it is out of our Hemisphere: That infinite God therefore, who cannot
but be every where, must be acknowledged to be ever, in a glorious manner,
present with us; manifesting his presence most eminently, in the high heavens,
and yet filling both heaven and earth with the Majesty of his glory: In him it
is that we live, and move, and have our being: he comprehends the whole world,
himself being only incomprehensible; secluded from no place, included in no
place; nearer to us than our own souls: when we die, we part from them; from
him we cannot part; with whom remoteness of place can make no difference, time
no change: when the heart is thus thoroughly assured, it is in a fair way to
see the Invisible; for now, after all the former impediments, the hinderance of
distance is taken away; and nothing remains, but that the eye be so
affected, and employed hereabouts, as it ought.

SECT. V.
TO which purpose, in the third place, there must be an exaltation, and a
fortification of our sight; An exaltation rasing it above our wonted pitch, for
our heart is so inured, and confined to bodily objects, that, except it be
somewhat raised above it self, it is not capable of spiritual things. A
fortification of our sight, so raised; for our visive beams are (at our best)
so weak, that they are not able to look upon a sight so spiritually glorious;
alas, we cannot so much as look upon the Sunnebeames, but we are dazeled, and
blinded, with that, which gives us opportunity of sight: how shall we be able
to behold the infinite resplendence of him that made it? St. Stephen was a true
Eagle; that blessed protomartyrs cleared, exalted, fortified sight pierced the
heavens, and saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God* Whence was this
vigor, and perspicacity? He was full of the holy Ghost, that Spirit of God,
that was within him, gave both clearness, and strength (in such miraculous
manner) to the eyes of him, who should strait-way see, as he was seen; who
should instantly by the eye of his glorified soul, no less see the
incomprehensible Majesty of God the Father, than now by his bodily eye, he saw
the glorified body of the Son of God: It must be the only work of the same
Spirit of God within us, that must enable us, both to the faculty, and exercise
of seeing the Invisible; for the performance whereof, there must be, in the
fourth place, a trajection of the visuall beams of the soul, through all
earthly occurrences, terminating them only in God; as now, we look through the
air, at any object, but our sight passes through it, and rests not in it:
whiles we are here, we cannot but see the world; even the holiest eye cannot
look off it; but it is to us, as the vast air is betwixt us and the Starry
heaven, only for passage; all is translucid, till the sight arrive there; there
it meets with that solid object of perfect contentment, and happiness,
wherewith it is thoroughly bounded. When it has therefore attained thither,
there must be, in the fifth place, a certain divine irradiation of the mind,
which is now filled, and taken up with a lightsome apprehension of an infinite
Majesty, of a glory incomprehensible, and boundless; attended and adored by
millions of heavenly Angels, and glorified Spirits; whereto way must be made by
the conceit of a transcendent light; wherein God dwells; as far above this
outward light which we see, as that is above darkness: For though we may not
in our thoughts liken God to any created brightness, (be it never so
glorious;) yet nothing forbids us to think of the place of his eternal
habitation, as infinitely resplendent, above the comparison of those beams
which any creature can cast forth. He is clothed (says the Psalmist) with
light as with a garment. Lo, when we cannot see a man's soul, yet we may see
his body; and when we cannot see the body, yet we may see the clothes: Even
so, though we may not think to see the essence of God, yet we may see, and
conceive of this his resplendent garment of light. Far be it therefore from
us, when we would look up to a Deity, to have our eyesight terminated in a
gloomy opacity, and sad darksomnesse, which has no affinity with any
appendance of that divine Majesty, who has thought good to describe it self
by light: Let our hearts adore such an infinite spirit, as that the light
wherein he dwells, is inaccessible, the light which he has, and is, is
inconceiveable, and rather rest themselves in an humble and devout adoration of
what they cannot know, than weary themselves with a curious search of what they
cannot comprehend. A simple and meek kind of astonishment, and admiration,
beseemes us here better, than a bold and busy disquisition. But, if this
outward light (which of all visible creatures comes nearest the nature of a
spirit) shall seem too material, to express the glory of that blessed
habitation, of the Highest: Let the mind labor to apprehend an intellectual
light, which may be so to our understanding, as this bodily light is to our
sense, purely spiritual, and transcendently glorious; and let it desire to
wonder at that which it can never conceive; How should this light be
inaccessible, if it were such as our either sense, or reason could attain unto?

SECT. VI.
WHen we have attained to this comfortable and heavenly illumination, there
must be, in the sixth place, a fixing of the eye upon this beatificall object,
so, as it may be free from distraction, and wandering. Certainly there is
nothing more apt to be miscarried, than the eye; every new sight winnes it away
from that which last allured it. It is not hard, or unusual to have some
sudden short glympses of this happy vision; which yet the next toy fetches off,
and makes us to forget: like as the last wave washes off the impression of the
former: what are we the better for this, than that patient, who having the
filme too early raised from his eye, sees the light for the present, but shall
never see any more. Would we see God to purpose? when we have once set eye
upon him, we may not suffer our selves, by any means to lose the sight of him
again; but must follow it still with a constant and eager intention: Like as
the Disciples of Christ, when they had fixed their eyes upon their ascending
Savior, could not be taken off, with the presence of Angels; but sent their
eye-beames after him into heaven, so earnestly, that the reproof of those
glorious spirits could hardly pull them off. You are now ready to tell me, this
is a fit task for us, when we are in our heaven; and to plead the difficulty of
such our settlement, in this region of change; where our eyes cannot but be
forced aside, with the necessity of our worldly occasions; and to question the
possibility of viewing two objects at once; God, and the world; not
considering, that herein lies the improvement of the Christians skill, in these
divine Optics: The carnal eye looks through God, at the world; The spiritual
eye looks through the world, at God; the one of those he sees mediately, the
other terminatively; neither is it in nature hard to conceive, how we may see
two such objects, as whereof one is in the way to the other, as through a
prospective glass, we can see a remote mark; or through a thin cloud we can
see heaven. Those glorious Angels of heaven are never without the vision of
God, yet being ministering spirits for the good of his Elect, here below, they
must needs take notice of these earthly occurrents: the variety of these
sublunary objects cannot divert their thoughts from their Maker: Although also
(to speak distinctly) the eye thus employed is not the same: nothing hinders
but that whiles the bodily sees a body, the spiritual eye may see a spirit: As
when a lodestone is presented to my view, the eye of my sense sees the body,
and fashion of the stone, my eye of reason sees the hidden virtue which is in
it; both these kinds of eyes may be thus fixed upon their several objects
without any intersection of the visuall lines of each other. But, that no man
may think God has so little respect to our infirmities as to impose upon us
impossible tasks, we must know, that since the soul of man in this state of
frail mortality, is not capable of a perpetual act of such an intuition of
God, here is necessary use of a just distinction: As the School therefore is
wont to distinguish of intentions, so must we here of the apprehension of God,
which is either actual, or habitual, or virtuall. Actual, when our
cogitations are taken up, and directly employed in the meet consideration of
the blessed Deity, and the things thereto appertaining: Habitual, when we have
a settled kind of holy disposition, and aptitude inclining us ever to these
divine thoughts, ready still to bring them forth into act, upon every least
motion: Virtuall, betwixt both these, being neither so quick and agile, as the
actual; nor yet so dull and flagging as the habitual, (which may be incident
to a man whether sleeping, or otherwise busied) when by the power of an
heavenly disposition, wrought in the mind, we are so affected, as that divine
thoughts are become the constant (though insensible) guests of the soul;
whiles the virtue of that original illumination sticks still by us, and is, in
a sort, derived into all our subsequent cogitations; leaving in them perpetual
remainders of the holy effects of the deeply-wrought, and well grounded
apprehension of God: As in a pilgrim toward the holy Land, there are not
always actual thoughts concerning his way, or end; yet there is still, an
habitual resolution, to begin and compass that journey; and a secret power of
his continued will, to put forward his steps to that purpose; there being a
certain impression remaining in the motive faculty, which still insensibly
stirs him toward the place desired: Neither is it unusual, (even in nature)
to see many effects continuing, when the motion of the cause, by which they
were wrought, cease; As when some deep Bell is rung to the height, the noise
continues some time in the air, after the clapper is silent: Or when a stone
is cast into the water, the circles that are caused by it are enlarged, and
multiplied, after the stone lies still in the bottom.

How ever therefore we cannot hope in this life (through our manifold
weaknesses, and distractions) to attain unto the steady continuance of the
actual view of him that is invisible, yet, to the habitual, and virtuall
power of apprehending him, we may, (through the goodness of him, whom we
strive to see) happily aspire.

Neither may we be wanting to our selves in taking all occasions of renewing
these our actual visions of God; both set, and casual: there is nothing that
we can see, which does not put us in mind of God; what creature is there,
wherein we do not espy some footsteps of a Deity? every herb, flower, leaf, in
our garden; every Bird, and Fly in the air; every Ant and Worm in the ground;
every Spider in our window, speaks the omnipotence, and infinite wisdom of
their Creator: None of these may pass us without some fruitful monition of
acknowledging a divine hand. But besides these, it will be requisite for us,
every morning to season our thoughts with a serious renovation of our awful
apprehensions of God; and not to take off our hand, till we have wrought our
hearts to some good competency of right, and holy conceits of that glorious
Majesty; the efficacy whereof may dilate it self to the whole following day;
which may be often revived by our frequent ejaculations: But above all other,
when we have to do with God, in the set immediate exercises of his services,
and our heavenly devotions, we must endeavor (to our utmost) to sharpen our
eyes, to a spiritual perspicacity; striving to see him, whom we speak unto,
and who speaks unto us, as he has pleased to reveal himself. But, over and
beside all these, even when we have no provocations from any particular
occasion, it must be our continual care, to labor with our God, that it would
please him to work us to such an holy, and heavenly disposition, as that what
ever our employments may be, we may never want the comfort of a virtuall and
habitual enjoying the sight of God; so as the power and efficacy of our first,
well-taken apprehension may run on, through all the following actions, and
events both of our life, and death.

SECT. VII.
Upon this constant fixednesse of our thoughts, on God, there cannot but follow
(in the seventh place) a mavelous delight, and complacency of the soul, in
so blessed an object; neither is it easy to determine whether of these do
more justly challenge a precedence in the heart, whether the eye be so fixed,
because it is well pleased with the sight; or whether it be so pleased and
ravished, with that happy sight, because it is so fixed: whatsoever these two
are in the order of nature, I am sure in time, they are inseparable, neither is
it possible for any man to see God as interessed in him, and not to love him,
and take pleasure in him: As a stranger, as an enemy, or avenger, even devils
and reprobate souls behold him, to their regret, and torment; if I may not
say, they rather see his anger, and judgment, than himself; but never eye can
see him as his God, and not be taken with infinite delight: for that absolute
goodness (out of which no man can contemplate God) can be no other, than
infinitely amiable. And if in the seeing of God, we be (as the School has
taught us to speak) unitively carried into him, how can we choose but in this
act, be affected with joy unspeakable and glorious? In thy presence, says the
Psalmist, is the fullness of joy: and at thy right hand, are pleasures for
evermore. In sum therefore; if when our eyes being freed from all natural
indispositions, and both inward, and outward impediments; we have so this
blessed object presented before us, as that, there is an exaltation and
fortification of our sight; and thereupon a trajection of the visuall beams
through all earthly occurrents, and a divine irradiation of the understanding,
and a steadfast fixing of the eye upon this happy object, without wandering and
distraction; not without a wonderful delight, and joy in the God of all
comfort, whom we apprehend; we do now effectually borrow Moses his eyes, and,
as he did, see the Invisible.

SECT. VIII.
But as all good things are difficult, and all difficulties full of
discouragement, unless they be matched with a countervaileable benefit, (in
which cases they do rather whet, than turn the edge of our desires) let us
see what considerations of profit, arising from this noble act, may stir up
our languishing hearts to the endeavor, and performance thereof: There are
actions, which carrying nothing but danger and trouble in the mouth of them,
had need to be drawn on with the promise of an external reward; there are
those, which carry in them their own recompense; such is this we have in
hand: What can there be out of it self, so good as it? When we take pains to
put our selves into some Theater, or Court, or some pompous triumph, we have no
other end but to see; and yet how poor, and unsatisfying is that spectacle;
and such, as wherein our frivolous curiosity shuts up in emptiness, and
coffeehouse? how justly then are we ambitious of this prospect, wherein, to
but see, is to be blessed. It is no news to see wantons transported from
themselves, with the sight of a beautiful face, though such, perhaps, as
wherein they can never hope to have any interest; and some curious eyes no
less taken with an exquisite picture, which yet shall never be theirs: how can
we be other than ravished with an heavenly delight, and pleasure, in so seeing
the infinite beauty of the God of Spirits, as that our sight cannot be severed
from fruition? the act it self is an abundant remuneration, yet does it not
want many sweet, and beneficial consequences, which do justly quicken our
desires to attain unto the practice of it. Whereof it is not the meanest, that
who-ever has happily aspired thereunto, cannot be carried away with earthly
vanities; what poor things are these, in comparison of those invisible
glories? Alas, what was the pleasure and riches of the Court of Egypt, in the
eyes of Moses, when he had once seen his God? It is a true word, Gustato
spiritu desipit omnis caro. Gers. de. 4. domibus.
that of the Chancellor of Paris, when a man has tasted once of the spirit,
all flesh is savourlesse: Surely, when once the chosen vessel had been rapt
into the third heaven, and seen those unutterable magnificencies of the divine
Majesty, who can wonder, if he looked, ever after, with scorn, and pity upon
all the glittering poverty of this inferior world? Go then ye poorely-great
ones of the world, and admire the piles of your treasures, the stateliness of
your structures, the sound of your titles, the extent of your territoryes; but
know, that he who has seen the least glympse of the Invisible, knows how to
commiserate your felicity, and wonders what ye can see in all these, worth
your admiration, and pursuit: What joy and triumph was among the Jews when
they saw the foundation of the second Temple laid? yet those ancient Priests
and Levites, whose eyes had seen the glory of the former Temple, wept, and
cried as loud, as the rest shouted: Those that know no better, may rejoice and
exult in these worldly contentments; but those, who have had but a blink of the
beauty of heaven, can look upon them no otherwise, than with an overly
contemptuousnesse. I wonder not if good old Simeon were content to have his
eyes clozed for ever, when he had once seen the Son of God: what ever he
should see afterward, would but abase those eyes, that had been blessed with
the face of his Savior. It was no ill conceit of the wise Orator, that he who
had once known and considered the magnitude of the world, could never after
admire any thing; Surely we may more justly say, that he who has duly taken
into his thoughts the consideration of the infinite power, wisdom, goodness,
of the great God of the world, cannot think the world it self, worthy of his
wonder. As some great Peer therefore, that has been used to stately shows,
and courtly magnificence, does not vouchsafe so much as to cast his eye toward
the mean worthless gewgawes of a Pedlars Stall, (which yet silly children
behold with great pleasure and admiration: so the soul that has been inured
to the sight of the divine Majesty, scorns to suffer it self to be
transported with the trash and toys of this vain and transitory world.

SECT. IX.
NO whit inferior to this benefit, is the second; that this sight of the
Invisible is a notable and prevalent means to restrain us from sinning, for
how dares he sin, that sees God ever before him? whom he knows of so pure
eyes, that he detests the least motion to evil; of so almighty power, as to
revenge it everlastingly. It was a poor thought of him (who yet could know no
better) that he who would dissuade himself from a secret wickedness, should
suppose a grave Cato, or some other such austere frowning Censor, to be by him,
looking upon his actions; as if the shame or fear of such a witness were a
sufficient coercion from evil: he that has no eyes to see a God, may scarre
himself with the imagined sight of a man, somewhat better than himself; but
he who has the grace to see the Invisible, finds a stronger restraint in that
presence, than if he were looked on by millions of Witnesses, Judges,
Executioners: Yet as this sight is mutual, (ours of God, and Gods of us,) the
good heart finds a more powerful restriction in his seeing of God, than in
Gods seeing of him: if there be more fear in this, there is more love in the
other; for, since this holy vision of God is ever joined with some warmth of
good affection to that prime, and infinite goodness, the very apprehension of
that unspeakable loveliness, which is in him, more effectually curbeth all
evil desires, in us, than the expectation of any danger, that can threaten us:
How can I do this great evil, and sin against God, Genesis 39 9.
says good Joseph: the sin affrights him more than the suffering, and the
offense of a God, more than his own danger.

The Spirit of God has thought fit to specify the third benefit, upon
occasion of the mention of Moses his vision of God; he endured, as seeing him
who is invisible: As this sight therefore has power to withhold us from doing
evil; so also to uphold us in the suffering of evil; What but cheerfulness,
and ease, could holy Stephen find in the stones of his enraged murderers,
when, through that hail storm he could see his Jesus, standing at the right
hand of God, ready to revenge, and crown him? What a pleasing walk did the
three children find in Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, whiles the Son of God made up
the fourth? What Bath was so suppling, and delightful, as the rack of
Theodorus the Martyr, whiles Gods Angel wiped, and refreshed his distended
joints? With what confidence and resolution, did the Father of the faithful
break through all troubles, and tentations, when he heard God say, Fear not,
Genesis 15.1.
Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Certainly, all fear
and discouragement arises from a conceit of our own weakness, and an
adversaries power, and advantage; take away these two, and the mind of man
remains undanted: and both these vanish at the sight of the Invisible; For,
what weakness can we apprehend, when God is our strength, or what adversary
can we fear, when the Almighty is with us? Good Ezekiah was never so much
scarred with all the bravings of Rabshakeh, as when he said, Am I come up
hither without the Lord? Had God taken part against his degenerated people,
what could the arm of flesh have availed, for their defense? As contrarily,
when he strikes in, what can the gates of hell do? Is it multitude that can
give us courage? as Elisha's servant said; there are more with us than against
us: It is strength? behold, the weakness of God is stronger than men; than
devils: How justly do we contemn all visible powers, when we see the
Invisible? when we see him, not empty handed, but standing ready, with a crown
of glory, Revel. 2, 7. To him that overcomes it shall be given.
to reward our conquest; Vincenti dabitur: Are we therefore persecuted, for
professing the truth of the Gospel, and cast into a dark, and desolate
dungeon, where no glimmering of light is allowed to look in upon us; where we
are so far from being suffered to see our friends, that we cannot see so much
as the face of our Keeper? Lo even there, and thence, we may yet see the
Invisible, and (in spite of malice) in his light we can see light. Do we lie
groaning upon the painful bed of our sickness, closing our curtains about us
to keep out the light, which now grows offensive to our sight; yea, does death
begin to seize upon our eyes, and to dim and thicken our sight, so as now we
cannot discern our dearest friends, that stand ready to close them for us;
yet, even then may we most clearly see the Invisible; and that sight is able to
cheer us up, against all the pangs, and terrors of death, and to make us
triumph even in dying.

SECT. X.
LAstly, what other does this vision of God but enter us into our heaven?
Blessed are the pure in heart, (says our Savior upon the Mount) for they
shall see God; Lo, he that only can give blessedness, has promised it to the
pure; and he that best knows wherein blessedness consists, tells us, it is in
the seeing of God; The blessed Spirits above, both Angels and souls of the
departed Saints, see him clearly, without any veil drawn over their glorified
eyes; we, wretched Pilgrims here on earth, must see him as we may; there is
too much clay in our eyes, and too many, and to gross vapors of ignorance and
infidelity betwixt us and him, for a full and perfect vision: Yet even here, we
see him truly, though not clearly; and the stronger our faith is, the clearer
is our sight; and the clearer our sight is, the greater is our measure of
blessedness: Neither is it a mere presence, or a bare simple vision, which
does either inchoate, or perfect our happiness: we find there was a day, when
the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Job 1.6.
and Satan came also among them; Zach. 12.10
and the wickeds eyes shall see him whom they have peirced; we see so much of
God, (in the way of our bliss) as we enjoy. I know not how the eye in these
spiritual objects, (betwixt which and us there is a gracious relation) has a
certain kind of applicatory faculty, which in these material things it
wants: O taste, and see (says the Psalmist) how sweet the Lord is; as if our
sight were more inwardly apprehensive of heavenly pleasures, than our most
sensible gustation: In these bodily objects, either there is no operation upon
the sense, or, to no purpose; The eye is never the warmer for seeing a fire a
far off, nor the colder for beholding ice: we are no whit the richer for
seeing heaps of treasure, nor the fairer for viewing another beauty; But such
a powerful, and glorious influence there is of God into our spiritual senses,
that we cannot see him by the eye of our faith here, and not be the happier; we
cannot see him above by the eye of our separated souls, and not be perfectly
glorious; and the one of these does necessarily make way for the other: for,
what is grace here but glory begun? and what is glory above, but grace
perfected? Whosoever therefore here, has pitched the eye of his faith upon the
Invisible, does but continue his prospect, when he comes to heaven: the place
is changed, the object is the same; the act more complete: As then, we do ever
look to have our eyes blessed with the perpetual vision of God, in the highest
heavens; let us acquaint them before hand, with the constant and continual
sight of him, in this vale of mortality.

SECT. XI.
NO sooner have our eyes been thus lifted up above the hills, to the sight of
the Invisible, than they must be instantly cast down, and turned inwards to
see our own wretchedness; how weak and poor we are, how frail, how vain
and momentany, how destitute of all good, how obnoxious to all sin, and
misery: Contrarieties make all things better discerned; And surely however it
be commonly seen, that the neernesse of the object, is an hindrance to the
sight, yet here, the more closely we behold our own condition, the more
clearly we shall discern, and the more fully shall we be convinced of this
unpleasing truth: It is not for us to look back (like the heirs of some
decayed house) at what we were; whoever was the better for a past happiness?
Alas, what are we now? miserable dust and ashes; earth at the best, at the
worst, hell; Our being is vanity, our substance corruption; our life is but a
blast, our flesh wormes-meat, our beginning impotent, above all creatures,
(even worms can crawle forward, so soon as they are, so cannot we) our
continuance short, and troublesome; our end grievous; who can assure himself
of one minute of time, of one dram of contentment? But, woe is me, other
creatures are frail too, none but man is sinful; our soul is not more
excellent, than this tainture of it, is odious, and deadly; our composition
lays us open to mortality, but our sin exposes us to the eternal wrath of
God, and the issue of it, eternal damnation: The grave waits for us, as men;
hell, as sinners: Beasts compare with us in our being; in our sinning, Devils
insult over us. And now, since the spring is foul, how can the streams be
clear? Alas, what act of ours is free from this woeful pollution? who eats, or
drinks, or sleeps, or moves, or talks, or thinks, or hears, or prays without
it? Even he that was blessed with the sight of the third heaven, as tired with
this clogge, could say, O wretched man that J am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? Blessed Apostle, if thou were so sensible of thy
in-dwelling corruptions, who knew'st nothing by thy self, how must our hearts
needs rend with shame, and sorrow, who are guilty of so many thousand
transgressions, which our impotence can neither avoid, nor expiate? how justly
do we fear God, since we have deserved to be under so deep a condemnation.

OF THE SIGHT and FEAR of the ALMIGHTY. The Second Book.
SECT. I.
THus therefore when a man shall have steadfastly fixed his eyes upon the dread
Majesty of an ever-present God, and upon the deplored wretchedness of his own
condition, he shall be in a meet capacity to receive this holy Fear, whereof
we treat: Neither indeed is it possible for him to see that all-glorious
presence, and not presently thereupon find himself affected with a trembling
kind of awfulnesse. Neither can he look upon his own vileness, without an
humble and bashful dejection of soul; But when he shall see both these at
once, and compare his own shameful estate, with the dreadful,
incomprehensible Majesty of the great God; his own impotence, with that
almighty power; his own sinfulness, with that infinite purity, and justice;
his own misery with the glory of that immense mercy, how can he choose but be
wholly possessed with a devout shivering, and religious astonishment. The heart
then thus tempered with the high thoughts of a God, and the humble conceits of
our selves, is fit for the impression of this Fear, which is no other, than an
awful disposition of the soul to God: wherein there is a double stamp, or
signature; the one, is an inward adoration of the Majesty seen and
acknowledged; the other, a tender and filial care of being secretly approved
of God; and of avoiding the displeasure, and offense of that God whom we so
adore. The first, is a continual bowing the knees of our hearts to that great,
and holy God; both inwardly blessing, and praising him in all his divine
attributes; in his infinite power, wisdom, justice, mercy, and truth; and
humbly submitting and resigning our selves wholly to his divine pleasure in all
things; whether for his disposing, or chastising.

SECT. II.
ALL true adoration begins from within; even the soul has the same parts, and
postures with the body: as therefore it has eyes to see, so it has a tongue
to speak unto, and a knee to bend unto the Majesty of the Almighty: Shortly
then; we shall inwardly adore the God of heaven, when our hearts are wrought to
be awfully affected to the acknowledgment, chiefly of his infinite Greatness,
and infinite Goodness; And this shall be best done, by the consideration of
the effects of both: Even in meaner matters, we cannot attain to the
knowledge of things by their causes; but are glad to take up with this
secondary information: how much more in the highest of all causes, in whom
there is nothing but transcendency, and infiniteness? We shall therefore most
feelingly adore the infinite greatness of God, upon representing unto our
selves, the wonderful work of his creation, and his infinite goodness, in the
no less wonderful work of our redemption: Romans 1.20.
For (as the great Doctor of the Gentiles most divinely) the invisible things
of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made; even his eternal power, and Godhead. Even so, O God,
if we cannot see thee, we cannot but see the world, that thou have made: and in
that, we see some glympses of thee: When we behold some goodly pile of
building, or some admirable picture, or some rarely-artificiall engine, our
first question uses to be, who made it? and we judge of, and admire the skill
of the workman, by the excellent contrivance of the work; how can we do
otherwise in this mighty and goodly frame of thy universe? Lord what a world is
this of thine, which we see? What a vast, what a beautiful fabric is this,
above and about us? Lo thou, that made such an heaven, can thou be other
than infinitely glorious? O the power and wisdom of such a Creator! Every
Star is a world alone, the least of those globes of light, are far greater
than this our whole inferior world, of earth and waters (which we think scarce
measurable,) and what a world of these lightsome worlds have thou marshalled
together in that one firmament? and yet what room have thou left in that large
contignation, for more? so as the vacant space betwixt one Star, and another,
is more in extent than that which is filled: In how exact a regularity do these
celestial bodies move, ever since their first setting forth, without all
variation of the time or place of their rising, or setting; without all change
of their influences? In what point and minute Adams new created eyes saw them
begin, and shut up their diurnall motions, we, his late posterity, upon that
same day and in the same Climate find them still; How have they looked upon
their spectators, in millions of changed generations, and are still where they
were, looking still for more? But, above the rest, who can but be astonished at
that constant miracle of nature, the glorious Sun, by whose beams, all the
higher and lower world is illuminated; and by whose sole benefit, we have use
of our eyes? O God, what were the world without it, but a vast, and sullen
dungeon of confusion, and horror; and, with it, what a Theater of beauty and
wonders? what a sad season is our midnight, by reason of his farthest absence;
and yet, even then, some glympses of emanations, and remainders of that hidden
light, diffuse themselves through the air, and forbid the darkness to be
absolute. Oh what an hell were utter darkness; what a reviving and glorious
spectacle it is, when the morning opens the curtains of heaven, and shows the
rising Majesty of that great Ruler of the day, which too many eyes have seen
with adoration; never any saw, without wonder, and benediction: And if thy
creature be such, what, oh, what art thou that have made it? As for that other
faithful witness in heaven, what a clear and lasting testimony does it give
to all beholders, of thine omnipotence? Always, and yet never changing? still
uniforme in her constant variations, still regular in the multiplicity of her
movings; and O God, what a train does that great Queen of Heaven (by thine
appointment) draw after her? no less than this vast element of waters, so many
thousand miles distant from her sphere? She moves in heaven, the sea follows
her, in this inferior orb, and measures his paces by hers: How deep, how
spacious, how restlesly turbulent is that liquid body? and how tamed and
confined by thine Almightinesse? How justly did thou expostulate with thy
people of old, by thy Prophet Jeremy, Fear ye not me, Ier. 5.22.
says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the
sand, for the bounds of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass
it; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet they cannot prevail;
though they roar, yet can they not pass over it? And what a stupendous work
of omnipotence is it, that thou, O God, have hanged up this huge globe of water
and earth, in the midst of a yielding air, without any stay, or foundation,
save thine own eternal decree? How wonderful art thou in thy mighty winds;
which, whence they come, and whither they go, thou only know; in thy
dreadful thunders, and lightnings; in thy threatening Comets, and other fiery
exhalations? With what mavelous variety of creatures have thou peopled all
these thy roomy elements; all of several kinds, fashions, natures,
dispositions, uses; and yet all their innumerable motions, actions, events, are
predetermined and overruled by thine all-wise, and almighty providence! What
man can but open his eyes, and see round about him these demonstrations of thy
divine power, and wisdom, and not inwardly praise thee in thine excellent
greatness? For my own practice, I cannot find a better notion, whereby to work
my heart to an inward adoration of God, than this; Thou that have made all this
great world, and guidest, and governest it, and fillest and comprehendest it,
being thy self infinite and incomprehensible: And I am sure there can be no
higher representation of the divine greatness unto our selves. Although
withal, we may find enough at home: for what man that looks no further than
himself, and sees the goodly frame of his body, erected and employed for the
harbor of a spiritual, and immortal soul, can choose but say, I will praise
thee, for I am fearfully, and wonderfully made.

SECT. III.
SVrely, could we forget all the rest of the world, it is enough to fetch us
upon our knees, and to strike an holy awe into us, to think that in him we
live, and move, and have our being: For, in these our particular obligations,
there is a mixed sense both of the greatness, and goodness of our God; which,
as it manifestly shows it self in the wondrous work of our excellent
creation, so most of all magnifies it self, in the exceedingly gracious work
of our redemption: Great is thy mercy that thou may be feared, says the
sweet Singer of Israel; Lo, power does not more command this holy fear, than
mercy does; though both here, meet together; for as there was infinite mercy
mixed with power, in thus creating us; so also, there is a no less mighty
power mixed with infinite mercy, in our redemption: What heart can but awfully
adore thy sovereign mercy, O blessed God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
in sending thine only, and coequall Son, the Son of thy love, the Son of
thine eternal essence, out of thy bosom, down from the height of celestial
glory, into this vale of tears and death, to abase himself, in the susception
of our nature, to clothe himself with the rags of our humanity, to endure
temptation, shame, death, for us? O blessed Jesus, the redeemer of mankind, what
soul can be capable of a sufficient adoration of thine inconceive able mercy,
in thy mean and despicable incarnation, in thy miserable, and toilsome life,
in thy bloody agony, in thine ignominious and tormenting passion, in thy woeful
sense of thy fathers wrath in our stead, and lastly, in thy bitter and painful
death? thou that knew no sin, were made sin for us, thou that art
omnipotent, would die; and by thy death, have victoriously triumphed over
death, and hell. It is enough, O Savior, it is more than enough, to ravish our
hearts with love, and to bruise them with a loving fear. O blessed Spirit, the
God of comfort, who but thou only can make our souls sensible of thy
unspeakable mercy, in applying to us the wonderful benefit of this our dear
redemption, in the great work of our inchoate regeneration, in the mortifying
of our evil and corrupt affections, in raising us to the life of grace, and
preparing us for the life of glory? O God, if mercy be proper to attract fear,
how must our hearts, in all these respects, needs be filled with all awful
regard unto thy divine bounty? Psalm. 31.20.
Oh how great is the goodness that thou have laid up for those that fear
thee, even before the sons of men!

SECT. IV.
NOw we may not think this inward adoration of the greatness, and goodness of
God to be one simple act, but that, which is sweetly compounded of the
improvement of many holy affections: for there cannot but be love mixed with
this fear; Eccl. 25.5.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of love; and this fear must be mixed
with joy: Psalm. 2.11.
Rejoice in him with trembling: and this fear and joy, is still mixed with
hope: Pro. ^1.2^.
For in the fear of the Lord is strong confidence; and the eye of the Lord is
upon them that fear him, Psalm. 33.1^.
upon them that hope in his mercy: As therefore, we are wont to say that our
bodies are not, neither can be nourished with any simple ingredient; so may we
truly say of our souls, that they neither receive any comfort, or
establishment, nor execute any powers of theirs, by any sole single affection;
but require a gracious mixture for both. As that father said of obedience, we
may truly say of grace, that it is all copulative. Neither may we think, that
one only impression of this holy fear, and inward adoration will serve the
turn, to season all our following disposition, and carriage; but, there must
be a virtuall continuation thereof, in all the progress of our lives; Our
Schools do here seasonably distinguish of perpetuity, of, whether the second
act, when all our several motions and actions are so held on, as that there is
no cessation, or intermission of their performance: (which we cannot here
expect) Or, of the first act, when there is an habit of this inward adoration,
settled upon the heart so constantly, that it is never put off, by what ever
occurrences; so as whatsoever we do, whatsoever we endeavor, has a secret
relation hereunto. And this second way; we must attain unto, if ever we will
aspire to any comfort in the fruition of Gods presence here, upon earth, and
our meet disposition toward him. I have often thought of that deep, and
serious question of the late judicious, and honorable, Mr. Samuel Burton
Archdeacon of Gloucester.
Sir Fulke Grevil, Lord Brook, (a man worthy of a fairer death, and everlasting
memory) moved to a learned kinsman of mine, (much interessed in that Noble man)
who when he was discoursing of an incident matter, very considerable, was taken
off with this quick interrogation, of that wise and noble person; What is that
to the Infinite? as secretly implying, that all our thoughts and discourse must
be reduced thither; and that they fail of their ends, if they be any other
where terminated* It was a word well becoming the profound judgment, and
quintessentiall notions of that rare, memorable Peer. And certainly so it is,
if the cogitations and affections of our hearts be not directed to the glory of
that infinite God, both they are lost, and we in them.

SECT. V.
REligious adoration begins in the heart, but rests not there; diffusing it
self through the whole man, and commanding all the powers of the soul, and
all the parts of the body to comply in a reverent devotion: so that, as we
fear the Lord whom we serve, so we serve the Lord with fear.

Where the heart stoopes, it cannot be, but the knees must bend, the eyes and
hands must be lift up; and the whole body will strive to testify the inward
veneration; as upon all occasions, so especially, when we have to deal with
the sacred affairs of God, and offer to present our selves to any of his
immediate services: Our fear cannot be smothered in our bosoms; Every thing
that pert^ines to that infinite Majesty must carry from us due testifications
of our awe; his Name, his Word, his Services, his House, his Messengers: I
cannot allow the superstitious niceties of the Jews, in the matters of God;
yet I find in their practice, many things worthily imitable; such as favor of
the fear of their father Isaac, and such as justly shame our profane
carelessness.

There is no wise man but must needs mislike their curious scruples, concerning
that ineffable name, the letters and syllables whereof, they held in such
dreadful respect, that they deemed it worthy of death, for any but sacred
lips, and that, but in set times and places, to express it; as if the mention
of it pierced the side of God, together with their own heart; Schichard de
jure regio Hebr.
And, if the name of God were written upon their flesh, that part might not be
touched either with water, or ointment. But well may we learn this point of
wit, and grace from this first, (and, then, the only) people of God; not
rashly, slightly, regardlesly, to take the awful name of God into our mouths,
but to hear and speak it (when occasion is given) with all holiness, and due
veneration.

There are those that stumble at their adoration at the blessed name of Jesus,
prescribed and practiced by our Church; as unjustly conceiving, that we put a
superstitious holiness in the very sound, and syllabicall enunciation of the
word; whereas, it is the person of that blessed Savior, to whom, upon this
occasion, our knees are bended: A gesture so far out of the just reach of
blame, that if it seemed good to the wisdom of the Church, to allot this
reverent respect to all* whatsoever the names, whereby the Majesty of God, in
the whole sacred Trinity, is signified, and expressed to men, it were most meet
to be accordingly exhibited unto them: And now, since it has (without
inhibition of the like regard to the rest) pitched upon that name, which
intimating and comprising in it the whole gracious work, and immediate author
of our dear redemption, has been exposed to the reproach and opposition of
the gainsaying world; We cannot (if we be not wanting to our filial
obedience) detrect our observance of so ancient, and pious an institution.
Never any contempt was dared to be cast upon the glorious name of the
Almighty, and absolute Deity, only the state of exinanition, subjected the
Son of God to the scorn, and under-valuation of the world; Justly therefore
has our holy and gracious Mother thought fit, and ordained, upon that person
and name, which seemed less honorable, and lay more open to affront, to
bestow the more abundant honor: In the mean time, as she is a professed
incourager and an indulgent lover of all true devotion, she cannot but be well
pleased, with what soever expressions of reverence, we give to the divine
Majesty, under whatsoever terms, uttered by our well advised, and well
instructed tongues.

I have known, and honored, as most worthy a constant imitation, some devout
persons, that never durst mention the name of God, in their ordinary
communication, without uncovering of their heads, or elevation of their hands,
or some such other testimony of reverence.

And certainly, if the heart be so thoroughly possessed with a sad awe of that
infinite Majesty, as it ought; the tongue dares not presume in a sudden
unmannerlinesse to blurt out the dreadful name of God; but shall both make way
for it, by a premised deliberation, and attend it with a reverent elocution. I
am ashamed to think how far we are surpassed by heathenish piety; The ancient
Grecians and amongst the rest, Plato, (as Suidas well observes,) when they
would swear by their Jupiter, out of the mere dread, and reverence of his
name, forbear to mention him: breaking off their oath, with a, (...), as those
that only dare to owe the rest to their thoughts; And Climas the Pythagorean,
out of this regard, would rather undergo a mulct of three talents, than
swear. Whiles the profane mouths of many Christians, make no difference in
their appellation, between their God, and their servant.

SECT. VI.
AS the name, so the word of our maker challenges an awful regard from us, as
a reflection of that fear we owe to the omnipotent author of it. What worlds
of nice caution have the masters of the Synagogue prescribed to their
disciples, for their demeanor toward the book of the Law, of their God? No
letter of it might be writ without a copy; no line of it without a rule; and
the rule must be upon the back of the parchment; no parchment might be
employed to this service, but that which is made of the skin of a clean
beast; no word might be written in a different color; insomuch as when in the
Pentateuch of Alexander the Great, Idem Schicardus de jure regio Heb^aeorum.
the name of Jehovah, was (in pretense of honor) written in golden Characters,
their great Rabbis condemned the whole volume to be obliterated, and defaced:
No man might touch it, but with the right hand, and without a kiss of
reverence: No man might sit in the presence of it; No man might so much as spit
before it; No man might carry it behind him; but lay it next to his heart, in
his travel; No man might offer to read it, but in a clean place; no man might
sell it, though the copy were moth-eat, and himself half famished: And is the
word of the everlasting God of less worth and authority, now, than it has
been? Or is there less cause of our reverence of those divine Oracles, than
theirs? Certainly, if they were superstitiously scrupulous, it is not for us to
be carelessly slovenly, and neglective of that sacred Book, out of which we
shall once be judged: Even that impure Alcoran of the Turks is forbidden to
be touched by any but pure hands. It was not the least praise of Carlo
Boromeo, Ogier. Apolog. Balsac^, etc.
the late Saint of Millaine, that he would never read the divine Scripture,
but upon his knees; and if we profess to bear no less inward honor to that
sacred volume; why should we, how can we think it free for us to entertain it
with an unmannerly neglect?

SECT. VII.
AS to the name and word, so to the services of God must the efficacy of our
holy fear be diffused; and these, whether private or public: If we pray, our
awe will call us, either to a standing on our feet, as servants; or a bowing of
our knees, as suppliants; or, a prostration on our faces, as dejected
penitents; Neither when the heart is a Camel, can the body be an Elephant:
What Prince would not scorn the rudeness of a sitting petitioner? It was a
just distinction of Socrates of old, (...). Plat. Apol.
that, to sacrifice, is to give to God; to pray, is to beg of God: And who is
so liberal, as to cast away his alms upon a stout, and unreverent beggar? If
we attend Gods message in the mouth of his holy servants, whether read or
preached, our fear will frame us to a reverent carriage of our bodies; so as
our very outward deportment may really seem to speak the words of the good
Centurion; Acts 10.33
Now we are all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded
thee of God; we shall need no law to veil our bonnets, save that in our own
breast. It was a great word that Simeon the son of Satach, Talm.
said to the Jewish Prince, and Priest, convented before their Sanhedrin; Thou
stand not before us, but before him that said, Let the world be made, and it
was made: did we think so, how durst we sit in a bold sauciness (whiles that
great Embassy is delivered) with our hats on our heads; as if we acknowledged
no presence but of our inferiors; yea, (that which is a shame to say) those
very apprentices, who dare not cover their heads at home, where their Master is
alone; yet, in Gods house, where they see him in a throng of his betters,
waiting upon the ordinances of the God of heaven, think it free for them,
equally, to put on, and to be no less fellows with their Master, than he is
with his Maker: as if the place and service gave a public privilege to all
comers, of a profane lawlesnesse: Surely, the same ground whereon the Apostle
built his charge for the covering of the heads of the women, serves equally for
the uncovering the heads of the men, Because of the Angels; yea more, because
of the God of the Angels; 1 Cor. 11.10.
who by these visible Angels of his Church, speaks to us, and solicites our
salvation. If we address our selves to the dreadful mysteries of the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus, our fear will bend our
knees in a meet reverence to that great and gracious Savior, who is there
lively represented, offered, given, sealed up to our souls; who at that
heavenly Table, is, (as Saint Jerome truly) both the guest, Ipse conviva and
convivium. Ad Hedibiam
and the banquet: Neither can the heart that is seasoned with true piety, be
afraid of too lowly a participation of the Lord of glory; but rather resolves,
that he is not worthy of knees, who will not here bow them; for, who should
command them, if not their Maker, if not their Redeemer? Away with the monsters
of opinion, and practice, concerning this Sacrament: Christ Jesus is here
really tendered unto us; and who can, who dares take him but on his knees? What
posture can we use with our fellows, if we sit with our God and Savior? At
our best, well may we say with the humble Centurion; Lord we are not worthy
thou should come under our roof: but, if we prepare not both souls, and
bodies, to receive him reverently, our sinful rudeness shall make us utterly
incapable of so blessed a presence.

SECT. VIII.
NEither does our awful regard reach only to the actions of Gods service, but
extends it self even to the very house, which is called by his name: the place
where his honor dwells. For, as the presence of God gives an holiness to
what place soever he is pleased to show himself in; (as the Sun carries an
inseparable light wheresoever it goes) so that holiness calls for a meet
veneration from us: It was a fit word for that good Patriarch, who swear by his
fathers fear; which he spoke of his Bethel; Genesis 31.53
How dreadful is this place, Genesis 28.17
this is none other, but the house of God: this is the gate of Heaven. The
several distances, and distinctions that were observed in the Temple of God,
at Jerusalem, are famously known: None might sit within the verge thereof,
but the King; all others, either stood, or kneeld. I have read of some sects of
men so curiously scrupulous, that their Priests were not allowed to breathe in
their Temple, Rugianorum sacerdos non intra aedem Dei sui halitum emittebatne,
etc. Hospinian de orgi. Festor. Mabumetan.
but were commanded (whiles they went in to sweep the floor) to hold their
wind, (like those that dive for sponges at Samos) to the utmost length of
time; and when they would vent their suppressed air, and change it for new, to
go forth of the doors, and return with a fresh supply. But, Zago Zabaes
relation.
we are sure the Ethiopian Christians are so holily mannerly, that they do not
allow any man so much as to spit in their Churches; and if such a defilement
happen, they cause it to be speedily cleansed: What shall we then say of the
common profaneness of those careless Christians, that make no distinction,
betwixt their Church, and their barn; that care not to look unto their foul
feet, when they come under this sacred roof; that with equal irreverence
stumble into Gods house, and their tavern; that can find no fitter place for
their ambulatory, their burse, their counting house; their sepulcher? It is
recorded of Saint Swithine, Matthew. Westmonast. 862.
the (no less famous than humble) Bishop of Winchester, that when he died, he
gave charge that his body should not in any case be buried, within the Church;
but be laid where his grave might be wet with rain, and open to weather and
passengers; I suppose, as conceiving that sacred place too good for the
repository of the best carcasses.

Surely, we cannot easily entertain too venerable an opinion of the habitation
of the Almighty: If our hearts have the honor to be the spiritual Temples of
God, we shall gladly give all due honor to his material Temples: and
doubtless in all experience, we shall so respect the house, as we are affected
to the owner. It was the discipline and practice of the Hetruscians, from whom
old Rome learned much of her skill in Auguries, and many mysteries of religion,
that those deities whom they desired to harbor in their own breasts, as
Virtue, Peace, Modesty, should have Temples erected within their walls; but
those, which were the Presidents of wars and combustions, or pleasures, and
sensuality, (as Mars, Venus, Vulcan,) should take up with Temples without
their walls: And even so it is, and will be ever with us; if we have an holy
regard to the God of heaven, and adore him, as inhabiting our bosoms, we
cannot but give all fair and venerable respects to those houses, which he has
taken up for his own worship, and presence.

SECT. IX.
NEither, lastly, can Gods very Messengers (though partners of our own
infirmities) escape some sensible reflections of our fear: It was the rule of
the Jews, that the very Prince of the people, Vide Schicardum de jure regio
Hebr.
if he would consult Gods Oracle, out of reverence to that divine pectorall,
must reverently stand before that Priest, who, at other times was bound to give
lowly obedience to his Sovereign Lord. What Great Alexander did to the Jewish
high Priest, who knows not? Neither has the practices of the godly Emperors
in the Christian Church, through all successions of Ages, savored of less
regard: Even the late Caesar Ferdinand in the sight of our English, not long
before his end, together with his Empress, received an Episcopal benediction
publicly, upon their knees. Away with that insolent pomp of kissing of toes,
Lipsius, electorum lib. 2. turpem and servilem.
(which Iustus Lipsius justly called once, foul and servile) fit for a
Caligula, or Maximinus the younger, or a Dioclesian; Away with the proud
horsing on shoulders, or treading on necks, or the lackeying of Princes; It was
a moderate word of Cardinal Zabarell, concerning his great Master; Tract. de
Schism: Innocentii septimi and Benedicti.
So is he to be honored, that he be not adored. Surely when religion was at
the best, great Peers thought it no scorn to kiss the venerable hands of
their spiritual fathers; Paulin. in vita Sancti Ambrosii.
and did not grudge them eminent titles of honor. It was but a simple port
that Elijah carried in the world, who after that astonishing wonder of fetching
down fire and water from heaven, thought it no abasement to be Ahabs lackey
from Carmel to Iezreel; 1 Kings 18.46.
yet Obadiah, who was high Steward to the King of Israel, even that day, could
fall on his face to him, and say, Art thou that my Lord Elijah? Not much
greater was the state of those Christian Bishops, who began, now to breathe
from the bloody persecutions of the heathen Emperors; yet, with what
dearness did that gracious Constantine (in whom this Island is proud to
challenge no small share) kiss those scarres, which they had received for the
name of Christ? with what titles did he dignifie them? as one that saw Christ
in their faces; and meant in their persons to honor his Savior: And indeed,
there is so close, and indissoluble a relation betwixt Christ and his
Messengers, that their mutual interest can never be severed. What Prince does
not hold himself concerned in the honors, or affronts that are done to his
Ambassadors? Those keys which God has committed to our hands, lock us so fast
to him, that no power in earth, or hell, can separate us; but still that word
must stand fast, in heaven: He that despises you, despises me: In vain shall
they therefore pretend to fear God, that contemn and disgrace their
spiritual governors. There is a certain plant, Gerard page 642.
which our Herbalists call ( herbam impiam) or wicked Cudweed, whose younger
branches still yield flowers to overtop the elder; Such weeds grow too rife
abroad; It is an ill soil that produces them: I am sure, that where the heart
is manured, and seasoned with a true fear of the Almighty, there cannot be but
an awful regard to our spiritual Pastors; well are those two charges
conjoined, Eccl. 7.33.
Fear God, and honor his Priests.

SECT. X.
HItherto having considered that part of holy Fear, which (consisting in an
inward adoration of God) expresses it self in the awful respects to his
Name, Word, Services, House, Messengers; we descend to that other part, which
consists in our humble subjection, and selfe-resignatito his good pleasure, in
all things; whether to order, or correct: The suffering part is the harder. It
was a gracious resolution of old Eli; 1 Samuel 3.18
It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever he will; Surely, that man, though he
were but an ill Father, to his worse sons, yet he was a good son to his
Father in heaven: for nothing but a true filial awe could make the heart thus
pliant; that represents our selves to us, as the clay, and our God to us, as
the potter; and therefore shows us how unjustly we should repine at any form,
or use, that is by his hand put upon us: I could envy that word which is said
to have fallen from the mouth of Francis of Assisse, in his great extremity; I
thank thee, Lib. 1. Conform^^uct. 12.
O Lord God, for all my pain; and I beseech thee (if thou think good) to add
unto it, an hundred fold more. Neither was it much different from that, which I
have read, as reported of Pope Adrian, Binius, etc.
but I am sure was spoken by a worthy divine, within my time and knowledge, of
the University of Cambridge. (whose labors are of much note, and use in the
Church of God) Master Perkins; who, when he lay in his last, and killing
torment of the stone, hearing the bystanders to pray for a mitigation of his
pain, willed them, not to pray for an ease of his complaint, but for an
increase of his patience; These speeches cannot proceed but from subdued, and
meek, and mortified souls; more intentive upon the glory of their Maker, than
their own peace and relaxation: And certainly, the heart thus seasoned, cannot
but be equally tempered to all conditions, as humbly acknowledging the same
hand, both in good, and evil: And therefore, even frying in Phalaris his Bull
(as the Philosopher said of a wise man) will be able to say, How pleasant?
Quam suave? Was it true of that heathen Martyr, Socrates, that, as in his
lifetime he was not wont to change his countenance upon any alteration of
events, so when he should come to drink his Hemlock, (...). Plat. Apol. etc.
as Plato reports it, no difference could be descryed, either in his hand or
face; no palenesse in his face, no trembling in his hand, but a steadfast and
fearlesse taking of that fatal cup, as if it differed not from the wine of his
meals? Even this resolution was no other, than an effect of the acknowledgment
of that one God for which he suffered; If so, I cannot less magnify that man
for his temper, than the Oracle did for his wisdom: but I can do no less
than bless, and admire the known courage, and patience of those Christian
Martyrs, who out of a loving fear of him, that only can save, and cast both
bodies and souls in hell, despised shame, pain, death, and manfully insulted
upon their persecutors? Blessed Ignatius could profess to challenge and
provoke the furious Lions, to his dilaniation. Blessed Cyprian could pray that
the Tyrant would not repent of the purpose of dooming him to death; and that
other holy Bishop, when his hand was threatened to be cut off, could say, Seca
ambas, Cut of both: It is not for me to transcribe volumes of Martyrologies.
All that holy army of conquering Saints began their victories in an humble awe
of him, whose they were; and cheerfully triumphed over irons, and racks, and
gibbets, and wheels, and fires, out of a meek and obedient submission to the
will and call of their ever-blessed God, and most dear Redeemer; In so much as
Saint Chrysostom professes to find patterns and parallels, for himself in all
varieties of tormenrs, and whatsoever several forms of execution: And the
blessed Apostle has left us a red Calender of these constant witnesses of God;
whose memory is still on earth, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38.
their Crown in heaven.

Neither is it thus only in the undaunted sufferings for the causes of God; but
our awe subjects us also to the good will of God, in all whatsoever changes of
estate. Do I smart with afflictions? I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
Mich. 7.9.
because I have sinned against him. I held my peace because thou Lord have done
it. Do I abound in blessings? Who am I, O Lord God, 2 Samuel 7.18
and what is my fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto: Philip. 4.11.
In both; J have learned in what condition soever I am, to be there with
content.

SECT. XI.
THus do we bow the knee^ of our hearts to God, in our adoration of his
Majesty, both in duly magnifying his greatness and goodness; and in our
humble submission to his holy, and gracious pleasure* there remains that other
signature of our awful disposition, which consists in a tender and child-like
care, both of his secret approbation of us, and of our avoydance of his
displeasure, and our offense toward him; these two part not asunder, for, he
that desires to be approved, would be loath to displease.

The heart that is rightly affected to God, is ambitious, above all things,
under heaven, of the secret allowance of the Almighty; and therefore is
careful to pass a continual, and exact inquisition upon all his thoughts,
much more upon his actions, what acceptance, or censure they find above; like
as some timorous child upon every stitch, that she takes in her first Sampler,
looks tremblingly in the face of her Mistress, to see how she likes it; Error
Tho. Aqui. Quodlib. art. 20. Hospin. in notis ad regul Benedicti.
as well knowing that the Law of God was not given us (as some have said of
Benedicts rule) only to profess, but to peforme; and that accordingly the
conscience shall find either peace or tumult. As we are wont therefore, to say
of the Dove, that at the picking up of every grain, she casts her eyes up to
heaven, so will our godly fear teach us to do, after all our speeches and
actions: For which cause it will be necessary to exercise our hearts with very
frequent (if not continual) ejaculations; Io. Capgrave.
I remember the story tells us of that famous Irish Saint (of whom there are
many monuments in these western parts) that he was wont to sign himself,
Patricius.
no less than an hundred times in an hour: Away with all superstition;
although Cardinal Bellarmine tells us (not improbably) that in the practice of
those ancient Christians, In one of his prefaces to his controversy.
their crossing was no other than a silent kind of invocation of that Savior,
who was crucified for us; Surely I should envy any man that has the leisure,
and grace, to lift up his heart thus often, to his God; let the glance be
never so short: neither can such a one choose, but be full of religious fear:
I like not the fashion of the Euchites, that were all prayer, and no practice,
but the mixture of these holy elevations of the soul, with all out actions,
with all recreations, is so good and laudable, tha^ whosoever is most frequent
i^ it, shall pass with me for mos^ devout, and most conversant it heaven.

But the most proper an^ pregnant proof of this Fear^ of God, (...). Plat.
Euthy phr.
is the fear of offending God; in which regard i^ is perfectly filial; The
goo^ child is afraid of displeasin^ his father, though he were su^^ not to be
beaten; whereas, the slave is only afraid of stripes not of displeasure: Out of
this dear awe to his father in heaven, the truly regenerate trembles to be but
tempted; and yet resolves not to yield to any assault; whether proffers of
favor, or violence of battery, all is one: The obfirmed soul will hold out,
and scorns so much as to look of what color the flagge is; as having learned
to be no less afraid of sin, than of hell: and if the option were given him,
whether he would rather sin without punishment; or be punished without
sin, the choice would not be difficult; any torment were more easy than the
conscience of a divine displeasure. It was good Joseph's just question. Genesis
39.9.
How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Lo it is the
sin that he sticks at, not the judgment; as one that would have feared the
offense, if there had been no hell: But, if it fall out that the renewed
person (as it is incident to the most dutiful children of God) be, through a
violent tentation, and his own infirmity, miscarryed into a known sin, how
much warm water does it cost him, ere he can recover his wonted state? what
anxiety, what strife, what torture, what selfe-revenge, what ejaculations and
complaints, what unrepining subjection to the rod? I have sinned, Job 7.20.
what shall I do to thee, O thou preserver of men; So I have seen a good
natured child, that even after a sharp whipping, could not be quieted till he
had obtained the pardon, and evened the brows of a frowning parent.

And now, (as it is with little ones, that have taken a knock with a late fall)
the good man walks hereafter with so much the more wary foot; and is the more
fearfully jealous of his own infirmity, and finding in himself but the very
inclinations toward the first motions of evil, he is careful, according to
that wholesome rule of a strict Votary, Benedict. reg. cap. 4.
( Cogitationes malas mox ad Christum allidere,) instantly to dash his newborn evil thoughts against the rock Christ. And henceforth, out of a
suspicion of the danger of excess, he dares not go to the further end of his
tether, but in a wise and safe rigor, abridges himself of some part of that
scope, which he might be allowed to take, and will stint himself rather than
lash out; indeed, right reason teaches us to keep aloof from offending that
power which we adore: Mar. Dorza. Sab. post d^minic. 4 Quadrag
The ancient Almaines holding their rivers for gods, durst not wash their faces
with those waters, lest they should violate those deities: And the Jews were
taught not to dare to come near an Idolatrous grove, though the way were never
so direct and commodious. No wise man however he might have firm footing upon
the edge of some high rocky promontory, will venture to walk within some paces
of that downfall; but much more will his sense and judgment teach him to
refrain from casting himself headlong (like that desperate Barbarian in
Xenophon) from that steep precipice; Xenoph. de exped. Cyri.
The fear of God therefore is a strong retentive from sin; neither can
possibly consist (in what-soever soul) with a resolution to offend; As then
the father of the faithful when he came into Gerar, a Philistim City, could
strongly argue that those heathens would refrain from no wickedness, because
the fear of God was not in that place; Genesis 20.11
so, we may no less irrefragably infer, where we see a trade of prevalent
wickedness, there can be no fear of God: Woe is me, what shall I say of this
last age, but the same that I must say of mine own? As this decrepit body,
therefore, by reason of the unequal temper of humors, and the defect of
radical moisture and heat, cannot but be a sewer of all diseases; So it is, so
it will be with the decayed old age of this great body of the world, through
want of the fear of the ever-living God; Psalm 119.136.
Rivers of waters O God shall run down mine eyes because men keep not thy law.
But what do I suggest to the obdured hearts of wilful sinners, the sweet and
gracious remedies of a loving fear? This preservative is for children; sturdy
rebels must expect other receipts: A frown is an heavy punishment to a dutiful
son, scourges and scorpions are but enough for a rebellious vassal. I must
lay before such, an hell of vengeance; and show them the horrible Topheth
prepared of old, even that bottomless pit of perdition; and tell them of
rivers of brimstone, of a worm ever gnawing, of everlasting burnings, of
weeping, wailing, 2 These 1.8
and gnashing, when the terrible Judge of the world shall come in flaming fire
rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and obey him not; And certainly,
if the sinner had not an Infidel in his bosom, the expectation of so direful
a condition, to be inflicted and continued upon him, unto all eternity, without
possibility of any intermission, or of any remission* were enough to make him
run made with fear; only unbeleefe keeps him from a frantic despair, and a
sudden leap into his hell. And if the custom and deceit of sin have wrought
an utter senselessness in those brawny hearts, I must leave them over to the
woeful sense of what they will not fear, yea to the too late fear of what
they shall not be able either to bear, or avoid. Certainly the time will
come, when they shall be swallowed up with a dreadful confusion, and shall no
more be able not to fear, than not to be; Oftentimes even in the midst of all
their secure jollity, God writes bitter things against them, such as make their
knees to knock together, their lips to tremble, their teeth to chatter, their
hands to shake, their hearts to fail within them, for the anguish of their
souls; Were they as insensate as the earth it self, Habac. 3.10.
Touch the mountains and they shall smoke, says the Psalmist; The mountains
saw thee, and they trembled, says Habbacuc: But if their fear be respited, it
is little for their ease; it does but forbear a little that it may overwhelme
them at once for ever; Woe is me for them; In how heavy and deplorable case
are they and feel it not? They lie under the fierce wrath of the Almighty, and
complain of nothing but ease. The mountains quake at him, Nahum. 1.56.
and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his presence; Who can stand
before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his
fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him, says the
Prophet Nahum. Yet, oh, what a grief it is to see, that so dreadful a power
should carry away no more fear from us wretched men; yea even from those that
are ready to fear where no fear is? Pains of body, frowns of the great,
restraint of liberty, loss of goods, who is it that fears not? But, alas, to
avoid these, men fear not to venture upon the displeasure of him whose anger
is death, and who is able to cast body and soul into hell fire: So we have
seen fond children, that to avoid a bugbeare have run into fire, or water:
So we have seen a starting jade, that suddenly flying from a shadow, has cast
himself into a ditch; We can but mourn in secret for those that have no
tears to spend upon themselves, and tremble for them that will needs gnash. If
those that are filthy, will be filthy still; If secure men will set up a trade
of sinning; every good heart will take up Nehemiahs resolution: Neh. 5.15
But so did not J, because of the fear of the Lord; and the practice of holy
Habacuc; Hab. 3.16.
I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble: It is wise
Solomon's good experiment, (which he loved to repeat; Prove. 16.6. Prove. 3.7.
) By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil: for they say one to another,
(as the Tremelian version has it, in Malachy) The Lord hearkeneth and hears;
Mal. 3.16.
and how dare they, how can they do amiss in that presence? For as the Saints
say, after the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb; Great and mavelous
are thy works, Revel. 15.3.4.
Lord God Almighty: Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints; who shall
not fear thee, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy.

SECT. XII.
SHortly then, that we may put these two together, (which are not willing to
be severed:) Whosoever is duly affected with a true filial fear of the
Almighty, cannot by allurements be drawn to do that which may offend so sweet
a mercy: cannot by any difficulties be discouraged from doing that which may
be pleasing to so gracious a majesty: The Magistrate that fears God, dares
not, cannot be partial to any wickedness; dares not, cannot be harsh to
innocence; managing that sword wherewith he is entrusted, so as God himself,
if he were upon earth, would do it, for the glory of his own just mercy: The
Messenger of God that fears him on whose errand he goes, dares not, cannot
either smother his message, or exceed it: he will, he must lift up his voice
like a trumpet, and tell Israel of her sins, and Judah of her transgressions;
not fearing faces, not sparing offenses. The ordinary Christian that fears
God, dares not cannot, but make conscience, of all his ways; he dares not
defraud or lie for an advantage, he dares not swear falsely for a world, he
dares not prostitute his body to whatsoever filthiness, he dares not oppress
his inferiors, he dares not turn away his own face from the poor, much less
dares he grind theirs; in one word, he dares rather die than sin; And
contrarily; what blocks soever nature lays in his way, (since his God calls
him forth to this combat) he cannot but bid battle to his own rebellious
corruptions, and offer a deadly violence to his evil and corrupt affections;
and enter the lists with all the powers of darkness, resisting unto blood, and
willingly bleeding, that he may overcome: Who now would not be in love with
this fear? Psalm. 34.9.
O fear the Lord ye his Saints, he that fears him shall lack nothing; Mal.
4.2.
The Sun of righteousness shall arise unto him with healing in his wings; In
the mean time, Psalm. 25 ^
the secret of the Lord is with him; The Angels of the Lord are ever about
him; P^al. ^^
Psalm. 2^.23
His soul shall dwell at ease here below; and above salvation is near unto
him; yea, Psalm. 85.10
he is already feoffed of life and glory. Pro. 19.25


SECT. XIII.
NOw, as some careful Pilot, that takes upon him to direct a difficult
sea-passage, which his long and wary observation has discovered, does not
content himself to steer a right course, in his own vessel, and to show the
eminent sea-markes a far off, but tells withal, what rocks, or shelves lie
on either side of the channel, which, upon the least deviation, may endanger
the passengers; So must we do, here; Having therefore sufficiently declared
wherein this fear of God consists, what it requires of us, and how it is
acted, and expressed by us; it remains, that we touch at those extremes,
which on both sides must be carefully avoided; These are, Security, and
Presumption on the one hand; on the other, Vicious fear. It was the word of
the wise man, yea, Prove. 28.14.
rather of God, by him, Happy is the man that fears always; but he that
hardneth his heart, shall fall into mischief; Lo an obdured security is
proposed to fear, both in the nature and issue of it: Fear intenerates the
heart, making it fit for all gracious impressions; security hardens it, and
renders it incapable of good: fear ends in happiness, security in an evitable
mischief; And these two (though contraries, yet) arise from the same cause
contrarily applied: Like as the same Sun hardens the clay, and softens the
wax; it is heat that does both; causing dryness in the one, and a dissolution
in the other: Even so the same beams of divine mercy melt the good heart into
an holy fear, (Great is thy mercy that thou may be feared) and harden the
wicked heart in a state of security; For, upon the goodness of God to men,
both in giving and forgiving, do men grow securely evil, and rebellious to
their God; as being apt to say; J have sinned, and what harm has happened
unto me? Ecclus. 5.4.
says Siracides: Lo even forbearance obdureth, Eccles. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work, is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: How much more
do the riches of Gods goodness which are the hottest beams of that Sun, Romans 2.4.
when they beat directly upon our heads? Prove. 1.32.
The ease of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall
destroy them, says Solomon; Our philosophy tells us, Nemo potest amplecti Dei
gratiam simul and seculi. Ambros, lib. 4. Epist. 29.
that an extreme heat shuts up those pores, which a moderate opens; It was a
sore word of Saint Ambrose; that no man can at once embrace Gods favor,
Aegidius. lib. Conform. and.c. conform. 8
and the world: Neither can I disallow that observation of a rigorous Votary;
that the Devils of consolation (as he calls them) are more subtle, and more
pernicious, than those of tribulation; Not so much perhaps in their own nature,
as for the party they find in our own breasts: The wise man could say; Prove.
30.9.
Lest J be full and deny thee, and ask, who is the Lord? Even very heathens
have been thus jealously conscious of their own disposition; Tit. Livius.
So as Camillus when upon ten years siege he had taken the wealthy city Veies,
could pray forsome mishap to befall himself, and Rome, to temper so great an
happiness. This is that which Gregory the great, upon his exaltation to that
papal honor, Torpet ignava men's, and circumla* trantibus curis temporalibus
cum pene ad stuporem deducta etc. Greg. Epist. l. 7.127.
does so much complain of, in himself: that his inward fall was no less than
his outward raising; and that his dull heart was almost grown stupid, with
those temporal occasions: And surely, so it will be, if there be not a strong
grace within us, Trifarius rerum cursus, Abun dantiae, Indigentiae,
Temperantiae; ex abundantia animoptatas etc. Fascic. temp. in An. 1404.
to season our prosperity.

That which the Historian observed in the course of the world, that abundance
begets delicacy and animosity; that again, quarrels and vastation of war;
and from thence grows poverty; is no less true in the particular state of the
soul; If we be rich and high fed, we grow wanton, and stomackfull, and apt to
make war with heaven, till we be taken down again with affliction:
Thereupon, it is that the wise and holy God, has found it still needful to
sauce our contentments with some mixtures of sorrow; and to proclaim the
Iubile of our mirth and freedom, upon the sad day of expiation: The man after
Gods own heart could say, In my prosperity I said, Psalm. 6.7.
I shall never be moved; but the next ye hear is, Thou did hide thy face,
and I was troubled; and this trouble he professes to have been for his good;
without these meet temperaments, worldly hearts run wild, and can say with
the scornful men, that rule in Jerusalem; Esaias. 28 15.
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when
the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come to us, for we
have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves: yea in a
stout insolence, as the Prophet Jeremy expresses it; Ier. 5.12.
They belie the Lord, and say, it is not he; neither shall evil come upon us;
neither shall we see sword, or famine. Neither yet is it only the abuse of Gods
long suffering and bounty that produces this ill habit of security, and
hard-heartednesse; but especially, a custom of sinning: Often treading hardens
the path; the hand that was at the first soft, and tender, after it has been
inured to work, grows brawned, and impenetrable. We have heard of Virgins,
which at the first, seemed modest; blushing at the motions of an honest love;
who being once corrupt, and debauched, have grown flexible to easy entreaties
unto unchastity, and from thence, boldly lascivious, so as to solicit others,
so as to prostitute themselves to all comers, yea (as our Casuists complain
of some Spanish Stews) to an unnatural filthiness. Martin. Vivaldus in
Candelabro. in Cap. de Confessi.
That which our Canonists say, in an other kind, is too true here, Vivald. 4.
part in 30.
Custom can give a Jurisdiction; neither is there any stronger law than it:
The continued use then of any known sin, be it never so small, gives (as
Gersons phrase is) a strong habituation; and, though it be a true rule, Habitus
inclinant, non cogunt.
that habits do only incline, not compel; yet the inclination that is wrought
by them, is so forceable, that it differs little from violent: Surely so
powrefull is the habit of sin, bred by ordinary practice, as that it takes
away the very sense of sinning; so as the offender now knows not that he does
the very act of some evil; much less that he sins, and offends in doing it;
and now the heart is all turned dead flesh, whether too good, or ill: there is
not then a more dangerous condition incident into the soul of man, than this
of security; it bars us of the capacity of any good, that may be wroug^^ upon
us, it exposes us to the success of all tentations, it draws down the
heaviest of Gods judgments upon our heads; it defies justice, it rejects
mercy, it makes the heart Gods Anvile, (which the harder it is struck, the more
rebounds the blow) but the devils featherbed, wherein he sinkes, and lies
soft, at free ease; neither would that evil spirit wish for any more pleasing
repose; it flatters the soul with an impossible impunity, it shifts off
necessary vengeance: Lastly, whiles other dispositions do but yield to an hell,
this invites it. By how much more woeful it is, by so much more careful must
we be to avoid it.

SECT. XIV.
IF we care for our souls then, we shall zealously apply our selves to prevent
this hellish evil; which shall be done, if we shall constantly use all
means to keep the heart tender; whereof the first is, Frequent meditation
upon the judgments of God, attending sinners: it is the Apostles own
prescript; Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, Heb. 12.28,
29.
with reverence and godly fear; For our God is a consuming fire. Could we but
stoop down a little, and look into hell, we should never come thither; the
apprehension of those torments would be sure to keep us from sinning, and and
impenitence; It is a true observation of Cyrill, that the want of belief is
guilty of all our obdurednesse; for should it be told thee, Cyr. in Lev. lib. 9
(says that Father) that a secular Judge intends to doom thee to be burned
alive to morrow, how busily would thou employ the remaining time to prevent
the judgment? how eagerly would thou run about, how submissively and
importunately would thou sue, and beg for pardon, how readily would thou
pour out thy money to those friends, that should purchase it? and why would
thou do all this, but because thou doubtest not of the truth of the report?
Were our hearts no less convinced of the designation of an everlasting burning
to the rebellious and impenitent, could we less bestirre our selves? To this
purpose also it will much conduce that we meditate often of our own frailty
and momentanynesse; no evil can fasten upon the soul of that man, that has
death ever before his eyes; That father said well, he easily contemnes all
things that thinks to die every day; The servant that said, my master deferres
his coming, was he that revelled in the house, and beat his fellows; he durst
not have done it, if he had seen his master at the door: No whit less
prevalent a remedy of security is a firm resolution of the soul to repel the
first motions to what soever sin, whose nature (as experience tells us) is to
gather strength by continuance; commonly all onsets are weakest in their
beginnings, and are then most easily, and safely resisted: Custom can never
grow where no action will be admitted to make a precedent: It is well observed
by that learned Chancellor of Paris, that some filthy and blasphemous
cogitations are better overcome by contemning them, Cogitationes fo^dae,
blasphemae, noxiae, potius vincuntur contemnendo, quam respondendo. Gers. de
precept. Theolog.
than by answering them; If either way they be repulsed, the heart is safe
from security: But, thirdly, if we have been so far overtaken as to give way
to the perpetration of evil, our care must be to work our hearts to a speedy
renovation by repentance; If sin have seized upon the soul, it may not
settle there; this is that which will else work a palpable indisposition: Let a
knife be wet with the strongest aqua fortis, and presently wipt dry again, the
metal is yet smooth, and bewrays no change; but, if that moist fire be
suffered to rest upon it a while, it eats into the blade, and leaves behind,
some deep notes of corrosion; It is delay in these cases that breeds the utmost
danger; Let a candle that is casually put out, be speedily rekindled at the
next flame, neither is the scent offended, nor the wick unapt to be strait-way
re-inlightned; stay but a while, the whole room complains of the noisome
smell, and it will cost perhaps much puffing, and dipping in ashes, ere it can
recover the lost light. That which Solomon advises in matter of suretiship, we
must do in the case of our sin; speedily extricate our selves, Prove. 6.4.
and give no sleep to our eyes till we be freed from so dangerous an
engagement. Moreover, unto these, it must be our maine care, not to give any
check to the conscience, upon whatsoever occasions: That power has as a keen
so a tender edge, and easy to be rebated; when that dictates to a man some
duty, or the refraining of some doubtful action, he that disobeyes it, makes
way for an induration; for when that faculty has once received a
discouragement, it will not be apt to control us in evil; but grows into a
careless neglect of what we do, or omit; and so declines to an utter
senselessenesse; As therefore we must be careful to have our consciences
duly regulated by the infallible word of God, so must we be no less careful
still, to follow the guidance of our conscience, in all our ways: And that all
these things may be performed with effect, we must be sure that we do
constantly observe all our set exercises of piety, hearing, reading, receiving
the blessed Sacrament, prayer, and especially, strict self examination,
whereby we may come to espy our first failings, and correct our very
propensions to evil: One said well, that nature does not more abhor vacuity
than grace does idleness: Gers. ser. de Domin. Evangel. Plus abhorret gratia
otium, quam natura vacuum.
now all these, if they seem harsh and tedious to corrupt nature; yet to the
renewed heart (familiarly conversant in them) nothing is more pleasing, and
cordial. The Philosopher could say, and find, (...). Arist. Eth. lib. 1.
that virtuous actions are delightful to well disposed minds; in so much as it
is defined for the surest argument of a good habit fully acquired, that we
find contentment and delectation in good performances.

Lastly, because ill used prosperity is apt to obdure the heart, we must be
sure to settle in our selves a right estimation of all these worldly things;
which indeed, are, as they are taken: I may well say of riches, as the Jewish
Rabbis had wont to say of their Cabala; with a good heart, they are good;
otherwise they are no better than the Mammon of iniquity: and indeed, worse
than want; but at their best, they are such, as are utterly unable to yield
true contentment to the soul; they are good for use, ill for fruition; they
are for the hand to employ, not for the heart to set up his rest in: hereupon
it is, that the holiest men have still both inclined and persuaded to their
contempt: Been habet quod molestant te omnia quae cernis, utique temporali: and
mortalia, etc. Gers. epist. ad Card. Cameracens.
That great master of meditation applauded it in his friend, the Cardinal of
Cambray, as the happiest condition; that all these earthly and temporal things
which his eye beheld, were tedious unto him; And Saint Bernard magnifies in
this name his dear acquaintance, Ep. 24. ad Gilbertum Londini.
Gilbert, Bishop of London, that even in that state, he would live poor; and
the same Father would have his Monk to take most joy, Ber. Specul. Monachorum.
and think himself then welcommest, when the coursest fare was set before him;
Lib. Conformirat: Conform. 8.
answerable whereunto (but beyond it was the diet of Valentine a rigorous
Votary, who for ten years together, would eat nothing but bread dipped in water,
wherein wormwood was steept; And of that other his fellow, who steept his bread
in lie, that he might eat ashes with the Prophet.

Not to run into extremities, it is sure and necessary counsel which the
Psalmist gives us to resolve; Psalm. 62.10.
If riches increase, not to set our hearts upon them; to account them no other
than as good helps, and needful impediments; and all worldly contentments
such, as are not worthy to take us up: It was a question moved to the founder
of some strict devotionists, whether they might laugh with all their heart, Si
ex toto cord ridere non licet? R^sp. negative Reg. Benedic^i. c. 32.
and it is answered negatively; Non licet: And the devout Governor of the
votaries of Clareval, could give charge to his religious; Non debet totus
manducare: and it is reported by the writer of his life, if he heard any of his
Dorter snorting in his sleep, he would chide that man, as sleeping carnally,
and secularly. Surely the world is, and should be the same to them and us, who
have no less engaged our selves to a professed hostility unto all the vanities
thereof; and have no more hearty share in the pomps, and pleasures of it, than
the most reclused Anachorets: At the best, this earth can be no other than our
valley of tears, and region of our pilgrimage. Girald. Cambr. prefat. ad tract.
de mirac.
Our Giraldus Cambrensis tells us that his Saint Brendan, upon long and
wearisome travel, at last went so far, as to come to the sight of the
earthly Paradise: They may, that list, believe it, Abrah. Ortel. In the
Geograph. Ego vero paradisum ubique fuisse puto, nempe ante Adami lapsum, and
non locum significare, sed loci naturam and qualitatem.
but sure I am; Never any mortal eye (since the Angel brandished his sword
there) could find ought worthy the name of a Paradise, in this inferior world;
here is Purgatory enough, and perhaps, some hell above ground: But if, as
Ortelius of late held, that all the whole earth was, at the first, Paradise,
any man shall now think that any part of it is so still, I shall pity him; and
think him worthy the pleasure of these earthly torments: For us, if we would
have our souls safe, we must learn with the blessed Apostle, so to use the
world, S. Martin. Cujus faciem non fusca vit moeror, nec l^vigavit risus. Ber.
spec. monach.
as if we used it not, and strive to attain to the equable temper of that holy
man, whose face was neither darkened with sorrow nor smoothed with laughter, as
well knowing, Quanto in^erius delectamur, tan to a superno amore disju^gimur.
Her. de interiore domo.
that what affection soever the world wins of us, is lost unto God. Thus, if we
shall keep our selves carefully from the trade of sin, and from the
fascination of the world, we shall be sure that our hearts shall not thus be
deaded with security.

SECT. XV.
THe no less direct, but more active opposite to holy fear, is Presumption.
We presume when, out of an unjust self-love, we entertain an higher opinion
of our spiritual estate, than there is cause; whether in respect of the way,
or of the end; Gods favor as the way, Salvation as the end: We are apt to
overweene our interest in Gods favor and our assured safety thereby; commonly
upon a double ground, either matter of event, or matter of ability: For, either
we misinterpret fair events, as pledges of happiness, and safety; or, we
mistake those qualities, for true graces, which are either mere appearances,
or perhaps, no better than very enormities; Millions of men miscarry both
ways; and are therefore so far from fear, as that they go dancing toward
their hell. It was the strong Bulwark which the Egyptian Jews set up against
all Ieremy's menaces, Ier. 44.17.
We will burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and pour out drink offerings
to her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the
Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: For then, we had plenty of
victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. Had their belly been their God, the
argument had held well; that deity is best pleased with store of cares, but the
true God, many times, even with Quails sends leanness: Carnal hearts know
not how to measure felicity, but by the affluence of what most pleases them;
and that please them most, which gives most contentment to their sense, and
appetite; wherein, if their desires be answered, they are soon transported from
themselves; and now, can be no other than the great favorites of heaven. 2 Chronicles. 26.15.
If Vzziah once feel himself grown strong, his heart is lifted up; why
should not a Censer fit him no less than a Scepter? The great Dragon of Egypt,
Ezec. 29, 2.
when he has lien at ease a while, in the swollen waters of his Nilus, can
say, My river is my own, and I have made it for my self: and, who is there
that has fished successefully in this sea of the world, but is ready to
sacrifice unto his own nets; and says within himself, Had I not been so
good, I had not sped so well: Our naturalists truly observe, that the most
poisonous flies are bred in the sweetest fruit trees; So are these most
dangerous presumptions in an outward happiness of condition: Let an
Amalekitish Agag be but a little made of, 1 Samuel 15.3^.
he comes in delicately and says; Surely the bitterness of death is overpast;
when a King has been indulgent, a Prophet will not be bloody: all is safe;
there may be hope of my crown; there can be no danger of my head. Hereupon it
is, that (as those whose heads are laid upon down pillowes, are not apt to
hear noise) the over-prosperous have their ears precluded against all threats
of peril, all counsels of reformation; as thinking they neither need to wish
themselves better, nor to fear being worse. And whiles they applaud themselves
(as the only darlings, they look overly and scornfully upon the meaner estate
of others, and pass deep censures upon the adversities of their miserable
neighbors; as if they could not fare ill, if they were not so: Job cannot be
afflicted if he were not an hypocrite; Does the Tower of Siloe, like some
dreadful pitfall, Luke 13 4.
overwhelme eighteen Citizens of Jerusalem? they were more heinous sinners
than their fellows. Does a Viper seize upon Saint Paul's hand? Acts 28.4.
Doubtless, this man is a murderer, whom vengeance would not suffer to live:
Thus the vain hearts of sensual men are carried with those outward events,
which God never meant for the distinction of either love, or hatred; Those that
are rich in these proud conceits, make their imaginary wealth their strong
City; which they please themselves in thinking impregnable; and as foolish
Micah argued a necessity of Gods future beneficence to him, by the good that he
had done, Judge. 17.1^.
in procuring a Levite to his Priest; So these flatter themselves with an
assurance of Gods present favor, by the benefits which God has showred down
upon them; wherein it falls out often, as it did with the riflers of Semiramis
his tomb; who, where they expected to find the richest treasure, met with a
deadly poison. Neither is it easy to know whether that other presumption of
abilities be not at least equally frequent and dangerous; The proud Angel of
the Church of Laodicea could say, I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing; not knowing that he was wretched, miserable, poor, blind,
naked: How many have we heard to boast of those graces, whereto they been
perfect strangers? How have we known some that have pretended to no less
illumination than Pisanus reports of John of Alverne, Lib. conformit.
who in a rapture was elavated above every creature, and his soul swallowed up
in the abisse of the divinity; when it has been, indeed, nothing but a
fanaticall illusion: How ordinarily do we find men challenging no mean share
in a lively faith, spiritual joy, fervent zeal, true sanctity, when in the
mean while, they have embraced nothing but the clouds of their own fancies,
instead of these heavenly graces; and, by this means have stripped themselves of
the possibility of those holy virtues, which they falsely soothed in themselves:
for who can care to seek for that which he thinks he has already? Men do not
so much covet, as arrogate spiritual gifts, Every Zidkijah can say, 1 King.
22.24.
which way went the spirit of God from me to speak unto thee? and like a
spiritual Epicure, can clap himself on the breast, with Soul take thy ease,
thou have grace enough laid up for many years: from this opinion of satiety
arises a necessary carelessness of better endeavors, and a contemptuous
undervaluation of the poor stock of grace in others; It being commonly
incident into these presuming souls, that was of old wont to be said of the
Tartars, that they are better invaders of other men's possessions, than keepers
of their own: those censures then, which they should spend upon their own
secret corruptions, they are ready to cast upon the seeming enormities of their
neighbors: And as if they would go contrary to the Apostles charge; Be not
high minded, but fear; these men are high-minded and fear not.

The way leads to the end, the presumption of the way, to the presumption of
the end: overweening and misprision of grace, to an over-reckoning of an undue
salvation. Good God, with what confidence have I heard some, not
over-conscionable men, talk of the assurance of their heaven; as if the way
thither were so short, and so plain, that they could not miss it; as if that
passage had neither danger nor difficulty; as if it were but a remove from the
Lobby to the great Chamber, wherein they can neither err, nor fall: Here need
no harsh exercises of mortification, here are no misdoubts of Gods desertions,
no selfe-conflicts, no flashes of troubled consciences, but all fair and
smooth; Have they sinned, the score is crossed by their surety; have they
forfeited their souls, their ransom is paid; is justice offended, mercy has
satisfied: Shortly, they have by Acesius his ladder climbed up into heaven, and
stolen the sight of the Book of life, and found their name there; and who can
obliterate it? I cannot forget a bold word, which many years ago, I heard fall
from a man whom I conceived not to have had any extraordinary reason of
confidence; If I should hear God say, there shall but one man be saved, I
would strait say, That is I, Lord. Surely the man was in good favor with
himself, in what terms soever he stood with the Almighty. Not that I
condemn an holy and well-grounded resolution of our spiritual estate; I know
who has charged us, to give diligence to make our calling and election sure:
Had it not been at all feisible, our wise and good God had not tasked our
diligence with it; and, had it been easy, and obvious, it might even without
diligence of study and endeavor, have been effected: Now, as one said of
Evangelicall Councels, I must say of this high pitch of Christianity; Non est
omnium vo^are ad alta montana consiliorum. Gers.
It is not for every man to mount up this steep hill of assurance; every soul
must breathe, and pant toward it, as he may; even as we would and must to
perfection: he is as rare as happy, that attaines it. Give me a man that has
worn out himself with a strict austerity, who by many secret bickerings has
mastered his sturdy and rebellious corruptions, who in a trembling awfulnesse
walks constantly with his God, keeping a severe watch over all his ways,
assiduous and fervent in his devotions; Shorly, who has spent his time in
heaven beforehand: why should I not believe that God has sealed up to such a
soul, an assecurance of his future glory? Some transient acts of interposed
doubting may, and will glance into the holiest heart; but, a formed habit of
doubt falls not into such an eminence of grace: This is not a lesson for every
novice to take out; whose maine care must ever be, to work out his salvation
with fear and trembling. As for spiritual security, let him labor toward
it, as that which he would most gladly compass, but not brag of it too soon,
as that which he has already compassed.

SECT. XVI.
AS there is no disease incident into the body, for which nature has not
provided a remedy, so neither is there any spiritual complaint incident into
the soul, for which grace affords not a redress.

The way of the general cure of presumption is, to take a just estimate of our
privileges and abilities; and to work the heart to a true selfe-dejection, and
humiliation, under the mighty hand of God; Particularly, he can never presume
upon those outward commodities, that seriously considers how they are valued by
the owner, and giver of them: Where are the most curious and rich Pearls laid
up, but in the mud of the sea? And what is the earth, but marsupium Domini, (as
Saint Malacby termd it of old;) Gods purse wherein he puts his most precious
jewels, and mettalles; And what baser piece has the world, than this
repository? And, if it please him to lay them out; how does he think them
worthy to be bestowed; He fills the belly of the ungodly with his hidden
treasure, Job. 9.24.
says the Psalmist; and, The earth is given into the hands of the wicked,
says holy Job in his answer to Bildad; neither is it other that he observes in
his reply to Zophar, Job. 12.6.
The Tabernacles of the robbers prosper, and they that provoke God, are secure,
into whose hands God brings abundantly; How then can we esteem those things
as pledges of favor, which God makes choice to cast upon enemies? which mere
natural men have contemned, as not worthy their affectation, or regard? with
what scorn did those naked Brachmanni (the relation is fatherd upon Saint
Ambrose) repel the proffered gold? And if at any time it has pleased him,
whose the earth is, and the fulness thereof, to lade his dear ones with this
thick clay, as himself styles it; and, to store them with abundance, he does
it not without a further blessing of sanctification; Some kinds of fishes there
are that pass for delicate, with our great masters of the palate, which yet,
must have the dangerous string in their backs pulled out, ere they can be safely
fed upon. Such is worldly wealth and prosperity; The wise and holy God plucks
out their venom, when he will have them served up for dainties to his
childrens table; Or if he find that the deceitfulness of riches will be apt to
beguile good souls, he deals with them, as careful gardiners are wont to do
by those trees from which they expect fair fruit; abate the number of their
blossoms, as more caring they should be good, than full: Lastly then, How can
we account those arguments of favor, which the best have had least; Even the
great Lord of all the world, for whom heaven it self was too strait, when he
would come down and converse with men, could say, The Foxes have holes, and the
fowls of heaven have nests, but the son of man has not where to rest his
head; And when the tribute money was demanded, is feign to send for it, to the
next fish: Shortly, wore out his few days upon earth, in so penal a way, that
his sorrows were read in his face; in so much as when he was but two and
thirty years of age, the bystanders could say, Thou art not yet fifty; What
proofs of divine favor then are these to presume upon, which the worst have,
which the best want, which God oft-times gives in judgment, denies in mercy.

SECT. XVII.
THere cannot be a more sure remedy for presumtion of abilities, than to take
an exact survay of our graces, both of their truth, and degrees. Satan is a
great imposter, he that was once an Angel of light, knows how to seem so
still; when he left to be an Angel, he began to be a Serpent; and his
continual experience cannot but have added to his Art, so as he knows how to
counterfeit graces, both in himself and his, in so exquisite a fashion, that
it is not for every eye to discern them from true. We see to what perfection
Mechanical imitation has attained; what precious stone has Nature yielded,
which is not so artificially counterfeited, both in the color and luster, that
only the skillful Lapidary can descry it; Pearls so resembled, that for
whiteness, cleernesse, smoothness, they dare contend with the true; Gold so
cunningly multiplied and tinctured, that neither the eye can distinguish it,
nor the touch, scarce the crucible: So as Art would seem to be an Havilah,
whose Gold is good; whiles Nature is an Ophir, whose Gold is exceeding good:
What marvel is it then, if crafty Spirits can make so fair representations of
spiritual excellencies, as may well deceive ordinary judgments? The
Pythonesse's Samuel was so like the true, that Saul adored him for such; And
Iannes and Iambres made their wooden Serpent to crawle so nimbly, and hiss so
fiercely, that till Moses his Serpent devoured theirs, the beholders knew not
whether were more formidable; Some false things seem more probable than many
truths; there must be therefore much serious and accurate disquisition, ere we
can pass a true judgment, betwixt apparent and real graces; Neither would it
ask less than a volume to state the differences whereby we may discriminate
counterfeit virtues from true, in all their several specialties; they are
faced alike, they are clad alike; the marks are inward, and scarce discernable
by any but the owners eyes. In a generality, we shall thus descry them in our
own hearts. True grace is right-bred, of a divine original, and comes down
from above, even from the father of lights; Gods spirit working with, and by
his own ordinances, produces it in the soul, and feeds it by the same holy
means it is wrought: The counterfeit is earth-bred, arising from mere nature,
out of the grounds of sensualialitie. True grace drives at no other end than
the glory of the giver, and scorns to look lower than heaven: The counterfeit
aims at nothing but vain applause, or carnal advantage, not caring to reach
an inch above his own head.

True grace is apt to cross the plausiblest inclinations of corrupt nature,
and chears up the heart to a delihgtfull performance of all good duties, as the
best pastime. The counterfeit is a mere parasite of fleshly appetite, and
finds no harshnesse, but in holy devotions. True grace is undantedly constant
in all opposition; and like a well wrought vault, is so much the stronger by
how much more weight it undergoes; This metal is purer for the fire, this
Eagle can look upon the hottest Sun: The counterfeit shows most gloriously
in prosperity; but when the evil day comes, it looks like the skin of a
dead Camelion, nasty and deformed. Lastly, true grace is best alone: the
counterfeit is all for witnesses. In brief, if in a holy jealousy of our own
deceitfulness, we shall put daily interrogatories to our hearts, and pass
them under severe examinations, we shall not be in danger to presume upon our
mistaken graces; but the more we search, the more cause we shall find of our
humiliation, and of an awful recognition of Gods mercy, and our own
unworthiness.

SECT. XVIII.
THe way not to presume upon salvation, is, in an humble modesty to content our
selves with the clearly revealed will of our Maker; not prying into his
counsels, but attending his commands: It is a grave word wherein the vulgar
translation expresses that place of Solomon, Scrutator majestatis, Pro. 25.27.
opprimetur a gloria; he that searches into majesty, shall be overwhelmed
with glory; Amongst those sixteen places of the Bible, which in the Hebrew are
marked with a special note of regard; that is one, Deuteronomy 29.29.
The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are
revealed, belong unto us and to our children for ever; that we may do all the
words of this Law. Wherein our maine care must be, both not to sever, in our
conceit, the end from the means, and withal, to take the means along with
us, in our way to the end: It is for the heavenly Angels to climb down the
ladder from heaven to earth: It is for us only to climb up from earth to
heaven: Bold men! what do we begin at Gods eternal decree of our election, and
thence descend to the effects of it in our effectual calling, in our lively
and steadfast faith, in our sad and serious repentance, in our holy and
unblameable obedience, in our unfaileable perseverance; This course is saucily
preposterous; What have we to do to be rifling the hidden counsels of the
Highest; Let us look to our own ways: We have his word for this; that if we
do truly believe, repent, obey, persevere, we shall be saved; that if we do
heartily desire, and effectually endeavor, in the careful use of his
appointed means, to attain unto these saving dispositions of the soul, we
shall be sure not to fail of the success: What need we to look any further,
than conscionably and cheerfully to do what we are enjoined; and faithfully
and comfortably to expect what he has promised? Let it be our care, not to be
wanting in the parts of our duty to God; we are sure he cannot be wanting in
his gracious performances unto us: But if we in a groundless conceit of an
election shall let loose the reins to our sinful desires, and vicious
practices, thereupon growing idle or unprofitable; we make divine mercy a
Pander to our uncleanness, and justly perish in our wicked presumption.

SECT. XIX.
THe other extreme follows: It may seem a harsh word, but it is a true one;
that there may be an evil fear of a good God; A fear of horror, and a fear
of distrust. That God, who is love it self, is terrible to a wicked heart;
Even in the beginning, our first progenitor ran from the face of his late
maker, and hid him in the thickets; For it is a true observation of Tertullian,
no wickedness can be done without fear, because not without the conscience
of doing it. Neither can any man flee from himself, as Bernard wittily: and
this conscience reads the terrible things that God writes against the sinner;
and holds the glass, wherein guilty eyes may see the killing frowns of the
Almighty: Now offensive objects cause the spirits to retire, as Philosophy and
experience teaches us; whereupon follows a necessary trepidation in the whole
frame of the body: And now the wicked heart could wish there were no God; or
(which is all one) that this God had not power to avenge himself; and, finding
that after all his impotent volitions, the Almighty will be still and ever
himself; he is unspeakably affrighted with the expectation of that just hand,
which he cannot avoid: This terror, if (through the improvement of Gods mercy)
at the last it drive the sinner to a true penitence, makes an happy amends for
its own anguish; otherwise, it is but the first flash of that unquenchable
fire, which is prepared for damned souls. In this case men do not so much
fear God, as are afraid of him: and such a torturing fear is never but joined
with heart-burning, and hatred: wherein sinners demean themselves to God, as
they say the Lampray does to the fisher, by whose first blow that fish is said
to be dulled, and astonished, but enraged with the next, and following:
Wretched men! it is not Gods fault that he is terribly just; no, it is his
glory, that he is mercifully terrible. Lib. 7. de Repub Ecclesiast. cap. 10.
nu. 121.
It is not for me to say as Spalatensis cites from Cyrill, that those who would
not be saved, are no less beholden to the bounty of the good God, than those
that are brought home to glory: I know and bless God* for the difference; But
certainly, God is wonderfully gracious (as he is also infinitely just) even
to those that will needs incur damnation; having tendered unto them many
powerful helps to their repentance, which he has, with much patience, and
longanimity expected. That God therefore is just, it is his own praise, that
he is terrible, we may thank our selves; for were it not for our wickedness,
there were nothing in God, not infinitely amiable: See thou then, O sinful
man, nothing at all in Gods face, but frowns, and fury; does every beam of
his angry eye dart vengeance into thy soul? so as thou would feign run
away from his presence, and wooest the rocks and mountains to fall upon thee
and hide thee from the sight of that dreadful countenance; cleanse thy hands,
purge thine heart, clear thine eyes with the tears of true contrition, and
then look up, and tell me, whether thou do not see an happy change of aspect,
whether thou can now discern ought in that face, but a glorious loveliness,
fatherly indulgence, unconceivable mercy, such as shall ravish thy soul with a
divine love, with a joy unspeakable and glorious.

SECT. XX.
Seldom ever is the fear of horror separated from a fear of distrust; which
in the height of it, is that which we call despair: for when the soul
apprehends a deep fear of Gods dereliction, it cannot but be filled with
horror. Now as the holy and well moderated fear gives glory to God, in all
his attributes, so this extremity of it affronts and dishonours him in them
all; but especially, in his mercy, and truth. In his truth, suggesting that God
will not make good his promises; in his mercy, suggesting that he either
cannot, or will not, forgive and save; It was a true observation of Saint
Hilary, Non est minimum officium fidei metus. Hilar. in Ps. 66.
that it is not the least office and effect of faith to fear, for that it is
said by the Prophet Esaias, He shall fill them with the spirit of the fear of
the Lord: and again, we are charged to work out our salvation with fear. But
there cannot be an act more opposite to faith, then to fear distrustfully; to
despair in fearing, none more injurious either to God, or our own souls: For
surely, Non superat bonitatem de^ malitia delictorum Cyril in Levit. l. 9.
as Cyrill well, the wickedness of our offenses to God, cannot exceed his
goodness toward us; the praise whereof from his creature he affects and
esteems so highly, as if he cared not, in any other notion, to be apprehended
by us: proclaiming himself no otherwise in the mount, then, The Lord, Exodus
34.6.7.
the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth; keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and
transgressions, and sin; adding only one word, (to prevent our too much
presumption) That will by no means clear the guilty; which to do, were a
mere contradiction to his justice: Of all other therefore GOD hates most to be
robbed of this part of his glory. Neither is the wrong done to God more
palpable, then that which is done herein unto our selves; in barring the gates
of heaven upon our souls; in breaking open the gates of hell to take them in,
and in the mean time striving to make our selves miserable, whether God will
or no. And surely, as our experience tells us concerning the estate of our
bodily indispositions, that there is more frequent sickness in summer, but
more deadly in winter; so we find it here; other sins, and spiritual
distempers are more common, but this distrustful fear, and despair of mercy
(which chils the soul with a cold horror) is more mortal. For the remedy
whereof, it is requisite that the heart should be thoroughly convinced of the
super-abundant and ever ready mercy of the Almighty, of the infallible and
unfaileable truth of all his gracious engagements; And in respect of both, be
made to confess, that heaven can never be but open to the penitent. It is a
sweet word and a true one of Saint Bernard, Jn libro tuo scribuntur omnes qui
quod possunt faciunt, et si quod debent non possunt B^n. Apol ad Guli^lm. Ab^^t.
In thy Book O Lord, are written all that do what they can, though they
cannot do what they ought; Neither does God only admit, but he invites, but
he intreates, but he importunes men to be saved; what could he do more,
unless he would offer violence to the Will, which were no other then to
destroy it, and so to undo the best piece of his own workmanship? It is the
way of his decree, and proceedings to dispose of all things sweetly; Neither is
it more against our nature, then his, to force his own ends; and when he sees
that fair means will not prevayle to win us from death, he is pleased
feelingly to bemone it, as his own loss: Why will ye dye, O house of Israel?
As for the stable truth of his promises, it is so everlasting, that heaven and
earth, in their vanishing, shall leave it standing fast: His title is, Amen,
and faithful is he that has promised, who will also do it: his very essence
can no more fail, then his word: He that fears therefore that God will be
less then his promise, let him fear that God will cease to be himself. It
was the motto of that witty and learned Doctor Done, the late Deane of Paul's,
which I have seen, more then once, written in Spanish with his own hand,
Blessed be God that he is God, divinely, like himself: as the being of God
is the ground of all his blessed adscriptions, so of all our firmitude, safety,
consolation: Since the veracity and truth of God (as his other holy attributes)
are no other then his eternal essence: Fear not therefore, O thou weak
soul, that the Almighty can be wanting to himself, in failing thee; He is
Jehovah, and his counsels shall stand; Fear and blame thine own wretched
infirmities, but the more weak thou art in thy self, be so much the str^nger
in thy GOD; by how much more thou art tempted to distrust, cling so much the
closer to the Author and finisher of thy salvation.

Thus if we shall hold an even course betwixt security on the one part, and
horror and distrust on the other; If the fortified and exalted eyes of our
souls, being cleared from all inward and ambient impediments, shall have
constantly fixed themselves upon the ever-present Majesty of God; not without a
spiritual lightsomnesse, and irradiation, and therewith, an awful complacency
of soul in that glorious sight, and from thence shall be cast down upon our
own vileness, thoroughly apprehending how much worse then nothing we are, in,
and of our selves, in the sight of God, we shall be put into a meet capacity
of an holy and well mixed fear: And, if now, our hearts thus enlightened,
shall be taken up with an inward adoration of the infinite power and greatness
of GOD, manifested in the framing and ordering of this visible world, and of
the infinite goodness and mercy of GOD, showed in the mavelous work of man's
redemption, and shall be careful to express this inward worship in all due
reverence, (upon all occasions) to the Name, the Word, the Services, the House,
the Messengers of the Almighty; withal, if our humble souls shall meekly
subject, and resign themselves over to the good pleasure of God, in all
things, being ready to receive his fatherly corrections with patience, and his
gracious directions with obedience. Lastly, if we shall have settled in our
hearts a serious care of being always approved to God in whatsoever actions;
and a child-like loathnesse, and dread to give any offense unto so dear and
glorious a Majesty, we shall have attained unto this blessed fear, which we
seek for, and be happily freed from that wicked indevotion, and profaneness,
to which the world is so much, and so dangerously subject: which I beseech the
God of heaven to work out in all readers, to his glory in their salvation,
Amen.

FINIS.

