A Horrible Creuel and bloody Murder, Committed at Putney in Surrey on the 21.
of April last, 1614, being thursday, upon the body of Edward Hall a Miller of
the same parish, Done by the hands of John Selling, Peeter Pet and Edward
Streater, his servants to the said Hall, each of them giving him a deably blow
(as he lay sleeping) with a Pickax.

Published by Authority.

a man holding an axe, and accompanied by another man and a demon, attacking
from behind another, seated man.

Imprinted at London for John Wright, and are to be sold without Newgate at the
sigue of the Bible. 1614.

To the Reader.
REader I do here present unto thy view one of the most horrible inhumane and
bloody murders that has ever been committed; which as it was damnably
devised so it was deuilishly and butcherly accomplished and executed, whereby
thou, and all the world may perceive in what a miserable estate the times are
wherein we live, when the thirst and luker of a little cankered coin, (with
the inticements of the Devil) shall have such predominance over the faculties
of the minds of wretched men, that they will not stick to run into most
desperate and dangerous actions, to the hazarding of soul and body, and to the
final temporal detriment of those (their parents or marsters) whom they are
in duty bound to love, honor and reverence then let this discourse be unto
thee as an Epitomy or breife abstract (to thee) of the miseries of man, and the
illusions of Satan; in reading of which if thou have a remorce or feeling of
the want of grace in men, then pray to him that is the giver of grace, that he
may be graciously pleased to make the ungracious world more gracious.

Farwell, I. T.

A HORRIBLE CRVELL AND bloody Murder, committed at Putney in Surrey, on the
one and twentieh of April last 1614.
THIS old impotent decrepit age wherein we live, the doting World limping on
her last legs, whereas impieties, blasphemies, iniquities, villainies, and
thousands more of hell-hatched enormities have gotten the upper per hand,
where the sweet seeming baytes of Satan leads men (like bears by the noses)
to commit all horrid and damnable trespasses, and transgressions against the
Divine Majesty of the omnipotent and eternal God. By which abominations the
wrath of the most high is oftentimes justly kindled against miserable
misgouernd mankind. So that God in his justice gives many over to a reprobate
sense, that they have no remorce or feeling of the breach or violating of the
sacred laws of their immortal Creator, and so (woe worth the while) As they
live dissolutely, they dye desperately, and after all (that which is worst) they
live a dying life eternally, or dye a living death everlastingly. What numbers
of execrable and inhumane murders are daily committed by barbarous, and
brutish minded men, on the bodies of their brethren, that Caine who was the
first of that bloody fraternity, if he were on the earth would blush to hear
and see how far he is out passed in butcheries? Amongst the number of
numberless bloodthirsty pa^irides and homicides: let this, which is here
following treated of, be accounted and Recorded for none of the least which
was effected, accomplished, and revealed in this sort. In the Parish of Putney
upon Thames in the County of Surrey, five or six miles distant from the
City of London, there dwelt this Murdered Man, named Edward Hall, by his
vocation a Miller, a man of good r^putation, having substance of money and
moueables sufficient: now this aforesaid Hall (notwithstand^ng his sufficiency
of all things needful, yet his natural inclination was to be sparing, and
in a manner miserable in his howse-keeping, which procured him the hatred of
his servants and family, and in conclusion was a great mot^u^ to his ^^^e
destruction; for it is Reported that his wi^e ^^^ing big with Child, and that
his p^r^^^ed the time of her deliverance to draw near, hi^ to ^^^e charges of
her lying in, did send his th^^^ s^^^e miles into the Country to hi^ Mothers,
in ^^e mean space in her absence, he was thus treacherously, and inhumainly
massacred and Murdered; for upon Thursday night the one and twentieth of April
last 1614. about ten of the clock after supper, the said Hall sleeping in a
Chair by the fire in his Kitchen, his servants (being three of them) namely
John Selling, Peter Pett, and Edward Streater, having (as they confessed)
conspired their Master his death long before, now they perceived him sleeping,
thought it not fit to let such an opportunity slip to put their damnable
practice in execution. John Selling having provided a pickaxe to give the
fatal blow, told the aforesaid Pett that now it was a fit time to do it,
and bade Pett strike the first stroke, and he would second him with another:
whereupon Pett took the pickaxe, and standing behind his sleeping Master,
lifting it up with all his force (being strengthened by the inspiration of the
Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning) gave his Master a violent blow
on the back betwixt his shoulders, wherewith Hall being astonnied fell down
and gave a great groan, where Selling presently caught the pickaxe out of
Pette hands stroke the second blow at Hall, and hitting him on the head, in
most cruel and ^^^^^ly manner, beat out his brains, the other (their third
companion in this mischief) named Streater, being all this while grinding
corn in his Masters Mill, a little distant from the house, not knowing as
then that the deuilish design was acomplished, till at last Pett went to him
and told him what was done, and bade him come and behold their handy-worke:
presently upon this Streater left the Mill, and coming into the house where
he saw his said Master lie imbrued in his own gore, with his brains most
brutishly dashed out. He upon the instant, and imporunate request or command of
Pett and Selling, the said Streater took the pickaxe and stroke the said Hall
a blow on the breast which split and shiuered his breast boane, Hall being
thus dead, these three Murderers consulted amongst themselves what were best
to be done with the dead body, protesting and vowing that whosoever should
reucale this their damnable deed, should have his brains beaten out. Then
they all took up the dead carkas and carried it into a Stable, where they
dug a hole and buried it. And afterward devising what were the best course
for them to take to keep this murder concealed, and to keep themselves clear
from suspicion thereof, at last they bethought themselves of a gelding which
was their Masters (at that time standing in the stable) which gelding they
(all three) took and sadled and bridled, and led him forth the same night into
Wimbleton wood where they turned the Horse astray, loosly to wander up and
down, that it might be thought that Thieves and robbers had assanited their
aforesaid Master in the wood, or that some mischance had there befalne him, of
the which (as they imagined) the straying Horse would be a manifest
infalliable token: but (as I said before) these villains having thus turned
the horse loose, returned home to their Masters house, where they searched,
sought, and ransacked for money, and at last they found the sum of between
thirty and forty pounds, which was the accursed wages and pillage which
these Murderers got for their inhumaine and hortible execution of the death of
their Master, which by the just judgment of God they enjoyed not long, for
notwithstanding that they had time to provide for their safety, from the
Thursday night (wherein they did this murder) yet they remained there till
Thursday following, till it pleased the Lord that this bloody fact was
revealed, which fell out in this sort following. Hall was missed amongst his
neighbors, and it was given out, and reported by his servants aforesaid, that
he was gone a far journey into the Country, but Edward Streater being
further examined, upon his examination confessed unto the Officers and chief
men of the Parish of Putney abouesaid, the whole order and manner of their
devising, complotting, attempting, proceeding, and executing, of this their
wilful cruel and bloody Murder, which God in his justice will nener suffer
to be hid or escape unpunished, then John Selling upon this went into the
contry to his Mistres, and told her that he had found his Masters horse in the
wood near Wimbleton aforesaid: but the other two, Pet and Streater, were
brought before Sir Thomas Gardner Knight and one of his Majesty's justice of
peace and quorum in the County of Surry, by whom they were examined, and there
confessed that they had done this cruel fact to their Master, because (as
they said) he did not love his wife so well as he ought to do, and because he
did not allow them meat enough, but that which I think most is to be believed
from them is, when they did affirm they did it by the inspiration and
instigation of the Devil. Then were these mallefactors committed to the common
iayle of the white Lion in Sowthwark, where till the sessions they are to
abide, then to have the recompense of their demerrits.

Thus have I truly and faithfully set down the true discourse of all this
horible murder, with the manner of the takings and attaching of the murderers,
wherein the blind world may perceive to what a miserable estate it is brought,
when as a man (for the vallue of so small a sum) shall be thus massacred and
murdered by his own servants, whom he best should trust. It is reported that
Pompey (being a Heathen) whose valiant deeds had purchased him the name of
great, Julius Caesar, Mark Anthony and he contending for the Empire and
domination of the whole world. Where many bloody battles was sought between
them; yet at last there was a truce agreed upon for a certain time, in the
which truce these three mighty commanders did feast and were merry together
diverse times, and being once invited to sup aboard of Pompeies Galley, as they
were sat, one of Pompeies servants whispered him in the ear, and asked him it
he would be Master of the whole world. Pompey fould him yes, if he knew how,
then said his servant again, let us cut Caesar and Anthonies throats, and
then all the world is thine. Pompey made answer, thou should (quoth he) have
done it without my knowledge, but now it shall not be don, for in me it is
villainy, but in thee it had bin good service. Thus this Heathen man may be a
pattern to all Christians, that by his example they should abhor and detest
murder, for Pompey would not basely take away the lives of his two mighty
mortal and only enemies, although he knew the doing of it would have gaind him
the Monarky of the whole world. What brutish beasts are these then, that for
triffles and a little cursed coin will murder their friends? God himselfs
says that blood shall have blood, and whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed, yet notwithstanding how many horrible and execrable
cruelties are committed daily by man, on man, that one devil will not deal so
diuelishly with another as men will do with men. What numbers have been
desperately stabd for taking the wall, of these Roaring boys of the damned
crew? (as they are fittly termed) how many have bin killed for refusing to
drink their friends, mistress or sometimes their whores healths? The numbers
are numberies, and therefore I will let them alone vnnumbered. The God of mercy
and peace, iudue the hearts of men with fear of thy great and glorious name,
with love and brotherly affection one toward another, that they may all with
one mind in unity worship thee that art their good and merciful creator,
preserver and defender: Through Jesus Christ thy son our alone and only
Savior and Redeemer, to whom, with thee and the holy and blessed spirit be
ascribed and rendered all honor, glory, might, majesty, dominton and
thanksgiving of men and Angels both now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

