William Cowper Esqr. Clerk of the Parliaments.
FAX MENTIS HONESTAE GLORIA

The first two parts of the Acts, or unchaste examples of the Englysh
votaryes, gathered out of their own legenades and Chronycles by Johan Bale,
and dedycated to our most edoubted sovereign king Edward the syxte*



Beware of the leven of the pharisees, which is hypocrisye. But there is
nothing hyd, that shall not be dyscouered, neither secret, that shall not be
known. Therefore, what so ever they have done in darkness, that same ^^all be
known in ye light. Lu. xi^

To the most virtuous, mighty, and excellent prince, king Edward the. vi.
by the grace of God king of England, France, and Irelande, defendar of the
faith, and in earth under Christ, of the churches of the seyde England and
Ireland the supreme head, his most humble subject Johan Bale, wishes all
honor, health, and felycyte.
LIke as man was of. ij. substaunces constytuted (most worthy and excellent
prince) that is to say, of soul and of body, so were there for his special
co^modyte in them both, and for his wholesome continuance in long succession,
ordained of God. ij. necessary functyous or administracyons from the worlds
beginning. Neither might the one of them without the other at any time be,
no more than the body without the soul, but anon after a deadly decay
thereupon followed in that common welthe. In the books of kings and of
Paralipomeno^, is this so plainly declared, ^or the divided kingdoms of
Israel and Judah, that at no hand it can be denied, The first of them, was the
explanacion of the heavenly doctrine, whom we now call ye godly office of a
preacher. The other we understand to be the public or politic regimet,
which is in ye high governance, autorite, and power o^ a king. The first of
these. ij. most necessary offices, the eternal son of God instituted in
paradise. The other took beginning of god ye father, which held an everlasting
monarchy before ye worlds constitucio^, and on the earth by his special gift
it took success in man. Through me do kings reign (says he) through me do
princes make just laws Prouer. viij. In ye Godhed are they here alone, but in
person diverse. The one governs, the other teaches. The seid son of God as
an everlasting pressed and bishop first called Adam and Eua to repentance, by
the voice of such a law as both detected and rebuked their sin.

Furthermor he published ye promise concerning ye holy seed of the woman, which
should break the head of the wicked serpent. Thus preached he than the first
Gospel of salvation, which is a joyful massage declarynge full remyssyon to
be given frelye in Christ, or for Christ's only sake, a righteousness in the
holy ghost following thereupon* with the life everlasting. As Adam was confyrmed
the image of God, and appointed to rule ye whole earth. Genesis i. He succeeded him
and his eternal son in these. ij. high offices of Governance and of
doctrine, through the gydaunce of his holy sprete, so be coming to the one a
vicegerent or liefe tenant, and to the other an high vycar general. He
instructed his posteryte in the right rules of faith for that age, and
prudently used their politic regyment. In this perfyghte trade succeeded the
fathers, Enos, Cainan, Malalehel, Iared, Henoch, Mathusalah, and Lamech, one
after an other, till the days of Noe. Which governed most godly, and preached
repentance for an hundred and. xx. yea^es space. After ye general floude
stood Noe up again, and executed these. ij. offices more earnestly than before.
Melchysedech his son was both a king and a priest, so was faithful Abraham
and his children after him, as apereth both by their wars and sacryfyces.

And all though Moses at times executed but one of these. ij. offices, and
Aaron his brother the other, yet were they afterward again both united in
Iosue and his successors, assysted by the bishops and Leuytes, till the
Jews despred a king. Than held Saul the temporal domynyon, and Samuel the
high presthode, David and Abiatha^, Salomo^ and Sadoch, in the same trade
following, till the realm was divided into Israel and Judah for the wickedness
of rulars. And as the false worshyppynges or execrable ydolatryes began to
increase by the deuylyshnesse of false prestes, God raised up the prophets,
with an earnestness to rebuke them and again to renew the heavenly doctrine
and governance. And as their course was out by a miserable mutacyon through
wars and captyuyte, that lively doctrine of salvation, by the sects of
pharysees, Saducees, and Esseanes was yet ones again obscured, and the high
governance clearly decayed and also removed from the chosen flock of God, the
scepture translated to Herod a cruel stranger. The son of God the eternal
father, called Jesus Christ, than entered into the flesh at his time
appointed, and became our high king and priest everlasting by his tryumphaunt
passion and ascensyon, restorynge these. ij. offices, and reserving them in
his gloryfyed humanyte to a sempyternall monarchye. To his Apostles and
dyscyples he appointed the admynystracyon of his heavenly word, leaving to the
worldely rulars the high governance of peoples. This has been breuely the
very order, course and process, concerning these. ij. most high offices sens
the worlds beginning.

How the great adversary of God Antichrist has sens Christ's ascensyo^ wrought
in his wicked course, to deprave these ij. mynystracyons of God, and to cause
them to serve his most blasphemouse and fylthie affectes, the first. ij.
parts of my English votaryes here present, does plenteously show. And my
hope is that ye ij. lattre parts, which will, God willing, most spedylye
follow, shall declare it yet much more at large. I have therein decreed for
difference of the books and apt arguments of the matters contained in them, to
give them. iiij. several tytles, of rysynge, building, holding, and falling.
For the first part treats of their up ryspng to myschefe, by the old
ydolatours in the reygne of perdycyon. The second part shows of their
hastye buildynge by the hypocrytyshe monks to establish the wicked kingedome
of Antichrist. The third part will declare the crafty vpholdinge of their
proud degrees and possessions, by the wilye and subtle slayghtes of the.
iiij. orders of frires. And ye fort part shall manifest their horrible fall in
this lattre age by yt grounded doctrines of the true preachers and writers.
These votaries do I take for those instruments of Satan, which continually
from time to time have destroyed these. ij high mynistracions, by darkenynge
the doctrine of God, and perverting justice in the rulars. Next to the
scriptures I take their most wicked examples for witnesses in that matter.

If your learned majesty, in this second part do mark their wicked
procedynges in taking from princes the inuestynge of prelates, and from the
churches minysters their married wives, ye shall find them the greattest
traitors that ever were on this earth, both to God and to man. For by taking
from princes the inuestyng of prelates, they deminyshed more than half their
autoryte, making them bound servants to Antichriste. And by condempnynge of
marryage in the mynysters, they not only perverted the doctrine of faith, but
also of godly preachers they made ydel workeme^ and unclean doers, ydolatours
coniurers, liars, oppr^ssours, tyrauntes, whoremongers, and most execrable
buggerers, so secludynge their names from the lambs book of life, and their
sowles from salvation in Christ, Apo. xxi. This simple work have I dedycated
to your excellent majesty, partlye to declare my obedyent heart to the same,
and partlye to detecte the subtle slaightes of the hipocrites, your mortal
enemies in the kyngedome of Antichrist. Therein may your highness as in a
myrrour, behold the ancient enemies of your noble predecessors, se their
procedynges, know their co^ueyaunces, and clearly perceive their practyses of
deceyt. Ye may also thereby be assertayned diverse ways by a nombre of their
ungodly examples of life, that your noble father of famous memory, ded run
for his time a most profitable course to the christen common welthe, when he
first ouerthrewe that most odyble monstre of Rome with his unclean
generacyon. The eternal father of our lord Jesus Christ, send your learned
majesty long life on the earth, that ye may in the sprete of Helias, double
his vyctoryouse doings, as I have no doubt but ye will. So be it.

Domine, in misericordiatus, saluum facregem.

The Autours names both Englysh and other, out of whom this present book is
collected.
A
ADelbaldus Traiectensis. Aegidius Faber. Aneas Syluius. Alanus Teukesbury.
Albertus Crants. Alexander Tertius. Alphredus Beuerlacensis. Andreas
Althamerus. Andreas Osiander. Anonymus Anglus. Antoninus Archiepiscopus. Aulus
Gellius.
B
Baptista Platina. Baptista Mantuanus. Barnefridus Vrspergensis. Bedas
Girvuinus. Benedictus de burgo Petri. Benno Cardinalis. Berengarius Turonensis.
Bernardus Clareuallensis. Bernardus Lutzenburgus. Berosus Chaldeus. Biblia
sacra. Blondus Flauius.
C
Caius Sempronius. Caesarius Monachus. Christianus Massaeus. Christophorus
Marcellus. Chronicon Calesianum. Chronicon Buriense. Compendium noui chronici.
Conradus Gesnerus. Cornelius Agrippa.
D
Doctor Origenes. Dunelmensis Monachus. Damianus Cardinalis. De utraque
potestate.
E
Eadmerus Cantuariensis. Egesippus Historicus. Erasmus Roterodamus. Etheiredus
Rhieuallensis. Eusebius Caesariensis.
F
Fabianus Chronographus. Fabius Pictor. Flauius Blondus. Flores historiarum.
Franciscus Bonadus.
G
Georgius VVicelius. Giraldus Cambrensis. Godfridus Viterbiensis. Gracianus
Monachus. Guido Perpinianus. Guilhelmus Malmesbury. Guilhelmus Cantuariensis.
Guilhelmus Caxton. Guilhelmus Horman.
H
Haremannus Shedel. Hector Boethius. Helinandus Monachus. Henricus
Huntendunensis. Henricus Bradsha. Herebertus Boseham. Hieronymus Stridonensis.
Hildebertus Cenomanensis. Huldricus Mutius.
I
Iacobus Meyer. Iacobus Bergomas. Ioannes Hagustaldensis. Ioannes
Sarisburiensis. Ioannes Fiberius. Ioannes Baconthorpe. Ioannes de Columna.
Ioannes VVicleuus. Ioannes Tyssyngton. Ioannes Treuisa. Ioannes Euersden.
Ioannes Hardinge. Ioannes Boccatius. Ioannes Capgraue. Ioannes Annius. Ioannes
Liechtenberger. Ioannes Hagen. Ioannes Paleonydorus. Ioannes Nauclerus. Ioannes
Stella. Ioannes Huttichius. Ioannes Tritemius. Ioannes Cibenius. Ioannes
Textor. Ioannes Carrion. Ioannes Mayor. Ioannes Functius. Ioannes Scuish.
Ioannes Eckius. Ioannes Riuius. Ioannes Lelandus. Irenaeus Lugdunensis.
Justinius Martyr.
L
Lambertus Shafnaburgensis. Lanfrancus Archiepiscopus. Legendarium Ecclesiae.
Lelandus Antiquarius.
M
Macrobius Aurelius. Marcus Cicero. Marcus Sabellicus. Marianus Scotus.
Martialis Valerius. Martinus Carsulanus. Martinus Lutherus. Matthaeus Paris de
S. Albano. Matthaeus VVestmonasteriensis. Monachus Dunelmi. Monumenta
coenobiorum.
N
Nauclerus Historicus. Nicolaus Treueth. Nigellus Eliensis.
O
Odo Cluniacensis. Origines Doctor. Osbernus Cantuariensis. Otho Phrisingensis.
Ouidius Naso.
P
Pamphilus Graecus. Paulus Phrigio. Paulus Aemilius. Petrus Damianus. Petrus
Blesensis. Petrus Equilinus. Philo Historicus. Plutarcus Chaeronaeus.
Poenitentiarum Romanum. Polydorus Vergilius.
R
Radulphus de Diceto. Radulphus Niger. Radulphus Cogeshale. Ranulphus
Cestriensis. Raphael Volateranus. Ricardus Hagustaldensis. Ricardus
Diuisiensis. Ricardus Praemonstratensis. Ricardus Croilandiensis. Ringmannus
Philesius. Robertus Montensis. Robertus Gaguinus. Robertus Goulet. Robertus
Fabyane. Robertus Barnes. Rogerus Houeden. Rogerus Cestriensis. Rodolphus
Gualtherus.
S
Scalamundi. Sebastianus Murrho. Sigebertus Gemblacensis. Simeon Dunelmensis.
Stephanus Langton.
T
Thomas Rudborne. Thomus Monmouth. Thomas Walden. Thomas Scrope. Titus Liuius.
Turstinus Eboracensis.
V
Valerius Martialis. Valerius Anselmus Rid. Vergilius Maro. Vergilius
Polidorus. Vincentius Bel^^censis. VVernerus Cartusiensis.
X
Xenophon Atheniensis.
FINIS.
Faults escapinge the printer in the first part of this work.
Fo. 15. page 2. li. 9. Orosius. fo. 16. page 2. li. 12. pretensed. fo. 17. pa.
1. li. 7. of these. pa. 2. li. 26 reuelacyons. fo. 32. pa. 10. li. 2. the
gantes or his stardes there. fo. 42. pa. 1. li. 19. she found. pa. 2. li. 6.
capite. fo. 46. page i. li. 26. Apoca. xiij. fo. 49. page 1. li. 18. to the
general. fo. 51. pa. 1. li. 15. Carsulanus. fo. 59. pa. 2. li. 31. Cap. xiij.
fo. 71. page 2. li. 9. Hardecanutus. fo. 72. pad. 1. li. 7. reasons, fo. 73.
page 1. li. 28. the. xij. year. fo. 74. page 1. li. 12. alvuayes. fo. 78. page
1. li. 5. let them. page 2. Hermannus Contractus.

Faults escapinge the prynter in the second part of this vuorke.
Fo. 3. pa. 2. li. 28. deficiunt S^urius, Lucretius, Spurius Papyrius. fo. 6.
p^. 2. li. 9. deficit. Yea, that great mother of myschefe, Apoca. xiij. fo 11.
pa. 2. li. 11. his books. fo. 13. page 2. li. 28. feast of all saints. fo. 15.
page 1. li. 20. no drink. fo. 17. page 1. li. 32. He shryned. fo. 51. page 2.
li. 26. If this. fo. 52. page 1. li. 3. but also. page 2. li. 25. Whole
consent. fo. 54. page 2. li. 25. famous. fo. 57. pa. 2. li. 7. fame. fo. 59.
pa. 2. li. 21. set ordinance. fo. 46. page 2. li. 5. deficit. Thus are these
verses to be Englished. fo. 64. pa. 2. li. 29 deficit. Thus do I Englysh them.
fo. 65. pa. 1. li. 9. dyspleased. fo. 66. pa. 2. li. 20. the abbess. fo 69.
page 1. li. 4. both of Christ. fo. 89. page 2. li. 15. deficit. Thus to be
Englyshed.

The first part of the Acts of English votaries, comprehendynge their
unchaste practices and examples by all ages, from the worlds beginning to the
year of our Lord a, M. collected owte of their own legendes and Chronycles By
Johan Bale.

Learn herin (good reader) to prove all spretes, and to judge false miracles,
rebukynge no Christen beleuer, but those obstinate hipocrites only, which yet
live after their popes old rules Read, but laugh not.

O thu maiden of Chaldea, Thou shall no mo^^ be called tender and plesaunte,
Thy shame shall be discovered, and thy preuytees shall be seane, for I (says
the lord) will avenge of the, and no man shall let me. Esa. 47. The preface of
this book.
GIldas that ancient Brytayne, in his first treatise of the dolorouse
destruction of his contreye, has this worthyesen thence against them which
were the chief cause thereof. And borrowed it is of the. xxiiij. chaptre of
Salomons proverbs. Whosoever commends the wicked (says he) and reports
them righteouse or holy, Pro. 24
the same shall ones have the course of the people, and the comminalte shall
abhor him. Plentuouse has the Popes clergy been in his point, specially in
the church here of England. Not only have they commanded unto us
whoremongers, bawdes, brybers, Idolaters, Romish saints.
hypocrytes, trayters, and most fylthy Gomorreanes, as Godly men and women,
but also they have canonysed the^ for most holy saints, set them up gylt
Images in their temples, commanded their vigils to be fasted, appointed them
holy days and the peoples to do them honor with euensonges, hours,
processio^s, lights, masses, ryngynges, synginges, sensynges, and the devil
and al of such heythnyshe wares. They have done by us as their old
predecessors the Idolatrouse prestes ded by the ancient Romans. They have
set us up a sort of lecherouse Gods to be worshypped in our temples, Old
gods and new.
to be our advocates, and to help us in our needs. Instead of Jupiter,
Saturn, Mercurye, Mars, Juno, Proserpina, Diana, and Venus, which ded all
their feats in whoredom, as the poets verefyeth, they have given us
Wenefryde, Cuthbert, Dunstane, Oswalde, Anselme, B^tket, Brigyde, Audrye,
Modwen, Edith, Osith, Ethelburge, and a great sort more of vnpure workers out
of marryage.

Mark the lives of their English saints, almost from the beginning, and ye
shall not find one of them canonysed for preaching Christ's veryte a right,
neither yet for leadynge a life after the perfyght rules of the Gospel. Not
one commend they for worshyppynge God without mennys tradycyons, nor yet for
executynge the works of Mercy, unless yt were to their advantage. Never
reckened they wedlock any Godly estate of living, though yt were an only
order instytuted of God in the beginning, yea, for his prestes also. Commonly
they have dyswaded both men and women from yt, as from a most pernycyouse
evil, Dyffa-
or from a myschefe of all myschefes, calling yt folyshnesse, fylthynesse,
beastlynesse, a walking in darkness, Macio^s of Marriage.
a mayntenau^ce of lechery, a fulfillinge of fleshlye desires, a ground of all
vice, an entrance of death, a corruptynge of maydenhode, a lake of myserye, a
clay pytt of uncleanness, a thraldom of Egypt a ne^te of Satan, a snare of
the devil, and a ponde of perdicyon, look Johan Capgraue in Catalago sanctorum
Anglie, specially in the lives or legendes of Clarus, Eanswyde. kyneswyde,
Etheldrede, wenefrede, Mylburge, Blasphemye.
and Myldrede with such other like, and ye shall find my words most true.
In the hystorye of Saint Vrsula have they named the^ Angels of darkness
which has persuaded marryage laufull. Of whose no^bre was first God the
eternal Father, and than Moses and the Prophets for the old law. And
afterward Jesus Christ his eternal Son, with Peter Paul, and the other
apostles, for the new law. Were not the men (think you) well ouerseane?

So perverse stomakes have they borne to women, that the more par^e of their
temptynge spretes they have made she deuyls (look their Saints legendes) but
he that tempted Christ was an he devil, a relygyouse devil, and a prestlye
devil. Wha^ they have been tempted with lecherouse spretes in the likeness of
women, they have (they say) by the suffren virtue of holy water, The deuyls.
turned them into deuyls again. But never were they yet so conning with all
their holy water, as to make of their whores honest married women. No, yt is
not their order, to do such miracles. In the life of Saint Godrick is mencyon
of a she, devil, but in the conclusion, he apereth with hanging ware of no
small quantyte, having his young ones following him with shaven crowns. Of a
lykelyhode therefore he was some spiritual he tempted, and his children within
holy orders. Such power had Saint Guthlake over those watchinge worms, that
he made them to tarry with him, and to build him up a monastery at Ascendyck,
now called Crowlande, some say. To be short in this matter. Their saints in a
manner were all unmarried. Saints unmarried.
If any were married that would needs be saints, they were anon compelled by
oath, or by the way of penance, to leave their makes to the occupieng of
others, the man his wife, and the woman her husband, as ye shall behold in
this book by most plentuouse examples. For matrimony has ever been such a
black bugge in their sinagoge and church, that never would canonysacyon serve
yet, where as was in place.

Notwithstanding we are thoroughly assertayned by innumerable scripturs and
arguments, that matrimonye is of God, and by their innumerable examples of
fylthynesse, that their vowed wyuelesse and husbandelesse chastyte is
altogyther of the devil. Sens the gloriouse aperaunce of the Gospel have that
Sodomiticall swarm or broad of Antichrist (that ye call the spiritualte) been
often times admonyshed of their fleshlye errors by the manifest scripturs
thereof. that they should ones repent their most horrible myschefes, Votaries.
and grant unto marriage the fredome due thereunto. And what have they done,
think you? Nothing else at all but laughed them to scorn, reportynge them to
be but fables and lies. The learned allegacyons, reasons, and arguments of
Philyp Mela^chton, Luther, Lambert, Pomerane, Barnes, and such other, they
have heard, Christen doctors.
but the answer is yet to make. They mock and mow at them like Jack a napes
or like them which went up and down by the cross when Christ was crucyfyed,
and that is enough for them. For they have it of their popes law to answer no
man, yea although they write their abhominacions to the vttermoste, unless
they have him in preson. I have therefore thought yt best, The autour.
seeing they regard not the sacred scrypturs, to lay before them their
abhomynable practyses and examples of fylthynesse, by their own legendes,
Chronicles, and saints Lives, that all men may know what legerdemaynes they
have used, and what lecherouse lives they have led here in England* sens the
worlds beginning. Let them now be ashamed of their beastlynesse, or else put
on their mothers face altogether.

In the first part of this book, may men breuelie behold how and by whom
this realm was first inhabited, which thing has been hitherto in all
Englysh Chronicles, Chronicles.
doubtfullie, vnagreablye, yea, and untruly treated, upon coniecturs,
fantasies, and lies only, by reason of ignorance in the scripturs and most
auctorised histories. They shall also perceive, what peoples have here by all
ages remained, what doctrines has been thaught by their true and false
prophets, what worshippinges of God they have used, and what laws in religion
they have followed. Finally they shall know clerelie, the deceytfull
workmanship of the instruments of Satan, their Bishops, prestes, Prestes
and monks, with other disgised locustes of the same generation. Whose
contynuall stodye, labor, and seking was always to blind them by a color of
chaste living / making them to believe, that their maryenge of wives was a
profane layte / a brutishe beastlynesse / and a thing which greatly
dyspleased God / Their own vowynge of vyrgynyte was again (they said) a
spiritual order, a life of Angels, Marriage.
and an holy religon which pleased God above all other, what though they never
had it in their lives. For true virginite is a faith uncorrupted, Virginite.
or a believe governed by the only word of God without all supersticions of
men. This was the only virginite that Marye was commended of / Lucc. 1. Faith
This virginite pertains chefely to marriage, as testifies Saint Paul. 2.
Cor. 11. 2. Cor 11
And as apereth in Abraham and other just fathers which had faithful wives. No
people are less acquaynted with this virginite than sectaries, or they that
vow virginite / for they chefelye depend upon mennis tradicions and rules.

But if a tree may be known by his fruits, and a man by his deeds, as our
sauer says they may, Math. 7, Mat. 7.
ye shall easily perceive by their acts, that these virginal votaries has
been the very Angels of darkness. Mark their gostlye conueyauntes, and
their other good works (as they will have them yet called) like as they are
here regestred in course. And ye shall find them more fyt for hell than for
heaven. Yea must they be canonised saints, and do most wonderful miracles.
But those miracles are the strong delusions (saint Paul says) that the Lord
will send unto them that shall perish for their vnbeleues sake. Miracles.
2. Thessalon, 2. I doubt not but this labor of mine, though it be very
simple, will ministre some light as well to the learned as unlearned. At the
least it shall teach them to judge false miracles, that they be no more so
deuylishly deceived. Let not the often citing of autours be greuouse to the
readers, Autours
my occasion justly considered. For thereby shall the papists have shame
always, if they report them fables, or else me a liar for the telling of them,
being in their writings so manifest. And as concerning those autours, they
were their own dear fryndes, and wrote the best they could of them. If they
had been their enemies, and so showed the worst of them, or else but indyfferent
writers as they were most parcyall witnesses, it had been a far other show
of their mischefes than here will apere.

Men trusted they would have seane them selves in this clear light of the
Gospel, and so have repented their former factes of falsehede. But truly they
are of a far other kind than so. Bishops.
Their nature is not to repent. do they never so many mischefes. Rather stody
they out new practyses of tyranny and cantels of cruelte, to add myschefe to
myschefe, till the great vengeance promised light fullye upon them. Who so
ever has promoted forewarde Gods veryte (they thank God of it) they have been
non of them as yet. Gospel
If they should make their boastes with Paul. 1. Corin. 15. that they have done
therein more labors than the other discyples, men of knowledge would by and by
say, that they lied most falselye. In deed they have with Menelaus, Alchimus,
Auantas, and with Cayphas gone before all worldly tyrauntes in the murtheringe
up of them whice has done it. And for errors, Error.
they say. But wha ever erred as they have done, sens the worlds beginning?
Truly non as yet. Neither, Turk, Jew, Saracene, Pagane, nor devil, as the
examples herafter wylll show,, they shall not be able to avoid yt, unless
they dyspute with fire and faggottes as they have done hitherto. For stark
naught are they in dysputacyo^s, where as they are not at hand. For this book.
I shall have their common lyuery, and be called a thousand times heretyke. But
neither look I for reasonable answer of them, nor yet for amendment of their
knaueryes.

In this book of mine, is one face of Antichrist chefelye disclosed
(parauenture iij. under one) wherwyth he has of long time painted out his
whore, Face of Antichaist.
the Rome church that she might to the world apere a gloriouse madame. That
face is her vowed chastyte, whereby she has deceytfullye boasted herself
spiritual, being but whore and thief, and dysdayned marryage as a vile draffe
sack, Narriage makes lay
and dyrtye dyshe cloute, calling all them but lewd lay persons that were
under yt, though they were kings and queen's, Lords, and ladies. Ye noble
gouerners and learned lawers, unto whom God has in this age delivered the
measurynge rod of his word, as he ded to Johan. Apocal. 11. that ye should
measure all things rightly. Be not now slack in your offices, as in the blind
time, but through fourth that wretched bond woman with her daughter, that Rome
church with her whorishnesse. No point of nobylyte were it, nobilite
nor yet of learned worthiness, to be as ye have been of late years, still
servant slaves to a most filthye whore, and to her whoredom and
whoremongers. Our most christen Emperor of England, king He^rye the. viij.
of that name, King Henry.
and now his most learned and graciouse son king Edward the.vi. a most
worthy ministre of God, has gone before you in that behalf. They have made
open unto ye the way, and driven away from your gates the great adversary that
should most have noyed you. Disdain not than you to follow. Take from your true
subjects, the popes false Christ with his belles and bablinges, with his
miters and mastries, Christ.
with his fannoms and fopperyes, and let them have freely the true Christ again
that their heavenly father sent them from above fashioned out unto the^ in the
Gospel. For much more bewtifull is he in the sight of true beleuers, than are
all the corrupt children of men, with all their gorgiouse aparelinges. Look you
thereunto with earnestness, for nothing will be at the lattre day more
straightly required of you than that.

The first part of the Acts of English votaries, comprehendynge their
unchaste practices and examples by all ages, from the worlds beginning to the
year of our Lord a.M. collected owte of their own legendes and Chronycles By
Johan Bale.
Marryage instituted of God.
IN paradyse our eternal and merciful father instituted marryage immedyatly
after mannys first creacion, Matrimony.
and left yt with him as an honest, comely, wholesome, holy, and needful
remedy against all beastlye abusyons often he flesh, that should after happen,
and granted thereunto his eternal blessing. Increase (says he) multyplye,
and fill the earth. Gene. 1. And this repeted he thryse after that. Gene, 8,
9, and 30, to the intent it might be g^^undedlye marked, and well known of
(...) to be his most ^ernest ordinance. This was the first order of Religion
that ^uer was made, the first religion
and of most holiness, if we dewlye respect the maker thereof with the other
circumstaunces besides, preferrynge his wisdom to ma^nis wisdom. And for
that it should not be reckened a thing vnaduyselye done of him, he looked
thereupon again among all his other works, and could behold no imperfeccyon
therein, but perceived that it was of exceeding goodness. Yet has there sens
risen a sort, which have against Gods heavenly wisdom, set their fleshly
folishnesse, which are non other to be reckened than the very sede and of
spring of the serpent. Unmarried prestes.
Though these have known that there is a God, yet have they not glorified him
in faith and meekness, but have become most vain in their ymaginacions.
Where as he has declared marriage excedingly good, Gods-aduersaries.
they have condemned it as a thing execrable and wicked. And where as he has
spoken it by his own mouth, that it is not good for man to be alone, they
have improued that doctrine and thaught the contrary, as a thing more perfight
and Godly.

Marryage contempned of Satan.
THus Satan erected him self against God in that wicked generation, which
began first in Cain, Cain.
and has ever sens continued in that posterite. For this presumpcion God gave
them clearly over, and left them to them selves with all their good intentes
and vows, whereupon they have wroughte sens that time fylthynesse unspeakable.
Their chaste women, vestals Monyals, Nonnes, Nonnes and Monks.
and Begines. changynge the natural use, have wrought unnaturally. Like wise
the men in their Prelacyes, presthodes, and innumerable kinds of Monkerye, for
want of women has brent in their lusts, and done abhomynacyons without
nombre, so receyuynge in them selves the just reward of their error. Of these
most hellishe and diabolick fruits, holy Saint Paul admonyshed the Romans,
in the first chaptre of his Epistle unto them, knowing before hand that out
of their corrupted christyanyte, Sodomites.
should rise such a filthy flock as should work them every where. But
neither of Paul nor yet of Peter have the fore warnynges auayeled, but those
brockishe boores have gone freely foreward without check till now of late
days, where in God has given us a more pure sight to behold their
buskelinges.

Marriage of Prestes in both laws,
TO make manifest unto the^, what wives the Lord appointed by his servant
Moses, unto the leuytycall prestes in the sacred posterite of Prestes wives.
Aaron Leuiti. 21. and. Ezech. 44. it were but labor lost. Priests wives.
Either to put them in remembrance that Christ was borne in marryage, though
his mother were always a maid, and that he left unto his Apostles marryage in
lyberte evermore yt were in vain also. For all this has GOD showed unto them
playnelye, by his true prophets in this lattre age, declarynge the fynall
destruccyon of that wretched kingdom. Haters of the Pope.
As by Martyn Luther, Johan Pomerane, Frances lambert, Oswaldus Myconius,
Philip Melanchton, and such other (as is said before) but all have they taken
for fables. That lord sent them one unto their own doors, which
effectuallye did his massage; even Robert Barnes by name, Barnes.
of whose grounded arguments they have not yet dyscharged the least, besides
that they have had from him by good Wyllyam turner and George Joy. And all
this have they disdaynouslye laughed to scorn. Considering therefore that no
gentyl speech will amend them, nor yet sharp threttenynges call them to
repentance. he will now cast their own vile donge in their faches, The
autours.
that it shall clean fast upon them Mala. 2. He will through in their tethe by
this book and such other the stynkynge examples of their hypocrytyshe lives,
with their calkynges and cloynynges to patche up that dauberye of the devil,
their vowed wynelesse and husbandeles chastity.

England inhabyted before Noe and after.
AND for as much as the tyttle of this present treatise only respects
England, England.
only shall it treat the unchaste examples of the spirytualte thereof, with
certain examples of Romyshe Popes which then wrought their iuggelynge
mastries there. To fatche the matter from their first foundation, and so to
stretche it forewarde, I am fullye assertayned by ancient wrytinges, that this
land was with people replenyshed long before Noes days. Before Noe.
Yea, such time as men were multiplied upon the universal earth, Gene. 6. As
they then had left Gods appointed Religion, and had taken ways unto them after
their own good into utes, such unspeakable fylthynesse followed, as brought
upon them the great dylunye or universal flod, The flod
which left none alive, but drowned them up as it did all other quarters. This
witnesses both Moses and Beresus, the most ancient writers we read of.
After the said flood, was it again inhabiteth by the of spring of Iapheth the
third son of Noe. Iapheth.
For of them (says Moses) were the Isles of the Gentyles sor^^d out into
regions, every one after, known dyuese from other, by their languages,
kyndredes, and nations, Genesis 10. And in the days of Phaleg the son of Heber,
Phaleg.
was that division of Provinces, like as follows in the same chapter. Samothes
the Brother of Gomer (whom the Bible calls Mesech) restored then again this
land in his posterite, Samothes gigas.
the priests thereof called Samothei, for so much as he was the first that
fournyshed it with laws, as witnesses Johannes Annius in commentarijs Berosi.

Albion with his Samothites.
AFter this grew it into a name, and was called Albion. Albion gigas.
Not ab albis rupibus, as fryre Bartylmew has fantasyed is his work De
proprietaribus rerum. Nor yet ab Albiana the Kings daughter of Syria, as
Marianus the monk has dreamed it. For of latyne words could it have no
name, before the latyne it self were in use. And the other without grounded
authority appears a plain fable, as witnesses both Volateranus and
Badius. But rather it should seem to be called Albion, ab Albione Gygante, the
son of Neptunus, Neptunus.
which was afterward slain of Hercules for stopping his passage at the
enteraunce of Rhodanus as testifies Diodorus Seculus and also Pomponius Mela.
Not only because the said Albion was a gyaunt, like as the before said
Samothes was before him, but also for that his father Neptunns was than taken
for the Lord or great God of the sea, wherein it is enclosed. What the chastyte
was of the Samothites or prestes for that age, Samothythes.
the Poets does declare at large. Venus was than their great Goddess, and
ruled all in that spiritual famelye, as she has done ever sens.

The Samothytes and their chastyte.
Vestals
THey had in their temples, vestals (whom now we call No^nes) whose office was
to mainteyne the fire for performaunce of the sacryfyces, least it should at
any time go out. These were chosen in before they were syxtene years old,
there remaynyng unmarried the space of. xxx. years, and others always by that
time succeeded in their rowmes. Some of these were presbyteresses, as they
pleased the spiritual fathers. And as uhe lyghtes went out by their
negligence, their ponnyshmentes were to be beaten of the Bishops. More over
if any of them chanced to fall in aduoutery, except they did it in the dark
with them, Chastity
their judgment was to be buried in the ground quycke. Always they went
away virgins from them (what soever was done in the mean season) and at the.
xxx. years end, they were in liberte to marrye if they would. This
testifies Hermanus Torrentinus, and Johannes Textor, with other auctours. Yet
was not this abominable supersticion so tyrannouslye handeled among them than,
Tyranny now.
as it has been sens among their successors the papists, whom by their
cruel coaccions (lived they never so long) they sent at the last to hell with
a conscience adust, were not the lord more merciful.

Brute with his Druydes.
IN process of time, got Brutus Syluius this land of the Albions by
conquest, Bruns syluius.
in the. xviij. year of Heli the high priest of the Israelites, like as Aeneas
did Italy, and other great aduentourers their regions. And of him was it called
Brytayne, and the people thereof Brytaynes. After he had fournyshed it with new
regimentes and laws, there entered in a new fashyoned sort of priests, all
diverse from the other, and they were called Druydes. Druydes.
These dwelt in the forestes like heremytes and procured both publyque and
pryuate sacryfices to be done. To them was it always put, to dyscusse all
matters of relygyon, to appoint thereunto the ceremonies, to bring up youth in
natural discipline, and to end all controuersyes. Plinius, Strabo, Cornelius
Tacitus, Caius Julius, and other approved autours, report them to have their
first oryginall in this land, but that appears not true. Rather should they
seem to come first hither from Athens, Athens.
a most famous city of the Greeks. Johan Hardynge reports in his
Chronycle, that king Bladud brought them first from thens, allegynge there
Merlyne for his author.

The Druydes and their chastity.
What their rule was concerning women, we shall not need to seek farther then
to the syxt chapter of Baruch, Whores
and the fourtene chapter of Daniel in the Bible. Baruch says there, that
their custom was to deck their whores with the yewels and ornaments of their
Idolles. Daniel says, that they with them devoured up the daily offerynges
and sacryfyces of Bell. Yet Hector Boethius writes in the second book of his
Scottysh Chronycle, that there were some among them, which taught one
everlasting God alone to be worshypped, One god
without Image made or other similitude else. Neither allowed they them (says
he) that applied unto their Gods the symylytudes of beasts after the
Egypcianes manner (as the Papists do yet to this day Saint Mark to a Lion,
Saint Luke to a calfe, Beasts worshypped.
and Saint Johan to an egle, beside Saint Antonies pygge, Saint Georges colte,
and Saint Dunstanes devil) but greatly reproved them. Nevertheless yet were
they great teachers of sorcerye. For as testifies Johan Textor in his
officines, so expert were the Brytaynes in art magyck in the days of Pliny,
that in a manner they passed the Parthianes which were the first masters thereof.

Priests married and unmarried.
NOw as concerning the priests of the Hebrews or Israelites for all these
ages (which were the peculyar flock of GOD) they had all wives that were
ryghtuouse among them, Priests married.
according to the Religion that he first appointed them. Noe, Melchisedech,
Abraham, Moses, Aaron, Phinees, Samuel, Nathan, Zorobabel, Jesus, Esoras,
Mathathias, and such other, were all married men and had children. The
Scripturs report that these men were beloved with God, and that in holiness
now were ever found like unto them. But neither was that for their vows nor
yet for their good intentes, Eccl. 44. and so fourth. vi. chapters more. If
any were chaste vowers that time the. ij. priests that lusts after Susanna,
Votaries.
were of them. Daniel. 13. So were the wanton sons of Heli and Samuel. 1.
Reg, 2. and. i. Re. 8. with such other like. Which were before God very
reprobates, for despysynge his order, as well in that as in other things. Of
such chaste vowers were there some, at the very time when Christ was borne,
both religious priests and levites, which were most highly taken among
them. These thinking marriage unholy, absteyned from the use of women, but
they spared not to work execrable fylthynesse among them selves, and one to
polute another. Zachary a married priest, Zachary married.
and father of holy Johan Baptist, a man for his marryage found just before
God, reprehended that abhominacion in them, and was cruellye slain for it, as
testifies Epiphanius lib 2. Tob. 2. De heresibus. He was put unto death
(says Philip Melanchton upon the. xi. chapter of Daniel) for rebukynge the
vices of his college.

Christ allows marryage in his.
Jesus Christ the eternal son of God, never condemned the first ordinance
of his everlasting father, but had it in such reverence, that he would not
be borne but under it. He found his worthy mother Mary no professed Nonne,
Marrye a wife.
as the dottynge papystes have dreamed, to cover their sodometrye with a most
preciouse color, but an honest man's wife, married according to the custom
than used. Mat. 1. and Luce, i. In her so married without either vow or promise
of virginite by the holy G^ostes most wonderful workynge was he incarnated
and so became man, No nonne.
to redeem us from the captivity of sin, and restore us again to the full
fauer of his father. He honored marriage with the first miracle that he
outwardly wrought in our manhood, and called unto his Apostelshyp, not
wyuelesse vowers, but married men. Johan 1 and Marci. 1. He went very gentilly
unto Peter's house, Peter marryes
and healed his wives mother which lay the sick of a fever, taking his
repast there, tarryenge with them all the night, and doing great cures there
also. And at his departure in the morning, he neither commanded Peter to
break up howsholde, nor yet to forsake his wife and make her a vowesse. Marci.
1. Luce. 4 Math. 8. He never commanded, No vows commanded.
nor yet exacted the vow of virgynyte in all his whole Gospel, but left all
men in lyberte to marrye if they list, forbyddynge all men fyrmelye, to make
any law of coaccion or of separation, where God has set fredome in marryage.
Math. 19. Marci. 10. No forsakynge of wife and children admytted he ever, but
as the v^moueable and constaunt standing by his word requires it, in them
that he has appointed to suffer death under the worlds tyranny for it.

The Apostles and first preachers married
Peter's wife went with him in the time of his preaching. Peter's wife.
1. Cor. 9. and was put to death at Antioche for confessing Jesus Christ, as
witnesses Clemens Alexandrinus in. 7. lib. Stromatum, and Eusebius
Caesarienfis li. iij. Ca. 30 Ecclesiastice history. Paul left his wife at
Philippos, Paul married.
a city of the Macedoneanes, by consent of them both. Philip. 4. and 1. Cor.
7. For this only cause (says bote Clemens and Eusebius) that he might the
more easelye thereby and with the less co^beraunce, preach the Gospel
abroad. Isidorus hispalensis in his book De ortu and obitu sanctorum patru^,
and Freculphus Lexouie^ sis in the second book and fort chapter of his
Chronycles, reports both, that Philip the Apostle preached in France to the
very extent of the Occeane sea, Philip married.
and was afterward done unto death in Hierapole a city of the Phrygianes,
and at the last honorablye buried there with his daughters. By whose occasyon
this real me than called Brytayne was converted unto the Christen believe. For
in the year from Christ's incarnacion. lxiij. was Joseph of Armathe and other
Disciples sent over of the said Philip to preach Christ, Joseph of Arimathe.
Anno. 63.
and entered both with their wives and children, Aruiagus then being King of
the land. This testyfieth Johan Capgraue in Catologo sanctorum Anglie, Thomas
scrope de auti. carm. cap. 7. Scrope.
Johan Hardyng in his. 47. chaptre, and Polidorus uergilius. li. 2. Anglice
history.

Brytayne first converted by men married.
THese were surely the origynall begynnynges (says Polidorus of the Christen
Religion in Brytayny. Gildas witnesses also, in his first treatise De excidio
Britannie. That the Brytaynes took the christen faith at the very spring or
first going forth of the Gospel, Gospel.
when the church was most perfyght, and had most strength of the holy
ghost. All that time and a long season after, the ministers held their wives,
according to the first order of God, without, vowynge or yet professynge of
virginite, and so continued to the days of Lucius, which is called in the
Chronycles the first Christen king. King. Lucius.
Though this Lucius were a good man, and began well to inclyne to the Gospel,
yet was he worldly minded, and thought that it wanted dew aucthorite so long
as it was ministered but of simple and poor lay married men. Anon therefore he
sent unto Rome. Rome.
ij. of those ministers called Eluanus and Meduinus unto Eleutherius the Bishop
(for they had then no pope) to have some aucthorite from then. And this was
done in the year of our Lord. C. lxxix. Anno domini 179.
Whereupon Marcus Sabellicus says, Enneade. 7. lib. 5. That of all provinces
Brytayne was the first that received the Christen faith with public
ordinance.

Christianite somewhat corrupted.
THen Eleutherius sent hither. ij. of his doctors, called fugacius and
Damianus, to set here an order. These first baptized lucius with a great part
of his nobility and commons, and then with his consent changed the Idols
temples into Christen churches (as they now call them) the flamynes or Idol.
sacryficers, Churches.
which were then. xxviij. in no^bre, into so many bishops, and the. iij.
archyflamenes into. iij. archebyshoppes, as wytnessyth Calfridus Mouemuthensis
in his second book. Autours
De origin and gestis Britonum. cap. 1. Alphredus Beuerlacensis in his
Chronycle, Vincensius, Antoninus, Nuclerus, Bergomas, Polidorus, and a great
sort more. This christianite endured in Brytayne, Christianite.
the space of. CC. and. xvi. years, unto the persecucion of Dioclesiane, says
Ranulphus in Polichronico. li. 4. Ca. 16. Upon this took the Romysh church
first occasion, to deuyde the christen provinces into dyoceses and parryshes.
Dyoceses paryshes.
Mark wyle these first buyldynges of Antechrist, or of Nemroth the yongar, and
considre out of what good stuff they rise without Gods word. All this have I
written hitherto, not as matters correspondyng to the fyttle of my book, but
that their spiritual fruits may apere what they are, even from the very
roots.

The first spryng of monkerye in Brytayne.
AS this new christianite from Rome, had gotten here of the Paganes both
temples and possessions, Temples.
and were well fauerdlye satled (their bishops and priests perchance being
the same ministers that had served the Idolles in them before) anon after there
arose out of it a certain kind of monkerye, Mo^kery
not in apparel, but in apperaunce of a more sober life. These within a while
seemed better learned than the other, and more depelye fell into the peoples
estymacyon. Whereupon arose some after great strife and unquietness among
them, and out of that strife most detestable heresies. Heresies
For one of them called pelagius, Pelagi^
being of the great monasterye of Bencornaburch in Chestre shyre (though some
call it Bangor) began to dyspute with them for the strength of manys fre will,
Fre will
and said that man might be saved thereby, without the grace of God, so denyeng
the effect of Christ's blood, as his folowers are not ashamed to do yet to this
day. Against this heretic Pelagius, wrote Saint Augustyn, Saint Hieron^,
Cyrillus Orosius, innocensius, Gennadius, and at the last Thomas Braduuardin a
doctor here in England, with diverse other.

Heresye in Brytayne aryseth of monkerye.
YEt came there in no vowynge of chastity all this time, neither was vyrginite
thought any holyer among them then marryage. For one Seuerus being both a
monk, Seuerus
priest, and bishop, had a son there called leporius a monk also and a
priest, Leporius.
which vexed the land with that learning taught of his father, in the year
of our Lord. CCCCxxxij. 432.
as witnesses both Prosper Aquitannus, and also Flores historiarum. This
leporius made his boast, that he was able to live purelye of him self, and by
force of his own fre will, without the assistence of God, as reports of him,
Gennadius Massiliensis, Autours
Honorius Augustudimensis, and Johannes Tritemius, in suis illustrium uirorum
Catalogis, and now last of all, Co^radus Gesnerus in uniuersali bibliotheca. Of
the same sort was there an other called Agricola, Agricola
a priests son also, which in the year of our Lord. CCCC. xlvi. 446.
troubled the Brytaynes with the same doctrine, as Flores historiarum shows.
The errors of both these were at the same time confuted by Germanus and Lupus
with ^ther french doctors, which came r^ydre then for the same purpose,
specially of Saint Augustine in Africa.

A priests son was Saint Partrick.
Saint Partrick the great Apostle of Irelande, partrick.
was borne here in this Brytayne about the year of our Lord. CCC. lxi. 361.
and had a priest to his father called Calphurnius, which was also a deacons
son that was name Podunus. His mothers name hight Conches, and was holy
Saint Martynes sister. Martinus.
This testyfyeth Ranulphus Cestrensis in Polychronico, lib. 4. cap. 29. and
Johan Capgraue in Catologo sanctorum Anglie. If this had been foul play in
those days, Saint Martyne would never so patiently have suffered it. For we
read that he was very tender unto the said Patrick, Patricius
after that his fryndes had sent him thydre, and taught him many Godly
things. What rule this Hartrick kept in that be half, I have not read. Yet
find I in his life written, that he had a laddy waiting on him called
Benignus, Benignus.
which always reported him, to be his own propre father, he never denyeng
it. I read also that one Moduenna, Modwenna.
an Iryshe woman was very familiar with him, whether it were by the way of
marryage or no, that can I no^ tell. Ex ante nominatis autoribus.

Saints were begotten in whordome.
TO enter more depely into the peoples opinion, a chastyte was pretensed anon
after in that monkerye, Chastity.
but not yet solempnelye vowed, and in many places of the realm were
monasteries builded both of men and women. But mark what followed thereof
immediately after. Christ chanced in those days to have many brethren. For
many virgins had then children without fathers, at the least the fathers of
them were never yet known.

Saint Dubrice that was afterward the great archebyshoppe of Cairlegion and
metropolytane of all the land, Dubricius.
had a maid to his mother, called Eurdila, but never would she confess him to
have any father. Saint Kentigerne bishop of glasghon (that ye now call Saint
Asses or Asaphes) had in like case a fair maid to his forth bryngar,
Ke^tigernus.
but farther would she grant none to him, for no co^pulsion, merlinus
Merlyne also the great sothsayer of wales, was an holy Nonnes son in saint
Peter's of Cairmardyne, no father yet known to him but a sprete of the air.
The first. ij. shows Johan Capgraue in Catalago sanctorum Anglie, And this
lattre wondre is mentioned of all famous writers. A great sort of these
histories could I rehearse, but these are enough at this time.

Like examples are among the Turks.
SOche an other knauerye is used among the Turks religyouse buggerers to this
present day, Turks
and those children that are begotten among them, are holden for most holy
saints, as these were. They take it for no maruele that Christ was borne of a
virgin, for (they say) they have such among them at all times. But to turn
again to my purpose. The cause why the fathers of the before seyde children
might not than be known, was this. Johan Capgraue says. A awe.
The ^^w was that time in Britayne, that if a young wenche had be begotten with
child in her fathers house, or any where else, this was her judgment.
Judgment.
She should have been brought unto an high mountayn, and there throune down
headlonges, her corruptour being byheaded. If this law had still continued, and
never so been put to the spiritual court without conscience, never had the
vow of their chastity run so far as it has done, to many a thousands
dampnacion.

More Saints yet begatten in whoredom.
Saint David of wales the great archebyschop of Meneuia. David.
which had so many prophecyers and so many Angels sent before to give
warning of his coming xxx. years ere he was borne, was begotten out of
marriage in stinkynge whoredom. For his mother was a Nonne, and his father the
earl of a country there called Cairdigam shyre. A prince called Dyhocus in
King Arthurs time, inflamed at the deuyls suggestyon with fleshlye love of his
own natural daughter, begat of her saint Kynede the holy hermyte, kinetus.
that in Wales wrought so many great miracles. One Dubtacus an Irysh man
begat holy saint Brigide of his maid servant called Brocsech, brigida.
eue^ vnderuech his wives nose to spyght her with it, which had so many
reuelacyon from heaven, and so many popes pardons from Rome. Saint Cuthbert the
great God, cuthbert
of the North, and he that was wont to defend us from the Scotts, was a
misbegotten also, for his mother was unmarried. And his father in Irelande to
have the good occupieng of her, slew both her father and mother. These were
the spiritual beginninges of the Saints of that age. If ye believe not me,
look Johan Capgraue in Catalpgo sanctorum Angliae., Capgraue.
and he shall tell ye much more of the matter. I could show you many more yet
of such holy saints birthes, but let these for this time suffice.

Whoredom esteemed most holiness
Mark how abominable whoryshnesse in all these whorish fruits, whoredom is
holy.
is auaunced of that whorish Rome church, to the great blemyshynge of Godly
marryage. The spiritual Sodomites and knaves has not been ashamed to write it
in the lives and lieng legendes of al these, that is to say of Dubricius,
David, Kinedus, Kentigerne, Cuthberth, and Brigide, with soche like, and
solempnely so to read and sing it as Gods service in their temples, Their Gods
service.
that they were sanctified in their mothers wombes. Se what aduauncementes they
have for stynking whoredom, and how little devotion to chaste marriage
instituted of God. Never were the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of
Moses, Eleazar, and Phinees, so painted out with miracles and wonders, nor yet
so pranked up with tabernacles and lights, sensinges and massinges, as these
whoresbirdes. Thus judge they whoredom holiness, and wholesome marriage sin.
Come out of Sodom ye whoremongers and Hipocrites, popish bishops and
prestes, The Popes.
for as yet ye have not reformed this abhominacion, but still uphold it for
your Romish Gods service. chaplaynes.
Come our thieves and knaves come out.

Women greuouse and solaciouse.
What a do these holy saints of theirs had and their vowers (wha^ they come
ones to vows making) for women and with women, women.
as to keep them out of their monasterirs, and to make the^ bear children when
they were barre^, it were an infinite thing to write. Saint David's monks were
skeared. David.
way with naked women at a broke side in Rosidaeualle. So were Saint Theliaes
hermites also in an other place not far from thens. Saint Dubrices brethren
had many hot mouinges in their flesh, dubricius.
and were feign often times to stand naked in the cold river. Saint Kentigernes
disciples took great pains upon them, Ke^tigernus,
to make baren women fruitful. When saint Brigida was at the very point of
marryage, Brigida
she stole away preuely with her iij. maids, and waited long after upon
bishop Machill, doing many great cures in his service with holy water. Saint
Modwen also after such an other sort, Saint Modwe^
waited upon bishop Hiber and his brethren with her maids. A woman the same
season accused Bishop Broon for begetting her with child, and Brigide like a
good body, brigida
by a charm or. ij made all safe again. As one of her maids was going to her
lover a prestes bed, for returninge again in time, she could her much thank.
All these holy histories shall ye find in Johan Capgraue.

A spirytuall example of a votarye.
SAint Iltute, Iltutus
or Elcute, which had been always a most valeaunte captain among the
Brytaynes, at the suggestion of saint Cadoc an Hermit, put from him his most
virtuous and chaste wife, leauyng her nothing else to live upon, but barley
bread and water on homelye repast for her that had been a lady and tenderly
brought up. And as she on a time resorted unto him only to have heard the sweet
word of the Lord, his wife.
her coming thydre so sore discontented his mind, that with a charm he put
out both her eyes. For I an certain, it came by no Godly power, (he being
led of so Godly a sprete. If this be saint Paul's learning, Not Poles
learning.
a man so miserably to leave his wife, and so ungodly to use her for axynge
good counsel, I report me to you. Yet must he be still a saint in the Popes
holy church, because he was a tiraunt to marriage for non other holiness had
he. Such saints reckon I more fit for hell than for heaven. Well, this story
has also Ioha^ Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum Anglye.

Vrsula with her sort appointed to marrye.
OF Vrsula and her. xi, Vrsula cum. xi. millibus
thousand companions have the spiritual hypocrites by help of their
spyrituall father the devil, practiced innumerable lies, by them to make their
newly sought out virginite to apere sumwhat gloriouse to the worldly dodypolles
that never will be wise. The veryte of the history is this, after all just
writers. When our Britaynes had ones gotten by their war, the land of
Armorica (that we now call the lesser Britayne) and were put in perpetual
possessyon thereof by their King Maximus about the year of our Lord. Armorica.
CCC. and XC. 390.
they acccorded among them selves through the assent of Conanus their
captain, Diounus.
only to mary with their own nation, and in no wise to have a do with the
French women there, for diverse parels. Whereupon they sent up and by over the sea to Dionothus the duke of Cornewale, Dionothus.
which than in the Kings absence had governance of all the realm, instau^tlye
desperynge him, to make prouysyon for them. For marriage.
Which immedyatly gathered from all parts of the land, to the nombre of. xi.
thousand maids and other women, and so shypped them at London upon the Tham
is with his own dear daughter Vrsula, for so much as Couanus desyered to have
her to wife. And as they were abroode upon the main seas, such contrary
wyndes and tempests fell upon the^, as drowned some of their ships, Drowned.
and drove the residue of them into the hands of their enemies the Hunues and
the pyetes, which slew a great nombre of them, as they found them not
agreeable to their fleshly purposes. This shows Galfredu, Monemuthensis li. 2.
cap. 4. Alphredus Beuerlace^sis, autours
Ranulphus, Cestre^sis, Ioa^nes Harding, Robertus Fabia^, Tritemius in
co^pe^dio Volateranus and Polydorus.

An history to their ghostly purpose
But se here ye co^ueyau^ce of these spirtiual ge^till men in Playstering up
their unsavory sorceries. They say, With lies.
they all vowed virginite, and were persuaded of saint Michael ye archa^gel and
of saint Ioha^ ye Evangelist, never to marry (as though they were diswaders of
marriage for their lecherouse vows and so went from thens religiously to Rome
on pilgrimage with great devotion, Pylgry
ij, and. ij. together, and were honorably received there of the Pope and his
clergy If this be not good ware, tell me. I think there wanted no spiritual
occupienge, for the time they were there, if the storye were true. For Daniell
says, that the lust of that proud kyngedome, should be upon women. Daniel. 11.
Dan. 11.
In all fleshly desires (says Hieremye (they are become like rauke stoned
horse, neyenge at every mannis wife. Hieremi. 5. Hiere. 5
And in deed some writers have uttered it, that they were never good sens their
being there. Now mark the sequel. In their return homewarde again toward
Coleyne, they had in their company (say their writers) pope Ciriacus) if
there ever were any such. Names feyned.
Poncius, Petrus, Vincencius. Calixtus, Kiltanus, Florencius, Ambrosius,
Justinius, and Christianus, all cardnales Cesarius, Clemens Columbanus. Yuuanus
Lotharius Pa^talus. Mauricius. Maurilius Poillanus, Sulpicius, Iacobus,
Guilhelmus. Michael, Eleutherius, Bonifacius, and. vij. more of the Popes
howsholde, all Bishops, besides a great nombre of Prestes and Chaplaynes.
Diversely is this holy legende handeled of Iacobus Bergomas in Li, Historiours.
Declaris mulieribus. of Sigebertus, Vincencius, Antoninus, Hartma^nus,
Carsulanus. Vorago, Vuernerus, Nauelerus, Mantuanus, Vuicelius. Caxton,
Capgraue. Hector, Boethius. Mayor, and a graet sort more, scarselye one agreyng
with an other.

Fine workmanship to be marked.
HE that would take the pain, to confer their Chronycles and writings,
Prove the spretes.
but concerning this only matter, observing dylygentlye their diverse
bestowynge of times, places and names with other things perceiving to the
circumstaunce of hystorye, should anon perceive the^e subtyle conueyau^ce in
many other matters. The solemn feast of these. xi. thousand she pilgrims,
for their going to Rome, is yet no small matter in their Idolatrouse church,
and yet they pour sowles never came there, as the most auc^entyue writers does
prove. Their going out of Brytanye was to be come honest Christen mennys wives
/ and not to go no pilgrimage to Rome, Only to marry.
and so become bishops bonilasses, or prestes playeferes Se what our ancient
Englysh writers had says in this matter / which more experimently knew it,
and lere the foren liars go, which being faere of cared the less to lie. In
deed this is a very strange procuringe of Saints, if ye mark it well, but
that the monks and prebendes of Coleyne thought to do sumwhat for the pleasure
of their Nonnes there, which had gathered togyter an haeye of dead mennys
bones. No^nes of Coleyne.
For their bones culde they not have, being drowned in the great Occeane sea,
as Galferdus and the other autours veryfyeth before. But both Christ and Paul
ones told us, that we should be subtyllye cyrcumuented of that wylye
generacyon, when they should work their deceytfull wonders. Math. 24. and. 2.
These. 2.

Vowynges ded not yet constraynt.
ALl this time were there no constraynynge vows but all was fre to leave or to
hold. For Constans the eldeste son of king Constantyne the second,
Co^sta^s.
being a monk of Saint Amphibalus abbeye in Cairguent, that ye now call Saint
Swythunes in wynchestre, was taken out of yt without dyspensacyon, about the
year of our lord.

CCCC. xliij and crowned king of Brytayne, 443.
being in full lyberte of marryage. Galfredus, Ranulphus Hardyng, Capgraue,
Caxton, and Fabyan. In like case Maglocunus (as Gildas reports) was first a
monk, Maglocunus. Gildas.
and afterward constytute king in the year of our lord. CCCCC lij. 552.
contynuynge still by the space of more than. xxxiiij. years, and had for their
he thyme. ij wives besides his concubines. This Maglocunus was rekened the most
romelye person of all his regyon, and a man to whom Gone had than given great
victories against the Saxons, Norweyes, and Danes. Yet was he in his age as was
long before him, Mempricius his predecessor, Mempricius.
given to most abominable so dometry, which he had learned in his youth of
the consecrate chastyte of the holy clergy. Galfredus, Ranulphus. Hardynge
Fabian. and Flores historiarum. Very vehement was Gildas being than a monk of
Beucornaburch not far from Chestre, in his daily preachinges, Gildas
prophecyeth.
both against the clergy and layte, concerning that vice and such other, and
prophesied before hand of the subuersyon of this realm by the Saxyns for it,
like as it sone after followed in effect. Look in both his books De excidio
Britannie and in scriptis Polidori. Galfredi and Ranulphi. with the preface of
William Cindals obedyence.

The Saxons enter with new Christianite.
ANon after the Saxon^ had gotten of the Brytaynes the full conquest of this
land, Saxons.
the name thereof was changed, and has ever sens been called England of Engist
which was than their chief Captayn, England
as wytneseth Johan Hardyng. Ioha^ Mayor. Hector Boethius. Caxto^. Fabyan Than
came there in a new fashioned christyanyte yet ones again from Rome
Christyanyte.
with many more heythuysh pokes than before. And that was upon this occasion, as
all writers agree. Gregory the first of that name (now called Saint Gregory)
beheld in the open market at Rome. Gregory.
Englysh boys to be sold. Mark this ghostly mystery, for the prelates had
than no wives. And women in those days might sore have distained their newely
rysin opinion of holiness, if they had chanced to have been with child by
them, and therefore other spiritual remedies were sought out for them by their
good prouiders and proctours, ye may (if ye will) call them applesquires.
Instede of marryage.
And at this Gregory beheld them fair skinned and bewtifully fared, with
hear upon their heads most comely, anon he axed, of what region they were.
And answer was made him, that they were of an isle called England. Well may
they be called Angly (says he) for they have very A^gelyck vysages. Angly.
Se how curyouse these fathers were, in the well eyenge of their wares. Here
was no circumstaunce unlooked to, perteining to the sale. Wares
Yet have this Bishopp been of all writers reckened the best sens his time.
This story mencioneth Iacobus de Voragine, Vincencius. Antoninus. Ioannes
Capgraue, Mayor, Polydorus. and an hundred autours more.

More English boys sold at Rome.
AN other example like unto this, tells theseyde Johan Capgraue in his
Cataloge. That at one Macutus an English, Marutus.
Brytayne, and Bishop of Aleth in Irelande, being at Rome about the year of
our Lord. CCCCC perceived serten Englysh boys to be sold there openly. 500.
He gave the price of them, and sent them home again. Of a likelyhode he
smelled the spyrytuall occupyeng there, and pytyed the most dampnable casting
away of those poor innocents, whom Christ had so derely redeemed with his
blood. Such an other act of christen pity wrought king Etelwolphus there
(after diverse writers) when he in the year of our Lord. Ethelwolphus
DCCC. xlvij. 847
made suit to Pope Leo the fort, to be clearly dispensed with forth order of
Subdeacon, which he had in his yowthe received) wholesome ware I warande you) of
Helmestane than Bishop of wynchestre. For by that time they had crepte into the
seat of the Serpent, Apoca. 13. Apo. 13.
and obtained full autoryte to dyspense with all pactes, professions, promyses,
vows, athes, oblygacyons, and sealynges to the Beasts holy service. Mark
always the times. Times
This story has Vuyllyam of Malmesburye. li. 2. De regibus, a Raulphe.
Hardyng. Fabyan and Polidorus with other. And that the one wants, the other
always habundauntly supplieth. Possession was taken of that seat of the Beast
under phocas the emperor in the year of our Lord. DC. and vij. 607.
wean the papacy first begone.

Augustine enters with his Monks.
NOw to return again unto Gregory. He sent upon the aforesaid occasyon, into
England in the year from Christ's in carnacion. CCCCC.xcvi. 596.
a Romysh monk called Augustyne, not of the order of Christ as was Peter,
Augustinus.
but of the supersticiouse sect of Beuet. there to sprede abroad the Romish
faith and religion, for Christ's faith was there long before. With him entered
Melitus. Iustus. Laurencius. Ioa^nes, Petrus. Rufinianus, Paulinus, and a great
sort more to the nombre of. xl. all monks and Italyanes. Monks
Well armed were they with Aristotle's artilery, as with logyck, Philosophy, and
other crafty sciences, but of the sacred scripturs, they knew little or
nothing. crafty science.
If ye believe not me, read in Johan Capgraues Cataloge, Inuita Augustini, his
interrogacions. Ad Gregorium per laurencium and Petrum, and ye shall find them
void of all christen learning, either of law or Gospel, yea, most insypient
and folishe. Yet was the said Augustine the best learned among the^. These took
with them a great nombre of french interpretours, Ignorant apostles.
because they were all ignoraunte of the language there. Here was a noble
christianite toward, when the preachers knew neither the scrypturs nor yet
the speech of the people. Well, yet they ded miracles, Yea, so said Christ
they should do, Miracles.
when he bad us in any wise to be ware of the^. Math. 24. For this story, mark
specially Johan Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum Anglie, Sigebertus Vince^cius,
Antoninus, Tritemius, Christianus Masseus, and the church legendary.

Dyuersly were they of women entreated
ANd as concerning women, grievously were they vexed with them coming
hytherward, Women.
specyallye at a vyllage called Say, Say.
within the cou^tye of Angeuin france. In the which was builded immedyatly
after, a church (they say) in the honor of the said Augustine, where as no
women come, but are plaged with most sudden death, angrye saints.
for the dyspleasure there showed them than, yet ded thy but laugh upon the^.
This shows Alexa^drethe prior of Esseby in his Annual of Saints by these
verses.

Cetus aput Say uexauit eos mulierum.
Quas peccasse probat. lux noua fo^sque nouus
Plebs parat ecclesia^. mulieribus haud resera^da^
Introitu^tentat una. sed inde perit.
This story has also Johan Capgraue. and the old Englysh Festyuall of Saints
which was sometime, Festyuall.
the only taught Gospel of England. Notwythstandinge this dyspleasure of
women abroad, yet found they women. favorable within England. For Bertha the
queen of Kent, than being a French woman, caused King Ethelbert to admit
them with al their tyrlery trashe. Ethelbert.
Yet for the small trust he had unto them at their first metynge he would in
nowyse commen with them within any house (the story says) least they should
after any sorcerouse sort bywytche him. The first point of Religyon they
showed, was this. They spread fourth a banner with a painted crucyfyre and a
silver cross thereupon, and so come to the king in processyon, Procession.
synging the Letany. Well might this be called a new chrystyanyte, for neither
was it known of Christ nor of his Apostles, nor yet euerseane in England
before. It came altogyther from the dust heap of their monkery.

Their first spiriituall prouysyons here.
AS the king admytted their enteraunce, he couenaunted thus with them, and
very wisely. That his people should always be at lyberte, lyberte.
and no man constrained to their new found Relygyon, sacrifices, and
worshyppynges. But alac that fredome continued not long with them, as ye shall
well perceive hereafter Then did Augustine get him into France again, and
caused one Etherius than Archebyshop of Arelas, Etherius.
to consecrate him the great bishop of all England, without eleccion or
consent of the people that we read of. And in the year of our Lord even. DC.
600.
did Gregorye send unto him from Rome, his prymates pall, with super altares,
chalyces, copes, Instruments.
candelstyckes, vestymentes, surplices, alter clothes, singing books,
rellyckes, and the blessings of Peter and Paul. And so admytted him for the
first metropolitan of all the whole realm, appointing his seat from thens
fourth at Canterburye, than called Doroberna, Doroberna.
the worthy city of London ever after deprived of her former title, and so
made an vnderlynge. But the spiritual fathers knew well enough what they did,
beholding before hand many hydden mysteries. They perceived that Caunterbury
was well out of the ways, Caunterburye.
and much nygher the sea then was London, and so much the fytter for their
craftye conueyaunces, and flyghtes to their holy father if need should require
it, with many other commoditees else. Mark always these nombres of Syxes and
their mysteries, No^bres.
for the age of Man and the Beast, Apoca. xiij.

Their preparacions for Antichrist.
THe first stody of these fathers after they were ones satled, primitie.
was al about mass offerynges, ceremonies, bishops seats, consecrations,
church hallowynges, orders geuynge, tithes, personages, puryfycacions of
women, and such like. Whereupon a Synuode was called, Synodus
and there commandments were given that all things should be here observed
according to the customs of Rome. In England was there before their coming a
Christiaanite, Christyanytye.
but it was all without masses, and in a manner without choice of either days
or meats. The Brytaynes in those days had none other Gods service but the
Gospel. Brytaynes.
Seldom admytted they any difference of times with the Jews, either any
Idol sacryfyces with the Gentyles, but followed the plain rules of the
scriptures. If any supersticions were among their Monks, they had naught to
do therewith, but were evermore at lyberte. For Princes at that time were not
yet become^ the beasts Images, Princes
to speak out of their spretes, or to make laws according to their lusts.
The labor of Augustyne with his monks, from the foresaid year of our Lord
DC. 600.
was to prepare Antichrist a seat here in England, against the full time or
his perfyght age, of 666. 666.
For though he were first conceived in the wicked church of Cain, yet could he
not show him self in his own likeness, that is to say, Christ's open
adversary, till Christ came in the flesh. And then he apeared at all one time
with him, Antichrist.
in the malygnaunt church of the Jews or spyrytualte of Herod, which then
first began to persecute him and to seek his death.

The prouinge of Augustines Apostelshyp.
IN the year of our Lord. DC. and ii. 602.
held Augustyne an other counsel in the west part and countye of worcestre,
Synodus
in a place that is yet called Augustynes oak, whereunto he called by
commandment, the. vij. bishops of the Brytayne church with their
principal doctors. And as they were taking their iournay thydreward, they
counsayled with a certain solytarye man, Solynarye man
which was known to be of a most perfight christen life, what was to be done
concerning the aforesayed Augustyne. Anon he made them this christen
answer: If he be a man of God (says he) in any wise follow his counsayll.
If he be not utterly refuse it. How shalll we know that? say they. Ye shall
well perceive it by his gentle sprete, says he again. For Christ bad his
scolers to learn of him to be meke hearted. Christen counsel.
If he be of that sort, he is like to bring ye none other then Christ's most
easy yoke. But if ye find him proud, be ware of the importable burdens of the
high minded Pharysees. And as they were commen thydre, A proud Monk.
they found him sitting a loft in a throne of high honor, showing unto them
no countenance of gentylnesse. Wherefore they regarded him not, but utterly
withstode all his enforcementes.

The English church begins with tyranny.
AFter long disputacions and other weywarde wrangelynges, he laid unto their
charges, that they were in many things, contrary to the universal Christen
church. Notwithstanding, if they would consent unto him in these. iij. points.
Three points
That is to say, to baptyse after the Romysh manner, to celebrate the feast of
Easter as they do there and preach to the English Saxons as he should
appoynte them, he would well bear with them in all other causes. In no case
would they grant unto him, nor yet accept him for their archebyshop but said
playnelye, they would still hold their ancient tradicions, which they
perfyghtlye knew to be agreeable to the holy Apostles doctrine. A tyrau^t
Then said Augustyne furyouslye unto them, that if they would not peaceably
grant to his requests, they should be enforced thero^to by most cruel
battle. And so in the year next following, were slain of their preachers by
Augustynes procurement, A murderer.
to the nombre of a thousand and ij. hundred, with their great mastre
Dionothus. Look Flores Historiarum, Amandus Zierixensis, Galfrede, Ranulph,
Capgraue, Caxton, Fabiane, their church legendary, and other. Thus did that
carnal Synagoge (than called the Englysh church) which came from Rome with
Augustine, A carnal Synagoge.
most cruelly persecute, at her first coming in, the christen church of the
Brytaynes in these holy martyrs. Their sinful Syon builded they then in blood,
Bloody Syon.
for that their wicked institutes were Godly dysobeyed. But be they sure, it
shall be plowed up in this lattre age, and lie wast like a void field,
according to Mycheas prophecye. Mich. iij.

What the Brytayne church was before.
TRue is the faithful saying of Johan Leylande in assertione Arturij fol. 35.
Johan Leyland
That the Romysh Bishop sought all means possible to uphold the Englysh
Saxons in a kingdom falselye gotten, the Brytaynes hatynge him for it, and he
again for myschefe provoking those Saxons fearcelye to invade them. Mark it
hardelye, for it is worthy to be noted. Mark also the agreement of the
Brytayne church with the vij. churches of Asia in Saint Iohans time. Brytayn
church.
Not only for the just nombre of their bishops, but also for their obseruacion
of Easter before this Augustines coming. For in their argumentacio^s about that
matter, they laid always for them selves the vsages of that church received
first of Johan the Euangelyst, Philyp the Apostle, Policarpus, Traseas,
Sagaris, Papirius and Meliton, allegynge the saynges of Policrates, and
Eusebius, in that behalf. Englysh church.
The church that Avgustyne than planted in England, was more governed by
bishops polycyes for their aduau^tage, then by ye express word of God to his
honor, as it has been ever sens. And therefore it was and is yet in outward
obseruacio^s, rather a polytique church then a Christen church, the Iewyshe
and Heythnyshe supersticions not rekened. God grant it ones a shap after his
prescripte laws and ordynau^ces. Amen.

Antichrist approached fast to his full age.
IN the year of our lord (as I said before). DC. and. vij. 607.
Antichrist fast approchyng to the fullness of his age, full age.
grew into a universal fatherhode. For than first began the papacye at Rome
under the false Emprour phocas, as witnesses Abbas yrspergensis, Hermannus
Contractus, Sigebertus, Ranulphus, Matheus Palmarius, Christianus Masseus,
Archilles Pirminius, Ioannes Carrion, et Martinus Lutherus in Mundi
supputacione. The Papacye.
Then obtained Bonifacius the third of that name, of the said Phocas for money,
in the mids of all scysme, strife, myschefe, and murder, to be Satan's great
steward here, and the devils leftenaunt. For in his power it was not to make
him Christ's vicar, nor yet sait Peter's successor. Thus gave the Dragon, then
his autorite and power to the beast with. vij. heads, that arose out of the
sea, or from the supersticiouse wauerynge multitude, Apoca. xiij. Apoc. 13.
Then wanted he nothing else, but to sit in the place of God, which is the
conscience of Man, that he might there exalte himself above all that is called
God. ij Thessa. ij. 2. Tes. 2.
To bring that to pass, the Monks and the priests sturrred quickly about
them, and left no cautels unsought out to bring all Christen realms under his
deuylyshe domynyon. For then had the Monks aucthorite to preach, baptyse, and
assoyle from sin, Monks autorite.
which they never had before. How and what they wrought here in England, is
evident by that has been showed before, and wylbe yet more plain in that
which hereafter follows. Mark it therefore in the name of God, for now is the
time wherein he must be reveled, that the Lord Jesus may consume him with the
breathe of his mouth. Esa. xi. Esa. xi.
and. ij. These. ij.

The chastity of his masmongers.
NOw concerning the continencye of this new broched brood or newlye fashyoned
clergy. For so much as they were Monks and came from Rome, they had
professed a false chastyte, A false chastity.
to apeare more holy then the priests, and thereby in process of time to
rob them of their benefyces or appointed lyuynges. Though Gregory in his time
made these constytucions, Gregori
that none should be admitted a priest which had married. ij. wives, nor yet
thereto be accepted that in priesthode kept concubynes, as testifies
Sabellicus, yet durst he not utterly condemn priests marryage, by reason of
a most terrible example of innumerable chyldre^s heads seane drowned in a
ponde. Example.
But mark yt spyritual occupienge of these hot fathers, for greuouslye were
they than vexed with night pollucions. Monks chastyte.
Whereupon Augustine sent unto Gregory, to know if they might well say mass
having them the night before. Unto whom after many words, he makes in effect
this answer. That like as they chance unto men iiij. ways, iij. ways.
that is to say, by superfluyte of nature, by glottenouse eating and
drinking, by infirmite of the flesh, and by filthy cogytacions of the mind,
so ought they to have. iiij. consyderacions. For the first. iij. a priest
ought not (he says) to astayne from his mass sayng. The forth describes by
suggestion, dylectacion, and consent, Colored Sodomye.
leaving it without any conclusion. If this be not good wholesome divinity of
your holy Romyshe Saints, tell me. This has Johan Capgraue in Catalogo
sanctorum Anglie.

Contempt of marryage with tails.
I Think a man might find as honest stuff as this, in the scooles of my lord
of wynchestres rentes at the bank side at London, Stews divinity.
if he had need of it. Ye may se by this, the virtuous study of these holy
chaste fathers, and the clarkelye conueyaunce of their fleshlye mouynges. Great
pytie had it been, but it had had place in their holy saints legendes to the
ghostlye intourmacyon of other, but that we should not else well have known their
bawdye hypocrysye. If their vnuirginall vows had not been, votaries learning
little should the world have neded this lecherous learning. Honest marryage
has not knowledge thereof, and yet is it a pleasyng service unto GOD. Is not
that (think you) a strange kind of chastyte, that is thus every weke
poluted? Yet may they after this learning, every day say Mass, their vow
never hyndered, but in marryage they may not so do under pain of death. Now
forsooth it is wholesome ware, and it should come even now from the deuyls black
bowgett. marriage contempned.
This is the reverence these poluted wretches have to matrymonye, being Gods
clear institucion, that they perferre all their fleshlye knaueryes unto it. For
it only, have they named men lay and women lewd, appoyntynge their children
tails here in England in disdain and scorn. Lay, with tails.
For naught was it not that Saint Paul called their learning Hyprocrysye, and
the detestable doctrine of dyuels. i. Timo. iiij. Johan Capgraue and Alexa^dre
of Esseby says, that for castyng of fyshe tails at this Augustine, Dorset
shyre men had tails ever after. But Polydorus applies it unto kentysh men at
Stroude by Rochestre, Dorset and Stroude
for cuttyng of Thomas Beckettes horses tail. Thus has England in all other
lands a perpetual infamye of tails by their written legendes of lies, yet
can they not well tell, where to bestow them truly.

Strife about the Eastre celebracion.
NExt after this Augustine was Laure^cius archbishop of Cau^terburye.
Laurencius cu^ alijs.
And after him Melitus. Then Iustus, then Honorius, then Theodatus, and
Theodorus, all black monks and Italyanes borne to the nombre of vij. This
Laurence held a great Synod with his other prelates in the I Will of ma^ne,
Synodus
dysputynge there with the Scottyshe and Iryshe Bishops, for the feast of
Eastre, what day it should be yearly celebrated, writynge from thens unto
their other prelates a treatise of the same. More then an hundred years space,
were the Papists then in controversy for the day of that Eastre celebracion,
the feast of easter
ere they could be quyeted. Great pains the relygiouse fathers took in those
days to strain out a gnatt, that their lecerouse posteryte after them, might
the better swallowe in a mighty camel. Math. xxiij. In things of small value
they were then very scrupulose, but the wayghtier causes they could let slyppe
well enough What so ever this Laurence was to women by his life, Women
he was (they say) very cruel unto them after his death. For in a certain
town called fordune, was a church bulded in his name, where no women might
enter with offering nor without offering, but they had ever more sore bellyes
of it. Sore bellies.
I pray god they went not many times thens with child, for there were many
fat Canons and prebendes. This supersticiouse table borowe they of the
paganes, whose oppinion was that no woman might enter into the temple of Venus
their great Goddess in the mount of Olympus, Venus.
without a great vyllanye. Iacobus Zieglerus in sua Syria.

Great business for their other tradicions.
HEre pass I over the clowtynge in of their canonical hours, Ceremomonies
and rytes.
of their absolucions for sins, their temples, their aulters, their
belryngynges, their lentes, their diversity of orders and divisions of
parishes, least I should be therein to tediouse unto the readers. Aidanus,
Finanus, and Cosmannus being all. iij. bishops of lyndiffarne in
Northumberlande one after an other, Good men.
and Scottysh me^ borne, could not well away with the pride and wanton toys
which they beheld in their Romysh rytes, but perseuered still in the simple
order of the primative church, not contented to change it. For the which in
those days, they had much a do with these high stomaked Romans. Hilda in
like case, Hilda ^t Colmannus.
that was the^ abbasse of Streneshalt (that we now call Whytby) a woman
learned, wise, and virtuous, dysputed with them in their general counsayl
upon Colmanus side, in the year of our Lord. DC. and lxiiij. 664.
concerning the day of their eastre celebracion, their head shauinge, and
other unsavory ceremonies, and wrote afterward an earnest treatise against
Agilbertus a french man and at that time bishop of Wynchestre. Agilberbertus.
All this might not help then, but in process of time they had their whole
minds, magry al their hearts. Bedas Giruninus li. 3. ca. 25. De gestis
Anglorum, Guilhelmus Malmesburye li. 3. De Pontificibus Ranulphus. lib. 5. cap.
17. Johannes Caphraue and other.

Religiouse examples dysuadynge marriage.
After Laurentius followed Melitus in the archebyshoppes seat of Caunterburye,
melitus.
in the year of our lord. DC. and. xix, 619.
which (they say) both alive and dead, dysuaded young men from christen
marryage. As Saint Columbanus a Scott, Columbanus.
about the same time, came to the sell of an holy Nonne for ghostlye counsel.
She bad him, away, least wanton youth would bring them together wild they
nylde they. Saint Edwyne king of Northumberland gave unto saint Paulinus the
archebyshop of york, Paulinus
his young daughter Eanfleda, so sone as she was baptized in the year of our
lord. DC. and. xxvi. 626.
that he should make her an unholy Nonne. And the day after the said Edwyne
was slain, he took with him both the daughter and mother, and so fled with
them unto Rochestre in kent be water, never returning thydre again. Saint
Fiacre a Scottysh heremyte had so great malice unto women, Fiacrius.
that he plaged so many of them with the foul evil, as came within the
precynct of his monasterye, because one woman had ones complained to the bishop
of his prodygyouse charmynges. Hector Boethius. Saint Foillanus an Irysh Bishop
with his brethren was very famylyar and seruysable unto Saint Gertruyde and her
nonnes at Nigella, Foillanus.
and made diverse barren women full graciouslye to conceive. Keyna.
Saint keynwirye a virgyne of wales, contempnynge marryage, fled from the^s to
Saint Myhels of the mount, to keep her vowed virginite among the holy
fathers there, as vower with vowers. All these stories has Johan Capgraue.

Other relygyouse examples of that age.
SEbba king of the East Saxons, Sebba is monked.
was so by wytched of the Bishop of London and his calkyng collygeners there
for his substance, that he had made himself a monk, leaving unto them both
his wife and possessions, if she had been no wife then he nor more godly
dysposed.

Yet was she by their incantacyons at the last deceived, they having of him an
innumerable sum of money, and he nothing of them again but a mangye monks
cowle and his buryall in Paul's. When Saint Egbynes father was ones departed in
wales, Egbinus.
his mother resorted with him to the Abbeye of Saint Sampson, Sa^pson.
and there received of him the habyte of a Nonne, bestowyng the rest of her
life among the good brethren there. Saint Eanswyde abbess of Folkstane in
kent, Eanswida.
inspyred of the devil dyffyned christen marryage to be barren of all virtues,
to have but transytoryouse fruits, and to be a filthy corruptyon of virginite.
Yet ware Marye, Johan Baptyst, and Jesus Christ sweet fruits thereof, the just
fathers of the old law not rekened. Saint Paul says also, that by virtue
of marryage, Fruits of marryage.
the unfaithful man is sanctyfyed by the woman that is faithful. i. Cor. vij.
Neither did he at any time teach marryage to be either a corrupcion or yet an
impedyment of christen virginite, when he coupled the Corintheanes (which
continued still married) a chaste virgin to Christ. 2. Cor. ii. But this
gentylwoman Eanswyde was much better acquaynted with the monks learning then
with Christ's, Eanswida.
and with a chastyte rather to their behoue than to his. Yet drove she out all
the gantes or bystardes there, if their church legende be true. These stories
showed Johan Capgraue.

The wanton toys of the holy fathers.
ABout this same time sent Pope Bonyface the fyft, a shyrte with a golden
collor, babyshe toys.
and a fine petycote of strange making, unto king Edwyne with the blessings
of Peter and Paul. And unto his wife Ethelburge a silver glass and a comb of
yvorye with the same, to uphold them in this new christianite. Se these
wanton fathers what toyrs they use, to set up their kingdom here. Never shall
ye read that Christ's dysciples had any such wyttye polycyes. Saint Petrock
an her myte of Cornewale, Petrocus.
was feign every night from the crow of the cock to the spring of the
morning, to stand naked in a pyt, to abate the hot mouynges of his flesh.
And never could he have remedy of that disease, till he went onpilgrimage to
Rome and Jerusalem. Here was a new sought out salve for that sore. Saint
Pyrane a Bishop also in Cornewale, Piranus.
had a fair dammesell in the monastery of his mother wyngell, called Brunet,
whom the Lord of the soil took up for his occupieng. At the last he agreed
with him no longer to have her, then the bernacle or butture should break him
of his sleep, which chanced sone after, and tha^ he sent her home again. If
these be not good honest legendes to be redd in the Popes holy church, lege^des
tell me. Ple^teouse shall ye find Ioha^ Capgraue in the rehersall of them and
such other.

The ghostly bestowing of their vows.
A Nonne belonging to saint Cota, and a monk perteyning to saint Pyrane about
the same time struck up a covenant of love. Chastyte of votaryes.
And as they met in a wode for performance of the same a young pigeon fell
betwixt them and made them both ashamed, and so they went home again. A like
matter. Such an other pagent was played at york, Vows observed.
but it was long after. The monks of saint Mary abbeye, and the nonnes of
Clement thorpe met together there at hay making, the abbottes fool being with
them. And as the abbot enquired of him at supper for pastyme, where he had been
all that day. He fell in a great laughing and declared before all his gestes,
that a sore battle had been foughten that after none betwixt his monks and
the monks of clement thorpe. But he thanked God that his monks had the best,
for they lay ever aloft. Because that one of Saint modwens maids, Modwenus.
had laid her best beloues shoes at her beds head, the spretes of heaven
that were wont to vysyte her, would not come there that night. After she had
been at Rome, and was comen home again, she dwelt at Scaleselyf, where as an
holy hermyte ded often times vysyte her, Heremita.
and much refreshe her with a legende book of saints lives. But no tydinges
was there among them, of Christ's holy Gospel. Look Johan Capgraue.

Erkenwalde and Osith, with their Nondryes.
Saint Erkenwalde the son of Vffa the first King of the east angres,
Erkenwaldus
abbot of Chertesye and Bishop of London, builded a Nondrye at Berkynge. And
because there were at that time in England no Nonnes to his mind (for Hilda
his kynswoman was to great a scripture woman in those days) he sent over the sea for an old acquayntaunce of his called Hildelitha, learned in art, but not
in Christ's dyuynyte. Her made he there abbasse, committing unto her
governance, his systre Ethelburge and a great sort more of young maids to be
thaught and made nonnes there. Ethelburga.
Such rule was kept among them within a short space after, that God sent upon
them a plage of pestilence, which took away all their chaplaynes, the cruel
Danes following and burning up that was left, monasterye, nonnes and all.
Saint Osith was married to Sigher King of the East Saxons. Ositha
But because she loved the spyrytualte much better than him, whyls he was on a
lyme in hunting, she sent by a preuye lettre for Accas, and Bedewinus,
Bishops of the East Angels, Spiritual knavery.
contaynynge Northfolke and Sothfolke, causyng them to put upon her a nonnes
aparell. So made she him to believe in his return, that she had professed the
vow of chastyte, and gave him thereby a most wretched occasyon to live all the
days of his life after, in most synnefull aduoutrie. But a just plage
followed. For in the year of our Lord. DC. liij. 653.
was she slain of the Danes, and her whore house (nondrye I should say)
utterly destroyed. Yet was she in the Popes church allowed for a stynkynge
martyr, for contemning marriage. Look Johan Capgraue.

The perfight age of the Beast,
THeodorus a Greek, Theodorus.
was of pope Vytelinaus constitute the sixth archebyshop of Caunterbury, from
Augustine or sens the Papacy began, to make all sure here to Antichrists
behoue in the syxty and six year of his age, and in the year from Christ's
in carnacyon six hundred, syxtye, and six, which is in saint Iohans Apocalypse
the full age of the Beast, Apo. 13.
and the full nombre of man, Mark it good reader. For now of a Beast,
becomes he a king, yea, as Daniele calls him, The fully co^plete age.
the unshamefast King of faces. Daniel. 8. Presuming to sit above God in every
mannys conscience 2. Thessa. 2. Named it is there, the nombre of man, and the
nombre of the Beast, No^^re of the beast.
for so much as it was the time, wherein mannys learning most strongly withstode
the learning of God, to the prankyng up of than odiouse adversary the very man
of sin, and son of perdycyon, all blasphemies thereupon following. Euydent
is it / by all the Englysh Chronycles, that than this Theodorus came hither
with the seal of that execrable Beast, to mark up all to that most
blasphemouse kingdom. For never before wrought the sprete of Antichrist, the
mystery of iniquyte so strongely as at that time. For hither than brought he
all vayn and craftye scyences, crafty sciences
of comitynge, calking, measurynge, singing, rymynge, reasonynge, arguing,
diffining, shauing, oylynge, exorcising, incanting, and coniuring. Look Johan
Bapgraue, in uitis Adriani, and Theodori. Besides that Bedas writes li. 4.
Cap. 2. and Ranulphus. li. 5. Cap. 18.

For the variaunce had in supputacio^s.
TO avoid controversies in the supputacyon of years, for so much as some
writes him to have comenly there in ye year before rehearsed, and some. ij.
years after. Ye shall understand that Theodatus which was his predecessor,
Theodatus
departed in the year of our Lord. DC. lxv. as witnesses Herma^nus Co^tractus
in Chronico desex etatibus mundi. In the year following was this Theodorus
admitted of Vitelianus, Theodorus.
and received his full autoryte of bindyng and losing (says Platina) to hold
the English nacyon still in that faith. Mark it. But by reason of serten
delays, it was more than a year after ere he entered into England. One cause
of his tarryaunce (Johan Capgraue says (was the growing of his hear
concerning his crown, which was shaven before after a far other sort / he
being a Greek. shauing
His abydyng there for that only cause, was more than. iiij. Months, besides
other nedy matters. So that it was the year of our Lord. DC. lxviij. 668.
the. xxvi. day of May, and the second year of his consecracyon ere he came
into Kent, as witnesses both Bedas and Ranulphus. With him sent Vitelianus a
monk borne in Aphrica, called Adria^, Adrianus.
to look to his doctrine, least he thaught any thing in the English church
that were not agreeable to the Romyshe faith (as the marriage of prestes, and
the howselynge with leuened bread) for he ded not in all points trust him,
because he was a Greek borne. Anon after he set up a great scole at
Caunterburye of all manner scyences, A scole.
as Rhetoryck, Logyck, Philosophy, Mathesy, Astrologye / Geometrye,
Arithmetyck, and Musyck, and taught them there openly both in latin and Greek,
Strange sciences.
besides the art Magyck, Sortilege, Physnomye, Palmestrye, Alcumye,
Necromancye, Chiromancy, Geomancy, and witchery, that was thaught there also.
Bedas, Ranulphus, and Ioha^ Cap

Sealinges to the Beasts obedience.
THan constitute he the said Adriane both abbot and general reader there,
Adrianus.
whyls he compassed about all the whole region for the Eastre celebracion and
other To mysh rytes. This is the first Archbishop (says Johan Capgraue) that
all the Englysh church was sworn to. Character.
Mark here the Seal of the Beast. Apo. 13. In the year of our Lord. DC.
lxxij. 672.
he held a Synod at Thetforde in Northfolke, sinodus
where as he enquired of every mannis faith toward the Church of Rome. Than
constitute he bishops for every quarter, and deposed all them that were not
confirmed by the popes auctoryte, of whose nombre Ceddas the bishop of york
was one. Ceddas
More over he published there a book of the churches ordynaunces, Ordinances.
made by the foresaid Vitelianus, with permission of organes to make them mirye,
commaundinge it only to be observed, Christ's order set a part. If this were
not the departing that Paul prophesied to come. 2. The. 2. where shall we
look for any. A saying has Ioannes de Molinis, Ioa^nes de Molinis.
in speculo carmel. Ca. 6. which (though he were a papyst) I find here most
true. From the days of Heraclius the Emproure (faith he) unto our times, the
day drawing toward night, the church sufferynge a sore eclippes, is come to
a down going. Yea, she is almost at the case of a full departing, etc. I
think a ^ruer sentence could not than be uttered all circumstaunces thereupon
considered. Great pytye was it, that the churches posterite than perceived not
so manifest a defeccion.

More sealinges yet to Antichrists kingedome.
IN the year of our Lord. DC. and lxxv. 680
held this Theodorus an other counsel at Hatfeld in the west parties. Synodus.
Whare as he demanded a reckening of the bishops and other curates, what
faith and fauer their peoples had than to the church of Rome, as pope Agathon
had commanded him to do by his wrytynges, Agatho^.
which wrote than unto him, to do all things wisely. Ye know what that
means. I think. Here was non inquire made, what believe they had than there
in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. No Gospel.
No, it was an other manner of matter, that they sought. Oh, wonderful was the
workynge of that Serpents generacyon. Polidorus says, li. 4. Anglice
history, that false religion and counterfett presthyde, was than thoroughly
salted and placed there, the Acts of the. iiij. general counsels received instead of the. iiij. Euangelies. In the next year following, was a general
Synod kept at Constantynople in Greece, Synodus generalis.
where as marryage was for ever permytted unto the Greek prestes, and utterly
forbidden the latynes, or all other besides them, the latin mass receyuynge
there his first confirmacion. Mass.
But Theodorus and his monks were at a good indyfferent point for that, which
had veyled within in one monastery in the I Will of Thanete lxx. Nonnes, making
fair Myldrede their abasse. Mildreda.
Look Ioha^ Capgraue Ranulphe and other English autours. In spite of the
former act, d^d Vitiza the king of Spain, Vitiza.
permyt his prestes by a law newelye made, to keep so many concubines as there
would. Michael Ricius de regibus Hispanie, and Paulus Constantinus Phr^gio in
Chronidis regnorum,

Chastyte, Monks, Monasteries, and Penance.
Wernerus Cartusiensis says in Fasciculo temporum, that vowynge of chastyte
was fre without constraynt in the time of saint Gregory and sumwhat after Bedas
reports, Chastyte fre.
li, 3, ca. 6, De gestis Anglorum, and Ioannes Mayor in gestis Scotorum. li. 2.
Ca. 11. That a monks cowle, after they had ones vowed chastyte, was holden in
such reverence, that no man would in a manner than journey, unless he had
their blessings. Into a most wonderful madness were the people than brought,
Hipocresye works.
by their hypocryticall wytcherye the very elect persons scant frefrom that
damnable error. Math. 24. Marcy. 13. For the unthankfulness of men (says
Job) in setting his veryte light, does God permytt the Hypocrytes to reign
over them in all power of deceytfull wonders. Job. 34. Thessal. 2. They ded
than spedelye set up monasteries without nombre, Monasteries.
all the realm over. Johan Hardynge says in his Chronicle, that King Oswye
builded within Northumberlande. oswius.
xij. in one years space. In the year of our Lord. DC. and lxxxiiij. 684.
held Theodorus yet an other counsel in the North parties at Twyforde, where
as he publyshed a serten book of his own making, called A penytencyall sum,
commaundynge his clergy to put it every where in practyse. Therein were
contained all manner of sins and excesses, with aggrauacions, reseruacions,
Su^ma penitencialis.
penaltes, sorrows, penaunces, and ponnishmentes. And this was to terryfye,
captyue, and snare the wretched consciences of men, even to vttre desperacion.
And where could have been sought out a practyse of more deuilishenesse?
Sigebertus. Sabellicus. Tritemius. and Scriptores ferme omnes.

The foundacyon of their Purgatory.
AT the same very time, was there one Drithelmus in Nortoumberlande,
Drithelmus.
which leaving both wife and children in the year of our Lord. DC. and.
lxxi. 671
made himself a monk at Mailros, Saint Cuthbert than being abbot there. The
said Drithelmus feigned himself on a time to be dead (here was knauerye upon
knauerye) and reported in his return, that he had seane by an Angels
demonstracion, both purgatory and paradise, Fou^dacyon of purgatory.
hell and heaven. After that he had subtillye declared this unto King Alphrede
and other great men of the contreye there, at the request of the monks, much
people resorted unto him for counsel for their sowles from all quarters of
England. So ready are the foles of this world to hear lies and illusyons,
Illusyons.
which never had love to the veryte. This knave evermore commended unto them
confession and penance, Confession.
fasting, prayer, and alms deeds, specyallye and above all other, mass
saynges, Masses
and monasteryes buyldinge. Was not this think you, a virtuous chrystyanyte
of these chaste fathers, to kegynne their holy church with? Were yt not pytye
but they were canonysed saints, and their feastfull days solemnysed twyse in
the year, Canonysed deuyls.
with ryngynges, syngynges, sensynges, and massynges, as this Cuthbertes were
and are yet to this day? I think the Turks church had never more knaves to
their Saints than these. For this Drithelmus is one of their saints also.
Johan Capgraue post uitam Adriam, Sigebertus, Vincencius, Antoninus, with
diverse other.

Chastyte of Cuthbert and doctrine of Colfride,
SO cruel was this Cuthbert unto women after he became a Saint of theirs,
Cuthbertus.
that non might come within his sayntuaryes (they say) at Doilwem, Cornen, and
Mailros in Scotland, nor yet at Durham, Ty^mouth, and Lynde farne here in
England, under pain of soden death, their chambers and selles exempted
always. Yet was the said Cuthbert very famylyar in his time with Ebba.
Elsteda, No^nes.
and Verca iij holy abbasses, and builded for his pleasure, a solemn uondry
at Carliell. Fynallye for the special good love he had unto Verca above all
other, Verca.
he commanded in his testament, that his body after his departinge, should be
wrapped in the fine lynnen clothe that she had given him. Ye may se by this,
that these chaste fathers had their lovers, and set sumwhat by their own
precyouse bodies. Saint Colfride abbot of Girwin in Northumberland, Colfridus.
wrote unto Athon king of the Pyctes, that it was as necessary for the vow of
a monk or degree of a pressed (prestes were than no vowers) to have a shaven
crown for restraynt of their lusts, Shaue^ crowns.
as for any christen man to bless him against spretes when they come upon him.
What wise learning this is. I report me unto you. Yet yt is regestred of Bedas
in his. v. book. De gestis Anglorum. and also of Thomas Vualden in his volume,
Walde^
De sacramentalibus. ii. 9. Ca. 80 to stop heretics mouths with, besides
that Ioha^ Capgraue has said in yt.

The fallen star. and. ij. Horns of the Beast.
ABout this time were many wonderful things seane in diverse quarters of the
world, specially a great Comete or blasyng star, A comete.
which seemed with flamynges of fire to fall in to the sea, great morren
following both of beast and man. Not all vulyke was this to that is described.
Apoca. 8. And betokened than (in my opinion) both the vttre fall of the
pryncelye governance and also the christen presthode, Regnu^ et sacerdotium.
or of both under one, as powers of one God. For both they being as stars in
the firmament or powers from above. Romano. 13 most wredchedly than delcined
from the true obedyence and faithful admynystracyon of Gods eternal veryte,
unto the beastly subieccyons and tradycyons of that execrable Pope. Sens that
time have they comen from the sea. They have taken their autoryte of that
Beast ^hych rose out of the sea. Apoca. 13 (till now at late days) the. ij.
horns of the other Beast, Apo. 13.
that is to say, of hypocresye, pryckynge them than forewarde. Those. ij.
horns of that earthlye Beast were here in England, ij horns
the. ij. monkysh sects that in those days first entered. The first of them
were the black monks of Saint Bernet, which entered first of all with the
before named Augustyne in the year of our Lord. Augustinus.
CCCCC. and xcvi to peruerte the South Saxons and kentysh men. 596.
The other were the black Chanons of the other Saint Augustyne (both black)
which came in with Byrinus the Archebyshop of Dorcestre in the year of our
Lord. Berinus
DC. xxxvi from Pope Honorus the first, 636
to deceive the west Saxons. For yche Pope and bishop preferred evermore the
sect he was of. These. ij. wrought so their wicked feats in those days, ij.
sects.
with lyenge signs in hypocresy, that they caused the before named stars,
Regnum et Sacerdocium. Regalite and presthode, to fall clearly from heaven.
Johan Capgraue, Ranulphus et Polidorus.

The fall of kingdoms, and raise of the Papacy.
Mark in the Chronicles, and ye shall find this most true. That like as the
Papacye had his Papacy
first raise in and of the fall of the Empire, so had those kingdoms which
first obeyed it, their orygynall begynninges of the overthrow of the
inferyour kingdoms. As England under King Inas by the fall of the Brytaynes,
and France under King Pypyne by the puttinge a sydy of the Merouyngeanes.
Kingdoms popish.
Sens these lecherouse locustes crepte first into England, never throne that
kingedome of the ancient Brytaynes (whose spyrituall head was God alone:
Britaynes.
but every day more and more decayed, till it was fullye ended. Mark it
hardelye from the first coming hither of the said Augustyne, till the year
of our Lord. DC. lxxxix. 689.
wherein Cadwallader their last King dyed a most desolate pilgrim at Rome,
cadwallader.
offeringe himself up there most myserablye to the Pope. Ever sens has yt
been to him obediente in all blasphemouse errors and doctrynes of Deuilles, by
the space of. DCCC. and. xliiij. years, Mark it.
till the year of our Lord. M. CCCCC. and. xxxiij. 1533.
wherein at our noble kings most wholesome request, we utterly by oath
renounced that odyouse monstre. Now is it Gods own kingdom again, and our
King his immedyate ministre. That Lord grant of his infynyte mercy,
england.
that like as we have put a side his name, we may even from the heart also
cast over his Idolatrouse yokes, following from henceforth the vncorrupt rules
of the Gospel. A like comparison has Paulus Orosius. lib. 2. Cap. 4.
Historiarum mundi, of Babylon and Rome. Roma et Babylon.
Very like begynnynges (says he? had Babylon and Rome, like powers like
prides, like continuaunces, like fortunes, and like ruynes, saving only that
Rome arose of the fall of Babylon, and so fourth.

An old prophecy of Merlyne disclosed,
AS I was in writing this matter an old Prophecy of Merline came unto my
remembrance. merline
That after the manyfolde irrupcions of strangers, the kings of this realm
should be ones again crowned with the Dyademe of Brute, Brute.
and bear his ancient name, the new name of strangers so vanishinge away.
He that applies unto this a right understanding shall find it very true. The
Diadem of Brute is the pryncely power of this whole region, immediately given
of God without any other mean mastry worker to Antichrists behoue. of God.
Fre was that power from the great whores domynyon (which is the Rome church)
till the violent conquest of the English Saxons, Saxons
which they had of the Brytaynes for their iniquities sake. And now (praise be
unto that Lord) it is in good way to that fredome again, and would fullye
attain thereunto, were here heythnysh yokes in religion ones thrown a side, as
I doubt it not but they will be within short space. As well may ye give
crede^ce to this Merlyne when he utters the verite, as unto old Balaam the
sothsayer, merlyne Balaam
which at a time prophesied the coming of Christ. Number. xxiiij. And as
concerning the return of the name, mark in this age the wrytynges of learned
me^, and ye shall well perceive the change, for now commonly do they write us
for Englyshemen, Brytaynes.

The whores flesh eaten of the. x. horns.
THE. x. horns of the first Beast (which were kingdoms maynteynyge that
whore (now joined all into one, The. x. horns of the beast
does mortallye hate her at this present instaunt, and is making her desolate
and maked in England. In the end they shall eat her flesh, and clearly
consume her with the fire appointed. England was sumtyme into. vij. kingdoms
divided, by the consent of al writers, and wales into. ij. called Venedotia and
Demetia or north wales and South wales, Ireland making up the truth. Or if ye
hold wales but for one, let Scotland supplye that rowme, which owes unto
England perpetual homage* As all these are now in one most worthy and
victoryouse King but one, so will God put into all their hearts one consent to
fulfill his will, and to give her kingdom unto the beast, or to send it again
to the deuell from whens it first came. Apoca. xvij. Apo. 17.
Consydre with your selves the late overthrow of the monasteries, couentes,
collegis, and chaunteries alleages of unclean spretes, and holds of most
hateful birds by the manifest word of God. And think not but the fyltye
habitacions of the great mastre deuyls will follow sone after. Apoca. xviij.
Apo. 18.
Let the gogle eyed Gardyner of wyncestre gyrde at it till his rybbes ache and
an hundred dyggynge deuyls upon his side, yet shall not one Jot of the lords
promise be vnfulfylled at the time appointed for that blasphemouse whores
overthrow, Winker of wyles
his most holy mother. Pray in the mean season (good christen readers)
pray, pray, pray, that his heavenly will be done in earth and not mannys,
and fashyon your lives to the form of his most dear son Jesus Christ's
doctrine. Amen.

Acts of vowed virginite for that age.
NOw to return again to their spi^ituall acts of chastyte for yt age. Wha^
one Sedia the father of saint Aidus, Sedia.
perceived that he by no means could have a child by his wife, he brought her
to these continent fathers for remedy of her barrenness, and she was speed the
next night after by a miracle, for all were miracles they did, Ioa^. Cap.
Guenhera a Cornysh woman (who^ some writers call fair Elyne) that made king
Arthure a cuckolde, Guenhera.
was after his death deuoutely received into Ambesbury non dry, as a penitent
to their spiritual use. Guilhelmus Malmesbury. Saint Oswalde said his wyf^
Bebla in bed with a relygiouse hermyte. Oswaldus.
Bebla.
And when the great heat came upon him (as ye spiritual fathers are hasty) she
found the means that he was cast in cold water to abate his hot courage. This
is one of the holy acts whereupon the pope has made ye said Oswald a saint.
Ioha^ hardyng. Saint Ebba which was in those days the mother of all no^nes,
Ebba.
was generate of an whore, as were al her fathers children besides her. ij. of
the^ only excepted. This Ebba had in the monastery of Coldyngham not far ^^om
Barwyck, both men and women dwelling together fell by fell (as the manner was
than of all Nondryes in England) which exercysed the battayles of chastyte so
long that in their night metynges they went to bed together by couples, their
religiouse love was then so great, till God sent a wild fire upon them for
that contempt of marryage. Ioannes Mayor. libro secundo. Capite. 12. and
Ioannes Capgraue in catalogo sanctorum Anglie.

A spiritual conueyaunce to be marked.
ETheldred (whom ye call Saint Andrye of helye) married. Etheldreda.
ij. great princes, Tombert of the South Girwyes, and Egfride the King of
Northumberlande, mocking them both by the space of more then. xiij. years, in
not geuynge them due benevolence according to the holy doctrine of saint Paul
i. Cor. vij. And in occasioninge them to aduouterouse living. The lattre of
the^ knowing that she minded wylfryde then bishop of york much more then him
(for the storye says that she loved that monk above all the men living)
required him in Gods behalf to admonysh her of her duty, Wilfridus.
that he might according to his laws have increase of succession by her. And
he like a false traitor knave, knavery
notwithstanding his promise to the contrary, persuaded her to persevere in her
obstynacye and utterly to resyst him, allegynge her vow and requyrynge a
diuorcement from him. Whereupon he was then compelled to marrye an other wife
called Ermenburgis, and Etheldrede was professed a No^ne in Coldyngha^ with
Ebba, by the said wylfryde. This king after that perceiving his knauerye, by
assent of Theodorus the archebyshop of Caunterbury, Theodorus.
bannyshed him out of his land. Then followed she after a pace, and whiles he
was bishop of Eastsexse, A waiting hound.
she became abbasse of hely, not far from his elbone. Mark this conueyaunce
for your learning. If this were not knauerye, where shall we find knavery? Yet
was this gentylman conueyer admytted for a saint, because he builded a college
at Rippon, The autour.
where my self was ones bayted of his Basan bulls, for mainteining the kings
prerogative against their pope, as good mastre Ioha^ Hercye can fulwell tell.
Ioannes Capgraue in uitis Etheldrede, and Vuilfridi.

Kings became pilgrims, and their wives Nonnes.
A Very proper cast the women had in those days, by the ghostlye counsel of
the prelates. They sent their h^sbandes to Rome on pilgrimage by heaps,
Pylgrimes.
whyls they kept them spyrituall company at home, Ethelburg made great haste
and left no calling on, till her husband king Inas was thydrewardes, Inas.
with scrippe ha^^e and staff, she lokyng for his no more coming home in the
abbeye of Berkynge. This Inas became a monk there, and was the first that
clogged the west Saxons with payment of the Rome shot, or Peter Pens to the
Pope. Volateranus, and Fabiane. After him followed Ethelrede king of Mercia in
like fashion of pilgrimage, Ethelredus.
and became afterward abbot of Bardeney. Johan Capgraue. Conredus also king of
the same prouynce, Co^redus.
dyed a folyshe monk at Rome. So did king Offa of the East Saxons, Offa.
the self same year of our Lord. DCC. and. ix. 709.
besides Ke^redus, Kenredus
Ethelwolphus, and a great sort more. Hermannus Contractus, Platina and
Polidorus. Colwolphus king of Northumberlande, Colwolphus.
returned again to Gyrwyn, and there dyed a monk. Robert Fabiane, Great
layser would it require, to show here how many of such kings, the ghostly
fathers sent at diverse seasons unto Rome, that they for the time might have
the spiritual occupyenge of their wives, and how many of their own bastardes
they made kings for them. Bastardes,
And therefore at this time I pass them over. Innumerable knaueryes wrought
they in those days, and all under the color of vowed chastyte.

Great experymentes of virginite.
AS Saint Aldelmus, Adelmus
the bishop of Sherborne (that ye now call Salysbury) chanced to be at Rome,
the people there made a foul exclamacion upon Pope Sergius the first, for
begettynge a wenche with child, which he (they say) by a little strange
workynge pacyfyed. In whose return, a Synod was holden in England against
the Brytaynes or welshe men, Synodus
for not conformynge their churches to the Romysh obseruacions, he there
required to inueye against them. Upon the which mocion, he wrote then two
books, ij. books.
one for the Eastre celebracion, and an other in the praise of virgynes, to
blemyshe the marriage of their priests there, and also to aduau^ce their
newlye professed chastyte. For that he had also in commandment of Sergius,
Sergius.
notwithstanding his own known lecherye. This Aldelmus never refused women,
but would have them commonly both at board and at bed, to mock the devil
with. In the time he was abbot of Malmesbury, he appointed often times to his
flesh this martyrdo^. As he felt any sore mouynges thereof, he laid by him
naked, the fairest maid he could get, so long time as an whole David's psalter
was in saying. And when his heat was past, he sent her home again as good a
maid as he left her. Is not this (think you) a strong argument to prove that
all priests may live chaste? This tells Bedas, Ranulphus, Johan Capgraue, and
many other English autours more.

Images admytted, with chaste examples.
ABout the same time, saint Egwine abbot of Euesham, Egwinus
and bishop of Worcestre (then called wickes) hearing tell that labor was
made to the pope, to have the christen temples replenyshed with Images to
promote that market forewarde, Images
he hyed him a peace to Rome. And there he declared to the holy father, the
secret reuelacions and commandments of our lady that he had, to set up an
Image of her to be worshypped at Worcestre, Lady of worcestre.
delyueryng him a book which he had written of the same apparycyons, besides
the life of Aldelme The pope then called Constantine the first, hearing this
new wondre sent him home again with his bulls of autoryte, Brithwaldus.
commaundynge Brithwalde then Archebyshop of Caunterburye (with all haste) to
call a general Synod of all the clergy for confirma^^on of the same, Sonodus
the kings required not to be absent that day. And this was done in the year
of our Lord. DCC. and ix. 709.
This Brithwalde being also a monk, was the first Englysh man that was
Archebyshop of Caunterburye. Mark it. Saint Guthlake an heremyte of Rependon,
Guthlacus.
told a certain abbot the same time, that going homewarde, he should find in
a wydowes house. ij. of his holy monks which had lyeu with her the night
before for easement of their chastity. Saint Bartellyne heremyte of Stafforde,
Bartellinus.
stale out of Irelande the kings daughter there. And as she was afterward
trauelynge of child in a forest, whiles he was seeking the mydwyfe, a wolf
came and devoured both her and her child. These stories has at large Johan
Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum Anglie, Guilhelmus Malmesbury et Ranulphus.

Englysh monks become Antichrists Apostles.
IN those days the monks of England were becomen so mighty in
supersticiouse learning, Monks Dispersed.
that they were able to pervert all other christen regyons, as they did then in
deed. Some of them went into Germanye, some into France, some into Italye and
Spain, and became the Popes instruments of all falshede, fasshioning him up
there a new kingdom of all deuylyshnesse to withstand the manifest glory of
God, and subduynge thereunto an pryncely Powers. You that are exercysed in
Chronycles and Saints Lives, mark for that age what is written of Columbanus,
The Popes apostles.
Colomannus, Tolimannus, Vuenefridus, Vuilibrordus, Vuilibaldus, Vuenebaldus,
Burghardus, Kilianus, Vuigbertus, Egbertus, Heuuadus the whyght and the black,
Etto, Bertuuinus, Elcquius, Lullius, Lebuinus, Liuinus, Ioannes Embertus,
Gallus Gaudus, Gaiabaldus, Gregorius, Megingoius Sturmio, and a great sort more
with their women, and ye shall se in them practices wonderful. I will give ye
out one here breuelye for an example, for to much yt were to write of them
all. Wenefridus was admitted of Pope Gregory the second, Wenefridus.
for the Archebyshop of Magunce and great Apostle of all Germany, and for his
bold countenance was of him named Bonifacius. Bonifacius.
In Excestre was he first borne, and professed a black Monk at Exancestre (now
called Excestre) under abbot wolfharde. After the great Synod holden at London
by the before named Brithwalde, Synodus
about the year of our Lord. DCC. and. x. 710.
where as priests Marryage was judged fornication, and the honoring of Images
accepted for a christen relygyon. Daniel then Bishop of Wynchestre, Daniel.
sent this Wenefride to Rome with his letters of commendacion for his
manfulnesse there showed. Johannes Capgraue, and geor-Vuicellius in Hagiologo
de sanctis ecclesie.

The great Apostle of all Germanye.
THe Pope after certain communicacions, perceiving him in all points fytt for
his purpose, sent him anon into Germanye with his fulle aucthoryte (as before is
specyfyed) to do his false feats there, Apostle of Germany.
and to bring that styffe necked people under his wicked obedyence, whom they
call the holy Christen believe. I think sens Christ's incarnacion was there
never none that more lyuelye wrought the propertees of the other Beast in
Saint Iohans Apocalypse, Alia bestia.
which rise out of the earth having two horns like the Lamb, if ye mark
it well. Apocalipsis. xiij. Apo. 13.
For he was next in authority to the Pope, by the Popes own witness, such
time as he came with the high legacye from his own right side, into all the
quarters and prouynces of the said Germanye. An hundred thousand conscyences,
Character.
did he seal with the Popes hot Iron^c^ aduste with his Romyshe faith in the
land of Bauarye, besides that he did in Thuringia, Hassia, Saxonia, Frislande,
Swethen, Acts of this beast
Denemarke, and in other regions there more. He held many great counsayls, he
ordained bishops, he builded monasteries, he canonysed saints, he commanded
relyques to be worshypped, he sent nonnes about a preaching contrary to the
doctrine of saint Paul, with many other wonders, and all by force of the
Popes decrees. To worship the first Beast.
Of kings he made monks, and caused emprours to kiss the Popes fete, Princes
to lead his brydell, and Dukes to hold his steruppes. Look in the Chronicles
of Ioannes Nauclerus, Generacione. 25. and. 26. Look also Vuicelius,
Vincencius, Antoninus. Capgraue, and Vuilibaldus in uita Bonifacij, and ye
shall find all this there and a great sort of wonders more. For there are
they showed at large.

Kings deposed, with other miracles.
BY such autorite as he received of pope Zachary, he afterward deposed king
Hylderyck of France, Hildericus.
dysheretynge in him for ever the most laufull succession of king Merouens,
which first received the true christen ^^yth there, as witnesses Sabellicus,
and admittinge in his rowme Pypyne with his aduonterouse stock, Pipinus.
for receyuynge their false faith by oath, to reign there ever after for
their carnal commodyte. He also assoyled all the people from the oath of
allegeaunce made before to the said Hylderich and his of spring, as testyfyeth
Paulus Aemillius, Platma, Nauclerus Tritemius, Otto Phrisingensis, and other.
Kingdoms translated.
In conclusyon, by this means became the noble kingdom of Lumbardye the
unlawful patrimonye of Saint Peter, and the mighty empire of Rome was
wonderfullye translated from the Greeks to the Germans. These were no small
miracles, if ye mark them well. If Antichrist turned not here the roots of
the trees upward, antichrist
never did he it in his life. All these things wrought this Bonyface or
wenefride, that the dwellers upon earth should worship the first Beast. Apoca.
13. Apo. xiij.
Innumerable multitudes of peoples brought he to the Popes faith in Germany
and in France, and in some other places, more by terryble coaccyons then by
any gentle callynges. For extremelye did he handle with cruel
inprisonmentes, one Adelbert a french man, Alderbertus.
and Claudius Clemens a Scott. ij. learned me^, Claudius
for reasonyng with him concerning vowed chastyte, rellyques, Images; the Popes
prymarye, Kings deposicions, oaths breaking, and such like errors. Errors
Look the works of Nauclerus, Vuicelias, ^ernardus Lut^^enburg, and Alphonsus
de castro.

Doctrine of Bonyface, with sale of whores.
Most dampnable was the doctrine of this Boniface, doctrine.
concerning the Pope. In a sertayne Epistle of his, we find this most
execrable sentence. That in case the said pope were of most filthye living,
and so forgetful of him self and of the whole christente, that he led with him
to hell innumerable sowles, yet ought no man to rebuke his ill doing. For he
(he says) has power to judge all men, and ought of no man to be judged
again. This have the Canonistes regest^red in the popes decrees for a
perpetual law, Canonistes.
and for a necessary article of Christen believe. Did. xl. Ca. ^i Papa. Yet
wrote he at an other time to Pope Zacharye, to se the manifest abusions of Rome
reformed, Rome.
specially their maskynges in the night after the paganes manner, and their
open selling of whores in the mark in there. Open sale of whores.
For they were (he said) sore impedimentes to his preachynges. For they that
had seane those reuelynges there, mistrusted much that faith. He wrote also
unto king Ethelbalde and other great men in England, Ethelbaldus.
requiring them to leave the aduouterouse occupyeng of nonnes, least such a
plage fell on the^, as chanced upon king Colfrede and king Osrede for like
doings. Colfredus. Osredus.
And though this Boniface allowed not christen matrimoney in priests but hated
it, yet after that o^e Geraldus a married bishop was slain in Thuringia in time
of the wars there, geraldus
he permytted his son Geilepus to succeed him in that office. geilepus
Helinandus monachus, Vincencius, Antoninus, Capgraue. etc.

The monasteries of fulda and floryake.
HE builded the great monastery of Fulda in Germanye, Fulda.
in the year from Christ's incarnacio^. DCC. and xliiij. 744.
Into the which no women might enter, but only Lieba and Tecla. Lieba.
ij. Englysh nonnes his best beloues. The body of the said Lieba, he commanded
by his life, of most te^dre love, to be buried in one grave with his own
precyouse body. So rich was that monasterye within few years after,
Monasterium fulde^se.
that it was able to find ye emperor in his wars. lx. thousand me^. For the
which the abbot had always this priuylege, to sit upon the right hand of the
said emperor at the high feasts. An other abbeye was builded before that at
floriake in france, Floriacus.
and not far from orlyaunce, in the year of our lord. DC.li. 651.
These. ij. monasteries floriake and fulda with their old inhabitauntes, would
I counsel al Chronycle readers to mark, as they fall in their way, for
wonders which has comen from thens, as will apeare after. A custom the holy
fathers had in those days, To ease their vows.
to lead nonnes about with them in strange lands where they went. As we
read of walburga, Hadeloga, Lieba and such other. I think it was to help
them to bear their chastity, whose carryage was sumtyme very comberouse unto
them, and they found not then in all cotreyes such plentye of Nondryes as
has been sens. Sigebertus, Capgraue, Tritemius, Nauclerus, Vuicelius.

Oxforde shurned. And Alcuinus monks.
AShamed are not these prestygiouse Papystes, to utter it in their stories and
read it in their Saints legendes in contempt of their christian governors,
that no king may enter the town of Oxforde without a mychefe, Oxford.
because one Algar a Prince about this age would have had Saint frideswyde to
wife. Frideswyde.
As though to be a king were a far vyler or vnworthyer office, than to be a
pylde shytten Nonne. O blind bludderynge Balaamytes, without all judgments
godly. Of God only y^ the worhy office of a King. A king.
Prouer. 8. where as your fisting Nonnes were of Antichrist and the devil.
Capgraue, Fabiane, Polidorus. About the same time, was Alcuinus a doctor of
England, Alcuinus.
made abbot of Turonia in France by the gift of Charles the great, which on a
night found all his monks dead in the dorter, by the soden stroke of God for
their Sodometrye, one only excepted. Odo cluniacensis, Guilhelmus Malmesburye,
Vincencius, Antoninus, Ranulphus, and Capgraue postuitam Ythamari. Autoures.
A great matter had it been in the popes books, if these men had had wives. For
than he could not have sent them to the devil so fast, according to the
general commission, which he had of Satan his great mastre, in that
vycarship of his.

English men ponnished at Rome.
AFter King Ethelwolphe being subdeacon and pressed, Ethelwolphus.
through wanton occupieng had had a bastard, by the popes dispensacion he
married Olburga his butlers daughter, and had by her iiij. sons, which all
succeeded Kings after him. Guilhelmus Malmesbury, et Ioannes Harding. As this
King on a time chanced to be at Rome, he se many English men there wearynge
fetters and gyues of Iron, Penitentes at Rome.
as they had been murderers or thieves. And as he inquired what the cause should
be, answer was made him, that it was for spyrytualll offenses done. For those
wylye watchers by that time had put many things in practyse, by force of
their penytenciall Sum, made by Theodorus before. They might than make what
sins they would, and send unto Rome whom so ever yt pleased them, Sit in
the cons^^ences
upon the reseruacyons of cases Pontifycall and papal, or by reason of the
aggrauacyons of circumstaunces of sins, making men believe they could not
dyspense with them, when the matter was not worth. ij. haste nuites. And this
was the cause of their greuouse correccyons than. For redress of this the
King conuenaunted than with the Pope, to give him by year^ a penye of every
fire house within his land, as Inas and Offa had done before him for their
domynyons. The Rome shot
He promised him also in acquytynge the churches trybutes, to give him. iij.C.
mark yearlye And finally he repared the English hospital there, Hospytall.
which had been decayed by fire. Ranulphus. Platina, Petrus Equilinus, Fabianus
et Polidorus.

An English monks peramoure, is a Pope.
THe monastery of fulda in Germanye, Fulda.
was in those days much frequented of Englysh monks, by^^use it was first
builded of the forseyd Archebyshop Boniface, which was an English man borne, A
young wenche borne and brought up in Maguncia therebye, Gilberta by name,
Gilberta.
so minded one of those monks, that she changed her apparel, and went away
with him like a waiting boy or lackeye into strange lands, and became in
all scyences of learning very counynge, and was called English Johan. As yt
chanced this monk to dye, she get her unto Rome, A wom^ pope
and became there a common reader of public lectours. and was had in soche
wonderful estymacyon, that Pope Leo the fort being dead, she was solempnelye
elected and intronysed Saint Peter's vycar in the year of our Lord.
DCCC.Liiij. 854.
called Johan the, viij. after diverse writers. By help of a Cardinal her
most familier chamberlayne, she was in conclusyon begett with child, when she
had been pope almost. ij. years and an half. And in a most solemn
procession to Laterane, when their church was in the most pride by fall of the
empire and subieccion of christian princes, Pride has a fall.
and the prelates in their most pompouse aparell, the day shynynge very
fair, she was openly delivered of child without midwife and so dyed. Wherein
God declared m^nifestlye to the world, that their glitteringe church was
altogyther an whore / to make good that was written in the reuelacion of Saint
Johan. An whore.
Apo. 17. Oh he that had seane the countenance of the prelates than, should
have beholden a great thange.

Popes chosen from thens fourth by their. N.
SEns that time has popes always been chosen, Popes chosen by their stones.
as stoned horse are in a colte feyer, by their doutye dimiceries, that they
can no more be deceived that way. For at the solemn stallynge of them, the
last deacon Cardynall does grope them brechelesse, at an hole made in the seat
for that ghostlye purpose, and than cries yt out before all the multitude,
that he has ware suffycyent to prove him no woman. Moreover the street where
she was delivered, has ever sens been shurned in all general precessyons, for
fear of ill happes. As is of women a serten bridge in a Scottysh I Will called
Leuissa, An example.
where as if but one woman should paste over (they say) there are no salmons
seane in that river, all the year after. Hector Boethius in Scoteci regni
descriptione. For the hystorye before reherced of this woman Pope, was yt
partlye my desire that ye should ^arke that monasterye of fulda. Fulda.
For she was one chaste fruit of our Englysh clergy, yssuynge from thens, ye
may chance after this yet to hear of more. Such an enemy to prestes marryage
was not in his time, as was that Boniface, which was thereof the first buylder.
For every where ded he, in all his g^nerall Synodes, Matrimony co^de^pned.
condemn yt for aduoutery by the popes canon laws. For the scripturs would
not serve him. The life of this female pope sheweeh more at large, Iacobus
Bergomas in li. De claris mulieribus, Platina, Sabellicus, Martinus Carsulanus,
Volateranus, Nauclerus, Mantuanus, Ioannes Stella, Ioannes textor, and Robertus
Barnes in uitis Romanorum Pontificum.

Holy water, with a book against marriage.
IN the year of our Lore. DCCC. LVIII. 858.
as a serten day devil at the foresaid Maguncia was hunted of the prestes with
procession and holy water, A pressed.
for dyuerstye vexynge the city, he did him self for fear (they say) under
one of the prestes copes, saying. He might well be bold there, considering he
had by him the fleshly occupienge of the general proctours daughter there.
This religiouse example of holy church shows. Sigebertus. Vincencius.
Antoninus, Nauclerus, and Masseus. Herin affirm they their holy water to be of
more strength, Holy water.
than either their presthode or yet their eaten maker, and more able to drive
away the devil. In the year of our Lord. DLCC.lxxv. 875.
was the Emprour Ludouicus the second tormented in purgatory (say they (only
for that he would not regard the admonishmentes of Gabriell the Archangell
against prestes marriage, Gabriel
called there of them the heresye of Nicolaitanes. Mark these packynges. The
religiouse fathers had than made a book of their religiouse factes and
practices, comprehendinge. xij. chapters, A book of. xij. chapters.
to put down matrimony and set up Sodom and Gomor in their spiritual
generation. Which they had sent unto the said Emprour by one Emarchus,
Sigebertus, Vincencius, Antoninus, et alij. Far unlike was this Gabriel to
him which apered unto Zachary the pressed in the time of his sacrifice. For that
Gabriel both allowed and commended his marriage. This Gabriel co^dempneth it
utterly. Of such Saint Paul warned the Corinthianes to be ware, Diverse
Gabriels.
tellinge them that Satan would resemble the Angel of light. 2. Cor. 11.

Other chaste miracles of that age.
Saint Odulphe a pressed about the same time going to his mass, Odulphus.
was suddenly taken up and carried over the sea to tryer in Germanye to do that
office there upon Eastre day, because Saint Frederick the Arcyebyshop there
had lain the night before with an holy nonne which was his own natural
systre, Fredericus.
to help forward the law. Deuteronomy 27. The bones of this Odulphe were first
buried at London, and than from thens translated to Euesham abbeye in the west
contreye, Saint Clarus of Orchestre, Clarus.
iudginge marryage sin and wickedness by the doctrynes that than were
taught, in dyspyght of the Christen perswasyons of his frindes, made himself
first a pressed and after a Monk, so fleing into Normandye. Where at the last
he was slain by procurement of a woman. These. ij. historyes shows Johan
Capgraue, and their church legendarye. As the Danes over went this land, The
Danes.
their common custom was to have a do with Nonnes where they found them, for
lack of their own wives. Till at the last they came to a nondrye (Coldyngham
some say) where all the good systers had cut of their own noses and their
over lappes to disfygure them selves, Coldyngham.
and so to escape the danger, ye may believe yt and ye will. In those days
king Alphrede made Donwolfe the con^e^de of Ethelyngay, Bishop of Wynchestre,
which had both wife and children. These. ij. lattre stories shall ye find in
Johan Harding, Ranulph, and Fabian.

A parelouse and foul bugge is marriage.
NOt long after him was there a Bishop of Wynchestre called Elphegus the
Balde. Elphegus.
Whose tyrannouse custom was always in the beginning of lent to seclude all
public penitentes from the churches enteraunce, and to require all married
men not to lie with their wives till Eastre were fully past. Parauenture that
he and his prestes might for that time of their mart have the fre occupieng of
them. Ghostly fathers
For other goodness know I non belonging thereunto, non other consyderacyon
had. This storye has Guilhelmus Malmesburye. li. 2. de pontificibus, and
Ranulphus Cestrensis. li. 6. Cap. 6. Co^te^cio^
In the first eleccion of this Elphegus, much strife was there betwyne the
prestes and the monks, the prestes electing out of their own sort to uphold
them still concerning their wives and children, and the monks chosinge this
Hipocrite to place them in their rowmes because they had no wives, as at the
lattre it came to pass. Egelricus.
Ioha^ Capgraue. At the same time was there a poor pressed in the Dyocese of
Durham, Egelricus being Bishop, which had both wife and children. a married
pressed
Him have the Sodomytysh knaves dyffamed in the legende of Cuthbert, that for
using his own wife, the bread and wine at his Mass apered so black as
pytche. But never write they in their legendes, what change it has when they
lie with other mennys wives, or play the most filthy sodomytes for lack of
women. Much be holden is marriage unto them. Marriage conte^pned.
For though all filthy sins may well stand with their offye. yet can they
not agree therewith. I think they tell here a good worshypfull tale for their
mass, if it be well marked. Look Johan Capgraue. In uita Cuthberti.

Mysfortune of. ij. married prestes and other.
AN other married pressed, at the same very season, attempted (they say) to
touch the dead bones of Saint Audrye the Nonne at Helye, such time as married
prestes inhabyted that monasterye. A married pressed.
And for his presumpcyon, because he was married, both he, his wife and
children, his kyndred, fryndes, and acquayntaunce, died all suddenly. For
marryage may touch nothing that long to that generacyon, unless
whoryshnesse be good mastres unto it, and come as a mean betwixt both. Look
Ioha^ Capgraue in uita Etheldrede. Ethelstanus a monk, ethelst^nus a monk
married
at one time taking presthode with Dunstane and Ethelwolde, wyt^in a while
after left all his orders a^^ took him to a wife. Wherefore they prophesied of
him that his end should be miserable. And because they would apere no false
Prophets, they inchaunted him, charmed him, and changed him in to an ele, and
so he lived in the water ever after with a great sort more of his company. A
miracle
Whereupon (they say) that monastery and town has ever sens been called Elye.
Elpe.
Guilhelmus Malmesburye et Ioannes Capgraue. A young infant called Brithgina,
Brithgida.
being no more than one day old / professed Elphegus into the monasterye of
wylton about the same time. So ded he also an other called Wilfhilda,
Wilfhilda.
into the nondrye of Wynchestre, so sone as she was weaned from suck. Whom
afterward King Edgare claymed in marryage, but she was to famylyer with
Ethelwolde a monk and a bishop, to grant thereunto. When he came to the house
where she was afterward abbasse, there was no small fyllinge in of cups,
Ioannes Capgraue.

Miracles and wonders wrought.
When Odo the Bishop of Salysburye was elected Archebyshopp of Caunterburye in
the year of our Lord. Odo.
DCCCC. and. xlvi. 946.
he would in no case be consecrated, till he was by the abbot of Floriake
professed a monk. Floria^us.
Partly because all his predecessors in that seat to the nombre of. xxi. had
been monks, and partlye for that the prestes in those days were in hate of
the people for their marryage at the monks suggestyons. And after he had
received his palle with Antichrists autoryte from Rome, he wexed so frantyck
upon the Kings concubines, The kings concubines.
that some of them he sealed in the ^aces with hot burning Irons most
shamefullye, and some of them he bannyshed into Irelande for ever, but unto his
own store he was gentle enough. For most haynouse heresye held he than the
christen marryage of prestes, and made synodall constytucyons against it,
Cinstitucions.
to enriche the monks through that craftye color with their great
possessions. His neuye Oswalde found he to scole at floryake the welsprynge of
Necromancye, Oswalde.
to learn there all craftye sciences. Floriacus.
In his time was a strife among the clergy at Caunterburye, for Christ's
flesh and blood in the Sa^ramente, the prestes most earnestly affirminge yt
to remain still bread an^ are only figure of Christ's body, The sacrament.
an^ the monks to be Christ's essencyall body, yea Christ him self. But when
scripturs failed ones upon the monks side, they were driven to false miracles
or plain experymentes of sorcerye. For Odo by a cast of legerdemayne, showed
unto the people a broken host bledynge, Miracles.
as a popysh pressed called sir Nicolas Gerues ded a. ij. years ago in Surrey, by
pricking his fingar with a pin.

Monkery augmented by Dunstane.
Saint Dunstane here in England being thaught of Irishe monks at
Glastenburye, Du^stanus magnus.
was found very conning in wanton Musyck, in sorcerye, and in Image making
out of all manner metals, stone and kinds of wode. By these and such like
occupienges, he found the means to augmente and enryche the monasteries of
monks and Nonnes every where within England, not withstanding he had often
times much a do with devils and with women. Yet had he at length these
pryuyleges than above all other spyrytuall doers. He wanne by his musyck and
fair speech the good fauer of diverse women, musyck.
yea, of some which had been the kings concubines, as Alfgine, wilfrich and
such other, though he before had put them to pains. By his sorceryes, sorcerye
he a^wayes made the Kings fytt for his ghostly purpose, as will apere
herafter, specially by King Edmonde that was Ethelstanes brother, whom by his
necromancye he brought to the point, inuysyblye to have been torn in pieces.
Carni^ge.
What he got by his Image making, the scripture shows plain, which
curses both the hand and the instrument of the Image maker. Sapi. 14. and
Deutro. 27. This storye declares mor at, large Osbertus monachus in uita
Dunstani Vincencius li. 24, Ca. 74. Antoninus par. 2. li. 16. Ca. 6. autours
Marianus Scotus. Guilhelmus Malmeshuriensis. Ranulphus Cestrensis. li. 6. Cap.
10. Volateranus. Bergomas. Nauclerus. Johan Capgraue. Johan hardynge. Vuylliam
Caxto^ Johan Lydgate. and Robert Pabyane.

The relygyouse Occupyeng of Dunstane.
AS Dunstane in the house of a wydowe was fashyonynge a prestes stool, A cast
or feate,
his harp hanging upon the wall without thouchynge sounded the note of
Gaudent in celis. Whereupon the wenches astoyned, went out of the owse with the
wydow and all her howsholde, proclamynge yt a broad, that he had much more
lernyng than was good For this and such like feats, serten men told King
Ethelstane, Ethelstanus.
that he was given to ill science, and wroughte many things by the devil,
whereupon he put him clerlye than out of service. For he had been before
committed unto that king by Athelmus his uncle (I will not say his father)
than Archebyshopp of Caunterburye, Athelmus.
to work feats to his mind for that spyrytuall generacyon. From thens went
he to Elphegus an other kinsman of his, Elphegus.
at that time bishop of Wynchestre, which put upon him a monks aparell, that
he might therbye avoid both the fire of concupyscence and the fire of hell. I
think few wise men will believe this physyck to be true, as that a monks
cowle were able to restrain those. ij. heates. a monks cowle.
Rather should it seem to procure them, else had we never had so many
lecherouse luikes and prodygyouse Sodomytes among them as we read of. Saint
Paul admonyshed Timothe, that such Hypocrytes should follow in the christen
congregacyon as having a shine of Godly living, Hypocrytes.
should utterly deny the power thereof. These (he said) should run from
house to house (as this Dunstane ded) and bring into bondage women laden with
sin. 2. Timo. 3.

Dunstane by sorcerye terrifieth King Edmonde.
NOw to return again to King Edmonde, Edmondus rex.
which succeeded his brother Ethelstane. Complayntes were made also unto him of
this Dunstane, by many noble men, for his prodygyouse feats. Whereupon he took
such dyspleasure with him, that not only he depryued him of offices (which
he had there) but also utterly bannished him the court. Du^stanes devil
works.
The third day after, as it chanced the King in a park to ride on
hunting, and to follow his game among rocks and bushes, he suddenly happened
into a most parelouse place, where as he neither could go forewarde nor yet
turn back again. The heart which he followed was before his face torn in
small pieces, so were the hounds most terryblye to behold, homely Play.
nothing there perceived that should do yt. The King so sore labored to
return with his horse, that he brake both brydell and steruppes, and yet could
in no wife prevail, nor yet light from his back. Than called he Dunstane to
remembrance, and (he being absent) before God there axed him forgiveness.
time I trow.
So were both the beast and hounds restored again unto him safe and found,
his bridelll and steruppes hole. I think this play sumwhat passed course
legerdemayne. After that was Du^stane the high steward of his house, and had
over all the realm a iurysdicyon* Of Glastenburye was he put in perpetual
possessyon, Glaste^burye.
to make thereof what he would. And so bycame yt first of all Saint Benettes
patrimony. Antedicti Autores. Let all the Popes army stand up here, and
allow this still for a miracle, as they have done hitherto in his legende, yet
do not I doubt to prove it against them all, abominable knauerye by the
scripturs.

He vexes king Edwine / retayning his concubine.
AS King Edwine upon the day of his coronacion occupied Alfgina his concubine,
Edwinus: alfgina.
having than non other wife, Dunstane being at that time but a monk and
abbot of Glastenburye, plucked them both vyolently from the bed, and brought
them before the Archebishopp Odo / threttenynge the woman suspensyon, Odo
ca^tuariensis.
ye may call it hanging if ye will. For the which the King after that expled
the said Du^stane into Flanders, and wrought the monks many other
dyspleasurs, till they found the means to depose him, by the virtue of ear
confession. Confession.
Volateranus, li, 2. Geographie, Osbertus, Vincencius, Antoninus Guilhelmus
Ranulphus and Ioannes Capgraue. Yet in the conclusyon (they say) he delivered
king Edwynes soul, after he was dead, from hell (I pray God he killed him not
before) and vanquyshed all the deuels there by virtue of a requiem mass, Mass of
requiem.
so bringing him into their purgatory. This was (I trow) no badde ware. As a
sertayn noble woman called Alfgina (the kings former concubine I fear me)
possessyng great substance, Alfgina loves.
had ones commoned with Dunstane, she so delyghted in his fair words (for his
advantage) that she would never after from him, but dwell with him still for
term of life. Strong love.
She left her own house and builded her an habitacion by the church, louyngly
intertaynynge men of holy orders. In conclusyon when she departed the world,
she left her great coffers and treasure bags with Dunstane to dyspose for her
soul (she had heard of King Edwyne with the which he after that builded fine
monasteryes. Ioannes Capgraue in Cat sanct. Anglie.

Dunstane keeps the kings of England under.
DVnstane was excedyngly beloved with Cadina King Eldredes mother (these are
the plain words, Cadina loves.
of the history) and he loved her excedyngly again. And when he ones became
the kings corectour and mastre, yea rather his king and Emperor (says the
text) by her means he was elected Bishop of wynchestre after ye decease of
E^phegus. But he enjoyed it not by reason of his tyranny against king Edwyne
yt succeeded him. Edwinus rex.
Whose co^cubynes he can sed the archebyshop Odo (as is said before) to seal in
the face with hot Irons and to bannysh the^, specially one he sore blemyshed
and sent into Ireland. And when Dunstane was for this presumptuouse pageant
exyled, the monks caused the commons to rise against him, The co^mens rise.
from the water of Humbre to the flood of Thamis, and so to depose him. Ioannes
Capgraue in uitis Dunstani and Odonis. Never were the co^cubines of David and
Solomon thus ordered of Samuel and Achimelech, Abiathar and Sadoch, the bishop
of yt age. In a serten vision received Dunstane. iij. swerdes (they say) of.
iij. iij. swerdes.
apostles, Peter, Paul, and Andrewe, with ye administracio^ of. iij.
byshoprickes in England, Worcestre, London, and Canterbury, to keep ye kings
under, and to bring monks into ye plentuouse possessions of the cathedral
churches yt priests with their wives and children by viole^te expelled. Married
priests.
Of him also y^ foresaid Odo thus prophesied at his co^secracio^. This will be a
most mighty captain (come down knawes come down) and valeaunt warrior
against ye worldly prync^s. Vince^cius, Antoninus, Capgraue. Thus grew the
ho^gry lean locustes into most sturdy wild horses with lyo^s heads. Apo. ix.
Apoc. 9.
neyeng after mennis wives. Hiere. 5. Hiere. 5.


What rule was at Rome in those days
TO fatche this matter where about we go, from the very well spring or first
oryginall, as the fruit from the tree and the tree from the root, we will
sumwhat show what chaste order was at Rome in those days. Rome chastity.
In the year of our lord. DCCCC. and vij. 907
was one Sergius a man without all virtue and learning made Pope, and became the
third of that name. Sergius
This Sergius kept a young whore in the time of his holy papacye called
Marozia, Marosia
and had by her a bastard, which was pope long after him, called Ioa^ the.
xi. and reigned in all fylthinesse more the^. vij. years. Some writers hold
that he begat of her Ioha^ the. x. also, but the contrary of that shall
apeare herafter. This filthy tyrau^t caused pope formosus (whom his
predecessor Steven had before disgraded and buried among the profane lay
multidude) to be taken up again, Formosus.
decked like a pope, set in a chair, to be byheaded, and his. iij. fyngars cut
of, his carkas so to be thrown into the ragynge flood of Tiber. Tyranny.
Se if there were ever any tyranny like unto the tyranny of these spiritual
Antichrists, thus cruelly handelynge, ^ man that is dead. This shows more at
large, Liuthprandus Ticinensis. lib. 2. Capi. 13. ac. lib 3. Cap. 12. rerum
Europicarum. Autours
Blo^dus Flauius, Baptista Platina, Ioannes Stella, abbas Vrspergensis,
Ptolemeus Luce^sis, Vincencius, Antoninus, Bergomas and alij.

The chastity of holy church there.
THeodora a most execrable whore, Theoracum filiabus.
and aduouterouse mother to the foresaid Marozia and Theodora the yongar (both
unshamefast whores also) so burned in concupiscens of the bewtye of one Johan
Rauennas a priest, Ioannes raue^nas
the^ sent in massage to the pope by Peter the Archebyshop of Rauenna, that she
not only moved him, but also compelled him to lie with her, and so become her
peramoure dear. This whore for his lecherouse occupyenge of her, made him first
Bishop of Bononye, than Archebyshop of his own native city Rauenna, and
finally Saint Peter's vycar in Rome, called Johan the. x. Joan ye. x
Pope of that name, that she might at all times have his company nygher home.
This was done in the year of our Lord. DCCCC. and. xv and he governed the
papacye there. 915.
xiij. years and more. Liuthprandus Ticinensis lib. 2 Cap. 13. rerum per
Europam gestarum. It is easy to se by this open experiment, that she and her.
ij. daughters might do much in the holy college of cardynalles. whores rule
all.
He that judges not that church to be whoryshe, which was so depelye under
the rule of whores, that they at their pleasure might appoint there unto what
head rulers they would, has little good judgment in him, I think.

A popes bastard is made Pope.
GVido the marquis of Thuscia, at the lattre married Pope Sergius whore
Marozia. Guido and Mazozia
Which willing to prefer unto Saint Peter's seat, the bastard whom she
had by the said Pope, caused him to enpryson her mothers dear peramoure Johan
the. x. and to stop up his breathe with a pyllowe. Immediately after, which
was the year of our Lord. DCCCC. and. xxix was he constytute pope, 929.
and called Ioha^ the. xi. Ioa^. xi.
but the same self year he was deposed again. Whereupon she clerly left all
spiritual occupienge, and in displeasure of the prelates, married her self sone
after her husbands death to one Hugh the King of Italye, hugo rex Italy.
which was her other husbands brother by the mothers side, and made him the
monarke of Rome to recover again this lost dignyte for her bastard. Thus
showed she her self to be a plain Herodias, besides her other unshamefast
whoredoms in the spiritualte. Liuthprandus. li. 3. Ca. 12. Pope Leo the. vi.
which followed the next, Leo et Stephanus.
hel^ the papacy not. iij. quarters of a year. And after him Steven the. vij.
little mo^e then. ij. years. They might not long tarrye here, but had a cast
of sour physycke to send them well hens, that they might give place to the
right heir. For next them he succeeded again, and continued almost. v. years
after. All that has written sens platynaes time, Writers deceived
have been fowlye deceived with him, concerning this Johan the. xi. some of
them taking one Johan for another, and some two for one, forwante of the before
seyde work of Liuthprandus, which wrote about the same very time.

Three whores made Goddeses for whoredom.
AT Rome were. iij. whores of name notable, iij. whores.
about the year of our lord, DCCCC. and. xxx. 930
called Bezola, Roza, and Stephana. Which in all prodygyouse lecherye has been
brought up there among the relygyouse Cardynalles, Bysshoppes, monks and
priests, from their very youth. As these whores came ones to the occupyenge
of king Hugh, Hugo rex.
he ever after abhorred his other wife Berta, a lady most fair and bewtyfull.
And for their connyng feats in that bawdye occupacyon, he gave them ever after
the names of. iij. Goddeses. Goddeses for Whoredom.
He called Bezola venus, Roza Juno, and Stephana Zemele. Of these harlottes one
made Boso her bastard Bishop of Placencia, the other made Theobaldus her
mysbegetten the archedeacon of Myllayne, and the third was not all behind with
her filthy fruit also. Liuthyra^dus Ticine^sis li. 3. Ca. 6. That vow of
chastity (I trow) is sumwhat worth, spiritual chastity.
when it has such feats in bawdye bytcherye, as all the world besides is
ignorant of. It were great pytie but it were so high advanced, and maynteyned
by pryncelye polityque laws, they becommynge servants thereunto by making
laws for the vpholdynge thereof.

A most high example of holy churches chastyte.
ALbericus the son of Marozia by her first husband Albert, Albericus
being Marquis of Hetruria and king of Italye, compelled the Romans his
subjects, partlye by great rewards, and partlye by strong threttenynges, to
admyt his son Octauyane to the papacye, Octauianus.
which was given to al riot and vice from his very infancye. Notwithstanding
for his pleasure they agreed thereunto, in the year of our lord. DCCCC and.
lvi. 956.
and named him Johan the. xij. Joan. xij
This holy successor of Peter and vycar of Christ (as they call popes) was
accused of his Cardinals and Bishops unto the Emperor Otho in the general
Synod at Rome, Synodus Rome.
that he would say no service, he massed without consecracion, he gave holy
orders in his stable, he made boys Bishops for money, he would never bless
himself, he forced not to be perjured, and made the holy palace of Laternense
a very stews. For he kept therein Raynera the wife of him that was knight
for his own body, Rainera
and gave her great possessions, with benefices, golden chalyces, and crosses.
He held also Stephana and her sister (which had been his fathers concubine)
and had by her a bastard not long before. He occupied at his pleasure Anna a
fresh wydowe, Anna.
her daughter also and daughters daughter. He spared neither high nor low,
old nor young, poor nor rytche, fair nor foul (they said) so that no women
durst come unto Rome on pilgrimage in his time. Rome sacrifice.
Neither reverenced he any place, but would do it every where, yea, upon their
very aulters. He would hawke, hunte, dance, leap, dyce, swear, fight, riot,
run, straye abroad in the night breaking up doors and wyndowes, and burn
many men's howses. One of his Cardynalles he gelded, he might be chaste.
he put out an others eyes which had been his Godfathers. Of some he borrowed
an hand, of some a tongue, a finger, a nose, an ear. In his dyce playnge
would he call upon ill spirits, and drink to the devil for love. Thus was he
in the end deposed, till his dear diamondes set hands unto it (for they
ruled all) and caused the Romans to set him in again. Their spiritual father.


Dunstanes autoryte against married priests.
THe papacye held this Johan the xij. Joan. xij
for the space of. ix. years. iij. months, and. v days, and was stricken of
the devil (they say) as he was lyenge in bed with a man's wife, and so dyed
within. viij. days after without howsell or shrift, they say. All this
writes of him the foresaid Liuthprandus lib. 6. Cap, 6. Liuthpra^dus.
and so forth. v. chapters more to the end almost of his book, which at the
same self time dwelt at Ticina in Italy. This is he of whom the byworde rise.
Byworde.
As myrye as Pope Johan. Unto this holy vycar of Satan and successor of
Simon Magus, went Dunstane out of England in the year of our Lord. DCCCC.
and. lx. 960.
to be confirmed archebyshop of Caunterburye. Dunstanus.
And there received therewith for a great sum of money, autorise and power of
the Beast, Apoc. 13. utterly to dyssolue priests marriage, that his monks by
that means, might possess the cathedral churches of England, as within a
while after they did. The first compulsion.
This Dunstane (as witnesses Ioa^ Capgraue) was the first that in this real me
compelled men and women to vow chastyte and to keep claustrale obedyence,
against the fre doctrine of Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 7. and Gal. 5. Forbyddynge
marryage instytuted of God, which is the very doctrine of deuyls. 1. Timot. 4
This is the worthy orygynall and first foundation of monks and priests
professed chastyte in England. Foundation of chastity.
Mark it with the sequel, and tell me hereafter, wheth^r it be of the devil
or nay.

Dunstane execute his deuylyshe commission.
THis craftye merchaunde Dunstone, as he was returned again into England, The
deuyls co^myssyoner.
by autorite of this most execrable monstre and wicked Antichrist, gave a
straight commandment that priests out of hand should put away their lawful
wives (who^ that brent co^scienced hypocryte called the vessels of fornycacyon)
else would he (he said) according to his commission, A thief.
put them both from benefyce and living. And where as he perceived the
benefyces most welthye, there was he most gredye upon them, and showed most
vyolence and ^yranny. A tirau^t.
For when the high deanes of ^athedrall churches, masters of colleges
prebendes, persons, and vycars would not at so beastly a commandment, leave
their wives and children so desolate without all natural order, he got unto
him the great power of king Edgare, King Edgare.
to assyst that cruel commyssyon of his, procured for money of the former
Antichrist of Rome, and by force thereof in many places most tyrannously
expelled them Ioa^nes Capgraue In Catologo sanctorum Anglie. Read all the
Bible and Chronycles over, of Nemroth, Pharao, Tyranny spiritual
Antioche, Nero, Decius, Traianus, with other like, and I think, ye shall not
find a more tyrannouse example. No, not in cruel Herod his self. For though
he slew the innocent babes, yet demynyshed he not the living of the fathers
and mothers, but this tyrant took all with him. If he had sought a Godly
reformacion where marryage was abused, marriage condemned.
it had been sumwhat commendable. But his hunting was to destroy it all
together, as an horrible vice in priests, and in place thereof to set up
Sodom and Gomor by a sort of Hypocryte Monks, so chaungynge all Godly order.

King Edgare is brought under thereby.
THus became the face, first of the Brytonysh and then of the Englysh church
sore changed, Facies ecclesiarum.
blemyshed, and by whoryshe commyssions from the whoryshe bishops of the
whorysh Synagoge of Rome, was made all together whoryshe. Prove me here in a
liar and an heretic if ye can, for I will, by the help of God, stand by that
I write here to the end of my life. If ye can not (I speak only to you
papistical bishops and priests) grant your selves to be the most thieves,
heretics, Heretics and thieves.
and seducers of the people, that ever yet reigned upon the earth, for
maynteynynge for holiness so deuelysh a knauerye. Immediatlye after this be
fell a sore chance, as God would. King Edgare which was ever a great whore
mastre and a tyraunte (as the Chronycles report him) had a do with a young
maid called wilfrith, wilfrith.
brought up in the nondrye of wylton (parauenture to their use) whereupon by
force of the former commyssion, he was condemned of Dunstane to. vij. years
penance, penance
and might in no wise be dyspensed with, till he had builded for their
commodyte the great nondrye of Shaftesbury with. xij. other monasteryes
besides. Specyallye till he had fullye granted to the utter condempnacion of
priests marryage through out al his realm, and fyrmelye promised to put the
monks in their rowmes in the great cathedral churches, An apyshe slave
writing to the pope for the same. For as witnesses both Wyllia^ of
Malmesbury, Ranulph of Chestre, Guido de columna, and Robert Fabiane, he was
not crowned till the. xij. year of his reign.

Dunstane fashyoneth the king to his purpose.
IN the end, this aduoutrye of the king made greatly for their purpose. For
when it was ones openly known, The beasts autorite.
Dunstane with his Bulle went by and by unto him, and by force thereof denounced
him accursed. The king of gentylnesse, as he was coming toward him, arose
out of his regal seat to take him by the hand and give him place. The
hystory says, that he then dysdayned to give him his hand. And lokynge upon
him with bend brows and most spyghtfull countenance, he said thus unto him.
A proud knave.
Thou yt have not feared to corrupt a vyrgyne made handefast to Christ,
presumest to towche (a knave) the consecrate, hands of a bishop? Thou have
defiled the spowse of thy maker (a monks whore) and thynkest by flattering
service, to pacyfye (a thief) the frynde of the brydegrome? No, No king but a
fool
speak not of it. His frynde will not I be, (O color of dyssymulacion, which
has Christ to enemy. This said he, to make him believe that she was a professed
nonne. But the craftye knave lied falsely, and so mocked his king to make of
him a very dysarde fool. For the Chronycles all agree in a manner that she was no
nonne but a we^che soiornau^t in the nondrye. A witles Beast.
Thus when he found him well fauerdlye submytted and well brought under, he
put him to his penance and depryued him of his crown for the term thereof, as
before is specifyed. Vincencius, Antoninus, Guilhelmus Malmesburye, Ranulphus
Cestrensis, Guido de columna, et Ioannes Capgraue.

The wyles of the serpent prevail.
This craftye pageaunt was played of Dunstane, to put all other inferrioure
subjects the more in fear to dysobeye the popes filthy commyssion. Practyse
For when the king was ones brought under (as they are not ashamed to write
it) who durst hysse there against? For Wylliam of Malmesbury says, and
Ranulphus allegete the same li. 6. Ca. 10. of his Polichronicon. Craft.
That by this means he aswaged the grudge of the great men, the murmoure of
the commo^s, and the malice of the priests. O wylye ser^^ntes, I trow the
devil of hell his self can not go beyond you in subtylte and craft for your
beastlye generacyon. When this victory was ones gotten, Priests go out.
then went the priests out by heaps from the cathedral churches and colleges
with their wives and children, and the monks came in as fast with all
prodygiouse lecherye, but all their feats were done in the^ dar^e. Than was it
blown abroad (as all such knaueryes must have a pretensed color) that
priests lived wantonlye and would not serve God, A color
with such like. But they could not in those days accuse them so largely of
occupienge other mennys wives, nor yet of abominable sodometrye, as they have
been known of sens that constrained fylthynesse.

Dunstane chefelye loved the fruits of aduoutrye.
Johan Capgraue, Vyncent, and Antonyne reports in their wrytynges, that this
aduouterouse child was Edward, Edward
surnamed the martyr (whom Dunstane took for his own, as paraduenture he had
just cause) or else for that he was his Godfather. Not wythstandynge diverse
other auctours hold that Editha was that child. Editha.
But what matter makes it which of them it was, when all they are allowed now
for canonysed Saints in the Popes whoryshe church. Al saints.
Yea, the whoremonger, the whore, the whoryshe bastard and all, to set
whoryshnesse forewarde and make it appear holy, where marryage is thought
unholy. And as for the mother of Edward, Ioha^ Hardyng names her Elflede,
Polidorus Elfrede, Wylliam of Malmesbury, The mother.
Ranulphe, and Fabiane calls her whyght Egelflede, and Caxton dare give her
no name, and therefore the matter is doubtful. As Dunstane was on a time
hallowynge of a church in the honor of Saint devil, du^stane.
saint Denis I should say, he beheld the right thombe of the foreseyd Edithe,
Editha.
tha^ being abbess of Wylton, as she was crossyng and blessing her forhead.
And much delyghtynge therein, he took it in his hand, and said. Never might
this thombe peryshe. Immedyatlye after he being at Mass and dolorouslye
weeping, said unto the deacon that served him. Alas this floryshynge flower
will fade, Great love showed.
this redolent rose will be gone, this dayntye Dyamonde will peryshe, this sweet
bird will away for ever. And after her death he found all her body
resolved into ashes, except that thombe and the secret part under her bellye,
for those. ij. parts of her, he had blessed before. A narrow sercher.
In deed he was very homelye to ser^he so far. But the cause of this (they
say (she afterward declared unto him in a secret vysyon. This story shows
Vuillia^ of Malmesburye. li, 2. de pontificibus. Ranulphus in polichronico, li.
6. Ca 9. Vincencius. li. 25. Ca. 33. Antoninus. par. 2. li. 16. Ca. 8 Johannes
Capgraue in uita Edithe.

Kings become the Beasts Images.
When King Edgare had ones performed his. Edgare
vij. years penance for his aduoutrye with fair Wilfrith (whom Dunstone
paraue^ture prepared for his own store) he became altogyther the dumme Image
of the Beast, Image Bestie
and might not vttre from the^s fourth, but as they gave him sprete. Apo. 13.
Than caused they him to call a general counsel (at London some say) in the
year of our Lord. sinodus
DCCCC. and. lxix. 969
by the ungracious autoryte of the before said pope Johan. And there was yt
fullye enacted, and establyshed for a law ever to endure, that all canons of
cathedroll churches, collygeners, persons, curates, vycars, prestes, deacons,
and subdeacons should either live chaste, that is to say, become Sodomytes (for
that has been their chastyte ever sens) or else be suspended from all
spyrytuall iurisdiccion. An Act for sodom.
This more than Pharaony^all constitucion, Tira^ny.
was the King sworn to aid. maynteyne, and defend with the material sword,
by the popes autorite. Than were there chosen out. ij. principal visitours,
Visitours.
Ethelwolde the Bishop of Wynchestre (that nest is often ungracious) and
Oswalde the Bishop of Worcestre, both monks, to s^ this through out the whole
realm executed. Vincencius li. 24. Cap, 83. Antoninus par, 2, ti. 16. Cap. 6.
Guilhelmus Malmesburye, Ranulphus, Guido de columna, Joan Capgraue. and opus
nouum de utraque potestate. ^o. 57,

Dunstane is accused of ill rule,
IN this counsel were some wise men (as all these writers witness, though it
be sumwhat fayntly) which laid for their marriage the scripturs, For marriage
and substancially proved themselves the maynteyners of virtue therein, and not
of aduouterye as they were there uncharitably noted. But that would not serve
them. The holy Ghost might in no wise prevail, the popes bawdye bulls being
in place, Bulls
but they must needs have the preferment, no remedy. An other sort were there
which accused Dunstane of ill rule in the dark. Dunstane accused.
For Petrus Equilinus says in Catalogo Sanctorum li, 8, Ca, 49. that he was
put to his purgacyon of many things there laid against him. Of a likelyhode
therefore they had smelled out sumwhat that was not all to his spiritual
honesty. Neither would these accusacions help, the popes Power ones so largely
published. The King durst utter nothing that was against him, Edgare
for fear of new penance, and for as much as it was well known that in the
time of his old penance he had occupied one minion at Wynchestre, an other at
Andouer, besides alfrede whom he at the lattre got to wife by the crafty
mouther of her husband Ethelwolde an earl. alfreda.


The king defends Dunstane and destroys wolves.
But to pacyfy and please this Dunstane, Oration ad clersi
King Edgare in his oracion there to the clergy, rebuked the prestes very
sore, for banketinge with their wives, for slacknesse of their mass saynges,
for pretermytting their canonical hours, for their crowns shauinges with
their vnprestly aparellinges, and such other like. More over he alleged unto
them in the seid oracion the lamentable complayntes (good knavery I warande
you) of his fathers soul aperynge to Dunstane, knavery
and reproving the wanton behauer of the prestes with their wives. He also
told them, in repressing their former accusementes, that his said dead father
in that vysyon reported Dunstane to be the pastoure, bishop, and keeper of his
soul (Christ was nothing) making him still to believe, A deuilish Illusion.
that the building of monasteryes was always the most helthsome good work,
expedyent help, price, remedy, redemption, and deliverance of the soul from
dampnacion. Ex oratione regis Edgari ad clerum Anglie. Look the book of both
iurisdiccions. Of this king Edgare is it veryfied by Ranulphe, that by a
yearlye trybute of. C C C. wolves out of Wales / he destroyed all the wolves in
that land. But within his own land, the fearce gredye wolves that devoured
Christ's flock. wolves.
Acto. 20. Act. 20.
and the wylye foxes that destroyed the sweet vyneyardes of the Lord. Can. 2.
Cant. 2.
he left untouched yea, rather he set them up, maynteyned them, and fed them
at his own table with most wicked Iesabel. 3. Reg. 18. For in his time they
obtained more than. xl great monasteryes. Monasteries.
As were Glastenburye, Abindon, Thorneye, Ramseye, Peterborowe, Wenton, Wylton,
Shaftesburye, Sherborne, Worcestre, Wynchestre, Hyde, Helye, Saint Albons,
Beanflede, and such other, besides innumerable gifts and promocions else,

Ethelwolde with his lewd commission.
FRom this before named general counsel, went first Ethelwolde with his
commission, Ethelwoldus impostor.
which had been abbot of Abyndon and was than Bishop of Wynchestre, being
hastye, headye, subtyle wytted, and learned in Profane letters, magus
as the hystoryanes writes of him. This busye whelpe of antichirst leaving
Christ's pure ways, to follow the footsteps of the Esseanes, Tacyanes,
Priscyllyanystes, Marcyanystes, and other heretykes more, Heretykes.
began first his feats at Wynchestre in the old college, And there drove out
the prestes with their wives and poor children, and put in monks of Abyndone
for them. And this was his suggestyon abroad to color the matter. a color
They kept very ill rule there (he said (they would not do their masses in
due order, and they seemed no holier then the other lay people. But Polydorus
reports. li. 4. Anglice history, that they were men of an honest life. From
thens he went unto other towns and cytyes, and there ded like wise, and bare
the name to be a vygylaunt father over Nonnes and relygyouse women. a father
This same one Bishop ded more (says Vincent) than could the King of the
realm with all his whole power. In the end he wrote to pope. Ioha^ the. xiij.
Joan. 13
(which was the bastard of pope Johan the. xij. by his peramoure Stephana) of
his dreams and vysyons for the time of his progress, Stephana.
desyering his power against the prestes also, with many other wonders.
Ioha^nen Capgraue in Catalo. Guilhelmus Malmesbury, Vince^cius, Antoninus,
Ranulphus, Guido de colu^na, et Polidorus.

Oswalde with his Beastly autorite.
ON the other side went Oswalde with his autoryte from that wicked counsel,
Oswaldus magus.
which had stodied necromancye with other vnpure scyences at Floryake besides
Orleaunce in france, Floriacus.
where he was first made monk and afterward in England bycame Bishop of
Worcestre. This fellawe so well armed with deceytes as ever were Pharaoes
sorcerers, was thought a man mete to deceive with lyenge signs the common
sort. So trudged he fourth with his craftye calkynges, and first expelled the
Canons of the cathedral church of worcestre with their careful wives and
children and out of. Prestes expelled
vij. other churches more within that his dyoces, and there placed for them the
laysy leave locustes, which not long before had leaped out of the bottomless
pyt. Apoca. 9. Apoc. 9.
the monks which at that time were bare and nedy. Than went he farther abroad,
and wrought there like masteryes, whereof England has depely felt ever sens. a
color
His suggestions were like the other, as that the prestes lived wantonly, and
would not mass in due form. For his travail in this / was he made
Archbishop of York by the labor of Dunstane. To tell his other feats it
would are to much time, and therefore I pass it over. These. ij. promoted the
said Dunstane above all other, as men having most wily crafts, iij false
knaves.
to assiste him in his business. These. iij. Monks brought the Kings so
under, that they had than all the realm at their pleasures Ioa^nes Capgraue,
Malmesburye, Vincencius, Antoninus, Ranulphus, Guido de Columna, et Polidorus.

Dunstane makes a king at his pleasure.
AFter the decease of King Edgare, in the year of our Lord. DCCCC. and. lxxv.
975
was a wonderful varyete and scisme through out the whole realm, Scisms.
partly for him that next should succeed King, and partly for the great injury
done to the married prestes. The queen Alfrede with Alpherus the duke of Mercia
and other great lords fauorynge her quarrel would needs have Ethelrede King
which was her son by Edgare, Alpherus.
on the one side. Ethelredus.
Dunstane and his monkish Bishops with the earl of East sex and serten
other Lords suborned by them, on the other side would needs have Edward,
Edwardus.
whom some reported to be Edgares bastard. Anon as Dunstane perceived the
queen's part to prevail (for she had the most of the lords) he called for his
metropolytanes cross, and there like a bold yeman and a tall, legatus
showed himself among them as the popes high legate from his own right
side. For he had by that time procured of Pope Johan the. xiij. Joan. 13
(which was the other popes bastard) a renouacyon of his former autoryte, to
double the whoryshnesse thereof. And by force of the same, he made Edward king
in spyght of them all, and showed himself (Johan Capgraue says) a very
natural father unto him ever after. a father
Nevertheless yt cost him his life in the forth year of his reygne. Than to
make all holy toward their side, A deceyt
and to blemyshe the other party, specyallye to stop mennis mouths abroad
(for many things were in those days spoken) they canonysed him a Saint,
finding the means to show miracles for him, and that made all whole every
way. Prefati Autores.

The prestes with their wives restored
ANon after this kings coronacion, Alpherus the Duke of Mercia with other
great men, Alpherus.
by counsel of the queen, drove the monks out of the cathedral churches and
restored again the prestes with their wives and children. For the prestes had
laid for them selves, Prestes restored
that it was vncomlye, uncharitable, yea, and unnatural, to put out an old
known dweller for a new vnknone: A neyber, a cytyzen, and a child brought up
among them, for a forouer and a stranger. The prestes.
They knew it (they said) to be vnpleasynge unto God, that man should take from
them that he had ones given them. Finally they alleged this grounded precept of
God for them selves. Let men do non otherwise than they would gladlye be done
to. The Monks on the other side, The monks
laid for their part, that Christ cared not an half penny for the old dweller
/ but allowed him only that would take the cross of penance upon him.
Whether that be in a monks cowle without just tyttle to enter into an other
mannys possessions or no. I put it to the judgment of them that are
christenlye learned. The troblouse cares in marryage, A cross in marriage.
as are the necessary prouisyons for house keeping, the virtuous bringing up
of children, and the daily helping of poverty, should rather seem a christen
cross to Godly wise men, than easy Idelnesse in monkerye. In the rude of this
controuersye, the greatter part both of the nobles and commons, judged the
prestes to have great wrong, and sought every where by all means possible,
Backare, sir monk.
to bring them again to their old possessions and dignitees, Yea, sumwhere
with good ernest blows and buffettes. Robertus Fabiane cum antedictis
Autoribus.

Dunstane makes an Idol to speak.
THis caused Dunstane in the year of our Lord. DCCCC. and lxxv. 975.
to call an other solemn counsel. But that was where they thought themselves
most strong, and might best do their feats, sinodus
at Wynchestre. Where after great words had between the duke of March and the
earl of East sex (which were than appointed as arbyters) Dunstane perceiving
all to go with the prestes, brought fourth his former commission, co^missio^
thinkinge thereby to stop their mouths. And when that would not serve, they
sought out a practyse of the old Idolatrouse prestes, which were wont to make
their Idolles to speak, by the art of Necromancy, wherein the monks were in
those days expert. A roode there was upon the frayter wall in the mon^stery
where the counsel was holden, A roode
and (as Vincent and Antoninus testifies) Dunstane required them all to pray
thereunto, which was not tha^ ignoraunte of that spyrytuall prouysyon. In the
mids of their prayer, the roode spoke these words, or else a knave monk
behind him in a truncke through the wall, knavery
as Boniface ded after for the papacye of Celestyne. The rood speaks.
God forbid (says he) ye should change this order taken. Ye should no do well,
now to alter it. Take Dunstanes ways unto ye, for they are the best. All this
work of the devil at al they were astayned, that knew not thereof the crafty
conueyaunce. If this were not cleave legerdemayne, tell me. Oh, that there was
not a Johan Boanerges at that time, to prove the spretes of that workemanshyp.
1. Joan. 4. 1 Ioa^. 4
If there had been but one Thomas Cromwell, thomas cro^well.
they had not so clerelye escaped with that knavery. Polidorus Vergilius, which
allows them in many other lewd points, smelled out their bouery in this,
and reports diverse other to do the same at that day.

That Idol is crowned King of England.
IN remembrance of this knavery (miracle, they say, were afterward written
upon the wall under that roodes fete, these verses following. Verses.


Humano more, crux presens edidit ore,
Coelitus affata, que perspicis hic subarata,
Absit ut hoc fiat, and cetera tunc memorata
With lie and all. Whom Johan Capgraue reports that he se there more tha^
CCCC. years after, Capgraue.
the roode translated from thens into the church for his miracles sake. About
the year of our Lord a.M. and. xxxvi. 1036
as King Canutus being at Southampton was boasted of one of his knights to
be the great Lord of the sea, Canutus.
he thought to prove it by a commandment of obedience. And as he well
perceived that yt would obey him in no point, he took the crown from his own
head, The crown.
acknowlegynge, that there was a Lord much higher and of more power than
himself was. And therefore he promised never more to wear yt, but to render yt
up unto him for ever. With that, Egelnothus than Archebyshopp of Caunterburye,
Egelnothus.
infourmed him of this roode which had dysolued prestes matrimonye and done
many other great miracles. Which provoked him anon after to go to Wynchestre,
and to resygne unto him his regal crown, constytutynge him than King of this
realm. An Idol made king.
Was not this (think you (good wholesome counsel of this Idolouse Bishop.
Zachary. II. if a man had need of it? A plain token is it that they were than
the Images of the Beast. Image of the Beast.
Apoca. 13. and no godly governors, yea, very Idolles and no Kings, that
were under such ghostly fathers. Henricus Huntyngtonensis Archidiaconus. li.
6. Ranulphus. li. 6. Ca. 20. Fabianus li. 1. Ca. 206, and Polydorus. li. 7.
with other autours more

An example of Claustrall virginite.
MArianus Scotus and serte^ other writers besides, do testyfye in their
Chronycles, that when this Canutus could have no fruit by his wife Elgiue of
hampton, canutus Elgiua.
and was not trouglye contented therwyth: She fearing that he should either
cast her up, or else resort to some other, got her among relygyouse chaste
women, to know what good chere was among them. And anon she found one to her
mind, which was bygge with child by a monk, not wythstandynge the great
chastity that was boasted before. Claustrall chastity.
But Marianus says, she was a presbyteresse or a prestes leman, to save the
honor of that order, because he was a monk his self. Algyne had this nonne
be of good chere, and if she wode agree unto her, it should be to her great
honor. But yt must (she said) be kept wonderfullye close. A monks bastard.
Immedyatly after the queen feigned herself to be great with child, and by the
conueyaunce of a mother. B. going betwixt them both, at the time appointed of
labourynge, she was delivered of the nonnes child, making the King to believe
it was his, to no small rejoice of them both. This child was called Sweno,
Sweno
and the year before Canutus died, was constitute King of Norwey. Some writers
have thought that Heraldus the first (which after succeeded King of England) to
come fourth also the same way, Heraldus.
and his own brother Hard canutus report it no far otherwise. Ranulphus
li, 6, Ca, 20, cum ceteris autoribus.

Dunstane disputes with sorcerye and murder.
NOw let us return unto Dunstane again. Dunstanus.
Though the aforesaid controuersye between the prestes and the monks ceased
for a time, by reason of their legerdemayne in the roode, knavery
yet was it not all finished. For some men of wisdom there were in those
days, which smelled somewhat (as Polydorus reports) judging it to be as it
was in deed, very subtyle knauerye. And plainly Ranulphus says, that the
spech came from the wall. Mark it hardelye. Whereupon Alpherus the Duke of
March with his company, Alpherus.
in the year following (which was from Christ's incarnacyon. DCCCC. and. lxx
vi. 976
) sent into Scotland for a certain learned Bishop, a learned
which was known both eloquent and wytty, Bishop.
to dispute the matter with them. Than was the place appointed in a street or
vyllage of the Kings, called Calna, for they trusted no more close howses in
the monasteries. And when the Bishopp had laid for the married prestes such
invincible scripturs, reasones, and arguments as Dunstane and his dodypoll
monks were not able to avoid, Dunstane an ass.
the blind ass had non other shift but to lay these faynte excuses for him
self. As that he was an aged man, sore broken in the labors of holy church,
and that he had at that time given over all study, A blind beast.
and only addycted him self unto prayer. But for as much (he said) as they
would not leave the disquietynge of him, but still vex him with old
quarellynges, they might well sem to have the victory, yet should they not have
their minds. And with that he arose in a great furye, for a color committinge
his cause unto Christ, but he set the Devil by his necromancy to work. a
limme of the devil.
For so sone as he was gone, with such as it pleased his pontifical pleasure
to call with him, suddenly (says Fabyane, Antonyne, Vincent, and Johan
Capgraue) the ioystes of the loft failed, and they that were under it, peryshed
there.

Dunstanes prouysyon in England for Satan.
This have this most cruel and wicked generacyon contynuallye builded their
synnefull Syon in blood. Michee. 3. Mich. 3
and are not yet ashamed of these their manifest knaueryes. For those belly
founders, thieves, and mourtherers of theirs yet advance they for their
pryncipall Saints. saints.
And when their feastfull days come, they are yet in the papystyck churches of
England with no small solempnite / mattensed, massed, candesed, lyghted,
processyoned, sensed, smoked, perfumed, and worshypped, the people brought in
believe, that the latyne reading of their wretched acts there in their
legendes, is Gods dyuyne service, Gods service.
being without fail the most dampnable service of the devil. Like as holy
Johan Baptyst by preaching repentance, prepared a plain pathwaye to Christ
and his kyngedome. Luce. 3. So ded this unholy Dunstane by sowynge of all
superstycyons, Precursor Antichristi
make redye the way to Satan and his filthye kyngedome against his coming
fourth from the bottomless pytt, after the full thousand of years from
Christ's incarnacyon. Apoca. 20. Apo. 20.
which is the sprete of Antichrist. miracles.
He raised up in England the pestylent order of monks, he builded them
monasterie^, he procured them substance innume^^ble, finally he brought unto
the^r hands the cathedral churches with the fre elecci^n of bishops, that
nothing should there be done within that realm, but after their lust and
pleasure. The^ was Christ's kingdom cle^elye put a syo^, and his immaculate
spouse, or church upon his word only dependynge, the church.
compelled to flee into desert. Apoc. xvi. Apo. 12.
Men and women that ryghtly believed, durst not than confess their faith, but
kept al close within them. For then was Satan al^^de. Satan.
these monks every where assistynge him in the fournyshynge out of that proud
painted church of Antichrist. Supersticion, hypocresye, and vain glory, were
before that time such vices as men were glad to hyde, Vices.
but now in their gandyshe ceremonies they were taken for Gods dyuyne service.

Signs and plages following these myschefes.
But now se what followed of these before rehearsed myscheues. In the year of our
lord. DCCCC. and lxxxviij. 988
(which was the. xij. year before that full thousand) departed this Dunstane,
as warm of deuyls frequenting his tomb, Devils.
as I shall in the next book show more playnelye. Within the same year aptare
and a bloudye cloud in the sky, A bloudye cloud.
which covered all England ^as witnesses Johan Hardinge with diverse other
Chronyclers, and it rayned blood over all the land. After that entered the
Danes so fast (says Ranulphe, Danes.
at every port, that no where was the English nacyon able to withstand them.
And the monks to help the matter well forewarde, by counsel of their
Archebyshop Siricius, Siricius
gave them. x. thousand pound to begin with, that they might live in rest
and not be hyndered. For little cared they what became of the rest, so their
precious bodies were safe. After this by diverse compulsyons they augmented
that sum, from. x. to. xvi. to. Monks were.
xx. to. xxiiij. to. xxx. and so fourth till they came to the sharp payment
of. xl. thousand pound, Englandes destruccio^.
and till they had no more money to give. For the more the Danes had, The Danes
stre^thened.
the more couetouse and cruel they were evermore. Thus did they to the land
innumerable harm, in seeking their own private commodite, and so brought
their own natyue people in most miserable thraldom. For by that means were
the Danes made strong, and the English nation became feeble and weak, yea, so
wretched at the last, that they were feign to call every vile slave among the
said Danes, Lord Dane,
their g^o^ lord. But now ^arke the end ^^cernynge these monks. In the year
of our lord a thousand and. xij. 1012
which was the. xxiiij. year from Dunstanes departing, and the. xij. from
the deuyls goingge fourth, the Danes after many great vyctoryes within the
realm, fyered the city of Caunterburye and enprysoned the Archebyshop than
Elphegus. Caunterburye. Elphegus.
And as he and his monks were able to give no more money, they tythed them
after this sort. They slew always. ix. and reserved the tenth to perpetual
sorrow and seruytude, till they had mourtered of them to the nombre of more
than. Tythynges.
ix. hundred, there and in other quarters abroad. And the most part of them
they hynge up by the members, which was a plain sygnifi^aon, that plage to
come then upon them for their Sodometrye and most violent contempt of christen
marriage. A just Plage.
Ranulphus Cestrensis lib. 6. Ca. 13. et. 15. Fabianus par. 1. Ca. 199.

The conclusyon of this first book.
Extent of this book.
HEre have I painted out before your eyes (most derely beloved country me^) the
chaste, holy, consecrate, and spiritual acts of your En^lyshe votaryes,
priests, monks, and bishops, from the worlds beginning, to a full complete
thousand years sens Christ's incarnacion. Not all have I here rehearsed, for
that were a labor without end, they being so innumerable, but a serten of
them for every age, that ye may up them perceive what the rest has been. In
the next part or book, The other book
which shall begin at Satan's going fourth at large, after his thousand
years tyenge up. Apoca. 20. and so continue to this year of our Lord a. MD.
and. LI. 1551.
that ye may know what chere has been among them, what occupyenge they have
had, what masteryes they have played, and what miracles they have done, for
that thyme and space also. I think it will apere an other manner of thing,
then that which has gone before. For so much as Satan their ghostlye
gouernoure Satan at large.
has for that time wrought most strongely. No more will I be ashamed to
rehearse their filthy factes (let them trust upon it) then they have been to
do them in effect, and to set them four the for holy, spiritual, consecrate,
chaste, honorable, and ghostly good works, Good works.
being abominable and most stynkynge knaueries.

The world shall well know what Sodomytes and Deuyls they are, Sodomites.
that have all this time contempned christen marryage instituted of God, and do
not yet repent their most dampnable doings in that behalf, but continue still
the same, leadyng their lives in unspeakable fleshlye fylthynesse. Christ
promised ones to all such as they are, that al their hydden mischeues should
come to light, if they would not at the call of his most holy Gospel,
repent. Nothing (says he) is so closelye hydden among those spiritual
murderers, but wylbe clearly openeed, neither yet so secretly coueted, but
shall apere manifest and be known to the world. Mat. x. Mat. ^
Marc. iiij. Mar. iiij
Luc. xij. Luc. 12.
Christ suffered very long the Pha^ysees and Bishops, the lewd
predecessors of our proud spirytualte. But when he ones perceived none other
in them but contempt of his verite with wylfull resistau^ce of the holy Ghost,
Christ to buketh.
he went fearcelye upon them with woe upon woe, calling them all that naught
was. As hypocrytes, dyssemblers, dodypolles, fools, blind beasts,
bellygoddes, scorners, false prophets, periures, vypers, serpents, deuourers,
rauenours, brybers, thieves, tyrauntes, murderers, and fire brandes of hell.

Look the. xxiij. chapter of Mathewe, Mat. 23.
and ye shall find that he poured all this upon them, and doubled it in the
captyuyte of Jerusalem, when the great vengeance of all innocent blood light
greuouslye upon them. For in the syege of that city were slain by Vespasianus
and Titus, Vespasianus and Titus.
to the nombre of. x. hundred thousands of Iues Not only of the inhabitauntes
of that regyon there, but from all quarters of the world about, which at that
time came thither to their Eastre celebracyon. Besides these, were there led
fourth from thens captyue. Captyues.
xcvij. thousand, of whom some were sold to the Romans to become their
contynuall servants and slaves, and the resydue given unto the Lions and
wild beasts, that they should daily devour them and be fed with their
flesh. All this witnesses Egesippus Iudeus. li. 5. Ca. 49. De Hierosolimorum
excidio. And now after his most manifest example, Example.
Christ wylleth us also extremelye to rebuke these cruel corrupters of the
christyanite, for their most spyghtfull contempt of his wholesome warnynges,
the Christen magistrates hereafter, Magystrates.
or else some other enemy of theyes, following with double vengeance upon the
heads of them. Apoc. xviij. This plage, when it shall f^ll, as it is not far
of, will be the most ryghtouse hand of God, upon that malygnaunte generation.

Great wondre will it be unto many (I know it well) to be hold their chief
English Saints thus rebuked. Englysh Saints.
And parauenture they will think, that I might as well speak against Peter
and Johan, Paul and James, with the other Saints, Apostles and Martyrs of the
prymatyue church, as against these ungodly hypocrytes of theirs. The Autour.
But I tell those menafore hand, that they are wretched lie blind, for want
of lyuelye knowledge in the sacred scryptures. They have no true judgment in
them to dyscerne the fallen star, Stars.
from the star so fyermelye fixed in the fyrmament as never could be yet
from thens removed. Never shall he that declyneth to men's inuencions, be all
one with him which only follows the pure word of God.

But undoubtedly of no small time, have the fallen stars darkened the clear
stars of heaven, Fallen stars.
the popes hypocrytysh Saints, the true Saints of Christ and perfyght
children of Abraham. The chief cause of this has been the cruel contempt of
holy wedlock, and the brag boastynge out of their vnholoye chastity. Never
saw ye yet any holy days made of Adam, Holy days.
Seth, Enos, and Enuch for the first age. Neither yet of Noe, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph Moises, David, Zorobabel, and such other for the other ages. I
think if Peter and Paul with the other Apostles, Peter and Paul.
had been known meryed men, they had never had so many perfuminges and
sensynges.

It is only marryage that has made men secular abiectes, secular and lay.
and unholy, lowsye, lewd, lay people. In spite of that have the spiritual
Sodomytes in the legendes of their sanctyfyed sorcerers, disfamed the English
posterite with tails, as I have showed before. That an englysh man now can not
travail in an other land by way of merchaundise or any other honest
occupyenge, Called Startsmen.
but it is most contumeliously thrown in his ^ethe, that all English men
have tails, Tails.
That uncomely note and report have the nation gotten without recover, by these
laysye and Idell lubers the Monks and the priests, which could find us
matters to aduau^ce their Canonysed Cay^sby, at their Saints (as they call
them) but manifest lies and (...). In the mean time have they boosted their
own most filthy whores, whores*
their Nonnes and veyled systers, for sanctyfyed vyrgynes and the pure spowses
of Christ. Never was there yet so precyouse and oryent a color to hyde all
their knaueryes, as was that counterfeit chastity of theyrs. That fair face of
the subtyle serpent, Face of the Se^pent.
has hitherto deceived all the world, and wrought innumerable myschefes
therein. But if those their sorcerers be Saints as they say they are, then may
the Deuyls of hell be Saints also. Let Dunstanes devil stand than checkemate
with Dunstane his mastre, Dunstanes devil
and be a popysh Saint as he is, for he never did a quarter of so much
mischefe as he has done. Stand up ye noble men and women in the true
knowledge of your lord God, Noble men.
if ye will hereafter be noted valeaunt. Be not as your fore fathers have been
before you, beastlye ignorant in the ways of his truth.

Follow the Christen pryncyples of your most worthy Iou^as, King Henry.
king Eduward the syxt and his noble father before him which have graciouslye
begone to smell out in that fulse generation the engy^^es of the devil. As
great honor will it now be to you (yea* rather much greater) to flee the sede
of the Serpent by the word of God, as ever it was to Saint George that noble
captain, Saint George.
to flee ye great hydre or Dragon at Silena, as Baptista Mantuanus specifieth I
speak not this for that I would ye to fall upon that sort with material
weapon, but with the mighty strong word of the Lord. For as Esaye, daniel,
and Paul reports, What makes noble.
they shall be destroyed without hands, Esa. xi. Dan. viij. and ii. Tes ij.
Only is it Gods true knowledge, that nobleth you before him, be therefore no
longer negligent. An vnrecurable dyshonoure were it unto you, from hence forth
to be led blind field of these bushardes in the dark. The most of you are
all ready very plentuouslye entered (that lord be praised) think him only
blessed which perseuereth to the end. Having the governance of Christ's
d^^e heritage, draw not your laws out of Antichrists rules now that ye
know Christ's wholesome doctrine. Laws.
Neither yet fatche the bread that ye shall feade your commons with, Doctrine.
out of his bawdye beggerlye bowgettes, but let them have the pure purueaunce
of God out of the undefiled scryptures. Be ones so merciful to that christen
flock, that ye cle^elye (...) them (...) that vile g^neracion. Let them no
long^r worship deuyls as they have done, Deuyls.
in these dead monks and thieves, but let them look freelye toward their
eternal and living God, both to their souls health and yours Amen.

Thus ends the first part of this work, called, The acts of English
votaryes. Collected by Johan Bale Anno. 1546.
The autours names both English and other, out of whom this present Book is
collected.
Abbas Vrspergensis. Achilles Pyrminuis. Alphonsus de Castro. Alphredus
beuerlace^sis Amandus Zierizensis. Antoninus Flore^tinus. Baptista Platina.
Baptista Mantuanus. Bartholomeus Anglus Bedas Giruuinus. Bernardus Lutze^burg
Berosus Chaldeus. Biblia Sacra. Blondus Flauius. Caius Julius. Christianus
Masseus. Cleme^s Alexandrinus. Colfridus Abbas. Conradus Gesnerus. Cornelius
Tacitus. De utraque Potestate. Diodorus Siculus. Edgari Oration. Egesippus
Iudeus. Epiphanius Cyprius. Eusebius Cesariensi^. Festiuate Sacerdotum. Flores
Historiarum. Franciscus La^bertus. Freculybus Iexoui e^ste Galfredus
Monemutensis. Ge^nadius Massilie^sis. Georgius Joy. Georgius Vnteelius. Gildas
Britanus. Giraldus Cambrensis. Guido de Columna. Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis.
Guilhelmus Caxton. Guilhelmus Tyndale. Guilhelmus Turner. Hartmanus Shedel.
Hector Boethius. Helma^dus Monachus. Henricus Huntyngtonensis. Herma^nus
Contractus Herma^nus Torre^tinus Honorius Augustudunensis. Iacobus Vorago.
Iacobus Bergomas. Iacobus Zieglerus. Iodoeus Badius. Ioannes Capgreue. Ioannes
Hardyng. Ioannes Stella. Ioannes de Molinis. Ioannes Annius. Ioannes Nauclerus.
Ioannes Lydgate. Ioannes Textor. Ioannes Tritemius. Ioannes Pomeranus. Ioannes
Carrion. Ioannes Mayor. Ioannes Lelandus. Isidorus hispalensis. Legendariu^
Ecclesie. Liuthprandus Ticine^sis. Marcus Sabellicus. Marianus Scotus. Martinus
Carsulanus. Martinus Lutherus. Matheus Palmarius. Merlinus Ambrosius. Michael
Ricius. Nanclerus, Ioannes. Nennius Britannus. Odo Chariacensis. Osteirus
Ca^tuariensis. Osunaldus Myconius. Otto Phrisingensis. Paulus Orosius. Paulus
Aemilius. Paulus Constantinus. Petrus Equilinus. Philippus Melanchton Plinius
Secundus. Polycrates Ephesius. Polydorus Vergiliue. Pomponius Mela. Prosper
Aquitannus. Ptolomeus Lacensis. Ranulphus Cestrensis. Raphael Volateranus
Robertus Fabyane. Robertus Barnes. Sigebertus Ge^blace^sis. Strabo Cretensis.
Thomas Bradunardin. Thomas Vualden. Thomas Scrope. Vince^sius Beluacensis.
Vtraque potestas. VVernerus Cartusiensis. VVilibaldus Anglus.
Finis.
The holy Ghost shall rebuke the world of sin, and of ryghtousnesse, and of
judgment. Joan. xvi. Into the new Jerusalem shall enter no unclean thing,
neither that which works abhominacion, nor yet what makes lies. But they
only which are written in the lambs book of life. Apoca. xxi. The man of sin
shall he opened, before the Lords coming, even the son of perdycyon,
which is an aduersarye, and is exalted above all that is called God, whom he
shall consume with the sprete of his mouth. ij. These. ij.
Imprynted at London by Abraham Vele, dwelling in Paul's churcheyarde at the
sin of the Lamb. Anno. 1551.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The second part or contynuacyon of the English votaries, comprehendynge th^yr
unchaste examples for. CC. years space, from the year a thousand from
Christ's incarnacyon, to the reign of king Johan, collected of their own
writers by Johan Bale.

B^holde (thou idolatrouse church) I will gather together all thy lovers, unto
whom thou have made thy self commen, yea, and all them whom thou fauourest,
and every one that thou hate, and will discover thy shame before them, that
they all may se thy fylthynesse. Ezech. xvi.

Imprinted at London, for Johan Bale, in the year of our Lord a M. D. and LI.
and are to be sold within Paul's chain, at the sign of S. John Baptist.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The Preface of this book.
FOr so much as Rome has been so synnefull a synke and pernicyouse puddell, as
has all the world infected by the sodometrouse vow of their symulate
chastyte, necessary I think it in this preface of the second part of my
Englysh votaryes, ij. part.
to show what foundacyon it has had in the same. Xenophon says in his book
of huntyng, that Rhoma is the name of a dog, and Johan Textor affirms the
same both in his Epithetes and Officines. A dog in the scripture is judged a
beast most vile, A dog
his price being all one with the reward or wages of an whore for her
whoredom. Thou shall (says the lord to Moses) neither bring the hyre of an
whore, nor the price of a dog into the house of God in no manner of vow, for
both of them are abhominacyon unto the Lord thy God, False teachers
Deuter. xxiij. They in the scriptures of the sacred Bible, are compared unto
dogs, which both profess and teach the verite of God vnpurely, snarynge the
simple sowles with the unprofitable tradycyons of men synnefull. Dogs are
ungentle barkers, cruel byters, lascyuyouse lechours, gredy deuoure^s, and
insacyable rauenours, much delyghtynge in blood. The malycyouse and couetouse
Romans, Romans.
with those vnpure Apostles, which they from time to time have sent unto this
our nacyon, has most apertly showed themselves to be those vile dogs and
swyne, whom Christ admonished us to be ware of. Matthew. vij.

In the Bible text, S. Hierome says, that Roma was the wife of Nahor Abraham's
brother. Nahor.
Gene. xxij. Whose children were afterward, obseruers of the Planetes and so
bycame Idolaters, after the mind of Philo and other old writers. Cechim the
son of Iauan, Cechim.
Genesis. x. otherwise called Italus, had a daughter named Roma, as testyfyeth
Berosus the Chaldean, Fabius Pictor, and Caius Sempronius, whom he constitute
queen of the Aborygenes or people of an unknown beginning. Which queen first
builded the great city so named, Whom after long tracte of time Romulus most
gorgyously fynyshed. Romulus.
This mencyoneth also Paulus Constantinus, Christianus Massaeus, and Ioannes
Functius in their Chronolagies, besides that Ioannes Annius ded therein before
them. Now let us consydre how lady Lechery the virgynall Goddess of the
Sodomyticall Papists, has compassed in, this great city on every side with
her fleshly fylthynesse. And first let us begin with Romulus and Remus, the
first setters up or aduauncers thereof. These. ij. bloody brethren had an whore
to their mother, called Rhea ilia, Ilia Rhea
which being a professed nonne to Venus, committed whoredom both ways, that
is to say, both in soul and in body. For under the vow of chastyte she
served the ydolles, as the manner was that time, and so dallyed besides in the
dark, as was well perceived by her game.

After the minds of Virgil, Ouide, and such other fabulouse Poets, these. ij.
cruel captains Romulus and Remus, received their first nurryshment of a she
wolffe whom they sucked, in sygnyfycacyon of the wonderful tyranny which should
follow in yt great city Rome, whereof they were the first amplyfyers. Other
authors report, that they were first nourced of an harlot called Lupa, Lupa.
not far from the floude of Tyber, where as the Romish Pope holds now his
palace, of whom all brothel houses, stews, or places where such fylthynesse
is wrought, have their names, and are called to this hour Lupanaria. Lupanaria.
Romulus thus preserved by a thief called Paustulus, nurryshed by a wolf, and
brought up by an whore, given also of him self to outragyouse lechery,
couetyse, and ambycyon, bycame such a traitor to his own stock, as in the
end most cruelly slew his natural brother Remus, to establysh his great
builded city in the wickedness of cursed Cain. Mark for this storye Titus
Liuius, Plutarchus, Bedas, and Johan Boccatius. Chloris otherwise called Flora,
Chloris.
a most notable harlot, obtaynynge infynyte riches by her execrable whoredom,
made Rome her heyer and the only inheritour of her fylthy possessions,
execrated of God, Deuter. xxiij. For the which the Romans admytted her for a
great Goddess, and dedycated unto her ones in the year in Apryle, certain
feasts, called Floralia sacra. Floralia.
This has Marcus Cicero, which calls her the mother of the Romans, so has
Aulus Gellius, and Johan Textor.

Of these autoryte among these Romans were there many, both consuls and
senators, which were named by this uncomely word Spurius, Spurij.
signifye^ge a bastard, as is to be seane in the chronycles of Eusebius, and
Paulus Constantinus, by Spurius Verginius, Spurius Tarpeius, Spurius Carbilius,
Spurius Posthumus, Spurius Scruilius, Spurius Largus, Spurius Cassius, Spurius
Nautius, Spurius Medullinus, Spurius Vectius, Spurius Furinus, Spurius
Herminius, Spurius Paulus, Spurius Oppius, Spurius Crassus, and a great sort
more. By this should it seem that unchaste living was not only vnpo^nyshed: but
also aduau^ced to great honor among the Romans. Priapus called in the Bible,
Priapus
Miplezeth, iij. Reg. xv. and. ij. Parasip. xv. was such a disformed child of
Venus, and most execrable ydoll of the Cananytes, as had never the like (for in
his groves the baudes of that land, both wrought their fylthynesse, and also
taught the foul feats of the same) his storye is far to uncomely to be
rehearced. Yet was he so deifyed of the Romans, that he both became the God of
their gardenes, A God.
and had his feastfull days every year with solempnyte observed, a garlande
of flowers set upon his head, and an he ass always offered in sacryfyce to
him. Ouidius primo libro fastorum, Textor, Althamerus, ac Cibenius. Non other
were admitted in those days by the high senate of the Romans, Romysh goods.
neither yet by commandment and custom worshypped, but such lecherouse
monsters as these were, of whom they had great nombre.

Resort we now to the Empire of this Rome, after the overthrow of the other
three general monarchies of the world, of the Assyreanes, Perseanes, and
Greeks, and se what enteraunce and progress lady lechery had therein. With
Cleopatra the queen of Aegipt, which was a woman (as testifyeth Egesyppus) of a
most corrupt life, Julius Caesar ye first Emprour, Julius
had very long occupye^ge without all honesty. Look Bedas de temporum
ratione. Iac^bus Bergomas, and other like authors. Of Nero Domicius, Nero.
whose fleshely appetyte could not with women be fully satisfied, the doings
were to execrable to be here rehear^ed. As Marcus Aurelius, Aurelius.
for the debylyte of nature, could no longar follow in that filthy course of
living, which he had continued in from his youth, he caused his own preuye
parts to be cut away, and so dedicate himself to Venus, taking upon him
from thens fourth the name and office of a woman, to prove that uncomely
occupyenge in an other prodygyouse kind. Freculphus has this in the first
chaptre of his second Tome, so has Ado Viennensis with others more. Clergy.
What acceptacy^n and fauer this most deuylysh example has obtained in our
Romysh spirytualte, geldynge excepted, the sequel of this book shall declare.
Bid also reports in his former treatise, de temporum ratione, that
Constantius the Emperor begat great Constantine here in England,
Constantinus.
of Elene his concubyne. Which Constantine, as a great nombre of Romysh
authors testyfyeth, was the first that builded Christen temples at Ro^e,
Temples.
and that fournyshed the clergy ther^e with such possessions and body ease, as
in process brought them into all kinds of wantonness in the flesh.

In contynuaunce of years, the Romysh Emprour became the elder son of
Antichrist by professyon and oath, ij. sons.
to defend the patrimony of S. Peter, as they call their theuysh possessions,
and so to maynteyne them in all ydelnesse, pride, and lechery. The French
king also on the other side, became his yongar son, being sworn always at
his coronacyon, with fire and with sword to support the same. Of our Englysh
kings I speak not, which nevertheless were his adoptyue children from the
days of king Alpheede ye great, to the myddle age of king Henry the. viij.
The Emprour after that, Emperor.
was appointed by office to hold the Popes styroppe whyls he leaped on his
mule, and the French king to hold his brydell and to wait upon his Ienet of
Spain Ex Christophoro Marcello in ritibus Romanae Ecclesiae. French king.
Tedyouse were it to declare here the whole cyrcumstaunce, how lechery reigned
in this second son also. As how Childericus the French king, Childericus.
being expuls^d for his insatiable aduoutrye, begat Clodoucus of an whore
which was an other mannys wife, of whom descended (as they report) all their
Christened kings. Look Gaguinus, Johan Liectenberger, and Franciscus Bonadus
in Anacephaleosi. Angisus the son of Arnolde bishop of Metis, Angisus
usurping the high stewardshyp of France, at layser made the king to go pyke
a salett, and defeated him of his crown by help of the prestes, as wytnessyth
Abbas Vespergensis, Tritemius in compendio, and Ioannes Nauclerus. The kings
by that means (says Otho Phrisingensis) became very idyotes, Pipinus of a
bastard stock in Alpaida the harlot, Pipinus.
admytted by Pope Zachary to ye crown, as testyfyeth Robertus Goulet in
compendio sexaetation mundi.

Necessary is it, that sumwhat be said here of their chaste relygyon also. In
Rome were and are yet certain temples, Temples.
into who^ neither honest matrone nor yet chaste vyrgyne were suffered to enter,
what was permytted to commen whores, oppressers of the people, and Sodomytysh
prestes in that behalf, I think all the world knows at this day. This
mad superstycyon (says Iacobus Zieglerus in sua Syria) had her first
orygynall in the mount of Olympus within the isle of Cypres, Olympus.
where as a solemn temple was dedycate to Venus, into whom no woman was
permitted to enter, and passed from thens to the Romans, being there admytted
for a most high relygyon. Nevertheless the commen whores had there allowed
them for their lascyuyouse occupyenge, Whores
most fair mansyons in a street called Suburrs, as both Martialis and
Pamphilus has uttered. Neither has any mannys doctrine, sens the worlds
beginning, been more hyghly accepted of the Romans and their clergy, than
the crafty and dark learning of bawdy Aristotle, Aristotle
which not only besides his Sodometry kept a most fylthy whore, called Hermia,
but also after her death, ded sacryfyce unto her as to a great Gods, and
made hymns in her praise. This shows Origene and Johan Textor in his
offycynes. Both Simon Magus and his whore Selenes, Simon Magus
which at Ty^us a city of Phoenices had maynteyned the brothell house or
stues, were admytted of the Romans for their execrable sorceryes, to be
worshypped for Gods with yearly sacryfyces. Look Justinius, Irenaeus, and
Eusebius Caesariensis, all ancient writers.

In England here sumtyme, might no bishop ride, Bishops.
but upon a mare, as testyfyeth Bedas li. ij. ca. xiij. Cestrie^sis, li. v. ca.
xij. and Robbert Fabiane, Pa. v. ca. cxxx. Which holy obseruacyon they had from
Rome, and it is not without mystery of their buggerysh beastlynesse. The great
aduouterer Pope Sergius, Sergius
after certain reuelacyons and miracles of the devil, brought fourth a great
chyste full of dead mennys bones, and caused the people both to kiss them and
to worshypp them in the head church of Rome, to double the whoredom there.
This wytnessyth first Bedas de temporum ratione, and than both Platina and
Petrus Equilinus. All these uncomely hystoryes considered, Rome with her
unchaste vows and votaryes, Rome.
is that blasphemouse Babylon, Apocal. xvo. and that Sodom and Egypt, Apo.
xi. whom all the scriptures detesteth. Her cytezens are they, whom God has
given up into most prodygyouse lusts of uncleanness, for changynge his truth
to a lie. For they under the professyon of chastyte, leauyng the natural use
of women (says S. Paul) have brent in their own lusts one to an other,
Sodomytes.
that man with man, that is to say, monk with monk, nonne with nonne, fryre
with fryre, and pressed with pressed, wrought fylthynesse. Roma. i. besides that
they ded with boys bitches and apes with other beasts, yea, the holye^t
fathers of the^. If ye spell Roma backwarde, Roma.
ye shall find it love in this prodygyouse kind, for it is preposterus amor,
a love out of order or a love against kind. I shame no more to tell this to
the Popes remnau^t here in England, than they shame to blaspheme marryage which
is Gods holy instytucyon, Papists.
and to play still the whoremasters and Sodomytes in every corner. The
eternal God ones clearly deliver this Christian laud from that monstruouse
generacyon. Amen.

Johan Bale to the Reader.
IT will be thought of many (most gentle reader) that I have not herin done
well, in bringing so many fylthy examples of the Popes unchaste masmo^gers to
light, Examples.
which ought rather to have been buried in oblyuyon. I wyshe these to consydre
whose vices the scripture hydeth, and whose it detecteth to rebuke and shame.
The same God which covered the nakedness of Adam and Eve with skynnes after
their fall, Adam.
Gene. iij. The same God has dyscouered the shame of Babylon (which now is the
Romysh church) and showed fourth her uncomely preuytees, according to
promise, Esaias. xlvij. Behold (says the lord of hosts) I will bring thine
own ways upon thine head, Ezech. xvi. I will upon the, Holy church.
thou bewtyfull harlot and maistres of witchcraft (says God) and will pull thy
clothes over thy head, that I may show thy nakedness amon^e the Heythen,
and thy shame among the kyngedomes. I will cast durte upon the, to make the
be abhorred and a gasynge stock, Nahum iij for he that commytteth aduoutry,
gets him self shame and dishonor, such as never shall be put out of
memory. Prouer. vi. The author.
Partly have these with a great sort more of the scriptures, provoked me to
fynysh this work, partly the incessaunt calling on of a great nombre of men
both worshypfull, godly, and learned, which with David, Psalm. Cxxxviij. do
perfyghtly, and thoroughly hate these bandy brothels, contempners of marriage,
and utter enemies of God. I have often told them (I hope, in the zele of God)
that I would as little abashe to show their fylthy acts, by the witness of
their own legendes and Chronycles, as they have abashed to do them. I have
tarryed these four years, tarryed.
sens I wrote the first part of this work, to behold their repentance for
this kind of wickedness, and I find them now more wyllfull and peruersed in
their deuylysh opinion than before. Therefore will I now ernestly detect the
Sodometrouse acts of their holy Romysh chastyte. The admonyshementes of S.
Paul, to their forefathers the Romans, of their hypocresy, Ghostly fruytes.
ly^s, falsehede, uncleanness, ydolatry, prodygyouse lusts, defylynges of
body, chaungynge of the natural use into an use against nature, and other
unspeakable beastlynesse, Roma, i. have they not regarded, but have wrought
those most execrable myscheues, and work them still in effect without
repentance. Therefore will I declare them in effect to cause gods people (as
necessary it is) effectually to abhor them. Judge me not herein to give a
doctrine of vice, Doctrine.
but rather an earnest doctrine to the contrary, in contempt of such
abhomynacyons as that college of the devil has offered to the world for
precyouse fruttes of spirytuall holiness. Vale.

The shame of Aegipt shall be dyscouered. They that dwell in the yles, shall se
even the same day.

Esaias. xx. Ad illustrissimum Anglorum regem Edvuardum sextum, Ioannes Balaeus.


Of old hystoryes we have it, not only to consydre what things has happened
unto us before, but also to be ware in time to come, that we may make the
kingdom guyet and peaceable for all men. Hester. xvi.

The second part or contynuacyon of the English votaries, comprehendynge their
unchaste examples for. CC. years space, from the year a thousand from
Christ's incarnacyon, to the reign of king Johan, collected of their own
writers by Johan Bale.
The ring leader of our votaries.
IN the. xx. chaptre of S. Iohans reuelacyon, is it said, that when the
thousand years are ones expyred, Satan shall be losed out of his preson,
Satan.
1000.
and shall go out at large to deceive the people, which are in the. iiij.
quarters of ye earth, Gog and Magog. By Syluester the second of that name,
Syluester. ij.
sumtyme a monk of Floryake, which by his Necromancy obtained the Papacy of
Rome, or general vycarshypp of the devil, in this full thousand year from
Christ's incarnacyon, was that commen adversary set at large, to wurke his
unspeakable myscheues by the lecherouse locustes of the pytt bottomless, the
bishops, monks, and prestes. Benno Cardinalis in uita Hildebrandi.

This Syluester and his successors were those Angels of darkness, Darkness.
which took from him the chain, wherewith Christ had tied him up, for that
thousand years space, which was the true ministracyon of his mighty word, and
so sent him forth abroad by most deuylysh doctrynes, in hypocresy to maynteyne
all kinds of ydolatry and fleshely fylthouse living. For the more lucky speed
of this new enterprise, this Syluester relygyousely gelded him self, as
Saturnus ded his father, Saturnus.
as the old poets feign, and as was also seane by the wanton examples of
Nero, Aurelius and Palumbus the pressed, dedycatyng his stones in a foul
sacryfyce to Satan, that the pretensed chastyte of his unchaste clergy,
Chastity
might thereby have the more prosperouse success. This stone offering of
Syluester, found I regestred in an old written Chronycle at Calys. xxviij.
years ago, Martinus Carsulanus, Vincentius, Vuernerus, and Albertus Crants,
agreynge sumwhat to yt same. In the same thousand year from Christ's
incarnacyo^ a most terryble earthquake befell, 1000.
and a most horrible comete or blasyng sterre was sent in ye sky, the. iiij.
day of Dece^b. as testyfieth Christianus Massaeus, Vincentius, and Antoninus.

The former hystoryes declared.
FOr a further manyfestacyon of the matters alleged, concerning Saturnus,
Nero, Aurelius, and Pasumbus, ye shall first understand, that Saturnus being
the son of Coelum and Vesta, Saturnus.
with a syckle cut of the preuye parts of his father, and threw them into the
sea. Whereof with the froth of that ragynge gulf, the fabulouse Poets
reports Venus to be engendered, which was the first mother of the pagane
prestes chastyte, and Vesta the begynnar of their nonnes, Vesta.
of her called Vestalles. This writes Marcus Cicero in libro ij. de natura
deorum, Macrobius in saturnalibus, and ^ebastianus Murrho in commentarijs
Mantuani, So was Nero, and after him Aurelius given to lascynyousnesse,
Aurelius.
that the one gelded male children to use them instead of women, and the other
when his lusts were past, gelded him self into a preposterous office of
Venery. Ioannes huttichius in uitis Caesarum Palumbus was a pressed of Rome,
Palumbus
in the art of Necromancye most depely learned. This chaplayne of the devil,
was a general prouyder for the oyled fathers there, that their fleshly heates
might be quenched in the dark, by other mennys wives and daughters, without
blemysh of their virgynall vow. When this pressed should dye, An offering.
he slytt of his genytalles, and threw them to the devil, as a reward for all
his labors taken in that conueyaunce, as will hereafter apere more at large.
Ex Guilhelmo Malmesburiensi, Ranulpho Cestrensi, Matthaeo VVestmonasteriensi,
Vincentio, and VVernero.

The study and succession of Prelates.
BEnno the Cardynall says, in the life of Pope Hyldebrande, that this most
deuylysh Syluestre, Syluestre.
after the full accomplyshement of this myllenary of years, Apo. xx.
rysynge out of the deep pyt of Gods permyssyon, ded many times to his
dyshonourynge, make sacryfyce to ye devil, obtaynynge thereby an end sumwhat
like his deseruynge. Yet left he discyples many behind him, whom he had
dylygently taught in the most deuylysh art of Necromancy, to hold the Romysh
church in that scole, and to prospere the kingdom of Satan in his going
forth at large, most specially. ij. Theophylactus and Laurentius, which
poisoned all the world with that myschefe. After the death of this Syluestre,
contynuall strife was among his dyscyples, Dyscyples.
who should obtain the Papacy. But he that had Theophylactus and Laurentius on
his side, he went away with the garlande most commenly, and sat in that seat
of Pestylence, till a poison were provided to fatche him away, if he wrought
not to their commodyte. Thus followed in that race, Johan ye. xviij which within
five months was poysened, Fathers
than Johan the xix. that tasted of the same ere the year came out, than
Sergius the. iiij, than Benedict the. viij. and Johan the. xx. which both were
uncles to Theophylactus. After that followed the said Theophylactus, called
Benedict the ix. which after. xv. years sold the Papacy to Johan Gracyan his
sorcerouse companyon for a great sum of money, Sorcerers.
and was in the end strangeled of the devil, as he was doing his feats in a
forest. The rest of this rabble will I show in Hyldebra^de, which was of them
in that art, a most dylygent dyscyple. Martinus Carsulanus and Baptista Platina
in uitis pontificum, Two princes.
does plainly report, that Otho the third Emprour and Robert the French
king, were Syluesters dyscyples in the science of art Magyck, and ded their
true service in the kingdom of Antichrist, becommynge his two sons in their
posteritees.

The sorcerouse procedynges of Syluester.
NEcessary do I think it, not to leave this sorcerouse Syluester thus, but
further to declare his ungodly begynnynges and procedynges. Wyllyam of
Malmesbury, Vincentius, Ranulphus and Rogerus Cestrenses, and Matthew of
Westminster reports in their famous writings, that he was a French man
borne, called Gerebertus first of all, and also that he was a professed monk
of Fleryake not far from Orleaunce, where as he tasted the first pryncyples
of Necromancy. Necroma^cy.
From thens he went to Hilpalis in Spain, and so long remained there with a
Saracene most expert in that art, till he had coppyed out and stolen all his
bobes, by help of his daughter with whom he had been famylyar, specially one
book which was to himself most secret. To prospere in this pelf, chefely to
escape the mortal danger of this Saracene, Oblacyon.
till he were on the other side of the sea, he gave himself wholly to the
devil, promising to be his perpetual servant. Many dyscyples he had in
this art, as is said before, Chefely Constantyne the Abbot of Saint Maximyne by
Orleaunce, Lotharius the archebyshop of Senona, Adelbolde the bishop of
Wirtzenburg, Otho the Emprours son, and Robert the son of Hugh Capet the
French king. Princes.
By this Robert was he first made archebyshopp of Remis in France, than by
Otho archebyshopp of Rauenna in Italy, and last of all the great bishop of
Rome by the deuyls prouysyon. According to this old verse. Scandit ad R.
Gerebertus ab R. post Papa uigens R. He clymed from R to R till he thryftely
came to R. That is to say, from Remis to Rauenna, and from Rauenna to Ro^e. He
set up a brazen head, Promocyons
of whom he always received answers, as that he should be Pope, and that be
should not dye till he sange Mass at Jerusalem.

The Popes eleccyon from hen^ fourth.
Immediately after this solucyon or setting at large of Satan, many wonderful
things followed to the perfourmaunce of his wicked kyngedome in the Romysh
Papacy. Papacy 1001.
First the eleccyon of their monstruouse Pope, the next year after was taken
clearly from the commen people by the clergy, and given to his own famylyars,
which anon after were called the college of calkers, Cardynalles I should say,
with these. ij. crafty clauses. Docendus est populus, non sequendus. The people
is to be taught of us, but not followed. Ioo^nes Baconthorpe.
Mayor est dignitas legis quae regit spiritu sancto, quam legis saecularis.
More worthy is that law which governs by the holy Ghost, than the law
secular, or the law whereby the multitude is governed. By this they judged God
to be the auctor of their deuylysh decrees, Decrees
and the cyuyle laws, of princes a thing of naught. Look Johan Baconthorpe in
prologo quarti sententiarum. quaest. x. Not long after this was the empire of
Rome, Empire 1002.
in their high dyspleasure, translated from their old fryndes the French men
to the sturdy Germans, as before from the Greeks to the French men, as they
found the^ not fytt for their turn. And this was their polycy. They perceived
the Germans to be the strongar people, Germans.
and at that day their high fryndes by the monks conueyaunces, and therefore
most fytt to defend their fleshely lybertees. Anonymus quidam de nobilitatis
origin cap. xi. Thus became the French king Antichrists younger son,
Yongar son.
which before time had been his whole right hand in Pipyne and in Charles the
great. Ri^ngmannus Philesius in descriptione Europae, cap ix.

The electours and confyrmacyon of the Emprour.
IN the second year after a thousand from Christ's incarnacyon, the
electours of the Emprour were appointed. Electours. 1002.
vij. for that great Antichrists commodyte, his confirmacyon, oath, and
coronacyon always reserved to his own precyouse fatherhede. Of these. vij.
electours, three were archebyshoppes, three were temporal princes, and the last
was a king. The archebyshop of Magunce over all Germany, the archebyshop of
Tryere over all France, and the archbishop of Coleyne over all Italy, were
constytuted high chauncellers of the Empire, Chauncellers.
as watch men to take heed, least any thing should in those quarters pass to
the holy fathers dishonor. The marquis of Brandenburg was ordained
chamberlayne, the duke of Saxon, the sword bearer, Princes
and the Palatyne of Rhene the chief seruytour at the Emprours eleccyon, with
cup, keye, and sword afterward to dyspatche him (as has been seane) if he
were not to holy church profitable. The king of Beme being butler, comes in
last of all as an arbiter or vmpere, if they can not agree to their spiritual
behoue. After that, Pyllars
four dukes, four marquesses, four landgraues, four burgraues, four earls,
four barons, four fre lords, four knights, four cities, four borowes, and
four carles were appointed as strong mighty buttrasses to assist this new
ordinance. Martinus Carsulanus in chronico, Ringmannus Philesius in praefato
opere, and Rodolphus Gualtherus in Homilia ij. de antichristo. By this occasyon
(says Wyllyam Caxton in his Englysh Cronicle, Par. vi.) the Egle lost many
feathers, The Egle.
and in the end shall be left all naked.

Mass, Purgatory, and musycke.
ABout this time (says Johan Wycleue) began the heresy of the consecrate
host, or bread God of the Papists, whereby they sought the utter destruccyon of
faith, by setting up of a most parelouse ydoll of their own making, An ydol
in ye place of Jesus Christ our sauer and redemer. Which heresy anon after
Berengarius Turonensis by the word of God most strongely wythstode, so ded one
Bruno the bishop of Angew, and VValeranus the bishop of Medburg, which were men
of most excellent life and learning, as their very enemies witnesses,
Hildebertus Cenomanensis, Thomas Walden, and Ioannes Tritemius. Odilo the
abbot of Cluniake, Odilo abbas. 1010.
practysed about the same very time, by help of ij. most crafty knaves an
anchor and a pilgrim, to deliver sowles by Masses and diryges, from the
terryble torments of a flamynge purgatory, Purgatory.
whom they had conceived by S. Gregoryes dyaloges and by the boylynge mount of
Ethna in the land of Cycyle. This Odilo procured of Pope Johan the xix. the
commemoracyon of sowles to be celebrated in the church, the next day after the
feast of all saints. Ranulphus Cestrensis, li. vi. ca. xv. and Petrus
Equilinus. Osbernus a monk of Canterbury, Osbernus 1010.
which had been famylyar with Dunstane, practysed new points of musyck, and
his example in Italy followed Guido Aretinus, to make the veneracyon of ydolles
more pleasant. Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, Vincentius, and Tritemius. Thus
began the hypocresye of Lecherouse monks and prestes, Hypocresy.
to abuse the symplycyte of the ignorant people, and strongely to confound
their Christen believe by tryfelynge superstycyons and ceremonies. Anon after
ded they add the crafty inuencyons of profane philosophers, that they might
the more wyttely deceive the plain sort, Philosophy.
and the more craftily deprave the holy scriptures.

A pressed and his lovely daughter.
ALl things in the Papacy and empire to their carnal commodyte thus dysposed,
the Romysh clergy satled themselves all the world over, in ye abundaunt
pleasurs of Sodom, Sodom
which were (as the prophet rehearceth) pride, plenty of feadynge, solacyouse
pastymes, ydelnesse, and cruelty, Ezech. xvi. Given were they to lascyuyouse
lusts and most prodygyouse occupyenges in the flesh, burning in aduoutry
(for contempt of marryage) as it were an oven that the baker heateth. Osee.
vij. Mark our English hystoryes in confyrmacyon of the same. For about this
time (Johan Capgraue says, in catalogo sanctoru^ Angliae) a devout holy pressed
(an ydell kneane you will say) went fourth every morning into his church
yearde, A pressed 1010.
and hallowed the granes there, with the. vij. Psalms and the Letany for all
Christen sowles. On a time this pressed found a maid child a^ the cross
there, all wrapped and swadled in cloutes, for whom he not only provided a
nurse, but also brought her up in nourtour and learning, taking her ever
after for his daughter, as (I doubt it not) but he had just cause. As this
we^che ones grew to conuenyent age, A we^che
her beauty so ta^gled his fleshely heart, that he vnfacyably brent in her
concupiscens. And as he on a day had cowched her naked in his bed, anon he
remembered his chaste vow (they say) and so turned his face to the door,
dysmembrynge himself with a sharp cuttle in her presence. And so throwynge
fourth that trashe which tempted him (if the legende be true) at the last he
made her an holy vowesse and veyled nonne to serve the spiritualte. This act
of prestish maydenhede, was dysclosed first in Irelande by a parliament of
deuyls, Deuyls
within the garden of an old father Hermyte, not far from S. Partrykes
purgatory, where as they showed themselves sore grieved with this pressed, for
redemynge sowles by latyne Psalms, out of their dark dominion, Look Johan
Capgraue postuitam Vu^fini episcopi.

Other hystoryes more of this age.
Wilfhilda was a young wenche, Wilfhilda.
whom king Edgare ones chaced, in the way of lechery, from Wynchester to
Warwell, and from Warwell to Wylton. And as she by the secret counsel of
monks, was become a professed nonne, he gave her the nonnery of Barkynge,
Barkinge.
adding thereunto the revenues of. xxiiij. vyllages, gorgyously to maynteyne
both her and her systers to the relygyouse occupyenge of bishops and of
monks. For when Ethelwolde bishop of Wynchester came thydre on visytacyon,
her love was so plentuouse and mighty toward him, that there was no good
chere to seek. Good chere.
Though the tappe were all day sterynge (the storye says) yet was there o
drink wantynge at night, and all by miracle of the said Wilfhilda*
Nevertheless at the last, by special help of Altrude the queen, the prestes
with their wives ^btayned Barkynge, the monks veyled spowses removed from
thens to Horton, for more than. xx. years space. Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis,
and Ioannes Capgraue. A like example to this latter act, showed Ethelgarus the
archebyshop of Canterbury after the death of Dunstane, Ethelgarus.
which more than. xx. years before, drove the monks out of Canterbury and
brought in the prestes with their wives. But he was shortly dyspatched for his
labor, not contynuynge in that rowme a year* And Siricius a monk succedynge
in that office, Siricius
restored again the hypocry^y^h monks in the year of our lord. DCCCC and.
xc. 990.
the prestes with vyolence expelled. Anonymus quidam in historiarum rhapsodijs.
Many such turmoylynges had England in those days by Satan's procurement, to
make that Romysh spirytualte a very Sodom and stynkynge iakes of hell.

Deuyls buffetynge and temptynge of monks.
IN the city of Bathe, Elphegus builded a great monastery of monks, Elphegus
1010.
which in process fell to so corrupt kinds of living, that one of them which
had been a ring leader in their night potacyous and lecherouse watchynges,
suddenly fell mad and dyed. The abbot at mydnyght hearing a noise, looked out
at the wyndowe, and beheld. ij. deuyls lashynge upon ye monks carkeys. ij.
devils
And as that wretch (says the storye) made claim to the suffrages of the
mass, they gave him this answer. Thou obeydest not God, therefore we will not
obey the. Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, li. ij. de pontificibus, Their power.
and Ranulphus Cestrensis, li. vi. ca. xvi. Rogerus Cestrensis, li. vi. ca.
xxiij. By this ye may se that the deuyls power is greater than is the power of
the popes mass, or yet of a monks cowle. Yet find we it written, that in an
other monastery, a monk showed unto his abbot, how grievously he was in his
flesh tormented, by the fiery concupiscence thereof. Anon he gave him his own
coat to do on, A cowle.
and with that his lust so abated, that ever after he was found chaste, the
devil making great lamentacyon for it. Vincentius in speculo, and Antoninus
in secundo historiarum to^^o. This story confounds the other, a monks cowle
so terryfyenge the devil, and asswagynge the heates of the flesh. A
wonderful thing was it, that so much virtue could not be found in wholesome
marriage, The virtue.
being Gods necessary instytucycyon, as in the superstycyouse coat of a handy
brothell monk. God of a likelyhode was not wise enough in his first
prouysyons, that he so neglygently forgate these monkysh remedies against those
heates in the flesh. O hypocryte knaves and Sodomytes. Hypocrytes.


Saint Iues water, and Saint Walstanes miracles.
SAint Iues water was in those days, about the year of our lord. S. (...)
a M. and. xij. very wholesome for the femynyne gender. For a certain woman
complained her unto the pryor of Ramsey in in confession, that a lecherouse
sprete had many nyghtes occupied with her in the likeness of an hare. I pray
God it were not some hongry sorcerer of that abbey. And he gave her counsel
devoutly to drink of that water, The water.
which was unto her ever after (the storye says) as a water well against all
his busye assaults. If ye search Johan Capgraue in uita Iuonis episcopi ye
shall find it a matter more uncomely, than may with honestye be expressed.
Saint Walstane of Bawburgh. S. Walstane.
iij. miles from Norwych, was neither monk not pressed, yet vowed he (they say)
to live chaste without a wife, and performed that promise by fasting of the
frydaye and good saints vygyls, without any other grace or gift given of god.
He dyed in the year of our lord a M. and xvi in the third calendes of June,
1016.
and became after the m^ner of Priapus the God of their feldes (...) Northfolke
and gyde of their haruestes, (...) mowers and sithe folowers seeking him ones
in ye year. Look his legende in ye Cataloge of Johan Capgraue, Capgraue.
prouyncyall of the Augustyne fryres, and ye shall find there, that both men
and beasts which had lost their preuy parts, had new members members.
again restored to them by thy^ Walstane. Mark this kind of miracles for
your learning, I think ye have seldom read the like.

A blasynge star, Canulus and Fulbertus.
IN the year of our lord a M. and xvij apared in the sky by the space of iiij
months, 1017.
a most wonderful blasyng star, in manner of a great burning beam, as
shows Sigebertus and Sabel^icus Many have judged this, to be the same star,
A star.
which fell from heaven like a flamynge creshet, Apoca. viij. for the
alteracyon of doctrine and of conuersacyon, which in those days chanced in
the universal church, and specially h^re in England. For Canutus a Dane,
Canutus.
be^nge the same year constytute king of England, followed much the
superstycyouse counsel of Achelnotus than archebyshopp of Canterbury, as
witnesses Polydorus, Fabyane and Caxton. He builded the abbeyes of S. Benett^s
in Northfolke and S. Edmonds Bury in Sothfolke, Abbeye^.
he translated the stynkynge bones of Elphegus from London to Canterbury, and
provoked the people to worshypp them. He went vndyscretly on pilgrimage to
Rom^, and there founded an hospytall for Englysh pilgrims. He gave the Pope
most p^ecyouse gifts, and burdened his land with an yearly trybute, called
ye Rome shot. Rome shot.
He shrymed the body of Berinus, and gave both lands and ornaments to the
cathedral church of Wynchestre. Anonymus quidam, Alphredus Beuerlacensis, and
Ricardus Diuisiensis. Yea, by the sorcerouse inchauntmentes of that lechour
Achelnotus, he feared dead men, he judged monks bastardes to be his own
children, Bastardes.
he crowned an ydoll with the crown of this realm, and believed that Mary
Christ's mother nurryshed Fulbertus the bishop of Carnote in France, Fulbertus
with the milk of her breasts in his syckenesse. Radulphus Niger, Guilhelmus
Malmesburiensis, VVernerus and Vincentius. Se here what power the devil had in
this kingdom of darkness. The prelates were able in those days, to make the
great princes of the world to believe, that our lady gave suck to an old
bishop a thousand years almost after her death. Gene suck.
Mark this point for your learning.

The co^ueyaunce of prelates in this age.
But ye must consydre that at Carnotus was a church of our lady in building,
A church
which could not well be fynyshed without such clarkely co^ueyaunces. And by
this means bycame Canutus a great benefactour thereunto. The prelates, as
bishops, abbotes, and prestes (for their co^modyte, ye must well know) were
so good to this Danysh usurper (ye cronycle says) yt they in receyuyng him for
their king at Southampton, utterly renou^ced by oath, ye successyo^ of their
natural Englysh king Etheldrede, causinge ye no^ylyte to consent to ye same.
Yea, and to bring ye spyghtful enterprise of theirs to full effect, they hired
a cruel traitor, O traitors.
called Edricus, to slay king Edmonde ^ronsyde his natural heir, and caused
ye ^eyd Canutus to send his. ij. sons Edmonde and Edward into Denmark to
be slain, O caytyfes.
to extynguysh that succession or ^yscent of Englysh blood, and so to
ouer^hrowe ye majesty of this nacyon for there ^ryuate commodyte. Alphredus
Beuerlacen^is, Ranulphus, Rogerus, Treuisa, Ioannes Cap^raue, Polydorus, atque
alij historiographi. By means of this Achelnotus also, an hun^red talentes of
silver, and one talent of ^olde were given at Papia in Italy, for ^he wythered
arm of S. Augustyne, ther^ith to augment the ydolatry here in En^lande. For
Idolatry
Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, li. ij. de ^gibus. And as concerning Burye ab^eye
before mencyoned. Bury abbey.
It was first a col^ge of prestes, founded by king Ethel^ane in the year of
our lord. DCCCC. ^^v. 925.
and now at the suit of Ailwyne ^yshopp of Helmam in Southfolke, it ^as
changed by king Canutus, to a mo^^sterye of Benettes monks, in the year of
our lord a M. and xxi. 1021.
ye prestes with their wives and children dyscharged. Chronicon Buriense, ac
^oannes Lelandus in commentario cygneae cantionis.

The Emprour married Canutus daughter.
IN the year of our lord a M. and xxxvi. 1036.
Henry the second Emprour of that name, married Guynylde the daughter of the
aforeseyd Canutus ye king of Euglande. This Henry had a systre, which was a
professed nonne. So inteyrly he loved this systre of his, that often times he
would have her to lie within his palace, very nygh to his own preuye chamber.
In a winter night a soul chaplayne of ye courtelaye with her, A chaplayne
which had been diverse times complained of before. In the morning, least his
fotynge should be seane in the snow newly fallen that night, she took him up in
her neck, and carried him out of the court toward his chamber. Coueyaunce.
The Emprour chanced to rise at that hour, as his custom was, to make water,
and se the pageaunt. Anon after fell a byshopryck which the pressed gaped for,
and the governance of a nondrye which the nonne desired. Whereupon the Emprour
called them unto him, the one after the other. Take that benefyce to you.
(says he to the priest) but saddle no more the nonne, Promocyons.
And you the abbeye (says he to his systre) and horse no more the pressed.
Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, li. ij. de regibus, Ranulphus, li. vi. ca. xxi.
Polychronici. and Vincentius, li. xxv. ca. xviij. Speculi historialis. Here
were a couple of no badde governors in that spirytualte, All holy
but al was chaste relygyon, so long as marryage was absent. Thus could the
worldely rulers tha^ laugh upon wickedness, and suffer virtue and
righteousness to dwell under contempt with Christ.

Two diverse examples for that age.
ANother nonne was there, at the same very time, whom a certain rich man took
out of the monastery and married, A nonne
not far from the said Emprour, because she complained her that she could not
live chaste. The bishop of the dyocese having knowledge thereof, by this
Emprours assystence, dyssolued that marryage, and sent her again to the
cloystre. Afterward this man, when he se his time, As a wife,
took her out again, and kept her in house with him. In the end they were
both excommunycated of the bishop, and could never obtain their absolucyon.
Antedicti autores cum Ioanne Treuisa. This Emprour had also in his chapel a
singing man, a pressed, A pressed.
which had both a good voice and was well learned, but inordynatly he loved a
certain whore not far of, which was not unknown unto him. On a day to prove
a mastry, the Emprour commanded him to say mass before him, which he utterly
refused to do, for so much as he had lain with that whore the night before. If
thou say no mass (says the Emprour) I bannysh the both ye court and
country. Say Mass
I am well contented, says the pressed, and so by and by with his stuff
departed. The Emprour with that, called the pressed again, and much commending
his constauncy, rewarded him with the next byshopryck that fell. autores
praefati cum Antonino. Thus is whoredom much made of still, Whoredom.
but marryage (whom God left for an honest, yea and an holy remedy for that
disease) is not yet by the doctrine of S. Paul persuaded, i. Cor. vij.

Lechery for lucre does great miracles.
ALwinus the bishop of Wynchestre in the year of our lord a M. and xliiij.
Alwinus.
1044
was of S. Edward the king committed with imprysonment, to ye examynacyon of
the clergy, for being to famylyar with Emma his mother, Emma.
or for lyenge with her whether ye will, and she put to the nondry of Warwell
till the day of her purgacyon. It was laid to her charge (says Polydorus)
that she of myschefe had married Canutus the Taken which was a cruel enemy to
the land, consequently that she had nothing helped but rather hyndred her
natural children in exyle, whom she had before by king Etheldrede, and finally
the rumor was, that she had dysceytfully sought their destruccyo^s to prefer
ye Danysh blood to ye crown of England, Danysh blood
to the great derogacyon of ye same. Ricardus Diu^siensis reports, that
Robert the archebyshop of Canterbury gave euydence against her, that she had
consented to the murder of her elder son Alphrede, A traitor.
and procured poison for her yongar son S. Edward, and that she had joined
her self in that treason with her lovely peramoure the bishop of Wynchestre
before named. But se what followed in the end. After she had ones commoned with
ye spiritual prelates, and given unto S. Swythunes abbeye in Wynchestre, the
possessyon of ix. lordeshyppes or mayners, she was able by help of S. Swythune
to go barefoted upon ix. burning plough shares of Iron, Miracles.
for that bishops trial and hers. On. iiij. for her self, and on. v. for
her sweet lover, and to do other miracles besides. But ye must first consider,
that she was borne over them betwyn. ij. bishops, which knew before hand how
to qualyfy those heates, and that the king being a simple man, was easy to
deceive. Ricardus Diuisiensis, An ydyote.
Guilhel. Malmes. Marianus Scotus Thomas Rudborne, Ioa^nes Capgraue post uita^
vvlstani, and Robertus Fabiane, part. vi. cap. ccx

S. Edward voweth chastyte in bed.
REported it is in the legende of lies which was wont with solemnyte to be
read in temples of the Papists, that after this king Edward was married to
Editha the daughter of earl Goodwyne, Edward
they both bring together in bed, vowed a perpetual chastyte, and therein
perseuered to the end of their lives. There continued in them (says the
legende) a conjugal love without conjugal act, and favorable imbracynges
without ye deflourynge of byrgynite. As though marryage were an enteraunce into
vyole^t whoredom, Marryage.
and a filthy deflourer of virgynyte, which rather sanctyfyeth it to increace
to Gods honor, as in Abraham and Sara, Zachary and Helisabeth. For in the^ was
marryage a great blessing of God, Gene. xxi. and a way of righteousness
without reprove, Luce. i. as it is in all the^ which be of like faith. Edward
was beloved (says the legende) but not corrupted. Legenda
Editha had fauer, yet was she not touched. As a new Abisag, she warmed the
king with love, but she lowsed him not by lecherouse lust. She delyted him with
sweet obsequyes, yet made she him not plyaunt to fleshly desires. In the same
lowsy legende more over is it written, that this Edward called marryaged a
fearful ship wrecke of maydenhede, Blasphemy.
comparynge it to the fyery furnace of the Caldeanes, Dani. iij. to the
mantell, which Joseph left in the hands of an whore, Gene. xxxix. to the
lascyuyouse outrage of the. ii. false prestes, which would have oppressed
Susanna, Dani. xiij, and to the fylthy intycementes of dronken Holophernes
toward fair Judith the servant of God, Judith. xij. Of a far other sprete
was S. Paul than was this Edward, S. Paul
when he called the married Corintheanes a chaste virgyne coupled to Christ for
their Christian beleues sake. ij. Cor. xi.

The Chronycles confuteth this deuylysh dream.
FOr a confutacyon of this practysed fable and most deuylysh error, Error.
let us se what ye Chronycles shows of the matter, which contain much more
truth than their quere legendes. Ricardus Diuisiensis says, that by fear and
terror of death, Edward was compelled to the marryage of Editha. And
Polydorus reports, that for hate of her father, which had slain his elder
brother Alphrede, he utterly refused her again, feysynge her goods at his
pleasure. Ranulphus and Anonymus shows, Testymonyes.
that he depryued her of all quenely honor, and put her into the abbeye of
warwell, with one only maid to wait upon her, so co^myttynge her to the
straight keeping of ye abbess there. Wy^lyam of Malmesbury and Marianus Scotus
says, yt after he had married her, Editha.
he neither put her from his bed nor yet carnally knew her. But whether yt
was for hate of her kyndred, or in purpose of chastyte, they can not dyffyne.
And Robert F^byane confesses the same in his chronycle, part. vi. ca. ccx.
These testymonyes considered, se what sure ground these oyled hypocrytes the
monks and the prestes have to advance in Edward their sodomytycal chastyte
against Gods fre instytucyon, Hypocrytes.
magnyfyenge his wife to ye stars in their letanyes, with Sancta Editha ora
pro nobis. Johan Capgraue rehearceth, that the peers of his realm had
persuaded him to marry, that his own lawful children might succeed him in yt
governance thereof, to the godly quetyng of the same, as ded David, Solomon,
Ezechias, Examples.
Josias, and other holy kings of ye Hebrews. But se what plage followed of this
Edwardes hypocresy by the perverse counsel of those ydell whysperers and
lecherouse leaders. Such an whores bird, bastard, stranger, and enemy
obtained the crown, as brought Englysh people in most miserable subieccyon,
Subieccyon.
that well was he which within his own nacyon might say. I am none Englysh
man. Ranulphus, Mattheus Paris, Capgraue, Fabianus, and Polydorus.

A voice heard, but not much regarded.
Nevertheless it is read of this Edward, ye lyenge on his death bed, he
heard this voice in a dream. A voice
The inyquyte of England (of ye clergy it wuld have said) provoked God to
wrath. The prestes have swerued from the lords testament, and with poluted
heart and hands do their office vnpurely. These be no natural shepherdes, but
hired strangers. Strangers.
These defend not ye flock, but suffer ye wolffe to take his pleasure of
the^. They only seek ye milk and the wolle, ye sheep they care not for, yt
hell is now redye to swellowe them in both. The gydes of ye people are bycome
unfaithful, next co^panyons to thieves, and robbers of their country. Neither
fear they God nor regard the law. The veryte they hate, ye right they
conte^pne, and cruelte they only regard. Neither have the prelates
righteousness, Prelates.
nor their chaplains and curates any godly discipline. Therefore will ye lord
whet his sword, his bow has he bent and made it ready. His ire and
indignacyo^ will he show to ye people, and send them ill angels to vex them,
according to his appointment. All this and much more has Johan Capgraue, in
Catalogo sanctorum anglicorum. Yet were not those lecherouse lubbers by these
forewarnynges amended. Lubbers
But this Edward they exalted above the moon, and for his unprofitable
chastyte (yea most hurtefull myschefe unto this whole realm) they have ever
sens placed him next Mary the mother of Christ and the holy Evangelist Johan.
Neither omytted they Editha in their letanyes, nor yet Emma his mother in their
commendacyons, New saints.
which had been so depely in love with Alwyne the forenamed bishop of
Wynchestre, that she both forgate him and his brother. Ricardus Diuisiensis cum
caeteris autoribus.

The Papacye, order of Cardynalles, and Swanus.
GRegory the vi. about ye same time, Gregory.
found the Papacy so impoueryshed, and the possessions thereof so demynyshed,
by the lecherouse rule, riot, and excess of his bawdy predecessors, in the
year of our lord a M. and xlvi. 1046
that he had nothing left him, to sustain his own holy fathered and his
Cardynalles with, in the relygyon of spirytuall ydelnesse, but the bare
offerynges and a few rentes there besides. Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis de
regibus, Vincentius, li. xxv ca. xxij. Ioannes de columna, and Antoninus part.
ij. tit. xvi. ca. i. About this time (Johan Carrion says) the gloriouse name of
Cardynalles Cardynalles.
came into an use, estymacyon, or fame, and so was noysed abroad. Whose proud
estate to maynteyne in all voluptuouse pleasurs, this Gregory took in hand the
materyall sword, and ded therewith such murder and myschefe, that the
prelates their selves denied him Christian buryall. Ranulphus cestriensis, ac
Platina in uitis ponti ficum. Swauus the first son of Goodwyne the earl of
West saxons and of Kent, Swauus.
lay many times with Edgyne the abbess of Leof, about the year of our lord
a M. and xlix. 1049
minding in the conclusyon to have married her. And was therefore compelled of
king Edward to flee the realm of England, into Flanders, till such time as
his peace were procured by Aldrede than archebyshop of York and bishop of
Worcestre also. Whereupon in his return he slew earl Beorne his own uncle,
for that he had thereof accused him. At the last was he sent to Jerusalem in
penance, Penance.
and dyed in that journey toward Licia, of a cold. Marianus Scotus,
Ranulphus li. vi. ca. xxiij. and Fabianus, par. vi. ca. ccxij.

Palumbus the pressed, and the witch of Barkeley.
PAlumbus a pressed at Rome, Palumbus.
a great Necromanser and a mighty worker of knaueryes spirytual (which after
some writers, had a Pope to his son) wrought innumerable sorceryes and
legerdemaynes of lechery for yt holy chaste prelates there, to bring every
mannys wife, daughter, or servant that they coueted, to their beds in the
dark. So conning he was in his feats of co^ueyau^ce, and might do so much
among the spretes of venery, that if an other workman of his speculacyon, had
sent fourth a devil of that science, he could cause his devil to supplant
that devil, Deuyls
and so conueye the woman where his mind was to bestow her. Which in
conclusyon set the devils at variaunce, and made the^ cry out of God for so
long time sufferynge that Palumbus in his wickedness to reign. And when this
holy masmonger should dye, he cut of his own members (as is before rehearced)
and gave them to the devil, Members.
byquethyng his evil deeds (which were myscheues unspeakable) to the holy
church and city of Rome. Anonymus, Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, li ij. de
regibus, Vincentius, li. xxv ca, xxix. Ranulphus, li. vi. cap. xxvi. and
Antoninus par. ij. ii. xvi. ca. vii. A like example find we in our Englysh
Chronicles, of Heyla the woman of Barkeley in Barkeshyre, which was both a
wytche and a bawd, knowing all necessary feats in spirytuall prouysyon at
need. A wytch
As this woman was dead (which had always been a frynd to holy church) the
devil rode away with her (they lay) upon a black horse. Forty masses a day
with other good suffrages, Masses.
provided by her son and daughter an holy monk and a nonne, were not able to
stop that passage. Guilhelmus Malmes^uri. li. ij. de regibus. Ranulphus. li.
vi. ca. xxv. Pabianus par. vi. ca. ccxiij. VVernerus, and Hermannus Shedel. In
these. ij. examples ye may behold, what wholesome study holy church had in
those days, Holy church.
and what labors the ghostly governors took upon them, to observe their
solemn vow of chastyte, which may not yet be dyspensed with.

Other chaste miracles about the same time.
IN the year of our lord a M. and liij. 1053.
a solemn fatherly pressed in Irelande, pretendynge much soberness, kept a
great scole of laddes and young wenches. And for so much as he had shorn some
of those wenches and apareled them like boys, Wenches.
the more aptely to come to the fl^shely occupyenge of the^, he was anon after
perceived, taken, and with shame bannyshed that land. Marianus Scotus,
Ranulphus, and Treuisa, li. vi. cap. xxiiij. This feate has been among our
votaryes much practysed in time of their prodygyouse heat^s, as an holy
spyrytuall remedy. Victor the second Romysh Pope of that name, Victor.
in the year of our lord a M. and lvi. held a general synod at Florence in
Italy, 1056.
where as he deposed many bishops and abbottes for symony and fornycacyon.
Guil. Mal. li ij. de pontificibus, Ranulphus, li. vi. ca. xxiiij. Martinus
carsulanus, Pl^tina and Ioannes stella. A subdeacon (they say) which mynystred
to him at mass, put venym in his chalyce, and so poysened him for his labor
Benno cardinalis, Poison
and Valerius anselmusryd Edward the son of king Edmonde Ironsyde, had. ij.
daughters being in exyle, Margrete and Christian. Margarete was godly married
to Malcomus the king of Scotts, and had viij. children by him, of whom. iiij.
reigned as kings after him. Christian by counsel of lascyuyouse monks,
bycame a superstycyouse nonne abhorrynge marryage, Christian.
as Polydorus reports her, by their doctrine of deuyls in hypocresy, so
becummyng a folysh vyrgyne, or else a mete damsel to serve them in the dark.

They laugh at lechery, that frown at marryage.
Never yet came plage of myschefe to this realm, that the Prelates have not
turned to their pryuate commodyte, O trayters.
and fynely laughed and sported the rat in the end. To promote the Danysh
blood to the crown of England, they sought unnaturally to destroy the
Englysh blood ryall, and through fine conueyaunce brought it well to pass, as
is written before. And when it was restored again in Edward, they threw him
into such a cold of hypocresy, Hypocresy.
or symulate chastyte whether ye will, that he dyed without issue, to give
place to the Normanes our most greuouse enemies in the basse blood of a
Bastard. And se what a toye they made thereof, to show themselves no less
joyful of his baudy concepcyon in whoredom, than the people of Jury were in
the blessed natyuyte of holy Johan Baptist in godly marryage. As Robert the
duke of Normandy (say they) rode through the town of Faloys, Duke Robert.
he beheld a skynners daughter called Arlet, daunsyng among maidens, whom he
took with him from thens to his bed for her bewtyes sake. And as he was
coming toward her, to accomplysh his fleshly desire, she rent her smock
from the chynne to the fete, Brotheis.
to make room for him. And as he inquired, what she meant thereby, she made him
this praty answer, say they. It were neither fytt nor comely, that the nether
part of my smock should be turned up, and so touch the lyppes of my lord. At
this merry sentence the duke had great sport, and so have the prelates had ever
sens, for they caused it to be regestred, holy matrymony frowned at and
evermore set at naught. At this fylthy fytt was Wyllyam Bastard begett, A
bastard.
which was afterward called the great conqueror of England, to the great
mysfortune, yea, to the utter shame, confusyon, and undoing thereof in those
days, he being a stranger, a mylbegotten, and so cruel a tyrau^t, as in the
wrath of God he showed himself there, for the ponnyshement of their sins.
Anonymus, Guil. Malmes. li-iij. de regibus Vincentius, Autores.
li xxv. ca. xxxix. Ranulphus, li. vi. ca. xix. Pabianus, par. vi. ca. ccvij.
and Polidorus, li. viij.

Of Stigandus a lecherouse monk with like companyons.
STigandus an hypocryte, Stigandus.
couetouse, ^echerouse, and unlearned, which had defiled his fathers bed
(Johan Capgraue says) and dyuersly oppressed the poor, for his good rule
keeping about the year of our lord a M. and liiij. 1054.
bycame bishop of Shirborne, than of Wynchestre, and finally archebyshopp of
Canterbury. He made hauock of the churches goods, and spent them in most
prodygyouse fylthynesse. And as witnesses Wyllyam of Malmesbury, li. ij. de
pontificibus, unmeet was he rek^ned to be a bishop in those days, A Bishop.
that could not ruffle it out with all pompouse aparel, horses, galaunt
servants, wanton meats, and women, in all lechery and sew denesse. And as
they were sumtymes cast in the tethe, that their conuersacyon was not
according to the Apostles lyu^s, they made a mock at it, commenly excusing
themselves by this hombly verse, Nunc aliud tempus, alij pro tempore mores.
Versus.
Now is it an other manner of time than was than, and requires a far other
fashyon of living. Marianus Scotus, Ranulphus, lib. vi. ca. xxiiij. Pabianus
par. vi. ca. ccxij. and Polydorus, li. ix. About the year of our lord a M.
and. lxxxij. 1082.
one Wyllyam bishop of Durhan dyspossessed the prestes of the college or
cathedral church of Durham because of their wives, Wyllya^
and placed the monks there in their rowmes, as witnesses Polydorus, li. ix.
Anglicae historiae, as he had heard, that king Edgare had done long before in
the church of Excestre. Olyuer a monk of Malmesbury, Olyuer.
of some authors called Elmer, was at the same time so well seane in
Necromancy, that he cou^de with wings fly abroad and work many wonders
Ranulphus li. vi. ca. xxviij. Vincentius, Nauclerus and alij.

Saint Freswydes, and Westmynster sanctuary.
IN the year of our lord a M. and lx. 1060.
was ye church of S. Frideswyde in Oxforde given unto the monks by the chaste
king Edward, Edward
of who^ we have spoken before, at the request of Pope Nycolas the. ij. in
recompense of his pilgrimage that he vowed to Rome, the prestes with their
wives dysplaced utterly. Yet was it afterward restored to them again by his
successor king Haralde, which with other like matter against our prelates,
cost him parauenture his life, the monastery at the last consumed with fire.
Ioannes Capgraue in uita Prideso^d^e. This Romysh Antichrist Nycolas, Nicolas
co^stytuted king Edward his vycar here in England, because he was a chaste
vower, that he and his successors should se that his sodometrouse chastyte were
well there maynteyned. Moreover he gave fredome to the sanctwary of Westminstre
for thieves and for whores, Westminster.
not only to be unto them a place of refuge, but also a sauegarde from
ponnyshment for term of their lives. Ioannes Capgraue in uita Ed^uar di cum
alijs autoribus. O ^hostly founders of chastyte. This great patryaeke of
Sodom, sent fourth Petrus Damianus a monk and Cardynall, Petrus Damianus.
to preach S. Gregory's Dyaloges against married prestes. For he afterward
wrote a book, Antoninus says, par ij. ^i xvi. ca. viij. De direptione
nuptiarum, of the taking away or utter dyssoluynge of marryage. Tritemius
mencyoneth also, that he wrote. ij. books against married prestes, one de
incontinentia sacerdotum, an other de clericorum uxoribus, and. ij. for the
unmarried monks, the one called regula solitariorum, the other de monachorum
profectu.

Berengarius, and the synod of Wynchestre.
MVche a do had Berengarius Turonensis the archediacon of Angew, Berengarius.
with the foreseyd Popet Nycolas, for Christ's natural presence in the
eucharisticall bread, which he had in open preaching and disputacyon denied,
calling both him and his masmongers pulpifices, that is to say, flesh
makers, in his book de Eucharistia. Truly not an holy church (says he) have
the veryte proved that congregacyon, but a malignaunt church, a counsel of
vanyte, and the very seat of Satan. Church
Lanfrancus contra Berengarium. Which opinion he afterward compelled him to
recant, not by force of argument, but by terror of cruel threttenynges.
Notwithstanding he returned again, persystyng more strong than before. Anon
after in the year of our lord a M. and lxix. 1069.
in the general synod at Wynchestre, Wynchestre.
were many bishops and abbotes deposed by the legates of Pope Alexander the
second, for ill rule keeping in bankettes of baudry. Among whom Stigandus was
one, which myserably dyed in preson. Ricardus Diuisiensis, Guilhelmus Malmesbu.
li. i. de pontificibus. Ranulphus lib. vij. ca. i. Fabianus, and Polydorus, li
ix. This Alexander made a constytucyon general, Alexander.
that none should hear the mass of pressed, which kept a concubyne under pain
of excommunycacyon, meaning a married wife. Gracianus monachus in uolumine
decretorum, VVernerus in fasciculo temporum, and Iacobus Bergomas. Yet granted
he that prestes sons might by the Apostles autoryte receive holy orders, A
prouiso.
which includes contradiccyon. Idem Gracianus.

Lanfrancus and his lowsye legerdemaynes.
A Young monk assystynge Lanfrancus the archebyshopp of Canterbury at his
mass, Lanfrancus.
not far from the shryne of Dunstane, beheld a swarm of deuyls, and was
suddenly possessed of one of them. Anon he opened his mouth, and uttered the
good rule of his lecherouse brethren, such matters (says the storye) yea, A
counsel.
so abhomynable and fylthie, as are not to be spoken. Than were they all called
to the chapterhowse, where as it was among them decreed, that all the holy
brethren should be shryue^ of Lanfrancus. Whereby they were anon so new
bournyshed, that in their return the devil had nothing to lay against them.
For the virtue Confession
of confession and absolucyon is such (they say) that it takes from the
^euyll both his wits and remembrance, that he has no longar any power to
accuse them. Forget not this workemanshypp, but mark it well. So good was the
foreseyd Dunstane (they say) to this Lanfrancus, Dunstanus.
that. iiij. score years after his death, he taught him how to recover again
the possessions and lands pelfered away by the kings from his
archebyshopryck. He made open unto him (if dead men may speak) the crafts of
all his enemies, Dead men.
and showed good ways to recover at their hands, and to avoid their cantels.
Ioannes Capgraue in uitis Dunstani and Lanfranci, Vincentius li. xxv. ca.
xxxvii. and Antoninus par. ij. ti. xvi. ca. x. The which Antoninus says, that
Lanfrancus played the same part again at Rome, Lanfrancus.
such time as he impugned there the doctrine of Berengarius concerning the
sacrament. For the which lordely act, Pope Alexander gave him. ij. ma^tels or
Legates robes, one of honor, an other of love. Ranulphus cum caeteris
autoribus.

Bishops change their seats and tytles.
IN the days of king Wyllyam the bastard, the Popes ba^tard bishops here
in England, Bishopryckes
changed their seats and tytles, from ye mean vyllages to ye most famous
cities of ye realm to apere more gloryouse in the reign of their father
Antichrist. As from Dorcestre to Lyncolne, from Lychefelde to Westchestre, from
Thetforde to Norwych, from Shirborne to Salysbury, from Wellys to Bathe, from
Kyrton to Excetur, from Selwey to Chychestre, with such like. And this was done
(some writers says) in the year of our lord a M. and lxviij. 1068.
by a decre of the Popes canons. Ranulphus. li. i. ca.. lij. An oath.
Under the same king also a solemn oath and profession by writynge to the
bastard bishop of Rome was demanded and taken by his vycar Lanfrancus, in the
year of our lord a M. and lxix. 1069.
and so ever after continued from thens fourth. A sore strife besell in the
same self year, A strife.
betwyn these bastard bishops, specially betwyn Lanfrancus of Canterbury and
Thomas Norman of York, which of them should be highest in that mytred kingdom
of ydelnesse. And as they met at Rome, they fell into a great dysputacion of
that matter before Pope Alexandre. Where as Lanfrancus, Lanfrancus.
to amend his own matter, proved the said Thomas to be a prestes son,
Remigius the bishop of Dorsett being present, which (Fabyane says) was a
prestes son also. In the end this Lanfrancus, by the help of Aristotle's
logyck, Gregoryes old constytucyon, and the popes authoryte, obtained both at
Rome and at Wyndesore in England, that Canterbury should from thens fourth have
the superporyte over the sea of York. Canterbury.
He that will behold the mad folyshnesse of this doltysh disputacyon, let him
look Wyllyam of Malmesbury, li. i. de pontificibus, Ranulphi Polychronicon,
lib. vij. ca. ij. Antoninum, Fabianum, atque Polydorum, li. ix.

An old bawdy bishop slain of a wenche.
IN the dyocese and city of Herford was a graye headed bishop, called Walter,
Walter.
that inordynatly loved a young wenche there, which was very conning sowster,
in the year of our lord a M. and lxx. 1070
Yet remembrynge in him self (says the storye) that nothing was more
busemynge, than an old dottynge fool, specially a bishop, so to rage, often
times withdrewe from following that affect. At the lattre as the devil would,
she entered the bishops bed chamber, by entycementes of his chamberlaynes,
the pretense being, that she should there cut them out shyrtes and napkyns.
And as she was in doing her work, those preuy prouyders avoided, A we^che
and the old bawdy bishop came in, as was appointed. He fell to the talk of as
fine brothelry, as any crafts man in that art might utter. And when yt would
not help, he fell to her by force, wrastelynge and tomblynge with her for the
best game. But se what followed immedyatly. As she perceived her self ouercomen,
Overcome.
and that she was no longar able to withstand his lecherouse purpose, she
thrust her sharp sheres whom she had in her hands, up into his share or under
his preuy members with vyolence, and so slew that Babylonysh bore, or ij.
horned got of the devil, as chaste Judith ded Holophernes. Guil. Malmes. li.
iiij. de pontificibus, and Ranulphus, li. vij. ca. ij. A commen practyse of
chaste relygyon keeping, A practyse.
have this been among ye horned prelates and oyled prestes in all ages of
Antichrist. Would God those ydell bellygoddes had always in that fylthie
occupyenge been thus worthily handeled. For than had not the world been so
depely deceived in them and their knaueryes.

Cecila king Wyllyams daughter. and Thurstinus.
MAtthaeus VVestmonasteriensis in the flowers of hystoryes, and Polydorus
Vergilius in the ix. book of his chronycle, reports that Cecyly the daughter
of king Wyllyam Bastard, Cecilia.
professed her self a nonne in the year of our lord a. M. and. lxxv. 1075.
to serve the devil in the monks hypocresy, and in ye burning heates of
Sodom. So daynty mowthed were these greasy grouteheades, and so crafty in their
generacyon, that they could find out kings daughters to serve their lusts,
and yet apere chaste ghostly fathers to the world. Thurstinus a monk of Cane in
Normandy, Thurstinus.
was of the said king Wyllyam, constytute abbot of Glastenbury for a great
sum of money, in the year of our lord a M. and lxxxiij. 1083.
This holy abbot consumed the substance and possessions of that rich abbey,
in all kinds of lechery and other prodygyouse fylthynesse. On a time there
fell betwyn him and his monks, a great strife, A battle.
for that he had restrained their accustomed fare. He brought in men of arms
to defend his cause, the monks laid about them like praty men, with stoles,
pottes, and candel^^yckes, till the warryours heads were well fauerdly broken.
In the end of the batayl were. iiij. monks found slain, ij. slain
and xviij grievously wounded, their blood flowing on the pauyment Henricus
huntington, li. vi Guilhel. Malmes. li. ij. de pontificibus, Matthaeus Paris in
historia anglorum. Ranulphus, li. vi ca. iij. Fabianus, par. vij ca. ccxxij.
Was not this (think you) a relygyouse rule? Had it not been much pytie, but
the commens of this realm, Co^me^s.
had been beggered for their mayntenaunce? being such ghostly vowers? O
blyndnesse and madness of ungodly governors.

Hildebrande by sorcery and murder, obtayneth the Papacy.
HIldebrandus a monk of Clunyake, Hildebra^dus.
being high archedeacon of Rome, was taught the art of Necromancye by
Theophilactus before mencyoned, whose custom was in wild forestes and on high
hills, to do sacryfyce to deuyls and by magycall art to make women both to
love him and follow him. Other instructours he had besides (says Cardynall
Benno) which had been Syluesters dyscyples, Dyscyples.
and were most conning in that speculacyon, that is to say, Laurence an
archebyshop, and Johan Gracyan afterward called Pope Gregory ye syxte. In
shaking his sleues or myttaynes, to delude the eyes of the simple, many times
he sent out sparkles of fire, which was judged a wonderful miracle, and a
sign of holiness in him. For so much as the devil (says Benno) could not
persecute Christ in the open face of the world, Adversary.
he sought fraudulently to deface his name and honor, by this hypocryte and
false monk Hyldebrande, under a monastical coat and colored pretense of
relygyon. This Judas ^ote of his maistre Pope Gregory ye sixte, to be the high
steward of S. Peter's altar, and so received the offerynges of pilgrims, till
all his bags were full. Than hired he one Gerardus Brazutua, a man given to
myschefes incomparable. This forcerouse wurker to make him Pope, in the space
of. xiij;, years, poysened. vij. Popes poysened.
vi of his predecessors one after another, yt is to say, Clement the. ij.
Damasus the. ij Leo the. ix. Victor the. ij. Steven the. ix. and Benedict the.
x. Nycolas the. ij. his own self poysened, and vyolently murdered Alexander
the. ij. in preson. Thus by great and outragyose murders he enjoyed ye papacy,
A murderer.
and was called Gregory the. vij. his first ordynaunces were these. He
transubstancyated the Eucharistycall bread, condemned the marryage of
prestes, and commanded monks to abstain from flesh, Valerius Anselmus Ryd.

The first busy buyldynges of this Hyldebrande.
BEnno Cardinalis reports of this hellysh Hyldebrand, Practyses.
that in the first entrance of his Romysh Papacy, he had all these deuylysh
prouysyons to wurke his myscheues with. The scriptures he had so trained with
the rules of logycke, that by them he was able to maynteyne all falshede. The
temporal powers he provided by all flattery, false fryndeshyp, gifts, and
other subtyle means to depresse. He had for money his secret spies and
trayterouse searchers in the emprours and every great princes house, A traitor.
to know things to his mind. After demaundes and answers again from deuyls,
he took upon him to prophecy lies in hypocresye. His exceeding tyranny was
such, that his enemies he never spared, but gave them death without remyssyon,
to the terryfyenge of others. And always he had about him a book of
Necroma^cye, with a nombre of deuyls to wurke feats to his Papal pleasure,
Deuyls
As the good Emprour Henry the. iiij. perceived in those days, most shameful
abuses to grow in the church, he labored by all ways possible to abolysh
them. He secluded scysmatykes, suspended symonyakes, suppressed sacrilegers,
ponnyshed per^ures, ba^nished bawdes, imprisoned deceyuers, and condemned
ydolatours. This perceiving Hyldebrande, which was a relygyouse maynteyner of
all these, sought by his preuy trayttours to dyspatche him. A traitor.
And on a day whyls this virtuous emprour was in prayer, he hired a
despertate knave to lay stones of great wayghte upon the rouse beams of the
temple right over his prayenge pewe, and to let them fall upon him to his
utter destruccyon. But se the ryghteouse hand of God. God stryketh
One of those stones being more than this wretch could well rule, bore him
down to the ground and so slew him.

Other practyses in myschefe, of the said Hyldebrande.
ANd when he perceived that this way would not take, Myschefe.
than sought he out an other myschefe by color of relygyon. He made an extreme
and terryble act against all them that had entered any spirytuall promocyon by
symony, and sent out commissyons upon the same, his self being ye greatest
symonyake that ever was on this earth. ij. cantels.
This had a great shine of holiness, and is no less judged of a great nombre
of the hystoryanes, yet was it to. ij. most myscheuouse ends. The one was,
that he might thereby confound all those that favored not his ways. An
other, that for execucyon of that act. the good Emproure might run into the
deep hate of the clergy, that they might also seek his undoing. For the
relygyon of this Hyldebrande, was never other than treason, neither was his
doctrine any other than deceyt of the devil. On a time after many sorcerouse
incantacyons, Sorcerer.
he demanded of that God which he thought he had made of bread by virtue of
transubstancyacyon, by what kind of myschefe the Emprour might be destroyed.
And when he ones perceived, that that God of his could make him none answer,
as the gods of the paganes ded, and as his famylyar deuyls would do, he threw
him with violence into the fire. God brent.
As Ioannes Portuensis openly declared at Rome in ye church of S. Peter. The
same day (Benno says) that he openly cursed the good Emprour, his chair that
was most strongely made b^ast a sondre in. ij. in token of the great scysme
which thereupon followed, Sigebertus co^fyrmynge ye same by an horrible
earthquake. All these examples has Benno in uita hildebrandi, Autores
Barnefridus Vrspergensis, Matthaeus Parisiensis, Hulricus Mutius, and Robert
Barnes in uitis Romanorum pontificum.

An act of condemnacyon for prestes marryage.
IN the year of our lord a M. and lxxiiij. 1074
Which after most writers, was the second year of his Papacy, this hellysh
Hildebrande held a general synod at Rome with the bishops of Italy. Wherein
he made this most deuylysh decre against prestes, not that they should no more
beget children, but that they should never after marry wives. This wicked decre
extended yet further, as if they had wives already, they should utterly forsake
them, Depryued.
or else be depryued of their benefyces and presthode without redempcyon, and so
made lay men. And that no man from that day fourth, should be admytted to
their orders, that had not professed a perpetual chastyte, a sodomy it would
be called, having a name according to the fruytes. The Germans and the
French men ded myghtely resyst this decre by the strong authorytees of Christ
and of Paul, and by the unreprovable examples of the Apostles and other holy
fathers in the prymatyue church, Examples
besides other scryptures, reasons, and arguments And when he perceived that
the prestes had despised and mocked his abhomynable ordinance, he cursed them
with book, belle, and candle, and utterly forbad them the church, commaundyng
their tithes to be brent, And when that would not help the matter neither,
than made he an other tyrannouse decre, Tyrau^t.
that their wives should be taken for whores, their children for bastardes, and
that no man from thens fourth should hear the mass of him that kept a
concubyne, as he than judged them, peruersly alleging Malachyes prophecye, as
though Maledicam benedictionibus uestris, in his mouth might vnualue or
dysable their masses. Thus was the church fylle^ with vnpure mynysters.
Rogerus houeden li i. historiae anglorum. Matthaeus Paris in chronico,
Ranulphus Cestrensis, Autore^
li. vij. ca. iij. and Rogerus Cestrensis, li. vij. Lambertus Shafnaburgensis,
Sigebertus, Martinus, Ioannes de Columna, Ioannes Nauclerus, Duneimense
chronicon, Mutius, and alij.

What myschefe sprange of that pectyferouse act.
VIncentius says in speculo historiali, li. xxix ca. xlv. and Matthew of
Westmynst^e in his second book de floribus historiarum, Cestes.
Antonious in the second part of his chronycles and Radulphus de Diceto
confirmynge yt same, that this example of Hyldebrand was strange and
prodygyouse, done without all Christen consyderacyon to the great preiudyce of
the saints. A sore slaundre (say they) grew thereupon, and so greuouse a
scysme as was never before in the church for any kind of heresy, Scysme
and all under name of relygyon. Very few or none were found chaste in the
church, after that constytucyon was on^s publyshed, some counterfetynge a
clennesse for lucre and promocyon only, some dyssemblynge. some boastynge, some
lyengr, and some being perjured, turnynge marryage into secret whoredom, and
honest living into most vile buggery. By this ^ccasyo^ (say they) arose in
the church pernycyouse teachers, Seducers.
auertynge the people by their profane noueltees, from the Christen synceryte
and doctrine of the Gospel. This horrible Hyldebrand the great patryarke and
first founder of the order of prodygyouse buggerers, otherwise called vnwyuynge
masmongers, notwythstandyng his vnrelygyouse constytucyon for others, yet kept
he Maude the duchess of Lorayne, Maude.
whom he for that purpose dyuorced from her second husband Azon the marquis
of Esten. Their occupyenges were furtiui complexus (the storye says)
imbracynges in the dark, or such cullynges when the candale was out, as might
not seane of all the world. She is called in the chronycles, S. Peter's denout
daughter (se the unshamefastness of these holy whoremongers) collateralis
pontifici, An whore.
ac nimium amans pontificem, being check mate with the Pope, and his own
dear peramoure. And when she should dye, she gave to the Romysh church a great
part of Hetruria, which is yet called the patrimony of S. Peter. Blondus li.
iiij. deca ij. Martinus, Platina, and Robertus Barnes.

Of whom it was in those days resysted.
AS an apt polycye to advance the clergyes estimacyon, augment their
possessions, and increase their rythes, A craft
brought Hyldebrande in this inhybycyon of prestes marryage. For by that
deceytfull face of the old wylye serpent, were the lecherouse massynge
prestes, monks, chanons, and fyestynge nonnes, judged terrestryall aungelles
of the folyshe world, when they were the very dross of the devil and poison
of all Christyanyte. Resystaunce.
A great nombre therefore of godly men both in Germany and France, perceiving
the great abhomynacyons that would follow thereof, myghtely still resysted both
Hyldebrande the Pope, and also his great synod of Italysh prelates, calling
him a cruel heretyke and author of pernycyouse doctrine, and them the
malygnaunt counsel of Satan, This wickedness is wrought (say they) not by
any sprete of God, but by the only suggestyon of Satan. Satan.
For their most deuylysh decre is directly repugnaunt to the word of God.
Christ said, that no man can away with that saying, save they to who^ it is
given. S. Paul had no commandment for virgynyte. The Apostles would not
require it, the old counsels durst not attempt it. But always was marryage
fre to them that could not refrain. Marryage.
What mean these hypocrites than to compel natural men by force of tyranny
to live the life of Angels, which is a thing impossyble to their weak nature.
By this cruel constytucyon they make open the way to all fylthynesse in the
flesh. If they will have such mynysters, let the^ fatche them from heaven,
for in the earth they are not to be had. This was the clamor of them which in
that age feared God, and doubted the myschefes of Antichrist. Angels.
Lambertus, Sigebertus, Vrspergius. Nauclerus, and Robertus Barnes.

Hyldebrande made the church a full Sodom.
NO small commendacyons has this sorcerouse monk and vicar of the devil,
among the hystorianes and chronycle writers after his time. Vycar.
As were Otho Frisingensis, Platina, Stella, Sabellicus, Blondus, Bergomas,
Aeneas, VVicelius and such other. He is magnyfyed above the stars for his
rebellyouse treason and tyranny against the virtuous emprour, and holden of
them for a most earnest, mighty, and constaunt defender of Antichrists oyled
kyngedome, which they call holy church. Holy church.
This maistre of myschefe and organe of the devil, brought by that means, the
mynysters to an ydelnesse, and defiled the church with most execrable buggery.
Among all his canon laws and synodall constytucyons, he gave out no
commandment that prestes should do no lechery, nor yet get children, but
only that they should not marry. And this was to put in full practyse, Warning.
that God had before premonyshed his church of, by his son Jesus Christ, by
his holy Angel, and by Johan his elect Apostle, three able witnesses, Apoca.
i. That is to say, the great city which is called a spirytualte, and is the
church malygnaunt, should be in effect, a very Sodom and Egipte, Apoca. xi.
Of necessyte might that be no fable, yt was of so able witnesses uttered before
hand so earnestly. Witnesses.
Some therefore must have fulfilled it, no remedy, and none so effectually as
this hellysh sodomyte Hyldebrand, by forbyddynge of marryage in his clergy, and
by deifyenge the Eucharistycall bread. These. ij. points chefely made the
Romysh church a Sodom and an Egipte, by dyssemblynge vows and a cou^terfet
presthode. Prouysyons.
How nondryes anon after were builded, boys, apes, and bytches provided, to
qualyfie the breche heates of these holy buggerers, and to save ye outward
shine of their boasted chastyte, it requires further process to be declared.

Married prestes are bayted with a bulle.
ROger Houeden plainly reports it, in the first book of his chronycles, that
the clergy contempnyng the bishop of Romes malycyouse threttenynges, Prestes.
chose rather to dwell still under his great curse, than to leave their married
wives. Tha^ practysed the said bishop to vex them and to ponnysh them by
others, as testyfieth Matthew of Westmynstre in the third book of his flowers
of historyes, procuring the commen people to be the instruments of his
tyranny. Tyranny
That he might the more fearcely chastyse them (says he) and so utterly drive
them from the embracinges of their wives, he forbad the lay people to hear
their masses, and charged them finally to destroy their lyuynges, by this
bulle following. A bulle.
Gregory the Pope, otherwise called Hyldebra^^, the servant of the servants
of God, s^ndeth the Apostles blessyng to all the^ within the kingdoms of Italy
and Germany, that shows their true obedience unto S. Peter. If there be any
prestes, deacons. and subdeacons, that still will remain in the sin of
fornycacyon, we forbid them the churches enteraunce by the omnypotent power of
God and by the autoryte of S. Peter, till time they amend and repent. But if
they persevere in their sin, Masses.
we charge that none of you presume to hear their service. For their blessyng
is turned into a curse, and their prayer into sin, as the lord does testifye
by his prophet. I will curse your blessings etce. This bulle has Symeon of
Durham, and Roger Houeden, the one in the second and the other in the first
book of their chronycles, besides other writers.

Lay people worshyppeth the beast and his Image.
MVche good stuffynge is in this bulle, Preposterously
when it judges marryage a fornycacyon, condempnyng it by S. Peter's autoryte,
whose doctrine to this day both allows it and commends it for a state of
righteousness, co^parynge the married persons to Abraham and Sara. i. Pet.
iij. Neither is the blessyng of any man turned into a curse, or his prayer into
sin for marryage, but rather for seducynge of Gods people by supersticyons
and hypocresy, Deceyuers.
wylfully resystyng the holy ghost, Mala. ij. and Psalm. cviij. as in this handy
bulle maker and his other bullish begles, whose blasphemouse acts are well
known. Radulphus de Diceto says in his Image of stories, that in the year of
our lord. a M. and lxxv. 1075.
this terryble turmoylyng against prestes marryage, gave more occasyon of
blasphemouse slaundre, than ever ded heresy in the church. For by that means
(says he) the lay people contempned holy orders, Contempt
they rejected ecclesyastycall subiectyon, and abhorred ye mysteryes of God.
They despised the presthode of their curates, in fury and madness they brent
their tithes, and trod under their fylthie feie their consecrate hosts. Thus
honored they the fowled beast and his image, Apocal. xiij. But this gave a
great raise to Antichrists proud and ambycyouse reign, Antichrist.
as herafter shall apere. Thomas Rudborne and Matthew of Westmynstre says, that
in the next year following, was a terryble earthquake with a certain
blusterynge noise over all England, whereby God declared to the world his anger
for such excedyng wickedness, as he has done other times more, at the lattre
day to be revenged utterly.

The treason of prelates and extorsyon of bishop Walter.
Bishops, abbotes, and prelates of ye Englysh broad, not having Wyllyam
conqueror a king to their minds, Wyllya^
caused it by little and little to be noysed a broad among the people, in the
said year of our lord a M. and ixxv. 1075.
how it neither stood with reason nor yet with conscience, that a bastard or
mysbegetten man, as he was, should have the Englysh nacyon in governance, what
though they had before with all practyses possible assysted him to the same.
Rebellion
Whereupon grew wonderful commocyons in diverse quarters of the realm,
specially at Norwych, Helye, and York, the great earls, Raufe Roger, and
Waldeof, aydyng the rude co^mens in that rebellyon, which provoked him to
show double hatred to the Englysh nobilyte. The next year following, 1076
as the earl Waldeof of Northumberla^d, was worthily depryued and at
Wynchestre byheaded for the same, Walkerus a lecherouse monk and ambycyouse
prelate, Walker.
not finding himself satisfied with the rich byshopryck of Durham, bought
tha^ of the king that earldom, to augment his pomp, possessions, and vain
gloryouse dygnite. He brought thydre a swarm of ydell and lascyuyouse monks
out of other parties, Satisfactyon.
thinking thereby to be eue^ with God, and with their howlynge and wawlynge to
pacyfie his anger, what mischefe so ever he had done before. But se what followed
about. v. years after. For his outragyouse oppression and tyranny, 1080.
the commens fell upon him, and slew both him and an hundred of his best me^.
Simeon Dunelmensis, Henricus Huntendunensis Matthaeus Paris, Rogerus houeden,
Thomas Rudborne, and alij.

The monks dyspossesseth the prestes at Durham.
AFter him succeeded in the byshoprycke, one Wyllyam an abbot, a man of more
words (ye story says) than of godly wytt. This prelate (as Simeon writes in
chronicis Dunelmi) persuaded the king that the prestes of the church of Durham
were vycyouse lyuers, Durha^.
because they had wives and would not leave them, and that bishop walkers
monks were the holy Ghostes children and most fytt to keep S. Cutbert,
because they were wyuelesse watchemen. He recyted unto him by the chronycle of
Bid and by other old writings, Reason.
that from the time of Aidanus their first bishop till the vyole^t slaughter of
the Danes, it had been possessed of monks. The king not much regarding the
matter, had him consulte with Pope Hildebrande, as he resorted unto him to Rome
for his confirmacyon, as all bishops were than confirmed by the great
Antichrist of that synnefull synagoge. Confirmed
The which ones performed to his mind, he returned home with Hyldebrandes
commyssyon. And in the year of our Lord a M. and lxxxiij. 1083.
obtaynynge therewith the whole consent of the prelates in the kings parlem^nt
at Westmynstre, he drove the married canons and their wives out of his
cathedral church of Durham, and placed ydell monks in their rowmes, to keep
Saint Cuthbertes shryne, Kepers.
unjustly depryuynge them of all possessyon. Rogerus houeden, li. i. and
Polydorus, li. ix. Other prelates anon after ded wurke the like, in diverse
other quarters of the realm, and filled all the land with the secret
occupyenges of wicked Sodom and Gomor, as well apered in their last vysytacyon
in our time, the regestre yet remaining.

The vysyon of Boso, and act of Tostius chaplayne.
JOHAN Capgraue reports in Saint Cuthbertes life, that one Boso a knight,
Boso.
was rapte or depr^^ed of all manner of feeling, by the space of more than two
days. And in the third day, as he was commen again to him self, he
instauntly desired to be confessed to the pryour of Durham at ye time called
Turgotus, Turgotus.
to whom he declared what vysyons he had in that wonderful trance. He
beheld (he said) on the one side of hell, all the monks of his abbeye going
sadly in processyon, and on the other side a sort of wanton gyglot wenches,
reioycinge in fleshely delyghtes and uncomely entycementes. He saw there also
in a dark desolate place, an high house all of iron. Vysyo^s
And whyls the door thereof often times opened and speared again, at the last he
beheld Wyllyam their bishop, which had been Hildebra^des commissyoner,
putting forth his head and calling for Godfrey the monk, which was at that
time the general procurator of his whole dyocese. And this was judged a token,
A token.
that they two should not live long after. Se what noble success this decre
of Hildebrande had here in this realm. The wife of Tostius sumtyme earl of
Northumberlande, called Judith, gave many rich ornaments about the same time,
to S. Cuthbertes church. This lady bad a lusty chaplayne, which coming of
devotion to Tynmouth abbeye, to se the translacyon of the body of S. Oswyne
king and martyr, Pilgrimage.
as martyrs went than, could within the town have no lodging for the excedyng
resort of people yt than was there. Howbeit upon acquayntaunce he found such
fauer, that a bed was prepared for him within the parrysh church. And because
he thought it not pleasant to lie a love, he conuayed in a wenche in the dark
to keep him company that night. But as he began to fall, Prestlyke.
to his accustomed night work, all the whole church moved (ye story says) as
it would have fallen upon them. Whereby he was than compelled to leave his
occupyenge. Ioannes Capgraue in uita Osvuini martyris.

The miracles of Lanfrancus the archebyshop.
LAnfrancus the archebyshop of Canterbury, held a synodall counsel at Paul's
in London, in the year of our Lord a M. and lxxvi. 1076.
Where as it was enacted by their common consent, that bishops from thens
forth should sytt in counsels and parlementes (by like they stood on foot before
with cappe in hand) and that they should generally remove their seats from
the mean vyllages to the cities of name (as some had done before) to apere more
notable, and to augment their autoryte and fame. Was not this a great study
(think you) for the Christen commen welthe? Thus clome they up from one degree
of pride to an other, Prydee
till they bycame here in England, like their father at Rome, exalting
themselves, as S. Paul prophesied of them above God and his Christ, ij. These
ij. This Lanfrancus ye next year after, made one Paulus a young monk of Lane
in Normandy, 1077.
the abbot of S. Albons. A bastard.
This Paul was his nephew, some say, his son, which is all one among the
Italyane prelates (as he was one) saving that nephew is a name more
spirytuall. Other great miracles this Lanfra^cus ded in his lattre age. At
Canterbury he enryched the monks with great lands, sumptuouse buyldynges, and
with precyouse ornaments, He repared their temples, and appointed strange
worshyppynges. He wonderfully augmented the pride here of the clergy,
Lanfrancus.
and finally builded ij. great hospytalles for pilgrims, to encreace the daily
ydolatryes, which tha^ began to spryng. Simeon Dunelmensis. Matthaeus
VVestmonast. Matthaeus Paris. Ranulphus Cestre^sis, Rogerus Cestren. Thomas
rudborne, Ioannes Capgraue, Fabianus and alij.

Of Osmunde the bishop, and of Salisbury use.
OSmundus was a man of great adventure and polycye in his time, not only
concerning roberyes, but also the slaughter of men in the wars of king
Wyllyam co^querour. A warryour.
Whereupon he was first the grande captain of Say in Normandy, and afterward
earl of Dorsett and also high chancellor of England. 1077
As Herman the bishop of Salisbury was dead, he gave over all and succeeded him
in that byshopryck, to live, as it were, in a securyte or ease in his lattre
age. For than was the church become Iesabels pleasant and easy cowche, Apoca.
ij. his cantels were not so fine in the other kind for destructyon of bodies,
but they were also as good in this for destructyon of sowles. To obscure the
glory of ye Gospel preaching, and augment the fylthynesse of ydolatry,
Blasphemer.
he practysed an ordynary of Popysh ceremonies, the which he entytled a
Consuetudynary or usual book of the church. His first occasyon was this. A
great battle chanced at Glastenburye, whyls he was bishop, between
Turstinus the abbot and his monks, 1083.
where in some of them were slain, and some sore wounded, as is said before. The
cause of that battle was this. Turstinus contempnynge their quere service,
than called the use of Saint Gregory, compelled his monks to the use of one
Wyllyam a monk of Fiscan in Normandy. Upon this Osmundus devised that
ordynary, Osmundus.
called the use of Sarum. Which was afterward received in a manner of all
England, Irelande, and wales. Every sir Sander Slyngesby had a book at his
belte thereof, called his portasse, contaynynge many superstycyouse fables and
lies, the testament of Christ set at naught. For this act was that brothell
bishop made a Popysh God at Salisbury. Canonysed.
Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, Ranulphus, Rogerus, Capgraue, Houeden, and alij.

Of Kenredus a pressed, which was gelded.
AN act was made in ye year of one lord a M. and lxxxvij. 1087.
by king Wyllyam conqueror, that who so ever were found stelynge of dear, he
should lose one of his eyes, and he that was deprehended in rauyshynge a woman,
should lose both his stones without rede^pcyon. This has Henricus
Huntendunensis, li. v. Ranulphus Cestrensis, li. vij. ca. iiij. Rogerus
Cestrensis, li vij. and Ioannes Treuisa. Not many years after, a priest called
Kenredus was taken in the I Will of Anglesey by the Englysh captains, Ke^redus
and gelded, some say, for offendynge the statute, though ye monkysh
chronicles far of otherwise interpret that matter. By reason of this and
many other like examples (for he was not alone in that age ye may be sure,
when they were so strayghtly sequestered from women) the clergy sought busyly to
be exempted from the lay or secular power, Exempcyon.
and in fine made lechery a spiritual matter, to have the correctyon thereof in
their spirytual courts I think the devil was never more crafty than they
have been, to shadow their fylthie enormities by a vain show of holiness,
which is plain hypocresy. But how so ever they prospered in those days, the
nobylyte and commens of this realm were wonderfully oppressed (Matthew of
Westmynstre says) so that both noble men and gentle men of the Englysh
blood, Nobylyte.
depryued of their possessions, and being ashamed to beg, were with their
children and famylyars, compelled to spoil and robbery, Roberyes.
when hunting would no longar serve them. Of this priest Kenredus, writes
Simeon, Henry Huntendune, Ranulphus, Houede^, Johan Capgraue, and Fabyane.

Prestes paid a trybute for their wives.
MVche a do had king Wyllyam Rufus with Odo the proud bishop of Bayon his
uncle, Styngers.
which was also earl of Kent, with Egelwinus the bishop of Durham, with Raufe
the bishop of Chichestre, and with other like heady prelates, specially with
Anselme, whom of a beggarly monk he had made archebyshop of Canterbury. The
said Anselme sought utterly to depryue him and all his successors, Anselme
of the inuestynge of prelates, or making of bishops and abbotes within his
own realm, labouryng to turn that autoryte from the lawful power of Christen
princes, to the usurped iurisdictyon of the proud Romysh bishop, as it anon
after came to pass, for ye which he was worthily exyled this realm. This king
Wyllya^ Rufus, partly of pytie but chefely of covetousness (for he had tha^
many buyldynges in hand) permytted the prestes for an yearly trybute, to hold
still their wives in spyght of the prelates specially in such dyoceses as had
monks than to their bishops, Wives.
which strayghtly had commanded Hyldebrandes wicked constytucyon to be
observed, that no priest having a wife, should hold his ben^fyce. Raufe the
bishop of Chichestre than stood up like a praty man, 1097.
and not only rebuked the king for taking that trybute, which like an a dust
conscyenced hypocryte he called the fine of fornycacyon, but also he withstode
his officers, stoppynge up the church porches with great stakes, thorns and
bryres, and interdyctynge the temples. But when the gentle king had ones
given him that trybute for his own dyocese, Tribute
he could take it well enough, and make no great noise thereof. Guilhelmus
Malmesburiensis, li. ij. de pontificibus, Ranulphus li. vij. ca. ix. Rogerus
li. vij. and Fabianus.

Varyaunce among bishops for married prestes.
A Little before, that is to say, in the year of our lord a M. and xc. 1090.
a sore contencyon had been among the bishops. They that had been prestes
and no monks favorably permytted the prestes to remain with their wives in
their dyoceses, at the least (says Roger of Chestre) some of them held their
peace and would not se them. The other sort which had been monks, vexed them,
troubled them, Styngers.
and most grievously molested them, depryuynge them of their lyuynges, and most
cruelly bannyshynge them out of their contreys. For the which vyolence, some of
those bishops that had been prestes, thrust the monks out of their
cloisters, and put in secular prestes, as they called them in their rowmes. Of
this band or factyon was Walkinus the bishop of Wynchestre the chief doar or
begynner, Walkinus.
having the kings agreement ^o the same. But in the end they prevailed not,
first Lanfrancus, and than Anselmus, being both monks and archeby^hoppes of
Canterbury, and writing ^o the Romysh Ne^roth against the^. Not^ithsta^dyng
when Walter was bishop of Durham, which succeeded Egelwinus, and had been the
kings chaplayne, to spyght the monks therewith, he compelled them to leave
their frayter, Walterus.
to dyne in his open halle, and to eat such meats as by their rule were
forbidden them. He also caused them to be served at the table, with women which
were not very sober, neither in aparel nor yet in gesture or countenance. And
all was to try out their hypocresye. But some of the^ (I think) took not the
matter very grievously. Trial.
Guilh. Malli. i. and iij. de ponti. Ranulphus, li, vij. ca. xi. and xi.
Polychronici, Rogerus, li. vij. Ioannes Treuisa, and alij.

God by signs manyfesteth the myschefe of this age.
But mark how God fulfilled in this age, that he had secretly showed before to
S. Johan the Evangelist, Apoca. vi. and viij. For a fore warning to his
electes. Warning.
Many stars were seane falling down from heaven in the year of our Lord a
M. and xcv. 1095.
specially a blasynge star in likeness of a great burning beam, reachynge
from the south to the north, a wonderful derth following, not only of
vytayles, but also of the fowls fode, Amos. viij. Which is the veryte of God
and sede of saluacyo^. Mark chronicon Sigeberti, Matthew Paris, Matthew of
Westmynstre, Roger Houeden, Scalamundi, and chronicon chronicorum. Yea, to make
the matter more plain unto us, Stars
for the fulfyllynge of those hydden scryptures in our own nacyon, Radulphus
de Diceto, Sigebertus, and Thomas Rudborne in their chronycles, adds thus
much to ye storye. Among the which fallen stars (say these autours) one
which was ye greatest of the^ all, seemed to fall on ye other side of the sea,
in France, as it had been a blasyng fire brand. And when the place was marked
in Normandy, The place.
and dylygently sought out, the searchers beheld a fearful flutteryng and
terryble boylynge in a serten water, an horrible stynkynge smoke arysynge
thereof. By this partycular fallen star, is signyfyed first Lanfrancus and
afterward Anselmus. ij. Normandy monks and archebyshoppes of Canterbury, by
whom in those days was all the hurly hurly, turmoyle, and change in relygyon
here in England, A change.
Lanfrancus conte^ding for transubstancyacyon of the Eucharysticall bread to
advance ydolatry, and Anselmus condemnynge the marryage of prestes and
autoryte of princes for inuestynge of prelates, to set up sodometry and
impunyte of sin in the clergy. Whereby the one was constytute the adoptyue
son of Antichrist, and the other the pope of England, as hereafter will
apere. The water betokens the wauerynge multitude, Mark it
and the stynkynge smoke the fylthie doctrine of those fallen stars.

Of a lecherouse bishop, and ij. supersticyouse earls.
RObert Bloet, which had been a monk of Euesham abbeye, symony.
went not thens so poor, but that he was able to give for the byshopryck of
Lyncolne five thousand pound, in the year of our lord a M. and xcij. 1092.
after the death of Remigius. By like he had been abbot of the place, that he
was so well mouyed. Never was Orpheus, Palemon, nor Sardanapalus more expert
(they say) in the fine feats of lechery, than he was. For Wylliam of
Malmesbury reports, that he was totus libidinosus, all given to fylthie
living. And yet he was brought up in the cloystre under Saint Benets rule, A
lechour.
a great professor of chastyte and a worthy governor in that relygyon. At
the last he dyed suddenly, and was buried at Lyncolne, where as the church
kepers were sore anoyed (they say) with his soul and other walking spretes)
till that place was pourged by prayers. Spretes
Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis. li, iiij, de pontifi. Ranulphus, Rogerus, Thomas
Rudborne, ac Polydorus. When Roger the earl of Shrowesbury perceived ones that
he could not live much longar, 1093.
he sent Reynolde the pryour of Shrowesbury to Clunyake in France, for the
kyrtle of holy Hugh the abbot there, that by license of Adelyse his wife, he
might for socour of his soul, depart to God in the heat of his holiness. As
much mede had he thereof (Treuisa says) as had Malkyn of her maydenhede, Reward
which no man was hasty on. Hugh the old earl of Chestre, being spoke unto
death in the same self year, caused by the entysement of Anselme, the prestes
clearly to be expelled out of the high chur^he of Westchestre, and the monks
to be placed there for them. Chestre.
So frantyck were the worldly rulers in this age. Henricus huntendune, li. xi.
Ranulphus, Rogerus, Treuisa, Fabianus, and alij.

Of bishop Herbert, which builded Christ's church at Norwych.
This Herbert was called by surname, Herbert.
losinga, and the father which bigate him, was Robert the abbot of Wynchestre.
But who was his mother the story tells not, to leave it as a secret matter
within relygyon. First was he here in England by fryndeshyp, made abbot of
Ramseye, and afterward bishop of Thetforde by flattery and fat payment, in
the year of our lord a M. and xci. 1091.
For the which he is named in the chronycles yet to this day, the ^yndelyng
match of symony, and that notes him no small doar in that feate.
Notwithstanding he so repented that symony (they say) that he went to Rome,
and there resigned up his ryng and pastoral hoke to Pope Vrbanus the second
in the year of our lord a M. and xciiij. 1094
not without an other great sum of money, ye may be sure, for there might
nothing pass without ready payment. But here ye may axe me, why the byenge
of a byshoprycke was symony in England, and not at Rome? Whereunto I answer.
For in England a king received the money, which has none autoryte to meddle
in that mart of byenge and selling, No merchaunt.
wantyng the character or mark of the beast, which they have at Rome, Apo.
xiij. Also they have lyberte in that generacyon to judge black white, evil
good, sower sweet, and darkness light, and also to wurke thereafter, Esa. v.
And when he had ones returned home again, 1095.
by virtue of Antichrists commissyon, he removed his seat of poysenynge
Christ's flock, from Thetforde to Norwyche in ye year of our lord. a M.
xcvi. 1096
dyspossessynge the prestes and their wives, and placynge ye monks in their
rowmes, to make that church a Sodom. Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, Radulphus de
Diceto, Matthaeus Paris, Matthaeus VVestmonasteriensis, Ranulphus, Rogerus,
Thomas rudborne, Ioannes Eucresden, Ioannes Capgraue, Fabianus and alij.

The robbery, symony, and sacrilege, of the said Herbert.
OF this bishop Herbert, Testymonyes.
were many strange things written, but yet very covertly and craftily (I
think) to hyde the open show of his euyls, because he was so great an abbeye
foundar. Some there were that scoffyngly bestowed upon his predecessor
Arfastus and him this text, Non hunc, sed Barrabam, Joan, xviij. Not him, but
Barrabas. For Arfastus had translated the byshopryck from Helmam to Thetforde,
which were in those days but vyllages. But he translated it from the^s to
Norwych, Norwych.
which was a famous town, and of great occupyenge. An other sort gave this
text, by the way, Amice, ad quid uenisti? Mathae, xxvi. Friend, wherefore art
thou come? Thus slyely they compared him to Barrabas and Judas, which both were
thieves, Malmesburius, Ranulphus, and Treuisa. Moreover a Poet or versyfyer of
that age, made these verses of him.

Surgit in ecclesiam, monstru^ genitore losinga, A monstre.

Simonidum secta, canonum uirtute resecta.
Petre nimis tardas, nam Simon ad ardua tentat,
Si praesens esses, non Simon ad altauolaret.
Proh dolor ecclesiae, nu^misuenduntur and aere,
Filius est praesul, pater abba, Simon uterque.
Quid non speremus, si nummos possideamus?
Money.
Omnia nummus habet, quod uult, facit, addit, and aufert.
Res nimis iniusta, nummis fit praesul and abba.
A monstre is up, the son of Losinga,
Whyls the law seeks, Symony to flea.
Peter thou slepest, whyls Simon takes time,
If thou were present, Simon should not clyme.
Churches are prysed, for silver and gold,
Symoners.
The son a bishop, ye father an abbot old.
What is not gotten, if we have richesse?
Money obtayneth, in every business.
In Herbertes way yet, it is a foul blot,
That he by symonye, is bishop and abbot.
Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, li. iiij. de regibus. A devil
Great suit made the monks of Norwych, to have had this Herbert a canonysed
saint But such impedimentes were always in the way, that it could not be
obtained.

Other anointed prelates of the lame race.
SImon the high Deane of Lyncolne, Simon.
occupied that rowme not without a cause. For his father Robert Bloet, was ye
lecherouse bulle, bishop I should say, of that large dyocese. This Simon was a
lusty blood (ye scory says) and as good a treadyng cock as ever was his
father, with stern lokes on both sides, as proud as a pecock. Henricus
huntendunensis in libro de contemptu mundi, Ranulphus in polychronico, and
Guilhelmus Horman in fasci rerum Britannicaru^. It is also reported of
Radulphus de Diceto, in his chronycle called Imagines historiarum, that Robert
Peche the bishop of Chestre, Couentre, and Lychefelde, begat Richard Peche
the archedeacon of Couentre, Richard Peche.
which afterward, as reason was, succeeded his father as bishop on same
dyoceses by inheritance. Radulphus praefatus, Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis in
opere de pontificibus, and Guilhelmus Horma^ in abreuiatione etusde^. The
third example will I there bring iii, though it chanced long before, which I
have left out in the first part of my votaryes. Ethelwolf the son of king
Egbert, Ethelwolf.
was professed a monk at Wynchestre, and received the order of a subdeacon
under bishop Helmestane. A bishop
Afterward ascendynge from one degree to an other, he was constytute bishop of
Wynchestre, and a Cardynall as some chronycles has, about the year of our
lord. viij hundredth and iij. By dyspensacyon of Pope Gregory the fourth, 803
he reigned king after his father, and married Osburga his own butlers
daughter, by whom he had four sons, which all reigned kings after him and
one daughter. In the time of his monkery, before he was married, he begat a
bastard called Adelstane, A bastard
whom he made under him the duke of Westsaxons, Rogerus houeden, Matthaeus
VVestmonasteriensis, Henricus Bradsha, Iacobus Mayer, and Ionnnes Scuysh.

Of Wulstane the mysbegotten bishop of Worcestre.
Wulstanus ye canonysed bishop of Worcestre, Wulstane.
had a monk of that abbeye to his father, called Estanus, and a nonne not
far of to his mother, that was named Vulgena. By bishop Brithegus was he made
a monk, and so was sent fourth to the monastery of Peterburg, to be instructed
and so brought fourth in the ydel rules of monkery. Wha^ it came to pass that
he was ones bishop, Lovers.
much love (they say) he had of fair women, and yet lived always a vyrgyne,
which is a matter very hard to be believed. The pontyfycall ring wherewith he
blessed the streets instead of Christen preaching, to bless.
he would never put from him, no, not at his very death, but commanded it to
be buried with him (I think) to bless therewith, when he should arise at the
lattre day. Matthaeus paris, Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, Ranulphus, Rogerus,
Radulphus de Diceto, Thomas Rudborne, Ioannes Capgraue and alij. Old wives in
Worcestre shyre, by the help of idle headed monks, to whom parauenture they
had been bawdes, practysed upon the Ethymology of his name a most shameful and
folyshe fable, A fable.
which yet remains among them. His father (they said) wyllyng to have a do
with his mother upon good frydaye, and she not consenting thereunto for the
days sake, was compelled to leave his begettynge upon a stone, which she
fyndyng there and lamenting the loss thereof, wrapped it up in a lock of
wolle, and so noryshed him up vndreneth her arm hole. By this means (they
say) he was first called Wulstone. Wolstone
This had been a strange begettynge of a child, but yt it was in monkery,
whose ways were not in that wurkynge, like other mennys ways. O most
prodygyouse sodomytes, how have ye illuded the simple with hypocresye and lies?

Of Steven Hardynge and his Cysteanes.
Steven Hardyng was first a monk of S. Benets error, Hardin^
order I should say, at Sherborne not far from Salysbury. This man to sprede
abroad the branches of hypocresye, went from thens into Scotland, and so
fourth into France and Italye till he came to Rome. We read not all this time
that ever he taught any Christen doctrine by ye godly office of preaching or
yet of writynge. But after he had visyted Rome and wandered over all Italye
(much good stuff ye may think, he gathered there) he returned into the
prouynce of Burgundy, and there made himself a monk again. Yet was he not so
quyeted (mark the subtyle workynge of Satan) but he took with him a certain of
his ydell companyons, and fled into the wilderness of Cistercium, and there he
began the wicked sect of Cisteanes, Cisteanes.
otherwise called the white monks, to be noysed abroad a new author of
relygyon. And this was in the year of our lord. a M. and xcviij. 1098.
It remains yet to the glory of England (says Wyllyam of Malmesbury) that
the order of Cisteanes was first begone by an Englysh man. Vincentius,
Antoninus, Houeden, Capgraue, Bergomas, Aegidius Faber, Thomas Scrope, Ioannes
Paleonydorus, ac Polydorus Vergilius de iuentoribus rerum. Of the ambycyon,
lechery, and covetousness of this abhomynable sect, and how it came first
into England, I will show more at large hereafter. 1135.
About this time arose other sects of perdycyon, Sects.
as the Grandimontensers, Camalduleanes, Cartusyanes, dark alleye brethren,
Rhodyanes, Templers, Hospytelers, Premonstrates, Iosephytes, and others, with
innumerable swarms of their laysye leave locustes, crepynge slowly out of the
smoky bottomless pytt, Apocal. ix.

Grave sentences, declarynge. the malice of this age.
Wernerus Roleuinke, a Charterouse monk of Coleyne, thus reports in his
wurke called fasciculus temporum, fasciculus
that we coming after should mark thereof the danger. A wanton time (says
he) began about the year of our lord a thousand, 1000.
and so followed on. For than the Christen faith very much decayed, utterly
declynynge from her accustomed strength and old manlynesse, to a feeble faint
folwyng, as maid Hildegarde shows in her prophecye. For in many regyons of
the Christianyte, were the rytes of the church poluted with mennys inuencyons,
and the sacraments with sorceryes defiled, the mynisters becommynge both
sothsayers and coniurers. Sorceryes.
So that many thought, and not without cause, that Antichrist was than in full
power, Benno says also in ye life of Hilbebrand, that the relygyo^ of the
clergy was none other in those days, tha^ a very treason or utter betrayenge
of the worldely gouerners, to maynteyne their insacyable ambycyon,
covetousness, and lechery. Thus were ye golden calves had in honor in that
age (says Wernerus) meaning the glytterynge prelates, And the other sort
slain or ill handeled, by them understanding ye true simple preachers, as was
Berengarius, Oclefe, and such other like, impugnynge their new ydolatryes. 1094
Johan Capgraue writes, yt a great reformacyon (a dyfformacyon he should have
said) was than in the Scottish church, by procurement of queen Margarete,
which was an Englysh woman borne. What changes were here in the church of
England, I have and will hereafter more plenteously declare.

Hildegardes prophecy, with other notes and examples.
IN the year after Christ's incarnacyon a thousand and an hundred (said
maid Hyldegarde) the Apostles doctrine and fervent righteousness, 1100.
which God had planted in the faithful Christyanes, begone to go back and to
change, as it were, into a doubtful staggerynge. But that woma^ly or fyckle
time will not so long endure, as it has been in breadyng, Vincentius, li,
xxix. ca. xxi. And Iacobus Meyer in chronicis Flandriae, says, yt in the year
of our lord a M. and xcvi. 1096
auaryce, ambycyon, and lechery, so strongely took place in the head rulers of
the clergy, that scarce one could be found out among them to resyst the
wicked, by the sword of the sprete which is the word of God. Many stars
than seemed to fall from heaven. Sigebertus says, Realyte they joined to their
sacramental bread, Realyte.
to make the people believe it to be Christ's natural body. They set up scole
doctrine and the Popes cano^ laws, sophystycally to mainteyne all fylthie
supersticions. Commenly they disputed with cheanes and imprisonmentes, to
terryfye their withstanders. Matthew of Westminstre says, that Paulus the abbot
of S. Albons, Paulus
following the fotesteppes of his father La^francus, was than here in England a
most busy doer, for so much as in England, france, and Italye, the great^^
(...) of men followed in those days the opinion of Berengarius, and Oclefe.
(...), says Henry the fourt Emp^^o^, to his son than having the governance,
and he being under him a woeful ^^ysoner. Those hypocrytes deceive the,
Deceyuers.
for they instruct not the multitude. They seek not thine honor, but deny it.
Under the color of faith, they prepare the snares of deceyt, whyls they
prefer the tradycyons of men to Gods holy commandments. Adelboldus
Traiectensis in uita Henrici Caesaris.

The first fytt of Anselme with king Wyllyam Rufus.
ANselmus a Normandy monk, at the instaunt request, labor, and long suit of
the clergy, 1094
was constytute archebyshopp of Canterbury, by king Wyllyam Rufus. The reason
why he was of our prelates before all others preferred to that dygnyte, was
t^ys. They perceived in him great copye of learning, pregnancy of wytt, a
stought stomach, a boldness unshamefast, an aduenterouse and folehardy head,
and a face without bashefulnesse. Anselme
Whereupon they thought him a man most mete to withstand the kings
procedynges, why^he were in those days nothing to the^r contentacy^ns. For
king Wyllyam was such a man as would not in many points agree to their
horrible ambysyon, King Wyllya^
auaryce, and incontynencyes. Which than they used without all shame, He ded
not much fauer the church of Rome (Matthew Paris says) because the holy
prelat^s were so vnsacyably given there to fylthie lucre. Such indygnacyon he
had against the Pope, by reason of the scysme, which than was at Rome, that he
in his parliament enacted it, that none of his subjects should thydrewarde
repair under forfeture of body and goo^^s or ^is under pain of perpetual
exyle. They could not be Peter's vycars (he Vycars
said) that studied so much for covetousness. Neither should they seem to
hold his power, whose virtuous life they had not in practyse. Concludynge
that the bishop of Rome neither had nor yet should have any thing to do in his
realm. He also restrained the Rome shot, Fabyane says. Whereupon Anselmus
judging the king a scysmatyke, Anselme
a rebel, and a tyrant, obstynatly withstode him to the very face like a
ruffelynge rouer. For the which he was reckened a traitor, as he was well
wurthie, the other bishops holding their fyngars in their noses. Matthaeus
Paris, Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, Radulphus de Diceto, Ioannes Capgraue, and
Ioannes Scuysh.

Fine conueyaunces of these wylye worms.
IT was no long time after that, ere the bishop of Rome had knowledge of this
matter by secret massengers, Spies.
as the clergy has evermore had their betrayers of princes. Whereunto he made
this wylye and foxish answer. Dum furor in cursu est, currenti cede furori.
Whyls fury is in course, give place to it, as though he would at layser
recompense it, when he should se hystyme. 1095.
The next year after was Gualtherus Albanensis a bishop Cardynall sent into
England from Pope Vrbane the second, bryngyng with him the metropolycall
mantell of Anselme, to augment his cockysh autoryte. This Gualtherus craftily
pacifyed ye wrath of the king, and colourably or dyssemblyngly reconcyled both
Anselme and the Pope unto him, only to serve ye time. Anselme from thens fourth
showed a merry countenance (Matthew Paris says) to cause king Wyllyam to think
that he bare him no dyspleasure, Falsehede
but had forgotten all iniuryes. O most crafty fox. Anon after upon this
dyssymulacyon, he axed lycens of the king to go to Rome with this Cardynall,
which he very prudently denied him for doubt of wrong appellacyons and
increase of scysme, unless he would go and no more return again. For there
was no cause why he should go thydre, A traitor.
having his prymates palle brought to him, unless it were to wurke some
secret myschefe, as he meant no less by these five colors of deceyt. Than
played he the part of a trayterouse renegate right out, fleing out of the
realm without lycens. All this has Matthew Paris in the second book of his
ch^onycles, and Radulphus de Diceto.

An other fytt of Anselme with king Wyllyam Rufus.
Mark the arrogaunt sprete of Antichrist in this obstinate Anselme. In a
bitter malice he suddenly departed from the king, A Satan
not taking his leave as became a good subject. To Canterbury he ro^e in post
haste, and so forth to Dover, pryuely to steal a passage over by night, more
like a thief than a true man. But where was than his kings obedyence,
according to this doctrine of Paul? Let every soul submyt himself to the
hyghar power. For who so resysteth that power, resysteth the set ordinance of
God, Roma. xiij. This was far from our Anselme. Se now what followed therefore.
When this packynge was ones known and detected by secret spies, A rebel.
the kings offycer Wyllyam Warelwast prevented the passage, searchyng by the
kings straight commandment, all his trusses, coffers, males, bowgettes,
sackes, satchels, sleues, purse, napkyn, and bosom, A search
for letters and for money, and so let him go like a vagabonde, all his
goods seysed as a forefeyture to ye kings use. Nevertheless wha^ he came
ones to Rome, he was reverently and joyfully received of Pope Vrbane, and made
lord high presydent of all his general counsels. He persuaded the said Pope
to take from the te^porall princes the whole power and autoryte of making
bishops and abbotes, declarynge unto him, what co^modyte and profit he might
have by the same. Suggestyon.
He taught him also many other fine propertyes and feats, how to play the
Pope in deed, and how to become a full Antichrist in length and in bredthe, in
pride and in all other ungodliness. Look Matthew Paris, and Johan Capgraue.

Anselmes good devotion and prayer for women.
RAnulphus and Treuisa says, that when this Anselme was yet but a lowsye
abbot, 1089
in a certain counsel holden at Turon in France, Pope Vrbane at his
instygacyon enacted it, that the Iewysh sabbot should be altogyther turned to
the service of our lady, and that every day in the weke her mattens and
hours should be said of all the whole clergy. Wherein I would this point to be
specially marked of all my readers. In the responde before. Te deum at mattens,
and in the anteme after Magnificat at eue^ song was this solemn petycyon
both song and said. Petycio^
Ora pro populo, Interueni pro clero, Intercede pro deuoto foemineo sexu. Pray
for ye people, be a gracious mean for the clergy, and make intercessyon for
the deuo^te kind of women, It this devout kind had been taken for the whole
kind of women, women.
it had never been placed so nygh the (...) But surely it was some (...) of
women, that they there (...) for, And not only of them, that gave aultre
clothes and towels, wax ca^dels and eches, mass grotes and trentals, but also
of them that served their other secret needs, when the natural beats were
importa^le. Tush, they never had hearts to do so great things, and contynually
for naught, but a provoking cause there was in the way. Truly this was a
fryndly foundacyon of Anselme for prestly women, Fryndly
though he were not very fryndely to their marryage, as afterward shall apere.
What wurthie acts he ded in the other. iij. counsels, at Cleremount, Baren,
and Rome, the process following shall well declare.

His crafty conueyaunce in those. iij. counsels.
IN the year of our lord a M. and xcvi. 1096
Vrb^nus held a general counsel at Cle^emount in france, whereas by the
subtyle persuasyons of Anselme, he moved the Christen princes to war upon the
Turks and Saracenes for the defense of Jerusalem and recover of other noble
cities of the holy land, as they called it, gyuynge them a cross to fight
under. And this was chefely to occupye their ydell h^ades, whyls they were
practysynge and bringing to pass other matters for the full establyshement of
Antychristes reygne. Practyses.
Never. was there such a knauerye practysed under so precyouse a color, as
was this winning of Jerusalem. Mark it for ye space of more than. ij.
hundred years. For under that they brought all their false packynges to pass,
demynyshed the temporal power, wrought all their myschefes, and made themselves
rich without measure. The next year after, to occupye the time, was an other
counsel holden at Baren in Apuita, 1097
where Anselmus played the man, dysputynge against the Greeks for having
leuened bread in their communyon and for admyttynge the marryage of prestes.
though the chronicles name an other thing. For Sigebertus says, that Nichetas
a learned Greek and monk of Co^stantynople, Nichetas.
had written a little before, de azimis Latinorum ac sacerdotum nuptijs, of the
unleavened bread of the Latynes and the necessary wynyng of prestes, against yt
blasphemies of the bishop of Rome. In the great synod at Rome the next year
after that, 1098
was the stallynge of prel^tes and admyttynge to benefyces clearly taken away
from the temporal rulers by the whose ^ sent of that counsel, at the
importune calling on of our Anselme, all lay men being accursed that from
thens forth should attempt it. I told ye before, they would wurke wonders,
wonders
when they were ones from home that should have co^trouled their doings.
Matthaeus Paris, Rogerus houeden, Radulphus de Diceto, Thomas rudborne, Ioannes
Capgraue, and alij plures.

A wonderful overthrow of the temporal power.
SIgebertus, Vincentius, Matthew Paris, and diverse other writers reports,
that in these. iij. counsels they both renewed and confirmed the wicked decrees
of Pope Hildebrande. Counsels
Moreover they enacted that the church, as they tha^ called their shorlynges,
should be faithful among themselves, should outwardly profess a chastyte, and
be clearly exempted from the lay powee. They ordained that bishops, abbotes,
and prestes, should in no wise receive any spirytuall promocyons of princes or
kings, for lucre
neither yet of any lay person, but only of the Pope for money, and that they
should not meddle with handy labors, which they called worldly occupyenges,
but lead all their lives in a slothful ydelnesse. They appointed the lay
people to fast ye lent, their masmongers and shauelynges Septuagesime. aduent,
rogacyon days, and quater-temper, and their whorysh orders only to be given on
their fasting days. They ordained also that he which robbed a prelate should
^e outlawed, Acts.
and he that struck a pressed, should be accursed. They decreed yt kyndredes
should not marry to ye vij. or viij degree in blood, in pain of their great
curse, that lay men should bye no tithes, that none should be chosen bishops
unless they were preste^ or deacons before, neither yet any prestes sons
admytted to holy orders, Monks.
except ^hey had been professed monks, All the (...) Matthew Paris, li. ij.
historiae (...) bruynges had the Babylon buylders, whyls the indiscreet princes
of Christendom were fighting for Jerusalem among ye Turks, they keeping
their wives warm till they came fool home again. A conueyaunce was this, I
think never any so wylye and subtyle before.

Blasphemies are uttered against God and his Christ.
Make speed.
IN this lattre counsel of Rome, as in the closyng up of the whole, they went
more sharply to wurke than before, Simeon of Durham and Roger Houeden says, in
their chronycles. For than they gave open sentence of excommunycacyon upon all
lay persons, what so ever they were, that should from thens fourth exhybyte
any spirytuall promocyons, upon them also that received them of their hands,
either yet should consecrate any such receyuers. Moreover they accursed all
them that for benefyces or other promocyons should serve any great man, A curse.
king, prince, duke, or earl, of the layte. For it was vnsemynge (they said)
yea, they called it a thing very execrable and wicked, that the hands which
were converted into so high wurkynge, as was granted to no Angel, that is to
say, to create him with their crossynges which created all (o abhomynable
Antichrists) and to offer him up for mannys redempcyon, o devils.
which redeemed all (o thieves and soul murderers) vnsemynge it is (say they)
that their holy hands should be brought to such a slauerye, as to be subject
to those filthy hands (o hypocryte knaves) which both day and night are
poluted with shameful touchynges, Blasphemy
robberyes, and blood shede. This was the closing up of that wicked counsel,
the prestes clappynge their hands for joy. Which turned all Christendom to
a most heavy ruin, as hereafter will apere. Simeon Dunelmensis, libro
secundo. Rogerus Houeden, libro primo Radulphus de Diceto, and Capgraue. What
was this counsel else, but the mouth of the beast speaking blasphemies? A mouth
Daniel. vij. and Apocal. xiij. Though these matters were first proponed at
Cleremount in France, and after enacted at Baren in Apulia, yet were they not
so strayghtly knyttt up till they came to Rome.

Mark the good conueyaunce.

Anselmus, made Pope of England for his practyses.
FOr the wyttie inuencyons, forecastynges, Sorceryes.
polecyes, dysputacyons, and other laboryouse affairs of Anselme about the
overthrow of pryncely autoryte, and vprearynge of Antichrists tyranny, and
for his earnest prouocacyons to have them performed in ye crafty wurkynges of
Satan, to se him horrybly, honorably I should say, rewarded for his pains,
Pope Vrbanus appointed both him and them that should afterward succeed in the
patryarcall seat of Canterbury, A seat.
to sytt at his right foot in every general counsel, and that he also
ratifyed by a specyal decre. And thus was it proclaimed when that place was
given him, in the open synod. Includamus hunc in orb nostro, tanqua^ alterius
orbis Papan^. Let us include or admyt this man in our world here, as ye Pope
of an other world, meaning great Brytayne or England, England
which the old cosmographers and famous hystoryanes called an other world,
for so much as it seemed from the great world by sea dyuyded, as Virgyll also
shows in his Bucolyckes. Never was there any place peculyarly appointed to
the archebyshoppes of Canterbury before that day. All this has Thomas Rudborne
in medulla chronicoru^, Johan Capgraue in a manner confirmyng the same, where as
he calls him the Apostle and patryarke of the other world. I have always
been of this opinion, that S. Iohans Apocalypse has as well his fulfyllynge in
the partycular nacyons, A pope.
as in the vnyversall church. I speak it here for Anselme, which was the
great Pope or Antichrist of England. Mark it hardely in him, and a great sort
more of his wicked successors.

The chastyte of Anselme, and death of king Wyllyam.
ANselme anon after departed from his holy father Vrbanus, as he might well
spare him when his turn was ones served, and so came to Lions, 1099
where as he remained till ye death of king Wyllyam Rufus. In the mean time
for his recreacyon (Johan Cagraue says) he sumtyme resorted to Hugh the abbot
of Clunyake, and to his, praty no^nes at Marceniacum. I think not the
contrary, but it was to ease him of some great burdene. For Roger Hourden,
Matthew Paris, and other writers affirms, A son.
that he had a nephewe called Junior Anselmus, which after the rule of the
Roman prelates, is as much to say as a son. He beheld it in a visyon at
Lions (they say) how S. Albone and other Englysh saints, sent fourth an evil
sprete to slay the said king Wyllya^, for oppressynge their abbeyes. But I
beshrewe their cruel hearts, their preuy legerdemaynes were not much to be
trusted, that king so suddenly slain. They feyne in an other fable, A fable.
that he tare with his tethe Christ's flesh from his bones as he hyng on the
roode, for witholdynge the lands of certain byshopryckes and abbeyes, Polydorus
not being ashamed to rehearce it. Some where they call him a read dragon,
some where a fyery serpent and a bloody tyrant, for occupyenge the fruits of
their vacaunt benefyces about his pryncely buyldynges. Thus rail they of their
kings without either reason or shame, in their legendes of abhomynable lies.
Look Eadmerus, Helinandus, Raylers
Vincentius, Matthew of Westmynstre, Rudborne, Capgraue, Wyllyam Caxton,
Polydore, and others. Where ever heard ye before, that their superfluouse,
ydell, and slow belly livings were Christ's flesh? either yet that an old
painted roode had flesh? Let not this be forgotten.

King Henry marryeth a votary without dyspensacyon.
1101.
HEnry the first of that name, constytute king, Anselmus returned into England
again, and married him to a professed nonne of Wynchestre, called Maude, which
was the daughter of Malcolme the king of Scotts. Much a do had her father and
mother, confessor and abbess (Matthew Paris says) to persuade her to this
marryage, and to obtain her consent in the end, by reason of her former
professyon and vow. Yet cursed she the fruit that should come of her body,
Ill change.
which afterward turned her children to great mysfortune (Polydorus says) for
thereupon were her two sons Wyllyam and Richard drowned in the sea, and her
daughter Maude the empress an unfortunate mother in bringing forth Henry the
second, which put unto death holy Thomas Becket. Here was (I trow) no bad
judgment. As scrupulose as Anselme was in other causes, yet found he no
fault in this marryage, No fault.
when he coupled them together, neither sought he to have that vow dyspensed
with. If Ranulphus and Treuisa he brought in to prove her vow a dissymulacyo^,
and that the said Anselme so found it. I have Matthew Paris, Rudborne,
Polydore, and other autours more to confound them, which largely has declared
it a full vow and professyon. But of one thing I sumwhat maruele, why they
and Wyllya^ of Malmesbury should judge it an vnwor thie marriage, Judgments.
and commend her for spending her substance so prodigally, upon syngars,
mynstrels, and poets, delyghtynge in their balettes and vain praysynges, and
oppressynge her tenauntes to maynteyne them. Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, li. v.
de regibus, and Ranulphus. li. vij. ca. xvi.

Anselme wurketh wyles, and Randolfe plain treason.
SOme writers have thought, specially Matthew of Westminstre, that Anselmus bare
with king Henry in this matter concerning his marryage, A practyse.
to win him in an other much more wayghtie and profitable purpose. For in
that generation they are more wyly (Christ says) than are the children of
light, Luce. xvi. But he failed of his purpose at that present. For immedyatly
after ye king made Reinalmus ye queen's chau^cellour, bishop of Herforde
without the clergyes eleccyon, Like a king.
and put him in possessyon without the Popes autoryte, contrary to the oath of
his coronacyon, as testyfyeth Radulphus de Diceto, Matthew Parts, and Roger
Honeden. But when Randolfe the bishop of Durham, whom the king put in the
Tower of London for oppressyon and ill rule keeping, had ones broken out of the
prison in the dronke^nesse of his kepers, and fled into Normandy, persuadynge
duke Robert Courtoys, to subdue the king his brother, Ra^dolfe
and so to usurp his crown, promising also that he had made him fryndes
within ye land by his secret counsel and letters. In his coming (as the
said duke took it ones upon him) a great commocion was within the realm, the
prelates freshly reioycynge thereat, and causynge it to be noysed a broad, that
this soden inuasyon was, for that king Henry had dysobeyed their holy father
of Rome, defeated his eldar brother, and married Christ's professed spowse. And
all this they subtylye had practysed, Practice
to take the peoples hearts from him that he might the more easily have been
subdued (as they thought) to their commodyte. Yet God of his great mercy gave
him than, as he head often after that, the victory over his enemies unlooked for,
to their utter shame and confusyon. Matthaeus Paris, and alij.

The chaste procedynges of diverse holy prelates.
IN the same very year, which was the year of our lord a M. a C. and one,
1101
Thomas the archebyshopp of York, surnamed the eldar, whom Lanfrancus proved
a prestes son before pope Alexandre the second, as is uttered before, departed
the world. This Thomas had a nephewe (Ranulphus says) called also Thomas the
yongar. ij. Thomas.
Ye know what a nephewe is by the rules of Rome, whose fotesteppes the fathers
most studyously followed in that age as natural subjects and children of their
creacyon. By right he should have followed his father in that office, as a
natural inheritour to the myter, but he was prevented by one Gerarde (Wyllyam
of Malmesbury, Gerard.
Ranulphe, and Roger of Chestre says) which was a man as the commen same went,
given all to lecherouse lyghtnesse and to sorcerouse witchcraftes. For when he
on a time was found dead in an herber, a book of curiouse arts was found under
his pyllowe, made by Julius Firmicus, whom he used to read to himelfe in the
none tide. For ye which his own clergy would scarsely suffer him to be buried
without the church under tyrfes or soddes of the grass. Roger Houede^ says,
that this yongar Thomas at the last being archebyshop of York and lyenge in
extremes, 1114.
was a persuaded of his phesycyanes to take to him a woman for remedy of his
disease, which he utterly refused to do, and so dyed. If this were true, as I
much doubt of it, than was he a phoenix in that generacyon, for Danyel says,
that their hearts should be set all upon women Danie. xi. But who so ever shall
resort to his doctrine and fruytes in Antichrists prelacie, doctrine
shall find him a virgyne of a far other sort than Christ has allowed in
the scryptures.

Prestes marryage condemned of our Anselme,
HEnry of Huntyngton in the first book of his chronycles says, that in the
year of our lord a M. a C and ij. 1102.
which was the iij. year of king Henry the first, at the feast of S. Michael
the archangell, Anselme the archebyshopp of Canterbury held a great counsel
at London, at Westmynstre some chronycles has, which is all one. King
Wyllyam Rufus for his time, would suffer the clergy to hold no such
assemblyes, and therefore they mortally hated him. In the which counsel (says
the said Henry, Roger of Westchestre confirmynge the same) he forbad the
prestes of England their wives, never before ye day prohybeted. Marryage.
Mark this. Which seemed to many (say they) a very pure relygyon, but some men
there were which thought it a matter full of parell, and would not have had it
so pass, least the prestes professynge a chastyte above their strengthes,
should thereby fall into most horrible ^yndes of fylthynesse (a Christen
sentence) to the great blemysh and shame of Christianyte. Sodometrye
And because I would this point to be the more earnestly marked of my readers,
to the confusyo^ of antichrists bullish buggerers of Anselmes and Hildebrandes
broad, I put here ye v^ry words of those autours, as they stand in their
latin works. In quo concilio (inquiu^t) Anselmus prohibuit uxores
sacerdotibus Anglorum, mark it
antea non prohibitas. Quod quibusda^ mundissimum ursum est, quibusdam
periculosum, ne, dum munditias uiribus maiores appeterent* in immunditias
horribiles ad Christiani nominis summum dedecus inciderent. For other Englysh
writers shows not the mat^er so lively, as does this Henry and Roger.

The acts of Anselmes great synod.
FIrst they enacted in this counsel, by virtue of Hyldebrandes constytucyon and
Vrbanes Bulle, Acts
that the horrible vice of symony should be condemned for ever, which was not
committed when they sold bishopryckes, abbeyes, deaneryes, prebendes, orders,
dedycacyons, consecracyons, benefyces, or any other ecclesyastycall doings or
promocyons, but only when the king or any other lay person ded give them or
dispose the^. This was their spiritual meaning. Next unto that, they enacted,
that no archedeacon (they spoke of no bishops) priest, Exe^pt.
deacon, subdeacon, collygener nor canon, should from thens fourth marry a
wife, nor yet keep her still, if he had been married to one before. They
ordained also that a priest keeping company with his wife, should be judged
unlawful, and that he should say no mass, and if he said mass, that it
should not be heard. They charged that none were admytted to orders from that
time forward (mark the time) unless they professed a chastyte, Chaste
profession
neither yet that any prestes sons should claim by heretage the benefyces of
their fathers, as the custom had always been, Other acts they made there
else, concerning prestes garments, shauynges, shopynges, offerynges,
tythynges, buryenges, buyldynges, confessynges, eatynges, and slepynges (no
preachynges) to folyshe to be rehearced. Al a like
Look the book of Anselmes. ccc. lxvij. epystles. Se here hardely, if the king
were not as well dyspatched of his pryncely power and autoryte one way, as the
prestes of their wives an other way. O wylye wurkers in that kyngedome of
inyquyte. Nothing was done here by the word of God to his glory, but by the
bishop of Romes autoryte to their vain glory.

Penaltees for them which broke these acts.
Besides their synodall acts, these iniunccions gave they to the prestes which
were dyvorced, Iniunctyons.
First that they and their wives should never more mete in one house, neither
yet have dwelling within their parryshes. If any of them should be accused by
ij. or. iij. witnesses, and could not pourge himself again by six able men
of his own order, he should be judged a transgressour of the statute, depryued
of his benefyce, and made an infame or be put to the open reproach of all men.
Shamed
He that rebelled, or in contempt of their new statute held still his wife,
and presumed to say mass, upon the. viij. day after should be solempnely
excommunycated. All archedeacons and deanes were strayghtly sworn, Forfaytes.
not to color their metynges, neither yet to bear with them for money. And
if they would not be sworn to this, that than they should lose their offices
without recover. All the moveable goods of them that were proved to
transgress the former statute, remained as forfaytes to the bishops, their
poor wives condemned for commen whores. Anselmus in epistolis. Never was
there any tyranny against the let ordinance of God, like unto this tyranny of
Antichrist, sens the worlds beginning, neither under Pharao, Antiochus, Nero,
nor yet Dioclecyane. All this time was not the shameful sodometry, Buggerers.
which secretly lurked among the ydell monks, ones reformed nor yet spoken
of. Was it not happy (think you) for England, that these fylthie buyldynges
of Antichrist, had ye good help of Whynchesters vows of. xxi. year, to
uphold the^ 1539.
when they were droppyng away in this lattre age? If ye consydre it well, ywys
it has passed all stage play.

Abbotes deposed, and prestes in Northfolke depryued.
IN this solemn counsel a great nombre of abbottes were deposed and
dysgraded, chefely these by name. Guye the abbot afperscour, Abbotes
Aldewyne the abbot of Ramseye, Wymunde the abbot of Tauestoc, Godryck the
abbot of Peterburgh, Haymo the abbot of Ceruel, Agelryck the abbot of Mydelto^,
Richard the pryour of Hely, Robert the abbot of S. Edmondes Bury, the abbot of
Mycelney, the abbot of Stoke, and certain others. I think it was for hauntyng
of whores, For whores.
or for bandy rule keeping. For Simeon of Durham, Radulphus Niger, Roger
Houeden, Johan Euersdene, and other historyanes report, that they lived without
all honesty. Bishop Herbert of Norwych had much a do with the prestes of his
dyocese anon after this counsel. For they would neither leave their wives, nor
yet give over their benefyces. Herbert.
Whereupon he wrote to Anselme the archebyshopp for counsel, what was to be
done therein Which Anselme required him by writing to persuade the people of
Northfolke and Southfolke, that as they professed a Christianite, they should
subdue them as rebels against the church, and utterly drive both them and
their married wives out of the contreye with rebukes and shame, placynge monks
in their rowmes. Look the C. and lxxvi. epistle of Anselme. Anselme
This was the reverence that the fallen stars had in those days of
hypocr^sye, to that holy ordinance of marryage, which God had provided for
mannys natural necessyte. O subtyle Sodomytes, how deuylyshely demented you
mennys eyes in that age, that they ded not perceive your wicked sorceryes?

The raylynge ryme of a folysh monk.
ABout the same time as malycyouse monk or beast without all good learning, A
iestar.
made these folysh verses in dyspyght of the married prestes, and set them upon
doors and posts, to cause the people to abhor the^ for their marriages.

O male uiuentes, uersus audite sequentes.
Vxores uestras, quas odit summa potestas,
Linquite propter eu^, tenuit q morte trophaeu^.
Quod si non facitis, inferni claustra petetis.
Babylon.
Christi spo^sa iubet, ne presbyterille ministret.
Qui tenet uxore^, domini quia perdit amorem.
Contradicentem, fore dicimus insipientem,
Non exrancore, loquor haec, potius sed amore.
Ye prestes that live so naughtyly,
Hear these my verses by and by.
Your wives forsake, whom God does hate,
For the lambs sake immaculate.
If ye do not, ye shall to hell, Monkelyke.

The spowse of Christ bad me so tell.
She wylleth no pressed, any mass to say,
Which has a wife, but that he decay.
We call him a fool, that believe not thus,
I speak not of hate by sweet Jesus.
This found I at Ramseye abbeye, in a little treatise de monachatu. Was it not
good stuff to confound prestes marryage with? Good stuff.
Where found this raskal monk, that marryage was a naughty life? either yet
that God ever hated the wife of a priest? considering that Abraham, Aaron, and
Peter, pleased their lord God in marryage. Who would for righteousness
thretten hell, but a fylthie Antichrist knave? Antichrist.
Never was it Christ's dear spowse that forbad the mynystracyon of a married
mynyster, but the sorcerouse synagoge of the devil. They are godly wise that
withstand this hypocresy of Satan, and no foles, though this beastly fool so
call them, of a spyghtfull hate against the veryte of the lord.

The earnest resystaunce of York dyocese.
GErarde the archebyshop of York, when he was ones satled at home after the
aforesaid great counsel, labored to set that way of wickedness in his
prouynce of York, that Anselme had planted before him in the prouynce of
Canterbury. For as the kings had their regyons of God, so had these sorcerers
their sorted out prouynces of the tyrannt of Rome, and would be above them
within their own nacyons, as their wicked maistre would be above God in his
monarchycall meddelynges. When this Gerarde had begone his feats, Gerard.
to depryue the prestes of their wives, not only ded they knytt him up with
bytynge words, but also they manfully reasoned, argued, and dysputed with him.
And when that would not help, they sharply threttened him and reuyled him,
saying, if they might not by the new statute hold wives of their own, Wives
they would not spare the wives of their neybers, make what laws they would.
Professyon of chastyte would they none make, otherwise than was their old
custom. Neither could he cause them by any persuasyon to take their new
orders, which had none orders before, for doubt of the vow annexed newly to
them. And much a do he had with the archedeacons son, whom for a certain
sum of money he had made sure of his fathers lyuynges before his dysseace.
Because it was done before that great synod, for lucre
he would gladly have dyssolued it, but it would not so come to pass. Look the
epystles of Anselme, in the lattre end.

An other Synod at London for Sodomytes.
IN the next year after this great counsel at Westmynstre for prestes
diuorcementes, which was the year of our lord a M.a.C. and. iij. 1103.
rumors and complayntes were brought to Anselme, that the land was sore
replenyshed with the execrable vice of Sodometry. sens the clergy was
inhybyted marryage. Thus entered in this plage here, with the wickedness of
the Romans for our vnbeleues sake, as S. Paul before prophesied, Roman. i.
Than was Anselme compelled to call an other counsel at Paul's within London, a
synod
where as he specially enacted it among other matters, that every sunday in
the year, the Sodomytes should be pronounced excommunycate. Ranulphus. Rogerus
and Treuisa. He ordained also that no cattle should be sold that day, to seem
to sytt upon other matters so well ae upon yt, and sumwhat to shadow ye
filthienesse of his masmo^gers. Wilye were ye wurkers in yt wicked generacio^,
to blind so ye sight of ye simple. The act for Sodometrye was this. An act.
Sodomiticum flagitium facientes, and eos in hac uoluntate inua^tes, graui
anathemate damnamus, donec poenitentia and confessione absolutionem mercantur.
With a greuouse curse we condemn both them that occupye the ungracious vice
of sodometrye, Sodomytes.
and them also that wyllyngly assyst them or be wicked doars with them in the
same, till such time as they may deserve absolucyon by penance and
confession. Is not here (think you) good matter, and relygyously handeled?
Where was the learning of the lord, yea, where were godly governors in this
wicked age? Oh that the people of God should be led by such helhoundes and
thieves, as these sodometrouse shauelynges were.

A general curse against Buggerers.
NOw follows the rest of this act, mark it (good reader) and thou shall
behold these holy canonysed deuyls in their own right colors. Saints
Qui uero in hoc crimine publicatus suerit, statutum est, siquidem fuerit
persona religiosi ordinis, ut ad nullum amplius gradum promoueatur, and si quem
habet, ab illo deponatur. Si autem laicus, ut in toto regno Anglie legali sua
condignitate priuetur. Et ne huius criminis absolutionem ijs quise sub regula
uiuere non nouerunt, aliquis nisi episcopus deinceps facere praesumat, An act.
Statutum quoque est, ut per totam Angliam in omnibus ecclesijs and in omnibus
diebus dominicis, excommunicatio praefata publicetur ac renouetur.

It is enacted, that what so ever he is, that is noysed or proved to be of this
wickedness, if he be a relygyouse person, he shall from thens fourth be
promoted to no degree of honor, and that which he has already shall be taken
from him. If he be a lay person (a secular priest he means) he shall be
deprived of al his fredome within the land (of benefyce he means) and be no
better than a foroner. Lay pressed.
And because that none else but a bishop shall presume to assoyle them that be
not professed monks, it is also enacted, that on every sunday in ye year,
and in every pareysh church of England, the said excommunycacyon or general
curse be publyshed and renewed. Publyshed.
This shall ye find in the volume of Anselmes epystles. Behold (I pray you)
how nycely this matter is touched. I wys poor matrymonye thou cannyst find no
such tender handelynge. No, thou shall not dwell in the monasteryes, neither
yet abide within the dyocese.

A right understanding of the same.
SE how this most shameful matter of bugrery is untowardly tossed and conuayed
here of these beastly buggerers, Conueyaunce.
the complayners thereof fynely lawhed to scorn. So have these holy fathers by
their good discressyons qualyfyed the matter, that by confession and penance
without repentance, of their own appoyntynge, may be able to dyscharge them.
If he be a relygyouse father, as they have appointed relygyon, he shall have no
more harm but the loss of his dignyte till they restore him again. Te^derly
But if he be a lay man, he shall lose his fredome, that is to say, if he were
a secular pressed, or one vnprested by them, he should clerly lose his benefyce,
prebende, or other living, some sodometrouse monk taking ye profyghtes
thereof. None might dyspence with a lay priest, but his bishop, which than was
most commenly a monk, to dyspatche him of his living at his pleasure. Practice
A buggerysh monk might be assoyled of his own abbot at home, and remain
still a fylthie buggerar for term of life, and never feel harm of it. This
general curse was only for prestes, deacons, subdeaco^s, canons, and college
men, which the year before this lived honestly in marryage, and now were
becommen prodygyouse buggerers, Buggerers.
as the monks were in their cloisters, for want of their natural wives. The
monks were not threttened to be under this curse, because they had vowed a
symulate chastyte, and because that what myschefe so ever they ded, the
monastery walls were able to hyde it.

This curse is publyshed, and again dysolued.
ANselmus after this, declared by a large epistle to his archedeacon Wyllyam,
Wyllya^
what order he and the curates should take in the publyshynge of this general
curse or excommuicacyon for buggerye. He wylled them to show fauer in penance
geuynge under his autoryte, as well to them that were ignorant of the
constytucyon that was made, as to them that sinned before the act. He
admonyshed them also to consydre their ages, and to way their contynuaunces in
that sin, A rope
with other cyrcumstaunces more, and whether they were such as had wives before
or nay, that they might so lose their benefyces. Anselmus in epistola. CC.
lxxviij. Ye would wondre to hear the whole tragedye. Here was a great
reformacyon of this horrible sin, without taking away of the cause. O
wicked and abhomynable hypocryte, Hypocryte.
though thou be now a canonysed devil. But mark I pray you, what it came to
in the end. This general curse was called back again at the instaunt suit
of the monks. Ye must know than, it towched them. They persuaded to Anselme,
that the publycacyon or opening of that vice, gave kyndelynges to the same in
the A craft.
hearts of ydel persons, mynystryng occasyon of more boldness to do the
like. So that it has continued ever sens in the clergy vnponnyshed. Ranulphus
Cestrensis, Rogerus Cestrensis, and Ioannes Treuisa. I would they had as well
considered, that the secret occupyenge thereof among themselves, No, not so.
had been a most manifest sign of their dampnacyon, But that the blind
beastly asses remembered not, for still it was noryshed in the monasteryes, and
none ill spoken of it, to the utter perdycyon of thousands.

Anselmus is at contencyon with the king.
IN the end of this year, a contencyon fell betwyn Anselme and the king, A
strife.
and this was the full occasyon ^herof. The king had made one Roger which was
his chau^cellour, bishop of Salisburye, and an other Roger which was his
larderer, the bishop of Herforde, for Reinalmus had given it over, he made also
Wyllyam Gyfforde the bishop of Wynchestre. This might the king do by the
laws of God, Lawful
for David, Salomo^ Iosaphat, and Ezechyas, among the people of God had done
the like, and were allowed in it. But because it was restrained by the bishop
of Rome, this Anselme swelled, fretted, and waxed so mad, that he would
neither consent to it (Radulphus de Diceto says) neither yet confirm the^,
nor communycate or talk fryndely with them. But spyghtfull and malycyously he
called them abortynes or children of destructyon, dysdaynously rebukynge the
gentle king as a defyler of relygyo^ and polluter of their holy ceremonies,
as witnesses Polydorus. With this uncomely outrage the king was much
dyspleased, as he might full well, and required Gerard ye archbishop of york,
as he ought him allegeau^ce, to consecrate the^, which without delay he
performed, saving to Wyllyam Gyfforde which refused it for doubt of Anselme.
Anselme
Thus in a great heat he ones yet again departed the realm with his
dysgraded abbottes and the said Wyllyam Gyfforde, making of the king a sore
complaynt to his holy father as he came ones to Rome. to Rome
The king anon after sent his messengers after him, to declare the truth, that
is to say, bishop Herbert of Norwych, bishop Robert of Lychefelde, and
Wyllyam Warelwast his trusty and famylyar counselor, Warelwast.
which in the end depryued him both of lands and goods in the name of the
s^yd king. Simeon Dunelmensis, Rogerus Houeden, Matthaeus Paris, Matthaeus
VVestmonasteriensis Ricardus praemonstratensis, Ranulphus, Euersden, Capgraue,
Caxton, and Fabiane.

The matter on both sides debated at Rome.
Upon a day wha^ the matter should be reasoned before Pope Paschall, Paschalis.
Willyam Warelwast the kings aturneye stood fourth in defense of his cause,
constauntly allegynge in the end, yt the king would not lose the autoryte of
inuestynge or admyttynge his prelates within his own domynyon, for ye crown
of his rea^me. Whereunto that proud bishop of Rome made this spightfull lewd
answer. Though thy king (says he) would not lose the gyuynge of spirytuall
promocyons in England for the loss of his crown, as thou have said here.
Know thou t^ys determynatly, I speak it here before God, that he shall not
obtain it at my hand, though he would also give his head and all. O
arrogaunt Antichrist, Antichrist.
full ryghtly show thy self. This has Matthew Paris, li iij. Anglorum
historiae, and Johan Capgraue. When Anselme was about to have pleaded his own
cause there, thinking to have had therein the assistence of Richard the pryour
of Helye, Richard
which was a man that time both wyttie and learned, he utterly fell from him,
and took the kings part very earnestly, confutynge all his false accusacyons
and malycyouse detrectyons, for the which in his return the king showed him
much fauer, as Radulphus de Diceto reports. Anon after Anselme entreated for
his dysgraded abbottes and vnconfirmed prelates, which was granted
forthwith, and they restored to their dygnytees. restored.
For that gentle seat (Matthew Paris says) was never wont to fail. when
either read or white came in the way. The next year after was Anselme
clearly forbid to return into England, unless he would observe the good
laws of the land, which he refused to do, the said Matthew says.

The conueyaunces of Anselme by epistles and writings.
When ye kings massengers were returned home again with these crooked news,
and with straight commandment from the cruel bishop of Rome, From Rome.
that he should neuermore intermeddle with appoyntynge out of prelates or by
gyuynge to them the ring and pastoral hoke, but to leave it only to his
absolute autoryte, he was sore displeased, turnynge all the possessions and
richesse of Anselme to his own use. What letters and crafty counsels, Knaueryes.
blasphemouse bablyng^s and abhomynable wrastynges of the scriptures went
betwyxt that lewd bishop of Rome and Anselme, for the space of. iij. years
after, it would require a great field of matter to show, as I find in his
epystles. Moreover it is a wondre to behold there, the subtyltye that this
Anselme uses, subtylte.
to bring his deuylysh purpose to pass, for demynyshment of ye Christen
princes autoryte and augmentyng of Antichrists vsurpacyon. That prince he
flattereth to give over his right, and an other he commends in his
folyshness yt has done it already, their folysh wives always suborned to put
the cause forward. That doltyshe priest he prayseth, which has contempned his
princes lyberalyte, to an other he promyseth much hyghar promocyon. These are
the ingynes of a crafty d^uyll, if ye mark them. His letters to sister
Frodelina, sister Ermengarda, sister Athelytes, sister Eulalia, sister Madily,
and sister Basyle, Systers
to Maude to abbess of Cane in Normandy, and to Maude the abbess of Wilton
here in England, declares him to be very famylyar with nonnes. Ex epistolis
Anselmi. He also made a treatise about the same time, called planctus amissae
uirginitatis, a bewailing of maydenhede lost.

The first order of typpet men, or secular prestes.
IN the year of our lord a M. a. C. and v^ began first the order of
Sarisburianes, 6.
Matthew Paris says. What manner of order this should be, I can not conjecture,
unless it were the order of portasse men, typpet knights, or new shaven sir
Iohans, professynge the unsavory use of Sarum. By like when these men were ones
clearly separated from their married wives, they were at the last contented at
their bishops suggestyon, to live peaceably under him, to come, as it were
into a vnyformyte of relygion in outward aperaunce, as the monks ded in their
cloisters, and so to win again some fauer or good opynyo^ of the people, An
order
which they for their wives had lost. Than began they first to shine in one
show, or to muster in one lyuerye, as the coltes of one mare, one short an
other long, one high an other low. For before that time were they dyspersed by
many dysgysinges, one diverse from an other. As the monks had their cowles,
caprones or whodes, and their botes, so had they than their long typpettes
their prestes cappes, Relygio^ like.
their side gowns gyrt to them, and their portasses relygyously hanging with
great butto^s at their gyrdles. They had also their crowns shaven, and their
hear docked, like as the monks had, though not so much as they, to apeare
also relygyouse rabble. Wha^ they had on^^ received that mark of the beast in
their foreheardes and ryghthandes, by the profession of a false chastyte they
were made free of Antichrists mart, and might by his autoryte both bye and
selle, Merchau^tes.
Apoc. xiij Yet could they never obtain of the say multitude, so great an
opinion of holy perfectyon as ded the monks, unless it were here one
hypocryte and there an other, but in conclusyon continued under ye slendre name
of secular prestes or hedge chaplains. Secular
For in most places they dwelt vploude, and wanted relygyouse habytacyons to
have s^t them forewarde or made them mo^e Pope holy.

How the emperor was used in the time of their sorceryes.
NEcessary were it, to mark an other crafty conueyaunce of these holy
helhoundes. A questyon might here be axed, A questyon.
where Henry the iiij. Emprour was for the time if this tragycall turmoyle,
that he looked not more narrowly to their hands, being a man so wise and so
godly. This questyon is suffycyently answered by the chronycle writers of that
age. The prelates occupied him with such mortal wars, from Hyldebrandes time
hitherto, that he knew not which way to turn him. They made his own
subjects in every quarter to rebel against him, O traitors.
and his own natural son in the end, upon desire of the crown imperyal,
most falsely to betraye him, subdue him, captyue him, emprison him, and cruelly
at the lattre to murder him. The storye is a matter very lamentable and
heavy, as Athelboldus Traiecte^sis, Barnesridus Vrspergensis, and Ioannes
Nauclerus has described it. When this man which was called Henry the v. was
ones satled in the empire, tidings were brought him ye next year after, that
Paschall the bishop of Rome held a general council at Trecas in France,
1106.
against his father. Wherein he prosecuting the former acts of Hildebrande,
prohybyted lay princes the inuestyng of prelates, and the prestes their wives
in the realm of France as he had done in other nacyons, Antichrist.
dysgradynge those bishops and abbottes whom the French king and emprour
had made. The said emprour hearing of this, sent learned men unto him,
gentylly requyrynge that he would not take from him, that his predecessors
without interrupcyon had used from the time of Charles the great, by the space
of more than. CCC. years. The boshopp at that time deferred the answer till
he came to Rome. Godfridus Viterbiensis, Deceyt.
Albertus Crants, Paulus Aemilius, Iacobus Bergomas, Ioannes Stella, Ioannes
Capgraue, li. i. de nobilibus Henricis, and Robertus Barnes.

The homblye handelynge of prelates at Rome.
When this emprour se his time, 1112.
he came into Italy with a great host of me^, Paschall ye Romish bishop not
pleased therewith, to whom he sent this massage. Give unto Caesar that is Cesars
meaning the imperyall crown and vnccyon, with power of inuestynge prelates.
For he required also that he should confirm the bishops whom he had
admytted before, which all he refused to do. The emprour with that, set his men
of war upon him and his calkers, Cardynalles I should say, which took the
very breches from their arses ( Christianus Massaus says) and committed them
almost naked to prison. Breches
Whereupon in the end, in all things he consented to the emprour, subscrybyng
and sealyng unto him a perpetual priuylege, for admyttynge bishops and
abbottes within his whole dominyon, cursynge all them that should at any time
after that withstand it. But as he was ones departed out of Italy, he called
an o^^^r synod at Laterane in Rome by counsel of our Anselme and such other,
A counsel
and dyssolued all again that he had granted, excommunycatynge the said
emprour and dysdaynouslye changynge his pryuylege to the scornful name of a
prauylege, or writynge that stood for naught. For Gesnerus says in his
universal Biblyotheke, that Paschalis wrote to Anselme an epistle for his
excuse. An excuse.
By like than he had laid it sumwhat sharply to his charge. Thus mocked they
in that age the great princes of the world, depryued the^ of power, and trod
their high dygnytees under their fylthie fete, all contrary to the wholesome
documentes byth of Christ and of his Apostles. This story is tenderly towched
of the Italysh writers for hurtynge themselves, yet has Robert Barnes
described it at large in uitis Romanoru^ pontificum. Barnes.
Ye shall understand that this was that emprour, which married king Henryes
daughter that was called Maude the empress. Ioannes Capgraue li. i. de
nobilibus Henricis.

Anselme brings the king in subiectyon to Antichrist.
Matthew Paris shows in ye third book of his large chronycle, that after king
Henry the first had taken his brother duke Robert prisoner, King Henry.
and obtained other great vyctoryes, in the year of our lord as M.a.C. and.
vij. 1107.
he received the archebyshop Anselme again into his fauer at Becca in
Normandy, restorynge him to his old possessions. And as touching the bishop
of Rome (says he) the learned king never feared him for his spirytuall
autoryte, but only for his temporal power. In the same year was a great
counsel holden in the kings palace at London, A counsel
where as the prelates were agreed by the space of, iij. days, that the king
should hold still the autoryte of admyttynge prelates and appoyntynge
spyrytuall offices, as other kings his predecessors ded, notwithstanding the
Popes late inhibicyon. This has Simeon of Durham, and Roger Houeden. But when
Anselme was ones come, Anselme
which was high president of that counsel and Pope of this whole isle of
Brytayne, all was clearly dashed again, and this contraryouse sentence of his
took place, that from that day forward no bishop nor abbot should receive
ring or pastoral hoke of the king or yet of any other lay mannys hand
within England. He added moreover this spyghtfull clause unto it, O traitor.
that when a prelate was ones chosen, the want of due homage to his king
should be no impedyment of his consecracyon. Look Radulphus de Diceto, Matthew
Paris, Matthew of Westminstre, and Roger Houeden. O manifest traitor without
all shame and honest obedyence. Than consecrated he. vij. bishops at ones, A
Pope.
which never was seane in England before, but at one time. Thus got Anselme
(Johan Capgraue says) the vyctory long looked and labored for, for the
churches lyberte.

An other synod of Anselme, for dyssoluyng prestes marryage.
IN the year of our lord a M.a. C. and viij. 1108.
Anselme held an other great synod at London, wherein yet ones again he made
solemn process against all prestes, deacons, and subdeacons, that had
married wives, renuynge all his former statutes and acts made against them, by
consent of the king and his barons. For before that time, they ded all without
their consent, which they afterward found not in all points to their
minds commodyouse. No women were from thens fourth permytted to dwell in house
with them, Women
saving only they which were so nygh of kynne as they might not marry with
(though they lay with some of them at times) as mother, sister, grandame,
aunte, and such like. Utterly was it forbidden them ever after to have any
talk with them that had been their wives, unless it were in the open streets
before two able witnesses. Simeon Dunelmensis, and Rogerus Houeden. Witnesses.
Who would thus so ungodly and presumptuously have taken upon him to have
separated those whom God had joined, but proud Antichrist and his dyabolycal
rabble of sorcerouse Gomorreanes? How stood this with the holy Ghostes doctrine
uttered of S. Paul, i. Corinth. vij. Antichrists.
Unto the married (says he) command not I but the lord, that the wife be
not separated from the man? But what else went these execrable hypocrytes about
in all these their ungracious procedynges, Papystes.
but to make Gods holy commandments of none effect, for their fylthie
rathers tradicyons? and with their new doctrine of deuyls in hypocresye, to
polute the Christianyte with the prodygyouse occupyenges of stynkynge Sodom.

The closing up of Anselmes unsavory doings.
ALl the next year after, ded Anselme bestow in a strange kind of
scolding, with Thomas the newly elected archebyshopp of York, 1109.
till such time as death clearly took him from the world. He utterly forbad
him the pastoral cure, till such time as he had submytted himself to his
Papacye, and professed a canonycall obedyence, which he called a submyssyon to
the church of Canterbury. If thou wylt not do thus (says he) we charge all
the bishops of England, A Pope.
under pain of the great curse, that none of them presume to consecrate ye,
neither yet to receive the for a bishop, if thou any where else be consecrated,
with many other obprobryouse tauntes. Matthaeus Paris, and Radulphus de Diceto.
Many ydell matters dysputed this Anselme, with very weak, raw, and fryuolouse
reasons, as is to be seane in his feeble wurkes of the sowles orygynall, wurkes.
of leaven and bread unleavened, of the measurynge of the cross, of the
mouynge of the aultre, of Maryes concepcyon, of the churches offices, and such
like, which Christ calls gnatt strayuynge. I maruele with what conscience
Polydorus called him that good shepeherde, which daungereth his life for the
sheep, and in the mids of all his false packynges. A wolf
He does Christ much wrong therein which only fulfilled it in effect. He does
no pastors office that robs Christen kings of their pryncely power and
autoryte, to enhaunce the tyrannouse vsurpacyons of Antichrist, as this Anselme
ded, but rather he shows the fashyons and roberyes of a thief. I can away at
no hand with so blasphemouse handelynge of the scriptures.

The moon was darkened and what it sygnyfyed.
Matthew Paris writes, Mathewe of Westmynstre repetynge the same, that in the
year of our lord a M.a C. and x. 1110.
the moon apered all dark without light. Whereby God declared in the open face
of ye world, that his church by the monks hypocresy in that age was darkened
with a beastly ignorance of his lively doctrine. For the moon betokens
commenly in the scryptures, the congregacyon of the lord. About this time
(says Johan Tritemius) entered all the craftye learning. Tritemius.
Yea, the subtyle phylosophye of the paganes began here to defyle our sacred
theologye with her unprofitable curyosytees The Gospel was put a part, saving
only to be red by parcels in the temple, in a foren language without
understanding, and the corrupted doctrine of fylthie bastardes Peter Lumbarde,
Peter the great eater, and Gracyane the monk, which were three children of one
bawdy nonnes fornycacion, iij. bastardes.
received and only had in price for it. The monks of that age (says Johan
Carrion in his chronycles) perceiving the knowledge of the holy scriptures to
wax faint and to be naught set by, for the study of the popysh lawers, they
thought also to practyse a new kind of dyuynyte, Dyuynyte.
and set up scholasticall dysputacyons of divine matters. But be ware of
subtyle sophysters in the doctrine of the church (says Johan Baconthorpe in
prologo quarti sententiarum. viij. quest.) For their property is to withstand
the veryte, and to snarle mennys conscyences by darkenyng the clear light
thereof. If it be to the contrary reasoned (says he) that sophystycall
arguments are fytt to confound heretykes by. I utterly deny that reason. For
only is it the open veryte that must confound them. As for sophysiues, their
wicked nature is to bring in all error and heresies. All this has
Baconthorpe. Baconthorpe.


Raufe the archebyshop of Canterbury, honors his king.
IN the year of our lord a M. a. C. and xiij. 1113.
the king was minded to have given the archebyshopryck of Canterbury, to
Faricius the abbot of Abendon. But at the instaunt request and suit of the
clergy in the counsel of Wyndesore, he altered his purpose, and gave it to
Raufe the bishop of Rochestre, Raufe.
a ruffelar to their minds. Him he adourned with his own pryncely hands,
mynystrynge unto him both the ryng and metropolycall cross. For than ones
again (Matthew Paris says) he had taken an earnest stomach against the bishop
of Romes unshamefast procedynges, his brother duke Robert imprisoned, and his
other enemies brought under. In the year of our lord a thousand a.C. and xv.
1115.
was the said Raufe consecrated, and received his patryarchal palle of Anselme
ye other Anselmes nephewe, which was tha^ the popes great legate a latere. As
the king was same year married, after his first wyfes ^^sseace, to Adelphe ye
duke of Loraines daughter and was again crowned with her by the bishop of
Wynchestre, this heady archebyshopp fell into a palseye for wodenesse, and said
unto him the next day after, that either he should leave that crown, The
crown.
unlawful (he said) for so much as it was not taken of him, or else he would
leave of his mass sayng, which was no small matter. And ye lords about him
had much a do to stay the lunetyke prelate, from strikynge down the crown
from the kings head and stampynge it under his foot. Yet ded the gentle
king give him fair words, the chronycles says. Look Wyllyam of Malmesbury,
li. i de pontificibus, Ranulphus li. xij. ca. xv. Rogerus, Authors.
li. vij. and Johan Capgraue, li. ij. de nobilibus Henricis And Treuisa adds
unto it in fine Englysh, that this hawtie prelate was a great Iaper, the term
is sumwhat homelye. Ded I not tell you before, that kings for their power, had
sped as ill, as the prestes for their wives? And I think, I told the truth.

Of Pope Calixtus and the head church of Wales.
MVche were it to rehearce the turmoylynges of Pope Calixte the second,
Calixtus,
for renuynge of the execrable acts of hellysh Hyldebrande and prestygyouse
Paschall, against the marryage of prestes and power of princes for inuestyture
of prelates. In the year of our lord a M. a. C. and.xix. 1119.
He held counsel at Remis in France, and in the year a M.a.C. and. xxiij.
1123
he held an other with CCC. bishops at Rome. And in these ij. counsels he
depryued all prestes of the commen Christianyte, that held still their wives,
willing them from thens fourth to be taken for no better tha^ paganes and
helhoundes, and to want their Christian buryall. The princes that had given out
ecclesyastycall offices, he condemned of sacrilege, preposterously allegynge
the scriptures, Scripturs.
that they which were admytted by them, entered not by the door, but they
scattered from Christ, dyuydynge his coote without seem. As though in their
exceeding pride and covetousness, they had been the same Christ which was
full of Godly symplycyte and lowlynesse, and their glytterynge synagoge that
simple coote without seem. 1123
In this lattre year dyed Raufe the heady archbishop of Canterbury, and
Wylliam Curbo^l, which was a chanon, succeeded. From the time of Augustyne till
that day, by the space of more than five hundred and. xxiiij. years, none
occupied that seat but monks, and that caused so many corrupcyons to enter
into ye church of England, for all they maynteyned Antichrist, A little before
this, that is to say, in the year a. M.a.C. and. ij. 1102.
bicame the archebyshopryck of Meneuia or Prymates seat of. S. David in wales,
first subject to the church of Canterbury. And from the days of king Lucy
to the year a. M.a.C. and. xv. 1115
none other were archebyshoppes there than Brytaynes or Welchemen, and all that
time had their ministers wives. Wives.
But sens the English monks occupied, they have had concubynes for wives, and
will not change at this day, men say. Thus entered fylthienesse in that
quarter also, the time would be marked. Suncon Dunelmensis, Rogerus Houeden,
Giraldus Cambrensis, and Ranulphus.

King Henry plaged, for sufferinge marriage to be condemned.
ALl foren wars ended, and controuersyes pacifyed, in the year of our Lord
a. M.a C. and xx. 1120
King Henrye the first with great joy and triumph departed out of Normandye,
and entered after his great victoryes, by sea into England. But within few
days folowinge was this gladness turned into a most heavy and horrible
sorrow. For William and Richard his. ij. sons and Marye his daughter, with
Otwell their tutoure and scholemaystre, Richard the earl of Chestre and his
wife the kings nece, all the merye chaplaynes, companions, and ruflars of the
court, chambrelaynes, buffares, and seruytours, the Archedeacon of Herforde,
the Princes play fellows, sir Jeffrey Rydell, sir Robert Malduyte, sir
Wyllyam Bygot, with many other great heirs, lords, Lords.
knights, and gentylmen, ladies and gentylwomen, Ladies.
to the nombre of a.C. and xl. Besides the yeomen and maryners, which were
more than half an hundred, taking passage by night, were al drowned in the
bottom of the sea, except one man, their bodies never found. Guilhelmus
Malmesbury, Simeon Dunelmensis, Rogerus Houeden, Matthaeus Paris, and Ioannes
Capgraue. Libro. ij. De nobilibus Henricis. Some monkyshe writers has judged
the curse of queen Mande, writers.
which was a professed votarye, to be the cause of this ruin, as is said
before, some other attrybuteth it to the vice of sodometrye, which many of
them had learned of the monks and the prestes after the solemn professyon
of their new vow of chastyte. But I do think it to be a plage of God upon
the kings posteryte, A plage.
for sufferynge so great a myschefe to enter in his time without
contradyccyon as that sodometry was, and as was the condempnacion of the
Christen ministers marryages. For in him (Polydorus says) utterly ended the
dissent of the Normannes blood in the male kind, according to the wise
mannys sentence, Sap. iiij. The plants of aduoutry shall take deep rotynge. As
he was the son of a bastard, Bastard
and suffered this preposterous religyon or bastardye of prestes without
wives, to take place here in his days, to the vprayse of buggery, and never
resysted it being gods immedyate mynistre.

Celsus an archebyshop had both a wife and chyldern.
CElsus the great archebyshop of Armach and high prymate of Ireland, Celsus
had both a wife and children in ye time of his archebyshoprye, according to
the usage of that contreye. That archebyshopryck, S. Bernard says) with the
primacye of the whole land, was holden as an inherytaunce in one kyndred, by
xv. generacyons, the son always succeding his father. And. viij. of them he
reports to be wonderfully well learned, but always they took their orders
for that long season, without any vow of professyon. No vow.
Neither would the people suffer any other to take that high office, save only
them which were of the same house and progenye. This has S. Bernard in uita
Malachiae, so has Vincentius, Antoninus, Petrus Equilinus, and Johan Capgraue
in their historyes of saints. What a beastly fool is Johan Eckius than, Eckius.
which reports in his Enchiridion, that it has not been heard sens the
death of Christ, that any pressed has married a wife, doctor Cool and other
Papists maynteinynge ye same here in England? This Celsus at the lattre,
being an old dottynge man, and seduced by them which taught lies in
hypocrisye, was the first that brought into yt regyon, that doctrine of deuyls
which condemned marriage in the clergy. For he sent his wife in a vysyon
(they say) a woman of a large and reverend countenance, Reverend
to surrendre, as he lay a dyenge, he pastoral cross to one Malachias which
had professed chastyte about the year of our lord a M.a.C. and xx. 1120.
Many mad packynges were among these Romysh saints, when the byshopryckes
waxed fatt. Pope Adryane the. iiij. xxxiiij. years after which was an Englysh
man, and Pope Alexander the third. xvi. years after yt, Irel ^
in their tyranny commanded king Henry the second, to subdue the Iryshe
nacyo^ as heretykes and rebels, because the people there withstode their
procedynges for their bishops and prestes marryages. And for that victory
they confirmed him lord of Irelande. Look the chronycles of Nicolas Treueth
and Johan Hardynge.

A lecherouse Cardynall condemns prestes marryage.
IOannes de Crema, the pressed Cardynall of S. Grilog in Rome, was sent into
England and Scotland, from Pope Honorius the second, as high commissyoner and
legate from his right side. in the year of our lord a M.a.C. and xxv. 1125.
to se that all things were well there in the clergy to his behoue. Besides
his general commissyon, he sent pryuate letters to the kings and the prelates
of both those regyons, to receive him as his own dear son and as S. Peter's
holy vycar, which declares his autoryte not small. This legate with great
pomp thus entering into England about the feast of Eastre, A legate
was horrybly, honorably I should say, received of the prelates, and went
banketynge and prowlynge from bishop to bishop, and from abbot to abbot, till
he came to the water of Twede and the town of Rorburgh in Scotland, where as
he found David the Scottysh king. His legacye there performed and all his
bags we^e stuffed, Bags
he returned again to London and at Westmynstre upon ye ix. day of Septe^b.
he held with. ij. archebyshoppes. xxiiij. bishops. xl. abbottes, and an
innumerable multitude of the clergy and commen people, a great synod. Where
as he rygorously and stoughtly replied against those prestes, that would for no
commandment forsake their married wives, repetynge often this vnsemynge
sentence, Sentence
that it was a shameful matter to rise from the sides of an whore to make
Christ's body. A clause was this in qualyte not unlike to him that uttered it,
which was an ydolatrouse whoremonger. He ordained in that synod, that prestes
should keep company with no kind of women, he condemned marryage to the. vij.
degree in blood, and that no prestes son should claim church or prebende by
inherytaunce, folyshely concludynge with this verse of David, A verse.
Psalm. lxxxii. Pone illos ut rotam, etc. Make of them a whele, lord, that
say, we will have the howses of God in possessyon. Simeon Dunelmensis, Rogerus
Houeden, Henricus Huntendunensis, Radulphus de Diceto, Matthaeus Paris,
Ranulphus and Rogerus Cestrensis atque alij.

This Cardynall shows the first fruits of that chastyte.
THe prestes being moved with ye furiouse act of this Cardinal, Cardynall.
and therewith perceyuyng him to be a man of light conversation, so narrowly
watched him ye night following, that they ^oke him in bed with a notable whore.
The matter was very open (says Roger Houeden) for it was done at London, where
great plenty is of witnesses. It could not well be hydden (says Henry of
Huntyngton in ye viij. book of his chronycles) neither was it fy^t to have been
kept secret from the knowledge of men. Secret.
If any be offended (says he) that a pressed should marry, let him keep it to
him self, leest he fall in like danger as ded this lordely legate. This
Cardynal was he (Polydorus says) that beheld a small mote in an other mannys
eye, and could not perceive the great beam in his own. The prestes ded him no
wrong, that in this case dysobeyed his unjust procedynges. Nothing was found
more vnfytt, Vnfytt.
than to require to strayghtly of others yt his leife could not do. Thus he
that entered with honor and pomp, went home again to his father with shame
and confusion. The acts of S. Peter's vycar were all turned over, and the
religyouse syttynges of the prelates there, were utterly laughed to scorn. The
bishops and fat ab^ottes departed thens with read chekes, Ashamed.
not glad of the bawdy chance that happened, and they let that matter pass
for the space of more than three years after. For the slaundre was not small,
Matthew Paris says. So returned the prestes ones again to their wives, and were
much more bold than before. Praefati autores cum Polydoro and Fabiano.

The king derydeth the bishops procedynges.
NOt all forgetful of their wicked fathers affairs, the prelates of England
in the year of our lord a M.a.C. and. xxix. 1129.
gathered themselves together at London yet ones again, in ye first day of
August, to put the prestes clearly from their wives. At this great counsel
(says Ricardus Premonstratensis) were all the bishops of England, except.
iiij. which dyed, as it chanced, ye same year, that is to say, of Wynchester
Durham, Chestre and Herforde. Their process was all against the cocasses or
she cooks of ye curates, Process
that they should not dwell in house with them. For after the prestes had been
compelled to renounce the tytles of their wives, they kept them in most places
under the name of their cocasses, lawnders, and seruyng women. The king
perceyuyng the malice of the bishops, and seeing advantage to grow
thereupon, Lucre.
by this propre polycye deceived them. He took upon him the correction of them,
and promised to execute true justice. But in the end (Matthew Paris says) he
laughed them all to scorn, and taking a pensyon of the prestes, he permytted
them still peaceably to hold their wives. Polydorus reports, that the king
got of the clergy this autoryte over the prestes, by a fine craft of
conueyaunce. A craft.
And when he had so done, mysused it. A very fine judgment of a man learned,
so to dyffyne of a princes power. The king deceived them (Roger Houeden says)
by the symplycyte of Wyllyam the archebyshop of Canterbury. For when they had
ones uncircumspectly granted him to execute justice upon the prestes wives,
Wives
it turned in the end to their rebuke and shame, the prestes for money set
again at lyberte for them. Praedicti autores cum Ranulpho, Matthaeo
VVestmonasteriensi, and Rogero Cestrensi.

A myddle swarmynge of Antichrists sects in England.
FOr causes diverse, which some of my readers shall find necessary to be
known, I have added here the times whe^in the second swarm of locustes, or
synnefull sects of Antichrist has entered into this realm of England. Sects.
The first swarm was of the Benedictynes and chanons of S. Augustyne, called
the black monks and black chanons, of whose fattynge up I have reasonably
treated both in the first part of this wurke, and also in this second. The
first of this lattre swarm* were the Cisteanes, Cistea^s.
otherwise called y^ whyght monks, which came into this land in the year of
our lord a M. a. C. and. xxxij. setting their first foundation in the deserte
of Blachoumor by the water of Rhie, whereupon their monastery was called
Rhieuallis. Saint Robertes fryres began at Gnaresborough in York shyre in the
yearr of our lord a M.a.C. and xxxvij. S. Robert.
And the order of Gilbertines at Sempyngha^ in Lincoln shire in the year of
our lord a M.a.C. and. xlviij The Premonstratensers or white chano^s, came in
to the realm and builded at Newhowse in Lyncolne dyocese in the year of our
lord a M.a.C. and xlv. The Chartrehowse monks came into the land and were
placed at Wytham in the dyocese of Bathe, Charterers.
in the year of our lord a M. a. C. and lxxx. I reckon not the hospytelers
and Templars, with such like. Ioannes Hagustaldensis, Ricardus
Praemonstratensis, Ioannes Capgraue, Thomas Scrope, and Polydorus Vergilius.
All these at their first enteraunce, were very lean locustes, Locustes.
as they are in S. Iohans reuelacyon described, barren, poor, and in outward
aperaunce very simple. But in process of time, through symulate holiness,
they grew fat like their fellows. Fat.
They got them lions faces, and were able to buckle with kings. Their
lecherouse acts, I shall hereafter declare.

King Steven professes a slavery to Antichrist.
HOw king Steven bicame an instrument to their wicked use, in ye year of our
lord a M. a. C. and xxxv. 1135.
it is easily known by ye oath which they compelled him to make at his
coronacyo^, what though he ded not in all points observe it. This is the oath,
as Ricardus prior Hagustaldensis has written it in his small treatise de
gestis regis Stephani. Mark it. I Steven by the grace of God, Steven.
good will of the clergy, and consent of ye commens, elected king of England,
and by Wyllyam the archebyshop of Canterbury and legate of the holy Rome
church under Pope Innocent the second, confirmed, make faithful promise to do
nothing here in England in the ecclesyastycall affairs, A vow.
after the rules of symonye, but to leave, admyt, and confirm the power,
order, and distrybucyon of all ecclesyastycal persons, and their possessions,
in the hands of the bishops and prelates of the same. The ancient dignitees
of ye church confirmed by old priuyleges, and their customs of long time
used, Customs.
I promise, appoint, and determyne inuiolably to continue. All the churches
possessyo^s, holds, and tenementes, which they hitherto have had, I grant
them from hens forward without interrupcyon, peaceably to possess, etc.
Behold here what popettes these lecherouse luskes made of their kings, Mark it
and se (I pray you) if they sought any other commen welthe than of their
ydell bellyes in that proud kingdom of Antichrist? Was this a following of
Christ after ye Gospel, thus to illude their Christen governors? Nay, it was
rather a ronnyng after Satan in the blasphemouse imytacyon of ye bishop of
Romes decrees. The last plage of God light upon this unfaithful generacyon, A
plage.
if they will not yet behold these euyls of their wicked fathers, and abhor
them from the heart.

The rebellyon and cantels of bishops against the king.
IN the next year following, notwithstanding this oath, 1036.
king Steven reserved to himself the inuestynge of prelates, Matthew Paris
says, and showed unto the clergy many other displeasurs. Wherefore in
process, they caused Maude the empress, contrary to their oaths of
allegeaunce, to come into ye realm, and to make claim to the crown and
strongely to war upon him. For ye which he enprysoned and bannyshed certain
of the bishops, Prelates.
chefely Alexandre of Lyncolne, Nigellus of Helye, and Roger of Salisbury. He
feared not to go unto Oxforde, and to sytt there in open parlyament, which no
king might do (they said) without a shameful confusyon. From Roger the
bishop of Salisbury he took the. ij. Castles of Vyses and Sherburne, finding
in them more than. xl. thousand marks in money, wherewith he performed the
great marryage between Constaunce the French kings sistre and Eustace his
son and heir. A help.
This bishops son (by like he had a wife) which had been the other
kings chancellor, this king handeled hard, to come to his purpose. He
kept him fastenynge, threttened him hanging, and at the lattre bannyshed him
the realm, which cost the bishop his life. A natural father. A sinode
Anon after the bishop of Wynchestre being the popes great legate and
perceiving the clergy not to be regarded, the realm being than in diuysyon
betwixt them both, that is to say, the king and Maude the empress, he
called a counsel of prelates and enacted it for a law, that what so ever he
were, that laid violent hands upon a church man, he stood accursed with
book, Accursed.
belle, and candell, and might of none be assoyled, but of the popes own
person. He ordained also that no priest from thens fourth should assiste any
king in his wars, Ioannes Hagustaldensis in historia xxv. annoru^, Rogerus
Houeden, Giraldus Cambrensis, Mattheus Paris, Polydorus, and Ranulphus.

The king enprisoneth the canons wives of Paul's.
RAdulphus de Diceto does show it plainly in his abreuiacio^s of chronycles
that in the year of our lord 1137. 1137.
The king was in displeasure with William the deane, Raufe Langforde, Richard
Belmeis, and the other canons of Paul's at London, about the eleccion of their
bishop. For contrary to his expectacion they had chosen Amselme the other
Anselmes nephew, which was than abbot of Bury, and a man of suspected living,
as witnessed Turstanus in an epistle to the pope. Tursta^.
Whereupon the king took all their wives otherwise called their kichine maids
for doubt of the spiritual laws, in their best apparelinges, and put the^ all
in the tower of London. Where as they were kept very straightly, and not
delivered again without bodily shame, deminishment of their fame, and
greuouse expenses, ye story says The bishops, archedeaco^s, Prelates.
chau^celloures, and deanes were in those days most commonly, al of one
kindred, as the seide Radulphus reports. The bishop of To. Innocent, than
wrote into England, yt Peter's little ship being long tossed on ye water vexed,
troubled, and oppressed of enemies, was very like, if remedy were not found in
time to be over rowne and drouned, the shourges of scismatikes and of heretics
were so great. Look Ricardus Hagustaldensis in his small treatise de bello
Standardico, Heretykes.
and Ioa^nes hagustalde^sis in descriptione eiusdem belli. By the scysmatykes
he meant those prestes, which would not leave their wives at his wicked
persuasyons, and by the little ship, his own sorcerouse synagoge of besmered
shauelynges.

An other counsel holden against prestes and their wives.
Upon this occasyon came Albericus ye bishop of Hostyense, in post from Rome,
in the year of our lord a M.a.C. and. xxxviij. 1138.
as the vycege rent of Pope Innocent the second in England and Scotland. This
Albericus called a synod at Westmynstre in the xiij day of Decembre, for this
whole regyo^, wherein he had to assocyate him. xviij. bishops and. xxx.
abbottes, besides the great number of other dysgysed prelates. His chief acts
were, that no priest, deaco^ nor subdeacon should hold a wife or woman within
his house, No wife
under pain of dysgradynge from his Christendom, and plain sendynge to
hell. That no prestes son should claim any spirytuall living by heretage.
That none should take benefyce of any lay man. That none were admytted to cure
which he had not the letters of his orders. That prestes should do no bodyly
labor. And that their transubstancyated God should dwell but. viij. days in
the box, for fear of worm eating, mowly^ge, or stynkynge, with such like.
In all their counsels they song still one song, following the rustye voices of
Hyldebra^de and Paschall. Ricardus and Ioannes Hagustaldenses. Wonders were
seane in the sky about this time, Matthew Paris says. In England was felt a
palpable darkness with a terryble earthquake, 1140.
ye sun aperynge like sack clothe, Apo. vi. Such an horrible eclyps (says
he) was over all this land, that men feared the heavens to have been decayed.
The sun in some places ( Ioannes Hagustalde^sis says) apered like quycke
silver, Mark it
to the wonderynge of many. These maruels would be marked of them, which
couete to understand the mysteryes of times after the holy scryptures.

The true meaning of signs in the firmament declared.
BY this time had the prelates a nombre of crafty wits in the vniuersytees,
Wits
which were as able by schole learning to defend a falshede, as ever were
Christ's dyscyples by his heavenly doctrine to maynteyne a veryte. These by a
contynuall exercise in disputacyons, bicame very crafty and subtyle. They took
it for an ornature of learning, and for a thing very conducyble to the
understanding of the scriptures, to define and diuyde all things, Define.
as ded the peripatetyckes or natural philosophers of Aristotle's sect, and so
to prove them by natural demonstracyons. Gloryenge in the sublymyte of their
wits, they would be taken for men much wyser than were the Apostles and
prophets, and in their doings preferred the Idees or ymagynacyons of Plato,
Plato.
to ye eternal sprete of Christ. In the rowme of the lively phylosophie of God,
they placed faint and unfruitful allegoryes, as ded the old Esseanes, and as
does in our time the wicked sect of Anabaptists, imputyng those things to
our synnefull wurkes, which only pertayneth to the kingdom of faith. Thus ded
the wisdom of the flesh erect her self against Gods heavenly wisdom,
Wisdom.
preparynge a way to Antichrist and the devil. These doctors busyly dysputed
of Peter's autoryte, and of the worthienesse of monkery, to make good the pride
of the bishop of Rome, and to confirm the shynynge show of hypocresye. Of
this nombre was Ricardus de Sancto Victore a Scott in Paris, 1140.
Alexandre Nequam and Robert Crikelade here in England, all regular chanons. By
this may ye understand, what it meant, that the sun apeared so dark in the
sky. For the heavens (David says) declares the glory of God, David,
and the firmament shows his handye wurke, or deeds of his permyisyon, Psalm.
xviij.

More examples, declarynge those marueyles.
ABout the same time were the bishop of Romes laws brought into this realm,
1140
by Baldewyn the archebyshop of Canterburye. But so sone as king Steven had
knowledge thereof, he condemned them by act of Parliament, commaundynge by
proclamacyons and streygth iniunctyons, that no man should retain them under
great penalte. By means whereof, they were in some places torn to pieces, and
in some places brent in the fire, as by good mennis judgment they were no
less worthy. Decrees
For they were very much against the commodyte of kings and their comme^
welthes, christian magistrates and powers Ioannes Sarisburiensis in Polycratico
de nugis aulicorum libro viij. cap. xxij. Both the monk Gracianus which
collectyd together the Popes decrees into our volume, called the concord of
laws dyscordaunt, and also Peter Lombarde his brother, in the rablement of his
unsavory sentences, complained very sore, Petrus.
that many in their time believed, the only substance of bread to remain in
the sacrament of Christ's body. Yea, the best learned masters of Paris (Johan
Tyssyngton says, in his book against the confession of Wycleue) were at the
same season of this opinion, that in the sacramental words, Esse was to be
taken for significare. Esse.
Against whom these adulterouse children, Gracianus and Petrus, brought forth
this smokye conclusion, not out of the scriptures, but from their own
soystered wits. That the only symylytude of bread and wine remained, but not
the substance of them. Many such mystes of madness were brought in, this
season, only to darken the clerenesse of the sun, To darken.
or to turn the verite into a^ye, Roman. i. But as dust at the lattre shall
they vanysh from the earth. We partly behold it now.

Prestes marryage at Norwyche, praised and scorned.
SAint Wyllyam of Norwyche, a martyr. which was there shryned in Christ's church
abbeye, in the year of our lord a. M.a. C. and. xliiij. 1144.
was crucified of the Jews dwelling than in a place yet called Abraham's hawle.
Elwina this S. Wyllyams mother, had a pressed to her father, whose name was
called Wulwarde, Wulwarde.
which was a man famous, the storye says, both in good life and learning,
plentuously having the gift of expowuyng secret misteryes. Her other sister
Liuina, being also this prestes dough^er, was joined in lawful marryage to an
other priest, called Goodwin. Goodwyn.
This pressed had a son called Alexandre, which was a married deacon, and looked
after the decease of his father, to enjoy his benefyce by inherytaunce. Either
must this legende of S. Wyllyam, written of Thomas Monmouth a monk of the same
abbeye, be a wicked thing for allowyng these two prestes marryages, Marryage.
either else that city of Norwyche has had most wicked and tyra^nouse rulers
in this our time. For a v. years ago, which was the year of our lord a. M.
D. and xlv. 1545.
upon the x^v. day of June, Corbet Rugge
a cruel justice and as wicked a mayre within the same city of Norwych,
enprisoned a faithful woman, and sought to put her to most shameful and
cruel death, having none other matter against her, but only that she had been
the wife of a priest, which had been (well bestowed) a preacher among them.
Men godly.
But God in conclusion provided a learned lawer and a ryghteouse judge for her
delyueraunce to both their confusyons. A wonderful thing, that this should be
cried lawful in their cathedral church with ryngyng, singing, and sensynge,
and in their yield haste condemned for felonye and treason. There ded they
worship it in it in their scarlet gowns with cappe in hand, and here they
improued it with scorns and with mockes, mockers
grennying upon her like termagauntes in a play. But let them no more look to
be forgotten of their posteryte, than were Judas and Pylate whom the world
yet speaks of. Beastly bussardes and ignorant asseheades, more fyt keep
swyne, than to rule Gods people.

The tyranny of those wicked ministers of Antichrist.
HEr coming to that city was to se, as became a mother, A mother.
an order for her child, which had vndyscretely bound himself prentyfe
within years, to one which was neither honest nor godly. As this false justice
and as frantyck a mayer, had knowledge of her being there, they sought not to
rectifye her just cause, being a desolate woman, but they conuented her before
them as she had been an ill doar, and laid unto her charge both fellonye and
treason. They strayghtly first examyned her, where and when she was married,
Examynacyon.
and what they were which were at that marryage. And when she had made them a
true and honest answer, they lawhed, toyed, and scorned, demanding of her,
if she were not ashamed of that doing. But let them be ashamed of sin, of
oppressyon, brybery, ydolatry, and tyranny which they have largely used, for
there belongs no shame to the holy instytucyon of God, No shame.
sanctyfyed of him to mannys use, though the great devil of Rome has made them
believe so. Than as wise as. ij. wyspes and as godly as. ij. goselynges, they
examined her what her believe was in the sacrament, to bring her into more deep
danger of death, calling her husbands doctrine, erroneouse, heretycall, and
sedicyouse doctrine. But this I protest unto them, which am her husband in
deed, that I will be able to defend my doctrine, doctrine
when they shall not be able to iustifye their most cruel and wicked example,
in defending of the bishop of Romes tyranny. I am depely in their books, men
say, therefore let them not blame me, if they be in my books again. It is the
nature always of an historye to declare the goodness and malice of times by
the diverse acts of men, to the warning of others, which I in my writings
have decreed to follow. I. Bale.
I have known their city in my time grievously plaged with fire, water,
pestylence, and war, above all other cities within this realm. Let them
therefore repent their wickedness, least the lattre plage be most greuouse of
all.

Of Tundalus vysyons, and the prestes with their sea crabbes.
TVndalus a knight of Ireland, which had in his youth ben a man given to much
myschefe, 1148.
had in his lattre age many strange apparicyons, and talked in hell (they
say) both with deuyls, and angels. A book he made of those apparicions, which
ye fathers reserved as most precyouse treasure, to terryfye therwyth ye weak
consciences of the simple, that they should gladly give their money to be
delivered from the fearful fire of purgatory. terror.
Look Vincentius, Antoninus, and Cornelius Agrippa. Johan Hagena charterouse
monk, by a commentary had enlarged it, to set the matter in his time forward.
Look Tritemius and Gesnerus. To maintain the mart of money masses, the
prestes practysed both in this realm and others, many fine seats in that
age, and one of the^ was this. Where as they dwelled not far from the sea
side, they took of these sea crabbes and tied eches unto them light, Crabbes.
and so put the^ upon dead mennys graves in the dark within their church
yeardes, to make the contreye ydyotes to believe that their spretes ded walk.
But in one place ye person was deprehended in his falshede, and all the others
thereby dyscouered. Dyscouered.
For the carpenters and masons coming thydre the next day after all soul
night, to their wurkes, found among the tymbre and broken bryckes, a certain
of these crabbes with their candels out. This priest was not wise enough
byleke, that he took no better head where his spretes bicame. But I think
these wucke men came sonner than he looked for. Ioannes Riuius de spectris and
apparitionibus, Autores
Andreas ^ssiander in coniecturis, and Erasmus in epistolis. I could here show
ye wonders of weping roodes, and sweating ladies, but I let it pass for
length.

An English pope has a monk to his father.
POpe Adrian the fourt was an Englishman, bredde, borne, and brought fourth at
S. Albons. xx. miles from London, and before his papacye was named Nicolas of S.
Albons. Nicolas
This Adryane, or Nicolas whether ye will, is reported of certain old writers,
to be the natural son of a rich and fat abbot of the same monastery, his
mother not ones remembered. And when he required after his fathers decease to be
taken in a monk among them, A monk.
they contemptu^usly refused him. Wherefore he went over the sea into france and
made him self there a regular chanon, becommynge at the lattre the abbot of S.
Rufus in prouynce. Thus clome he up from one degree to an other till he got the
Papacye, wherein he wroughte such wonders as ded his predecessoures. Often times
in famylyare talk with Johan of Salisbury his country man, Salisbury
he had these fine tryckes and sentences most true. To take the Papacye (says
he) is to succeed Romulus in murder, and not Peter in sheep fedynge. For never
is it gotten without the shedynge of our brothers blood. None is more
wretched than the Romyshe bishop, nether is any mannis condicyon more
miserable than his. The seat is thornye and has sharp pryckes on every
side, All true.
and the crown is fyerie, fearce, and as hot as hell, with such other like.
This has Helinandus Monachus, Radulphus de Diceto, Ranulphus of Chestre, and
chefely Ioannes Salisburiensis, lib. viij. and. ca. xxiij. De nugis aulicorum.
At the last was the breathe of this Adriane stopped up with a fly, 1159.
which entered into his throat, and the Papacye left to an other, in the fyft
year of the same.

S. William of york. S. Wulfryck, and S. Robert.
ME thinks, it is a very strange thing to consydre the end of S. William
ye archbishop of York which dyed in the year of our lord a.M a. C. and.
liiij. conplynge it with the degree of his sayntwode. S. Willyam.
For he dyed a martyr, and is allowed in their temple service, but for a
confessor only. But I think, there hangs some mystery in it, Roger Houeden
says, that he was poysened at his mass, Poysened.
by the treason of his own chaplaynes. And Mathewe Paris shows, that in the
time of his celebracyon, such a deadely venym was put into his chalyce, as
dep^yued him of life. Johan Euersden comes after, and he declares the same.
Why should he not than be allowed for a martyr? I suppose the answer to rest
in this point. They were no lay men that put him to death, but anointed and
spiritual confessors. Spiritual.
And the sheep of their slaughter can become no martyrs, as apereth by all them
whom they have slain and brent, sens Satan went at large. It is enough (I
trow) that they have made him a saint for his recompens, for other virtues we
read none that he had. If york minstre had had before as other great
churches had, York.
a shryned patron, he might well have chanced to have lost that promocio^. O
subtyle sorocerers, your crafts now apere, so that ye can not hyde them. I
should write of S. Wulfrycke, which dyed the same year, because he so
conningly, 1154.
with cold water could quench the whote flames of his flesh, and dyscharge
so many prestes of their lecherouse heates. I should also show the virtue of.
S. Roberte, 1159.
the religyouse abbot of Guaresborough, that so familiarly ded visit good
wholesome matrones But at this time I leave it to Johan Capgraue and such other,
for want of layser.

The marryage of Marye the abbess of Ramseye.
MArye the daughter of king Steven, being a professed nonne, and abbess of
the famous monastery of Ramseye, 1155.
in the year of our lord a M. a. C. and. lv. bicame werye of her professyon,
and consented to marry with Matthew the earl of Bolayne, preferrynge gods holy
instytucyon to the ungodly yoke of the Romysh bishop. Matthew Paris and Thomas
Rudborne says, that being in the cluystre, she was before that, infamed of
light conuersacyon. No better.
Could there be any better way than, for cuttynge of that uncomely slaundre,
than Gods first ordinance? Well, she married him and he her, some writers
say, by dyspensacyon, and some say, without dyspensacyo^. But how so ever it
came to pass, she had two daughters by him, called Ida and Matilda. Thomas
Becket that time being high chancellor of England, Becket.
showed him self to this marryage a contynuall aduersarye, but he could not
therein prevail, the king and the great lords of the realm so depely holding
therewith. But of this arose the first grudge that the king had against him, as
some of the historyanes reports it. In the end, after that she had continued
with her husband by the space of xvi. years, she was compelled by ye bishop of
Romes tyranny and Beckettes calling on, to return again with many
slaunderouse rebukes of the world, rebukes.
to her cloystre. This has Robertus Montensis in additionibus Sigeberti, and
Ricardus Premonstratensis in annalibus Anglorum. Thus ded that wicked
Antichrist tread under his fylthie fete, all power in heaven and in earth,
exalting himself above the great God of all, ij. These. ij.

The beginning of the order of Gylbertynes.
IOcelyne a knight of Lyncolneshire, perceiving his son Gylbert to be a man
much deformed and not fyt for the world, Gylbert
procured him to be made a priest, and gave him the two fat benefyces of
Sempyngham and Tiryngton within his own domynyon. The exercise of this
Gilbert, was chefely to teach boys and gyrles, of whom, as they were grown
to more persyght age, he made a new relygyon, called of his name the order of
Gilbertynes. As he ones became person of Sempyngham, A order.
with his p^rrysh pressed was he hosted in the house of one which had a fair
daughter, as ye custom has been always of prestes for the most. And being
tangled with her beauty on a time as she had served at the table, he a dreammed
the night following, that he had put his hand so far in her bosom, as he
could not pull it back again. This maid (says the legende) was one of the
first. vij. of whom he began that holy religyon. He secluded them from the
talk of the world and from the sight of men, 1148.
enclosynge them up within high walls, teaching them monasterye rules. His
buyldynges were such, that though he had both men and women within one
monastery, yet were the men so disseuered from the women, that they could not
mete, and they had diverse rules. The monks observed the rule of S.
Augustyne, Rules
and the nonnes the rule of S. Benedyct, but who kept S. Christ's rule there,
I can not tell. Thyrtene couentes he had within the realm, containing before
his death, to the nombre of. DCC. brethren and a. M and. D. systers. Look
Johan Capgraue in uita Gilberti confessoris.

A nonne at watton biget with child by a monk.
EThelredus the abbot of Ryenall, utters in his small treatise de quodam
miraculo, 1159.
that in an house of the same order, at Watton in york shire, was a young
nonne, put thydre by Henry Murdach the archebyshop a Cysteane monk, when she
was but. iiij. years old. I pray God she were not his daughter in the dark,
for of such packynges were plenti in those days. As this wenche grew in
years, so grew she in lascyuyousnesse. Her eyes, her talk, her pase, all
were vnsober, wild, and wanton. This nonne fell in love with a young monk of
that house, Wa^ton.
which was sumwhat pleasant. She looked smothely upon him (the storye says)
and he as gentyllye vysed her again. They began with loving lokes, and
continued with beckes for breaking of silence. At the lattre they came to
talks and to nygthe metynges, till she was left with child. For Nigellus
Wireker says in Speculo stulto rum which he wrote in the same age. Nigellus.


Quid de Sempyngham, quantum uel qualia sumam,
Nescio, nam noua res me dubitare facit.
Hoc tamen ad presens, nulla ratione remitta^,
Nam necesse nimis fratribus esse reor,
Quod nunquam nisi clam, nullaque sciente sororum,
Cum quocumque suo, fratre manner licet.
Thus are these verses Englyshed.
Of Sempingham, what should I much prate? Gilbertynes.

An order it is, begone but of late.
Yet will I not let, the matter so pas,
The sylly brethren, and systers alas.
Can have no metynges, but late in the dark. And this ye know well, is an
heavy warke. When this young monk ones perceived that her bellye was up, he
threw of his disgysed garments, and fled by night out of the monasterye,
thynkyng at his layser to have conuayed her away also. Hefled.
But she poor soul tarryed behind, being unreasonably beaten and ponnyshed
in the prison.

The nonne dismembreth the monk, and is delivered.
AS this young man resorted to ye abbeye again, minding in the dead of the
night to have stolen away his lover, Returned.
the nonnes watched him and took him. Yea, they stripped him all naked, and
bound him fast to a stole. Than brought they forth the young nonne and put a
sharp knyfe in her hand, compellynge her by most cruel enforcementes, to
gelde him. And when she had vnconnygly performed that act, whores.
they took up the pieces, and with violence thrust them into her mouth. The young
monk was never heard of after for I think, he could non other but dye of
that incision. The nonne returned to prison again. 1153.
Wha^ the hour was come of her delyueraunce, Henry Murdach the archebyshop of
York sumtyme, which was dead more tha^. vi. years before, brought with him
(the story says) two hansom mydwyues from heaven, which discharged her of her
child without pain, and took it fourth with them, (if the iakes swellowed it
not in) so that it never was seane after. Their holy father Gylbert allowed
this miracle by his life time, and declared it to the forseyd Etheldred, that
he should chronycle it. A shyfte
If this be not an honest conueyaunce to excuse these shameful murders, I
report me to you. But this storye was not alone, if there had been more
Etheldredes to have brought them to light. Of these double Gylbertynes of both
genders, men and women, thus writes the forseyd Nigellus. Nigellus.


Canonici missam tantum, reliquumque sorores,
Explent officij debita iura sui.
Corpora, non uoces murus disiungit, in unum
Psallunt, directo psalmatis absque mero.
Thus are they to be Englyshed.
The monks sing the mass, the nonnes sing the other, ij. sorts.

Thus do ye sister, take part with ye brother
Bodies, not voices, a wall does disseuer,
Without deuocio^, they sing both together
The chastyte of all other monks and nonnes in that age.
NIgellus the forseyd Poet, does largely touch the corrupt living and
hypocresye of his time, Hypocresy.
chefely in bishops, prestes, abbottes, monks, chanons, and nonnes. His book
is all in old latyne verses, and is named the glass of foles, that every
dyssolute prelate might behold his folly therein. Of the abbottes this
judgment he gives among other.

Qui duce Bernardo gradiu^tur, uel Benedicto,
Aut Augustini sub leuiore iugo.
Omnes sunt fures, quocu^que charactere sancto,
Thieves.
Signati ueniant, magnificentque Deum.
Ne credas uerbis, ne credas uestibus albis,
Vix etenim factis est adhibenda sides.
Quorum uox lenis, uox Jacob creditur esse,
Caetera sunt Esau, brachia, colla, manus.
Mark it
Rursus in Aegyptum, quam deseruere reuersi,
Dulce sibi reputant a Pharaone premi.
Carnis ad illecebras nullo retinente ruentes,
In foueam mortis carne trahente cadunt.
They that pretend, to follow S. Bernard,
Benet or Austen, which is not so hard.
False thieves they are all, seem they never so good,
Nor yet so devout, in their cowle and whode.
Believe not their words, nor aparell white,
all void
For nothing they do, that before God is right.
As gentil as Jacob, in words they apere,
But in all their works, they are Esau clear.
To Egypt again, they are come to dwell,
Under great Pharao, fearyng no parell,
They follow ye flesh, and seek no restraint,
Which will at the last, with hell them acquaint,
This also he writes of the nonnes.
Haru^ sunt quaedam steriles, quaedam parientes, Nigellus.

Virgineoque tamen nomine cuncta tegunt.
Quae pastoralis baculi dotatur honor,
Illa quidem melius, fertiliusque parit.
Vix etiam quaeuis sterilis reperitur in illis,
Donec eius aetas talia posse negat.
Some nonnes are barren, and some bearing beasts, Fruitful.

Yet are all virgynes, at principal feasts.
She that is abbess, as her both befall,
In fruitful bearing, is best of them all.
Scarce one shall ye find, among ye whole rought,
Which is unfruitful, till age comes about.
Malcolmus, S. Edward, and abbot Eldrede.
OF Malcolmus ye king of Scotts which was the. iiij. of that name, Malcolme.
we read that at the suggestion of supersticiouse monks, he vowed never to
marrye. Arnoldus the bishopp of S. Andrews, having knowledge thereof, and
co^syderyng the inconuenyence that might ensue for want of succession, wisely
and Godly dyssuaded him again from that vain purpose. He required him to
considre, by the sayng of Plato, that he was not borne only to himself,
neither stood it with his vocacion, being ye high head or king of that commen
welthe, A king
to dye without an heir of his own body, with other necessary counsels.
Hector Boethius, li, xiij, Scotorum historiae. If our great S. Edward had had
store of such good counselors, as he had of Romysh hypocrytes (I think the
c^owne of this realm had never been distamed with the bastardes blood, first
of the Normannis and than of the french men, the noble English blood so
extynguyshed, and the land decayed, till God rayled it up again. But as Johan
Mayor thought in his Scottysh chronycle of this Malcolmus, Mayor.
so do I think of our S. Edward. that he might well be nombred among the
folysh virgynes. Which seking heaven by that kind of virginite, ded find the
gate shut up against them, Math. xxv Thomas Becket of a great devotion to
chastyte, by lycens of pope Alexandre the iij. transl^ted the cor^upted carkeys
of this Edward in the year of our lord a M. a. C. and. lxiij. 1163.
and set a shryne over it, garnyshed with gold, silver, pearl, and precyouse
stone, to cause the people to do thereunto ydolatry. Thomas Rudborne in medulla
chronicorum. Water.
Cold water was of great virtue in this age byleke. For Johan Capgraue says,
that Ethelredus the abboth of Rieuall, not only by it abbated the ardent heates
of his flesh, but extynguyshed also the flames of all other vices.

Sentences wonderful in those days uttered.
PEirus Blesensis a worthy learned man, 1160.
being at sundry tym^s the archedeacon of Bathe, of London and of Canterbury,
spared not at times, sharply to reprehende the enormitees of the clergy.
Diverse of his epistles are yet to be seane, wherein he eloquently towcheth and
rebukes the puffed up arrogancye of Thomas Becket the archebyshopp of
Canterbury. Often he compared the clergy to Samaria and Edom, and called our
high countenaunced prelates, sumtyme the glytterynge calfes of Bethell and the
ydolles of Egypt, Calfes.
sumtyme the fatt hulles of Samaria, the chaplaynes of Baal, and those judges
which made wicked laws, with such like. To take ye lord with the household
(says he) nothing is more dampnable than is a bishops house, if ye seek
virtue. Nothing further from honestye, if ye look for manners. Nothing more
filthy, if ye judge after conscience. Nothing more rebukeable, if ye respect
fame. Fame
Nothing more pernycyouse, if ye mark the example. O lord (says he) deliver
thy house from the great ydoll, break the horns of that synnefull one. At
Rome filthy lucre peruerteth all things, and suffers monks to perfourm
their lykynges, in all kinds of fleshely abusyons, which they redeem by a
yearlye pensyon. Their lewdenesse is told in the Pauylyons of Geth, and
publyshed also in the open streets of Ascalon. Thus is their head captain
becomen the prince of Sodom, Antichrist.
his dyscyples accompanyenge him in the chair of pestylence, with a great
nombre more of the like. Wernerus coucludeth in fasciculo temporum, that it was
than a rare thing to find a chaste monk in the cloystre, and a more rare
thing to find an honest priest abroad.

The fresh and lustye begynnynges of Thomas Becket.
AS those autours report, which chefely wrote Thomas Beckettes life, whose
names are Herbert Boseham, writers.
Johan Salisbury, Wyllyam of Canterbury, Alen of T^ukesbury, Benet of
Peterburgh, Steven langton, and Richard Croilande, he bestowed his youth in all
kind^s of lasciuiouse lightness and lecherouse wantonness. After certain
roderies, rapes, and murders committed in the kyng^s wars at the siege of
Tolouse in L^ngu^docke and in other places else, Tolouse
as he was commen home again into England, he gave hyms^lfe to great study,
not of the holy scriptures, but of the bishop of Romes lowsye laws, whereby
he first of all obtained to be archedeacon of Canterburye under Theobalde the
archebyshop, than high chancellor of England, metropoly^ane, archebyshop,
prymate, pope of England, and great legate from Aut^christes own right
side. Becket.
In the time of his high chauncellourshyppe, being but an ale bruars son of
London, Johan Ca^graue says, that he took upon him as he had been a prince. He
played the courtyer all together, and fashyoned himself wholly to the kings
delyghtes. He ruffled it out in the whole clothe with a mighty rabble of
digised ruffianes at his tail. A ruflar
He sought the wordly honor with him that sought it most. He thought it a
plesaunt thing, to have the flatteringe praises of the multitude. His bridle
was of silver, his saddle of velvet, his styruppes, spores, and bosses double
gylte, his expenses far passing the expenses of any earl. pleasure
That delyghte was not on the earth, that he had not plentye of. He fed
with the fatteste, was cladde with the softeste, and kept company with the
plesauntest. Was not this (think you) a good mean to live chaste? I trow it
was.

His chastyte at Stafforde, and stoughtnesse at Clarendon.
IN the town of Stafford was (Willyam of Canterbury says, a we^che
Johan Capgraue confirmynge the same) a lusty mynion, a trulle for the nones, a
piece for a prince, with whom by report, the king at times was very famylyar.
Betwixt this wanton damsel or prymerose peerlesse and Becket the chancellor,
went store of presents, and of love tokens plentye, for love
and also the lovers met at times. For when he resorted thydre, at no place
would he be hosted and lodged, but where as she held resydence. In the dead
time of the night (the storye says) was it her general custom, to come alone
to h^s bedchambre with a candell in her hand, to toye and tryfle with him. Men
are not so folysh, but they can well conceive, what chastyte was observed in
those praty, All chaste
nyce, and wanton metynges. But they say, he sore amended when he was on^s
consecrated archebyshop of Canterburye, and left we^e his accustomed
enbracynges after the rules of love, and became in life relygyouse, that before
in love was lecherouse. At his said consecracion was he made a priest, which
requy^ed a change of life. Change
He received a monks cowle from Pope Alexandre (Matthew Paris says) made our
lady his general advocate, and shryued the body of S. Edward a vyrgyne, and
therefore he could no longar be unchaste. In the year of our lord a M. a. C. and
lxiiij. 1164.
at Clarendon, Johan of Oxforde being high presydent of the counsel, many
things were proponed concerning the inuestytures, offices, and enormities of
the clergy, Prestes.
and laws made thereupon. Whereunto the archebyshopp Becket with the other
bishops condescended and were sworn. But when he ones perceived yt they were
repugnaunt to the terrestryall godhede of the bishop of Rome, he fretted for
wodenesse, and was angrye with himself, adding to his oath this subtyle
clause to make it of none effect, Addicyo^
salou in omnibus ordine meo, and honor sanctae ecclesiae, mine order saved
always, and the honor of holy church reserved. By this he was able to deny
all again at his pleasure. Matthaeus Paris, and alij.

Antichrist he prefers to his kings obedyence.
WHithin the same year the king made an act, An act.
yt men of the church committing offenses notable, should be exautorysed or
dysgraded by the bishop of the dyocese, a justice being present, and so
delivered to secular keeping, till he suffered according to his demerytes. The
occasyon of this act was one Philippe Broic a priest and canon of Bedforde, A
priest.
which conwardly had killed a man. This proud sturdy canon bearyng^ him self
very bold upon his Romysh orders, was at utter contempt and diffyaunce of the
justice, geuyng him full many obprobryouse words, as though his office had
been but a slauerye to his oylye presthode. Than stirt up Becket, and starkeled
like a lion, seeking by all trayterouse means to bring the king under, Under.
and to exalte the tyrannouse kyngedome of Antichrist to the very heavens. He
furyously contended with him to the very death, that prestes and other within
oylye orders, ought not for theft, murder, buggery, and other like deadly
offenses, to be examyned and ponnyshed by the publyque magistrates, as the lay
sort were. He affirmed it also with stomache, Becket.
that the churches fredom was such, as the temporal kings h^d nothing ado
with the^ which were anointed and shaven, they being thereby the Romysh Popes
creatures and not his. Radulphus Niger, Radulphus de Diceto, Matthaeus Paris,
Matthaeus VVestmonasteriensis, Rogerus Houeden. Ricardus Croilande, Autour.
Nicolaus Treueth, and alij plerique An excedyng great thing were it, to
declare the subtyle practyses, deu^ses, dysguysynges, crafts, colors,
conueyau^ces, and other tryfelynges, to bring all his matters to p^sse agayn^t
the king, and a werynesse to the reader to rehearce them, wherefore I let them
over pass.

Artycles, for whom Becket is admitted the Popes martyr.
Diverse of our chronycle writers, does testyfye in their works, that these
were the artycles wherefore he strove with the king. articles.
That no spiritual cause ought to be pleaded in the temporal court. No clarke
may be compelled to answer in matters before the kings officers. Patr^nes
may lawfully and freely give benefyces without the kings allowance. A bishop
or pastor may freely go out of the realm without the kings lycens, for the
right of his church. Cursed.
He that is ones excommunycated, must have his discharge of the spiritual
court, and not of the king. The clergy and layte must be clered of their
offenses by the ordynaryes, and not by the kings justices. Appellacyons made
from one degree to an other, as from lowar o^dynary to the hyghar, may be ended
without the kings consent. Lands and teneamentes may lawfully be given to
the clergy in alms, without the kings commyssyon. Spirytuall promocyons
ought only to remain in the hands of the superior ordynaryes, wha^ their
occupyers are dead, No king
till others succeed in their roumes, and not in the hands of temporal me^.
Religiouse men men ought not in the quarrel of their kings, to go to the
wars. They that flee unto sayntwaryes, ought there to be socoured against the
temporal power, and their deeds made open to the judge ecclesyastycall.
Clerks, Clerks
curates, and prestes, are not bound to come to the commen judgments at
sessyons, or assyses, neither yet to be at them though they be commanded. Se
what good stuff here is, to make a martyr. All is to demynyshment of a kings
power, and nothing else.

Becket stays the Popes church, by confoundynge heretykes.
IN the same year of our lord a M. a C and. lxiiij. 1164.
was Thomas Becket reckened (Matthew Paris says) such a mighty, stedefast,
and strong sure pyllour, as the whole church both leaned upon, and was also
stayed by. But ye must consydre, that it was the Popes church that he meant and
not Christ's, for that has a stay strong enough of him without mannys help.
Mark the forseyd artycles. The church (says he) shaken, was ready to have
fallen, and the Pope which was set up as a staff to have stayed it, a church
was at that time so broken, that the shyuers or pieces wounded him, Thomas
lokyng for nothing else, but martyrdom for the church. In the same year were
in England certain godly men, whom some Popysh writers dysdaynously calls
Waldeanes, some publycanes, some false Apostles. Christyanes.
Th^se were at Oxforde straightly examyned of the bishops, and so brought to
judgment by this Becket, for holding these opynyons. That the church of Rome
was that whore of Babylon, which had forsaken the faith of Christ, and that
barren fygge tree without fruit which he reproved, and that no Christen man
was bound to obey the Pope and his bishops. That monkerye was as the dead
carreyne that stynketh, Monkery.
and that their vows were fryuolouse, ydell, and abhomynable, being the
vpspryngynge branches of Sodom. That their orders were the great beasts
characters, and their temples the wurse for their hallowynges. That purgatory,
saints worshyppyng, masses, and prayenges for the dead, with such like, were
most deuylysh inuencyons. For maynteynynge these and other like opynyons,
Opynyons.
against the proud synagoge of Rome, they were sealed in the faces at Oxforde,
with whote fyerye keys, and so bannyshed the realm for ever. Radulphus de
Diceto, Matthaeus Paris, Guido Perpinianus de heresibus, Thomas Walden ad
Martinum quintum, and Bernardus Lutzenburgus.

His trayterouse end, and advancement above Christ.
When Becket was returned again into England, in the year of our lord a. M.
a.C. and. lxxi. 1171.
after. vi years exyle, he outragiously troubled certain of the bishops, to
the kings great dishonor. Mathewe Paris says. For the only cause why he so
hatefullye persecuted them, was, for that they had fulfilled the kings
desire, in anoyntynge his son Henry ye yongar to raygne after him, not
having his consent being pope of England. For this he entered the pulpet,
more like a mad Bedlem tha^ a sober preacher. franrick
Not to teach Christ in meekness, but in his wode furye to execrate those
bishops, to curse the^ with book, belle, and candell, and by the popes
autoryte to condemn them to hell. Upon this the kings servants fell on
him, in purpose (as they took it) to revenge their liege lords great injury,
and his sons dyshonoure. They pared his pylde crown with their swerdes, and
cut of the popes mark to his very braiue whyls he in ydolatry commended
himself and the cause of his church, Idolatrye.
to his patron S. Deuyse, being but a dead image there standing upon the
aultre. Stephanus Langton, Richardus Croilande, Rogerus Houeden, Nicolaus
Treueth, and Ioannes Capgraue Thus ended he his life in most rank treason, and
was for his labor made a god of yt papists. Yea, they charged christ in ye
end by commandment, A devil
to deliver us heaven freely by the shedynge of Thomas blood, as though yt had
been a payment of satisfaction for our sins. And as thereby apered, they put
Christ clean out of office for him, by this co^iuracion. Tu per Thome
sanguinem, que^ pro te impe^dit, fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascedit.
O thou Christ suffer us to clyme up to that place, by the blood of Thomas which
he shed for yt, to ye which Thomas ma^fully ascended. Mark this hardely, for
such a defeccyon from Christ as Saint Paul speaks of, Defeccyon.
and for the strong delusyon that they should have which believed lies, that
they might be dampened. ij. Thessalo. ij For here Thomas redemeth Christ and
ascends to haven, leaving us his blood to clyme thydre by. Were there ever
greater heretykes, thieves, and soul murderers, than were our Papists? I can
not think it.

The false miracles, and canonisacyon of Becket.
OF Christ and of all his Apostles and prophets, are not written so many
great miracles, Miracles.
as of this one Becket. As that so many sick, so many blind, so many bleare
eyed, bedred, crooked, broused, mangled, lamed, drowned, palseyd, leprosed,
sorrowful, exyled, with child, enprysoned, hauged, and dead, were by them as
by him delivered. Neither were there ever so many writers of any popyshe
saints life, or so many great volumes made as of his, as is showed before. And
all this was to blemyshe the king, Books.
and to depresse the high power both in him and in all his successors kings
after him. In the third year after his death, 1173.
was he proclaimed a saint by the popes authority, and his day triumphasitly
celebrated over all England, his mass beginnynge with Gaudeamus. The king
came in all naked, saving that he had a liuen breche about his nether
parts. He received of the monks a discipline with rods, and was so absolved
of them in their chaptre house. Assoiled
He resygned his power upon their high aultre, consented to their usurped
lybertees, and professed him self a perpetual subject to Antichrist and the
serpent, Apo. xiij. O blasphemers of God, and shameless mockers of men. But
Cesarius says in the. viij. book of his dyaloges. ca. lxix. that in the.
xlvij. year after his death, 1220.
a questyon was moved in ye open schools at Paris, whether he were saved or
dampened. Where as Roger Norman proved him wurthie to be dampened for obstynate
rebellyon against his king, A rebel
which was Gods appointed mynyster, Peter the great chauntre of Paris having
nothing to object in the churches quarrel to the contrary, but his miracles,
which were most manifest lies and illusions.

King Henry smells out Antichrist and is again blinded.
SVmwhat must I say here of the king, called Henry the second, Henry. ij
which was a very wise, well learned, and godly prince, Petrus Blesensis
says, in epistola ad Gualterum archiepiscopum Panorimtunum. Though he in the
year of our lord a. M.a. C. and. lxvi. 1166.
permitted at the popes request, a grote to be given of every plough land
within all his dominions, for aid of the christen wars against the Turks,
yet perceyuinge. ^. years after, the crafty bestowynge thereof, 1168.
and how the seide pope had mayteined the treason of Becket against him, he
caused all his people to forswere his obedience, from the child of. xij.
years to them of extreme age Look Matthew of Westminstre li. ij de floribus
historiarum. 1169.
In the next year after, to please him again, pope Alexandre confirmed unto
him the bulle of Adriane the. iiij. for the conquest of Irelande, and made him
the high lord of that region under him, the Peter pens for every chymney that
smoked, always to his fatherhede reserved. And this was (Johan hardynge says
in his chronycle) for an error which the Iryshe men held, Error.
against the spyrytualte, and for certain heresies wherwyth they had been long
infected. In the year therefore of our lord a.M.a. C. and. lxxi. 1171.
were both the nobylyte and clergy of the land sworn unto him, to take the
kings of England for their lords ever after. Rogerus Houeden. A like chance
had the Scotts in the year of our lord a. M. a.C. and. lxxxviij. 1188.
Pope Clement the third in his high dyspleasure subiectynge that whole realm
to the crown of England, willing their kings, nobylyte, and clergy, to
give always to the kings of England, their oath of obedyence, as to their
superioure lords. Nicolaus Treueth.

A patronage proved lawful by v. married prestes.
Now will I bring a matter, which Barnes rehearses in his book of prestes
marryage, Barnes.
because it fell in this age. In the time of pope Alexandre the. iij. (says
he) there was a controuersye for the patronage of a benefyce, between the
priour of Plympton in Deuenshyre, and one Johan de Valletorda. 1176.
Judges were deputed to hear the master, Richard the archebyshoppe of
Canterbury, and Roger the bishop of Wynchestre. Before whom the priour of
Plimpton proved his personage, by reason that he was in possession thereof, A
priour
and had given it out before to diverse persons. First (he said) there was a
priest of Plympton called Alphege, which had by the gift of the said pryour
of Plympton, the benefyce of Sutton, now called Plymmouth. This Alphege had
a son called Cedda, Alphege
which had also the benefyce after his father. And after this Cedda was
there an other priest called Alnodus which had the benefyce like wise. This
Almodus had a son called Robert Dunpruste, which after the decease of his
father had also the said benefyce. And after this Robert Dun^rust William Bakon
his son, Bakon.
enjoyed the benefyce like wise* Ex monumentis eiusdem coenobij. This is a
witness suffycyente, to prove that it is no new learning, nor yet so long a
go sens prestes had lawful wives, as the ydell headed papystes do make the
ignorant multitude believe. And this was in those days an use through out
the realm, that the son should in benefyces succeed the father, the son
either else the next of his kin that was learned, till the monks hypocresye
procured the alteracyon for their bellyes sake.

Examples diverse that prestes in that age had wives.
FVrthermore the seyde pope Alexandre, in his epistles decretall shows many
of the ^yke examples. Examples
And in one, to Johan of Oxforde than bishop of Norwyche, he commands, that
Wyllyam the new person of Dysse, for claymynge the benefyce by inheritance
after the decease of his father person Wulkerell, which begat him in his
presthode should be dyspossessed, no appellacyon admitted. The deane and
chaptre of Salisbury in an other place he charge, not to admyt Hughe Howet to
the prebende of Baphorde which was his fathers before him, Prestes
least it so should grow again into a custom. The like he wrote to the
Archedeacon of Lyncolne, and to other diverse prelates of the realm,
specyallye to the bishop of Excestre, of one Johan a prestes son, which
after like sort would have succeeded his father. success.
To the bishop of Wyncestre he shows there also, that the monks of Lenton
abbeye by Notyngham, molested one Oliver a pressed which had peceably holden the
benefyce of Mapleshalle by the space of. xxx. years. The greattest matter they
had against him, was, that he had been that prestes son, which had been
curate of the same parryshe before him. But in this he defeated the monks, and
showed him fauer, Curates
because he had there continued so long. The exampels of this kind are so
many, that I leave them for tedyousnesse. Let those lewd papystes be ashamed
than, which following, the lowsye learning of that bawdye dronkarde Johan
Eckius, Eckius.
in his folyshe. Enchiridyon, reports with him and with doctor Cool in
their ignorant frenesye, that it has not been heard sens Christ's ascensyon,
that a priest ever married, or had a wife. Questyonlesse their brutysh heads
are to blockysh.

Remedies taught of S. Godrycke for vows keeping.
Saint Godrycke borne at Walpole in Northfolke, went first abroad with
pedlary wares, Pedlar.
and afterward on pilgrimage to Rome and Jerusalem. In his return he
professed the chaste life of an hermyte at Fynkale by Durham, and bicame the
great fou^der of dyspersed Hermytes here in England. Much was he tempted with
the sprete of fornycacyon, and had no small a do to keep his vow of chastyte.
To abate the great heates of his flesh, Heates.
he sought diverse remedies, but marryage was none of them, for that was not
thought in those days holy, though it were of God. He tombled all naked among
bryres and thorns. He wore sumtyme a shyrte of hear, and sumtyme a coote of
mayle next his skin. Of barelles he made within his own chapel a well,
Water.
wherein he stood to ye chynne in ye time of his heates, For in the night
always was he most grievously tempted with she deuyls. But one of them
transfourmed into an he devil, turned up his broad bumme, (if devils have
buttockes) and made such a show there, as I am ashamed to write. He that has
devotion to know the whole storye, let him resort to the holy legende of
his life, Lege^de.
that was wont to be read upon his feastfull days with no small devotion.
This devil had a nombre of young devils following him, like pratye black
boys with shaven crowns, and I think he was the great abbot of our votaryes.
So was S. Godrycke terryfyed with this lecherouse devil, Geares.
that all the hears of his holy body (the legende says) stood up like sowes
brystles. Such men as had barren wives, complained to this holy Godrick,
and he made them fruitful by tyenge hy^ gyrdle about them. This fat carle and
foul fornycatoure (the storye says) dyed at Fynkale in the year of our
lord a. M. a.C. and. lxx. 1170.
doing more than CC. and. xxviii. miracles within few years, and was made a
saint with Thomas Becket. Look Johan Capgraue.

A counsel at Rome against Buggerers.
THe buggerye of prestes and relygyouse prelates was in that age so noysed
abroad and complained of, that in the year of our lord a. M. a. C and lxxix.
1179.
Pope Alexandre was compelled to call a general counsel at Rome, of. CCC and.
x. bishops. Where as he ordained again that prestes in any wise should live
chaste. And if it chanced any of the^ to be found a buggerer (as they were
none other but sodo^ytes and whoremongers all ye pack) he should be first
exco^munycated, and than hydden from the syghte of the people, Sequestered.
till such time as they dyspensed with him. Here was a sore ponnysheme^te for
so horrible a myschefe, but that they sumwhat te^dered them selves in the same,
as occupyers in one art. He ordained also that archebyshoppes should ride in
vysytacyons, Ryders.
with no more than half an hundred horses, bishops with. xxx. legates with.
xxv. archedeacons with. vij. and deanes with. ij. sequestrynge all
ecclesyastycall persons from the judgments of the lay magistrates. For by
that time had they gotten of king Henry the second, a full reuocacion of ^egal
customs, a co^firmacio^ of the churches liberties, yt they might freely appeal
to ye pope against all powers, yt no clarke should be brought afor a lay judge
for no manner of wickedness, Pryuyleges
and yt he which struck a priest should be alway^s ponnyshed at the bishops
pleasure. Matthaeus Paris, and Matthaeus VVes^monasteriensi^* About this time
were the se^ular can^^^ removed from Waltham by this Popes autoryte, Waltha^
because some of them had wives, and regular chanons which were men without
wives, unless they were other mennys, placed in their rowmes, the king of
gentylnesse recompensynge Guye the deane and certain other of those canons an
other way. Radulphus de Diceto, Rogerus Houeden, Ranulphus, Treuisa, and
Ioannnes Euersden.

Notable sentences of a learned man in this age.
Johan Salisbury, a chaplayne first of the court, and afterward bishop of
Carnote in France, 1120
being a man exercysed in all kinds of good lyterature, and perceiving abuses
intolerable daily to increase in ye clergy, with very sharp rebukes as with
fyerye darts, often touched them, both in his famylyar epistles and also in his
great wurke called Polycraticon. In the Rome church (says he) sytteth the
scrybes and the pharysees, and upon mennys shulders they lay burdens
importable. Burde^s
The great bishop there is greuouse to all men, and scant to be suffered of any
man. His legates are so furyouse and ragynge mad, that a man would think, as
they step foewardes, that Satan were sent from the face of God to flagelle
the church. They noye where they go, and therein are they like to the devil.
Right iudgem^^^ with them, is none other than an open byenge and selling.
Gain take they for godliness, and the gatherynge of goods for most high
religion. Lucre.
For money they iustifye ye wicked, and ouerloade the afflicted consciences.
They deck their tables with gold and silver, and rejoice in things which are
most wicked. They eat the sins of the people, and are clothed with the same.
Yea, they diversely abuse themselves in lykynges of the flesh, whyls the true
worshippers worship God their heavenly father in sprete and veryte. He that in
any point dyssenteth from their doctrine, Dissent.
is either judged an heretyke or a scysmatike. Christ therefore of mercy in
this age show himself, and teach us what way we may walk a right to his
pleasure, with many such other clauses. Ex lib. v. cap. xvi. and ex li. vi.
ca. xxiiij. Polycratici.

The insacyable gluttony of Benettes monks.
GIraldus Cambrensis reports in his wurthye wurke called Speculu^ ecclesiae,
1187.
li, ij ca. iij. that as king Henry the second was hunting at Gildeforde, ye
pryour of S. Swithunes of Wynchestre and. xiij. of his monks, fell down upon
their knees before him i^ the ^apre, and with weeping tears complained, that
Richard More their bishop, had demynyshed their face of. iij. dishes at every
meal which their founders had allowed them for the maintenance of Gods
service. Dyshes
The king demanded of them, how many remained? They answered, but. x. only,
where as before of custom they had xiij contynuynge from the days of S.
Swythune to that present. With that the king called his lords unto him, and
swore, as his fashyon was. By the eyes of God (quoth he) I judged of these
monks, that their house had been brent, or that some other ill chance had
fallen unto them. And now I perceive their matter is none other, but that their
bishop has shortened them of their bellye chere. Bellye
If their bishopp do not by the^, as I which am their king, do by my court,
that is to say, bring them to. iij. dyshes, I pray God, he be hanged. Than
said the monks. This request of ours, is chefely to refreshe the poor thereby.
No (said the king) it is rather to pamper your glottonouse mawes, Pa^per.
which never are satisfied. The poor may otherwise and in more honest order
be provided for, than to read of your so glottonouse leauynges, to the publyque
slaundre of Christianyte. A like storye he shows of the monk^^ of Christ's
church at Canterbury, which were served with xvi. dysh^s every day, Dyshes
and of other more. He (...) that the cattle which was the (...) fed, were as
ra^^e as stoned horses, and as unable to perfou^me their vow of chastyte, as
ever were they. Sancti ordinis professores, de ferculorum numerositate
contendunt, says Petrus Blesensis upon Job. They are holy votaryes that
strive for so many fat dyshes.

The abhomynable lecherye of the same monks.
IN the dyocese of S. David in Wales, and within the prouynce of Goer, the
pryour of Langenith which was a celle of the order of Clunyakes or monks
without botes, A priour
beholding a certain young woman, first by wanton lokes, and after by other
lewd entycementes, made her at his pleasure, to serve his lascyuyouse purpose.
And when it was ones grown to a publyque infamy, that all men spoke ill of it,
with money he corrupted the offycyals, Conueyaunce.
to escape the open reproach. And when none other way else would serve, he gave
her in marryage to a young man not far of. Yet left he not so her company,
but abused her after as he had done before, till such time as he was deposed by
the dyocesyane, and lo with shame exyled the contreye. The like was done also
by two other monks of Northwales, of whom one was priour of Sagia, Two priours.
an other of Breckennoch, both celles of Clunyakes and not far from the haven
of Myluerd. Which were for their whoredoms most shamefully deposed and
bannyshed. Yea, the said Geralde reports it to be a commen thing among them,
where as such celles were builded, and wyshed for his time, that not one of
them had been within the whole realm of England, for the myschefes that he
knew by them. And when they went abroad (he says) about the affairs of
their religion or howses, Abroad
they would in none other innes be lodged, but where as they might have whores
at their pleasures. Giraldus Cambrensis in Speculo ecclesiae, li ij. ca. i. Was
not this (think you) an holy religion, and an high profession of chastyte?

Of two Englysh votaries, one a traitor, the other a thief.
AS Heraclius the patriarch of Jerusalem was returned home again out of
England, in the year of our lord a M.a. C. and. lxxxvi. 1086.
an Englysh votary of the order of Templars, called Robert of S. Albons,
betrayed that holy city with all the Christen inhabytauntes to Saladinus the
souldane of Babylon, upon this covenant, that he should have his nece to
marrye. And so it came to pass in the end, the king taken prisoner, prisoner
and the patryarke compelled to flee, so that the kingdom was destroyed
forever. An other English votarye of the same order of Templars, called
Gylbert Ogerstan, king Henry appointed with certain others to gather up the
money which he had determined to be given to releue the holy land and city
of Jerusalem against the Turks. And when he had deprehended him in an
horrible theft in doing the same, A thief.
to the mayntenaunce of his accustomed lecheryes, where as he might iustlye
have hanged him, he only committed him to the maystre of the temple at London,
that he should ponnysh him according to their statutes. Rogerus Houeden libro
secundo, historiae Anglorum. The hospytelers and Templars were two fygtinge
orders, ij. orders
instituted first in the contreye of Palestyne or holy land, as they call it,
for the only defense of Christen pilgrims going to and fro. In process of
time they grew to so great richesse, that as the adage goes, the daughter
devoured the mother. They exempted themselves from the pa^ryarkes iurysdyccyon,
which was their first father and foundar, and bicame servants to the great
Antichrist of Rome. They serve.
Not only to fill all that land with his fylthie supersticyons, but also to
bring the profyghtes to his insacyable hands that were gath^red from all
other nacyons. For where as colleccyons were, to maynteyne those wars (Roger
Hourden says) that always a Templar was one gatherer, and an hospyteler was
an other. But in the end, about the year of our lord a thousand three
hundredth and twelve, 1312.
they had their deserved reward, for than were the Templars destroyed,
Matthaeus Paris, Ranulphus, Aegidius Faber, Ioannes Paleonydorus, Ioannes
Nauclerus, Paulus Phrigio atque Polydorus.

A crown of Pecockes feathers, sent to king Henrye.
ROger Houeden writes it, as a matter seryouse and earnest, that in the year
of our lord a M. a. C. and. lxxxvi. 1186.
Pope Vrbane the third hearing tell that king Henry had appointed his yongar
son Johan to the lattre conquest of Irelande, sent him a crown of Pecockes
feathers fynely wouen and wrought together with gold. The next year after he
sent one Octauian a Cardynall, 1187.
and Hugh Nouaunt, which was bishop of Couentry and Chestre, as legates from
his right side, to have crowned the said Johan king of Irelande. But the
king not being so Pecockysh as he judged him, dyscretely and wisely deferred
the time, till the Cardynall was gone. Se what five toys these fo^de fathers
had in their crafty heads, to mock Christen princes with for advantage.
mockers
Here was a gnat workemanly strayned out to swalowe in a camel for it. He was
at great cost that sent Pecockes feathers. So was it a precyouse kyngedome
toward, whose king should have been crowned with them. But I maruele that he
sent not therewith, a foxes tail for a scepture, and a whode with two ears.
Rightly has the scriptures set out this generacyon for moc^^rs. Hierem. xx. A
great dissensyon arose the same time at Canterbury, 1187.
between Baldewyne the archebyshopp and the covent of monks, because he had
begone to build a new college of secular prestes next ioynynge to them. They
caused Pope Vrbane the third, to dyssolue it again, fearing thereby in
process to have lost their pryuylege of electynge their archebyshoppes, and so
not to have their pleasures as they had before. Pleasure
Whereupon he was compelled, to remove his building from thens to Lambheth by
Westmynstre, Radulphus de Diceto, Rogerus Houeden, Ranulphus, Treuisa, and
Fabianus.

A bishop made both an earl and high justice.
IMmedyatly after king Richard the first was crowned, and sworn to defend
all Antichrists affairs, in the year of our lord a. M. a. C. and. lxxxix the
bishop of Durham Hugh Pusath, 1189.
for a great sum of money bought of him the earldom of Northumberlande.
And when the king should do the ceremonye over him of making an earl, and
was girdynge the swearde about him. Se (says he to his lords and noble men)
what a miracle I can do. miracle
I can make of an old bishop, a young earl. Am not I (think you) a very
conning artyfycer? Like frates he played many in the same year, in making
prelates barons and vycountes, to have riches to his pleasure. In this the
king thought, he mocked them, but they mocked him after a far other sort in
the end. This dotyng bishop was not yet all satisfied, Durha^
but added thereunto a. M. marks more to be admytted the high justice of
England. And for that he might dwell at home without check, and polle at his
pleasure, he gave to the pope an unreasonable sum of money, to be dispensed
with for his vow to the holy land, and obtained it. After this he decreed
with himself, to live long on the earth, Long life.
upon this admonicio^ of Godryck the Hermit, which said, that he should be
stark blind vij. years before he should dye. But he understood not, that there
was as well a blindness in soul as in body. And that made him so unready
when he should have dyed, and also so wretchedly soeth to depart from this
world. Mattheus Paris, Radulphus de Diceto, Ranulphus, Rogerus Treuisa and
Polidorus. autours
Se here, how they keep their own spiritual laws, for intermedlynge with
temporal matters. But that for lucre they may break all order.

The preuye membre of a fyshe, swaloweth in a monk.
GIraldus Cambrensis declares in the second part of his wurke, Giraldus.
called the glass of the church, ca. vij. That by the sea coast a she fish was
found of a wonderful greatness, called a thirlepoole. The people in great
nombre came from all quarters there about, some to behold the monstruouse
shappe of the fyshe and same to cut it in pieces and to carry the^ home to their
howses, to son profitable use. Among other there was a monk more quycke and
sterynge to perceive all things than any other there. A monk.
This monk drawing very nygh to the fyshe, beheld, vewed, and marked the
preuye part thereof above all. Which was (the story says) as it had been
the opening of a great door or gate. He looked thereupon very seriouslye, and
much wondered, neither could he in any wise be satysfyed with the syghte
thereof. At the last without modestye, shame, and all bashefulnesse, he
approached so nyghe, A fall
that by the slyme and fat^esse thereof, which than lay upon the said, his
fotynge failed him,- and he fell flat into the foul hole, so being swalowed
up of that which his lecherouse heart most desired. So that these adages might
than have been found true Such saint, such shryue, such bear, such
bottell, such treasure, such trust. As much was it to recover him and to save
his life as all they could do which stood about, with long pooles, pro^ hokes,
lives ropes, and other hasty prouisyons. A subtle enemy was it (says
Giraldus) that provided him so ridiculouse and obprobrioule a fall. Drowned.
But this is the good fortune of our votaries. In ye end they fall head
linges into ye gulf of yt filthiness which they have so arde^tly, all their
life time affected.

The lasciuiouse heart of an other monk per^eiued.
AN other like story shows the said Giraldus in the next chaptre following,
Canterbury.
of a monk of Glastenbury. It chanced (says he) at the kings request and
suit of the abbot, that the grave of king Arthour between. ii. high pilers of
stone, was opened within ye holy Saintwary of Aualon. There found they the
flesh both of him and of his wife Guenhera turned all into duste, within
their coffynes of strong oak, the bones only remaining. A monk of the same
abbeye standing by, 1101.
and beholdynge the fine bruydinges of the womannis hear, so yelowe as gold,
there still to remain. As a man rauyshed, or more than half from his wits he
leaped into the grave. xv. foot deep, to have caught them suddenly. But he
failed of his purpose. For so sone as they were towched, they fell all to
powder. No less was this monk (says Giraldus) a figure of that insaciable
hell of lechery, Giraldus.
than was the other monk, for he showed as depely the signs of a shameless
mind, as ded the other. Giraldus lib. ij cap, viij. Speculi ecclesiastici, and
in opere de institutione principis, Radulphus Cogeshale, Ioannes Fiberius,
Richardus Premonstratensis, Autores
Mattheus VVestmonasteriensis, Ranulphus, Rogerus, Treuisa, and Ioa^nes
Lelandus in assertione Arturij. All this makes good the foresayenge of Tamel,
yt the hearts of the^ in this generation should be all upon women Dame. xi. I
would not that this also were forgotte^n in this age by the way, Stryses
but marked and remembered, for it includes a great mysterye. When stryfes and
controuersyes were risen between monks and their bishops for sleuelesse
matters the king might not meddle in so spiritual causes, but a legate must
all ways come from Rome to do it.

Notate uerba, signate mysteria.

King Richard is sent abroad, and a bishop rules.
Never were there any people, either scarce any deuyls of hell, in crafts
and wordlye wiles comparable to these spretes of Rome, Wiles.
the bishops, monks and prestes. They could send kings abroad on
Pilgrymage, and in the mean time occupye their whole realms to their Romyshe
masters behoue. King Richard the first, for his stoughte stomach called Cor
de Lion, 1191.
was sent in to the land of Palestyne, to fight with the great Turk for
Jerusalem, which an English votarye and bird of their unclean cage, had
both betrayed and lost a little before, and could never be recovered sens. For
the time of his absence, one Wyllyam Longeshampe, being chau^cellour of
England and bishop of Helie, holding the governance of the whole realm, A
rular.
wonderfully oppressed the same. Having the kings whole power and his popes
autoryte, he rode contynually with no less than a. M. horse, the noble mennys
sons being glad to become slaves to him. With the best barons and earls
married he his cosynes, neces, and kynswomen, yet was his grande father a poor
plough man and his own father a cowherde. Being and holy votarye, a votary
he refused the use of women, and in his bed chamber abhomynablye occupied with
buggerye boys, as the commen rule was than of that myscheuouse spyrytualte. So
long he ruffled it out in all kinds of tyranny, till at the last, Johan
the kings brother, being than the greattest duke within the land, began to
couple with him. Than fearing to have been called to a very strayghte
reckenynge, he fled with a small company of his most trusty servants to the
castle of Doue^, Accomptes.
minding in the night to have stolen over the sea. But as herafter shall
follow, he came to short of that passage. Hugo Nouaunte in libello de fuga
Guilhelmi Heliensis, and Rogerus Houeden. li. ij. Anglorum historiae.

This bishop counterfetteth a woman, and is taken.
INuentynge a new craft of conueyaunce, he came down halting from the
castle above, to the seaside byneth, Disgysed.
appareled in all points like a woman, whose kind nevertheless above al
things he abhorred. A side grene garment he had upon him, and a cloak with
wide sleues of the same color. His head was al covered with a fair great
k^rchief and his face with a propre muff^ar. In his right hand he bare a piece
of lynen cloth, A sowster.
and in the left hand a met yearde. And as he was set upon a great stone, a
fysher man coming from the water, and inpyosynge him to be an whore, ran fast
upon him, and clasped one hand about his neck, with the other he searched for
his preuye parts. When he ones understood him to be a man and no woman, he
called to them about and desired them to come and to se a maruele, for he had
found (he said) a man in a woman. His servants therewith drewenygh, A monstre.
and with gentle words pacyfyed this fysher. Anon after approached two women,
requyrynge to know the price of his lynen clothe. He played momme chance and
would make none answer. With that they suspectynge the matter, plucked of his
mufflar from his face, and so perceived him to be an old man newly shaven.
Than called they to them more company, A priest.
and cried with loud voices. Let us stone this wild monstre, which has
deformed both kinds. Than threw they of all that was upon his head, and made
his prestes crown all bare. They rated him, reuyled him, rayled upon him, A
play.
byspatled him and byspitted him. Yea, they threw him down on the gr^unde, and
dragged him from place to place upon the sands, some by the arms, and some by
^he legs. His servants not able in any wise to help him. A^ the last they
brought him into a dark sellar, where as they cawched him with rebuke and
shame, till the high counsel of the realm sent for him. Hugo Nouaunt, and
Rogerus Houeden, in praefatis opuscalis.

He dies, and is lamented of an old rood.
AFter this was he brought to the Tower of London, enprysoned, examyned,
depryued, Depryued.
dyscharged of his governance, and so permytted to depart out of the land,
and Walter Constaunce the archebyshop of Rohan being an Englysh man borne, by
the kings letters was placed in his rowme. He that will se this storye treated
of, more at large, let him resort to the forseyd wurkes of Hugh Nonaunt and of
Roger Houeden. Dyerse other aunours makes mencyon of the same, as Radulphus de
Diceto, Meue^
Ricardus Praemonstrataensis, Matthew Paris, Johan Euersden, Johan Scuysh,
Robert Fahyane, and Polydorus Vergilius, but not so copyously. Hugh Nouaunt
wysheth in the end of his small treatise, the excess of this lewd prelate so
to be ponnyshed, that the kings dignyte might be conserved, and the order of
presthode not utterly confounded. After long travail in the year of our
lord a M. a. C. and xcvii. 1197.
He came to the city of Pictanis or Potyers where as he ended his life. And so
long as he lay in extremes, a certain rode (they say) in the cathedral
church there, which was called the church of Saint Mar^yale, ded pyteously
weep and lament, so that the tears fell down from his eyes, as it had been a
floude of water. Belike the bishop had been some great frynde to that rode, A
frynd
that he took his death so heauylye. But they say, it was his accustomed use,
always to mourn when a bishop departed. Look Roger Houeden. And it may well
be, for the scripture says, that both they are ydolles, that is to say, both
the painted rode, and the bishop that preaches not, Baruch. vi. and Zacha. xi.

Antichrist detected, by Ioachim abbas.
Wills king Richard was yet in the land of Palestyne, 1191
he sent to the I Will of Calabria for abbas Ioachim, of whose famous learning
and wonderful prophecyes he had heard much. Among other demauades, he axed
him of Antichrist, what time and in what place he should chesely apere.
Antichrist (says he) is already borne in the city of Rome, and will set him
self yet hyghar in the seat Apostolycke. Antichrist.
I thought (said ye king) that he should have been borne in Antyoche or in
Babylon, and to have comen of the stock of Dan. I reckened also that he should
have reigned in the temple of God within Jerusalem, and only have trauayled
for the space of three years and a half where as Christ trauayled, and to
dispute against Enoch and Helias. Not so (says Ioachim) but as the apostle
reports, Ioachim.
he is that only adversary which extolleth himself above all that is called
God. For where as the lord is called but holy, he is called the most holy
father. Thus Antichrist shall be opened, and him shall God destroy with the
sprete of his mouth, and light of his coming. Wha^ this was ones known in
England and in other quarters of the kings dominyon, the prelates begone to
starkie. Yea, Walter Constaunce the kings deputy, with other archebyshoppes,
bishops, abbottes, and prelates of the clergy, prelates.
cast their heads together, impugnynge this new doctrine with all power
possible. And though they brought fourth many strong arguments in aperaunce
(says Roger Houeden) yet could they never to this day bring their matter to
a full conclusion, Arguments.
but left it always in doubt. Rogerus Houeden, and Radulphus Cogeshale.

Antichrist apereth in his full pride.
CElestine the third Pope of that name, crowned yt Emproure at Rome, 1191.
called Henry the. vi. and gave him a votarye to wife which was named
Constantia, a professed nonne of Panorme in Cycyll, and the daughter of king
Roger. This coronacyon was celebrated on this wise. He first met the Emprour
without the church door, and before his enteraunce took a solemn oath of him,
that he should for term of life, with sword defend holy church, Defend.
support all her customs, laws, and lybertees, and finally preserve ye
patrimony of S. Peter. Wha^ this was ones granted, the entered into the
church, where as the same Pope erected into a trone of magnificence most
maruelouse, took the imperyall crowns betwixt his. ij. fete, and with them
crowned first ye emprour and than the empress his wife. This done, with his
right foot he spurned the Emprours crown of his head again, Antichrist.
addyng this unshame fast clause, yt he had as well power to depose him, as to
crown him. And the crown fell to the ground. The Cardynalles standing by,
took it up again, and set it upon the said emprours head. Rogerus Houeden,
Ranulphus and Rogerus Cestrensis, ac Treuisa, This story have I here rehearsed,
Mark it
that my readers might thereby know, ye Antichrist was now at ye highest, and in
the full of his abominable pride, both in this Celestyne, and also in his
predecessor Alexandre the third* which Alexandre made the father of this
emproure, called Fridericus Barbarossa, in S. Marks church at Venyce, to lie
flat at his fete upon the pauymente, he setting his foot in his neck, and
vnsesonably vtterynge this sentence. o Inciset
Upon the adder and cockatryce shall thu walk, the lion and dragon shall thu
tread under foot Psalm. xc. Look Iacobus Bergomensis. Hartma^nus Shedel,
Ioannes Nauclerus, Ioannes Stella, and Barnes,

An archebyshop execrated, and a bishop wounded.
IN the next year followynge which was the year of our lord a. M.a. C. and.
xcij. 1192
Geffrey the archbishop of york, which was ye kings bastard brother,
resorted to London by commandment. And as he came toward Westmynstre with
his cross borne before him, ye bishop of London with certain other prelates met
him full in yt face, Charity
and without frindely salutacion excommunicated him for that only act, and
suspended the new temple both from synging and rynging, where he was lodged,
so that he was compelled to depart again from London, ye purpose of his coming
not performed. Rogerus Houede^. Lo here was much a do for a thing of naught.
And no small matter was it in those days, to break their apishe tradicions:
about the same time: Hugh Nonaunt the bishop of Chestre Nouant
drove all the black monks out of Couentre, and turned their monastery into a
college of prestes, sortyng their lyuynges into prebendes. The cause was this.
They had kept noughty rule, and would not be reformed. Moreover they were in
daily contencyon with the bishop, Contencion.
so that on a time, not only they vyolently struck him, but also they drew
blood of him before their high aultre. Radulphus de Diceto, Radulphus
Cogeshale, Ricardus Diuisiensis, Ricardus Praemonstratensis, Rogerus Houeden,
Matthaeus Paris, Ranulphus, Treuisa, and Fabianus. 1198.
About. vij. years after this, at the commandment of Pope Celestine the
third, the monks were restored again and the prestes rejected, by Hubert the
archebyshop of Canterbury, Hubert.
Hugh the bishop of Lyncolne, and Samson the abbot of S. Edmondes Bury.
Radulphus de Diceto, Ioa^nes Euersde^ in Angloru^ aunalibus, atque Polydorus.

Prestes provided poisons diverse ways.
AS a certain chaplayne belonging to the archebyshop of York, and called Raufe
Wygetoft, in the year of our lord a. M.a. C. and xcvi. 1196.
lay upon his death bed at Rome, he openly confessed that he had sent into
England false letters and poisons to the dyspachement of his enemies, And when
diligent search was made at London, by them that followed Roger of Rippun a
pressed which was the conueyar thereof, it was so found in deed, This poison was
brought thydre, Poison.
to have destroyed maistre Simon the deane of York and certain of the canons
there. And chefely it was in a ring and girdle, which both were brent at
Totehyll before a great multitude of people, ye pressed enprisoned. This myschefe
was laid to the archbishop Geffreye of his enemies, but it was found
otherwise. Rogerus Houeden and Radulphus Cogeshale. Was not this (think you) a
vertuouste study of these holy votaryes? Study.
At the same time was there a crafty knave, an holy monk, I should say, in
the abbeye of Euesham, which lay long in a trance. And afterward he wrote
a new Apocalips or book of reuelacions, concerning the pains of hell and
joys of heaven, not unlike to Tundalus. praefati autores cu^ Ioanne Scuish. An
other false tole was there in the dyocese of London, which about the same
season, Sisions.
had visyons wonderful (they say) of the peynes of purgatory. Thus went the
devil about in this doubtful age, after diverse sorts to deceive the
ignorant multitude, and very few there were tha^, which in the true faith
resysted him.

A bishop and an archedeacon taken in the wars.
IN time of the wars, which were betwixt the french king and king Richard
Cor de lion, Johan ye kings brother and Marchades a great captain went abroad
with a nombre of horsemen to ^roue mastryes. Johan.
Anon as Phylyp the bishop of Beluace, a man more given to war than to
preaching, had knowledge thereof, thinking them to be a mete pray for him,
came freshly out of the city with sir Wyllyam Marlon and his son and a great
nombre more of valeaunt warryours. Warryres.
In the end, the bishop, the archedeacon, and all the chief captains were
taken, the resydue all slain and dyspersed. These. ij. prelates Ioha^
presented with great tryumphe to the king his brother, as those which had
been before time his great enemies. I have gotten (says he) ye great chaunter.
A chaunter.
and a good quere man to answer him in the same note, and here I deliver them
to you. The king smyled, as one very glad that they were taken, considering
the displeasurs which they had done, and commanded them, armed as they were,
to be enprysoned. Pope Celestyne hearing thereof by the canons of that church,
commanded him to deliver again his sons. Canons
To whom he sent their armor with this massage in questyon. Are these the
garments of thy sons, or mete apparelynges for thy children? No (says the
Pope) nor yet of my brethren, but rather they are the vestures of the children
of Mars. And so he let them be still, at the kings pleasure. Where as they
remained for ye space of. iiij. years after. Matthaeus Paris, Co^timae
Matthaeus VVestmonasteriensis, Rogerus Houeden, Rogerus Cestrensis, Ranulphus,
Treuisa, Nicolaus Treueth, Ioannes Euersden, and Ioannes Scuish.

Fulco for the marryage of. iij. spiritual wives.
Wyls these wars yet endured, theee came unto king Richard, one Fulco a
french pressed, 1197.
which had preached very much against usurers and whores, This Fulco required
ye king in any wise to put from him. iij. abhomynable daughters which he had,
and to commit them to marryage, least God ponnyshed him for them. Little was
marryage beholden to such a preacher. Thou lie hypocryte (says y^ king) to
thy very face, for all the world knows, that I have not one daughter. I lie
not (says Fulco) for thou have. iij. daughters. One of the^ is called Pride,
an other covetousness, and the third lechery. With that the king called unto
him, his lords and his barons. This hypocryte (says he) has required me
here, Hypocrite.
to marry fourth my three daughters. And now that I have found out apt
husbands for them, Husbands.
I will do it in effect, I therefore biquethe my pride to the high minded
Templars and Hospytelers, for they are as proud as hell. My covetousness I
give to the Cisteane monks, for they couere the devil and all. My lechery I
commytt to the prelates of ye church, for they have therein most felicyte. With
this was the preacher co^fused, for he knew it was no lie. Fulco.
Compendium noui chronici, Matthaeus Paris, Matthaeus VVestmonasteriensis,
Rogerus Houeden, Radulphus Cogeshale Ranulphus, Rogerus, Treuisa, and Ioannes
Scuish. To this agrees that which Giraldus Cambrensis writes, li iij. ca.
xij. Speculi ecclesiastici. Which is, that Pope Alexandre the third was wont
to say, that he had iij. howses whom he inteyrly loved, Three howses.
that above all others enjoyed his special protection. Which were the three
religyons of Templars, Hospytelers, and Cysteanes. Ye may be sure, it was for
no goodness, that they so highly stood in his fauer.

Men possessed of deuyls, and Ci^teane monks.
ROger Houeden shows, li. ij. historiae Anglorum, that in the year of our
lord a. M. a. C. and xcviij. 1198.
many were possessed of deuyls and vexed with horrible freuesyes, For remedy
of this many monks were sought to, as men of most holy conuersacyon, chefelye
the Cysteanes. Among whom there was an abbot which took upon him to expel
them in the name of Christ. And as he was doing with one, the evil prete spoke
in him and said. We are the same legion of devils which Christ drove out of
the Gergesytes into the heard of swyne, Legion.
and that drowned them in the sea, Math. viij. A power we have received to
enter into all blasphemers, as we have found some in this city, If we therefore
be expelled out of these mad men, we will next of all enter into the, thu
hipocryt, and into thy dyssemblyng order, and torment you as we have done the
others. Not passinge. iij. years before (says the said Roger) certain paganes,
1196.
wastinge the land of Sanctius the king of Portingale, came toward an abbeye
of the Cysteanes to destroy it. The monks having knowledge thereof, came fourth
and submytted themselves, desyerynge their lives with tears. The paganes
commended their conuersacyon, and said, that they might in that order be
saved, if they had women. The monks judged of this true sentence, as they
had done of marriage, Women.
that it was very whoredom. But the paganes thought of the monks, as the
truth was, that under that color of religion they were filthy buggerars. And
so the paganes were much better than the sodometrouse monks were. Ex eodem
Rogero.

Two archebyshoppes rebuked, for collegys building.
Many greuouse accusacyons were made the same year to pope Innocent the
third, 1198.
by the monks of Canterburye, against Hubert their archebyshop. Chefely that
he had builded a chapel at Lambeth, to the horrible preiudyce of the mother
church of Canterbury, placynge prestes or secular canons therein, and
appoyntynge them lyuynges out of their yearlye rentes to their utter undoing.
For there he intended (they said) to consecrate bishops, co^secrat
and to depryue them of their eleccyons, contrary to their ancient customs.
So that they much feared that the dygnyte of there church, which always had
been a true handemayde to the church of Rome, should have been translated to
that chapel Apostatrice, as they tha^ called it full wisely. Thus was the
archbishop at ye last compelled, as was Baldewin his predecessor, Baldewyn.
to stryke it down flat to the ground, whom after like forte they had also
vexed for buylding the like at Canterbury. Neither was the king nor yet all
the realm, at that day able to stay them. Raufe Cogeshale says. For they
feared thereby also to have lost their prerogatyue in chosinge always the
archbishop. They much disdayned prestes in those days (Ranulphus says) and
judged them men of much less perfection than they were of, Prestes
for their monkish cowles sake. But these. ij. archebishoppes were men of good
knowledge (Treuisa says) for they understood that Christ which was the only
head of ye church, reckened no perfeccio^ in monks and frires, wha^ he left
his poor Apostles ye governors thereof. apostles
Look Roger Houede^, Matthew Paris, Matthew of Westmin, Raufe Cogeshale,
Ranulphus, Treuisa, Fabian, and Johan Scuish.

A lecherouse votarye assoyled at Rome for money.
IN an old book of confession reckenynges, 1199.
and of absolucio^s sought at Rome by bawdye prestes and monks of this realm,
and obtained for money, I found this abhomynacyon to close up my book with,
whereat I much wondered. The petycyon of an holy votray of England (it should
serve that he was a prebe^d of Lincoln) to Anselme ye bishop of Albanense,
contained this heavy complaint. That he at times by ye devils suggestio^, had
accupied al sorts of women as well in ye churches as in other sacred places.
Occupied.
He began first with the mothers, and tha^ followed on with ye daughters, neces,
and nigh kinswomen, From the^ he went to the nonnes, and had to do with a sort
of them also. For the which he honestly desyereth absolucyon for his money,
and has it as honestly of this bishop being the Popes deputy, after this
form. To your discressyon (says this bishop by writing to the bishop of
Lyncolne) do we commit it, Discressyon.
to assoyle this clarke in forma ecclesiae, from the sentence of
excommunicacyon, in case he has run into the danger thereof for his
fornycacyons, aduoutryes, incestes, and other sins. We will you also to
enjoin him pena^ace, as ye shall se it conuenyent, for the health of his
soul. Datum etc. A great, nombre of these bawdy bruynges, found I in that
book, A book.
called poenitentiarium Romanum. Se how tender these fathers are to their own
lecherouse occupyenges, and marriage among them is yet indyspensable O deuyls
birds and promoters of all prodygyouse whoredoms and knaueryes.

The conlusyon of this second book.
THus have I brought to an rude, the second part of the acts of my Englysh
votaryes, Acts.
which is a contynuacion of them for. CC. years space, from Satan's coming
fourth from the bottomless pytt. Apocal. xx. after the full thousand of years
from Christ's incarnacyon, to the reign of king Johan in the year of our
lord a M. and. CC. If it be marueyled of, Years.
that the first part should be so short, contaynynge so many years, and this
part so long of so few years, I desire them that so maruayle, to take this
for a full reason thereof. He that is in prison, can not build so fast to his
contentacion, as he that is abroad and at lyberte. I told ye before, that
Satan was tied up for the time. Satan.
Not from doing of myschefe, for that has he wrought in all ages of the
world. But he was sequestered from doing this greatest mischefe of all, in the
Christen church, for their unthankful receyuynge of the Gospel of
salvation, which had professed the same. When Noe by his preaching, had
admonyshed the people long before, of the floude, that was coming, if they
repented not their sins, it layserlye came forward. But when it was ones
entered, than was there no stop but in it flowed apace. no stop.
In like case was it with this floude of darkness and beastlye ignorance,
prescrybed of S. Johan the Euangelyste, at the time appointed, it fell fast
upon them that were drowned therein for their vnbeleues sake.

Hydden
That Satan ded before, for the more part was secret. But that he has done
sens, has been open and aparaunte both ways. Idolatry and supersticyon,
which are the devils own fruits, by the space of those. CC. years, and of
more tha^. CCC years after them, had a bewtiful show and a gloryouse shyn^e
of relygyon, holiness, perfeccyon, and of Gods only high service. Such
craftye colors and deceyuable mystes, Mistes.
were cast upon them, by Satan's subtyle sophisters and sorcerouse dyuynes.
Thus were they seane, wondered at, worshipped, and had in great honor for
that. v. hundred years space, but not known a right, for lack of godly
dyscressyon and knowledge of Gods wurde, whereby all spretes are discerned and
proved. But now in this lattre age, by the light of the lords aperaunce they
are both seane and known, Light
what they are in deed. The wurdes of the lords own mouth in the sacred
scriptures, has declared and manifested them to be most filthy abhominacions
in their best aparellynges. More copye of writers in this age than in any
other before, Autour.
is also a lively proof and declaracyon of the same. Therefore am I now
compelled, ere I pass any further, to show in few wurdes the summarye
contents of the. iiij. parts of my votaryes acts, that my reader may know
the dyfference of them, by their diverse grounds and arguments.

In the first part, after long engenderynge, bredynge, and brynynge, my
votaryes have risen fast, by the craftye inuencyons of Idolatours. In the
second part, they have builded fast, by the wyttye practyses of a monks and
chanons. In the third part, iiij. paroes.
shall they hold fast, by the busye calkynges of the. iiij. orders of fryres.
And in the forte part, shall they fall fast, by the mighty assaults of the
preachers and writers. The first part comprehends all the time from the
worlds beginning to a full thousand years after Christ's incarnacyon.
co^tentes
The second part contains CC. years more, from yt thousand of years to ye
reign of king Ioha^. the third part shall continue for. CC. years after that,
which is from the enterau^ce of king Ioha^ to the reygne of king Henry the
fort. And the last part shall conclude with an hundred and fyftye years, The
last
which is from the first year of king Henry the forte, to the lattre end of
this present year from Christ's incarnacyon a. M. D. and. l. or this next
after that, which is. li. Thus may these. iij. books be known diverse,
Diverse
the one from the other, by their diverse titles, of fast rysyng, fast
building, fast holding, and fast fallinge, though all they proceed out of one
only argument of Englysh votaryes.

He that shall with wisdom consydre in this second part, Crafts.
the wylye procedynges of these Babylon buylders, how they pranked up their
stought sturdye Antychrist above God and his Christ, he shall find that these
were their chief practyses of myschefe. They perceived that God of his infynyte
wisdom had placed. ij. high admynystracyons in the christianite for the
conseruacion thereof, and that they were, the publyque autoryte of noble
princes, and the gracious office of godly preachers. ij. offices
The one was for ye outward welthe of the body, the other for ye inward wealth
of the soul. They thought, if these. ij. were not perverted and poysened,
they should never come to their full purpose. Wherefore they sought first of
all to bring them under by sophistycall sorceryes. the first
And first they began with the weaker concerning the world, which were the
curates, preachers, or ministers of Gods wurd for they were (as apered) the
more easy to overcome. Christ the son of God, the holy Apostles, and the
godly fathers of the primative church, upon diverse consideracions, permitted
them to have wives. Wives.
S. Paul most earnestly wrote it both to Timothe and Titus; that it should
stand as a buildinge unremovable. Oportet episcopu^ irreprehensibilem esse,
oportet.
unius uxoris maritum, i, Timo. iij. and Tit. i. A bishop must be unrebukable.
A pastor must be the husband of one wife. Mark well that, Must be.

If this wiuinge (thought they) might be brought to an ill opinion, that the
people might trecke^ it naught, tha^ should we make that office of pastoral
cure, Wretches.
which before served God in paineful study of his wurd to serve us in all
vanitees and plesures of the flesh. To bring this to good pass, we must
pretend a perpetual chastyte. We must outwardly profess never to towche a
woman, women.
what so ever we do else in yt dark By this shall we have these commoditees We
shall apere more holy than other people. We shall have the preachers obedient
to our affectes. They shall not rebuke our horrible dark doings by the
Gospel. No, for they shall for want of women, have uncomely lusts in their
hearts, whereby they will be given over of God to themselves. So shall they
become buggerers and whoremaisters. Buggerers
Yea, and such blind bussardes and beasts, as will be able to abide no
truth. So shall our wickedness in the sight of people, become a life of
perfectyon and holiness. By these chefely and by other like practyses, came
that admynystracyon for the sowles behoue, to an utter decay and ruin, as is
showed at large in this former book. Now let us go to the other, which is the
Christen regyment of princes, and declare by what ways these wicked buylders
brought that also to a counterfeit shadow of Christen governance, The. ij.
they being made the dumme images of the beast. Apoca. xiij.

All for the publyque welthe, and conseruacyon of Christen com^ynaltees, had
they their attorite and power. Autorite
This administracyon sought these enemies to destroy an other way. They first
took from kings the inuestynge of prelates, or the power of admyttynge them to
spirytuall offices. They made the great princes believe, that they were but lay
men, and might not intermedle in spiritual causes, or in the appoyntynge of
the ecclesyastycall funccyons. Se here, how one myschefe grew upon another,
Deceyt.
as yt overthrow of Christen princes autoryte, upon the condempnacyon of
prestes marryage. They said, it was vnconuenyent, that he which had touched a
woman (as the kings ded their wives) should lay hands upon him, or admyt him
to office, that should make Christ's body. o Satan,
O blasphemause buggerers. Where found these execrable hypocrytes, that it was
ever sin a man to touch that vessel which was sanctified to his use? Either
yet, where was power granted to their buggerysh generacyon, to make Christ's
bobye? O deuyls merydyane, Mockers.
as the Prophet does call you, when will ye leave to illude both God and man?
But to conclude. By this mean, at the last they had their full purpose, and
thereby made the Christen princes to become their slaves, Yea, to hold their
stiroppes with cappe in hand, to kiss their fylthie fete, and to lead their
mules and their horses.

Yea, they played with those worldly rulers, for all their great power and
wisdom, Traitors.
as the bearwardes do with their apes and their bears. They led them in the
cheaues of their iniquyte, and compelled them at times, to do such feats as
they appointed the^. Moreover when they would not obey to their minds, they
feared them with the whyppe. They terryfyed them with their black curses.
Curses.
They fraybugged the^ with the thundreboltes of their excommunycacyons and
interdiccyons, and threttened to set all other nations upon them. But our noble
king Edward, and his valeaunt father king Henry afor him, threw of from their
shulders, the execrable yoke of those obstinate infidels. Neither needs he to
fear, to tread still under his fete that odyouse hydre and his singe serpent
of Rome. An hidre
For the eternal God, which has given to him the power of a king, is
strongar than is Satan their great maistre. Long were it to treat, how these
lecherouse locustes have used their kings here in England, both before the
conqueste and after. Before the conquest they showed fauer ^o none, Fauer.
save only to them that were monastery buylders. The other, like locustes they
vexed, and sought by all means to suppress them. They have not much rested,
sens their maistre the devil was at large, after his thousand years
inprisonment.

First they deprived the English succession of regal regyment, to advance
the Danysh blood to the crown of England. Than brought they in the Norme^nes
and French men procuring their bastard a banner from Rome to subdue the
land. Traitors.
And when they were stayed by the sufferaunce of God, for the sins of the
people, than ded they turmoyle with them also. They rebelled against king
Wyllyam conqueror, and labored to subdue him, because (they said) he was both
a bastard and a tyrant. rebels.
They sent fourth S. Albon (if dead me^ might straye abroad) to kylle king
Wyllyam Rusus, because he was their enemy. They made their dead bishops, to
prick at king Henry the first with their pastoral hokes, the chronycles
says, because he had much dyspleased them. They tell of king Steven, that
their maker flewe away, Blasphemers.
when he should have received him, the taper in his hand ded break, and the
pixte fell out of his tabernacle, at his coronacyon. Of king Henry the second
they report that he came of the devil by the fathers side, and from the curse
of God by the mothers, for killing Thomas Becket, and yet he killed him not.
They sen^ fourth king Richard Cordelyon, Deceyuers.
to fight for Jerusalem, whyls they occupied his realm here at home,
dyffamynge him of lecherye, pride, and covetousness. Thus have they handeled
their kings hitherto. How they used the rest of them, ye shall know, God
wyssynge, in my next, ij. books following.

Breuely to conclude upon that is said before concerning the dacayed autoryte
of princes, ij. matters.
and condemned marryage of prestes, which wonderfully gave way to
Antichrists vsurpacyons. The pretense of those wicked workmen, which thus
pranked him up with untempered buyldynges, was in their general counsels, to
condemn the foul heresye of Simonye, and lecherouse commixtion of
Nicolaitanes. Such were the prodygyouse and fylthie names that they gave to
the inuestytute of prelates in the hands of a prince, Verlettes.
and the marryage of Christen ministers, at that time at lyberte, to make their
own wicked acts to apere very godly. They said, (...) was the great error of
Simo^ Magus, (...) a king should admyt a bishop, either yet have power to give
fourth any spirytuall promocyon, and yet Simon Magus was no king, Simon Magus
but a membre of their spiritualte. They affyrmed it also, to be the
abhominacyon of the Nicolaitanes, when a Christen mynistre took to him a wife,
and yet the Apostles had power to lead about with them, systers to wives. i.
Corin. ix. But doubtless they fowly forgote themselves in these matters. For
Simon Magus would have so^^e the holy Ghost, as they ded all their spiritual
promocyons and cures. And Nicolaus Antiochenus, made his wife common, as they
have done other mennys wives to their own lecherouse uses, besides boys,
bytches, and apes. For the said Nicolas was never condemned for marryage, but
for abusing that honorable estate. Judge.
By these may ye measure their other buyldynges, till more matter come
forward, and sawde the eternal God, for the light ^^yche we have in this a^^
received, both to know them and to beware of them. So be it.

Thus ends the second p^rt of this wurke, called, The Acts of Englysh
votaryes. Collected by Johan Bale, Anno. M.D.L.
(...).

