EPISTLES, THE THIRD AND LAST VOLVME.

CONTAINING two Decades.

By JOSEPH HALL Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON Printed for E. Edgar, and A. Garbrand, at the Windmill in Paul's Church
yard. 1611.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND EXCELLENT PRINCE, HENRY, Prince of Wales, all happiness.
Most Gracious Prince,
LET me not (whiles I desire to be dutiful) seem importunate, in my
dedications. I now bring to your Highness these my last, and perhaps most
material Letters: wherein, if I mistake not, (as, how easily are we deceived
in our own?) the pleasure of the variety shall strive with the importance of
matter. There is no worldly thing, I confess, whereof I am more ambitious then
of your Highnesses contentment, which that you place in goodness, is not more
your glory, then our joy: Do so still, and heaven and earth shall agree to
bless you, and us in you. For me, after this my officious boldness, I shall
betake myself in silence, to some greater work, wherein I may approve my
service to the Church, and to your Highness, as her second joy and care. My
heart shall be always, and upon al opportunities, my tongue and pen, shall no
less gladly be devoted to my gracious Master, as one

Who rejoice to be your Highnesses (though unworthy, yet) faithful and
obsequious Servant. IOS. HALL.

THE SVMME OF THE SEVERAL EPISTLES.
DECAD. V.
EP. I. TO my Lord Bishop of Bath and Wels. Discoursing of the causes and means
of the increase of Popery. 1.

EP. II. To my Lord B. of Worcester Showing the differences of the present
Church, from the Apostolical; and needlesnesse of our conformity thereto in
all things. 21.

EP. III. To my Lady MARY DENNY. Containing the description of a Christian, and
his differences from the worldling. 33.

EP. IIII. To my L. HONORIA HAY. Discoursing of the necessity of Baptism; and
the estate of those which necessarily want it. 43.

EP. V. To Sir RICHARD LEA, since deceased. Discoursing of the comfortable
remedies of all afflictions. 57.

EP. VI. To Master PETER MOVLIN Preacher of the Church at Paris. Discoursing of
the late French occurrents, and what use God expects to be made of them. 69.

EP. VII. To M. THOMAS SVTTON. Exciting him, and (in him) all others to early
and cheerful beneficence: showing the necessity and benefit of good works.
77.

EP. VIII. To E. B. Dedicated to Sir GEORGE GORING. Remedies against dulnes and
hartlesnesse in our callings, and encouragements to cheerfulness in labor.
91.

EP. IX. To S. H. I. Discussing this Question. Whether a man and wife after
some years mutual, and loving fruition of each other, may upon consent,
whether for secular, or religious causes, vow and perform a perpetual
separation from each others bed, and absolutely renounce all carnal knowledge
of each other for ever. 101

EP. X. To M. WILLIAM KNIGHT; Encouraging him to persist in the holy calling of
the ministry, which upon conceit of his insufficiency, and want of affection,
he seemed inclining to forsake, and change. 115


DECAD. VI.
EP. I. TO my Lord DENNY. A particular account how our days are, or should be
spent, both common and holy. 1

EP. II. To M. T. S. Dedicated to Sir FVLKE GREVILL. Discoursing how we may
use the world without danger. 13

EP. III. To S. GEORGE FLEETVVOOD. Of the remedies of sin, and motives to
avoid it. 21

EP. IIII. To M. Doctor MILBVRNE. Discoursing how far, and wherein Popery
destroieth the foundation. 31.

EP. V. Written long since to I. W. Dissuading from separation: and shortly
oppugning the grounds of that error. 41.

EP. VI. To Master I. B. A complaint of the mis-education of our Gentry. 65

EP. VII. To Master JONAS REIGES BERGIVS in Zeland. Written some whiles since,
concerning some new opinions then broaced in the Churches of Holland; and under
the name of Arminius (then living:) persuading all great wits to a study and
care of the common Peace of the Church, and dissuading from al affectation of
singularity. 75

EP. VIII. To W. I. condemned for murder Effectually preparing him, and (under
his name) whatsoever Malefactor, for his death. 83.

EP. IX. To Master JOHN MOLE, of a long time now prisoner under the Inquisition
at Rome. Exciting him to his wonted constancy, and encouraging him to
Martyrdom. 93.

EP. X. To all Readers. Containing Rules of good advice for our Christian and
civil carriage. 107.


Errata.
DECAD. V.
PAge 3. line 11. read setlednes for seelednes. p. 12. l. 16. read their for
they, p. 14. l. 4. r. stales for stalls. p. 17. l. 13. r. great, oppugnation
for Great oppugnation, p. 23. l. 15. r. person for persons, p. 27. l. 19. r.
Fastes for Facts, p. 28. vlt r. concluding for concluding, p. 37. l. 9, r.
ingrosses for ingrosse, p. 44. l. 2. read heard for hard, p. 72. l. 10. r.
Duels for Doels, p. 72. l. 20. r. Cotton for Cotton, p. 74. l. 12. r. holy for
wholly, p. 84. penult. r. deathbed for dead bed, p. 92. l. 4. r. more weak for
more weaker p. 98. 7. r. our price for our pride, p. 104. l. 12. r. then ever
forthen never, p. 110. l. 1. r. matrimonial for matrimonicall, p. 115. l. 8.
r. I am not more for I am more, p 116. l. r. 20 appose us for oppose us:

DECAD. VI.
PAge 39. l. 6. r. Judges for Judge. p. 66. l. 19. r. Ruffians for ruffianlike,
p. 73. l. 5. r. glad for gald, p. 87. l. 20. r. let for lets, p. 110. l. 12. r.
yield for yields. p. 112. l. 11. r. probation for prouation,

The fifth Decade.
EPISTLE. I. To my Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wels.
EP. I. Discoursing of the causes and means of the increase of Popery.

BY what means the Romish religion has in these latter times prevailed so
much over the world, (Right Reverend and honorable) is a consideration both
weighty, and useful: for hence may we frame our selves either to prevent, or
imitate them: To imitate them in what we may; or prevent them in what they
should not. I meddle not with the means of their first risings: the
munificence of Christian Princes, the honest devotions of wel-meaning
Contributers, the division of the Christian world, the busy endeavors of
forward Princes, for the recovery of the holy land, with neglect of their own,
the ambitious insinuations of that sea, the same and large dominion of those
seven hills; the compacted indulgence, and conniuence of some treacherous, of
other timorous rulers; the shameless flattery of parasites, the rude ignorance
of Times; or if there be any other of this kind; My thoughts and words shall
be spent upon the present, and latest age. All the world knows, how that
pretended chair of Peter tottered, and cracked, some threescore years ago,
threatening a speedy ruin to her fearful usurper: How is it that still it
stands, and seems now to boast of some setlednesse? Certainly, if hell had
not contrived a new support, the Angel had long since said, It is fallen, it
is fallen; and the Merchants, Alas, Alas, the great City. The brood of that
lame Loyola shall have this miserable honor, without our envy; that if they
had not been, Rome had not been. By what means, it rests now to enquire.

It is not so much their zeal for falsehood; which yet we acknowledge, and
admire not. If Satan were not more busy then they, we had lost nothing. Their
desperate attempts, bold intrusions, importunate solicitations have not
returned empty; yet their policy has done more then their force. That Popish
world was then foul, and debauched, as in doctrine, so in life; and now
began to be ashamed of it self; when these holy Fathers, as some Saints
dropped out of heaven, suddenly professed an unusual strictness, sad piety,
resolved mortification; and so drew the eyes, and hearts of men after them,
that poor fowls began to think it could not be other then divine, which
they taught; other then holy, which they touched. The very times (not seldom)
give as great advantage, as our own best strength: and the vices of others
give glory to those which either are, or appear virtuous. They saw how ready
the world was to bite at the bait, and now followed their success, with new
helps. Plenty of pretended miracles must bless, on all sides, the in deauours
of this new Sect; and calls for both approbation, and wonder. Those things by
the report of their own pens (other witnesses I see none) have been done by
the ten Patriarcks of the Iesuitish Religion, both alive and dead, which can
hardly be matched of him, whose name they have usurped. And now the vulgar can
say, If these men were not of God, they could do nothing: How can a man that
is a sinner do such miracles? not distrusting either the fame, or the work,
but applauding the Authors, for what was said to be done. But now lest the
envy of the fact should surpass the wonder, they have learned to cast this
glory upon their wooden Ladies, and to communicate the gain unto the whole
Religion: Two blocks at Hale and Scherpen-heuuell, have said and done more for
Popery, then all Friars, ever since Francis wore his breeches on his head. But
because that praise is sweet, which arises from the disgrace of a rival,
therefore this holy society has besides, ever wont to honor it self by the
brokage of shameless untruths against the adverse part; not caring how probable
any report is, but how odious. A just volume would not contain those willing
lies, wherewith they have purposely loded religion, and us; that the multitude
might first hate us, and then enquire: and these courses are held not
tolerable, but meritorious. So the end may be attained, all means are just;
all ways straight. Whom we may, we satisfy: but wounds once given, are
hardly healed with out some scarres: and commonly accusations are vocal,
Apologies dumb. How easy is it to make any cause good, if we may take liberty
of tongue, and conscience? Yet lest some glimpse of our truth and innocence
should perhaps lighten the eyes of some more inquisitiue Reader, they have by
strict prohibitions, whether of books, or conference, restrained all
possibility of true informations; Yea their own writings, wherein our opinions
are reported with confutation, are not allowed to the common view, lest if it
should appear what we hold, our mere opinion should prevail more then their
subtilest answer. But above all, the restraint of Gods book has gained them
most; If that might be in the hands of men, their religion could not be in
their hearts; now, the concealment of Scriptures breeds ignorance, and
ignorance superstition. But because forbiddance does but whet desire, and work
a conceit of some secret excellence in things denied; therefore have they
devised to affright this dangerous curiosity, with that cruel, butcherly,
hellish Inquisition. Wherein yet there is not less craft then violence. For
since they have perceived the blood of Martyrs to be but the seed of the
Church, and that these perfumes are more dispersed with beating; they have now
learned to murder without noise, and to bring forth (if, at least, they list
sometimes to make the people privy to some examples of terror) not men but
carcasses. Behold, the constant confessions of the dying Saints have made them
weary of public executions: None but bare walls shalll now testify the
courage and faith of our happy Martyrs. A disguised corpse is only brought
forth to the multitude either for laughter, or fear. Yet because the very dead
speak for truth in a loud silence; these spectacles are rare; and the graves
of heretics are become as close as their death.

Yet lest (since neither living mouths, nor faithful pens may be suffered to
insinuate any truth) those speeches should perhaps be received from the
Ancients, which in us were heretical; the monuments of impartial antiquity
must be depraved, all witnesses that might speak against them must be
corrupted, with a fraudulent violence; and some of them purged to the death. So
whiles ours are debarred, and the Ancients altered, posterity shall acknowledge
no adversary.

What should I speak of those plausible devices; which they have invented to
make superstitious, and foolish Proselytes? Their proud vaunts of antiquity,
universality, succession, and the name of their forefathers, do not only
persuade, but amaze, and besot an ignorant heart. The glorious shows of their
processions, the gaudy ornaments of their Altars, the pomp and magnificence of
the places, and manner of their Services, the triumphs of their great
Festiuals, are enough to bewitch any childish, simple, or vain beholders. Who
knows not that nature is most led by sense? Sure, children and fools (such
are all mere natural men) cannot be of any other religion.

Besides all these, their personal undertakings, what for cunning, what for
boldness, could promise nothing but success. They can transform themselves
into all shapes; and in these false forms thrust themselves into al Courts,
and companies, not oftener changing their habit, then their name. They can take
the best opportunities to work upon those which are either most unable to
resist, or most like to bestead them. That I may not speak of the wrongs of
unseasonable travel: wherein many unsettled heads have met dangers, and
solicited errors: who like fond and idle Dinahs, going abroad to gaze, have
been ravished ere they return. Never any bird was so laid for, by the ne^s
and calls of the fowler, as the great heir of some noble family, or some fiery
wit, is by these impostors. They know that greatness is both lawless, and
commanding; if not by precept, yet by example: their very silence is
persuasory, and imperious. But alas for that other sex: Still the devil begins
with Eve; still his assault is strongest, where is weakest resistance. Simon
Magus had his Helena, Nicholas the Deacon had his choros foemineos (as Hierome
calls them.) Marcion had his Factoresse at Rome; Appelles his Philumena,
Montanus his Prisca and Maximilla; Arrius his Constantines-sister, Donatus his
Lucilla, Elpidius his Agape, Priscillianus his Galla: and our Jesuits have
their painted Ladies (not dead, but living) both for objects and instruments.
When they saw they could not blow up religion with French powder into heaven,
they now try by this Moabitish plot to sink it down to hell. Those silly
women, which are laden with sins, and diverse lusts, must now be the stalls
of their spiritual fornications: But for that these enterprises want not
danger; that both parts may securely succeed, behold public liberty of
dispensations, whether for dissembled religion, or not unprofitable
filthiness. These means are (like the Authors) dishonest, and godless. Add
(if you please) hereto, those which pretend more innocent policy: their common
dependances upon one commander, their intelligences given, their charges
received, their rewards and honors (perhaps of the Calender, perhaps of a red
hat) duly conferred. Neither may the least help be ascribed to the conference
of studies; (the conjoined labors of whole Societies directed to one end, and
shrouded under the title of one Author:) to large maintenances, raised from the
deathbeds of some guilty benefactors: from whence flow both infinite numbers,
and incomparable helps of Students. Under which head, for the time past, not a
few are moved by the remembrance of the bounteous hospitality of the
religious; who having engrossed the world to themselves, seemed liberal in
giving something; like unto some vaineglorious thieves, which having robbed
wealthy Merchants, bestow some pence upon beggars. Further, the smothering, if
not composing of their frequent strifes, and confining of brawles within their
own thresholds; with the nice men aging of their known oppositions, has
won many ignorant friends. Lastly, the excellent correspondence of their
doctrines unto nature, has been their best solicitor. We have examined
particulars in a former Epistle: wherein we have made it evident, that Popery
affects nothing but to make nature either proud, or wanton: it offers
difficulties, but carnal; and such as the greatest lover of himself would
easily embrace for an advantage. That we may therefore sum up all; I need
not accuse our carelessness, indifferency, idleness, loose carriage; in all
which, would God we had not aided them, and wronged our selves; Nor yet their
zeal and forwardness; worse means are guily of their gain. In short, the
fair outside which they set upon Religion, which sure is the best they have,
if not all; their pretended miracles, wilful untruths, strait prohibitio^s,
bloody and secret inquisitio^s, deprauations of Ancient witnesses, expurgation
of their own; gay and gairish sights, glorious titles, crafty changes of
names, shapes, habits, conditions; insinuations to the great oppugnation of the
weaker sex; falsehood of answers, and oaths, dispensatons for sins, uniting
of forces, concealing of differences, largeness of contributions, multitude of
actors, and means, accordances to men's natural dispositions: Where we on the
contrary care not to seem but to be, disclaim miracles, dare not save the
life of religion with a lie; give free scope to all pens, to all tongues, to
all eyes* shed no blood for religion: suffer al writers to speak like
themselves; show nothing but poor simplicity in our devotions, got ever, and
look as we are; teach the truth right-downe in an honest plainness, take no
vantage of imbecility: swear true, though we die; give no hope of indulgence
for evil; study each retired to himself, and the muses; publish our quarrels
and aggrauate them* anger nature, and conquer it. Such gain shall be gravel
in their throats: such losses to us (in our not daring to sin) shall be
happy and victorious; in all other regards are both blame worthy, and
recouerable. What dullness is this? Have we such a King, as in these lists of
Controversy, may dare to grapple with that great infallible Vicar, for his
triple crown: Such Bishops as may justly challenge the whole Consistory of
Rome; so many learned Doctors, and Divines, as no nation under heaven, more; so
flourishing Universities as Christendom has none; such blessed opportunities,
such encouragements; and now when we want nothing else, shall we be wanting to
our selves? Yea above all these, the God of heaven favors us; and do we
languish? The cause is his, and in spite of the gates of hell shall succeed,
though we were not: our neglect may slacken the pace of truth, cannot stay the
passage. Why are we not as busy, as subtle, more resolute? Such spirits, and
such hands as yours (reverend Lord) must put life into the cold breasts of this
frozen generation, and raise them up to such thoughts and endeavors, as may make
the emulation of our adversaries equal to their enmity.

To my Lord Bishop of Worcester.
EP. II. Showing the differences of the present Church from the Apostolical;
and needlesnesse of our conformity thereto in all things.

I Fear not to say those men are but superstitiously curious, (Right Reverend,
and honorable) which would call back all circumstances, to their first
patterns. The Spouse or Christ has been ever clothed with her own rites:
And as apparel, so Religion has her fashions, variable according to ages,
and places: To reduce us to the same observations which were in Apostolical
use, were no better then to tie us to the sandals of the Disciples, or the
seamlesse coat of our Savior. In these cases, they did, what we need not: and
we may, what they did not God meant us no bondage in their example: their
Canons bind us whether for manners, or doctrine, not their Ceremonies. Neither
Christ, nor his Apostles did all things for imitation: I speak not of
miraculous Acts. We need not be silent before a Judge, as Christ was; we need
not take a towel, and gird our selves, and wash our servants feet, as Christ
did; we need not make tents for our living as Paul, nor go armed as Peter; nor
carry about our wives, as he, and the other Apostles. I acknowledge the ground
not only of separation, but Anabaptisme; and wonder that these conceits do
not answer themselves who can choose but see a manifest difference betwixt
those laws, which Christ and his great Ambassadors made for eternal use, and
those rituall matters, which were confined to place, and time? Every Nation,
every persons sins that observes not those; These for the most part, are not
kept of the most; and are as well left without sin by us, as used without
prescription or necessity by the Authors. Some of them we cannot do; others
we need not: which of us can cast out devils by command? Who can cure the
sick by ointment, and imposition of hands? The Disciples did it. All those
Acts which proceeded from supernatural privilege, ceased with their cause:
who now dare undertake to continue them? Unless perhaps some bold Papists, who
have brought in gross magic instead of miraculous authority; and daube very
chrcasses instead of healing diseases. There be more yet, which we need not
do: What need we to choose Ministers by Lot? What need we to disclaim
all peculiarity in goods? What need we to Christen in rivers; or to meet
upon their banks? What need we to receive Gods Supper after our own? What
to lean in each others bosom while we receive it? what to abhor leaven in
that holy Bread? what to celebrate love feasts upon the receipt? what to
abstain from all strangled and blood? what to depend upon a maintenance
arbitrary, and uncertain? what to spend our days in a perpetual pererration,
as not only the Apostles but the Prophets and Evangelists some ages after
Christ? whosoever would impose all these on us, he should surely make us, not
the Sons, but the slaves of the Apostles. Gods Church never held her self
in such servile terms; yea Christ himself gave at first some precepts of this
nature, which he reuersed ere long: when he sent the Disciples to preach, he
charges, take not gold, nor silver, nor money in your girdles; afterward Judas
carried the bag. He charges, not to take so much as a staff; yet after behold
two swords: should the Disciples have held their master to his own rule? Is it
necessary that what he once commanded, should be observed always? The very
next age to these Christian Patriarcks, neither would nor durst have so much
varied her rites, or augmented them if it had found it self tied either to
number, or kind: As yet it was pure, chaste, and (which was the ground of all)
persecuted. The Church of Rome distributed the sacramental Bread: the Church
of Alexandria permitted the people to take it: the Churches of Affricke and
Rome, mixed their holy wine with water; other colder regions drank it pure.
Some kneeled in their prayers, others fell prostrate; and some lifted up eyes,
hands, feet toward heaven: some kept their Easter according to the Jewish use
the foureteenth of March; the French (as Nicephorus) the eight of the Calends
of April, in a set solemnity: the Church of Rome the Sunday after the
fourteenth Moon; which yet (as Socrates truly writes) was never restrained by
any Gospel, by any Apostle. That Romish Victor overcame the other world in
this point, with too much rigor; whose censure therefore of the Asian Churches
was justly censured, by Irenaeus. What should I speak of their difference of
facts? there can scarce be more variety in days, or meats. It has ever
been thus seen, according to our Anselmes rule, that the multitude of
different ceremonies in all Churches, has justly commended their unity in
faith. The French Divines preach covered (upon the same rule which required the
Corinthians to be vncouerd) we bare: The Dutch sit at the Sacrament, we kneel;
Geneua uses wafers, we leauened bread; they common vestures in Divine
service, we peculiar: each is free: no one does either blames, or over rule
others. I cannot but commend those very Nouatian Bishops (though it is a wonder
any precedent of peace should fall from schismatics) who meeting in Council
together, enacted that Canon of indifferency, when the Church was distracted
with the differences of her Paschall solemnities; conluding how insufficient,
this cause was to disquiet the Church of Christ. Their own issue (our
Separatists) will needs be unlike them in good; and strive to a further
distance from peace: whiles in a conceit not less idle, the^ scrupulous, they
press us to an uniform co^formity in our fashions to the Apostles. Their own
practice condemns them: They call for some, and yet keep not all: yet the
same reason enforces all, that pleads for some: and that which warrants the
forbearance of some, holds for all. Those tools which serve for the
foundation, are not of use for the roof. Yea the great master builder chose
those workmen for the first stones which he meant not to employ in the walls.
Do we not see all Christ's first agents extraordinary Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets; Prophetesses? See we not fiery and cloven tongues descending* What
Church ever since boasted of such founders; of such means? Why wol^d God begin
with those which he meant not to continue, but to show us we may not always
look for one face of things? The nurse feeds and tends her child at first;
afterward he is undertaken by the discipline of a Tutor; must he be always
under the spoone, and ferule, because he began so? If he have good breeding,
it matters not by whose hands. Who can deny, that we have the substance of all
those royal Laws, which Christ and his Apostles left to his Church? what do
we how thus importunately catching at shadows? If there had been a necessity
of having what we want, or wanting what we have, let us not so far wrong the
wisdom and perfection of the lawgiver, as to think he would not have
enioined that, and forbidden this. His silence in both argues his indifferency,
and calls for ours; which while it is not peaceably intertayned, there is
clamor without profit, malice without cause, and strife without end.

To my Lady Mary Denny.
EP. III. Containing the description of a Christian, and his differences from
the worldling.

MADAM.
IT is true that worldly eyes can see no difference, betwixt a Christian, and
another man; the outside of both is made of one clay, and cast in one mould;
both are inspired with one common breath: Outward events distinguish them not;
those, God never made for evidences of love, or hatred. So the se^ses can
perceive no difference, betwixt the reasonable soul, and that which informs
the beast: yet the soul knows there is much more, then betwixt their bodies.
The same holds in this: Faith sees more inward diffrence, then the eye sees
outward resemblance. This point is not more high, then material: which that it
may appear, let me show, what it is to be a Christian: You that have felt it,
can second me with your experience; and supply the defects of my discourse. He
is the living temple of the living God, where the deity is both resident and
worshipped. The highest thing in a man is his own spirit; but in a Christian
the spirit of God, which is the God of spirits. No grace is wanting in him; and
those which there are, want not stirring up. Both his heart and his hands are
clean: All his outward purity flows from within; neither does he frame his
soul to counterfeit good actions, but out of his holy disposition, commands and
produces them, in the sight of God. Let us begin with his beginning, and fetch
the Christian out of his nature, as another Abraham from his Chaldea: whiles
the wordling lives and dies, in nature, out of God. The true convert therefore
after his wild and secure courses puts himself (through the motions of gods
spirit) to school unto the law; there he learnes what he should have done,
what he could not do, what he has done, what he has deserved. These lessons,
cost him many a stripe, and many a tear, and not more grief then terror: For
this sharp master makes him feel what sin is, and what hell is: and in
regard of both, what himself is. When he has well smarted under the whip of
this severe usher, and is made vile enough in himself, then is he led up into
the higher school of Christ, and there taught the comfortable lessons of
grace; there he learnes, what belongs to a Savior, what one he is, what he
has done, and for whom, how he became ours, we his; and now finding himself
in a true state of danger, of humility, of need, of desire, of fitnes for
Christ, he brings home to himself all that he learns, and what he knows he
applies. His former Tutor he feared, this he loves; that showed him his
wounds, yea made them: this binds and heales them: that killed him, this shows
him life, and leads him to it. Now at once he hates himself, defies Satan,
trusts to Christ, makes account both of pardon and glory. This is his most
precious Faith, whereby he appropriates, yea in grosses Christ Jesus to
himself: whence he is justified from his sins, purified from his
corruptions, established in his resolutio^s, comforted in his doubts, defended
against temptations, ouercomes all his enemies. Which virtue, as it is most
employed, and most opposed, so carries the most care from the Christian heart,
that it be sound, lively growing: Sound, not rotten, not hollow not
presumptuous: sound in the Act; not a superficial conceit, but a true, deep,
and sensible apprehension; an apprehension, not of the brain, but of the
heart, and of the heart not approving, or assenting, but trusting, and reposing
Sound in the object, none but Christ: he knows, that no friendship in heaven
can do him good, without this; The Angels cannot: God will not: Ye believe in
the Father, believe also in me.

Lively; for it cannot give life, unless it have life; the faith that is not
fruitful is dead: the fruits of faith are good works: whether inward, within
the roof of the heart, as love, awe, sorrow, piety, zeal, joy, and the rest;
or outward toward God, or our brethren: obedience and service to the one: to
the other relief and beneficence: These he bears in his time: sometimes all,
but always some.

Growing: true faith cannot stand still, but as it is fruitful in works, so
it increases in degrees; from a little seed it proves a large plant, reaching
from earth to heaven, and from one heaven to another: every shower and every
Sun adds something to it. Neither is this grace ever solitary, but always
attended royally: For he that believes what a Savior he has, cannot but
love him: and he that loves him cannot but hate whatsoever may displease him:
cannot but rejoice in him, and hope to enjoy him, and desire to enjoy his hope,
and contemn all those vanities which he once desired and enjoyed. His mind
now scorneth to grouell upon earth, but soareth up to the things above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God: and after it has seen what is done in
heaven, looks strangely upon al worldly things. He dare trust his faith above
his reason, and sense* and has learned to weane his appetite from craving
much: He stands in awe of his own conscience and dare no more offend it, then
not displease himself. He fears not his enemies, yet neglects them not;
equally avoiding security, and timorousness: He sees him that is invisible;
and walks with him awfully, familiarly. He knows what he is borne to, and
therefore digests the miseries of his wardship, with patience: he finds more
comfort in his afflictions, then any worldling in pleasures. And as he has
these graces to comfort him within, so has he the Angels to attend him
without; spirits better then his own, more powerful, more glorious; These
bear him in their arms, wake by his bed, keep his soul while he has it
and receive it when it leaves him. These are some present differences, the
greatest are future, which could not be so great, if themselves were not
witnesses; no less then betwixt heaven and hell, torment and glory, an
incorruptible crown, and fire vnque^chable. Whether Infidels be leeue these
things or no, we know them: so shall they, but too late. What remaynes but that
we applaud our selves in this happiness; and walk on clearly in this heavenly
profession? acknowledging that God could not do more for us; and that we cannot
do enough for him. Let others boast (as your Ladyship might with others) of
ancient and noble houses, large Patrimonies, or dowries, honorable commands;
others of famous names, high and envied honors, or the favors of the greatest;
others of valor or beauty, or some perhaps of eminent learning and wit; it
shall be our pride that we are Christians.

To my Lady Honoria Hay.
Ep. IIII. Discoursing of the necessity of Baptism; and the estate of those
which necessarily want it.

MADAME.
MEthinks children are like teeth, troublesome both in the breeding, and
loosing, and oftentimes painful while they stand: yet such, as we neither
would, nor can well be without. I go not about to comfort you thus late, for
your loss, I rather congratulate your wise moderation, and Christian care of
these first spiritual privileges; desiring only to satisfy you in what you
hard as a witness; not in what you needed as a mother. Children are the
blessings of Parents, and baptism is the blessing of children, and parents:
Wherein, there is not only use, but necessity; Necessity, not in respect so
much of the end, as of the precept: God has enjoined it, to the comfort of
parents, and behoof of children: which therefore, as it may not be
superstitiously hastened, so not negligently differred. That the contempt of
baptism damneth, is past all doubt; but that the constrained absence thereof,
should send infants to hell, is a cruel rashness. It is not their sin to die
early: death is a punishment, not an offense; an effect of sin, not a cause
of torment; they want nothing but time; which they could not command. Because
they could not live a while longer, that therefore they should die
everlastingly, is the hard sentence of a bloody religion. I am only sorry,
that so harsh an opinion should be graced with the name of a father, so
reverend, so divine: whose sentence yet, let no man plead by halues. He who
held it impossible for a child to be saved unless the baptismall water were
powered on his face, held it also as impossible, for the same infant, unless
the sacrame^tal bread were received into his mouth. There is the same ground
for both, the same error in both, a weakness fit for forgetfulness; seeyet how
ignorant, or il meaning posterity, could single out one half of the opinion for
truth: and condemn the other of falsehood. In spite of whom, one part shall
easily convince the other; yea without al force, since both cannot stand, both
will fall together, for company. The same mouth, which said, unless ye be
borne again of water, and the holy Ghost, said also, Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood: An equal necessity of both. And
lest any one should plead different interpretations, the same Saint Austin
auerres this later opinion also, concerning the necessary communicating of
children, to have been once the common judgment of the Church of Rome: A
sentence so displeasing, that you shall find Index Expurg.
the memory of it noted with a black coal, and wiped out in that infamous
bill of Expurgations. Had the ancient Church held this desperate sequel, what
strange, and yet wilful cruelty had it been in them, to defer baptism a
whole yearelong: till Easter, or that Sunday, which has his name (I think)
from the white robes of the baptized?

Yea what an adventure was it in some, to adiourne it till their age (with
Constantine) if being unsure of their life, they had been sure the prevention
of death would have inferred damnation? Look unto that legal Sacrament of
circumcision, which (contrary to the fancies of our Anabaptists) directly
answers this Evangelical. Before the eight day they could not be
circumcised: before the eight day they might die. If dying the seventh day,
they were necessarily condemned: either the want of a day is a sin, or God
sometimes condemns not for sin: Neither of them possible, neither according
with the justice of the Lawgiver. Or if from this parallel, you please to
look either to reason or example, the case is clear. Reason; No man that has
faith, can be condemned; for Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: and he in
whom Christ dwells cannot be a reprobate. Now it is possible a man may have a
saving says, before baptism: Abraham first believed to justification: then
after received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of
that faith, which he had when he was uncircumcised: Therefore some dying before
their baptism, may, yea must be saved. Neither was Abraham's case singular; he
was the Father of all them also, which believe, not being circumcised: these,
as they are his Sons in faith, so in righteousness; so in salvation:
uncircumcision cannot hinder, where faith admits; These following his steps
of belief before the sacrament, shall doubtless rest in his bosom, without
the sacrament; without it, as fataly absent, not as willingly neglected. It is
not the water, but the faith: not the putting away the filth of the flesh
(says Saint Peter) but the stipulation of a good conscience; for who takes
Baptism without a full faith (says Hierome) takes the water, takes not the
spirit; Whence is this so great virtue of the water, that it should touch the
body, and cleanse the heart (says Austen) unless by the power of the word,
not spoken, but believed? Thou see water (says Ambrose:) every water heales
not, that water only heals which has the grace of God annexed; And if there
be any grace in the water (says Basil) it is not of the nature of the water,
but of the presence of the spirit. Baptism is indeed, as S. Ambrose styles it,
the paune and image of our resurrection, yea (as Basil) the power of God to
resurrection: but (as Ignatius expoundes this phrase aright) believing in his
death, we are by baptism made partakers of his resurrection. Baptism
therefore without faith cannot save a man, and by faith does save him; and
faith without baptism (where it cannot be had; not where it may be had, and is
contemned) may save him: That Spirit which works by means, will not be tied
to means.

Examples. Cast your eyes upon that good thief: good in his death, though in
his life abominable: he was never washed in lordan, yet is received into
Paradise; his soble was foul with rapines, and injustice, yea bloody with
murders: and yet being scouted only with the blood of his Savior, not with
water of baptism; it is presented glorious to God. I say nothing of the souls
of Traian, and Falconella, mere heathens, living and dying without Christ,
without baptism: which yet their honest Legend reports delivered from hell,
transported to heaven, not so much as scorched in Purgatory: The one by the
prayers of Gregory, the other of Tecla. What partiality is this to deny that
to the children of Christians, which they grant to known, infidels? The
promise is made to us, and our seed; not to those that are without the pale of
the Church. Those Innocents which were massacred for Christ, are by them
canonized for Saints, and make one day in their Calendar (each year) both
holy, and dismal; whereof yet scarce any lived to know water, none to know
baptism. Yea, all Martyrs are here privileged; who are Christened in their
own blood, instead of water: but where has God said, All that die without
baptism, shall die for ever, except Martyrs? why not, except believers? It is
faith that gives life to Martyrs; which if they should want, their first death
could not avoid the second. Ambrose doubted not to say, his Valentinian was
baptized, because he desired it; not because he had it: he knew the mind of
God, who accounts us to have what we unfeignedly wish.

Children cannot live to desire baptism, if their parents desire it for them,
why may not the desire of others be theirs, as well as (according to Austins
opinion) the faith of othe^rs believing, and the mouth of others confessing? In
these cases therefore of any souls but our own, it is safe to suspend, and
dangerous to pass judgment. Secret things to God: He that made all soulesv,
knows what to do with them, neither will make us of counsel: But if we
define either way, the errors of charity are inoffensiue. we must honor good
means and use them, and in their necessary want depend upon him, who can
work, beyond, without, against means.

Thus have I endeavored your Ladyships satisfaction in what you heard, not
without some scruple. If any man shall blame my choice in troubling you with a
thorny, and scholasticall discourse, let him know that I have learned this
fashion of St. Hierome the Oracle of Antiquity, who was wont to entertain his
Paula, and Eustochium, Marcella, Principia, Hedibia, and other devout Ladies,
with learned canuases of the deep points of Divinity. This is not so
perplexed, that it need to offend: nor so unnecessary, that it may be unknown.

To Sir Richard Lea, since deceassed.
EP. V. Discoursing of the comfortable remedies of all afflictions.

WIse men seek remedies before their disease: sensible patients, when they
begin to complain: fools, too late. Afflictions are the common maladies, of
Christians: These you feel, and upon the first groans seek for ease.
Wherefore serves the tongue of the learned, but to speak words in season? I
am a scholar of those that can comfort you: If you shall with me, take out my
lessons, neither of us shall repent it. You smart and complain, take heed
least too much: There is no affliction not grievous: the bone that was
disioynted, cannot be set right without pain. No potion can cure us, if it
work not: it works not, except it make us sick: we are contented with that
sickness, which is the way to health. There is a vexation without hurt: such
is this: We are afflicted, not ouer-pressed; needy, not desperate; persecuted
not forsaken, cast down but perish not. How should we, when all the evil in a
City comes from the providence of a good God; which can neither be impotent,
nor unmerciful? It is the Lord, let him do what he will. VVoe were us if
evils could come by chance; or were let loose to alight where they list: now
they are oueruled; we are safe. The destiny of our sorrows is written in
heaven by a wise and eternal decree: Behold he that has ordained, moderates
them. A faithful God, that gives anissue with the tentation: An issue, both of
their end, and their success. He chides not always, much less strikes; Our
light afflictions are but for a moment, not so long, in respect of our vacancy;
and rest. If we weep sometimes, our tears are precious; As they shall never be
dry in his bottle, so they shall soon be dry upon our cheeks. He that wrings
them from us, shall wipe them off: how sweetly does he interchange our sorrows,
and joys, that we may neither be vain, nor miserable? It is true; to be
struck, once in anger, is fearful: his displeasure is more then his blow: In
both, our God is a consuming fire. Fear not, these stripes are the tokens of
his love: he is no Son, that is not beaten; yea till he smart, and cry; if not
till he bleed: no parent corrects another child, and he is no good parent,
that corrects not his own. Oh rod worthy to be kissed, that assures us of his
love, of our adoption! What speak I of no hurt? short praises do but
discommend, I say more, these evils are good: look to their effects. What is
good if not patience? affliction is the mother of it; tribulation brings
forth patience. What can earth or heaven yield better then the assurance of
Gods spirit? Afflictions argue, yea seal this to us. Wherein stands perfect
happiness, if not in our near resemblance of Christ? Why was man created
happy, but because in Gods image? The glory of Paradise, the beauty of his
body, the duty of the creatures, could not give him felicity without the
likeness to his creator. Behold, what we lost in our height, we recover in our
misery; a conformity to the Image of the Son of God: he that is not like his
elder brother, shall never be coheire with him. Lo his side, temples, hands,
feet, all bleeding: his face blubbred ghastly, and spitted on: his skin al
pearled with a bloody sweat, his head drouping, his soul heavy to the death:
see you the worldling merry, soft, delicate, perfumed, never wrinkled with
sorrow, never humbled with afflictions? What resemblance is here, yea what
contrariery? Ease slays the fool; it has made him resty, and leaves him
miserable. Be not deceived; No man can follow Christ without his Gross; much
less reach him and if none shall reign with Christ, but these that suffer
with him; what shall become of these jolly ones? Go now thou dainty worldling,
and please thyselfe in thy happiness, laugh always, and be ever applauded; It
is a woeful felicity that thou shall find in opposition to thy redeemer: He
has said, woe to them that laugh; Beleeuest thou, and do not weep at thy
laughter? and with Solomon, condemn it of madness? And again, with the same
breath, Blessed are ye that weep: who can believe this, and not rejoice in his
own tears, and not pity the faint smiles of the godless? Why blessed? For
ye shall laugh: Behold we that weepon earth, shall laugh in heaven: we that now
weep with men, shall laugh with Angels; while the fleering worldling, shall be
gnashing, and howling with devils: we that weep for a time, shall laugh for
ever: who would not be content to differ his joy a little, that it may be
perpetual, and infinite? What mad man would purchase this crackling of
thorns (such is the wordlings joy) with eternal shrieking and torment? he that
is the door and the way, has taught us, that through many afflictions we must
enter into heaven. There is but one passage, and that a strait one: It with
much pressure we can get through, and leave but our superfluous rags as torn
from us in the crowd; we are happy. He that made heaven, has on purpose thus
framed it; wide when we are entered; and glorious narrow and hard in the
entrance: that after our pain, our glory might be sweeter. And if before hand
you can climb up thither in your thoughts; look about you, you shall see no
more palms, then crosses: you shall see none crowned, but those that have
wrestled: with crosses and so rows, to sweat, yea to blood; and have overcome.
All runs here to the ouercommer, and ouercomming implies both fighting, and
success. Girde up your loins therefore, and strengthen your weak knees,
resolve to fight for heaven, to suffer in fighting, to persist in suffering; so
persisting you shall overcome, and ouercomming you shall be crowned. Oh reward
truly great, above desert, yea, above conceit. A crown for a few groans:
And eternal crown of life and glory, for a short and moment any suffering:
How just is Saint Paul's account, that the afflictions of this present life are
not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us? O Lord let me smart that
I may reign; uphold thou me in smarting, that thou may hold me worthy of
reigning. It is no matter how vile I be, so I may be glorious. What say you?
would you not be afflicted? Whether had you rather mourn for a while, or for
ever; One must be chosen: the election is easy: Whether had you rather
rejoice for one fit or always? You would do both. Pardon me; it is a fond
covetousness, and idle singularity to affect it. What? That you alone may fare
better then all Gods Saints? That God should strew Carpets for your nice feet
only, to walk into your heaven, and make that way smooth for you, which all
Patriarks, Prophets, Evangelists, Confessors, Christ himself, have found
rugged and bloody? Away with this self love; and come down you ambitious
Son of Zebedee: and ere you think of sitting near the throne, be content
to be called unto the Cup. Now is your trial; Let your Savior see how much
of his bitter potion you can pledge; then shall you see how much of his glory
he can afford you. Be content to drink of his Vinegar, and gall, and you shall
drink new wine with him in his kingdom.

To Master Peter Moulin, Preacher of the Church at PARIS.
EP. VI. Discoursing of the late French occurrents, and what use God expects to
be made of them.

SInce your travels here with us, we have not forgotten you; but since that,
your witty and learned travels in the common affairs of Religion have made
your memory both fresh, and blessed. Behold, whiles your hand was happily
busy in the defense of our King, the heads and hands of traitors were busy in
the massacring of your own. God does no memorable, and public act, which he
would not have talked of, read, construed of all the world. How much more of
neighbors, whom scarce a sea seuereth from each other? how much yet more of
brethren, whom neither land, nor sea, can sever? Your dangers, and fears, and
griefs have been ours: All the salt water that runs betwixt us, cannot wash
off our interest in all your common causes: The deadly blow of that miscreant
(whose name is justly sentenced to forgetfulness) pierced even our sides. Who
has not bled within himself, to think that he, which had so victoriously
out-liued the swords of enemies, should fall by the knife of a villain? and
that he should die in the peaceable streets, whom no fields could kill? that all
those honorable and happy triumphs should end in so base a violence? But oh our
idleness, and impiety, if we see not a divine hand from above, striking with
this hand of disloyalty. Sparrows fall not to the ground without him much less
Kings; One dies by a tyle-sheard, another by the splinters of a Lance, one by
Lice, another by a Fly, one by poison, another by a knife; What are all these
but the executioners of that great God, which has said, Ye are Gods, but ye
shall die like men? Perhaps God saw (that we may guess modestly at the
reasons of his acts) you reposed too much, in this arm of flesh; or Perhaps he
saw this scourge would have been too early, to those enemies, whose sin,
though great, yet was not full: or perhaps he saw, that if that great spirit
had been deliberately yielded in his bed, you should not have slept in yours:
Or perhaps the ancient conniuence at those streams of blood, from your too
common deels, was now called to reckning; or, it may be, that weak revolt from
the truth. He whose the rod was, knows why he struck: yet may it not pass
without a note, that he fell by that religion, to which he fell. How many ages
might that great monarch have lived (whatsoever the ripe head of your more then
mellow Cotton could imagine) ere his least finger should have bled, by the hand
of an Huguenot? All religions may have some monsters; but blessed be the God of
heaven, ours shall never yield that good Jesuit, either a Mariana to teach
treason, or a Rauillac to act it. But what is that we hear? It is no marvel:
That holy Society is a fit Guardian for the hearts of kings: I dare say, none
more loves to see them: none takes more care to purchase them. How happy were
that Chapel (think they) if it were full of such shrines? I hope all
Christian Princes have long, and well learned (so great is the courtesy of
these good Fathers) that they shall never (by their wills) need be troubled
with the charge of their own hearts. An heart of a KING in a Jesuits hand,
is as proper, as a wafer in a Priests. Justly was it written of old, under the
picture of Ignatius Loyola, Cauete vobis Principes; Be wise O ye Princes, and
learn to be the keepers of your own hearts. Yea rather, O thou keeper of
Israel, that neither slumbrest nor sleep, keep thou the hearts of al
Christian Kings, whether alive or dead, from the keeping of this traitorous
generation; whose very religion is wholly rebellion, and whose merits bloody.
Doubtless, that murderer hoped to have stabbed thousands with that blow, and
to have let out the life of religion, at the side of her collapsed Patron: God
did at once laugh and frown at his project; and suffered him to live to see
himself, no less a fool then a villain: Oh the infinite goodness of the
wise, and holy governor of the world; who could have looked for such a calm in
the midst of a tempest? who would have thought that violence could beget
peace? Who durst have conceived that King Henry should die alone? and that
Religion should loose nothing but his person? This is the Lords doing, and it
is marvelous in our eyes. You have now paralleled us: Out of both our fears
has God fetched security: oh that out of our security, we could as easily
fetch fear: not so much of evil, as of the Author of good; and yet trust him
in our fear, and in both magnify him. Yea, you have by this act gained some
conuerts, against the hope of the agents: neither can I without many joyful
congratulations, think of the estate of your Church; which every day honors
with the access of new clients; whose tears and sad confessions make the
Angels to rejoice in heaven, and the Saints on earth. We should give you
example, if our peace were as plentiful of goodness as of pleasure. But how
seldom has the Church gained by ease? or lost by restraint? Bless you God for
our prosperity, and we shall praise him for your progress.

To Master THOMAS SVTTON.
EP. VII. Exciting him, and (in him) all others to early and cheerful
beneficence: showing the necessity and benefit of good works.

SIR, I trouble you not with reasons of my writing, or with excusds: If I do
ill, no plea can warrant me; If well, I cannot be discouraged with any
censures. I crave not your pardon, but your acceptance. It is no presumption
to give good counsel; and presents of love fear not to be ill taken of
strangers. My pen and your substance are both given us for one end, to do
good: These are our talents, how happy are we if we can improve them well:
suffer me to do you good with the one that with the other, you may do good to
many, and most to your self. You cannot but know, that your full hand, and
worthy purposes have possessed the world with much expectation: what speak I
of the world? whose honest and reasonable claymes yet, cannot be contemned
with honor, nor disappointed without dishonor. The God of heaven, which has
lent you this abundance, and given you these gracious thoughts of charity; of
piety, looks long for the issue of both: and will easily complain either of too
little or too late. Your wealth and your will are both good, but the first is
only made good by the second for if your hand were full, and your heart empty,
we who now applaud you, should justly pity you, you might have riches, not
goods, not blessings: your burden should be greater, then your estate; and you
should be richer in sorrows, then in mettalls. For (if we look to no other
world) what gain is it to be the keeper of the best earth? That which is the
common cofer of all the rich mines, we do but tread upon; and account it vile,
because it does but hold, and hide those treasures. Whereas the skillful
metalist that finds, and refineth those precious veins, for public use, is
rewarded, is honored. The very basest Element yeeldes gold; the savage Indian
gets it, the servile prentise works it, the very Midianitish Camel may wear
it, the miserable worldling admires it, the covetous lew swallows it, the
unthrifty Ruffian spends it: what are al these the better for it? Only good
use gives praise to earthly possessions. Here in therefore you owe more to God,
that he has given you an heart to do good a will to be as rich in good
works, as great in riches. To be a friend to this Mammon, is to be an enemy
to God: but to make friends with it, is royal, and Christian. His enemies may
be wealthy, none but his friends can either be good, or do good: Da and
accipe, says the wise man. The Christian which must imitate the hie pattern
of his creator, knows his best riches to be bounty; God that has all, gives
all; reserues nothing. And for himself; he well considers, that God has not
made him an owner, but a servant: and of servants a servant, not of his goods
but of the giver; not a treasurer, but a Steward: whose praise is more to lay
out well, then to have received much. The greatest gain therefore that he
affects, is an even reckning, a clear discharge: which since it is obtained by
disposing, not by keeping, he counts reservation loss, and just expense his
trade, and joy; he knows, that Well done faithful servant, is a thousand
times more sweet a note, then Soul take thine ease; for that is the voice of
the master recompencing, this of the carnal heart presuming: and what follows
to the one, but his masters joy? what to the other, but the loss of his soul?
Blessed be that God which has given you an heart to fore think this, and in
this dry, and dead age, a will to honor him with his own: and to credit his
Gospel, with your beneficence; Lo we are vpbrayded with barrenness: your name
has been publikly opposed to these challenges, as in whom it shall be seen,
that the truth has friends that can give. I neither distrust, nor persuade
you, whose resolutions are happily fixed on purposes of good: only give me
leave to hasten your pace a little, and to excite your Christian forwardness,
to begin speedily, what you have long and constantly vowed. You would not but
do good; why not now? I speak boldly, the more speed, the more comfort:
Neither the times are in our disposing, nor our selves: if God had set us a
day, and made our wealth inseparable, there were no danger in delaying; now our
uncertainty either must quicken us, or may deceive us. How many have meant well,
and done nothing, and lost their crown with lingering? whose destinies have
prevented their desires, and have made their good motions the wards of their
executors, not without miserable success: to who^, that they would have done
good, is not so great a praise, as it is a dishonor that they might have done
it: their wracks are our warnings, we are equally mortal, equally fickle. Why
have you this respite of living, but to prevent the imperious necessity of
death? it is a woeful and remediless complaint, that the end of our days has
overrun the beginning of our good works. Early beneficence has no danger,
many ioies: for the conscience of good done, the prayers and blessings of the
relieved, the gratulations of the Saints, are as so many perpetual comforters,
which can make our life pleasant, and our death happy our evil days good, and
our good better. All these are lost with delay, few and cold are the prayers
for him that may give: and in lieu, our good purposes fore flowed, are become
our tormenters upon our dead-bed. Little difference is betwixt good differred,
and evil done: Good was meant, who hindered it, will our conscience say? there
was time enough, means enough, need enough, what hindered? Did fear of envy,
distrust of want? Alas what bugs are these to fright men from heaven? As if the
envy of keeping, were less then of bestowing: As if God were not as good a
debtor, as a giver: he that gives to the poor lendes to God, says wise
Solomon; If he freely give us what we may lend, and grace to give; will he
not much more pay us what we have lent; and give us because we have given?
That is his bounty, this his justice* Oh happy is that man that may be a
creditor to his maker: Heaven and earth, shall be empty before he shall want a
royal payment. If we dare not trust God whiles we live, how dare we trust men
when we are dead? Men that are still deceitful, and light upon the balance,
light of truth, heavy of self-love. How many executors have proved the
executioners of honest wills? how many have our eyes seen, that after most
careful choice of trusty guardians, have had their children and goods so
disposed, as if the parents soul could return to see it, I doubt whether it
could be happy? How rare is that man that prefers not himself to his dead
friend? profit to truth? that will take no vantage of the impossibility of
account? What ever therefore men either show, or promise, happy is that man
that may be his own auditor, superuisor, executor. As you love God and your
self, be not afraid of being happy too soon. I am not worthy to give so
bold advice, let the wise son of Syrach speak for me. Do good before thou
die, and according to thine ability stretch out thine hands, and give: Defraud
not thy self of thy good day; and let not the portion of thy good desires
ouerpasse thee: Shall thou not leave thy travels to another, and thy labors to
them that will divide thine heritage? Or let a wiser then he, Solomon: Say not,
tomorrow I will give, if thou now have it: for thou know not what a day will
bring forth. It has been an old rule of liberality, he gives twice that gives
quickly, whereas slow benefits argue vnchearefulnesse, and lose their worth.
Who lingers his receipts is condemned as unthrifty: he that knows both,
says, it is better to give, then to receive. If we be of the same spirit, why
are we hasty in the worse, and slack in the better? Suffer your self therefore
good Sir, for Gods sake, for the Gospels sake, for the Churches sake, for your
souls sake, to be stirred up by those poor lines, to a resolute and speedy
performing of your worthy intentions: and take this as a loving inuitation sent
from heaven, by an unworthy messenger. You cannot deliberate long of fit
objects for your beneficence, except it be more for multitude, then want: the
streets, yea the world is full; How does Lazarus lie at every door? how many
Sons of the Prophets in their meanely-prouided Colleges may say, not, Mors in
olla, but Fames? how many Churches may justly plead, that which our Savior
bad his Disciples, The Lord has need? And if this infinite store has made
your choice doubtful, how easy were it to show you, wherein you might oblige
the whole Church of God to you, and make your memorial both eternal, and
blessed; or, if you had rather, the whole common wealth? But now I find my
self too bold and too busy, in thus looking toward particularities: God,
shall direct you, and if you follow him, shall crown you: howsoever, if good
be done, and that be times: he has what he desired, and your soul shall have
more then you can desire. The success of my weak yet hearty counsel, shall
make me as rich, as God has made you with all your abundance. That God bless
it to you, and make both our recknings cheerful in the day of our common audit.

To E. B. Dedicated to Sir GEORGE GORING.
EP. VIII. Remedies against dullness and hartlesnesse in our callings, and
encouragements to cheerfulness in labor.

IT falls out not seldom (if we may mesure all by one) that the mind over laid
with work, grows dull, and heavy: and now does nothing, because it has done
too much; over lavish expense of spirits has left it heartlesse: As the best
vessel with much motion and vent, becomes flat, and dreggish. And not fewer
(of more weaker temper) discourage themselves with the difficulty of what they
must do: some trauailers have more shrunk at the Map then at the way?
Betwixt both, how many sit still with their hands folded; and wish they knew how
to be rid of time? If this evil be not cured, we become miserable losers,
both of good hours, and of good parts. In these mental diseases, Empiricks
are the best Physicians. I prescribe you nothing but out of feeling: If you
will avoid the first: moderate your own vehemency; suffer not your self to
do all you could do: Rise ever from your deske, not without an appetite. The
best horse will tire soonest, if the reine lie ever loose in his neck:
Restraints in these cases are encouragements: obtain therefore of your self
to defer, and take new days: How much better is it to refresh your self,
with many competent meals, then to buy one days glutonie: with the fast of
many? And if it be hard to call off the mind, in the midst of a fair and
likely flight; know that all our ease and safety begins at the command of our
selves: he can never task himself well, that cannot favor himself. Persuade
your heart that perfection comes by leisure: and no excellent thing is done at
once: the rising and setting of many Suns (which you think slackens your
work) in truth ripens it. That gourd which came up in a night, withered in a
day; whereas those plants which abide age, rise slowly. Indeed, where the
heart is unwilling, prorogation hinders: what I list not to do this day, I
loath the next; but where is no want of desire, delay does but sharpen the
stomach. That which we do unwillingly leave, we long to undertake, and the
more our affection is, the greater our intention, and the better our
performance. To take occasion by the foretop, is no small point of wisdom;
but to make time (which is wild and fugitive) tame and pliable to our
purposes, is the greatest improuement of a man: All times serve him, which has
the rule of himself.

If the second, think seriously of the condition of your being: It is that we
were made for; the bird to fly, and man to labor. What do we here if we
repine at our work? we had not been, but that we might be still busy; if not
in this task we dislike, yet in some other of no less toil: There is no act
that has not his labor, which varies in measure according to the will of the
doer. This which you complain of, has been undertaken by others, not with
facility only, but with pleasure; and what you choose for ease, has been
abhorred of others, as tedious. All difficulty is not so much in the work, as
in the Agent. To set the mind on the rack of long meditation (you say) is a
torment: to follow the swift foot of your hound alday long, has no
weariness: what would you say of him that finds better game in his study,
then you in the field, and would account your disport his punishment? such
there are, though you doubt and wonder. Never think to detract from your
business, but add to your will. It is the policy of our great enemy, to
drive us with these fears, from that he fore-sees would grow profitable: like
as some inhospitall Savages make fearful delusions by sorcery, upon the
shore, to fright strangers from landing. Where you find therefore motions of
resistance, awaken your courage the more, and know there is some good that
appears not; vain indeauors find no opposition. Al crosses implie a secret
commodity: resolve then to will because you begin not to will: and either
oppose your self, as Satan opposes you, or else you do nothing. We pay no
price to God for any good thing, but labor; if we higgle in that, we are
worthy to lose our bargain. It is an inualuable gain, that we may make in
this trafique: for God is bountiful, as well as just, and when he sees true
endeavor, does not only sell, but give: whereas idleness neither gets nor
saues, nothing is either more fruitless of good, or more fruitful of evil;
for we do ill whiles we do nothing, and lose, whiles we gain not. The
sluggard is senseless, and so much more desperate, because he cannot
complain: but (though he feel it not) nothing is more precious then time, or
that shall abide a reckning more strict and fearful: yea this is the measure
of all our actions, which if it were not abused, our accounts could not be but
even with God: so God esteems it (what ever our pride be) that he plagues the
loss of a short time, with a revenge beyond all times. Hours have wings, and
every moment flies up to the author of time, and carries news of our usage:
All our prayers cannot entreat one of them either to return, or slacken his
pace: the mispense of every minute is a new record against us in heaven. Sure,
if we thought thus, we would dismiss them with better reports, and not suffer
them either to go away empty, or laden with dangerous intelligence; how happy
is it that every hour should convey up, not only the message, but the fruits
of good, and stay with the Ancient of days, to speak for us before his
glorious throne? know this and I shall take no care for your pains, nor you,
for pastime. None of our profitable labors shall be transient, but even when
we have forgotten them, shall welcome us into joy: we think we have left
them behind us, but they are forwarder then our souls, and expect us where we
would be. And if there were no crown for these toiles, yet without future
respects there is a tediousness in doing nothing. To man especially, motion is
natural: there is neither mind, nor eye, nor joint which moves not: And as
company makes way short, hours never go away so merrily, as in the fellowship
of work. How did that industrious heathen draw out water by night, and
knowledge by day, and thought both short, ever laboring only that he might
labor? Certainly if idleness were enacted by authority, there would not
want some, which would pay their mulct, that they might work and those spirits
are likest to heaven, which moves always, and the freest from those
corruptions, which are incident to nature: The running stream cleanses it
self, whereas standing ponds breed weeds, and mud. These meditations must
hearten us to that we must do: whiles we are cheareful, our labors shall
strive whether to yield us more comfort, or others more profit.

To S. H. I.
EP. IX. Discussing this Question.

Whether a man and wife after some years mutual, and loving fruition of each
other, may upon consent, whether for secular, or religious causes, vow and
perform a perpetual separation from each others bed, and absalutely renounce
all carnal knowledge of each other for ever.

I Wish not my self any other advocate, nor you any other adversary, then
Saint Paul who never gave (I speak boldly) a direct precept, if not in this:
his express charge whereupon I insisted, is Defraude, not one another, except
with consent for a time, that you may give your selves to fasting and prayer,
and then again come together, that Satan tempt you not, for your incontinency.
Every word (if you weigh it well) opposes your part, and pleads for mine: By
consent of al Divines ancient, and modern, (defrauding) is refraining from
matrimonical conversation: see what a word the Spirit of God has chosen for
this abstinence: never but taken in ill part. But there is no fraud in consent,
as Chrysostom, Athanasius, Theophilact, expound it: true; therefore Saint Paul
adds (unless with consent) that I may omit to say, that in saying (unless
with consent) he implies, both that there may be a defrauding without it, and
with consent a defrauding, but not unlawful: but see what he adds (For a
time,) consent cannot make this defrauding lawful, except it be temporary: No
defrauding without consent, no consent for a perpetuity. How long then, and
wherefore? Not for every cause, not for any length of time, but only for a
while, and for devotion (vt vacetis, etc.) Not that you might pray only (as
Chryso stome notes justly) but that you might (give your selves to prayer.) In
our marriage Society (says he) against that paradoxe of Hierome, we may pray,
and woe to us it we do not; but we cannot (vacare orationi.) But we are bidden
to pray continually: yet not I hope, ever to fast and pray. Mark how the
Apostle adds (that you may give you selves to fasting and prayer;) It is
solemn exercise, which the Apostle here intends, such, as is joined with
fasting, and external humiliation; wherein al earthly comforts must be
forborne. But what if a man list to task himself continually, and will be
always painfully deuote: may he then never abstain? No: (Let them meet
together again) says the Apostle, not as a toleratio^, but as a charge? But
what if they both can live safely thus severed? This is more then they can
undertake: there is danger, says our Apostle, in this abstinence (lest Satan
tempt you for your incontinencie) what can be more plain. Neither may the
married refrain this conversation without consent: neither may they with
consent, refrain it for ever. What can you now urge us with, but the examples,
and sentences of some Ancients? Let this stand euicted for the true and
necessary sense of the Apostle, and what is this, but to lay men in the
balance with God? I see and confess how much some of the Fathers admited
virginity; so far, that there wated not some, which both detested marriage as
vicious, and would force a single life upon marriage, as commendable: whose
authority should move me, if I saw not some of them opposite to others, and
others no less to Saint Paul himself. How often does Saint Austin redouble
that rule, and importunately urge it to his Ecdicia, in that serious Epistle,
that without consent the continence of the married, cannot be warrantable:
teaching her (from these words of Saint Paul which he charges her, in the
contrary practice, not to have read, heard, or marked) that if her husband
should contain, and she would not, he were bound to pay her the debt of
marriage benevolence; and that God would impute it to him for continence not
withstanding. Hence is that of Chrysostom, Homil. in 1. Cor. 7.
that the wife is both the servant and the Mistress of her husband, a servant
to yield her body, a Mistress to have power of his: who also in the same place
determines it forbidden fraud, for the husband, or wife to contain alone:
according to that of the Paraphrast Let either both contain, or neither.
Hierome contrarily, defines thus: But if one of the two (says he) considering
the reward of chastity, will contain, he ought not to assent to the other
which contains not, etc. because lust ought rather to come to continency,
then continency decline to lust, concluding that a brother, or sister is not
subject in such a case; and that God has not called us to uncleanness, but to
holiness. A strange gloss to fall from the pen of a Father: which yet I durst
not say, if it were more boldness for me to dissent from him, then for him to
dissent from all others. He that censures Saint Paul to argue grossly to his
Galatians, may as well tax him of an unfit direction to his Corinthians: It
shall be no presumption to say, that in this point all his writings bewray more
zeal, then truth: whether the conscience of his former slip caused him to
abhor that sex; or his admiration of virginity transported him to a
contempt of marriage. Antiquity will afford you many examples of holy men
voluntarily sequestered from their wives: Precepts must be our guides, and not
patterns. You may tell me of Sozomens Ammon, that famous Monk, who having
persuaded his bride the first day to continuance of virginity, lived with her
18. years in a several bed: and in a several habitation, upon the mountain
Nitria, 22. years, you may tell me of Ieromes Malchus, Austens Ecdicia, and
ten thousand others: I care not for their number, and suspect their example:
Do but reconcile their practice with Saint Paul's rule; I shall both magnify
and imitate them. I profess, before God and men: nothing should hinder me but
this law of the Apostle: whereto consider, I beseech you, what can be more
opposite then this opinion, then this course of life.

The Apostle says, Refrain not but with consent for a time: your words, and
their practice says, Refrain with consent forever: he says (meet together
again) you say, never more: he says (meet lest you be tempted) you say,
meet not though you be tempted. I willingly grant with Athanasius, that for
some set time, especially (as Anselme interprets it) for some holy time, we
may, and (in this latter case) we must forbear all matrimonical acts, and
thoughts: not for that they are sinful, but unseasonable. As marriage must be
always used chastely, and moderately: so sometimes it must be forgotten. How
many are drunk with their own vines, and surfeit of their own fruits? either
immodestie, or immoderation in man or wise, is a dulterous. If yet I shall
further yield, that they may conditionally agree, to refrain from each other,
so long till they be perplexed with temptations, on either part: I shall go
as far as the reach of my warrant, at least perhaps beyond it: since the
Apostle charge, Meet again lest you be tempted; not, meet when you are
tempted? But to say, absolutely, and for ever renounce (by consent) the
conversation of each, other, what temptation soever assault you, is directly,
not beyond, but against Paul's divinity, no less then my assertion is against
yours. The ground of all these errors in this head of Matrimony, is an
unworthy conceit of some unchristian filthiness in the marriage bed. Every
man will not utter, but too many hold that conclusion of Hierome: It is good
for a man not to touch a women, therefore to touch her, is evil; whom I doubt
not, but Saint Austin meant to De bono coniugij, cap. 19.
oppose, while he writes, Bonum inquam sunt nuptiae, and contra omnes calumnias
possunt sana ratione defendi: Marriage (I say) is a good thing, and may by
sound proof be defended, against all slanders: well may man say that is
good, which God says, is honorable; and both good and honorable must that
needs be, which was instituted by the honorable author of goodness, in the
state of man's perfect goodness: Let us take heed of casting shame upon the
ordinance of our maker. But there was no carnal knowledge in Paradise. But
again, in Paradise God said, increase and multiply: there should have been,
if there were not. Those that were naked without shame should have been
conioined without shame, because without sin. Meats and drinks, and acts of
marriage (says Austin) (for these he compares De bono. coniug. c. 9. etc. 16.
both in lawfulnes, and necessity) are, as they are used, either lawful,
venial, or damnable. Meats are for the preservation of man: marriage acts for
the preservation of mankind: neither of them are without some carnal delight:
which yet, if by the bridle of temperance it be held to the proper, and
natural use, cannot be termed lust. There is no ordinance of God, which either
is of more excellent use, or has suffered more abuse in all times: the fault
is in men, not in marriage: Let them rectify themselves, their bed shall be
blessed. Here need no separation from each other, but rather a separation of
brutishnes, and close corruption from the soul; which whosoever has learned
to remove, shall find the crown of matrimonicall chastity, no less
glorious, then that of single continence.

To Master WILLIAM KNIGHT.
EP. X. Encouraging him to persist in the holy calling of the ministry, which
upon conceit of his insufficiency, and want of affection, he seemed inclining
to forsake, and change.

I Am more glad to hear from you, then sorry to hear of your coffeehouse:
whereof, as the cause is from your self, so must the remedy. We Scholars are
the aptest of all others to make our selves miserable: you might be your own
best counselor were you but indifferent to your self: It I could but cure
your prejudice, your thoughts would heal you: And indeed the same, hand that
wounded you, were fittest for this service. I need not tell you, that your
calling is honorable; If you did not think so, you had not complained. It is
your unworthiness, that troubles you: Let me boldly tell you, I know you in
this case better then your self; you are never the more insufficient, because
you think so: If we will be rigorous, Paul's question ((...)) will appose us
all: but according to the gracious indulgence of him that calls things which
are not as if they were, we are that we are, yea, that we ought; and must be
thankful for our any thing. There are none more fearful then the able, none
more bold then the unworthy: How many have you seen and heard, of weaker
graces (your own heart shall be the judge) which have sat without palenesse,
or trembling, in that holy chair, and spoken as if the words had been their
own: satisfying themselves, if not the hearers? And do you (whose gifts many
have envied) stand quaking upon the lowest staire? Has God given you that
unusual variety of tongues, skill of Arts, a style worth emulation, and
(which is worth all) a faithful and honest heart; and do you now shrink
back, and say, send by him by whom thou should send? Give God but what you
have; he expects no more: This is enough to honor him, and crown you. Take
heed while you complain of want, least pride shroude it self under the
skirts of modesty; How many are thankful for less? You have more then the
most; yet this contents you not; it is nothing unless you may equal the best,
if not exceed; yea I fear how this might satisfy you, unless you may think
your self such as you would be: What is this but to grudge at the bestower of
graces? I tell you without flattery, God has great gains by fewer talents:
set your heart to imploie these, and your advantage shall be more then your
masters. Neither do now repent you of the unadvisedness of your entrance; God
called you to it upon an eternal deliberation, and meant to make use of your
suddennes, as a means to fetch you into his work, whom more leisure would
have found refractarie: Full little did the one Saul think of a kingdom, when
he went to seek his Fathers straies in the land of Shalishah; or the other
Saul of an Apostleship, when he went with his commission to Damascus: God
thought of both; and effected what they meant not; Thus has he done to you;
Acknowledge this hand, and follow it. He found and gave both faculty and
opportunity to enter; find you but a will to proceed, I dare promise you
abundance of comfort. How many of the Ancients, after a forceable Ordination,
became not profitable only, but famous in the Church? But, as if you sought
shifts to discourage your self, when you see you cannot maintain this hold of
insufficiency, you fly to alienation of affection; In the truth whereof, none
can contoll you but your own heart; in the justice of it, we both may, and
must. This plea is not for Christians; we must affect what we ought, in spite
of our selves; wherefore serves religion if not to make us Lords of our own
affections? If we must be ruled by our slaves, what good should we do? Can
you more dislike your station, then we all naturally distaste goodness? Shall
we neglect the pursuit of virtue, because it pleases not, or rather displease,
and neglect our selves, till it may please us? Let me not ask whether your
affections be estranged, but wherefore? Divinity is a mistress worthy your
service: All other Arts are but drudges to her, alone: Fools may contemn her
who cannot judge of true intellectual beauty; but if they had our eyes; they
could not but be ravished with admiration. You have learned (I hope) to
contemn their contempt, and so pity their injurious ignorance. She has chosen
you as a worthy client, yea a Favorite, and has honored you with her
commands, and her acceptations; who but you would plead strangeness of
affection? How many thousand sue to her; and cannot be looked upon? you are
happy in her favors, and yet complain: Yea so far, as that you have not
stuck to think of a change: No word could have fallen from you more unwelcome.
This is Satan's policy to make us out of love with our callings, that our
labors may be unprofitable, and our standings tedious. He knows that all
changes are fruitless, and that whiles we affect to be other, we must needs be
weary of what we are: That there is no success in any indeauor without
pleasure; that there can be no pleasure where the mind longs after
alterations. If you epsy not this craft of the common enemy, you are not
acquainted with your self: Under what form soever it come, repel it: and
abhor the first motion of it, as you love your peace, as you hope for your
reward. It is the misery of the most men, that they cannot see when they are
happy; and whiles they see but the outside of others conditions, prefer
that which their experience teaches them afterward to condemn, not without
loss and tears. Far be this unstableness from you, which have been so long
taught of God. All vocations have their inconveniences, which if they cannot be
avoided, must be digested. The more difficulties, the greater glory: Stand fast
therefore, and resolve that this calling is the best, both in it self, and for
you: and know that it cannot stand with your Christian courage to run away from
these incident evils, but to encounter them. Your hand is at the plough; if
you meet with some tough clods, that will not easily yield to the share, lay
on more strength rather; seek not remedy in your feet by flight, but in your
hands, by a constant indeauor. Away with this weak timorousness, and wrongful
humility: Be cheerful and courageous in this great work of God; the end
shall be glorious your self happy, and many in you.

THE SIXTH DECADE Of EPISTLES.

LONDON, 1610.

The Sixth Decade.
EPIST. I. To my LORD DENNY.
A particular account how our days are, or should be spent, both common and
holy.

EVery day is a little life, and our whole life is but a day repeated: whence
it is, that old Jacob numbers his life by days, and Moses desires to be taught
this point of holy Arithmeticke, to number not his years, but his days: Those
therefore that dare loose a day, are daungerously prodigal; those that dare
mis-spend it, desperate. We can best teach others by our selves: Let me tell
your Lordship, how I would pass my days, whether common or Sacred; that you
(or whosoever others, ouer-hearing me) may either approve my thriftinesse, or
correct my errors: To whom is the account of my hours either more due, or more
known? All days are his, who gave time a beginning, and continuance; yet some
he has made ours, not to command, but to use. In none may we forget him, in
some we must forget all, besides him. First therefore, I desire to awake at
those hours, not when I will, but when I must: pleasure is not a fit rule for
rest, but health: neither do I consult so much with the Sun, as mine own
necessity, whither of body, or, in that, of the mind. If this vassal could
welserue me waking, it should never sleep: but now, it must be pleased, that
it may be serviceable. Now, when sleep is rather driven away, then leaves
me; I would ever awake with God; my first thoughts are for him, who has made
the night for rest, and the day for travel: and as he gives, so blesses both.
If my heart be early seasoned with his presence, it will savor of him all day
after. While my body is dressing, not with an effeminate curiosity, nor yet
with rude neglect; my mind addresses itself to her ensuing Task; bethinking
what is to be done, and in what order; and marshalling (as it may) my hours
with my work: That done after some whiles Meditation, I walk up to my Masters
and companions, my books; and sitting down amongst them, with the best
contentment, I dare not reach forth my hand to salute any of them, till I have
first looked up to Heaven, and craved favor of him to whom all my Studies are
duly referred: without whom, I can neither profit, nor labor. After this, out
of no ouer-great variety, J call forth those, which may best fit my occasions;
wherein, I am not too scrupulous of age: Sometimes I put my self to School, to
one of those Ancients, whom the Church has honored with the name of Fathers;
whose Volumes, I confess, not to open, without a secret reverence of their
holiness, and gravity: Sometimes, to those later Doctors, which want nothing
but age to make them classical: Always to GODS Book. That day is lost,
whereof some hours are not improued in those Divine Monuments: Others I turn
over out of choice, these out of duty. Ere I can have sat unto weariness, my
family, having now overcome all household-distractions, inuites me to our
common devotions; not without some short preparation. These heartily performed,
send me up, with a more strong and cheerful appetite to my former work,
which I find made easy to me by intermission, and variety: Now therefore, can
I deceive the hours with change of pleasures, that is, of labors. One while
mine eyes are busied, another while my hand, and sometimes my mind takes the
burden from them both: Wherein, I would imitate the skilfullest Cooks, which
make the best dishes with manifold mixtures: one hour is spent in Textuall
Divinity, another in Controversy; histories relieve them both. Now, when the
mind is weary of others labors, it begins to undertake her own; sometimes it
meditates, and winds up for future use; sometimes it lays forth her conceits
into present discourse; sometimes for it self, ofter, for others. Neither know
I whether it works or plays in these thoughts: I am sure no sport has more
pleasure, no work more use: Only the decay of a weak body, makes me think
these delights insensibly laborious. Thus could I all day, (as Ringers use)
make my self Music with chaunges, and complain sooner of the day for
shortness, then of the business for toil; were it not that this faint
moniter interrupts me still in the midst of my busy pleasures, and inforces me
both to respite and repast I must yield to both; my body and mind are joined
together in these unequal couples, the better must follow the weaker. Before my
meals therefore, and after, I let my self loose from all thoughts, and now,
would forget that I ever studied: A full mind takes away the bodies appetite,
no less then a full body makes a dull and unweildy mind: Company, discourse,
recreations, are now seasonable and welcome; These prepare me for a diet, not
gluttonous, but medicinal; The Palate may not be pleased, but the stomach; nor
that for it own sake: Neither would I think any of these comforts worth
respect in themselves, but in their use, in their end; so far, as they may
enable me to better things, If I see any dish to tempt my Palate, J fear a
Serpent in that Apple, and would please my self in a wilful denial: I rise
capable of more, not desirous not now immediately from my Trencher, to my
Book; but after some intermission. Moderate speed is a sure help to all
proceedings, where those things which are prosecuted with violence of endeavor,
or desire, either succeed not, or continue not.

After my latter meal, my thoughts are slight, only my memory may be charged
with her Task, of recalling what was committed to her custody in the day, and
my heart is busy in examining mine hands and mouth, and all other senses of
that days behavior. And now the Evening is come, no Tradesman does more
carefully take in his Wares, clear his Shoppeboord, and shut his Windows,
then J would shut up my thoughts, and clear my mind. That Student shall live
miserably, which like a Camel lies down under his burden. All this done,
calling together my family, we end the day with God. Thus do we rather drive
away the time before us, then follow it. I grant, neither is my practice
worthy to be exemplarie, neither are our callings proportionable. The lives of
a Nobleman, of a Courtier, of a Scholar, of a Citizen, of a Countreyman,
differ no less then their dispositions: yet must all conspire in honest
labor. Sweat is the destiny of all trades, whether of the brows, or of the
mind. God never allowed any man to do nothing. How miserable is the condition
of those men, which spend the time as if it were given the^, and not lent: as
if hours were waste Creatures, and such as should never be accounted for; as
if GOD would take this for a good Bil of reckoning; Item, spent upon my
pleasures, forty years. These men shall once find, that no blood can
privilege idleness; and that nothing is more precious to God, then, that which
they desire to cast away, Time. Such are my common days: but Gods day calls for
another respect. The same Sun arises on this day, and enlightens it; yet
because that Sun of righteousness arose once upon it, and gave a new life unto
the world in it, and drew the strength of Gods moral precept unto it, therefore
justly do we sing with the psalmist; This is the day which the Lord has made.
Now, I forget the world, and in a sort, my self; and deal with my wonted
thoughts, as great men use, who, at sometimes of their priuacie, forbid the
access of all suitors. Prayer, Meditation, reading, hearing, preaching,
singing, good conference, are the businesses of this day; which I dare not
bestow on any work, or pleasure, but heavenly. J hate superstition on the one
side, and looseness on the other; but I find it hard to offend in too much
devotion, easy in profaneness. The whole Week is sanctified by this day, and
according to my care of this, is my blessing on the rest. I show your Lordship,
what I would do, and what I ought: I commit my desires to the imitation of the
weak, my actions to the censures of the Wise and Holy; my weaknesses to the
pardon and redress of my merciful God.

EPIST. II. To Mr. T. S. Dedicated to Sir Fulke Greuill.
Discoursing how we may use the World without danger.

How to live out of the danger of the World is both a great and good care,
and that which troubles too few. Some, that the World may not hurt them, run
from it; and banish themselves to the tops of solitary Mountains: changing
the Cities, for Deserts, houses, for Gaues, and the society of men for beasts;
and least their enemy might insinuate himself into their secrecy, have
abridged themselves of diet, clothing, lodging, harbor, fit for reasonable
creatures; seeming to have left off themselves, no less then companions.

As if the World were not every where; as if we could hide our selves from
the Devil; as if solitariness were privileged from Temptations; as if we did
not more violently affect restrained delights; as if these Hieromes did not
find Rome in their heart, when they had nothing but rocks and trees in their
eye. Hence these places of retyrednesse, founded at first upon necessity mixed
with devotion, have proved infamously unclean; Cells of lust, not of piety. This
course is preposterous; If I were worthy to teach you a better way, learn to
be an Hermit at home: Begin with your own heart, estraunge and weane it from
the love, not from the use of the world: Christianity has taught us nothing,
if we have not learned this distinction; It is a great weakness not to see,
but we must be inamored: Elisha, saw the secret state of the Syrian court, yet
as an enemy: The blessed Angels see our earthly affairs, but as strangers:
Moses his body was in the Court of Pharaoh, amongst the delicate Egiptians,
his heart was suffering with the afflicted Israelites. Lot took part of the
fair Meadows of Sodom, not of their sins. Our blessed Savior saw the glory
of al Kingdoms, and contemned them: and cannot the world look upon us
Christians, but we are be witched? We see the Sun daily, and warm us at his
beams, yet make not an Idol of it; does any man hide his face, least he should
adore it? All our safety or danger therefore, is from within. In vain is the
body an Anachoret, if the heart be a Ruffian: And if that be retired in
affections, the body is but a Cipher: Lo then the eyes will look carelessely
and strangely in what they see, and the tongue will sometimes answer to that
was not asked. We eat and recreate, because we must, not because we would:
and when we are pleased, we are suspicious: Lawful delights, we neither
refuse, nor dote upon, and all contentments go and come like strangers. That
all this may be done, take up your heart with better thoughts; be sure it will
not be empty, if Heaven have fore-stalled all the rooms, the World is
disappointed, and either dares not offer, or is repulsed. Fix your self upon
the glory of that eternity, which abides you after this short pilgrimage. You
cannot but contemn what you find in comparison of what you expect. Leave not
til you attain to this, that you are willing to live, because ye cannot as yet
be dissolved: Be but one half upon earth, let your better part converse above
whence it is, and enjoy that whereto it was ordained. Think how little the
World can do for you and what it does, how deceitfully: what stings there are
with this Honey, what farewell succeeds this Welcome.

When this Iael brings you Milk in the one hand, know she has a nail in the
other. Ask your heart what it is the better, what the merrier, for all those
pleasures where with it has befriended you: let your own trial teach you
contempt; Think how sincere, how glorious those joys are, which abide you
elsewhere, and a thousand times more certain (though future) then the present.

And let not these thoughts be flying, but fixed: Jn vain do we meditate, if
were solue not: when your heart is once thus settled, it shall command all
things to advantage. The World shall not betray, but serve it; and that shall
be fulfilled which God promises by his Solomon; When the ways of a man please
the Lord, he will make his enemies also at peace with him.

Sir, this advice my poverty affoorded long since to a weak friend; I Write it
not to you, any otherwise, then as Scholars are wont to say their part to
their Masters. The world has long and justly both noted and honored you for
eminence in wisdom and learning, and I above the most; I am ready with the
awe of a Learner, to embrace all precepts from you: you shall expect nothing
from me, but Testimonies of respect and thankfulness.

EPIST. III. To S George Fleetwood.
Of the remedies of sin, and motives to avoid it.

THere is none, either more common, or more troblesom guest, then Sin.
Troublesome, both in the solicitation of it, and in the remorse. Before the
act, it wearies us with a wicked importunity; after the act it torments us with
fears, and the painful gnawings of an accusing Conscience: Neither is it more
irksome to men, then odious to God; who indeed never hated any thing but it;
and for it any thing. How happy were we, if we could be rid of it? This must be
our desire, but cannot be our hope; so long as we carry this body of sin
and death about us: yet (which is our comfort) it shall not carry us, though
we carry it: It will dwell with us, but with no command; yea, with no peace:
We grudge to give it house-roome, but we hate to give it service. This our
Hagar will abide many strokes, ere she be turned out of doors; she shall go at
last, and the seed of promise shall inherit alone. There is no unquietness
good, but this: and in this case, quietness cannot stand with safety: neither
did ever war more truly beget peace, then in this strife of the soul.

Resistance is the way to victory, and that, to an eternal peace and
happiness. It is a blessed care then, how to resist: sin, how to avoid it:
and such as I am glad to teach and learn. As there are two grounds of all sin,
so of the auoydance of Sin; Love, and Fear: These if they be placed amiss,
cause us to offend: if aright, are the remedies of evil: The Love must be of
God; Fear, of Judgment.

As he loves much, to whom much is forgiven, so he that loves much, will not
dare to do that which may need forgiveness. The heart that has felt the
sweetness of Gods mercies, will not abide the bitter relish of sin: This is
both a stronger motive then Fear, and more Noble; None but a good heart is
capable of this grace: which who so has received, thus powerfully repelles
tentations.

Have I found my God so gracious to me that he has denied me nothing, either
in earth or heaven: and shall not J so much as deny my own will for his sake?
Has my dear Savior bought my soul at such a price, and shall he not have it?
Was he crucified for my sins, and shall I by my sins crucify him again?
Am J his in so many bonds, and shall J serve the Devil? O God! is this the
fruit of thy beneficence to me, that J should wilfully dishonor thee? Was thy
blood so little worth, that I should tread it under my feet? Does this
become him that shall be once glorious with thee? Have thou prepared heaven
for me, and do I thus prepare my self for heaven? Shall I thus recompense thy
love, in doing that which thou hate? Satan has no Dart (I speak
confidently) that can pierce this Shield: Christians are indeed to often
surprised, ere they can hold it out: there is no small policy in the
suddainenesse of temptation: but if they have once settled it before their
breast, they are safe, and their enemy hopeless. Under this head therefore,
there is sure remedy against sin, by looking vpwardes, backwards, into our
selves, forwards. Upwards, at the glorious Majesty, and infinite goodness of
that God whom our sin would offend, and in whose face we sin: whose mercies,
and whose holiness is such, that if there were no hell, we would not offend.
Backwards, at the manifold favors, whereby we are obliged to obedience. Into
our selves, at that honorable vocation, wherewith he has graced us, that holy
profession we have made of his calling, and grace, that solemn vow and
Covenant, whereby we have confirmed our profession; the gracious beginnings of
that spirit in us, which is grieved by our sins, yea quenched. Forwards, at
the joy which will follow upon our forbearance, that peace of conscience, that
happy expectation of glory, compared with the momentary and unpleasing delight
of a present sin; All these, out of Love; Fear is a retentiue, as necessary,
not so ingenuous. It is better to be won, then to be frighted from sin: to
be allured, then drawn. Both are little enough in our pronesse to evil: Evil,
is the only object of fear. Herein therefore, we must terrify our
stubburnnesse, with both evils; Of loss, and of sense: that if it be possible,
the honor of the event may counteruaile the pleasure of the tentation: Of
loss, remembering that now we are about to loose a God; to cast away all the
comforts and hopes of ano her world; to rob our selves of all those sweet
mercies we inioyed; to thrust his spirit out of doors (which cannot abide to
dwell within the noysom stench of sin) to shut the doors of heaven against
our selves. Of sense; That thus we give satan a right in us, power over us,
advantage against us. That we make God to frown upon us in heaven; That we
arm all his good creatures against us on earth; That we do as it were take
Gods hand in ours, and scourge our selves with all Temporal plagues; and force
his curses upon us, and ours: That we wound our own consciences with sins,
that they may wound us with everlasting torments; That we do both make an hell
in our breasts before hand, and open the gates of that bottomless pit, to
rereceiue us afterward: That we do now cast Brimstone into the Fire; and
least we should fail of tortures, make our selves our own fiends: These, and
what ever other terrors of this kind, must be laid to the soul: which, if
they be thoroughly urged to an heart, not altogether incredulous, Well may a man
ask himself, how he dare sin? But if neither this Sun of mercies, nor the
tempestuous Winds of judgment can make him cast off Peter's cloak of
wickedness; he must be clad with confusion, as with a cloak, according to
the Psalmist.

I tremble to think how many live, as if they were neither beholden to God,
nor affrayde of him; neither in his debt, nor danger: As if their heaven and
hell were both upon earth; Sinning not only without shame, but not without
malice; It is their least ill to do evil; Behold they speak for it, joy in
it, boast of it, enforce to it; as if they would send challenges into heaven,
and make love to destruction: Their lewdness calls for our sorrow, and zealous
obedience; that our God may have as true Servants, as enemies: And as we see
natural qualities, increased with the resistaunce of their contraries: so
must our grace with others sins: We shall redeem somvvhat of Gods dishonor
by sin, if we shall thence grow holy.

EPIST. IIII. To Mr. Doctor Milburne.
Discoursing, how far, and wherein Popery destroys the foundation.

THe mean in all things is not more safe then hard: whether to find or keep:
and as in all other morality, it lies in a narrow room; so most in the matter
of our censures, especially concerning Religion: wherein we are wont to be
either careless, or too peremptory: How far, and wherein Popery raceth the
foundation, is worth our inquiry: I need not stay upon words. By foundation,
we mean the necessary grounds of Christian faith. This foundation Papistry
defaces, by laying a new; by casting down the old. In these cases, addition
destroys: he that obtrudes a new word, no less overthrows the Scripture,
then he that den^yes the old, yea this, very obtrusion denies: he that sets
up a new Christ, reiects Christ: Two foundations cannot stand at once: The
Arc and Dagon: Now Papistry lays a double how foundation: The one, a new rule
of faith, that is, a new word: The other, a new Author, or guide of Faith, that
is, a new head besides Christ God never laid other foundation, then in the
Prophets and Apostles: upon their Divine writing, he meant to build his Church;
which he therefore inspired, that they might be like (himself) perfect and
eternal: Popery buildes upon an vn-written word, the voice of old (but
doubtful) Traditions. The voice of the present Church, that is, as they
interpret it, theyrs; with no less confidence and presumption of certainety,
then any thing ever Written by the finger of God; If this be not a new
foundation, the old was none. God never taught this holy Spouse to know any
other husband, the^ Christ; to acknowledge any other head; to follow any other
Shepherd, to obey any other King: he alone may be inioyed without jealousy,
submitted to without danger, without error believed, served without scruple:
Popery offers to impose on Gods Church a King, shepherd, head, husband,
besides her own: A man; a man of sin. He must know all things, can err in
nothing: direct, inform, animate, command, both in earth and Purgatory,
expound Scriptures, cannonize Saints, forgive Sins: create new Articles of
Faith; and in all these, is absolute and infallible as his Maker; who sees not,
that if to attribute, these things to the son of God, be to make him the
foundation of the Church; Then to ascribe them to another, is to contradict him
that said, Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. To lay a new foundation, does necessarily subvert the old: yet
see this further actually done in particulars: wherein yet this distinction may
clear the way: The foundation is overthrown two ways; either in flat
terms, when a main principle of faith is absolutely denied: as the deity and
consubstantiality of the son by Arrius, the Trinity of persons by Sabellius
and Seruetus, the resurrection of the body by Himeneus and Philetus, the last
Judgment by Saint Peter's Mockers; Or secondly, by consequent; when any
opinion is maintained, which by just sequel over turns the truth of that
principle, which the defendant professes to hold; yet so, as he will not
grant the necessity of that deduction* so the Ancient M^n^i, of whom Ierom
speaks, while they urged Circumcision, by consequent according to Paul's
rule, rejected Christ: so the Pelagians, while they defended a full perfection
of our righteoushes in our selves, overthrew Christ's justification: and in
effect said, I believe in Christ, and in myself: so some Vbiauitaries, while
they hold the possibility of the conversion, and salvation of reprobates,
overthrow the Doctrine of Gods eternal decree, and immutability. Popery comes
in this latter rank; and may justly be termed heresy, by direct consequent:
Though not in their grant, yet in necessary proof and inference. Thus it
overthrows the truth of Christ's humanity, while it holds his whole human
body locally circumscribed in heaven, and at once (the same instant) wholly
present in ten thousand places on earth, without circumscription: That whole
Christ is in the forms of bread, with all his dimensions, every part having
his own place and figure: and yet so, as that he is wholly in every part of the
bread. Our justification, while it ascribes it to our own works: The
Al-sufficiency of Christ's own Sacrifice, whiles they reiterate it daily by the
hands of a Priest. Of his satisfaction, while they hold a payment of our
utmost farthings, in a devised Purgatory. Of his mediation, while they implore
others to aid them, not only by their intercession, but their merits; suing
not only for their Prays, but their gifts: The value of the Scriptures,
whiles they hold them insufficient, obscure, in points essential to salvation,
and bind them to an uncertain dependence upon the Church. Besides hundreds of
this kind, there are heresies in actions, contrary to those fundamental
practices which God requires of his: As prohibitions of Scriptures to the
Laity: Prescriptions of devotion in unknown tongues: Tying, the effect of
Sacraments and Prayers to the external work: Adoration of Angels, Saints,
Bread, Relics, Crosses, Jmages: All which, are as so many real underminings
of the sacred foundation, which is no less active, then vocal. By this, the
simplest may see, what we must hold of Papists; neither as no Heretics, nor
yet so palpable as the worst: If any man ask for their conviction. In the
simpler sort, I grant this excuse fair and tolerable: Poor souls, they
cannot be any otherwise informed, much less persuaded: Whiles in truth of
heart, they hold the maine principles which they know, doubtless, the mercy
of God may pass over their ignorant weakness, in what they cannot know. For
the other, I fear not to say, that many of their errors are wilful. The
light of truth has shined out of heaven to them, and they love darkness more
then light. Jn this state of the Church: he shall speak and hope idly, that
shall call for a public and universal euiction: How can that be, when they
pretend to be Judges in their own cause? Unless they will not be adversaries
to themselves, or judge of us, this course is but impossible: As the Devil, so
Antichrist, will not yield: both shall be subdued; neither will treat of
peace: what remains, but that the Lord shall consume that wicked man (which is
now clearly revealed) with the breath of his mouth, and abolish him with the
brightness of his coming. Even so, Lord Jesus come quickly. This briefly is my
conceit of Popery, which I willingly refer to your clear and deep judgment,
being not more desirous to teach the ignorant* what I know, then to learn of
you what I should teach, and know not. The Lord direct all our thoughts to his
glory, and the behoof of his Church.

EPIST. V. Written long since to Mr. I. VV.
Dissuading from separation: and shortly oppugning the grounds of that error.

IN my former Epistle (I confess) J touched the late separation with a light
hand: only setting down the injury of it (at the best) not discussing the
grounds in common; now your danger draws me on to this discourse: it is not
much less thanke-woorthy, to prevent a disease, then to cure it: you confess
that you doubt; I mislike it not, doubting is not more the way to error, then
to satisfaction; lay down first, all pride and prejudice, and I cannot fear
you: I never yet knew any man of this way, which has not bewraide himself far
gone with ouer-weening: and therefore it has been just with God, to punish
their self love with error: an humble spirit is a fit subject for truth:
prepare you your heart, and let me then answer, or rather God for me; you
doubt whether the notorious sin of one unreformed, uncensured, defile not the
whole Congregation; so as we may not without sin communicate therewith: and
why not the whole Church? woe were us, if we should thus live in the danger of
all men: have we not sins enough of our own, but we must borrow of others? Each
man shall bear his own burden: is ours so light, that we call for more weight,
and undertake what God never imposed? It was enough for him that is God and man
to bear others iniquities; it is no task for us, which shrink under the least
of our own: But it is made ours, you say (though another) by our toleration
and conniuence: indeed, if we consent to them; encourage them, imitate or
accompany them in the same excess of riot; yet more, the public person, that
forbeares a known sin, sins; but if each man's known sin be every man's,
what difference is betwixt the root and the branches? Adams sin spread it
self to us, because we were in him, stood or fell in him; our case is not
such. Do but see how God scorneth that unjust Proverb of the Jews, That the
fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge? How
much less are strangers? Js any bond so near as this of blood? Shall not the
child smart for the Parent; and shall we (even spiritually) for others? You
object Achans stealth, and Isreal's punishment: an unlike case, and
extraordinary: for see how direct Gods charge is. Be ye ware of the execrable
thing least ye make your selves execrable, and in taking of the execrable
thing, make also the host of Israel execrable and trouble it. Now every man
is made a party, by a peculiar iniunction, and not only all Israel is as one
man: but every Israelite is a public person in this act; you cannot show the
like in every one, no, not in any: it was a law for the present, not intended
for perpetuity: you may as well challenge the Trumpets of Rammeshornes, and
seven days walk unto every siedge. Look else, where the Church of Thyatira
suffers the Woman Iezabel to teach and deceive. A great sin, Yet to you
(says the spirit) the rest of Thyatira, as many as have not this learning: I
will put upon you none other burden, but that which you have, hold fast; He
says not, Leave your Church, but Hold fast your own. Look into the practice
of the Prophets, ransacke their burdens, and see if you find this there; yea,
behold our best pattern, the son of God. The Jewish Rulers in Christ time
were notoriously covetous, proud, oppressing, cruel, superstitious, our Savior
feared not polluting, in joining with them; and was so far from seperating
himself, that he called and sent others to them. But, a little Leaven Leauens
the whole lump: it is true, by the infection of it; sin, where it is
vnpunnished, spreads; it so wreth al those whose hands are in it, not others.
If we dislike it, detest, resist, reprove, and mourn for it; we cannot be
tainted: the Corinthian loue-feasts had gross and sinful disorder: yet you
hear not Paul say, Abstain from the Sacrament till-these be reformed; Rather
he enioynes the act, and controules the abuse: GOD has bidden you hear and
receive: show me, where he has said, except others be sinful. Their
uncleanness can no more defile you, then your holiness can excuse them. But
while J communicate (you say) I consent; God forbid. It is sin not to cast
out the deserving; but not yours: who made you a Ruler and a Judge? The unclean
must be separated, not by the people: I Would you have no distinction betwixt
private and public persons? What strange confusion is this? And what other
then the old note of Corah and his company, Ye take too much upon you, seeing
all the Congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them:
wherefore, then lift you up your selves above the congregation of the Lord?
What is (if this be not) to make a monster of Christ's body: he is the head,
his Church the body, consisting of diverse limbs? All have their several
faculties and employments; not every one, al; who would immagine any man so
absurd, as to say, that this body should be al tongue, or al hands; every man a
Teacher, every man a Ruler? As if Christ had said to every man, Go teach, and
whose sins ye remit: How Senseless are these two extremes? Of the Papists,
that one man has the Keys: Of the Brownists, that every man has them. But
these privileges and charges are given to the Church* True; to be executed by
her Governors, the faculty of speech is given to the whole man, but the use of
it to the proper Instrument. Man speaks; but by his tongue; if a voice should
be heard from his hand, ear, foot, it were unnatural. Now if the tongue
speak not when it ought, shall we be so foolish as to blame the hand? But you
say; If the tongue speak not, or speak ill, the whole man smarteth; the man
sins: I grant it, but you shall set the natural body on too hard a rack,
if you strain it in all things, to the likeness of the spiritual, or
civil. The members of that being quickened by the same soul, have charge of
each other, and therefore either stand or fall together: It is not so in these.
If then notwithstanding vnpunnished sins we may join with the true Church:
Whether is ours such? You doubt, and your solicitors deny: surely if we have
many enormities, yet none worse then rash and cruel judgment; let them make
this a color to depart from themselves: there is no less woe to them that call
good, evil: To judge one man is bold and dangerous: Judge then, what it is to
condemn a whole church: God knows, as much without cause, as without shame,
Vain men may libel against the spouse of Christ: her husband never diuorc't
her: No, his love is still above their hatred, his blessings above their
censures: Do but ask them, were we ever the true church of God? If they deny
it, Who then were so? Had God never Church upon earth, since the Apostles time,
till Barrow and Greenwood arose? And even then scarce a number? nay, when or
where was ever any man in the world (except in the Schools perhaps of Donatus
or Nouatus) that taught their Doctrine; and now still has he none, but in a
blind lane at Amsterdam? Can you think this probable? If they affirm it, when
ceased we? Are not the points controuerted still the same? The same
Government, the same doctrine? Their minds are changed, not our estate: Who
has admonished, euinced, eccommunicated us; and when? All these must be done;
Will it not be a shame to say, that Francis Johnson, as he took power to
excommunicate his Brother, and Father; so had power to excommunicate his
Mother, the Church? How base and idle are these conceits? Are we then
heretics condemned in ourselves, wherein ouerthroew we the foundation? What
other God, Savior, Scriptures, Justification, Sacraments, Heaven, do they
teach beside us? Can all the Masters of separation, yea can all the churches in
Christendom, set forth a more exquisite and worthy confession of Faith, then
is contained in the Articles of the Church of England? Who can hold these, and
be heretical? Or, from which of these are we revolted? But to make this good,
they have taught you to say, that every truth in Scripture is fundamental; so
fruitful is error of absurdities; Whereof still one breeds another more
deformed then it self. That Trophimus was left at Miletum sick, that Paul's
Cloak was left at Troas, that Gaius Paul's host, saluted the Romans, that
Naball was drunk; or that Thamar baked Cakes, and a thousand of this nature
are fundamental: how large is the separatists Creed, that has all these
Articles? If they say al Scripture is of the same author, of the same
authority: so say we, but not of the same use: is it as necessary for a
Christian to know that Peter hosted with one Simon a tanner in Ioppd, as that
Jesus Christ the son of God was born of the Virgin Mary. What a mo^ster is this
of an opinion, that al trueths are equal? that this spiritual house should be
all foundation, no walls, no roof? Can no man be saved but he that knows
every thing in scripture? Then both they and we, are excluded: heaven would not
have so many, as their Parlor at Amsterdam: Can any man be saved that knows
nothing in Scripture? It is far from them to be so ouercharitable to affirm
it: you see the^ that both al truths must not of necessity be known, and some
must: and these we justly call fundamental: which who so holds, al his hay
and stubble (through the mercy of God) condemn him not: still he has right to
the church on earth, and hope in heaven: but whither every truth be fundame^tal,
or necessary: discipline (you say) is so: indeed necessary to the welbeing of a
church, no more: it may be true without it, not perfect. Christ co^pares his
spouse to an army with banners: as order is to an army, so is Discipline to the
Church: if the troops be not well marshalled in their several ranks, and move
not forward, acording to the discipline of war, it is an army still: confusion
may hinder their succes, it cannot bereave the^ of their name: it is, as
beautiful proportion to the body, an hedge to a vineyard, a wall to a City, an
hem to a garment, seeling to an house. It may be a body, vineyard, City,
garment, house, without them: it cannot be well and perfect: yet which of our
adversaries will say we have no Discipline? Some they grant, but not the
right: as if they said? Your City has a Bricke-wall indeed, but it should
have one of hewn stone; your Vineyard is hedged, but it should be paled and
ditched: while they cavil at what we want, we thank God for what we have;
and so much we have, in spite of all detraction, as makes us both a true
Church, and a worthy one.

But the mayn quarrel is against our Ministry, and form of worship: let these
be examined; this is the Circle of their censure. No Church, therefore no
Ministry: and no Ministry, therefore no Church: unnatural sons, that spit in
the face of those spiritual Fathers that be got them, and the Mother that bore
them. What would they have? Have we not competent gifts from above, for so
great a function? Are we all unlearned, insufficient? Not a man that knows to
divide the word aright? As Paul to the Corinthes, is it so that there is not
one wise man amongst us? No man will affirm it: some of them have censured
our excess in some knowledge; none, our defect in all: What then? Have we not
a true desire to do faithful service to God and his Church? No zeal for Gods
glory? Who has been in our hearts to see this? Who dare vsurp upon God, and
condemn our thoughts? Yea, we appeal to that only Judge of hearts, whether he
has not given us a sincere longing for the good of his Syon: he shall make the
thoughts of al hearts manifest: and then shall every man have praise of God:
if then we have both ability and will to do public good: our inward calling
(which is the main point) is good and perfect: for the outward, what want we?
Are we not first (after good trial) presented and approved by the learned, in
our Colleges: examined by our church-gouernors, ordaind by imposition of hands
of the eldership, allowed by the congregations, we are set over: do we not labor
in word and doctrine? do we not carefully administer the sacraments of the Lord
Jesus? have we not by our public means won many souls to God? what should we
have and do more? All this, and yet no true Ministers? we pass very little to
be judged of the^, or of man's day: but our ordainers (you say) are
Antichristian: surely our censurers are unchristian: tho we should grant it:
some of us were baptized by heretics: is the sacrament annihilated, and must
it be redoubled? How much less ordination, which is but an outward admission
to preach the gospel? God forbid that we should thus condemn the innocent: more
hands were laid upon us, then one: and of them, for the principal, except but
their perpetual honor, and some few immateriall rites, let an enemy say what
they differ, from Super-intendents? and can their double honor make them no
elders? Jf they have any personal falts, why is their calling scourged? Look
into our Saviors times: what corruptions were in the very Priesthood? It was
now made annual, which was before fixed and singular. Christ saw these abuses,
and was silent: here was much dislike, and no clamor; we for less, exclaim
and separate: even personal offenses are fetched into the condemnation of
lawful courses. God give both pardon and redress to this foul
uncharitableness. Alas! how ready are we to toss the forepart of our
Wallet, whiles our own faults are ready to break our necks behind us: all
the world sees and condemns their ordination to be faulty, yea none at all,
yet they cry out first on us, craftily (J think) least we should complain:
that Church-gouernours should ordain Ministers, has been the constant
practice of the Church, from Christ's time, to this hour. I except only in an
extreme desolation, merely for the first course: that the people should make
their Ministers, was unheard of in all ages and Churches till Bolton, Brown,
and Barrow: and has neither color nor example: Does not this comparison
seem strange and harsh? Their Tradesmen may make true Ministers, our Ministers
cannot: who but they would not be ashamed of such a position? Or who but you
would not think the time misspent in answering it? No less frivolous are
those exceptions that are taken against our worship of God, condemned for
false and Idolatrous, whereof Volumnes of Apologies are written by others: we
meet together, pray, read, hear, preach, sing, administer, and receive
Sacraments: wherein offend we? How many Gods do we pray to? Or to whom but
the true God? In what words but holy? whom do we preach but the same Christ
with them? what point of faith, not theirs? What sacraments but those they dare
not but allow? Where lies our Idolatry, that we may let it out? Jn the manner of
performing: in set Prayers, Antichristian Ceremonies of crossing, kneeling,
etc, For the former: what sin is this? The Original and truth of Prayer is in
the heart: the voice is but as accidental: if the heart may often conceive the
same thought, the tongue her servant may often utter it, in the same words: and
if daily to repeat the same speeches be amiss, then to entertain the same
spiritual desires, is sinful: to speak once without the heart is
Hypocritical: but to speak often the same request with the heart, never
offends. What intolerable boldness is this; to condemn that in us which is
recorded to have been the continual practice of Gods Church in all
successions? Of the Jews, in the time of Moses, David, Solomon, Iehosophat,
Ezekiah, Jeremy: Of the ancient Christian assemblies, both Greek and Latin,
and now at this day of all reformed churches in Christendom; yea, which our
Savior himself so directly allowed, and in a manner prescribed: and the
blessed Apostles Paul and Peter in all their formal salutations (which were no
other then set prayers) so commonly practiced: for the other (least I exceed a
letter) tho we yield the^ such as you imagine; worse they cannot be: they are
but Ceremonious appendances: the body and substance is sound. Blessed be God
that we can have his true Sacraments at so easy a rate, as the payment (if
they were such) of a few circumstantiall in conueniences: How many deer
children of God in all ages, even near the Golden times of the Apostles, have
gladly purchased them much deerer, and not complained: but see how our Church
imposes them: not as to bind the Conscience, otherwise then by the common bond
of obedience; not as actions; wherein Gods worship essentially consists, but
as themselves, Ceremonies: comely or couenient, not necessary; whatsoever: is
this a sufficient ground of separation? How many moderate and wiser spirits
have we, that cannot approve the Ceremonies, yet dare not forsake the Church?
And that hold your departure far more evil, then the cause. You are invited
to a feast, if but a Napkin or Trencher be misplaced, or a dish ill carved, do
you run from the Table, and not stay to thank the host? Either be less
curious, or more charitable. Would God both you, and all other, which either
favor the separation, or profess it, could but read over the ancient Stories
of the Church, to see the true state of things and times; the beginninges,
proceedings, increases, encounters yeildings, restaurations of the Gospel,
what the holy Fathers of those first times, were glad to swallow, for peace;
what they held, practiced, found, left: whosoever knows but these things
cannot separate: and shall not be contented only, but thankful: God shall give
you still more light: in the mean time, upon the perril of my soul, stay, and
take the blessed offers of your God, in peace: And since Christ says to you
by my hand, will you also go away? Answer him with that worthy Disciple,
Master whether shall I go from thee, thou have the words of eternal life?

EPIST. VI. To Mr. I. B.
A complaint of the mis-education of our Gentry.

I Confess, I cannot honor blood without good qualities, not spare it; with
ill. There is nothing that I more desire to be taught, then what is true
Nobility: What thank is it to you that you are borne well? If you could have
lost this privilege of Nature, I fear you had not been thus far Noble: That
you may not plead desert, you had this before you were; long ere you could
either know or prevent it; you are deceived if you think this any other then
the body of Gentility, the life and soul of it, is in noble and virtuous
disposition, in gallantnesse of spirit, without hautinesse, without insolence,
without scornful over lynesse: shortly, in generous qualities, carriage,
actions. See your error, and know that this demeanor does not answer an
honest birth: If you can follow all fashions, drink all healths, wear favors
and good cloths, consort with Ruffians, companions, swear the biggest Oaths,
quarrel easily, fight desperately, game in every inordinate Ordinary, spend
your patrimony ere it fall, look on every man betwixt scorn and anger; use
gracefully some gestures of apish complement; talk irreligiously, dally with a
Mistress, or (which term is plainer) hunt after Harlots, take smoke at a
Playhouse, and live as if you were made all for sport, you think you have
done enough, to merit, both of your blood, and others opinions. Certainly, the
world has no baseness, if this be generosity: Welfare the honest and civil
rudeness of the obscure sons of the earth, if such be the graces of the
eminent: The shame whereof (methinkes) is not so proper to the wildness of
youth, as to the carelessness or vanity of Parents: I speak it boldly; our
land has no blemmish comparable to the mis-education of our Gentry; Infancy
and youth are the seedtimes of al hopes: if those pass unseasonably, no fruit
can be expected from our age, but shame and sorrow: who should improve these,
but they which may command them: I cannot altogether complain of our first
years. How like are we to children, in the training up of our children? Give
a child some painted Babe; he joys in it at first sight: and for some days
will not abide it out of his hand or bosom; but when he has sated himself
with the new pleasure of that guest, he now (after a while) casts it into
Corners, forgets it, and can look upon it, with no care: Thus do we by ours.
Their first times find us not more fond, then careful: we do not more follow
them with our love, then ply them with instruction: When this delight begins
to grow stale, we begin to grow negligent. Nothing that I know can be faulted
in the ordering of Childhood, but indulgence Foolish Mothers, admit of Tutors,
but debar rods? These, while they desire their Children may learn, but not
smart, as is said of Apes, kill their young ones with love; for what can work
upon that age, but fear? And what fear without correction? Now at last, with
what measure of Learning their own will would vouchsafe to receive, they are
too early sent to the Common Nurseries of Knowledge; There (unless they fall
under careful tuition) they study in jest, and play in earnest. In such
universal means of Learning, all cannot fall besides them; what their company,
what their recreation would either instill or permit, they bring home to their
glad parents. Thence are they transplanted to the Collegiate Jnnes of our
common Laws: and there too many learn to be lawless, and to forget their
former little. Paul's is their Westminster, their Study, an Ordinary, or
Playhouse, or Dancing School; and some Lambert their Polydon. And now after
they have (not without much expense) learned fashions and licentiousness, they
return home, full of welcomes and gratulations. By this time some blossoms of
youth appearing in their face, admonish their Parents to seek them some
seasonable match; Wherein the Father inquires for Wealth, the Son for
Beauty, perhaps the Mother for parentage, scarce any for Virtue, for
Religion. Thus settled, What is their care, their discourse; yea, their Trade,
but either an Hound, or an Hawke? And it is well, if no worse: And now, they so
live, as if they had forgotten that there were Books: Learning is for Priests,
and Pedants; For Gentlemen, pleasure. Oh! that either wealth, or wit should be
cast away thus basely: That ever Reason should grow so debauched, as to think
any thing more worthy then knowledge: with what shame and emulation may we
look upon other Nations (whose Apish fashions we can take up in the
Channelles, neglecting their immitable examples) and with what scorn do they
look upon us? They have their solemn Academies for all those qualities, which
may accomplish Gentility: from which they return richly furnished, both for
action and speculation. They account knowledge and ability of discourse as
essential to great nesse, as blood: neither are they more above the vulgar in
birth, then in understanding: They travel with judgment, and return with
experience: so do they follow the excercises of the body, that they neglect
not the culture of the mind. From hence grows ciuility, and power, to manage
affairs either of Justice or State; From hence encouragement to learning, and
reverence from inferiors. For those only can esteem knowledge, which have it;
and the common sort frame either their observance, or contempt out of the
example of their leaders.

Amongst them, the sons of Nobles scorn not, either Merchandise, or learned
professions; and hate nothing so much, as to do nothing: I shame and hate to
think, that our gallants hold there can be no disparagement, but in honest
callings. Thus perhaps I have abated the envy of this reproof, by
communicating it to more; which J had not done, but that the generality of evil
importunes redress. I well see that either good or evil descends: In vain shall
we hope for the reformation of the many, while the better are disordered. Whom
to solicit herein, J know not, but all: How gald should I be, to spend my
light to the snuff, for the effecting of this? I can but persuade and pray;
these I will not fail of: The rest to him that both can amend and punish.

EPIST. VII. To Mr. Jonas Reigesbergius in Zeland.
Written some whiles since, concerning some new opinions then broached in the
Churches of Holland; and under the name of Arminius (then living) persuading al
great wits to a study and care of the common Peace of the Church, and
dissuading from al affect ation of singularity.

I Received lately, a short relation of some new Paradoxes from your Leiden;
you would know what we think: I fear not to be censured, as meddling: your
truth is ours: The Sea cannot divide those Churches whom one faith unites. I
know not how it comes to pass, that most men, while they too much affect
ciuility, turn flatterers; and plain truth is most where counted rudeness.
He that tells a sick friend he looks il, or terms an angry tumor the Gowt,
or a waterish swelling, Dropsy; is thought unmannerly. For my part, I am glad
that I was not borne to feed humors: How ever you take your own evils, I must
tell you, we pity you, and think you have just cause of deiection, and we
for you: not for any private cares, but (which touch a Christian nearest) the
Commonwealth of God. Behold, after all those hills of carcasses, and streams
of blood, your civil sword is sheathed, wherein we neither congratulate, nor
fear your peace; lo now, insted of that, another while, the spiritual sword is
drawn and shaken, and it is well if no more. Now the politic State sits still,
the church quarrels: Oh! the insatiable hostility of our great enemy, with what
change of mischiefs does he afflict miserable man? No sooner did the
Christian world begin to breath from persecution but it was more punished with
Arrianisine: when the red dragon cannot devour the child, he tries to drown
the mother; and when the waters fail, he raises war. Your famous Iunius had
nothing more admirable the^ his love of peace: when our busy separatists
apealed him, with what a sweet calmnes did he reject them, and with a grave
importunity called the^ to moderation. How it would have vexed his holy soul
(now out of the danger of passions, to have forseene his chair troblesom. God
forbid that the Church should find a challenger, instead of a Champion: Who
would think but you should have been taught the benefit of peace, by the
long want? but if your temporal state (besides either hope, or belief) has
grown wealthy with War, like those Fowls which fatten with hard weather: yet
be too sure, that these spiritual broils, cannot but impouerish the Church;
yea, affamish it. It were pity that your Holland should be still the
Amphitheatre of the world, on whose Scaffoldes, all other Nations should sit,
and see variety of bloody shows, not without pity, and horror. Jf I might
challenge ought in that your acute, and Learned Arminius; I would thus
solicit, and conjure him: Alas! that so Wise a man should not know the vvorth
of peace; that so noble a Son of the Church, should not be brought to light,
without ripping the womb of his Mother! what mean these subtle Novelties? If
they make thee famous, and the Church miserable; who shall gain by them? Is
singularity so precious, that it should cost no less, then the safety and
quiet of our common mother? If it be truth thou affectest; what alone? Could
never any eyes (till thine) be blessed with this object; where has that
Sacred verity hid her self thus long from all her careful Inquisitors, that
she now first shows her head to thee unsought? Has the Gospel shined thus
long, and bright, and left some Corners unseen? Away with all new truths;
fair and plausible they may be, sound they cannot: some may admire thee for
them; none shall bless thee. But grant that some of these, are no less true,
then nice points; What do these unseasonable Crochets and quauers trouble the
harmonious plain-songs of our peace? Some quiet error may be better then some
unruly truth. Who binds us to speak all we think? So the Church may be still,
would God thou were wise alone? Did not our adversaries quarrel enough before,
at our quarrels? Were they not rich enough with our spoils? By the dear name of
our common parents, what meanest thou, Arminius? Whether tend these new-raised
dissentions? Who shall thrive by them, but they which insult upon us, and rise
by the fall of truth? who shall be undone, but thy Brethren? By that most
precious, and bloody ransom of our Savior, and by that awefull appearance, we
shall once make before the glorious Tribunal of the son of God, remember thy
self, and the poor distracted limbs of the Church, let not those excellent
parts, wherewith God has furnished thee, lie in the narrow way, and cause any
weak one, either to fall, or stumble, or err. For Gods sake, either say
nothing, or the same. How many great wits have sought no Bypath, and now
are happy with their fellows. Let it be no disparagement to go with many to
heaven. What could he reply to so plain a charge? No distinction can avoid
the power of simple truth. I know he hears not this of me first: Neither that
learned and worthy Fran. Gomarus, nor your other grave fraternity of reverend
Divines, have been silent in so main a cause. I fear rather too much noise
in any of these tumults: There may too many contend; not entreat. Multitude of
suitors, is commonly powerful; how much more in just motions, But if either
he, or you, shall turn me home, and bid me spend my little moisture upon our
own brandes, I grant there is both the same cause, and the same need. This
Counsel is no whit further from us, because it is directed to you: Any Reader
can change the person: I lament to see, that every where peace has not many
Clients, but fewer lovers; yea, even many of those that praise her, follow her
not. Of old, the very Nouation men, Women, Children, brought stones and mortar
(with the Orthodox) to the building of the Church of the Resurrection, and
joined lovingly with them, against the Arrians: lesser quarrels divide us; and
every division ends in blows, and every blow is returned; and none of al
lights beside the Church: Even the best Apostles dissented; neither knoledge,
nor holiness can redress all differences: True, but wisdom and charity
could teach us to avoid their prejudice. If we had but these two virtues;
quarrels should not hurt us, nor the Church by us: But (alas) self-loue is too
strong for both these: This alone opens the floodgates of dissension, and
drownes the sweet, but low valley of the Church. Men esteem of opinions,
because their own; and will have truth serve, not govern; What they have
undertaken, must be true: Victory is sought for, not satisfaction; Victory of
the Author, not of the cause: He is a rare man that knows to yield, as well
to argue: what should we do then, but bestow our selves upon that which too many
neglect, public peace; first, in Prayers that we may prevail, then in tears
that we prevail not? Thus have I been bold to chat with you of our greatest
and common cares. Your old love, and late Hospital entertainment in that your
Island, called for this rememberance; the rather to keep your English tongue
in breath, which was wont not to be the least of your desires. Would God you
could make us hapy with news not of Truce, but sincere amity and union; not of
Provinces, but spirits. The God of Spirits effect it both here and there, to
the glory of his Name and Church.

EPIST. VIII. To W. I. condemned for Murder.
Effectually preparing him, and (under his name) whatsoever Malefactor, for his
death.

IT is a bad cause that robs us of all the comfort of friends; yea, that
turns their remembrance into sorrow. None can do so, but those that proceed
from our selves; For outward evils, which come from the infliction of others,
make us cleave faster to our helpers, and cause us to seek and find ease in
the very commisseration of those that love us: whereas those grieses which
arise from the just displeasure of Conscience, will not abide so much, as the
memory of others affection; or if it do, makes it so much the greater
corrasiue, as our case is more incapable of their comfort. Such is yours. You
have made the mention of our names tedious to your self, and yours to us. This
is the beginning of your pain, that you had friends: If you may now smart
soundly from us, for your good, it must be the only joy you must expect, and
the final duty we owe to you. It is both vain and comfortless to hear
what might have been; neither would J send you back to what is past, but
purposely to increase your sorrow; who have caused al our comfort to stand in
your tears. If therefore our former Counsels had prevailed, neither had your
hands shed innocent blood, nor Justice yours. Now, to your great sin, you
have done the one, and the other must be done to your pain, and we your
welwillers, with sorrow and shame live to be witnesses of both. Your sin is
gone before, the revenge of Justice will follow: Seeing you are guilty, let GOD
be just; Other sins speak, this cries; and will never be silent, till it
be answered with it self: For your life; the case is hopeles; feed not your
self with vain presumptions, but settle your self to expiate another blood
with your own. Would God your desert had been such, that we might with any
comfort have desired you might live. But now, alas, your fact is so heinous,
that your life can neither be craved without in-iustice, nor be protracted
without inward torment. And if our private affection should make us deaf to
the shouts of blood, and partiality should teach us to forget all care of
public right, yet resolve, there is no place for hope. Since then you could
not live guiltless, there remains nothing but that you labor to dye
penitent; and since your body cannot be saved alive, to endeavor that your
soul may be saved in death. Wherein, how happy shall it be for you, if you
shall yet give care to this my last advice; too late indeed for your
recompense to the World, not too late for your self. You have deserved death,
and expect it; Take heed least you so fasten your eyes upon the first death
of the body, that you should not look beyond it, to the second, which alone is
worthy of tre^bling, worthy of tears.

For this, though terrible to Nature, yet is common to us, with you. You must
dye: What do we else? And what differs our end from yours, but in have and
violence? And who knows whether in that? It may be a sickness as sharp,
as sudden, shall fetch us hence: It may be the same death, or a worse, for a
better cause: Or if not so, There is much more misery in lingering: He dies
easily, that dies soon: But the other, is the utmost vengeance that GOD has
reserved for his enemies: This is a matter of long fear, and short pain. A
few panges lets the soul out of prison; but the Torment of that other is
everlasting; after ten thousand years scorching in that flame, the pain is
never the nearer to his ending. No time gives it hope of abating; yea, time
has nothing to do with this eternity. You that shall feel the pain of one
minutes dying, think what pain it is to be dying for ever and ever. This,
although it be attended with a sharp pain, yet is such as some strong
spirits have endured without show of yeildance. I have herd of an Irish
Traitor, that when he lay pining upon the wheel with his bones broke, asked
his friend if he changed his countenance at all: caring less for the pain,
then the show of fear. Few men have dyed of greater pains, then others have
sustained and live. But that other ouer-whelms both body and soul, and leaves
no room for any comfort in the possibility of mitigation. Here, men are
executioners, or diseases; there fiends. Those devils that were ready to tempt
the graceless unto sin, are as ready to follow the damned with tortures.
Whatsoever become of your carcass, save your soul from these flames: and so
manage this short time you have to live, that you may die but once. This is
not your first sin; yea, God has now punnished your former sins with this: A
fearful punishment in it self, if it deserved no more: your conscience
(which now begins to tell truth) cannot but assure you, that there is no
sin more worthy of hell, then murder; yea, more proper to it. Turn over
those holy leaves (which you have too much neglected, and now smart for
neglecting) you shall find Murderers among those that are shut out from the
presence of God: you shall find the Prince of that darkness, in the highest
style of his mischief, termed a Manslayer. Alas! how fearful a case is this,
that you have heerein-resembled him, for whom Topheth was prepared of old, and
imitating him in his action, have endangered your self to partake of his
torments. Oh, that you could but see what you have done, what you have
deserved; That your heart could bleed enough within you, for the blood your
hands have shed: That as you have followed Satan our common enemy in sinning,
so you could defye him in repenting: That your tears could disapoint his hopes
of your damnation. What an happy unhappiness shall this be to your sad
friends, that your better part yet lives? That from an ignominious place,
your soul is received to glory? Nothing can effect this but your Repentance,
and that can do it. Fear not to look into that horror, which should attend
your sin, and be now as severe to your self, as you have been cruel to
another. Think not to extenuate your offense with the vain Titles of manhood;
what praise is this, that you were a valiant Murderer? Strike your own breast
(as Moses did his Rooke) and bring down Rivers of tears to wash away your
bloodshed. Do not so much fear your judgment, as abhor your sin; yea,
your self for it: And with strong cries lift up your guilty hands to that
God whom you offended, and say: Deliver me from blood-guiltines O Lord. Let me
tell you, as without repentance there is no hope, so with it, there is no
condemnation. True penitence is strong, and can grapple with the greatest sin,
yea with all the powers of hell. What if your hands be red with blood? Behold,
the blood of your Savior, shall wash away yours: If you can bath your self in
that; your Scarlet soul shall be as white as Snow. This course alone shall make
your Cross the way to the Paradise of God. This plaster can heal all the
sores of the foul, if never so desperate: Only, take heed that your heart be
deep enough pierced, ere you lay it on; else under a seeming skin of
dissimulation, your soul shall fester to death. Yet joy us with your true
sorrow, whom you have grieved with your offense; and at once comfort your
friends, and save your soul.

EPIST. IX. To Mr. John Mole, of a long time now prisoner under the
Inquisition at Rome.
Exciting him to his wonted Constancy, and encouraging him to Martyrdom.

WHat passage can these lines hope to find into that your straight and curious
thraldom? Yet who would not adventure the loss of this pains for him, which
is ready to loose himself for Christ? what do we not ow to you which have thus
given your self for the common faith? blessed be the name of that God who has
singled you out for his Champion, and made you invincible: how famous are your
bonds? How glorious your constancy? Oh, that out of your close obscurity, you
could but see the honor of your suffering, the affections of Gods Saints, and
in some, an holy envy at your distressed hapines. Those walls cannot hide you: No
man is attended with so many eyes from earth and heaven: The Church your Mother
beholdes you, not with more compassion, then joy: Neither can it be said, how
she at once pitties your misery, and reioyces in your patience: The blessed
Angels look upon you with gratulation and applause. The adversaries with an
angry sorrow to see themselves overcome by their captive, their obstinate
cruelty ouer-matched with humble resolution, and faithful perseverance. Your
Savior sees you from above, not as a mere spectator, but as a patient with
you, in you, for you; yea, as an agent in your indurance and victory, giving
new courage with the one hand, and holding out a Crown with the other; Whom
would not these sights incorage? who now can pity your solitariness? The
hearts of all good men are with you. Neither can that place be but full of
angels, which is the continual object, of so many Prayers, yea the God of
heaven was never so near you, as now ye are removed from men. Let me speak a
bold, but true word. It is as possible for him to be absent from his Heaven,
as from the prisons of his Saints. The glorified spirits above sing to him; the
persecuted souls below, suffer for him, and cry to him; he is magnified in
both, present with both; the faith of the one, is as pleasing to him, as the
triumph of the other; Nothing obliges us men so much, as smarting for us;
words of defense are worthy of thanks, but pain is esteemed above recompense.
How do we kiss the wounds which are taken for our sakes, and profess that we
would hate our selves, if we did not love those that dare bleed for us: How
much more shall the God of mercies be sensible of your sorrows, and crown your
patience? To whom you may truly sing that ditty of the Divine Psalmist, Surely
for thy sake am I slain continually, and am counted as a Sheep for the
slaughter. What need I to stir up your constancy, which has already amazed,
and wearied your persecutors? No suspicion shall drive me heereto; but rather
the thirst of your praise. He that exhorts to persist in well-doing, whiles he
persuades, commends. Whether should I rather send you, then to the sight of
your own Christian fortitude? which neither Prayers, nor threats, have bin able
to shake: Here stands on the one hand, Liberty, Promotion, Pleasure, life, and
(which easily exceeds al these) the dear respect of wife and children (whom
your only resolution shall make Widow and Orphans) these with smiles, and
vows, and tears, seem to importune you. On the other hand, bondage,
solitude, horror, death (and the most lingering of all miseries) ruin of
posterity: these with frowns and menaces labor to afright you: Betwixt both,
you have stood unmoved; fixing your eyes either right forward upon the cause
of your suffering, or upwards upon the Crown of your reward: It is an happy
thing when our own actions may be either examples, or arguments of good. These
blessed proceedings call you on to your perfection; The reward of good
beginnings prosecuted, is doubled; neglected, is lost. How vain are those
temptations, which (would make you a looser of all this praise; this
recompense? Go on therefore happily; keep your eyes where they are, and your
heart cannot be, but where it is, and where it ought: Look still, for what
you suffer, and for whom: For the truth, or Christ: what can be so precious as
truth? Not life it self. All earthly things are not so vile to life, as life
to truth; Life is momentary, Truth eternal; Life is ours, the Truth, Gods: Oh
happy purchase, to give our life for the Truth. What can we suffer too much for
Christ? He has given our life to us; he has given his own life for us. What
great thing is it, if he require what he has given us, if ours for his? Yea,
rather, if he call for what he has lent us; yet not to bereue but to change
it; giving us Gold for our clay, glory for our corruption. Behold that Savior
of yours weeping, and bleeding, and dying for your alas! our souls are too
strait for his sorrows; we can be made but pain for him; He was made sin for
us: we sustain for him, but the impotent anger of men, he strugled with the
infinite wrath of his Father for us. Oh, who can endure enough for him, that
has passed thorough Death and hell for his Soul? Think this, and you shall
resolve with David, I will be yet more vile for the Lord. The woorst of the
despite of men, is but Death; and that, if they inflict not, a disease will; or
if not that, Age. Here is no imposition of that which would not be but an
hastening of that which will be: An hastening, to your gain. For behold,
their violence shall turn your necessity, into Virtue and profit. Nature has
made you mortal, none but an enemy can make you a Martyr; you must die,
though they will not; you cannot die for Christ, but by them: How could they
else devise to make you happy? Since the giver of both lives has said, He
that shall loose his life for my sake, shall save it. Lo, this alone is lost
with keeping, and gained by loss. Say you were freed, upon the safest
conditions, and returning: (As how welcome should that news be, more to yours,
then to your self.) Perhaps, death may meet you in the way, perhaps
ouer-take you at home: neither place, nor time, can promise immunitie from the
common destiny of men: Those that may abridge your hours, cannot lengthen
them; and while they last, cannot secure them from vexation; yea themselves
shall follow you into their dust; and cannot avoid what they can inflicte;
death shall equalie tirannize by them, and over them: so their favors are but
fruitless, their malice gainefull. For, it shall change your prison into
heaven, your Fetters into a Crown, your Iailours to Angels, your misery into
glory. Look up to your future estate, and rejoice in the present: Behold
the Tree of Life, the hidden Manna, the Scepter of Power, the Morning-Starre,
the white garment, the new name, the Crown, and Throne of Heaven are adressed
for you. Overcome and enjoy them: oh glorious condition of Martyrs, whom
conformity in death, has made like their Savior in blessedness; whose honor
is to attend him for ever, who^ they have ioyed to imitate. What are these
which are arayd in long white robes, and whence came they? These are (says
that Heavenly Elder) they which came out of great Tribulation, and vvashed
their long Robes, and have made their long Robes white, in the blood of the
Lamb.

Therefore they are in the presence of the Throne of GOD, and serve him day and
night in the Temple: and he that sits on the Throne, will dwell among them,
and Govern them, and lead them unto the lively Fountains of waters, and GOD
shall wipe all tears from their eyes.

All the elect have Seals in their fore-heades: But Martyrs have Palm in
their hands: All the elect have White Robes; Martyrs, both white and long.
White, for their Glory, long for the largeness of their Glory. Once red with their own blood; now white with the blood of the Lamb: There is
nothing in our blood, but weak obedience; nothing but merit in the
Lambes-bloud. Behold, his merit makes our obedience Glorious. You do but
sprinckle his feet with your blood; Lo, he washes your long white Robes,
with his. Every drop of your blood is answered with a stream of his; and
every drop of his, is worth Rivers of ours: Precious in the sight of the
Lord, is the Death of his Saints: Precious in prevention; Precious in
acceptance, precious in remuneration. Oh, give willingly that which you cannot
keep, that you may receive what you cannot leese. The way is steep, but now
you breath toward the top. Let not the want of some few steps, loose you an
eternal rest. Put too the strength of your own Faith; The Prayers of Gods
Saints shall further your pace; and that gracious hand that sustaines heaven
and earth, shall uphold, and sweetly draw you up to your glory. Go on to
credit the gospel with your perseverance, and show the false-hearted Clients
of that Romayne-Court, that the Truth yeildes real and hearty professors;
such as dare no less smart, then speak for her.

Without the walls of your restraint, where can you look beside encouragements
of suffering? Behold in this, how much you are happier then your many
predecessors. Those have found friends, or wives, or children, the most
dangerous of al tempters. Suggestions of weakness, when they com masked with
love, are more powerful to hurt. But you, all your many friends, in the
valor of their Christian love, wish rather a blessed Martyr, then a living and
prosperous reuolter: yea, your dear wife (worthy of this honor, to be the
wife of a Martyr) preferres your faith, to her affection; and in a courage
beyond her Sex, contemnes the worst misery of your loss; professing she
would redeem your life with hirs, but that she would not redeem it with your
yeildance: and while she looks upon those many pawns of your chaste love,
your hopeful Children, wishes rather to see them fatherless, then their
Father unfaithful: The greatest part of your sufferings are hers. She bears
them with a cheerful resolution. She diuides with you in your sorrows, in
your patience; she shall not be divided in your glory: For us we shall
accompany you, with our Prayers, and follow you with our thankful
commemorations; vowing to Write your name in red Letters, in the Kalenders of
our hearts; and to Register it in the monuments of perpetual Records, as an
example to all posterity, The memorial of the just shall be blessed.

EPIST. X. To all Readers.
Containing Rules of good advise for our Christian and civil carriage.

I Grant, Brevity where it is neither obscure nor defective, is very pleasing,
even to the daintist judgments. No marvel therefore, if most men desire much
good counsel in a narrow room; as some affect to have great personages, drawn
in little Tablets, or, as we see worlds of Countries described in the compass
of small Mappes: Neither do I unwillingly yield to sollowe them; for both the
powers of good advice are the stronger, when they are thus united; and brevity
makes counsel more portable for memory, and readier for use. Take these
therefore for more; which as I would feign practice, so am I willing to
commend. Let us begin with him who is the first and last: Inform your self
aright concerning God, without whom, in vain do we know all things: Be
acquainted with that Savior of yours, which paid so much for you on earth, and
now sues for you in heaven; without whom, we have nothing to do with God, nor
he with us. Adore him in your thoughts, trust him with your self: Renew your
sight of him every day; and his of you: Ouer-look these earthly things, and
when you do at any time cast your eyes upon heaven, think, there dwells my
Savior, there I shall be. Call your self to often reckonings, cast up your
debts, paiments, graces, wants expenses, imploiments, yield not to think your
set Devotions troublesome: Take not easy denialles from your self; yea, give
peremptory denials to your self; He can never be good that flatters
himself: hold nature to her allowaunce; and let your will stand at curtesy:
happy is that man, which has obtained to be the Master of his own heart:
Think all Gods outward favors and provisions the best for you; your own
abilities, and actions the meanest. Suffer not your mind to be either a
Drudge or a wanton; exercise it ever, but ouerlay it not: In all your businesses
look through the world, at God; whatsoever is your level, let him be your
scope: Every day take a view of your last, and think either it is this, or may
be: Offer not your self either to honor, or labor; let them both seek you:
Care you only to be worthy, and you cannot hide you from God; so frame your
self to the time and company, that you may neither serve it; nor sullenly
neglect it; and yeeld^ so far, as you may neither betray goodness, nor
countenance evil. Let your words be few, and digested; It is a shame for the
tongue to cry the heart mercy, much more to cast it self upon the uncertain
pardon of others ears. There are but two things which a Christian is charged
to buy, and not to sell, Time and Truth; both, so precious, that we must
purchase them at any rate. So use your friends, as those which should be
perpetual, may be chaungeable; while you are within yourselfe, there is no
danger: but thoughts once uttered must stand to hazard. Do not hear from your
self, what you would be loath to hear from others. In all good things give
your eye and ear the full scope, for they let into the mind; restrain the
tongue, for it is a spender* few men have repented them of silence: In all
serious matters take counsel of days, and nights and friends and let leisure
ripen your purposes: neither hope to gain ought by suddenness: The first
thoughts may be confident, the second are wiser. Serve honesty ever, though
without apparent wages: she will pay sure, if slow: As in apparel, so in
actions, know not what is good, but what becomes you: how many warrantable
acts have misshapen the Authors. Excuse not your own ill, aggrauate not others:
and if you love peace, avoid Censures, comparisons, contradictions: out of
good men choose acquaintance, of acquaintance, friends, of friends; familiars*
after probacion admit them, and af^e^ admittance change them not. Age
commends friendship. Do not always your best; it is neither wise, nor safe
for a man ever to stand upon the top of his strength* If you would be above the
expectation of others (...) your self. (...) after your p^^^^; not after your
mind* (...) To where you may deny; except upon Confidence of de^^^^, or hope
to require* Either frequent ^^li^s, or complaints, are wearisome to any
friend: Rather smother your griefs and wantes a^ you may, then be either
querulous, or importunate. Let not your face belie your heart, nor always tell
tales out of it; he is fit to live amongst friends or enemies, that can be
ingenuously close: Give freely, sell thriftily: Change seldom your place,
never your state: either (...) conueniences, or swallow them, rather theen you
should run from your self to avoid them.

In all your reckonings for the world, cast up some crosses that appear not;
either those will come, or may: Let your suspicions be charitable; your trust
fearful* your censures sure, Give way to the anger of the great: The Thunder
and Cannon will abide no fence. As in throngs we are afraid of loss; so while
the world comes upon you, look well to your soul; There is more danger in good,
then in evil: I fear the number of these my rules; for Precepts are wont (as
nails) to drive out one another: but these, intended to scatter amongst many:
and I was loath that any guest should complain of a niggardly hand; Dainty
Dishes are wont to be sparingly served out; homely ones, supply in their
bigness, what they want in their worth.

FINIS.

