EPISTLES The FIRST VOLVME: Containing II. DECADS.

* By JOSEPH HALL.

AT LONDON Printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham and E. Edgar: and are to be sold
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. 1608.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY, PRINCE OF GREAT Britain, Son and
Heir Apparent to our Sovereign Lord, JAMES, King of Great Brit. etc. all
glory in either world.
MOst gracious Prince:
IT is not from any conceit of such worth in my labors, that they durst look
so hye. A lower Patronage would have served an hyer work. It were well, if
ought of mine could be worthy of popular eyes. Or if I could wring ought from
my self, not unworthy of a judicious Reader; I know your Highness wants
neither presents, nor counsels: presents from strangers, counsels from your
teachers; neither of them matcheable by my weakness: Only duty herein excuses
me from presumption. For, I thought it injustice to deuote the fruit of my
labor, to any other hand beside my Masters: which also I knew to be as
gracious, as mine is faithful. Yet (since even good affections cannot warrant
too much vileness in gifts to Princes) lest while my modesty disparages my
work, I should hazard the acceptance; here shall your Grace find variety,
not without profit. I hate a Divine, that would but please; and, withal,
think it impossible for a man to profit, that pleases not. And if, while my
style fixes it self upon others, any spiritual profit shall reflect upon
your H. how happy am I! who shall ever think, I have lived to purpose, if (by
the best of my studies) I shall have done any good office to your Soul.
Further (which these times account not the least praise) your Grace shall herein
perceive a new fashion of discourse, by Epistles; new to our language, usual to
others: and (as Novelty is never without some plea of use) more free, more
familiar. Thus, we do but talk with our friends by our pen, and express our
selves no whit less easily; somewhat more digestedly.

Whatsoever it is, as it cannot be good enough to deserve that countenance; so,
the countenance of such Patronage shall make it worthy of respect from others.
The God of Princes protect your person, perfect your graces, and give you as
much favor in heaven, as you have honor on earth.

Your Graces humbly-deuoted servant, IOS. HALL.

EP. 1. TO JACOB WADSWORTH, Lately revolted, in Spain.
Ep. 1. Expostulating for his departure, and persuading his return.
HOw unhappily is my style changed! Alas, that to a friend, to a brother, I
must write as to an Apostate, to an adversary! Does this seem harsh? you have
turned it, by being turned your self. Once, the same walls held us in one
loving society; the same Diocese, in one honorable function; Now, not one
Land, and (which I lament) not one Church: you are gone, we stand and woder.
For a sheep, to stray through simplicity, is both ordinary and lamentable:
but, for a shepherd is more rare, more scandalous. I dare not presume
overmuch, upon an appeal to a blinded conscience. Those, that are newly come
from a bright candle into a dark room, are so much more blind, as their light
was greater; and the purest yuorie turns with fire into the deepest black.
Tell us yet by your old ingenuitie, and by those sparks of good which yet (I
hope) ly covered under your cold ashes, tell us, what divided you? Your motives
shall once be scanned before an higher bar. Shame not to have the weak eyes
of the world see that, which once your undeceivable Judge shall see, and
censure. What saw you, what heard you anew, that might offer violence to a
resolved mind, and make it either to alter, or suspend? If your reasons be
invincible; inform us, that we may follow you: but if (as they are) slight and
feeble; return you to us: return, and think it no shame to have erred, just
shame to continue erring. What such goodly beauty saw you in that painted,
but ill-fauored stru^pet, that should thus bewitch you, so to forget your
self, and contemn the chaste love of the Spouse of your Savior? I saw her,
at the same time in her gayest dress: Let my soul never prosper, if I could
see any thing worthy to command affection. I saw, and scorned: you saw, and
adored. Would God your adoration were as far from superstition, as my scorn
from impiety. That God judge betwixt us, whether heerin erred: yea, let men
judge, that are not drunk with those Babylonish dreggs. How long might an
indifferent eye look upon the comicall and mimick actions in those your
mysteries, that should be sacred, your magical exorcismes, your clericall
shauings, your uncleanly unctions, your crossings, creepings, censings,
sprinklings, your cozening miracles, garish processions, burning of noonedaie,
christning of bells, marting of pardons, tossing of beads, your superstitious
hallowing of candles, wax, ashes, palms, chrisme, garments, roses, swords,
water, salt, the Pontifical solemnities of your great-master, and what-euer
your new mother has (besides) plausible, before he should see ought, in all
these, worthy of any other intertainment, then contempt! Who can but disdain,
that these things should procure any wise proselyte? Cannot your own memory
recount those truly religious spirits, which having sought Rome as resolved
Papists, have left the World as holy Martyrs; dying for the detestation of
that which they came to adore? Whence this? They heard and magnified that,
which they now savve, and abhorred. Their fire of zeal brought them to the
flames of Martyrdom. Their innocent hopes promised them Religion: they found
nothing but a pretense; promised devotion, and behold idolatry: they saw,
hated, suffered, and now reign; vvhiles you wilfully, and unbidden, will lose
your soul, where others meant to lose, and have found it. Your zeal dies,
where theirs began to live: you like to live, where they would but die. They
shall comfort us, for you: they shall once stand up against you: While they
would rather dye in the heat of that fire, then live in the darkness of their
errors; you rather dye in the Egyptian darkness of errors, then live in the
pleasant light of truth: Yea, I fear, rather in another fire, then this light.

Alas! what shall we looke-for of you? Too late repentance, or obstinate
error? Both miserable. A Spira, or a Staphylus? Your friends, your self,
shall wish you rather unborn, then either.

O thou, which art the great shepherd, great in power, great in mercy, which
leauest the ninety and nine to reduce one, fetch home (if thy will be) this
thy forlorn charge: fetch him home, drive him home to thy fold, though by
shame, though by death. Let him once recover thy Church, thou him, it is
enough. Our common Mother I know not whether more pitties your loss, or
disdeignes thus to be robbed of a son: Not for the need of you; but her
own piety, her own love. For, how many troops of better informed souls
has she every day returning into her lap; now breathing from their late
Antichristianisme, and embracing her knees upon their own? She laments you,
not for that she fears she shall miss you; but, for that she knovves you
shall want her. See you her tears, and do but pity your self as much as
she you. And, from your Mother, to descend to your Nurse; Is this the fruit
of such education? Was not your youth spent in a society of such comely order,
strict government, wise laws, religious care (it was ours, yet let me praise
it to your shame) as may justly challenge (after all bragges) either RHEMES,
or DOWAY, or if your Jesuits have any other den more cleanly, and more
worthy of ostentation? And could you come out, fresh and unseasoned, from the
midst of those salt waves? Could all those heavenly showers fall beside you;
while you, like a Gedeons fleece, want moisture? Shall none of those divine
principles, which your youth seemed to drink in, check you in your new
errors? Alas! how unlike are you to your self, to your name? Jacob wrestled
with an Angel, and prevailed: you grapple but with a Jesuit, and yield. Jacob
supplanted his brother: an Esau has supplanted you. Jacob changed his name for
a better, by his valiant resistance: you, by your cowardly yielding, have lost
your own. Jacob strove with God, for a blessing: I fear to say it, you
against him for a curse; for, no common measure of hatred, nor ordinary
opposition can serve a reuolter: Either you must be desperately violent, or
suspected. The mighty one of Israel (for he can do it) raise you fallen,
return you wandered; and give you grace at last to shame the Devil, to forsake
your stepmother, to acknowledge your true Parent, to satisfy the world, to
save your own soule^. If otherwise; I will say of you, as Jeremy of his
Israelites (if not rather with more indignation) My soul shall weep in secret
for your revolt, and mine eyes shall drop down tears, because one of the Lords
flock is carried away captive.

To my Lord and Patron, the Lord DENNY, Baron of Waltham.
EP. 2. Of the Contempt of the world.
MY Lord, my tongue, my pen, and my heart, are all your servants; when you
cannot hear me, through distance, you must see me in my Letters. You are now
in the Senate of the Kingdom, or in the concourse of the City, or perhaps (tho
more rarely) in the royal face of the Court. All of them, places fit for your
place. From all these, let me call off your mind to her home above; and, in
the midst of business, show you rest: If I may not rather commend, then
admonish, and beforehand confess my counsel superfluous, because your holy
forwardness has prevented it. You can afford these, but half of your self:
The better part is better bestowed; Your soul is still retired, and reserved.
You have learned to vouchsafe these worldly things, use, without affection; and
know to distinguish wisely, betwixt a Stoicall dullness, and a Christian
contempt: and have long made the world, not your God, but your slave. And, in
truth (that I may loose my self into a bold and free discourse) what other
respect is it worthy of? I would adore it on my face, if I could see any
Majesty, that might command veneration. Perhaps, it loves me not so much, as
to show me his best. I have sought it enough: And have seen what others have
doted on; and wondered at their madness. So may I look to see better things
above, as I never could see ought here, but vanity and vileness.

What is fame, but smoke? and metal, but dross? and pleasure, but a pill in
sugar? Let some gallants condemn this, as the voice of a Melancholic scholar:
I speak that which they shall feel, and shall confess. Tho I never was so, I
have seen some as happy, as the world could make them: and yet I never saw any
more discontented. Their life has been neither longer, nor sweeter, nor their
heart lighter, nor their meals hartier, nor their nights quieter, nor their
cares fewer, nor their complaints. Yea, we have known some, that have lost
their mirth when they have found wealth; and at once have ceased to be merry
and poor. All these earthly delights, if they were sound, yet how short they
are! and if they could be long, yet how unsound! If they were sound, the^ are
but as a good day between two agues, or a sunshine betwixt two tempests.
And if they were long, their honey is exceeded by their gall. This ground bears
none but maples, hollow, and fruitless; or, like the banks of the dead sea, a
fair apple, which under a red side contains nothing but dust. Every flower in
this garden either pricks, or smells ill. If it be sweet, it has thorns: and
if it have no thorns, it annoies us with an ill sent. Go then, ye wise
idolatrous Parasites, and erect shrines, and offer sacrifices to your God, the
World; and seek to please him with your base and servile devotions: It shall
be long enough ere such religion shall make you happy. You shall at last
forsake those altars, empty and sorrowful. How easy is it for us Christians,
thus to insult over the worldling, that thinks himself worthy of envy? How
easy to turn off the World with a scornful repulse; and when it makes us
the Devils proffer, All these will I give thee, to return Peter's answer, Thy
silver and thy gold perish with thee? How easy to account none so miserable,
as those that are rich with injury, and grow great by being conscious of
secret evils? Wealth and honor, when it coms upon the best terms, is but vain;
but, when upon ill conditions, burdensome. When they are at the best, they are
scarce friends; but, when at the worst, tormentors. Alas! how ill agrees a gay
coat, and a festered heart? what auailes an high title, with an hell in the
soul? I admire the faith of Moses: but, presupposing his faith, I wonder not
at his choice. He preferred the afflictions of Israel, to the pleasures of
Egypt; and chose rather to eat the Lamb, with sour herbs, then all their
fleshpots: For, how much better is it to be miserable then guilty? and what
comparison is there betwixt sorrow and sin? If it were possible, let me be
rather in hell without sin, then on earth wickedly glorious. But, how much
are we bound to God, that allows us earthly favors, without this
opposition! That GOD has made you at once honorable and just, and your life
pleasant and holy, and has given you an high state with a good heart; are
favors, that look for thanks. These must be acknowledged, not rested in:
They are yet higher thoughts that must perfect your contentment.

What God has given you, is nothing to that he means to give: He has been
liberal; but, he will be munificent. This is not so much as the taste of a
full cup. Fasten your eyes upon your future glory, and see how meanly you shall
esteem these earthly graces. Here, you command but a little pittance of mould
(great indeed, to us; little, to the whole): there, whole heaven shall be
yours. Here you command, but as a subject: there you shall reign as a King.
Here, you are observed; but sometimes with your just distaste: There, you
shall reign with peace, and joy. Here, you are noble among men; there,
glorious amongst Angels. Here, you want not honor; but you want not crosses:
there, is nothing but felicity. Here, you have some short joys: there, is
nothing but eternity. You are a stranger, here; there, at home. Here, Satan
tempts you, and men vex you: there, Saints and Angels shall applaud you; and
God shall fill you with himself. In a word, you are only blessed here, for
that you shall be.

These are thoughts worthy of greatness: which, if we suffer either
employments, or pleasures to thrust out of our doors, we do wilfully make
our selves comfortless. Let these still season your mirth, and sweeten your
sorrows, and ever interpose themselves betwixt you and the world. These, only,
can make your life happy, and your death welcome.

To my Lord HAY, H. and P.
EP. 3. Of True Honor.
MY Lord, It is safe to complain of Nature where Grace is; and to magnify
Grace, where it is at once had, and affected. It is a fault of Nature, and not
the least, that as she has dim eyes, so they are mis-placed. She looks
still, either forward, or downward; forward to the object she desires, or
downward to the means: Never turns her eyes either backward, to see what she
was; or upward, to the cause of her good: Whence, it is just with God to
withold what he would give, or to curse that which he bestows; and to besot
carnal minds with outward things, in their value, in their desire, in their
use: Whereas true wisdom has clear eyes, and right set; and therefore sees
an invisible hand in all sensible events, effecting all things, directing all
things to their due end; sees on whom to depend, whom to thank. Earth is too
low, and too base, to give bounds unto a spiritual sight. No man then can
truly know what belongs to wealth, or honor, but the gracious; either how to
compass them, or how to prize them, or how to use them. I care not how many
thousand ways there are to seeming honor, besides this of virtue: they all
(if more) still lead to shame: Or what plots are devised to improve it; if
they were as deep as hell, yet their end is loss. As there is no counsel
against God: so there is no honor without him. He enclines the hearts of
Princes to favor; the hearts of inferiors to applause. Without him, the hand
cannot move, to success; nor the tongue, to praise: And what is honor without
these? In vain does the world frown upon the man, whom he means to honor;
or smile, where he would disgrace. Let me then tell your L. who are favorites
in the Court of heaven; even whiles they wander on earth: Yea, let the great
King himself tell you, Those that honor me, I will honor. That men have the
grace to give honor to God, is an high favor: but, because men give honor to
God (as their duty) that therefore God should give honor to men, is to give,
because he has given. It is a favor of God, that man is honored of man like
himself: but, that God allows of our endeavors as honor to himself, is a
greater favor then that wherewith he requires it.

This is the goodness of our God: The man that serves him, honors him: and
whosoever honors him with his service, is crowned with honor. I challenge all
times, places, persons: who ever honored God, and was neglected? Who wilfully
dishonored him, and prospered? Turne-ouer all Records; and see how success
ever blessed the just, after many dangers, after many storms of resistance,
and left their conclusion glorious; how all godless plots, in their loose,
have at once deceived, shamed, punished their Author. I go no further: Your
own breast knows, that your happy experience can herein justify GOD. The
world has noted you, for a follower of virtue; and has seen how fast Honor
followed you: VVhiles you sought favor with the GOD of heaven, he has given
you favor with his Deputy on earth.

Gods former actions are patterns of his future: He teaches you what he will
do, by what he has done. Unless your hand be weary of offering service,
he cannot either pull-in his hand from rewarding, or hold it out empty. Honor
him still, and God pawnes his honor, on not failing you. You cannot distrust
him, whom your proof has found faithful. And, whiles you settle your heart
in this right course of true glory; laugh, in secret scorn, at the idle
endeavors of those men, whose policies would out-reach God, and seize upon
honor, without his leave. (GOD laughes at them in heaven. It is a safe and
holy laughter, that follows his.) And pity the preposterous courses of
them, which make religion but a foote-stoole to the seat of advancement; which
care for all things but heaven, which make the world their standing mark; and
do not so much as roue at GOD. Many had sped well, if they had begun well,
and proceeded orderly.

A false method is the bane of many hopeful endeavors. God bids us seek first
his kingdom; and earthly things shall find us, unsought. Foolish nature first
seeks the world: and if she light on God by the way, it is more then she
expects, desires, cares for; and therefore fails of both, because she seeks
neither aright. Many had been great, if they had cared to be good; which now
are crossed in what they would, because they willed not what they ought. If
Solomon had made wealth his first suite, I doubt he had been both poor and
foolish; now, he asked wisdom, and gained greatness; Because he chose well,
he received what he asked not. O the bounty and fidelity of our God! because
we would have the best he gives us all: Earth shall wait upon us, because we
attend upon heaven.

Go-on then, my Lord, go-on happily to love religion, to practice it: let God
alone, with the rest. Be you a Pattern of virtue; he shall make you a
Precedent of glory. Never man lost ought, by giving it to God: that liberal
hand returns our gifts, with advantage. Let men, let God see that you honor
him; and they shall hear him proclaim before you, Thus shall it be done to
the man whom the King will honor.

To Mr NEVVTON,
Tutor to the Prince.
EP. 4. Of Gratulation, for the hopes of our Prince; with an aduising
apprecation.
SIr, God has called you to a great and happy charge; You have the custody of
our common Treasure: Neither is there any seurice comparable to this of yours;
whether we regard God, or the world. Our labors, oft-times bestowed upon
many, scarce profit one: yours, bestowed upon one, redounds to the profit of
many millions: This is a summarie way of obliging all the World to you. I
encourage you not in your care: you have more comfort in the success of it,
then all Worlds can give you. The very subject of your pains would give an
heart to him that has none. I rather congratulate, with you, our common
happiness, and the hopes of posterity, in that royal and blessed issue. You
have best cause to be the best witness of the rare forwardness of our gracious
Master: and I have seen enough, to make me think I can never be enough
thankful to God for him. That Princes are fruitful, is a great blessing: but,
their children are fruitful in grace, and more emine^t in place then virtue, is
the greatest favor God can do to a State. The goodness of a private man is
his own; of a Prince, the whole worlds. Their words are Maxims, their
actions examples, their examples, rules. When I compare them with their royal
Father (as I do often and cheerfully) I cannot say whether he be more happy
in himself, or in them. I see both in him, and them; I see and wonder, that
God distributes to natural princes gifts proportionable to their greatness.
That wise Moderator of the world knows what use is of their parts: he knows
that the head must have all the senses that pertain to the whole body: And
how necessary it is, that inferiors should admire them no less for the
excellency of their graces, then for the swaie of their authority. Whereupon,
it is, that he gives heroical qualities to Princes: and, as he has bestowed
upon them his own name; so also he gives them special stamps of his own
glorious image. Amongst all other virtues, what a comfort is it to see those
years, and those spirits stoop so willingly to devotion? Religion is grown
too severe a Mistress for young and high courages to attend. Very rare is that
Nobility of blood, that does not challenge liberty; and that liberty, that
ends not in looseness. Lo, this example teaches our gallants, how well even
Majesty can stand with homage; Majesty to men, with homage to God.

Far be it from me, to do that which my next clause shall condemn: but, I
think it safe to say, that seldom ever those years have promised, seldom
have performed so much. Only God keep two mischiefs ever from within the smoke
of his Court; Flattery and Treachery: The iniquity of times may make us fear
these; not his inclination.

For, whether as English, or as men, it has been ever familiar to us to faune
upon Princes: Tho, what do I bestow two names upon one vice, but attyred in
two sundry suits of evil: For, Flattery is no other than gilded treason;
nothing else but poison in gold: This evil is more tame; not less
dangerous. It had been better for many great ones not to have been, then to
have been in their conceits more then men. This, Flattery has done: and
what can it not? That other, Treachery, spills the blood; this, the virtues of
Princes. That takes them from others: This bereaues them of themselves. That,
in spite of the actours, does but change their Crown: this steals it from
them for ever. Who can but wonder, that reads of some not unwise Princes, so
bewitched with the enchantments of their Parasites, that they have thought
themselves Gods immortal, and have suffered themselves so styled, so adored?
Neither temples, nor statues, nor sacrifices have seemed too much glory to the
greatness of their self-love; Now none of all their actions could be either
evil, or unbeseeming; Nothing could proceed from them worthy of censure,
unworthy of admiration: Their very spots have been beauty, their humors
justice, their errors witty, their Paradoxes divine, their excesses heroical.
O the damnable seruilitie of false minds! which persuade others of that which
themselves laugh to see believed. O the dangerous credulity of self-love
which intertaines all advantages if never so evil, never so impossible. How
happy a service shall you do to this whole world of ours, if you shall still setle
in that princely mind a true apprehensio^ of himself; and shall teach him to
take his own height aright; and even from his childhood to hate a parasite, as
the worst traitor: To break those false glasses, that would present him a face
not his own: To applaud plain truth, and bend his brows upon excessive
praises. Thus affected, he may bid vice do her worst. Thus shall he strive with
virtue, whether shall more honor each other. Thus sincere and solid glory shall
every where follow, and crown him. Thus, when he has but his due, he shall
have so much, that he shall scorn to borrow the false colors of adulation.
Go-on happily in this worthy and noble employment. The work cannot but
succeed, that is furthered with so many prayers.

To Sr. THOMAS CHALLONER,
EP. 5. A report of some Observations in my travel.
SIr, besides my hopes, not my desires, I traueled of late; for knowledge
partly, and partly for health. There was nothing that made not my iourny
pleasant, save the labor of the way: which yet was so sweetly deceived, by the
society of Sr Edmund Bacon (a Gentleman truly honorable, beyond al titles) that
I found small cause to co^plain. The sea brookt not me, nor I it; an unquiet
element, made only for wonder and use, not for pleasure. Alighted once from
that wodden conueyance, and uneven way, I bethought my self how fondly our
life is committed to an vnsteadie and reeling piece of wood, fickle winds,
restless waters; while we may set foot, on steadfast and constant earth. Lo,
then every thing taught me, every thing delighted me; so ready are we to be
affected with those foreign pleasures, which at home we should ouer-look. I
saw much, as one might in such a span of earth, in so few months. The time
favored me: for, now newly had the key of peace opened those parts which war
had before closed; closed (I say) to all English, save either fugitives or
captives. All civil occurrences (as what fair Cities, what strange fashions,
entertainment, dangers, delights we found) are fit for other ears, and winter
euenings. What I noted, as a divine within the sphere of my profession, my
paper shall not spare in some part to report; and that to your self, which have
passed a longer way, with more happy fruit of observation. Eue^ little streams
empty themselves into great rivers; and they again into the Sea. Neither do I
desire to tell you what you know not: it shall be sufficient that I relate
ought, which others shall think memorable.

Along our way, how many Churches saw we demolished! Nothing left, but rude
heaps, to tell the passenger, there had been both devotion and hostility. O
the miserable footsteps of war, besides bloodshed, ruin and desolation! Fury
has don that there, which Covetousness would do with us; would do, but shall
not: The truth within, shall save the walls without. And, to speak truly
(whateuer the vulgar exclaim) Idolatry pulled down those walls; not rage.
If there had been no Hollander to raze them, they should have fallen alone,
rather the^ hide so much impiety under their guilty roof. These are
spectacles not so much of cruelty, as justice; Cruelty of man, Justice of
God. But (which I wo^dred at) Churches fall, and Jesuits Colleges rife, every
where: There is no City, where those are not either rearing, or built. Whence
comes this? Is it, for that devotion is not so necessary as Policy? Those
men (as we say of the Fox) fare best, when they are most cursed. None so much
spighted of their own; none so hated of all; none so opposed by ours: and yet
these ill weeds grow. Whosoever lives long, shall see them feared of their
own, which now hate them; shall see these seven lean kine devour all the
satte beasts that feed on the meadows of Tyber. I prophecy, as Pharaoh
dreamed: The event shall justify my confidence.

At Bruxelles, I saw some English-women profess themselves Vestalls; with a
thousand rites, I know not whether more ridiculous, or magical. Poor souls!
they could not be fools enough at home. It would have made you to pity,
laugh, disdain (I know not which more) to see by what cunning sleightes and
fair pretenses that weak sex was fetched into a wilful bondage; and (if
those two can agree) willingly constrained to serve a master whom they must
and cannot obey: Whom they neither may forsake for their vow, nor can please
for their frailty. What follows hence? Late sorrow, secret mischief, misery
irremediable. Their forwardness, for will worship, shall condemn our
coldness for truth.

I talked there (in more boldness, perhaps, then wisdom) with Costerus a
famous Jesuit; an old man, more teasty then subtle, and more able to wra^gle
then satisfy. Our discourse was long and rouing; and on his part full both of
words and vehemence. He spoke as at home; I as a stranger: yet so, as he saw me
modestly peremptory. The particulars would swell my Letter too much: It is
enough, that the Truth lost less then I gained. At Gaunt (a City that
commands reverence for age, and wonder for the greatness) we fell upon a
Cappucine nouice, which wept bitterly, because he was not allowed to be
miserable. His head had now felt the razor, his back the rod: all that
Laconicall discipline pleased him well; which another, being condemned to,
would justly account a torment. What hindered then? Piety, to his mother, would
not permit this which he thought piety to God: He could not be a willing
beggar, unless his mother must beg unwillingly. He was the only heir of
his father, the only stay of his mother: the comfort of her widow-hoode
depended on this her orphane; who now naked must enter into the world of the
Capucines, as he came first into this; leaving his goods to the division of
the fraternity: The least part whereof should have been hers, whose he wished
all: Hence those tears, that repulse. I pitied his ill-bestowed zeal; and
rather wished, then durst teach him more wisdom. These men for devout, the
Jesuits for learned and pragmaticall, have engrossed all opinion, from other
Orders. O hypocrisy! No Capucine may take or touch silver: for, these are (you
know) the quintessence of Franciscan spirits. This metal is as very an
Anathema to these, as the wedge of gold to Achan; at the offer whereof he
starts back, as Moses from the serpent: Yet he caries a boy with him, that
takes and caties it; and never complains of either metal or measure. I saw,
and laughed at it; and, by this open trick of hypocrisy, suspected more, more
close. How could I choose? while commonly the least appears of that which is;
especially of that which is loathsome in appearance, much more in nature. At
Namurs, on a pleasant and steep hilltop, we found one that was termed a married
Hermit; approving his wisdom above his fellows, that could make choice of so
cheerful and sociable a solitariness. Whence, after a delightful passage up
the sweet river Mosa, we visited the populous and rich Clergy of Leodium. That
great City might well be dichotomized into Cloisters, and Hospitalls. If I
might adventure, I could here play the Critic, after all the ruins of my
neglected Philology. Old monumnts, and after them our Lipsius, call this
people Eburones: I doubt whether it should not rather be written Ebriones; yet
without search of any other Records, save my own eyes: While yet I would
those streets were more moist with wine, then with blood; wherein no day, no
night is not dismal to some. No law, no Magistrate layeshold on the known
murderer, if himself lift: For three days after his fact; the gates are open,
and justice shut: private violence may pursue him, public justice can not:
whence, some of more hot temper carue themselves of revenge; others take-vp
with a small pecuniarie satisfaction. O England, thought I, happy for justice,
happy for security! There you shall find in every corner a Maumet; at every
door a Begget, in every dish a Priest. From thence we passed to the Spa, a
village famous for her medicinal and mineral waters, compounded of iron and
Copperice; the virtue whereof yet the simple inhabitant ascribes to their
beneficial Saint, whose heavy foot has made an ill-shaped impression, in a
stone of his The name of the upper Well of the Spa.
Sauenir; A water more wholesome then pleasant, and yet more famous then
wholesome. The wild deserts (on which it borders) are haunted with three kinds
of ill cattle; Free-booters, Wolves, Witches; Although these two last are
oft-times one. For, that savage Ardenna, is reputed to yield many of those
monsters, whom the Greeks call (...); they, Lougarous; we (if you will)
Witch-wolues: Witches that have put on the shape of those cruel beasts. We
saw a boy there, whose halfe-face was devoured by one of them near the
village: yet so, as that the ear was rather out then bitten off. Nor many
days before our coming, at Limburgh was executed one of those miscreants, who
confessed on the wheel to have devoured two and forty children in that
form. It would ask a large volume, to scan this Problem of Lycanthropy. The
reasons, wherewith their relation furnished me on both parts, would make an
Epistle tedious. This in short I resolved; A substantial change is above the
reach of all infernal powers, proper to the same hand that created the
substance of both: Herein the Devil plays the double Sophister; yea, the
Sorcerer with Sorcerers. He both deludes the Witches conceit, and the
beholders eyes.

One thing I may not omit, without sinful ouer-sight; A short, but memorable
Story, which the Grephier of that Town (though of different religion)
reported to more ears then ours. When the last Inquisition tyrannized in
those parts, and helped to spend the Faggots of Ardenna; one of the rest, a
confident Confessor, being led far to his stake, sung Psalms along the
way, in an heavenly courage, and victorious Triumph: the cruel Officer
envying his last mirth, and grieuing to see him merrier then his tormentours,
commanded him silence; He singes still, as desirous to improoue his last
breath to the best. The view of his approaching glory, bred his joy; his joy
breaks forth into a cheerful confession: The enraged Sheriff causes his
tongue, drawn forth to the length, to be cut off near the roots. Bloody
wretch! It had been good Music to have heard his shreekes: but, to hear his
Music was torment. The poor Martyr dies in silence, rests in peace. Not many
months after, our butcherly officer has a son born with his tongue hanging
down upon his chinne, like a Dear after long chase; which never could be
gathered up within the bounds of his lips. O the divine hand, full of
justice, full of revenge! Go now, Lipsius, and write the new miracles of thy
Goddess; and confirm superstition by strange events. Histoire et Miracles,
etc.
Judge you that have seen, if ever the Chapel of Halle or Zichem have
yielded ought more notable. Que le 8. iour du mois de Septembre an dict an.
1603. estant Feste de la Natiuite de nostre Dame, le nombre de Pelerins a este
euuiron 20000. Page 35.
We met every where Pilgrims to those his Ladies: two Ladies shall I call
them, or one Lady in two shrines? If two, why do they worship but one? If but
one, why does she that cure at Zichem, which at Halle she could not? O what
pity it is, that so a high a wit should in the last be subject to dotage! All
the masculine brood of that brain we cherished, and (if need were) admired:
but, these his silly virgins, the feeble issue of distempered age, who can
abide? One of his darlings, at Louan, told me from his own mouth; Virgo
Hallensis.
that the elder of these two daughters, was by him in ten days got, conceived,
borne, christened. I believed, and wondered not. These acts of superstition have
an invisible father, and midwife: besides that it is not for an Elephant to
go three years with a Mouse. It was told me in the shop of his Moretus, not
without some indignation, that our King, when he had well viewed the book,
and read some Passages, threw it to the ground with this Censure; Damnation to
him that made it, and to him that believes it. Whether a true story, or one of
their Legends, I inquire not: I am sure, that sentence did nor so much
discontent them, as it ioyed me. Let me tell you yet, ere I take off my pen,
two wonders more, which I saw in that wonder of Cities, Antwerp; One, a solemn
mass in a shambles, and that on Gods day: while the house was full of meat, of
butchers, of buyers; some kneeling, others bagaining, most talking, all busy.
It was strange to see one house sacred to God, and the belly; and how those two
services agreed: The Priest did eat flesh, the butchers sold flesh in one
roof, at one instant. The butcher killed, and sold it by pieces; the Priest
did sacrifice, and orally devour it whole: whether was the more butcher? The
like we might have seen at Malines. Mechlinia.
The other, an Englishman, One Goodwin a Kentish-man.
so madly devout, that he had wilfully mur'd up himself as an Anachoret; the
worst of all prisoners: There sat he pent-vp, for his further merit, half
hunger-starued for the charity of the Citizens. It was worth seeing, how manly
he could bite-in his secret want, and dissemble his ouer-late repentance. I
cannot commend his mortification, if he wish to be in heaven, yea, in
purgatory, to be delivered from thence: I durst not pity him; because his
dura^ce was willing, and (as he hoped) meritorious: But, such encouragement as
he had from me, such thank shall he have from God; who in stead of an
Euge, which he looks for, shall angerly challenge him, with Who required
this? I leave him now, in his own fetters; You, to your worthy, and
honorable employments.

Pardon me this length. Loquacity is the natural fault of Trauailers: while I
profit any, I may well be forgiven.

To Sr DAVID MVRRAY,
EP. 6. Concerning the Miracles of our time.
Indeed the world abounds with miracles. These, while they fill the mouths
of many, sway the faith of some, and make all men wonder. Our nature is greedy
of news; which it will rather feign, then want. Certainly, ere long, miracles
will be no wonders, for their frequence. I had thought, our age had had too
many graye hayres, and with time experience, and with experience craft, to have
descryed a iuggler: but, now I see, by the simplicity, it declines to his
second childhood. The two Lipsian Ladies, the charms of Bluntstones boy, and
Garnets straw, what a noise have they made! I only wonder how Faux and Catesby
escaped the honor of Saints, and privilege of miracles. Herein you ask my
sentence; more seasonably, then you hoped. For, I meant to have wrote a just
volume of this subject, and furnished my self accordingly in that region of
wonders; but that I feared to surcharge the nice stomach of our time, with too
much. Neither would my length have ought auailed you; whose thoughts are so
taken up with those hie and serviceable cares, that they can give no leisure to
an over long discourse. May it please you therefore to receive, in short, what
I have deliberately resolved in my self, and think I can make good to others.

I have noted four ranks of commonly named Miracles: from which, if you make a
just subduction, how few of our wonders shall remain either to belief or
admiration? The first merely reported, not seen to be done; the next seeming
to be don, but counterfaited; the third, truly done, but not true miracles;
the last, truly miraculous, but by Satan. The first of these are bred of lies,
and nourished by credulity: The mouth of fame is full of such blasts. For
these, if I listed awhile to rake in the Legends, and book of Conformities, an
ingenuous Papist could not but blush, an indifferent Reader could not but lay
his hand on his spleen, and wonder as much that any man could be so impudent
to broach such reports, or any so simple to believe them; as the credulous
multitude wonders that any should be so powerful to effect them. But, I seek
neither their shame, nor others laughter. I dare say, not the Talmud, not the
Alcoran, has more impossible tales, more ridiculous lies. Yea, to this head,
Canus himself (a famous Papist) dare refer many of those ancient miracles
reported, and (by all likelihood) believed of Bid, and Gregory. The next are
bred of fraud, and cozenage, nourished by superstition. Who knows not, how the
famous Kentish I do I moved her eyes, The Rood of Grace at Boxley Abbey.
and hands, by those secret gimmers, which now every Puppet-play can imitate?
How Saint Wilfreds needle opened to the penitent, and closed it self to the
guilty? How our Lady sheds the tears of a bleeding vine? and does many of her
daily feats, as Bell did of old eat up his banquet, or as Picens the Eremite
fasted forty days. But, these two every honest Papist will confess, with
voluntary shame and grief; and grant that it may grow a disputable question
whether Mounteba^ks or Priests are the greatest cozeners. Viues, beyond his
wont vehemently, terms them execrable and satanicall impostors. The third are
true works of GOD, under a false title: God gives them their being, men their
name: unjust, because above their nature; wherein, the Philosopher and the
superstitiously-ignorant, are contrarily extreme: while the one seeks out
natural causes of Gods immediate and metaphysicall works; The other ascribes
ordinary effects, to supernatural causes. If the violence of a disease cease,
after a vow made to our Lady; If a soldier, armed with this vow, escape
gunshot; a captive, prison; a Woman traueling, death; the vulgar (and I would
they alone) cry out, A miracle. One loadstone has more wonder in it, then a
thousand such euentes. Every thing draws a base mind to admiration.
Francesco del Campo (one of the Archdukes Quiryes) told us, not without
importunate devotion, that in that fatal field of Newport, his vow to their
Virgin helped him to swim over a large water, when the oars of his arms had
never before tried any waves. A dog has done more, without acknowledgement
of any Saint. Fear gives sudden instincts of skill, even without precept.
Their own Costerus durst say, that the Cure of a disease is no miracle: His
reason, because it may be done by the power of Nature, albee in longer time. ^n
l' an mil six cents and trois, y fureut comptez cent and trente cinque potences
and iambes de bo^s de persons boyteuses y apportees au seul espace de quatre
ou cincque mois. Histoire and Miracles. c. 12. p. 34.
Yield this, and what have Lipsius his two Ladies done? wherefore serves all
this clamor, from the two hills? I assented not; neither will be herein thus
much their enemy: For, as well the manner of doing, as the matter, makes a
miracle. If Peter's handkerchiefe, or shadow, heal a disease, it is miraculous,
though it might have been done by a Potion. Many of their recoueries,
doubtless, have been wrought through the strength of Nature in the Patient;
not of virtue in the Saint. How many sick men have mended, with their physic
in their pocket? Tho many other also (I doubt not) of those Cures have fallen
into the fourth head; which indeed is more knotty, and requires a deeper
discourse. Wherein, if I shall euince these two things, I shall (I hope) satisfy
my Reader, and clear the Truth: One, that miracles are wroght by Satan; the
other, that those which the Romish Church boasts, are of this nature, of this
author. I contend not of words: we take miracles in Augustines large sense;
wherein is little difference betwixt a thing marvelous and miraculous; such as
the spirit of GOD in either instrument calls (...), Or (...)
and (...). Perhaps, it would be more proper to say, that God works these
miracles by Satan: for, as in the natural and voluntary motions of wicked
men; so in the supernatural acts of evil spirits (as they are acts) there is
more then a mere permission. Satan, by his tempest, bereaues Job of his
children: yet Job, looking higher, says The Lord has taken. No sophistry can
elude this proof of Moses; that a Prophet or dreamer may give a true sign or
wonder, and yet say Let us go after strange Gods: Deuteronomy. 13. 1
nor that of our Savior, who ^oretels of false Christ's, false Prophets that
shall give (...); signs and wonders, and those great. The are some too great,
I grant, for the hand of all infernal powers: by which, our Savior inuincibly
proves the truth of his deity: These never graced falsehood, neither admit
any precedent from our times. As to the rest so frequent and common, for me, I
could not believe the Church of Rome were Antichristian, if it had not boasted
of these wonders. All the knot lies then, in the application of this to Rome,
and our imaginary Lady: How shall it appear, that their miracles are of this
kind? Ludouicus Viues gives six notes to distinguish Gods miracles, from
Satan's; Lipsius three: Both of them too many, as might easily be discovered by
discussing of particulars. It is not so much the greatness of the work, not
the belief of witnesses, not the quality nor manner of the action, nor truth
of essence, that can descrie the immediate hand which works in our
miracles. That alone is the true and golden rule which Justin Martyr (if at
least that book be his) prescribes in his Questions and Aunswers; How shall
it be known that our miracles are better then the Heathens, although the
event countenance both alike? By the faith and worship of the true God.
Resp. Ex fide and cultu very dei: Miracles must be judged by the doctrine
which they confirm; not the doctrine, by the miracles. The dreamer, or
prophet, must be esteemed, not by the event of his wonder; but, by the
substance and scope of his teaching. The Romanists argue preposterously, while
they would prove the truth of their Church by miracles; whereas they should
prove their miracles by the truth: To say nothing of the fashion of their
Cures, that one is prescribed to come to our LADY, rather on a Fridaye, as *
Henry Loyez; another, to wash nine Days in the Water of MONT -- AIGV, as
Leonard Stocqueau; Page 7.
another, to eat a piece of the Oak where the image stood, Histoire and
miracles de nostre Dame. page 73. page 102.
as Magdaleine the widow of Bruxelles. All which if they savor not strong of
magical receipts, let the Indifferent judge. Surely, either there is no sorcery,
or this is it. All shall be plain, if the doctrine confirmed by their
miracles be once discussed: for, if that be divine truth, we do unjustly
impugn these works as diabolical; if falsehood, they do blasphemously
proclaim them for divine. These works tend all chiefly to this double
doctrine; that the blessed virgin is to be inuoked, for her mediation; That God
and Saints are to be adored in and by Images; Positions that would require a
volume, and such as are liberally disputed by others: whereof one is against
scripture; the other (which in these cases values no less) besides it. One
deifies the virgin; the other, a stock or stone. It matters not what subtle
distinctions their learned Doctors make betwixt mediation of Redemption, and
Intercession, (...), and (...), the Saint and the Image: We know, their
common people, whose devotion inriches those shrines (by confession of their
own Writers) climb the Hill of Zichem with this conceit, Examen Pacifique de
la doctrine des Hugenots.
that Marie is their Sauioresse; Osauueresie sauue moy. Manuel of French
prayers, printed at Liege, by approbatio^ and authority of Anton. Gheuart
Inquisitor, etc.
that the stock is their Goddess: which unless it be true, how do their
wonders teach them lies! and therefore how from GOD? But, to take the first at
best (for, the second is so gross, that were not the second commandment by
Papists purposely razed out of their Primiers, children and carrers would
condemn it) it cannot be denied, that all the substance of prayer is in the
heart; the vocal sound is but a complement, and as an outward case wherein
our thoughts are sheathed. That Power cannot know the prayer, which knows not
the heart: either then the Virgin is God, for that she knows the heart, or to
know the heart is not proper to GOD: or to know the heart, and so our
prayers, is falsely ascribed to the Virgin: and therefore these wonders, which
teach men thus to honor her, are Doctors of lies; so, not of GOD. There cannot
be any discourse, wherein it is more easy to be tedious. To end; If prayers
were but in words, and Saints did meddle with all particularities of earthly
things, yet blessed Marie should be a God, if she could at once attend all
her Suitors. One solicites her at Halle, another at Scherpen-heuuell, another
at Luca, at our Walsingham another; one in Europe, another in Asia; or
perhaps another is one of her new Clientes in America: Ten thousand
devout Supplyants are at once prostrate before her several shrines. If she
cannot hear all; why pray they? If she can, what can GOD do more?
Certainly (as the matter is used) there cannot be greater wrong offered to
those heavenly spirits, then by our importunate superstitions to be thrust into
Gods throne; and to have forced upon them the honors of their Maker. There is
no contradiction in heaven: a Saint cannot allow that an Angel forbids. See
thou do it not, was the voice of an Angel: if all the miraculous blocks in
the world shall speak contrary, we know whom to believe. The old rule
was, Let no man worship the Virgin Marie.
(...): Either that rule is devilish, or this practice. And if this practice
be ill, GOD deliver me from the immediate author of these miracles. Change
but one Idol for another, and what differ the wonders of Apolloes Temples,
from those of these Chappelles? We reverence (as we ought) the memory of
that holy and happy Virgin: We hate those that dishonor her; we hate those
that deifie her. Cursed be all honor, that is stolen from God.

This short satisfaction I give, in a long question; such as I dare rest in;
and resolve that all Popish miracles are either falsely reported, or falsely
done, or falsely miraculous, or falsely ascribed to heaven.

To Mr. WILLLIAM BEDELL, at Venice.
EP. 7. Lamenting the death of our late Divines and inciting to their imitation.
WE have heard, how full of trouble, and danger, the Alps were to you; and did
at once both pity your difficulties, and rejoice in your safety. Since your
departure from us, Reynolds is departed from the World. Alas; how many worthy
lights have our eyes seen shining and extinguished?

How many losses have we lived to see the Church sustain, and lament; of her
children, of her pillars; our own, and foreign? I speak not of those, which
(being excellent) would needs be obscure: whom nothing but their own secrecy
deprived of the honor of our tears. There are, besides, too many whom the
world noted and admired; even since the time that our common mother
acknowledged us for her sons. Our Fulk led the way; that profound, ready
and resolute Doctor, the hammer of heretics, the champion of Truth: whom our
younger times have heard often disputing acutely, and powerfully. Next him,
followed that honor of our schools, and Angel of our church, learned
Whitakers; then whom, our age saw nothing more memorable: what clearnes of
judgment, what sweetness of style, what gravity of person, what grace of
carriage was in that man? Who ever saw him, without reverence? or heard him,
without wonder? Soon after, left the world that famous and truly illuminate
Doctor, Francis Iunius, the glory of Leiden, the other hope of the Church, the
Oracle of Textuall and schoole-diuinity: rich in languages, subtle in
distinguishing, and in argument invincible: and his companion in labors, Lu.
Trelcatius, would needs be his companion in joys; who had doubled our sorrow
and loss, but that he reco^penced it with a son like himself. Soon after, fell
old reverend Beza; a long-fixed star in this firmament of the Church: who,
after many excellent monuments of learning and fidelity, lived to prove upon
his adversaries, that he was not dead at their day. Neither may I without
injury, omit that worthy payr of our late Divines, Greenham, and Perkins:
whereof the one excelled in experimental divinity; and knew well how to stay a
weak conscience, how to raise a fallen, how to strike a remorse-lesse: The
other, in a distinct judgment, and a rare dexterity in clearing the obscure
subtilties of the school, and easy explication of the most perplex
discourses. Doctor Reynolds is the last; not in worth, but in the time of his
loss. He alone was a well-furnisht library, full of all faculties, of all
studies, of all learning: The memory, the reading of that man, were near to a
miracle. These are gone, amongst many more, whom the Church mournes for in
secret: would God her loss could be as easily supplied, as lamented. Her
sorrow is for those that are past; her remainder of joy in those that remain;
her hope in the next age. I pray God the causes of her hope, and joy, may be
equivalent to those of her grief.

What should this work in us, but an imitation, yea (that word is not too
big for you) an emulation of their worthiness? It is no pride, for a man to
wish himself spiritually better then he dare hope to reach: nay, I am
deceived, if it be not true humility. For, what does this argue him, but low
in his conceit, high in his desires only? Or if so; happy is the ambition of
grace, and power of sincere serviceableness to God. Let us wish, and affect
this, while the world lays plots for greatness: Let me not prosper, if I
bestow envy on them. He is great, that is good: and no man, me thinks, is
happy on earth, to him that has grace for substance, and learning for
ornament. If you know it not, the Church (our mother) looks for much at your
hands: she knows how rich our common father has left you: she notes your
graces, your opportunities, your employments: she thinks you are gone so far,
like a good Merchant, for no small gain; and looks you shall com home well
laded. And for vent of your present commodities (tho our chief hope of
success be cut off with that unhoped peace) yet what can hinder your private
traffic for God? I hope (and who does not?) that this blow will leave in your
noble Venetians a perpetual scar; and that their late irresolution shall make
them ever capable of all better counsels; and have his work (like some great
Eclipse) many years after. How happy were it for Venice, if as she is every
year married to the sea, so she were once thoroughly espoused to Christ! In the
mean time, let me persuade you to gratify us at home, with the publication
of that your exquisite Polemicall discourse; whereto our conference with M.
Alabaster, gave so happy an occasion: You shall hereby clear many truths;
and satisfy all Readers: yea, I doubt not, but an adversary (not too perverse)
shall acknowledge the Truths victory and yours. It was wholesome counsel of a
Father, that in the time of an heresy every man should write. Perhaps, you
complain of the inundations of Francford: How many have been discouraged from
benefiting the world, by this conceit of multitude! Indeed we all write; and,
while we Write, cry out of number.

How well might many be spared, even of those that complain of too many? whose
importunate babbling cloyes the world, without use.

To my Lord, the Earl of ESSEX.
EP. 8. Advise for his Travails.
MY Lord, both my duty and promise make my Letters your debt; and, if neither
of these, my thirst of your good. You shall never but need good counsel, most
in travail: Then are both our dangers greater, and our hopes.

I need not tell you the eyes of the world are much upon you, for your own
sake, for your fathers: Only let your eyes be upon it again, (...) and pitied,
which have brought nothing from foreign Countries, but misshapen clothes, or
exoticall gestures, or new games, or affected lisspings, or the diseases of the
place, or (which is worst) the vices? These men have at once wandered from
their Countily, and from themselves: and some of them (too easy to instance)
have left God behind them; or perhaps, in stead of him, have after a loose and
filthy life brought home some idle Puppet in a box, whereon to spend their
devotion. Let their wrack warn you: and let their follies be entertained by
you, with more derestation then pity. I know your Honor too well to fear
you: your young years have been so graciously prevented with sovereign
antidotes of truth and holy instruction, that this infection despaires of
prevailing. Your very blood gives you argument of safety: yet, good counsel is
not unseasonable, even where danger is not suspected. For Gods sake, my Lord,
whatsoever you gain, lose nothing of the truth; remit nothing of your love and
piety to God; of your favor and zeal to religion. As sure as there is a God,
you were trained up in the true knowledge of him. If either Angel, or Devil,
or Jesuit, should suggest the contrary, send him away, with defiance. There
you see and hear, every day, the true mother and the fained, striving and
pleading for the living child. The true Prince of peace has past sentence
from heaven, on our side. Do not you stoop so much as to a doubt, or motion
of irresolution. Abandon those from your table and salt, whom your own or
others experience shall descry dangerous; Those serpents are full of
insinuations: But, of all, those of your own Country: which are so much more
pernicious, by how much they have more color of privilege of entirenesse.
Religion is the greatest care: aduises for carriage, and improuement of
travail, challenge the next place. I need not counsel you to keep your
state, with affability; and so to menage your self, as that your courtesy may
be more visible, then your greatness. Nature has taught you this, and has
secretly propagated it from your Father: who, by his sweetness of disposition,
won as many hearts, as by his valor and munificence. I rather tell you, that
a good nature has betrayed many; who, looking for that in others which they
have found in themselves, have at last complained of their own credulity, and
others deceit. Trust not Strangers too much; with your counsel, with your
person: and, in your greatest familiarities, have an eye to their common
disposition, and infirmities. Those natures, wherewith you converse, are
subject to displeasure; and violent, in pursuit of small indignities. Yesterday
heard I named, from no unfaithful report, a French Courtier, that in single
combat has sent 18. souls from the field to their place: yet he ever as the
patient in the quarrel; and for this, mentioned with more then excuse: I
censure not how justly. This is others care: Only hence I argue the rifeness
of unkindness taken, and pursued. You shall see, that the soil is not so
diverse, as the inclination of persons: who, in all Climates, though they
differ in particulars, yet still agree too well in common falls. The Italian
deep, close, and crafty; the French rash; the Germain dull. One not forward to
offer wrongs; but, apprehensiue of a small wrong offered: another, prone either
to take, or give them; but, not uneasy to remit: another, long in conceiving,
long in retaining. What do I exemplify? There are long Catalogues of peculiar
vices, that haunt special places; which, if they were not notoriously
infamous, my charity would serve me to particularize: It were pity there
should be fewer virtues, local and proper. There are good uses to be made of
others enormities; if no more, by the^ to correct our own: who loathes vice in
another, is in good forwardnes to leave it in himself. The view of the public
calamities, and disorders of other Churches, shall best teach you thankfulness
for the better state of ours: But, better use of their virtues; by how much it
is more excellent to know what we should do, then what we should not. You
must now look upon all things, not with the eyes of a stranger only, but of a
Philosopher, but of a Christian; which accounts all lost, that is not reduced
to practice. It is a great praise, that you are wiser by the contemplation of
foreign things; but, much greater, that you are better. That you have seen
Cities, and Courts, and Alps, and Rivers, can never yield you so sound
comfort, as that you have looked seriously into your self. In vain do we
affect all foreign knowledge, if we be not thoroughly acquainted at home.
Think much, and say little; especially in occasions of dispraise: wherein,
both a little is enough, and oft-times any thing is too much. You cannot
enquire too much: that, which in us inferiors would be censured for dangerous
curiosity, in your greatness shall be construed as a commendable desire of
knowledge. Ask still after men of greatest parts and reputation: and where you
find Fame no lier, note and respect them. Make choice of those for
conversation, which either in present, or in hope, are eminent: and when you
meet with excellencies in any faculty, leave not without some gain of
knowledge. What are others graces to you, if you only admire them; not
imitate, not appropriate them? Lo, your equals in time grow up happily in the
College (so I may term it) of our young, and hopeful Court, which you have
left; and, above all, that gracious President of worthiness and perfection:
whom while in all other things you serve, you may without reproof emulate for
learning, virtue, piety. My self am witness of their progress; which I do
joyfully gratulate to the succeeding age. Beware, least their diligence shall
outstrip you, and vpbraid you with that ancient check of Going far and
faring worse. I am bold and busy in counselling: you abound with better
monitors; and the best you carry about, I hope, in your own bosom. Tho these
should be needless, yet they argue my humble affection, and discharge my
duty. My prayers are better then my counsels; both of them hearty and
unfeigned for your good. God guide and return you safe, from a journey not more
happy and prosperous then I wish it.

To St. ROBERT DRVRY, and his Lady.
EP. 9. Concerning my Remooueall from them.
WIth how unwilling an heart I leave you, he knows that searches the heart:
Neither durst I go, but that I sensibly see his hand pulling me from you.
Indeed, desire of co^petencie betrayed me, at first; and drew mine eyes to
look aside: but, when I bent them upon the place, and saw the number and the
need of the people, together with their hunger and applause, meeting with the
circumstances of Gods strange conueyance of this offer to me; I saw, that was
but as the fowlers feather, to make me stoop: and, contemning that respect of
my self, I sincerely acknowledged hyer motives of my yielding; and resolved I
might not resist. You are dear to me, as a Charge to a Pastor; If my pains
to you have not proved it, suspect me: Yet I leave you. God calls me to a
greater work: I must follow him. It were more ease to me, to live secretly
hidden in that quiet obscurity, as Saul amongst the stuff, then to be drawn
out to the eye of the world, to act so hye a part before a thousand witnesses.
In this point, if I seem to neglect you, blame me not; I must neglecte and
forget my self. I can but labor, wheresoever I am. GOD knows how willingly I
do that, whether there or here. I shall dig, and delve, and plant, in what
ground soever my Master sets me. If he take me to a larger field,
complain you not of loss, while the Church may gain. But, you are my own
charge; No wise father neglectes his own in compassion of the greater need of
others: yet consider, that even careful Parents, when the Prince commaundes,
leave their families, and go to warfare. What if God had called me to heaven;
would you have grudged my departure? Imagine that I am there, where I shall
be; although the case be not to you altogether so hopeless: for, now I may
hear of you, visit you, renew my holy counsels, and be mutually comforted
from you; there, none of these. He, that will once transpose me from earth to
heaven, has now chosen to transpose me from one piece of earth to another:
what is here worthy of your sorrow, worthy of complaint? That should be for
my own good: this shall be for the good of many. If your experience have
taught you, that my labors do promise profit; obtain of your self to deny
your self so much, as to rejoice that the loss of a few should be the
advantage of many souls. Tho, why do I speak of loss? I speak that, as your
fear, not my own: and your affection causes that fear, rather then the
occasion.

The God of the harvest shall send you a Laborer, more able, as careful: That
is my prayer, and hope, and shall be my joy. I dare not leave, but in this
expectation, this assurance. What-euer become of me, it shall be my greatest
comfort to hear you commend your change; and to see your happy progress in
those ways I have both showed you, and beaten. So shall we meet in the end,
and never part.

Written to Mr. I. B. and Dedicated to my father, Mr. I. HALL.
EP. 10. Against the fear of Death.
YOu complain, that you fear Death: He is no man, that does not. Besides
the pain, Nature shrinkes at the thought of parting. If you would learn the
remedy, know the cause; For that she is ignorant* and faithless. She would
not be cowardly, if she were nor foolish. Our fear is from doubt, and our
doubt from unbelief: and whence is our unbelief, but chiefly from ignorance?
She knows not what good is elsewhere: she believes not her part in it. Get
once true knowledge and true faith, your fear shall vanish alone. Assurance of
heavenly things, makes us willing to part with earthly. He cannot contemn this
life, that knows not the other. If you would despise earth therefore, think
of heaven. If you would have death easy, think of that glorious life that
follows it. Certainly if we can endure pain, for health; much more shall we
abide a few pangs, for glory. Think how fondly we fear a vanquished enemy.
Lo, Christ has triumphed over Death: he bleedeth and gaspeth under us; and yet
we tremble. It is enough to us, that Christ died: Neither would he have died,
but that we might die with safety, and pleasure.

Think, that death is necessarily annexed to nature: We are for a time on
condition that we shall not be; we receive life, but upon the terms of
redeliucrie. Necessity makes somethings easy; as it usually makes easy
things difficult. It is a fond injustice to embrace the covenant, and shrink
at the condition.

Think, there is but one common rode to all flesh: There are no bypath of
any fairer, or nearer way; no, not for Princes. Even company abateth miseries:
and the commonnesse of an evil makes it less fearful. What worlds of men
are gone before us; yea, how many thousa^ds out of one field? How many crowns
and scepters ly piled up at the gates of death, which their owners have left
there, as spoils to the Conqueror? Have we been at so many graves, and so
often seen our selves die in our friends; and do we shrink when our course
comes? Imagine you alone were exempted from the common law of mankind, or
were condemned to Methusalahs age; assure your self death is not now so
fearful, as your life would then be wearisome.

Think not so much what Death is, as from whom he comes, and for what. We
receive even homely messengers from great persons; not without respect to their
masters: And what matters it who he be, so he bring us good news? what
news can be better then this. That God sends for you, to take possession of a
kingdom? Let them fear death, which know him but as a pursuiuant sent from
hell; whom their conscience accuses of a life wilfully filthy; and bindes-ouer
secretly to condemnation: We know whither we are going, and whom we have
believed; Let us pass on cheerfully* through these black gates, unto our
glory.

Lastly, know that our improuidence only adds terror unto death. Think of
death, and you shall not fear it. Do you not see, that even Bears, and
Tigres, seem not terrible to those that live with them? How have we seen
their keepers sport with them, when the beholders durst scarce trust their
chain? Be acquainted with Death; though he look grimme upon you, at the
first, you shall find him, yea, you shall make him a good companion.
Familiarity cannot stand with fear. These are receites enough. Too much store
does rather ouerwhelme then satisfy. Take but these, and I dare promise you
security.

FINIS.
The second Decade of Epistles.
To Sr. ROBERT DARCY.
EP. 1. The estate of a true, but weak Christian.
IF you ask how I fare: Sometimes, no man better; and, if the fault were not
my own, Always. Not that I can command health, and bid the world smile when
I li^t. How possible is it for a man to be happy without these; yea in spite
of them? These things can neither augment, nor empaire those comforts, that
come from above. What use, what sight is there of the stars, when the
sunneshines? Then only can I find my self happy, when (ouer-looking these
earthly things) I can fetch my joy from heaven. I tell him that knows it, the
contentments that earth can afford her best Favorites, are weak, imperfect,
changeable, momentary; and such, as ever end in complaint. We sorrow that we
had them; and, while we have them, we dare not trust them: Those from above
are full, and constant. What an heaven do I feel in my self, when (after many
trauerses of meditation) I find, in my heart, a feeling possession of my God!
When I can walk, and converse with the God of heaven, not without an opennesse
of heart, and familiarity: When my soul has caught fast and sensible hold of
my Savior; and either pulls him down to it self, or rather lifts up it self
to him; and can and dare secretly avouch, I know whom I have believed: When I
can look upon all this inferior creation, with the eyes of a stranger, and am
tra^sported to my home in my thoughts; solacing my self in the view and
meditation of my future glory, and that present of the Saints: When I see
wherefore I was made, and my conscience tells me I have done that for which I
came; done it, not so as I can boast, but so as it is accepted; while my
weaknesses are pardoned, and my acts measured by my desires, and my desires
by their sincerity; Lastly, when I can find my self (upon holy resolution)
made firm and square, fit to entertain all events; the good with moderate
regard, the evil with courage and patience, both with thanks; strongly settled
to good purposes, constant and cheerful in devotion; and, in a word, ready
for God, yea full of God. Sometimes I can be thus, and pity the poor and
miserable prosperity of the godless; and laugh at their months of vanity,
and sorrow at my own: But then again (for why should I shame to confess it?)
the world thrusts it self betwixt me and heaven; and, by his dark and
indigested parts, eclipseth that light which shined to my soul. Now, a
senseless dullness ouer-takes me, and besots me; my lust to devotion is
little, my joy none at all: Gods face is hid, and I am troubled. Then I begin
to compare my self with others, and think, Are all men thus blockish and
earthen? or, am I alone worse then the rest, and singular in my wretchedness?
Now I carry my carcass up and down carelessly, and (as dead bodies are
rubbed, without heat) I do in vain force upon my self delights, which
others laugh at: I endeavor my wonted work, but without an heart; there is
nothing is not tedious to me, no not my self.

Thus I am, till I single my self out alone, to him that alone can revive
me: I reason with my self, and confer with him; I chide my self, and entreat
him: and, after some spiritual speeches interchanged, I renew my familiarity
with him; and he the tokens of his love to me. Lo, then I live again, and
applaud my self in this happiness, and wish it might ever continue, and think
basely of the world in comparison of it. Thus I hold on, rising and falling;
neither know, whether I should more praise God for thus much fruition of him,
or blame my self for my inconstancy in good; more rejoice, that sometimes I
am well, or grieve that I am not so always. I strive, and wish, rather then
hope, for better. This is our warfare; we may not look to triumph always: we
must smart sometimes, and complain; and then again rejoice that we can
complain; and grieve that we can rejoice no more, and that we can grieve more,
Our hope is, If we be patient, we shall once be constant.

To Sr. EDMUND BACON.
EP. 2. Of the benefit of Retiredness, and secrecy.
SVspect (if you can) that, because now many cold winds blow betwixt us, my
affection can be cooler to you. True love is like a strong stream, which the
further it is from the head, runs with more violence. The thoughts of those
pleasures I was wont to find in your presence, were never so delightful, as
now when I am barred from renewing them. I wish me with you; yea (if I could or
might wish to change) I should wish me your self. To live hidden, was never
but safe, and pleasant; but now, so much better, as the world is worse. It is
an happiness, not to be a witness of the mischief of the times; which it is
hard to see, and be guiltless. Your Philosophical Cell is a safe shelter from
tumults, from vices, from discontentments. Besides that lively, honest, and
manly pleasure, which arises from the gain of Knowledge in the deep mysteries
of Nature; How easy is it, in that place to live free from the common cares,
from the infection of common evils. Whether the Spaniard gain or save by his
peace, and how he keeps it; and whether it were safer for the States to lay
down arms, and be at once still and free; Whether the Emperors truce, with
the Turk, were honorable and seasonable; or whether Venice have won or lost
by her late iarres; are thoughts that dare not looke-in at those doors. Who is
envied, and who pitied at Court; Who buys hopes, and kindness dearest; who
lays secret mines to blow up another, that himself may succeed, can never
trouble you: These cares dare not enter into that Sanctuary of Peace. Thence
you ca^ see how all, that live public, are tossed in these waves, and pity
them. For, great places have seldom safe and easy entrances: and (which is
worst) great charges can hardly be plausibly wielded, without some indirect
policies. Alas! their privileges cannot counteruaile their toil. Weary
days, and restless nights, short lives and long cares, weak bodies, and
unquiet minds attend lightly on greatness. Either Clients break their sleep
in the morning, or the intention of their mind drives it off from the first
watch: Either suits or complaints thrust themselves into their recreations; and
Packets of Letters interrupt their meals. It is ever Term with them, without
Vacation. Their businesses admit of no night, no holiday: Lo, your priuacie
frees you from all this, and what-euer other glorious misery. There you may
sleep, and eat, and honestly disport, and enjoy your self, and command both
your self and others. And, whiles you are happy, you live out of the reach of
Envy; unless my praises send that guest thither: which I should justly
condemn as the fault of my love. No man offers to undermine you, none to
disgrace you: you could not want these inco^ueniences abroad. Yea, let a man
live in the open world, but as a looker on, he shall be sure not to want
abundance of vexations. An ill mind holds it an easy torment, to live in
continual sight of evil; if not rather a pleasure: but, to the well disposed,
it is next to hell. Certainly, to live among Toades and Serpents, is a Paradise
to this. One jests pleasantly with his Maker: another makes himself sport with
Scripture. One fills his mouth with oaths of sound: another scoffs at the
religious. One speaks villainy; another laughes at it; a third defends it. One
makes himself a Swine; another a Devil: Who (that is not all earth) can endure
this? who cannot wish himself rather a desolate Hermit, or a close prisoner?
Every evil we see, does either vex, or infect us. Your retiredness auoids
this; yet so, as it equally escapes all the evils of Solitariness. You are
full of friends; whose society, intermixed with your closenes, makes you to
want little of public. The Desert is too wild, the City too populous: the
Country is only fit for rest. I know, there want not some obscure corners, so
haunted with dullness, that as they yield no outward unquietness, so no inward
co^tentment. Yours is none of those; but such as strives rather, with the
pleasure of it, to require the solitariness. The Court is for honor, the City
for gain, the Country for quietness; A blessing, that need not (in the
judgment of the wisest) yield to the other two. Yea, how many have we known,
that having nothing but a cote of thatch to hide the^ from heaven, yet have
pitied the careful pomp of the mighty? How much more may those which have
full hands, and quiet hearts, pity them both? I do not so much praise you in
this, as wonder at you. I know many upon whom the conscience of their wants,
forces a necessary obscurity; who if they can steal a virtue out of necessity,
it is well: but, I no where know so excellent parts shrouded in such willing
secrecy. The world knows you, and wants you; and yet you are volu^tarily
hid. Love your self still; and make much of this shadow, until our common
mother call you forth to her necessary service, and charge you to neglect your
self, to pleasure her. Which once don; you know where to find Peace. Whether
others applaud you, I am sure you shall your self: and I shall still magnify
you, and (what I can) imitate you.

TO Mr. JOHN WHITING.
EP. 3. An Apologeticall discourse of the Marriage of Ecclesiastical persons.
I Know not, whether this quarrel be worthy of an answer, or rather of a
silent scorn; or if an answer, whether merry or serious. I do not willingly
suffer my pen to wade into questions: Yet, this argument seems shallowe
enough for an Epistle. If I free not this Truth, let me be punished with a
divorce. Some idle table-talk calls us to plead for our wives. Perhaps some
gallants grudge us one, who can be content to allow themselves more. If they
thought vviues curses, they would afford the^ us. Our marriage is censured (I
speak boldly) of none but them, which never knew to live chastely in marriage;
who never knew Gratians true distinction of Virginity. virg. Carnis, Me^tis


What care we for their ce^sure, Cause 35. q. 5. C. Tunc sa^^bitur.
where God approues? But some perhaps maintain it, M^lier suam virginitatem been
secuat, si^^eo nubat vt filios pariat ad iustitiam.
out of judgment: Bid them make much of that, which Paul tells them, is a
doctrine of Devils. Were it not for this opinion, the church of Rome would want
one evident bra^d of her Antichristianisme. Let their shauelings speak for
themselves; upon whom, their unlawful Vow has forced a wilful and impossible
necessity. I leave them to scan the old rule of In turpi voto muta decretum;
Profitentur continentia^ corporum, in incontine^ tiam debacchantur animorum. De
Romans Cler. Saluianus.
if they had not rather, Caute si non cast. Even moderate Papists will grant
us free, because not bound by vow; no not so far as those old Germans, pro
posse et nosse. Or what care we, if they grant it not? while we hold us
firm to that sure rule of Basil the great; Qui vetat quod Deus, praecepit. aut
praecipit quod Deus vetuit, maledictus habeatur ab omnious qui amant Dominum.
In Moralib. sum. ca 14.
He that forbids what God inioynes, or inioynes what God forbids, let him be
accursed. I pass not what I hear men, or Angels say, while I hear God say,
Let him be the husband of one wife. That one word shall confirm me, against the
barking of all impure mouths. He that made marriage, says it is honorable: what
care we for the dishonor of those that corrupt it? yea, that which Nature
notes with shame, God mentions with honor, Heb. 13. The Marriage Bed is
honorable.
(...); Non quia peccatum sit coniugibus commisceri: hoc enim opus castum non
habet culpa^ in coniuge, etc. Gregory in Psalm. Poenit. (...). Socrat. hist.
eccles.
Greg. with the title of opus castu^; Paphnutius, of (...), chastity. But, if
God should be judge of this controversy, it were soon at an end; who, in the
time even of that legal strictness, allowed wedlock, to the ministers of his
sanctuary. Let Cardinal Panormitan be heard speak. Continentia non est in
clericis secularibus de substantia ordinis, nec de iure diuino. (...)
Continency, says he, in Clergy men is neither of the substance of their
order, or appointed by any law of GOD. And Gratian, out of Augustine, yet more.

Copula sasacerdotalis nec legali, nec Euangeli^^ nec Apostolica authoritate
prohibetur. 26. q 2. c sors. ex Aug.
Their marriage, says he, is neither forbidden by legal, nor Evangelical,
nor Apostolic authority.

God never imposed this law of Co^tinence: who then? Only ex statuto Ecclesiae.
Durand. 4. Did. 37. q 1. Tom. in 2. 2. q. 88. art. 11.
The Church. As if a good spouse would gainesay what her husband wills: But,
how well? Hear, O ye Papists, the judgment of your own Cardinal; and
confess your mouths stopped. Sed credo pro bono and salute esse animarum (quod
esset salubre statutum) vt volentes possint contrahere; quia experientia
docente, co^trarius prorsus effectus sequit^r ex illa lege co^tinent ae; cu^
hodie non viuant spiritualiter nec sint mundi, sed macula^tur illicito coitu
cum eorum grauissimo peccato, vbi cu^ propria vxore esset castitas. Panormit.
de Cler. Comug. cap. Cum olim.
But I believe (says he) it were for the good and safety of many souls, and
would be an whole some law, that those which would, might marry; For that, as
experience teaches us, a contrary effect follows upon that law of
Continency; since at this day they live not spiritually, neither are clean,
but are defiled with unlawful copulation, to their great sin: whereas with
their own wife it might be chastity. Is this a Cardinal, think you, or an
Huguenot? But, if this red hat be not worthy of respect; Let a Pope himself
speak out of Peter's Chair. Pius the second, as learned as has sit in that
room this thousand years; Sacerdotibus magna ratione sublatas nuptias,
maiore restituendas videri: In the record of Platina himself In vita Pij. 2.
Marriage says he, upon great reason was taken from the Clergy; but, upon
greater reason is to be restored. What need we other judge? How just this
law is, you see; see now how ancient: For, some doctrines have nothing to plead
for them, but Time. Age has been an old refuge for Falsehood. Tertullians rule
is true; That, which is first, is truest. What the ancient Jewish Prelates
did, Moses is clear: what did the Apostles? Does not (...), etc. 1. Cor. 9. 5.
etc.
Paul tell us that both the rest of the Apostles, and the brethren of the Lord,
and Cephas, had wives, and (which is more) carried them still along in their
trauells? For that childish elusion of Rhemists read it a woman asister.
(...), who can abide, but to laugh at? Does not Clemens, citatus etiam ab
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 13* Petrum cum vxorem sua^ ad mortem ducicerneret hortatum and
consolatum his verbis. (...).
Clemens of Alexandria (a father not of more antiquity, then credit) tell us,
that Peter, Philip, and Paul himself, were married? and this last (tho
vnlikest) how is it confirmed by Ignatius, in his Epistle to the
Philadelphians? Yea, their own Cardinal, learned In illud. ad Philip. (...).
Caietane, does both avouch and euince it. This was their practice: what was
their Constitution? Look in these Canons, which the Romish Church fathers upon
the Apostles, and Franciscus ^urrian their lesuite sweates to defend it in a
whole volume: There you find, Canon. 5. enacted that (...) (non eijciat)
(...). Can. Apost. 5.
no Bishop, Presbyter, Deacon, shall forsake his wife ((...)) in pretense of
religion, upon pain of deposition. It would move laughter, to see how the
Jesuits gnaw upon this bone, and suck-in nothing but the blood of their own
jaws; Constant. 6 l. 3. Can. Quoniam. Canon Apostolicae (...). Nos, seque^tes
veterem Canonem Apostolicae (...), and constitutiones sacroru^ virorum, legales
suptias amodo valere volumus, etc.
while the sixth General Council auerres and proclaims this sense truly
Apostolical, in spite of all contradiction.

Follow the times now, and descend lower; what did the ages succeeding? Search
records: What-euer some palpably-foysted Epistles of Popes insinuate; they
married, without scruple of any contrary iniunction. Many of those ancients
admired virginity; but, imposed it not. Amongst the rest, Qui a Christianis
parentibus enutriti su^t, etc. maxim si fuerint ex patribus sacerdot^li sede
dignificatis. i. Episco patus, presbyteratus, aut diaconatus ne glorientur.
Orig. Tract 8. in Matthew*
Origin (tho himself a wilful Eunuch) is feign to persuade the sons of
Clergy men, not to be proud of their Parentage. After this, when the fathers
of the Nicene Council went about to enact a law of Continency, Socrates the
Historian expresses it thus: Visum erat Episcopis lege^ nouam introducere in
Ecclesiam. Socr. l. 1. c. 8.
It seemed good (says he) to the Bishops to bring in a new law into the
Church. Signa per Paphnutium non m^nus quam dudum per Apostolos siebant. Ruff.
n. l. 1. c. 4. Pathnutium, miraculis and pietate clarus, obtinuit in Nicena
synodo habendum pro castitate cu^ propriavxore concubitum Socra. l. ^. c. 8
It was then new, and they but would have brought it in; therefore before it
was not: where we know how Paphnutius, himself a Virgin, famous for holiness,
famous for miracles; rising ((...)) cried loud, that they ought not to lay this
((...)) heavy yoke, upon men of the Church. His Arguments wan assent. He
spoke and prevailed. So this liberty was still continued and confirmed. If
this be not plain enough; Holy In Epist. ad Dracont.
Athanasius, a witness past exception, shall serve for a thousand histories
till his age.

Multi ex episcopis matrimonia no^ inieru^t; Monach^ co^tra parents ^iberoru^
facti su^t: quemad modu^ vicissim Episcopos filiorum patres, and Monachos
generis potestate^ no^ quaesiuisse animaduertas. Athana^. Epistola. ad
Dracon^ium.
Many Bishops, says he have not married; and contrarily Monks have been
fathers of children: as contrarily, you see Bishops the fathers of children;
and Monks that have not sought posterity. Would you yet have instances of the
former, and the next age? Here you have Numidicus presbiter, qui vxore^
concremata^ and adhae a rentem lateri laetus aspexit. Cyprian. l. 4. Ep. 10.
Numidicus the Martyr, a married Presbyter; Ex D^onisio. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 41
Cheremon of Nilus, a married Bishop; Eusebius. l. 7. cap. 29. Eusebius. l. 8. c.
9. Gregorios vero apud Nazianzum oppidum in locum patris sui episcopus
subrogatus Ruffin. l. 2. c 9.
Demetrianus Bishop of Antioch, whose son Domnus succeeded Paulus
Samosatenus; Philo^omus and Phileas BB. of the Thmuites; Gabinius brother of
Eutychianus BB. of Rome; The father of Nazianzen, Basil, and the other Gregor.
Nassen frater Basilij, test Nicephoro, vxoratus, vxorem and liberos habuit:
sed non propterea fuit inrebus et exercitijs diuinis inferior vel deterior.
Sozom*
Gregory, Hilarious, and that good Spiridion Bishop of Cyprus, of whom Sozomen
gives so direct testimony. To omit others* what should I speak of many
Bishops of Rome, whose sons not spurious, as now a-dayes, but (as Pope
Urban himself witnesses) De legiti nis coniugiis not.
lawfully begot in wedlock, followed their fathers in the Pontifical chair.
Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos Pontifices legantur esse promoti, non
sunt intelligendi de fornicatione sed de legitimis connubiis nati; quae
sacerdotibu^ vbique ante prohibitionem licita erant, et in Orientali ecclesia
vsque body eis licere probantur, Did. 56. Ceno^an.
The reason whereof, that Pope himself ingenuously rendereth; for that marriage
was every where lawful to the Clergy, before the prohibition (which must
needs be late) and in the Eastern Church to this day is allowed. What need
we more testimonies or more examples? What ever The author of the Aeth^opick
history.
Heliodorus, Bishop of Trica (a man fitter for a wanton loue-storie, then a
Church controversy) brought into the Church of Thessalia, Socrates thus flatly
writes of those Bishops of his time; Nam non pauci illorum, du^ Episcopatu^
gerunt, etia^ liberos ex vxore legitima procreant. Socrat. l. 5. cap. 21.
For many of them in the place and function of Bishops, beget children of their
lawful wives. This was practiced: see what was decreed in that sixth general The
words of that Council are thus truly translated by Chemnitius; Quoniam in
Romana ecclesia, loco canonis seu decieti, traditum esse cognouimus, vt ij qui
digni habe^ di sunt ordinatione diaconi vel piesa byteri piofitea^tur se
deinceps cum vxoribus suis no^ congressuros; nos sequentes veterem canonem
Apostolicae, sincerae, exquisitae and ordinatae constitutionis, legitimas
sacroru^ viroru^ cohabitationes coniugales etia^ ex hodierno die in poster^
valere ratas and firmas esse volumus; nullo modo eoru^ cum vxoribus propriis
coniu^ctione^ seu copulatione^ dissoluentes. Itaque si quis dignus inueniatur
etc. is minime prohibe^dus est ad hu^c gradu^ asce^dere, ideo quod eu^ legitima
vxore cohabitet. Nec te^pore ordinationis suae ab eo postuletur, seu cogatur vt
abstinere velit aut debeat legitimo co^gressu cu^ propria vxore.
Counsel of Constantinople, to this purpose, to the confusion of all replyers.
If any Protestant Church in Christendom can make a more peremptory, more full
and absolute, more cautelous decree for the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons,
let me be condemned as faithless: A place, I grant, miserably handled by our
adversaries; and because they cannot blemish it enough, indignely torn out of
the Councels. What dare not impudency do? Against all evidences of Greek
Copies, Citat a Nilo Thesalonicensi.
against their own Gratian, against pleas of antiquity. This is the readiest
way; Whom they cannot answer, to burn; what they cannot shift off, to blot out;
and to cut the knot, which they cannot untie. The Romanists of the next age
were somewhat more equal: who, seeing themselves pressed with so flat a
decree, confirmed by authority of Emperors, as would abide no denial, began
to distinguish upon the point; limiting this liberty only to the Eastern
Church, and granting that all the Clergy of the East might marry, not theirs.
So Pope Steven the second freely confesses: Aliter se Orientaliu^ habet
traditio Ecclesiaru^: aliter huius sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae. Nam eorum
sace^dotes, diaconi, ^ut subdiacont. matrimonio copulantur: Istius autem
ecclesiae vel occidentaliu^ nullus sacerdotum, a subdiacono vsque ad episcopum,
licentiam habet coniugiun sortiendi. dis. 31
The tradition (says he) of the Eastern Churches is otherwise, then that of
the Roman Church. For, their Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons are married; but,
in this Church, or the Western, no one of the Clergy, from the Subdeacon to
the Bishop, has leave to mary.

Liberally; but not enough: and if he yield this, why not more? shall that be
lawefull in the East, which in the West is not? Do the Gospels or laws of
equity alter according to the four corners of the world? does God make
difference betwixt Greece and England? If it be lawefull, why not every where?
if unlawful, why is it done any where? So then you see, we differ not from the
Church in this; but from the Romish Church: But this sacred council does not
only universally approve this practice (with pain of deposition to the
gainsayers) but auouches it for a decree Apostolical. Judge now, whether this
one authority be not enough to weigh down an hundred pety Conuenticles, and
many legions (if there had been many) of private co^tradictions. Thus, for
seven hundred years, you find nothing but open freedom: All the scuffling
arose in the eight age; wherein yet this violent imposition found many and
learned adversaries, and durst not be obtruded at once. Lo, eue^ then, Gregory
the third, writing to the BBs. of Bauaria, gives this disiunct charge; Nemo
scor ta aut concubinam alat: sed aut caste^ viuat, aut vxorem ducat; qua^
repudiare fas non esto.
Let none keep an harlot or a co^cubine: but either let him live chastely, or
marry a wife; whom it shall not be lawful for him to forsake: According to
that rule of Clerks cited from Did. 23.
Isidore, and renewed in the Anno. 813
Council of Mentz, to the perpetual shame of our iuggling adversaries. Nothing
can argue guiltines so much, as unjust expurgations. Clerici castimonia^
inuiolati corporisperpetuo conseruare studeant; aut certe vnius matrimonij
vinculo foederentur. Isid. reg. cleric.
Isidore says, Let them contain, or let them marie but one: They cite him,
Let them contain; and leave out the rest: somewhat worse the^ the Devil cited
scripture. But, I might have spared all this labor of writing, could I persuade
whosoever either doubts, or denies this, to reade-ouer that one Epistle which
Whether Huldericus or (as he is somwhere entitled) Volusianus, I inquire not:
the matter admits of no doubt. Huldericus Episcopus Augustae. Anno. 860. Aeneas
Sylu. in sua^ Germ. Hedion. Eccl. hist. l. 8. c. 2. Fox, in Act. and Monum.
has it fully translated.
Huldericus BB. of Auspurge wrote learnedly, and vehemently, to Pope Nicolas
the first, in this subject: which if it do not answer all cauils, and satisfy
all Readers, and convince all (not wilful) adversaries, let me be cast, in
so just a cause. There you shall see, how just, how expedient, how ancient this
liberty is; together with the feeble and injurious grounds of forced
continency: Read it, and see whether you can desire a better advocate. After
him (so strongly did he plead, and so happily) for two hundred years more, this
freedom still blessed those parts; yet, not without extreme opposition.
Histories are witnesses of the busy, and not unlearned co^bats of those times,
in this argument. But now, when the body of Antichristianisme began to be
complete, and to stand up in his absolute shape, after a thousand years from
Christ; this liberty, which before wauered under Nicolas 1. now by the hands
of Leo 9. Nicolas 2. and that brand of hell, Gregory 7. was utterly ruined,
wives debarred, single life urged: Auentinus l. 5. Gratu^ scortatoribus, quibus
pro vna vxore sex centas ia^ malierculas ^^re l^cebat.
A good turn for whoremaisters (says Auentine) who now for one wife might
have six hundred Bed-fellowes.

But, how approved of the better sort appears (besides that the Churches did
ring of him, ech-where, for Antichrist) in that at the Anno. 1076.
Council of Worms the French and German BB^ deposed this Gregory, in this
name (amongst other quarells) for Maritos ab vxoribus separat.
separating man and wife. Violence did this; not reason: neither was Gods will
here questioned; but, the Popes wilfulness. What broils hereon insued, let Ex
Interdicto sacerdotum coniugio, grauissiam seditio gregem Christi perculit: nec
vrquam talis lues populum Christi afflixit. Auent. l. 5. Henric. Huntingdon. de
Anselmo. l 7. de An. 1100 in synodo Londinensi: Prohibu^^ sacerdotibus vxores,
ante non prohibitas: Anselm. (says that Historian) was the first that forbad
marriage to the Clergy of England (and this was, about the year of our Lord,
1080) Till then ever free. Item Fabianus Liberos aijt fu^sse sacerdotes per
annos 1080.
^uentine witness.

The bickeringes of our English Clergy, with their Dunstanes, about this time,
are memorable in our own Hist. which teach us how late, how repiningly, how
unjustly, they stooped under this yoke. I had rather send my Reader to Bale and
Fox, the^ abridge their momuments, to enlarge my own.

I have (I hope) fetched this truth far enough; and deduced it low enough,
through many ages, to the midst of the rage of Antichristian tyranny. There
left our liberty; there began their bondage. Our liberty is happily renewed
with the Gospel: what God, what his Church has ever allowed, we do enjoy.
Wherein we are not alone: The Greek Church, as large for extent as the Roman
(and, in some parts of it, better for their soundness) do thus; and thus have
ever done.

Let Papists and Atheists say what they will; It is safe erring with GOD and
his purer Church.

To my Sister, Mrs. B. BRINSLY.
EP. 4. Of the Sorrow not to be repented of.
IT is seldom seen, that a silent grief speedes well: for, either a man must
have strong hands of resolution to strangle it in his bosom; or else it drives
him to some secret mischief: whereas sorrow revealed, is half remedied, and
ever abates in the uttering. Your grief was wisely disclosed; and shall be as
strangely answered. I am glad of your sorrow; and should weep for you, if you
did not thus mourn. Your sorrow is, that you cannot enough grieve for your
sins. Let me tell you, that the Angels themselves sing at this lamentation;
neither does the earth afford any so sweet music in the ears of God. This
heaviness is the way to joy. Worldly sorrow is worthy of pity, because it
leads to death: But, this deserves nothing but envy and gratulation. If
those tears were common, hell would not so enlarge it self. Never sin,
repented of, was punished: and never any thus mourned, and repented not. Lo,
you have done that, which you grieve you have not done. That good GOD, whose
act is his will, accounts of our will as our deed. If he required sorrow
proportionable to the heinousness of our sins, there were no end of
mourning. Now, his mercy regards not so much the measure, as the truth of it;
and accounts us to have that which we complain to want. I never knew any truly
penitent, which in the depth of his remorse, was afraid of sorowing too much;
nor any unrepentant, which wished to sorrow more. Yea, let me tell you, that
this sorrow is better, and more, then that deep heaviness for sin, which you
desire. Many have been vexed with an extreme remorse for some sin, from the
gripes of a galled conscience, which yet never came where true repentance grew;
in who^ the conscience plays at once the accuser, witness, Judge, torme^tor:
But, an earnest grief, for the want of grief, was never found in any but a
gracious heart. You are happy, and complain. Tell me, I beseech you; This
sorrow which you mourn to want, is it a grace of the spirit of God, or not? If
not, why do you sorrow to want it? If it be, oh how happy it is to grieve for
want of grace! The God of all truth and blessedness has said, Blessed are those
that hunger and thirst after righteousness; and, with the same breath, Blessed
are they that mourn: for, they shall be comforted. You say, you mourn; Christ
says, you are blessed: you say you mourn; Christ says, you shall be
comforted. Either now distrust your Savior, or else confess your happiness,
and with patience expect his promised consolation. What do you fear? you see
others stand like strong Oaks, unshaken, unremoved: you are but a reed, a
feeble plant, tossed and bowed with every wind, and with much agitation
bruised: Lo, you are in tender and favorable hands, that never brake any, whom
their sins bruised; never bruised any whom temptations have bowed. You are but
flax; and your best is not a flame, but an obscure smoke of grace: Lo, here his
spirit is as a soft wind, not as cold water; he will kindle, will never quench
you. The sorrow you want, is his gift: Take heed least while you vex your
self with dislike of the measure, you grudge at the giver. Beggars may not
choose. This portion he has vouchsafed to give you, if you have any, it is
more then he was bound to bestow: yet you say, What, no more? As if you took
it unkindly, that he is no more liberal. Even these holy discontentments are
dangerous. Desire more (so much as you can) but repine not, when you do not
attain. Desire; but so as you be free from impatience, free from unthankfulness.
Those, that have tried, ca^ say how difficult it is to complain, with due
reservation of thanks. Neither know I whether is worse, to long for good things
impatiently, or not at all to desire them. The fault of your sorrow, is rather
in your conceit, then in it self. And, if indeed you mourn not enough, stay
but Gods leisure, and your eyes shall run over with tears. How many do you
see sport with their sins, yea brag of them? How many that should die for
want of pastime, if they might not sin freely, and more freely talk of it?
What a Saint are you to these, that can droup under the memory of the frailty
of youth, and never think you have spent enough tears! Yet so I encourage you in
what you have, as one that persuades you not to desist from suing for more. It
is good to be covetous of grace, and to have our desires herein enlarged with
our receipts. Weep still, and still desire to weep: but, let your tears be as
the rain in a sunshine; comfortable and hopeful: and let not your longing,
savor of murmur, or distrust. These tears are reserved; this hunger shall be
satisfied; this sorrow shall be comforted: There is nothing betwixt God and
you, but time. Prescribe not to his wisdom: hasten not his mercy. His grace
is enough for you: his glory shall be more then enough.

To Mr. HVGH CHOLMLEY.
EP. 5. Concerning the Metaphrase of the Psalms.
Fear not my immoderate studies. I have a body that controlls me enough in
these courses; my friends need not. There is nothing whereof I cold sooner
surfeit, if I durst neglect my body to satisfy my mind: But, vvhiles I affect
knowledge, my weakness checks me and says, Better a little learning then no
health. I yield, and patiently abide my self debarred of my chosen felicity.
The little I can get, I am no niggard of: neither am I more desirous to gather,
then willing to impart. The full handed, are commonly most sparing. We
vessels, that have any empty room, answer the least knock with a hollow
noise: you, that are full, sound not. If we pardon your closeness, you may well
bear with our profusion: If there be any wrong, it is to our selves, that we
utter what we should lay up. It is a pardonable fault to do less good to our
selves, that we may do more to others. Amongst other endeavors, I have boldly
undertaken the holy meeters of David; how happily, judge you by what you see.
There is none of all my labors so open to all censures; none, whereof I would so
willingly hear the verdit of the wise, and judicious. Perhaps, some think the
verse harsh; whose nice ear regards roundnesse, more then sense: I embrace
smoothness, but affect it not. This is the least good quality of a verse; that
intends any thing but musical delight. Others may blame the difficulty of the
tunes: whose humor cannot be pleased without a greater offense. For, to say
truth, I never could see good verse written in the wonted measures. I ever
thought them most easy, and least Poetical. This fault (if any) will light
upon the negligence of our people; which endure not to take pains for any fit
variety: The French and Dutch have given us worthy examples of diligence, and
exquisiteness in this kind. Neither our ears, nor voices are less tunable.
Here is nothing wanting, but will to learn. What is this but to eat the
corn out of the ear, because we will not abide the labor to grind, and knead
it? If the question be, whether our verse must desce^d to the^, or they ascend
to it; a wise moderation I think would determine it most equal, that each part
should remit somewhat, and both meet in the midst. Thus I have endeavored to do,
with sincere intent of their good, rather then my own applause. For, it had
been easy to have reached to an higher strain: but I durst not; whether for
the grave Majesty of the Subject, or benefit of the simplest Reader. You shall
still note, that I have labored to keep David's entire sense, with numbers
neither lofty, nor slubbred: which mean is so much more difficult to find, as
the business is more sacred; and the liberty less. Many great wits have
undertaken this task; which yet have either not effected it, or have smothered
it in their private desks, and denied it the common light. Amongst the rest,
were th^se two rare spirits of the Sidnyes; to whom, Poesy was as natural as
it is affected of others: and our worthy friend, Mr. Syluester, has showed
me, how happily he has sometimes turned from his Bartas, to the sweet Singer
of Israel. It could not be, that in such abundant plenty of Poesy, this
work should have past unattempted: would God I might live to see it perfected,
either by my own hand, or a better. In the mean time, let me expect your
impartial sentence, both concerning the form, and sense. Lay aside your love,
for a while; which too often blinds judgment. And as it uses to be done in most
equal proceedings of Justice, shut me out of doors, while my verse is
discussed: yea, let me receive not your censure only, but others by you: this
once (as you love me) play both the Informer and the Judge. Whether you allow
it, you shall encourage me; or correct, you shall amend me: Asteriscus. Veru.

Either your stars or your spits (that I may use Origens notes) shall be
welcome to my margent. It shall be happy for us, if God shall make our poor
labors any way serviceable to his Name, and Church.

To Mr. SAMVEL SOTHEBY.
EP. 6. A Preface to his Relation of the Russian affairs.
Travel perfiteth wisdom; and observation gives perfection to travel:
without which, a man may please his eyes, not feed his brain; and, after much
earth measured, shall return with a weary body, and an empty mind. Home is
more safe, more pleasant; but less fruitful of experience: But, to a mind
not working and discursiue, all heavens, all earths are alike. And, as the end
of travel is observation; so, the end of observation is the informing of
others: for, what is our knowledge if smothered in our selves, so as it is not
known to more? Such secret delight can content none but an envious nature. You
have breathed many and cold airs, gone far, seen much, heard more, observed
all. These two years you have spent in imitation of Nebuchadnezars seven;
co^uersing with such creatures as Paul fought with, at Ephesus. Alas! what a
face, yea what a back of a Church have you seen? what manners? what people?
Amongst who^, ignorant superstition strives with close Atheism, treachery with
cruelty, one Devil with another; while Truth and Virtue do not so much as give
any challenge of resista^ce. Returning once to our England after this
experience, I imagine you doubted whether you were on earth, or in heaven. Now
the^ (if you will hear me, who^ you were wont) as you have observed what you
have seen, and written what you have observed; so, publish what you have
written: It shall be a grateful labor, to us, to posterity. I am deceived, if
the ficklenes of the Russian state, have not yielded more memorable matter of
history the^ any other in our age, or perhaps many centuries of our
predecessors. How shall I think, but that God sent you thither before these
broils, to be the witness, the register of so famous mutations? He loves to have
those just evils which he does in one part of the world, known to the whole;
and those evils, which men do in the night of their secrecy, brought forth
into the Theater of the world; that the evil of men's sin being compared with
the evil of his punishment, may justify his proceedings and condemn theirs.
Your work shall thus honor him; besides your second service, in the benefit
of the Church. For, whiles you discourse of the open Tyranny of that Russian
Nero, John Basilius; the more secret, no less bloody plots of Boris; the ill
success of a stolen Crown; tho set upon the head of an harmless son; the
bold attempts and miserable end of a false, yet aspiring challenge; the
perfidionsnesse of a servile people, unworthy of better governors; the
miscariage of wicked governors, unworthy of better subjects; the iniust
usurpations of men, just (tho late) reuenges of God, cruelly rewarded with
blood, wrong claims with overthrow, treachery with bondage; the Reader, with
some secret horror, shall draw-in delight, and with delight instruction: Neither
know I any relation whence he shall take out a more easy lesson of justice,
of loyalty, of thankfulness.

But, above all, let the world see and commiserate the hard estate of that
worthy and noble Secretary, Buchinski. Poor gentleman! his distress
recalles ever to my thoughts Esops Storke, taken amongst the Cranes: He now
nourishes his hair, under the displeasure of a foreign Prince; At once in
durance, and banishment. He served an ill master; but, with an honest heart,
with clean hands. The masters injustice does no more infect a good servant,
then the truth of the servant can justify his ill master. A bad workman may
use a good instrument: and oft-times a clean napkin wipeth a foul mouth. It
joys me yet to think, that his piety, as it ever held friendship in heaven,
so now it wins him friends in this our other world: Lo, even from our Island
inexpected deliverance takes a long flight, and blesses him beyond hope; yea
rather, from heaven, by us. That GOD, whom he serves, will be known to those
rude and scarce humane Christians, for a protector of innocence, a favorer of
truth, a rewarder of Piety. The mercy of our gracious King, the compassion of
an honorable Councellor, the love of a true friend, and (which wrought all, and
set all on work) the grace of our good God, shall now loose those bonds, and
give a glad welcome to his liberty, and a willing farewell to his distress.
He shall, I hope, live to acknowledge this; in the mean time, I do for him.
Those Russian affairs are not more worthy of your records, then your love to
this friend is worthy of mine. For, neither cold this large Sea drown or
quench it, nor time and absence (which are wont to breed a lingering consumption
of friendship) abate the heat of that affection, which his kindness bred,
religion nourished. Both rareness, and worth shall commend this true love;
which (to say true) has been now long out of fashion. Never times yielded
more love; but, not more subtle. For, every man loves himself in another,
loves the estate in the person: Hope of advantage is the loadstone that draws
the yro^ hearts of men; not virtue, not desert. No age afforded more Parasites,
fewer friends: The most are friendly in sight, serviceable in expectation,
hollow in love, trustlesse in experience. Yet now Buchinski, see and confess
thou have found one friend, which has made thee many: on whom while thou
bestowedst much favor, thou have lost none. I cannot but think how welcome,
Liberty (which tho late, yet now at last has looked back upon him) shall be
to the Cell of his affliction; when, smiling upon him, she shall lead him by
the hand, and (like another Angel) open the iron gates of his miserable
captivity, and (from those hard Prestaues and savage Christians) carry him by
the hair of the head, into this paradise of God. In the mean time I have
written to him as I could, in a known language, with an unknown hand; that my
poor Letters of gratulation might serve as humble attendants to greater.

For your work, I wish it but such glad intertainment, as the profit, yea the
delight of it deserves; and fear nothing, but that this long delay of
publicatio^ will make it scarce news: We are all grown Athenians, and
account a strange report like to a fish, and a guest. Those eyes and hands
staid it, which might do it best. I cannot blame you, if you think it more
honored by the stay of his gracious perusal, then it could be by the early
acceptatio^ of the world. Eue^ the cast garments of Princes are precious Others
have in part prevented you; whose labors, to yours, are but as an Echo to a
long period: by whom, we hear the last sound of these stirs, ignorant of the
beginning. They give us but a taste in their hand: you lead us to the open
fountain. Let the Reader give you but as much thank, as you give him
satisfaction; you shall desire no more.

Finally, GOD give us as much good use, as knowledge of his judgments; the
world, help of your labors; your self, encouragement; Buchinski, liberty.

To STANISLAVS BVCHINSKI, late Secretary to DEMETRIUS Emp. of Russia.
EP. 7. Of the comfort of Imprisonment.
THe knowledge, that the eye gives of the face alone, is shallow, uncertain,
imperfect. For, what is it, to see the utmost skin, or favor of the visage;
changeable with disease, changeable with passion? The ear (me thinks) does
both most clearly disclose the minds of others, and knit them faster to ours:
which, as it is the sense of discipline, so of friendship; commanding it even
to the absent, and in the present cherishing it. This thing we have lately
proved in your self, most noble Stanislaus: nearer examples we might have
had; better, we could not. How many, how excellent things have we heard of
you, from our common friend, tho most yours, which have easily won our belief,
our affections! How often, how honorable mention has he made of your name! how
frequently, how serue^tly have we wished you, both safety, and liberty! And
now, Lo where she comes, as the Greeks say, (...), and visites her forlorn
Client. Although, I would not doubt to say that this outward durance of the body,
has seemed more harsh to the behoulders, then to your self, a wise man, and
(which is more) a Christian; whose free soul, in the greatest straights of the
outer man, flies over Seas and Lands, whither it lists; neither can, by any
distance of place, nor swelling of waves, nor height of mountains, nor
violence of enemies, nor strong bars, nor walls, nor guards, be restrained
from what place it self has chosen. Lo, that enioyes God, enioyes it self,
and his friends; and so feeds it self with the pleasure of enjoying them,
that it easily either forgers, or contemnes all other things. It is no
Paradoxe, to say that A wise Christian cannot be emprisoned, cannot be
banished: He is ever at home, ever free. For, both his liberty is within him,
and his home is universal. And what is it, I beseech you (for you have tried)
that makes a prison? Is it straitness of walls? Then you have as many
fellows, as there are men. For, how is the soul of every man pent within
these clay-walles of the body, more close, more obscure^ whence, she may look
often, through the grates of her busy thoughts; but, is never released in
substance, till that God, who gave us our Mittimus into this Jail, give us our
Delivery, with a Return ye sons of Adam: Thus, either all men are
prisoners, or you are none. Is it restraint? How many (especially of that other
sex in those your Eastern parts) chamber up themselves, for state; so as
they neither see the Sun, nor others them? How many superstitious men, for
devotion? How many obscure Aglai, for ease and carelessness, keep themselves
in their own Cottage, in their own village; and never walk forth so much as
to the neighbor towns? And what is your Russia to all her inhabitants, but a
large prison, a wide Gally? yea, what other is the world to us? How can he
complain of straitnes, or restraint, that roues all over the world, and beyond
it? Tyranny may part the soul from the body; cannot confine it to the body.
That which others do for ease, devotion, state, you do for necessity: why not
as willingly, since you must do it? Do but imagine the cause other; and your
case is the same with theirs which both have chosen, and delight to keep
close; yet hating the name of prisoners, while they embrace the condition. But,
why do I persuade you, not to mislike that, which I pray you may forsake? I had
rather you should be no prisoner at all; then to be a cheerful prisoner upon
necessity. If the doors be open, my persuasion shall not hold you in: Rather
our prayers shall open those doors, and fetch you forth into this common
liberty of men; Which also has not a little (tho an inferior) contentment.
For, how pleasant is it to these senses, by which we men are wont to be led,
to see and be seen, to speak to our friends, and hear them speak to us; to
touch and kiss the dear hands of our Parents and with them at last to have
our eyes closed? Either this shall befall you; or what hopes, what pains (I
add no more) has this your careful friend lost? and we, what wishes, what
consultations? It shall be; I dare hope, yea believe it: Only thou our good
God give such end, as thou have done entrance into this business; and so
dispose of these likely endeavors, that whom we love and honor absent, we may
at last in presence see and embrace.

To my father in law, Mr. GEORGE WENYFFE.
EP. 8. Exciting to Christian cheerfulness.
YOu complain of dullness; a common disease, and incident to the best minds,
and such as can most contemn vanities. For, the true Worldling hunts after
nothing but mirth; neither cares how lawless his sport be, so it be pleasant:
he faines to himself false delights, when he wants: and, if he can pass the
time, and chase away Melancholy, he thinks his day spent happily. And thus it
must needs be; while the world is his God, his devotion can be but his
pleasure: whereas the mortified soul, has learned to scorn these frivolous
and sinful joys; and affects either solid delights, or none; and had rather
be dull for want of mirth, then transported with wanton pleasures. When the
world, like an importunate Minstrel, thrusts it self into his chamber, and
offers him Music, unsought; if he vouch-safe it the hearing, it is the
highest favor he dare, or can yield: He rewards it not, he commends it not;
Yea, he secretly loathes those harsh and iarring notes, and reiects them.
For, he finds a better consort within, betwixt GOD and himself, when he
has a little tuned his heart with meditation. To speak fully, the World is
like an ill fool in a play: the Christian is a judicious spectator, which
thinks those iestes too gross to be laughed at; and therefore entertaines
that with scorn, which others with applause. Yet in truth, we sin, if we
rejoice not: There is not more error in false mirth, then in unjust
heaviness. If Worldlings offend, that they laugh when they should mourn; we
shall offend no less, if we droupe in cause of cheerfulness. Shall we
envy, or scorn, to see one joy in read and white dross, another in a vain
title; one in a dainty dish, another in a ieste; one in a book, another in a
friend; one in a Kite, another in a Dog; vvhiles we enjoy the God of
heaven, and are sorrowful? What dull metal is this we are made of? We have
the fountain of joy, and yet complain of heaviness. Is there any joy,
without God? Certainly, if joy be good, and all goodness be from him; whence
should joy arise, but from him? And if he be the Author of joy; how are we
Christians, and rejoice not? What? do we freeze in the fire, and starve at a
feast? Have we a good conscience, and yet pine and hang down the head? When GOD
has made us happy, do we make our selves miserable? When I ask my heart
David's question, I know not whether I be more angry, or ashamed at the
answer; Why art thou sad, my soul? My body, my purse, my fame, my friends; or
perhaps none of these: only I am sad, because I am. And what if all these, what
if more? when I come to my better wits, Have I a father, an advocate, a
comforter, a mansion in heaven? if both earth and hell conspired to afflict me,
my sorrow cannot counteruaile the causes of my joy. Now I can challenge all
adversaries; and either defy all miseries, or bid all crosses, yea death it
self, welcome. Yet GOD does not abridge us of these earthly solaces, which
dare weigh with our discontentments, and sometimes depress the balance. His
greater light does not extinguish the less. If God had not thought them
blessings, he had not bestowed them: and how are they blessings, if they
delight us not? Books, friends, wine, oil, health, reputation, competency,
may give occasions, but not bounds to our reioycings. We may not make them Gods
riualls, but his spokes-men. In themselves they are nothing; but, in God, worth
our joy. These may be used; yet so as they may be absent without distraction.
Let these go; so God alone be present with us, it is enough: He were not God,
if he were not All-sufficient. We have him, I speak boldly; We have him in
feeling, in faith, in pledges, and earnest; yea, in possession. Why do we not
enjoy him? Why do we not shake-off that senseless drowsinesse, which makes
our lives unpleasant; and leaue-ouer all heauiness, to those that want God; to
those that either know him not, or know him displeased?

To Mr. W. R. Dedic. to Mr. THOMAS BVRLZ.
EP. 9. Consolations of immoderate Grief for the death of friends.
WHile the stream of sorrow runs full, I know how vain it is to oppose
counsel. Passions must have leisure to digest. Wisdom does not more moderate
them, then time. At first, it was best to mourn with you, and to mitigate your
sorrow, by bearing part; wherein, would GOD my burden could be your ease. Every
thing else is less, when it is divided; And then is best, after tears, to give
counsel: yet, in these thoughts I am not a little straited. Before you have
digested grief, advise coms too early; too late, when you have digested it.
Before, it was unseasonable; after, would be superfluous. Before, it could not
benefit you: after, it may hurt you, by rubbing-vp a skinned sore afresh. It is
as hard to choose the season for counsel, as to give it: and that season is,
after the first digestion of sorrow; before the last If my Letters then meet
with the best opportunity, they shall please me, and profit you: If not, yet I
deserve pardon, that I wished so. You had but two Jewels, which you held
precious; a Wife, and a Son: One was your self divided; the other, your self
multiplied: You have lost both, and well-neere at once. The loss of one caused
the other, and both of them your just grief. Such losses, when they come
single, afflict us; but, when double, astonish us; and, tho they give advantage
of respite, would almost ouerwhelme the best patient. Lo, now is the trial of
your manhood, yea of your Christianity: You are now in the lists, set-vpon by
two of Gods fierce afflictions; show now what patience you have, what
fortitude. Wherefore have you gathered, and layd-vp, all this time, but for
this brunt? Now bring forth all your holy store to light, and to use; and
approve to us in this difficulty, that you have all this while been a
Christian in earnest. I know, these events have not surprised you on a
sudden: you have suspected they might com; you have put-cases if they should
come. Things that are hazardous, may be doubted: but, certain things are, and
must be expected. Providence abates grief, and discountenances a cross. Or,
if your a^^^ction were so strong, that you (...) not fore-thinke your loss;
take it equally but as it falls. A wise man and a Christian, knows death so
fatal to Nature, so ordinary in event, so gainful in the issue, that I wonder
he can for this either fear or grieve. Does GOD only lend us one another,
and do we grudge when he calls for his own? So I have seen ill debtors,
that borrow with prayers, keep with thanks, repay with enmity. We mistake
our tenure: We take that for gift, which GOD intendes for loan; We are
Tenants at will, and think our selves owners. Your wife and child are dead:
Well; they have done that for which they came.

If they could not have died, it had been worthy of wonder; not at all, that
they are dead. If this condition were proper only to our families; and
friends, or yet to our climate alone; how unhappy should we seem to our
neighbors, to our selves! Now it is common, let us mourn that we are men.
Lo, all Princes and Monarchs dance with us in the same ring: yea, what speak
I of earth? The God of Nature, the Savior of me^, has trod the same steps of
death? And do we think much to follow him? How many servants have we
known, that have thrust themselves betwixt their Master and death; which have
died, that their master might not die? and shall we repi^e to die with ours? How
truly may we say of this our David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us; yea,
worth a world of Angels: yet he died, and died for us. Who would live, that
knows his Savior died? who can be a Christian, and would not be like him? Who
can be like him, that would not die after him? Think of this, and judge
whether all the world can hire us not to die. I need not ask you, whether you
loved those who^ you have lost: Could you love them, and not wish they might
be happy? Could they be happy, and not die? In truth, Nature knows not what
she would have; We can neither abide our friends miserable in their stay, nor
happy in their departure: We love our selves so well, that we cannot be
content they should gain by our loss. The excuse of your sorrow is, that you
mourn for your self. True: but, compare these two, and see whether your loss
or their gain be greater. For, if their advantage exceed your loss; take
heed, least while you bewray your love in mourning for them, it appear that
you love but your self in them. They are gone to their preferment, and you
lament: your love is injurious. If they were vanished to nothing, I could not
blame you, tho you took up Rachels lamentation: But now, you know they are in
surer hands then your own: you know, that he has taken them, which has
undertaken to keep them, to bring them again: You know, it is but a sleep,
which is miscalled Death; and that they shall, they must awake, as sure as they
lie down; and wake more fresh, more glorious, then when you shut their eyes.
What do we with Christianity, if we believe not this? and if we do believe
it, why do we mourn as the hopeless? But the matter, perhaps, is not so
heavy as the circumstance: Your crosses came sudden, and thick; You could not
breathe from your first loss, ere you felt a worse. As if he knew not this,
that sent both: As if he did it not on purpose. His proceedings seem harsh;
are most wise, most just. It is our fault, that they seem otherwise then they
are. Do we think, we could carue better for our selves? O the mad insolence
of Nature, that dares control, where she should wonder! Presumptuous clay!
that will be checking the Potter. Is his wisdom, himself? Is he, in himself,
infinite? is his Decree out of his wisdom; and do we murmur? Do we,
foolish worms, turn again when he treads upon us? What? do you repine at
that which was good for you, yea best? That is best for us, which God sees
best: and that he sees best, which he does. This is Gods doing. Kiss his rod
in silence, and give glory to the hand that rules it. His will is the rule of
his actions; and his goodness, of his will. Things are good to us, because he
wills them: He wills them, because they are good to himself. It is your glory
that he intends, in your so great affliction. It is no praise to wade over a
shallow Ford: but, to cut the swelling waves of the Deep, commendes both our
strength and skill. It is no victory, to conquer an easy and weak cross.
These maine evils have crowns answerable to their difficulty: Wrestle now, and
go away with a blessing. Be patient in this loss, and you shall once triumph
in your gain. Let God have them with cheerfulness, and you shall enjoy God
with them in glory.

To Mr. I. A. Merchant.
EP. 10. Against Sorrow for worldly losses.
IT is fitter for me to begin with chiding, then with advice: what means this
weak distrust? Go on, and I shall doubt whether I write to a Christian. You
have lost your heart, together with your wealth: How can I but fear, least
this Mammon was your God? Hence was Gods jealousy in remoouing it; and hence
your immoderate tears for losing it. If thus; God had not loved you, if he had
not made you poor. To some, it is an advantage to leese: you could not have
been at once thus rich, and good. Now, heaven is open to you, which was shut
before; and could never have given you entrance, with that lode of iniquity.
If you be wise in menaging your affliction, you have changed the world for GOD,
a little dross for heaven. Let me ever lose thus, and smart when I co^plain.

But, you might have at once retained both. The stomach, that is purged, must
be content to part with some good nourishment, that it may deliver it self of
more evil humors. God saw (that knows it) you could not hold him so strongly,
while one of your hands was so fastened upon the world. You see, many make them
selves wilfully poor: why cannot you be content God should impouerish you? If
God had willed their poverty, he would have commanded it: If he had not willed
yours, he would not have effected it. It is a shame for a Christian, to see an
Heathen philosopher laugh at his own shipwreck; while himself houles out, as
if all his felicity were embarked with his substance. How should we scorn, to
think that an heathen man should laugh either at our ignorance, or impotence?
ignorance, if we thought too highly of earthly things; impote^ce, if we
ouerloued them. The fear of some evils is worse the^ the sense. To speak
ingenuously; I could never see, wherein poverty deserved so hard a conceit. It
takes away the delicacy of fare, softness of lodging, gayness of attire, and
perhaps brings with it contempt: This is the worst, and all. View it now on the
better side: Lo, there quiet security, sound sleeps, sharp appetite, free
meriment; no fears, no cares, no suspicion, no distemper of excess, no
coffeehouse. If I were Judge, my tongue should be unjust, if poverty went
away weeping. I cannot see, how the evils it brings, can compare with those
which it remoues; how the discommodities should match the blessings of a mean
estate. What are those you have lost, but false friends, miserable comforters?
Else they had not left you. Oh slight and fickle stay, that winds could
bereave you of! If your care could go with them, here were no damage: and, if
it go not with them, it is your fault. Grieve more for your fault, then for
your loss. If your negligence, your riotous misspence had empaired your
estate, then Satan had impouerisht you; now would I have added to your grief,
for your sin, not for your asfliction: But now, since winds and waters have
done it as the officers of their maker; why should not you say with me, as I
with Job, The Lord has taken? Use your loss well, and you shall find that
God has crossed you with a blessing. And if it were worse then the world
esteems it, yet think not what you feel, but what you deserve: You are a
stranger to your self, if you confess not, that God favors you in this whip.
If he had stripped you of better things, and scourged you with worse, you
should still have acknowledged a merciful justice: If you now repine at an
easy correction, you are worthy of severity. Beware the next, if you grudge
and swell at this. It is next to nothing which you suffer: what can be further
from us, then these goods of outward estate? You need nor abate either health,
or mirth, for their sakes. If you do now draw the affliction nearer then he
which sent it, and make a foreign evil domestical; if while God visits your
estate, you fetch it home to your body, to your mind; thank your self that
you will needs be miserable: But, if you love not to fare ill; take crosses as
they are sent, and go lightly away with an easy burden.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 86. line 2. falls for faults. page 98. li. 1. nor for not.


