THE RECONCILER: OR An Epistle Pacificatorie of the seeming differences of
opinion concerning the true being and visibilitie of the Roman Church.

ENLARGED With the addition of Letters of Resolution, for that purpose, from
some famous Divines of our CHVRCH.

By Ios: Exon.

LONDON, Printed for NATH: BVTTER. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND truly religious, my singular good Lord, Edward
Earl of Norwich.
My ever honored Lord:
I Confess my charity led me into an error; Your Lordshippe well knows how
apt I am to be overtaken with these better deceits of an over kind credulity.
I had thought that any dash of my pen, in a sudden, and easy advertisement,
might have served to have quitted that ignorant scandal, which was cast upon
my mis-taken assertion, of the true visibility of the Roman Church. The issue
proves all otherwise: I find, to my grief, that the misunderstanding
tenacitie of some zealous spirits has made it a quarrel. It cannot but
trouble me to see that the position, which is so familiarly current with the
best reformed Divines; and which has been so often and long since published by
me without contradiction; yea, not without the approbation and applause of the
whole representative body of the Clergy of this kingdom, should now be
quarrelled, and drawn into the detestation of those that know it not; As one
therefore that should think it corosive enough, that any occasion should be
taken by ought of mine, to ravell but one thread of that seamless coat, I do
earnestly desire, by a more full explication, to give clear satisfaction to
all Readers; and by this seasonable reconcilement, to stop the floodgates of
contention; I know it will not be unpleasing to your Lordship, that through
your honorable and pious hands, these welcome papers should be transmitted to
many; Wherein I shall first beseech, yea adjure al Christians, under whose eyes
they shall fall, by the dreadful name of that GOD, who shall judge both the
quick, and the dead, to lay aside all unjust prejudices; and to allow the
words of Truth, and Peace; I dare confidently say, Let us be understood, and we
are agreed.

The searcher of all hearts knows how far it was from my thoughts to speak ought
in favor of the Roman Synagogue: If I have not sufficiently branded that
Stru^pet, I justly suffer. Luthers broad word is by me already both safely
co^strued, Ob.
and sufficiently vindicated. But, do you not say, It is a true visible
Church? Do you not yield some kind of communion with these clients of
Antichrist? What is, if this be not, favor? Mark well, Christian Reader, and
the Lord give thee understanding in all things: Resp.
To begin with the latter; No man can say but the Church of Rome holds some
Truths; those truths are Gods, and in his right, ours, why should not we
challenge our own, wheresoever we find it? If a very Devil shall say of
Christ, Thou art the Son of the living God, we will snatch this truth out of
his mouth, as usurped; and in spite of him, proclaim it for our own. Indeed;
there is no communion betwixt light and darkness, but there is communion
betwixt light and light; Now all truth is light, and therefore symbolizeth with
it self. With that light, therefore, whose glimmering yet remains in their
darkness, our clearer light will, and must hold communion; If they profess
three Persons in one Godhead; two natures in one person of Christ; shall we
detrect to join with them in this Christian verity? We abhor to have any
communion with them in their errors, in their idolatrous or superstitious
practices, these are their own, not ours. If we durst have taken their part in
these, this breach had not been; Now who can but say that we must hate their
evil, and allow their good? It is no countenance to their errors that we
embrace our own truths; It is no disparagement to our truths, that they have
blended them with their errors: Here can be no difference, then, if this
communion be not mis-taken; no man will say that we may sever from their
common truths; No man will say that we may join with them in their hateful
errors.

For the former; He that says a thief is truly a man, does he therein
favor that thief? He that says, a diseased, dropsied, dying body, is a true
(though corrupt) body, does he favor that disease, or that living carcass? It
is no other, no more that I say of the Church of Rome: Trueness of being, and
outward visibility, are no praise to her; Yea, these are aggravations to her
falsehood: The advantage that is both sought and found in this assertion is
only ours; as we shall see in the sequel, without any danger of their gain. I
say, then, that she is a true church, but, I say withal, she is a false
Church: True in existence, but false in belief: Let not the homonymie of a
word breed jarres, where the sense is accorded: If we do not yield her the
true being of a Church, why do we call her the Church of Rome? What speak we
of? or where is the subject of our question? who sees not that there is a
moral trueness, and a natural? He that is morally the falsest man, is, in
nature, as truly a man, as the honestest; and therefore in this regard as true
a man: In the same sense therefore that we say the Devil is a true (though
false) spirit; that a cheater it a true (though false) man, we may and must
say, that the Church of Rome is a true (though false) Church; Certainly, there
has been a true error, and mis-taking of the sense that is guilty of this
quarrel. As for the visibility, there can be no question: Would God, that
Church did not too much fill our eye, yea the world; There is nothing wherein
it does more pride it self, than in a glorious conspicuitie, scorning, in this
regard, the obscure paucitie of their opposers.

But you say, Ob.
What is this but to play with ambiguities; That the Church of Rome is it
self, that is, a Church; that it is visible; that it is truly existent, there
can be no doubt; but is it still a part of the truly existent, visible church
of Christ? Resp.
Surely, no otherwise than an heretical and Apostaticall Church is, and may
be: Reader, whosoever thou art, for Gods sake, for thy souls sake, mark where
thou treadest; Else thou shall be sure to fall either into an open gulf of
uncharitableness, or into a dangerous precipice of error. There is no fear,
nor favor to say, that the Church of Rome, under a Christian face, has an
Antichristian heart; overturning that foundation by necessary inferences,
which by open profession in avoweth: That face, that profession, those avowed
principles are enough to give it claim to a true outward visibilitie of a
Christian Church; whiles those damnable inferences are enough to feoffe it in
the true style of heresy, and Antichristianisme; Now, this heresy, this
Antichristianisme makes Rome justly odious, and execrable to God, to Angels,
and Men; but cannot utterly dischurch it, whiles those main principles
maintain a weak life in that crazie, and corrupted body.

But is not this language different from that whereto our ears and eyes have
been inured, from the mouths, and pens of some reverend Divines and
professors of our Church? Know, Reader, that the stream of the famous Doctors,
both at home, and abroad, has run strongly my way: I should have feared, and
hated to go alone; what reason is there then to single out one man in a
throng? Some few worthy Authors have spoken otherwise, in the warmth of their
zealous contention; yet so, as that even to them durst I appeal for my Judges;
for if their sound differ from me, their sense agrees with me: that, which as I
touched in my Advertisement, so I am now ready to make clear by the instance
of learned Zanchius; whose pregnant testimonies compared together, shall
plainly teach us, how easy a reconcilement may be made betwixt these two,
seemingly-contrarie, opinions: That worthy Author, in his profession of
Christian Religion, which he wrote, and published, in the 70. year of his
age, having defined the Church of Christ in general, and passed through the
properties of it, at last, descending to the subdivision of the Church
militant, comes to inquire, how particular Churches may be known to be the
true churches of Christ, whereof he determines thus. Illas igitur, etc. Those
Churches therefore do we acknowledge for the true Churches of Christ; in
which first of all, the pure doctrine of the Gospel is preached, heard,
admitted; and so only admitted, that there is neither place, nor ear given to
the contrary: For both these are the just property of the flock or sheep of
Christ; namely, both to hear the voice of their own Pastor, and to reject the
voice of strangers. John 10. 4. In which, secondly, the Sacraments instituted
by Christ, are lawfully, and (as much as may be) according to Christ's
institution, administered, and received; and therefore, in which the Sacraments
devised by men are not admitted, and allowed; In which lastly, the discipline
of Christ has the due place; that is, where both publicly, and privately,
charitable care is had, both by admonitions, corrections, and at last (if need
be) by excommunications, that the Commandments of God be duly kept, and that
all persons live soberly, justly, and piously, to the glory of God, and
edification of their neighbor. Thus he; wherein, who sees not how directly he
aims, both at the justifying of our Churches, and the casheering of the Roman,
which is palpably guilty of the violation of these wholesome rules? And indeed,
it must needs be said, if we bring the Roman Church to this touch, she is cast
for a mere counterfeit; she is as far from truth, as truth is from falsehood:
Now by this time you go away with an opinion that learned Zanchie is my
professed adversary, and has directly condemned my position, of the
trueness, and visibilitie of the Roman Church: Have but patience, I beseech
you, to read what the same excellent Author writes, in his golden Preface to
that noble work, De natura Dei; where this question is clearly, and punctual
decided: There you shall find, that having passed through the woeful and
gloomie offuscations of the Church of God, in all former ages, he, descending
to the darkness of the present Babylon; concludes thus: Deinde non potuit
Satan, etc. Moreover, Satan could not, in the very Roman Church, do what he
listed, as he had done in the Eastern; to bring all things to such pass, as
that it should no more have the form of a Christian Church; For, in spite of
Satan, that Church retained still the chief foundations of the faith, although
weakened with the doctrines of men; it retained the public preaching of the
word of God, though in many places mis-understood, and mis-construed; the
invocation of the name of Christ, though joined also with the invocation of
dead men; the administration of Baptism, instituted by Christ himself,
howsoever defiled with the addition of many superstitions. So as, together with
the symbol of the covenant, the Covenant it self remained still in her; I
mean in all the Churches of the West, no otherwise than it did in the Church
of Israel, even after that all things were in part profaned by Jeroboam, and
other impious, and Idolatrous Kings, upon the defection made by them from the
Church, and Tribe of Judah; For, neither do I assent to them which would have
the Church of Rome to have no less ceased to be the Church of Christ, than
those Eastern Churches, which afterward turned Mahumetan; what Church was
ever more corrupt than the Church of the ten Tribes, yet we learn from the
Scriptures, that it was still the Church of God? And how does S. Paul call that
Church, wherein Antichrist (he says) shall sit, the Temple of God? neither is
it any Baptism at all, that is administered out of the Church of Christ. The
wife that is an Adulteress, does not cease to be a wife, unless being
despoiled of her mariage-ring, she be manifestly divorced: The Church of Rome,
therefore, is yet the Church of Christ; but what manner of Church? Surely so
corrupted and depraved, and with so great tyranny oppressed, that you can
neither, with a good conscience, partake with them, in their holy things, nor
safely dwell amongst them. Thus he again; Wherein you see he speaks as home
for me, as I could devise to speak for my self: and as appositely professes
to oppose the contrary.

Look, now how this learned Author may be reconciled to his own pen; and by
the very same way, shall my pen be reconciled with others: Either he agrees
not with himself, or else, in his sense, I agree with my gainsayers: Nothing
is more plain, then that he in that former speech, and all other classicke
Authors, that speak in that Key, mean, by a True Church, a sound, pure, right
believing Church; so as their vera is rather verax: Ibid. praefat. de not. Dei.
Zanchie explicates the term, whiles he joines veram and puram together; so as
in this construction it is no true Church that is an unsound one; as if truth
of existence were all one with truth of doctrine: In this sense, whosoever
shall say the Church of Rome is a true Church, I say he calls evil good, and
is no better than a teacher of lies. But, if we measure the true being of a
visible Church, by the direct maintenance of fundamental principles, though by
consequences indirectly overturned, and by the possession of the word of God,
and his Sacraments, though not without soul adulteration; what judicious
Christian can but, with me, subscribe to learned Zanchius, that the Church of
Rome has yet the true visibilitie of a Church of Christ: what should I need to
press the latitude, and multiplicity of sense of the word, Church; there is no
one term that I know, in all use of speech, so various; If, in a large sense,
it be taken to comprehend the society of all that profess Christian Religion,
through the whole world, howsoever impured, who can deny this title to the
Roman? If, in a strict sense, it be taken (as it is by Zanchius here, and all
those Divines who refuse to give this style to the Synagogue of Rome) for the
company of elect faithful men gathered into one mystical body under one
head, Christ, washed by his blood; justified by his merits, sanctified by his
Spirit, conscionablie waiting upon the true ordinances of God, in his pure
Word, and holy Sacraments* who can be so shameless, as to give this title to
the Roman Church? Both these sentences, then, are equally true; The Church of
Rome is yet a true Church in the first sense; The Church of Rome long since
ceased to be a true Church in the second. As those friendly soldiers
therefore, of old, said to their fellows ((...)?) why fight we? Stay, stay,
dear brethren, for Gods sake, for his Churches sake, for your souls sake,
stay these busy and unprofitable litigations; put up, on both sides, your
angry pens; Turn your Swords into Sithes, to cut down the rank corruptions
of the Roman church; and your Spears into Mattockes, to beat down the walls
of this mystical Babylon; There are enemies ^now abroad, Let us be friends at
home; But if your sense be the same, you will ask, why our terms vary, and
why we have chosen to fall upon that manner of expression, which gives
advantage to the Adversary, offense to our own? Christian Reader, let me
beseech thee, in the bowels of Christ, to weigh well this matter, and then tell
me why such offense, such advantage should be rather given by my words, than
by the same words, in the mouth of Luther, of Calvin, of Zanchie, Iunius,
Plessee, Hooker, Andrews, Field, Crakenthorpe, Bedel, and that whole cloud of
learned and pious Authors, who have, without exception, used the same language?
And why more by my words, now, than twenty years ago, at which time I
published the same truth, in a more full and liberal expression. Wise and
charitable Christians may not be apt to take offense where none is given. As
for any Advantage that is hereby given to the Adversaries, they may put it in
their eye, and see never the worse. Lo; say they, we are of the true visible
Church; this is enough for us; why are we forsaken, why are we presecuted, why
are we solicited to change? Alas, poor souls, do they not know, that
Hypocrites, lewd persons, reprobates, are no less members of the true visible
Church? what gain they by this but a deeper damnation? To what purpose did the
Jews cry, The Temple of the Lord, whiles they despighted the Lord of that
Temple? Is the sea-weed ever the less vile, because it is dragd up together
with good fish? They are of the visible Church, such as it is; what is this but
to say, they are neither Jews, nor Turks, nor Pagans; but misbeleevers,
damnablie heretical in opinion, shamefullie idolatrous in practice; Let them
make their best of this just Elogie; and triumph in this style, may we never
prosper if we envy them this glory: Our care shall be, that, besides the
Church sensible, Epist. l. 2. resp. ad Catabaptist.
(as Zuinglius distinguishes) we may be of the Church spiritual; and not
resting in a fruitless visibilitie, we may find our selves livelie limbs of
the mystical body of Christ; which only condition shall give us a true right
to heaven; whiles fashionable profession, in vain cries, Lord, Lord, and is
barred out of those blessed gates, with an, I know you not.

Neither may the Reader think, that I affect to go by-waies of speech: no, I
had not taken this path, unless I had found it both more beaten, and fairer: I
am not so unwise, to teach the Adversary what disadvantage I conceive to be
given to our most just cause, by the other manner of explication. Let it
suffice to say, that this form of defense more fully stops the adversaries
mouth in those two maine and envious scandals, which he casts upon our holy
Religion, Defection from the Church, and Innovation; than which, no suggestion
has wont to be more prevalent with weak, and ungrounded hearts, what we
further win by this, not more charitable, than safe Tenet, I had rather it
should be silently conceived by the judicious, then blazoned by my free pen;
shortly, in this state of the question, our gain is as clear, as the
Adversaries loss: our ancient Truth triumphs over their upstart errors, our
charity over their merciless presumptions; Fear not therefore, dear
brethren, where there is on room for danger; Suspect not fraud where there is
nothing but plain, honest, simplicity of intentions; censure not where there
is the same Truth, clad in a different, but more easy habit of words; But if
any man's fervent zeal shall rather draw him to the liking of that other,
rougher, and harder way, so as in the mean time he keep within the bounds of
Christian charity, I tax him not; let every man abound in his own sense;
Only let our hearts, and tongues, and hands, conspire together in peace with
our selves, in war with our common enemies.

Thus far have I (Right Honorable) in a desire of peace, poured out my self
into a plain explication, and easy accordance: Those whom I strive to
satisfy, are only mis-takers; whose censures, if some man would have either
laughed out, or despised, yet I have condescended to take off by a serious
deprecation, and just defense.

It is an unreasonable motion to request minds prepossessed with prejudice to
hear reason; Whole Volumes are nothing to such as have contented themselves
only to take up opinions upon trust, and will hold them, because they know
where they had them: In vain should I spend my self in beating upon such
anviles; but for those ingenuous Christians, which will hold an ear open for
justice, and truth, I have said enough, if ought at all needed.

Alas, my Lord, I see and grieve to see it; it is my Rochet that has offended,
and not I; In another habit, I, long since, published this, and more, without
dislike; It is this color of innocence that has bleared some over-tender
eyes; Wherein I know not whether I should more pity their error, or applaud
my own sufferings; although I may not say with the Psalmist, What has the
righteous done? Let me (I beseech your Lordship) upon this occasion, have
leave to give a little vent to my just grief in this point.

The other day I fell upon a Latin Pamphlet, homely for style, tedious for
length, zealously uncharitable for stuff, wherein the Author (only wise in
this, that he would be unknown) in a grave fierceness flies in the face of
our English Prelacie; not so much enveighing against their Persons, (which he
could be content to reverence) as their very places. I blessed my self to see
the case so altered: Heretofore, the Person had wont to bear off many blows
from the function; now the very function wounds the person: In what case are
we, when that which should command respect, brands us? What black Art has
raised up this spirit of Aerius from his pit? Woe is me, that zeal should
breed such monsters of conceit: It is the honor, the Pomp, the wealth, the
pleasure (he says) of the Episcopal Chair that is guilty of the
depravation of our Calling; and if himself were so overlayd with greatness,
he should suspect his own fidelity. Alas, poor man, at what distance does
he see us? Foggie Air uses to represent every object far bigger than it
is. Our Savior in his temptation upon the Mount, had only the glory of those
Kingdoms showed to him, by that subtle Spirit, not the cares, and vexations;
Right so are our dignities exhibited to these envious beholders; Little do
these men see the toils, and anxieties that attend this supposedly-pleasing
eminence.

All the revenge that I would wish to this uncharitable Censurer, should be
this, that he might be but for a while adjudged to this so glorious seat of
mine; that so his experience might taste the bewitching pleasures of this
envied greatness; he should well find more danger of being over-spent with
work, than of languishing with ease and delicacie.

For me I need not appeal to Heaven: Eyes enough can witness how few free
hours I have enjoyed, since I put on these Robes of sacred honor. In so much
as I could find in my heart, with holy Gregory, to complain of my change;
were it not, that I see these public troubles are so many acceptable services
to my God, whose glory is the end of my being: Certainly, my Lord, if none but
earthly respects should sway me, I should heartily wish to change this Palace
(which the Providence of God, and the bounty of my gracious Sovereign has
put me into) for my quiet Cell at Waltham, where I had so sweet leisure to
enjoy God, your Lordship, and my self: But I have followed the calling of my
God, to whose service I am willingly sacrificed; and must now, in an holy
obedience to his Divine Majesty, with what cheerfulness I may, ride out all
the storms of envy, which unavoidably will alight upon the least appearance
of a conceived greatness; in the mean time, what ever I may seem to others,
I was never less in my own apprehensions; and, were it not for this
attendance of envy, could not yield my self any whit greater than I was; what
ever I am, that good God of mine, make me faithful to him; and compose the
unquiet spirits of men, to a conscionable care of the public peace; with
which prayer, together with the apprecation of all happiness to your Lordship,
and all yours, I take leave and am

Your Lordships truly devoted in all hearty observance and duty, IOS. EXON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER Wisdom and Charity.
IT is no easy matter for a man so far to mortify his self-love, as to
neglect himself for the public good; and to veil his private engagements
(though with some seeming disadvantage) to the peace of the Church; that which
is too apparent in the present occasion. Whiles there might be some color of
ambiguitie of terms, and possibility of misconstruction, in that Position
concerning the true being, and visibility of the Roman church; I could the
less marvel that a mistaking should breed a quarrel; but now, after so clear
an explication, as I have given of my sense, and so satisfactory a
reconcilement, as no ingenuous Christian can except against; I am not a little
troubled to see the peace of the church yet disquieted with personal, and
unkind dissertations.

Surely (what ever may be pretended) not one hair of any Christians head can
be endangered, in that assertion of mine (yet not so much mine, as the most of
the reformed Divines of Christendom) as it is by them, and me both understood,
and interpreted; since we call all Christians to no less detestation of the
abominable corruptions, and Idolatries of the Roman Church, notwithstanding
the yeeldance of a bootlesse visibilitie, then those that deny it the being,
and name of a Church: yea we raise more strong advantage against the adversary
by this grant, then by that denial.

Neither is here the least contradiction to any clause of the Articles of our
Church, of England, in that sense wherein I have delivered my self; such is my
true filial honor to that our holy Mother, that I should hate my self, if I
should offer to oppose any of her sacred dictates; how ever it may sound to an
ignorant ear.

In every opposition there must be supposed the same subject, the same respect,
the same understanding of both; Else how ever the words run, the matter
disagrees not. For example; If one man shall say, The Church is visible,
material, consisting of lime and stone; Another shall say, The Church is
invisible, immateall, not consisting of any earthly stuff; these two do not
contradict each other; whiles the one speaks of the outward fabric of the
Church; the other of the spiritual state of the Church; Neither is it
otherwise in my assertion, and that which is counter-alledged from the Articles
or Homilies of the Church; as I have sufficiently explained my sense both in my
Advertisement, and Reconciler; It is not for me to cloy my Reader with
repetitions.

Now, lest I might perhaps seem partial to my own cause; and flatter my self
in my own opinion; I have craved the judgment of some, of the most eminent and
approved Divines of our Church, and the French; whose names are justly
reverend; whose works have made the^ famous in our gates: I have of many
hundreds, selected only four; B. Morton of Cov. and Lichfield. B. Dauenan^ of
Salisbury Dr. Prideaux of Oxford. Dr. Primerose Preacher of the French Church.
two Bishops, and two Doctors; such, as whose very mention is able to stop the
mouth of calumny; and to make ignorance ashamed of it self. I have taken the
boldness to publish their private Letters in answer to mine. Peruse them,
Reader, and take satisfaction; and confess it was thy mistaking, and not my
error that made me appear foul: Farewell, and love peace, and the God of
peace be with thee.

I. E.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of Couentree and
Lichfield.
MY Lord; may your leisure serve you to read over this poor sheet of Paper,
and to censure it: Your name is left out in the Catalogue of some other famous
Divines, mentioned in the body of it, that you might not be forestalled. I
suffer for that wherein your self, amongst many renowned Orthodoxe Doctors of
the Church, are my partner; As if you had not already said it enough; I beseech
your Lordship say, once more, what you think of the true being, and
visibilitie of the Roman Church, Your excellent and zealous writings have
justly won you a constant reputation of great learning, and no less
sincerity, and have placed you out of the reach of suspicion; No man can, no
man dare mis-doubt your decision; If you find any one word amiss in this
explication, spare me not; I shall gladly kiss your rod; and hold your utmost
severity a favor; But if you here meet with no other then the words of a
commonly professed truth; acquit me so far as to say, there is no reason I
should suffer alone; And let the wilful, or ignorant mis-takers know that they
wound innocence, and, through my sids, strike their best friends. I should not
herein desire you to tender my fame, if the injury done to my name did not
reflect upon my holy station, upon my wel-meant labors, upon almost all the
famous, and wel-deseruing Authors that have stood for the truth of God; and
lastly if I did not see this mis-taken quarrel to threaten much prejudice to
the Church of God; whose Peace is no less dear to us both, then our lives; In
earnest desire, and hope of some few satisfactorie lines from your Reverend
hand, in answer to this, my bold, yet just, suit, I take leave, and am

Your much devoted and loving Brother, IOS. EXON.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord and Brother JOSEPH
Lord Bishop of Exon, these.
RIght Reverend, and as dearly beloved Brother, I have (I confess) been too
long in your Lordships debt for these Letters; which are now to Apologize for
me, that although I had my payment ready, and in numeratis at the first reading
of your Reconciler, yet I reserved my Answer until I had perused the two
other Books and seconds, that so I might return my payment cum faenore.

In that your Lordships Tractate, I could not but observe the lively Image of
your self; that ^s (according to the general interpretation of all sound
professors of the Gospel of Christ) of a most Orthodoxe Divine; And now
remembering the Accordance your Lordship has with others touching the Argument
of your Book, I must needs reflect upon my self; who have long since
defended the same point, in the defense of many others. I do therefore much
blame the Petulcitie of whatsoever author that should dare to impute a Popish
affection to him, whom (besides his excellent writings and Sermons) Gods
visible, eminent, and resplendent Graces of Illumination, zeal, piety and
eloquence have made truly Honorable and glorious in the Church of Christ. Let
me say no more, I suffer in your suffering, not more in consonancie of
judgment then in the sympathy of my affection. Go on dear Brother with your
deserved Honor in Gods Church with holy courage, knowing that the dirtie feet
of an Adversary, the more they tread, and rub, the more luster they give the
figure graven in Gold. Our Lord Jesus preserve us to the glory of his saving
grace.

Your Lordships unanimous friend and Brother, THO. Covent. and Lichfield.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Salisburie.
MY Lord, I send you this little Pamphlet for your censure; It is not credible
how strangely I have been traduced every where, for that, which I conceive to
be the common opinion of reformed Divines, yea of reasonable men; that is, for
affirming the true being and visibilitie of the Roman Church; You see how
clearly I have endeauored to explicate this harmless position; yet I
perceive some tough mis-vnderstandings will not be satisfied; Your Lordship
has with great reputation spent many years in the Diuinitie-Chaire of the
famous University of Cambridge. Let me therefore beseech you, whose Learning,
and sincerity is so thoroughly approved in Gods Church, that you would freely
(how shortly so ever) express your self in this point; and, if you find that
I have deuiated, but one hayre-breadth from the Truth, correct me; If not, free
me by your just sentence: What need I entreat you to pity those, whose
desires of faithful offices to the Church of God are unthankfully repayed
with suspicion, and sclaunder; whose may not this case be? I had thought I had
sufficiently in all my writings, and in this very last Book of mine (whence
this quarrel is picked) showed my fervent zeal for Gods truth against that
Antichrian faction of Rome, and yet I doubt not but your own ears can
witness what I have suffered. Yea as if this calumny were not enough, there
want not those whose secret whisperings cast upon me the foul aspersions of
another Sect, whose name is as much hated, as little understood, My Lord, you
know I had a place with you (though unworthy) in that famous Sinod of DROT,
where (howsoever sickness bereaved me of the hours of a conclusiue
subscription) yet, your Lordship heard me, with equal vehemency to to the
rest, swaying down the unreasonableness of that way: I am still the same man,
and shall live and die in the suffrage of that Reverend Synod; and do
confidently auow, that those other opposed opinions cannot stand with the
Doctrine of the Church of England. But if for the composing of the differences
at home (which your Lordship knows to be far different from Netherlandish)
there could have been tendered any such fair propositions of accordance, as
might be no prejudice to Gods truth, I should have thought it an holy, and
happy project, wherein, if it be not a fault to have wished a safe peace, I am
innocent. God so love me as I do the tranquillity and happiness of his
Church; yet can I not so ouer-affect it that I would sacrifice one dram of
Truth to it; To that good God do I appeal as the witness of my sincere he
art to his whole Truth, and no less then ever zealous detestation of al
Popery, and Pelagianisme. Your Lordship will be pleased to pardon this
importunity, and to vouchsaue your speedy answer, to

Your much devoted and faithful Brother, IOS. EXON.

MY Lord; you desire my opinion concerning an assertion of yours, whereat some
have taken offense. The proposition was this. [That the Roman Church remaynes
yet a True Visible Church.] The occasion which makes this an ill sounding
proposition in the ears of Protestants (especially such as are not thoroughly
acquainted with School Distinctions) is the usual acception of the Word,
True, in our English tongue. For though men skilled in Metaphysickes hold it
for a maxim, Ens, Verum, Bonum conuertuntur: yet with us, he which shall
affirm, Such an one is a True Christian, a True Gentleman, a True Scholar, a
True Soldier, or the like; he is conceived not only to adscribe Trueness of
Being unto all these, but those Due Qualities, or Requisite Actions whereby
they are made commendable or Praiseworthy in their several kinds. In this
sense the Roman Church is no more a True Church in respect of Christ, or those
due Qualities, and proper Actions which Christ requires; then an arrant whore
is a True and loyal Wife unto her Husband I durst upon mine oath be one of
your Compurgators, that you never intended to adorn that Strumpet with the
Title of a True Church in this meaning. But your own Writings have so fully
cleared you herein; that Suspicion it self, cannot reaosnably suspect you in
this point. I therefore can say no more concerning your mistaken proposition
then this. If in that treatise wherein it was delivered; the Antecedents, or
Consequents were such, as served fitly to lead the Reader into that Sense,
which under the word True, comprehends only Truth of Being or Existencie,
and not the Due Qualities of the thing or subject; you have been causelessly
traduced. But on the other side, if that Proposition comes in ex abrupto, or
stands solitary in your discourse, you cannot marvel though by taking the
word True according to the more ordinary acception, your true meaning was
mistaken. In brief, your Proposition admits a True sense; and in that sense,
is by the best learned in our Reformed Church, not disallowed. For The Being
of a Church does principally stand upon the Gracious Action of God, calling men
out of Darkness and Death, unto the Participation of sight and life in Christ
Jesus. So long as God continues this Calling unto any people, though they (as
much as in them lies) Darken this light, and corrupt the means which should
bring them to life and salvation in Christ; yet where God Calls men unto the
Participation of life in Christ, by the word and by the Sacraments, there is
the true Being of a Christian Church; let men be never so false in their
Expositions of GODS Word, or never so untrusty in mingling their own
Traditions with Gods Ordinances. Thus the Church of the Jews lost not her
Being of a Church, when she became an Idolatrous Church. And thus under the
government of the Scribes and Pharisees, who voided the Commandments of God by
their own Traditions; there was yet standing a true Church in which Zacharias,
Elizabeth, the Virgin Mary, and our Savior himself was borne, who were
members of that Church, and yet participated not in the corruptions thereof.
Thus to grant that the Roman was, and is a True Visible Christian Church,
(though in doctrine a false, and in practice an Idolatrous Church) is a true
assertion, and of greater use and necessity in our Controversy with Papists
about the Perpetuity of the Christian Church, then is understood by those who
gainsay it. This in your Reconciler is so well explicated, as if any shall
continue in traducing you, in regard of that Proposition, so explained, I
think it will be only those who are better acquainted with wrangling, then
reasoning, and deeper in love with strife, then truth: As for the aspersion of
Arminianisme, I can testify that in our Joint employment at the Synod of Dort,
you were as far from it, as my self. And I know that no man can embrace it
in the Doctrine of Predestination, and Grace, but he must first desert the
Articles agreed upon by the Church of England, nor in the point of
perseverance, but he must vary from the common Tenet, and received opinion of
our best approved Doctors in the English Church. I am assured that you neither
have deserted the one, nor will vary from the other. And therefore be no more
troubled with other men's groundless suspicions, then you would be in like
case, with their idle Dreams. Thus I have enlarged my self beyond my first
intent. But my love to your self, and the assurance of your constant love unto
the Truth, enforced me thereunto. I rest always

Ian 30. 1628. Your loving Brother IO. SARVM.

To the Reverend and learned, Master Doctor PREDEAVX, professor of Divinity in
Oxford, and Rector of EXCETER College.
WOrthy Master Doctor Predeaux: All our little world here, takes notice of your
worth, and eminency; who have long furnished the Divinity Chair in that
famous University, with mutual grace and honor. Let me entreat you, upon
the perusal of this sorry sheet of Paper, to impart your self freely to me,
in your censure; and to express to me your clear judgment, concerning the
true being, and visibilitie of the Roman Church; you see in what sense I
profess to hold it; neither was any other ever in my thoughts; Say, I beseech
you, whether you think any learned Orthodoxe Divine can, with any color of
reason, maintain a contradiction hereunto; And if you find (as I doubt not)
much necessity and use of this true, and safe Tenet; help me to add (if you
please) a further supply of Antidotes to those Popish spiders, that would
feign suck poison out of this herb. It was my earnest desire that this
satisfactorie reconcilement might have stilled all tongues, and pens,
concerning this ill-raysed brabble: but I see to my grief, how much men care
for themselves more, then peace; I suffer, and the Church is disquieted; your
learning and gravity will be ready to contribute to a seasonable pacification;
In desire, and exspectation of your speedy answer, I take my leave, and am

Your very loving friend, and fellow laborer, IOS. EXON.

Right Reverend Father in GOD;
Upon the receite of your Reconciler, which it pleased you to send me, I took
occasion (as my manifold distractions would permit) to peruse what had been
said on both sides, concerning the now-being of the Roman Church. VVherin I
must profess, that I could not but wonder at the needless exceptions against
your Tenet; you affirming no new thing in that passage misliked in your Old
Religion. And this your Advertisement (afterward) so fully and punctually
clears, and your Reconciler so acquitteth, with such satisfying ingenuitie,
that I cannot imagine they have considered it well, or mean well, that shall
persist to oppose it. For who perceiues not, that your Lordship leaves no more
to Rome, then our best Divines ever since the Reformation have granted? If
their speeches have been sometimes seemingly different, their meaning has
been always the same; that in respect of the common Truths yet professed
among the Papists they may, and ought to be termed, a True visible. Church,
in opposition to Jews, Turks, and Pagans, who directly deny the Foundation,
howsoever their Antichristian aditions make them no better then the Synagogue
of Satan. This being agreed upon by those, whose Judgment we have good
reason to follow (cited in your Advertisement, and by others) they do an ill
office to our Church (in my opinion) who set them at ods in this point, that
are so excellently reconciled; and give more advantage to the Adversary by
quarrelling with our worthies, then the Adversary is like to get by our
acknowledgment, that they are such a miserable Church, as we discover them to
be. What I have thought long since in this behalf, it appears in my Lecture
De Visibilitate Ecclesiae; and as often as this has come in question in our
public Disputes, we determine here no otherwise, then your Lordship has
stated it. And yet we trust to give as little vantage to Popery, as those
that do detest it; and are as circumspect to maintain our received Doctrine
and Discipline without the least scandal to the weakest, as those that would
seem most forward. That distinction of Romes case before, and since, the
Council of Trent, holds not to dis-Church it; but shows it rather to be more
incureable now, then heretofore Neither find I any particulars objected, which
those worthy men have not sufficiently cleared, that have justified your
Assertion. Not to trouble therefore your weightier affairs with my needless
interposition; As that controversy about the Altar ( Iosuah 22.) had presently
a fair end upon the full understanding of the good meaning on both sides; so I
trust in God this shall have: In which I am so persuaded that if it were to be
discussed there after our Scholasticall manner, it might well be defended
either pro, or con, with out prejudice to the Truth, according to the full
stating, which your Advertisement, and Reconciler have afforded. And thus, with
tender of my due observance, and Prayers for your happiness, I rest

Your Lordships in Christ to be commanded, IO. PRIDEAVX
From Exon Coll. Marij 9. No.
To my Reverend and learned friend M. Doctor PRIMEROSE, Preacher to the French
Church in LONDON.
WOrthy Master Doctor Primerose; you have been long acknowledged a great light
in the Reformed Churches of France; having, for many years, shined in your
orb, the famous Church of Bordeaux, with notable effects, and singular
approbation both for judgment and sincerity; both which also your learned
writings have well approved; So as your sentence cannot be liable to the danger
of any suspicion; Let me entreat you to declare freely what you hold
concerning the trueness, and visibilitie of the Roman Church, as it is by me
explicated; And, with all, to impart your knowledge of the common Tenet of those
foraine Divines, with whom you have so long conuersed, concerning this point;
which (if I mistake not) only a stubburne ignorance will needs make litigious.
It grieves my Soul to see the peace of the Church troubled with so absurd a
mes prison; In exspectation of your answer, I take leave, and commend you, and
your holy labors to the blessing of our God. Farewell; from

Your loving Brother, and fellow laborer IOS. EXON.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, and my very good Lord, JOSEPH Bishop of
Exceter.
Right Reverend Father in God,
I Have been so busied about my necessary studies for preaching on Sunday,
Tuesday, and this Thursday, that I could not give sooner a full answer to your
Lordships Letter, which I received on Friday last at night, whereby I am
desired to declare freely what I think concerning the trueness and visibilitie
of the present Roman Church, as it is by your Lordship explicated, and what is
the common tenet of the foreign Divines; with whom I have so long conuersed
beyond the Seas, concerning that point. I might answer in two lines, that I
have read your Reconciler, and judge your opinion concerning that point to be
learned, sound, and true* Though that if I durst favor an officious lie, I
would willingly give my Suffrage to those Divines which out of a most fervent
zeal to God, and perfect hatred to Idolatry, hold that the Roman Church is in
all things BABEL, in nothing BETHEL. And as they which seek to set right a
crooked tree, bow it the clean contrary way to make it straight, so to recover
and pull out of the fire of eternal damnation, the Roman Christians, I would
gladly pourtray them with sable colors, and make their religion more black in
their own eyes, then they are in ours the hellish colored faces of the
flat-nosed Ethiopians, or to the Spaniard the monstrous Sambenit of the
Inquisition.

But fearing the true reproach cast by Job in his friends teeth, Job 13. 7.
Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? and knowing
that we must not speak a lie, no not against the Devil which is the Father of
lies, I say that the Roman Church is both BABEL and BETHEL, and as Gods Temple
was in Christ's days at once Mat. 24. 13.
the house of Prayer, and a den of thieves, so she is in our days, 2. These.
2. 4.
Gods Temple, and the Revel. 18. 1, 2.
habitation of Devils, the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every
unclean, and hateful bird; which I prove thus.

The Church is to be considered three manner of ways. First according to Gods
right which he keeps over her, and maintains in her by the common and
external calling of his Word and Sacraments. Secondly, according to the pure
preaching of the Word, and external obedience in hearing, receiving, and
keeping the Word syncerely preached.

Thirdly, according to the election of grace, and the personal calling, which
has perpetually the inward working of the Holy Ghost joined with the outward
preaching of the Word, as in Acts 16. 14.
Lydia. Thence comes 1. Pet. 3. 21.
the answer of a good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

To begin with the last consideration, these only are Gods Church which are
Romans 2. 2^ 29.
Jews inwardly in the spirit, as well as outwardly in the letter, whose praise
is not of men, but of God, John 1.
who are Nathaniels, and true Israelites, in whom there is no guile: Invisible
to all men: Visible to God alone, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
who knows them that are his, and each of them to themselves, because 1. Cor.
2. 12.
they have received the Spirit which is of God, that they might know the things
which are freely given to them of God, and Revel 2 17.
the white stone, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. Of this
Church called by the Apostle, the people which God foreknew, Romans 11. there is
no controversy amongst our Divines.

In the second consideration, these only are the true visible Church of God,
amongst whom the Word of God is truly preached without the mixture of humane
traditions, the holy Sacraments are celebrated according to their first
institution, and the people consents to be led and ruled by the Word of God.
As when Exodus 19. 7, 8. Exodus 24. 3, 7.
Moses laid before the faces of the people all the words which the Lord
commanded him, and all the people answered together, All that the Lord has
spoken we will do, the Lord said unto Moses, Exodus 34. 27.
Write thou these words: For after the tenor of these words I have made a
covenant with thee, and with Israel: And Moses said to the people, Dent. 26.
17, 18.
Thou have avouched this day the Lord to be thy thy God, and to walk in his
ways; and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Judgments,
and to harken unto his voice: And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be
his peculiar people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep
all his Commandments. This condition of the Commandment GOD did often
inclucate into their ears by his Prophets. As when he said to them by
Jeremiah, Ier. 7. 23. Ier. 1^. 4.
This thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God,
and ye shall be my people, and walk ye in all the ways, in that I have
commanded you, that it may be well unto you.

So in the Gospel, Christ says, John 10. 27.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. But John 10. 7.
a stranger will they not follow, but will fly from him: For they know not the
voice of strangers: where he gives the first mark of the visibly true and
pure Church, to wit, the pure preaching, and hearing of Christ's voice. As
likewise Saint John says, 1. John 4. 6.
He that knows God hears us: hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the
spirit of error. Again, the Lord says, John 13. 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another, pointing out the concord and holy agreement which is among the
brethren, as another mark of the orthodoxe Church: As likewise when he says,
Matthew. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven, he shows that good works are the
visible mark of the true orthodoxe Church: The true preaching and reverent
hearing of the Gospel, is a visible mark of our faith and hope: Our concord in
the Lord, is a mark of our Charity: Our good works are real and sensible
testimonies of our inward Faith, Hope, and Charity. Where we find these
three signs, we know certainly that there is Christ's true Church, and judge
charitably, that is probably, that every one in whom we see these outward
tokens of Christ's true and orthodoxe Church, is a true member of the mystical
body of the Lord Jesus. I say charitably, because outward marks may be
outwardly counterfeited by Hypocrites, as it is said of Israel, Ps. 78. 36. 37.
They did flatter with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues,
for their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant: And of many of these that followed our Savior, John 2. 23. 24.
Many believed in his Name, when they saw the miracles which he did: But Jesus
did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men.

Therefore when the people of Israel departed from the Covenant, and by their
Idolatry brake, as much as in them lay, the contract of marriage between them
and God, they ceased in that behalf, to be Gods true Spouse and people,
though still they called him their Husband and their God. When they made a
molten Calfe in the Wilderness, and worshipped the works of* their own
fingers, God said to Moses, Exodus* 32. 7.
Thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted
themselves, and not my people. And Moses to show that on their part they had
broken the Covenant, Exodus 32. 19.
broken the Tables of the Covenant, when under Achaz they did worse, Isaiah
called them Esaias 1. 4, 9.
children that are corrupted, their Prince and Governors, Rulers of Sodom,
themselves, people of Gomorrah. their holy City* an Harlot: And God about the
same time cried unto them by Micah, Micah. 2. 7, 8.
Thou that art named the house of Jacob: Thou that was ^^late my people. And to
the teh Tribes by Hosea, Hosea 4. 17.
Ye are not my people, and I will not be your God: After the same manner
Christ said to the Jews, which gloried and made their boast that God was their
Father, John 8. 42. 4^.
If God were your Father, ye would love me; Ye are of your father the Devil:
And the lusts of your Father ye will do?

If we speak of the Romish Church according to this distinction, defining the
Church by the keeping of the Covenant in pureness of doctrine, and holiness
of life, God himself has stripped her of that glorious Name, calling her Revel.
11. 8.
spiritually Sodom, Egypt, and Revel. 14 ^
Babylon. Sodom in the pollution of her most filthy life; Egypt in the
abominable multitude of her filthy Idols; Babylon in the cruel and bloody
oppression and persecution of the Saints. And because she was to call her self
as falsely as arrogantly the mother Church, the Angel calls her THE MOTHER OF
HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH: Because also she was to bring and
magnify her self in the multitude of her Saints, he says, that Revel. 17.
5, 6
she is drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs
of Jesus. And taking from her the name of the Church, which she challenges
priuatiuely to all other Christian congregations, he names her, as I have
already said, Revel. 18. 2.
the habitation of Devils, the hold of every foul spirit, and a Cage of
every unclean and hateful bird.

In the first sense Moses said to God, Exodus 32. 11.
why does thy wrath wax hot against THY people: because although they had
broken the Covenant on their part by the works of their hands, God had not as
yet broken it on his part. Jeremiah in the greatest heat of their monstrous I
dolatries prayed after the same manner, Iere. 14 21.
Do not abhor us for thy Names sake, do not disgrace the Throne of thy
glory: Remember, break not thy Covenant with us. And Esaiah, Esa. 64. 8, 9.
Thou art our Father, we are ALL thy people. For so long as God calls a people
to him by his word and Sacraments, and honors them with his name: So long
also as they consent to be called by his name, professing it outwardly, they
remain his people, although they answer not his calling, neither in
soundness of faith, nor in holiness of life. Even as rebellious Subjects are
still true Subjects on the Kings behalf, who loses not his right by their
Rebellion: Nay on their own also in some manner, because they still keep and
profess his Name, and give not themselves to any foreign Prince. Did David
loose his right by the Rebellion of the people under his son Absalom! And
therefore when the King subdueth these traitors, he carries himself toward
them, both in forgiving and in punishing, as their lawful and natural Prince,
and not as a Conqueror of new Subjects. So as a strumpet is a true wife, so
long as her husband consents to dwell with her, and she is named by his name;
And as Agar when she fled from her mistress Sarai, was still Sarais maid, as
she confessed, saying, Gene. 16. 8.
I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai. In like manner a rebellious,
fugitive, and whooring Church, is still a true Church, so long as God keeping
the right of a King, of a Master, of a Husband over her, gives her not the
bill of Diuorcement, but consents that her Name be called upon her, and she
still calls her self his kingdom, his maid, his wife. Thus God calls the
Jews His people, even then when he said they were not his people, because he
had not broken the band of marriage with them, and put them away by
diuorcement. Therefore he said unto them, Esa. 50.
Where are the Letters of your mothers diuorcement, whom I have put away?
Meaning he had not given unto them a writing of diuorcement, but did still
acknowledge them to be his spouse, notwithstanding their manifold and most
filthy Whoredoms with false Gods, which he charged them with, saying unto them
by Jeremiah, Iere. 3. 14.
Thou have polluted the land with thy whooredomes, and with thy wickedness:
Thou have a whoores forehead, and refusest to be ashamed, will thou not for
this time cry unto me, my father thou art the guide of my youth. Turn, O
backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you: Or according
to the French translation, I have the right of an Husband over you. So after
he had called the ten Tribes Hosea 1. 6, 9.
Lo-ruhama, and Lo-hammi, saying, he would no more have mercy upon them, and
that they were not his people, he calls them his people, Hosea 4. 12.
My people, says he, asks counsel at their sticks, and their stuff
answers them.

But after that God had scattered them among the Medes and other nations of
Assyria, and broken his covenant with them, they became not only in the
second, but also in the first sense. Iesrehel, and no more Israel, Lo-ruhama,
and no more Ruhama, Lo-hammi, and no more Hammi. Then was fulfilled the the
prophecy, Hosea 2. 2.
Plead with your mother, plead: For she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband. So the Jews which were Gods people in the midst of their idolatry,
since they have denied Christ to be the Messiah, the Mediator between GOD
and them, and have crucified the Lord of glory, are no more Gods people,
although they beg still that name. Revel. 3. 9.
They are, says Christ, the Synagogue of Satan: They say they are Jews, and
are not, but do lie: For seeing God Romans 11 17.
has broken them off, and grafted the Gentiles in their room, they qualify
themselves Gods people as falsely and injuriously, as a whore lawfully
divorced by her husband, calls her self his wife.

To apply this to the Roman Church, which has adulterated and corrupted the
whole service of God, and is more adulterous then was at any time Judah or
Ephraim, and therefore is not a true visible Church in the second sense, I say
she is one in some sort in the first. In her God does still keep his true
word in the Old and New Testament, as the contract of his marriage with her. In
her is the true Creed, the true Decalogue, the true Lords Prayer, which Luther
calls the kernel of Christianity: In her Christ is Preached, though
corruptly. In her the Trinity and Incarnation of Christ are believed: In her
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost are prayed unto, though in an unknown
tongue to the most part: In her the little children are Baptized in the Name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And no Divine will deny that
their Baptism is a true Sacrament, whereby their children are borne to God,
seeing we do not rebaptise them, where leaving her, they adioyne themselves
to us. Who then can deny, that she is a true Church? For out of the Church
there is no Baptism, and the Church alone bears children to God. In her
sits the man of sin, the son of perdition, who sits 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
in the Temple of God, which is the Church. Its granted that she is Babylon
in the second sense: And Revel. 18. 4.
Gods people is commanded to come out of Babylon. What is Gods people, but Gods
Church which forsakes her successively, as of old the typical people came out
of the typical Babylon, not at once, but at many several times? If then we
apply unto her Gods commandment, exhorting her to come out of Babylon, either
we understand not what we say, or we acknowledge her to be Gods people, that
is Gods Church, though idolatrous, rebellious, and disobedient: Neither shall
she cease to be Gods people in this sense, till the coming of the blessed
day, when the air shall rebound with the shouting of the Saints, Revel. 14. 8.
Babylon is fallen, she is fallen that great City, because she made all
nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornication.

I say then, that as Jerusalem was at the same time the holy City, and a
Harlot, the Temple was Bethel and Bethauen, Gods House, and a house of
Iniquity, the Jews were Gods people, and no people, Gods children and the
Devils, Ephraim was Idammi and Lo-Hammi, in diverse r^spects, even so the Romish
Church is both BETHEL and BABEL, Bethel from God, calling her to the communion
of his grace in Christ by his Word, and Sacrament of Baptism, Babel from her
self, because she has made a gallimaufrey of the Christian Religion,
confounding pell-mell her own traditions with Gods Word, her own merits with
Christ's, the blood of Martyrs with the blood of the Lamb of God, John 1. 29.
which takes away the sin of the world, Purgatory with the same blood, 1.
John 1. 7.
which purges us from all sin, Justification by works with Justification
Gal. 2. 16.
by faith only, praying to the Creatures with praying to the Creator, Idols of
men, women, beasts, Angels with Gods worship, the mediation of Saints with the
mediation of him who is Heb. 7. 22, 25.
the surety of the new Testament, and is able to save to the uttermost all
those that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them. Nay, as Calvin said truly, in the Romish Church Christ is scarcely
known among the Saints, of whom some are in Heaven, as the Apostles, etc. some
on Earth, as the Pope, some in Hell, as Saint George an Arrian Heretic, and
bloody Butcher of true Christians, Saint Dominicke the firebrand of the war
against the Albigeois, Saint Garnet whom Tyburne sent to his own place, to be
rewarded of the Gunnepowder Treason: Some did never die, because they had never
the honor to live, as Saint Christopher, Saint Katherine, Saint Vrsule, Saint
Longin, who was a Spear. Saint Eloi who was two couple of sharp nails, and
many more of the same stuff. In a word, the roaring of the Camards of Bahal is
so loud in that Church, that Christ's voice is scant heard in her, and yet heard
both in the mouth of these Babylonian builders, which understand not one
another, and in the mouths of the people halting between Christ and the Pope
their Bahal. And therefore in that behalf not the true, but a true Christian
Church.

This testimony is the praise of the most wonderful patience of God, who
suffers so long that common hackney to bear his Name. It is her shame, As it
is the shame of a Queen married to a good husband, to be convicted of running
up and down after strangers Its a vantage to us in our employment for her
conversion. For as when Agar had confessed truly that she was Sarahs maid, the
Angel took her at her word, saying, Genesis 16. 9.
Return to thy Mistress, and submit thy self to her, and persuaded her: Even
so we take the Roman Church by the neck, when she confesses that she is
Christ's Church, as she is indeed, exhorting her to return unto Christ, to
obey his Word, to submit her self unto him, and to follow the true Faith of the
ancient Catholic and Apostolic Church. Neither is it any vantage to her
against us, to enforce us to return to her, or to vpbraid us for forsaking
her. For as Moses, when the people had committed Idolatry, Exodus 33. 7.
took his Tabernacle, and pitched it without the Camp, afar off from the
Camp, breaking of all communication with those which had broken the Covenant
of the LORD their God, till they repented: As God said to Jeremiah, of the
Jews, which had Ezech. 16. 25.
opened their legs to every one that passed by, and multiplied their
whoredoms, Ier. 15. 1. 19.
Cast them out of my fight, and let them go forth: Let them return unto thee:
but return not thou unto them. As Hosea said of Ephraim, Hosea 4. 17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone: So Christ says unto us, Revel. 18.
1.
Come out of Babylon, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins: and
that ye receive not of her plagues: Her sins are a spiritual leprosy. And
we run away from leprous men, though true men, and our nearest and dearest
friends, crying what they are loath to cry, Leuit. 13. 45.
Unclean unclean, lest their breath should infect us: Her sins are
infidelity, not negative, but pri^atiue, not in whole, but in part; As Saint
Paul a believing lew was in unbelief when he persceuted the Church: And Saint
Paul says unto us 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers, etc. Come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. A faithful subject will not take a
traitor, though a subject, by the hand, nor I a Papist in matter of his
Religion: Neither will honest women (...) with the greatest Lady, though she be
a great ones wife.

This I have ever taught privately, Preached publicly, published in Printed
Books against Papists, during these thirty three years of my Ministry in
the French Churches, without any advantage to our Adversaries, without any
contradiction of our divines, without any acception taken against it by our
Churches, or any particular among the brethren, which all in their name Preach
and publish that they are of the same mind, calling themselves The Reformed
Churches, and our Religion The reformed religion. For as the good Kings of Judah
did not build a new Temple, call to God a new people, set up a new Religion,
but repurge and cleanse the old Temple, restore the ancient Religion, exhorted
Gods people to shake off the new inventions of the new patched Religion, and to
return to the Lord their God by the old way, which their fathers had beaten,
and Moses had traced unto them in the Law; And as Zorobabel, Esdras, N^h^. 3.
and 4.
Nehemiah, Ieshuah, builded the Walls of Jerusalem upon the ancient foundation,
every man building next himself; Even so the Protestant Divines have every
one next himself, not builded a new Church upon a new foundation, but repurged
the ancient Church of idolatry, superstition, false interpretations of the
Scriptures, and traditions of men, whereof she was fuller then ever Augeas his
Stable was full of mucke, but beaten down, and burned with the fire of Gods
word the Walls 1. Cor. 3. 20, 10, 11.
of Wood, Hay, Stubble, which the Babylonian builders had raised upon the old
foundation, which is Christ Jesus, and edified upon it a fair Palace of
Silver, Gold, precious Stones. This same is the opinion also of my Colleagues of
the French Church of this City of London.

If any selfe-conceited Christian thinks this an advantage, rather then a
disparagement and disgrace to that punke, the Roman Church, and takes thereby
occasion to persevere to be her Bawd or Stalion, and to run a whoring with
her, I say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 36. 3.
The wicked has left off to be wise, and to do good, And with the Angel,
Revel. 22. 11.
He that is unjust, let him he unjust still: And he which is filthy, let him
be filthy still: For neither must an honest heart speak a lie for the good
that may come of it; Nor conceal in time and place a necessary truth for any
evil that may ensue of it. If it harden more and more the flintie hearts of
some unto death, it will soften and melt the iron hearts of others unto life,
that seeing among us the mudde and dirt of humane traditions, wherewith the
Pope and his Clergy had furred and soyled the brightshining glass of the
Gospel, wiped away from this heavenly mirror of Gods favor, they may come unto
us, and 2. Cor. 3. 18
beholding with open face, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, may be
changed with us into the same image, from gloire to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

Which last effect I pray with my heart your Reconciler may have with those
that are children of peace: And so recommending your Lordship, with all your
learned, eloquent, sound, and useful labors to GODS most powerful blessing
and my self to the continuance of your godly Prayers, and old friendship, I
remain for ever

Your Lordships most humble and affectionate Servant, Gilbert Primrose.
From London the 26. of February, 1629.
To my Worthy and much respected Friend Mr. H. CHOMLEY.
MAster Cholmely, I have perused your learned and full reply to Master Burtons
answer; wherein you have in a judicious eye abundantly righted your self, and
cleared a just cause; so, as the Reader would wonder where an Adversary might
find ground to raise an opposition; But, let me tell you, Were it a Book
written by the pen of an Angest from Heaven, in this subject, I should doubt
whether to wish it public. How true, how just soever the plea be, I find
(such is the self-love, and partiality of our corrupt nature) the quarrel is
enlarged by multiplying of words; when I see a fire quenched with Oil, I will
expect to see a controversy of this nature, stinted by public altercation.
New matter still rises in the agitation, and gives hint to a fore-resolued
opposite, of a fresh disquisition: So as we may sooner see an end of the common
peace, then of an unkindly jar in the Church; especially such a one, as is
fomented with a mistaken Zeal on the one side, and with a confidence of
knowledge, on the other. Silence has sometimes quieted such like mis-raised
brabbles, never, interchange of words; This very question was on foot, some
forty years ago, in the hot chase of great Authors, but, whether through
the ingenuitie of the parties, or some ouer-ruling act of Divine Providence, it
soon died, without noise; so I wish it may now do; Rather let the weaker
title go away with the last word, then the Church shall be distracted; For
that Position of mine, which occasioned your vindication, you see it
sufficiently abetted, and determined, by so reverend authority, as admits no
exception; I dare say; No learned Divine of our own Church, or the foraine,
can but subscribe (in this our sense) to the judgment of these Worthies; To
draw forth therefore this cord of contention to any futher length, were no
less needless, then prejudicial to the public peace; He is not worthy to
be satisfied, that will yet wrangle.

As for those personal aspersions that are cast upon you by malice, be
persuaded to despise them. These Western parts, where your reputation is
deservedly precious, know your Zeal for Gods truth no less fervent, (though
better governed) then the most fiery of your Censurers; No man more hates
Popish Superstition; only your fault is, that you do not more hate error,
then injustice; and cannot abide wrong measure offered to the worst enemy.
Neither be you troubled with that idle exprobration of a Prebendary
retribution; who would care for a contumely so void of truth? God knows that
worthless gift was conferred upon you, ere this task came into either of our
thoughts; And who so knows the entire respects betwixt us, from our very
cradles, till this day, may well think that a Prebend of three pounds by
year, need not go for a fee, where there is so much, and so ancient cause of
dearness: I am sorry to see such rancour under the cote of Zeal; Surely,
nothing but mere malice can be guilty of this charge; no less then of that
other envious challenge of your decay of graces, of falling from your first
love, from industry to ease, from a weekly, to a Monthly preaching; When those
that know the state of your Tiuerton, the foure-parted division of that charge,
and your forced confinement to your own day, by public authority, both
Spiritual, and Temporal, must needs acquit you, and cry down the wrong of an
accuser; As for the vigor of Gods good graces in you, both common, and
sanctifying, all the Country are your ample witnesses; I that have interknowne
you from our childhoods, cannot but profess to find the entrance of your age
no less above the best of your youth in abilities, then in time; and still, no
less fruitful in promises; of increase, then in eminent performances. What
need I urge this? your Adversaries do enough feel your worth; So as (to speak
seriously) I cannot sufficiently wonder at the liberty of those men, who
professing a strict conscience of their ways, dare let their pens, or tongues
loose to so injurious and uncharitable detraction, whereof they know the just
auenger is in Heaven; It should not be thus betwixt Brethren, no not with
enemies.

For the main business; There wants not confidence on either side; I am
appealed to by hoth; an unmeet Judge, considering my so deep engagements. But,
if my vmperage may stand, I award an eternal silence to both parts; Sit down
in peace, then, you, and your worthy second; Whose young ripenes, and modest and
learned discourse, is worthy of better intertainment then contempt; And let
your Zealous Opponents say, that you have ouer-comne your selves in a resolved
cessation of pens; and them, in a love of peace.

Farewell, from your loving Friend and ancient Colleague.

IOS. EXON.

FINIS.

