Certain IRREFRAGABLE PROPOSITIONS WORTHY OF Serious Consideration.

By J. H. B. of Exon.

LONDON, Printed by M.F. for NATH: BUTTER. MDCXXXIX.

TO MY DREAD SOVEREIGN, THE KINGS MOST Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Matie,
AS one, whose heart (amongst many thousands) bleeds with the sad thoughts of
the woeful Divisions of our dear Fellow Subjects; and unfainedly pitties the
mis-guidance of those poor well-meaning souls amongst them, whose credulity
has heedlesly betrayed them into a zealous error; I have let fall these few
Propositions; which I have presumed to set down, not as in the way of a
Challenger; for, most (if not all) of them are such, as be not capable of
Contradiction, but rather of a faithful Remembrancer to my dear Brethren, of
those Points which they cannot but know, and yield: as well supposing, that
nothing but mere want of consideration can be guilty of this perilous
distraction, in them, who profess to love their King, and the Truth.

Now the good God of heaven open the eyes and hearts of us all, that we may
both see, and be sensible of the invaluable blessing of our peace, and the
happy freedom of his Gospel, which we do comfortably enjoy under Your
MAJESTY'S sweet and religious Government, to the wonder, and envy of all other
Nations; and compose the hearts of all your Native Subjects to meet Your
MAJESTY'S most gracious indulgence, with all humble thankfulness.

And the same God forbid that any of us should be weary of our happiness: and
be drawn to do any act that may (before all the world) pour shame upon our
holy profession; whose chief glory it has always hitherto been to render us
still loyal and obedient, and in this very regard, to triumph over the false
religion of our opposites. Such shall be ever the prayers of

Your Maties most humble, and faithful Subject, and ancientest Chaplain, JOS:
EXON.


Seven irrefragable Propositions concerning Oaths and Covenants.
1.
NO man may swear, or induce another man to swear unlawfully.

2.
IT is no lawful Oath that is not attended with Truth, Justice, and Judgment,
Jer. 4.2. the first whereof requires that the thing svvorn be true: the
second, that it be just: the third, that it be not undue, and unmeet meet to be
svvorn and undertaken.

3.
A Promissory Oath which is to the certain prejudice of another man's right,
cannot be attended with Justice.

4.
NO prejudice of another man's right can be so dangerous and sinful, as that
prejudice which is done to the right of public and Sovereign Authority.

5.
THe right of Sovereign Authority is highly prejudiced, when private subjects
incroach upon it; and shall, upon suspicion of the disavowed vowed intentions,
or actions of their Princes, combine, and bind themselves to enact, establish,
or alter any matters concerning Religion, without (and therefore much more if
against) the authority of their Lawful Sovereign.

6.
A Man is bound in Conscience to reverse and disclaim that which he was
induced unlawfully to engage himself by Oath to perform.

7.
NO oath is, or can be of force, that is made against a lawful oath formerly
taken; so as he that has sworn Allegiance to his Sovereign, and thereby
bound himself to maintain the right, power, and authority of his said
Sovereign, cannot by any second oath, be tied to do ought that may tend to the
infringement thereof: and if he have so tied himself, the Obligation is, ipso
facto, void and frustrate.

COROLLARIE.
IF therefore any sworn Subject shall by pretenses and persuasions, be
drawn to bind himself by Oath or Covenant, to determine, establish, or
alter any act concerning matter of Religion, without, or against the allowance
of Sovereign Authority, the act is unlawful and unjust, and the party so
engaged is bound in conscience to reverse and renounce his said act: Otherwise
(besides the horrible scandal which he shall dravv upon Religion) he does
manifestly incur the sin of the breach of the third and fifth Commandments.

Two, as undoubted Propositions, concerning Church Government.
1.
NO man living, no History, can show any vvel-allovved and settled national
Church in the whole Christian World, that has been governed otherwise then
by Bishops, in a meet and moderate imparity, ever since the times of Christ and
his Apostles, until this present Age.

2.
NO man living, no record of History can show any Lay-Presbyter that ever was
in the whole Christian Church, until this present Age.

COROLLARIE.
IF men would as easily learn as Christian wisdom can teach them, to
distinguish betwixt callings and persons, betwixt the substance of callings,
and the not-necessary appendances of them, betwixt the rules of Government, and
the errors of Execution, these ill-raised quarrels would dye alone.

Da pacem Domine, F.E.


