THE SOVLDIERS HONOR. WHEREIN By diverse inferences and gradations it is
euinced, that the Profession is just, necessary, and honorable; to be
practiced of some men, praised of all men. Together with a short Admonition
concerning Munition, to this honored City. Preached to the worthy Company of
Gentlemen, that exercise in the Artillery Garden: and now on their second
request, published to further use.

By THO. ADAMS.

EXODUS. 15.3. The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his Name.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip and Edward Blount, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the black Bear. 1617.

To the well deserving Captain EDWARD PANTON, the Captains and truly generous
Gentlemen, Citizens of London, of the Society of ARMS, practicing in the
Artillery Garden.
We are all Soldiers, as we are Christians: some more specially, as they are
men. You bear both Spiritual Arms against the enemies of your Salvation, and
Material Arms against the enemies of your Country. In both you fight under
the Colors of our great General Jesus Christ. By looking a little into this
mystical war, you shall the better understand how to be Milites cataphracti,
good Soldiers in all respects.

Job calls man's life a Warfare: and we find, Revel. 12. that there was war
in heaven: Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon; and the Dragon and
his Angels. Where by Heaven is meant the Church of God upon earth; as
Interpreters observe generally. For in Heaven above there is no warfare, but
welfare: no trouble, but Peace that passes all understanding: Now to this War
every Christian is a professed Soldier: not only for a spurt, for sport; as
young Gentlemen use for a time to see the fashion of the wars: but our Vow
runs thus in Baptism; that every man undertakes to fight manfully under
Christ's Banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil; and to continue his
faithful Soldier and Servant to his lives end. And this Battle let us fight
with courage, because we are warriors under that General that (without
question) shall conquer. Nil desperandu^ Christo Duce, and Auspice Christo.
They overcome by the blood of the Lamb. Reu 12.11. Though they loose some
blood, they shall be sure to win the victory.

Bernard supposes a great war between Christ the king of Jerusalem, and Satan
the K. of Babylon. The Watchman on the walls spies a Christian soldier to be
surprised by the Babylonian Host, and carried captive to their Tents. Hereof he
informs the king, who presently charge Timorem, the Fear of God, to run and
redeem the soldier. Fear comes thundering upon the adversary power, and
forces the^ trembling to surrender back their prey; which he is now returning
home to the king. Hereupon steps up Spiritus Tristitiae, Sadness; and cries, O
ye Babylonians, is it not a shame that one man should rescue a prisoner from
such a multitude? Well ne timeatis a Timore isto, be not afraid of this fellow
Fear: I will give you a stratagem how to reduce him. This must not be done
Mart sed art; not by force but by fraud: mark the event.

This Spirit of Sadness lies in the way, and falls in with the Soldiers,
colloguing as a friend, as a fiend; amica sed iniqua collocutione. Suspectles
Fear follows a little off. But Sorrow had brought the Soldier to the brinke
of a deep Pit, Desperation; and was even upon the point of thrusting him in;
The Watchman observes it, and again tells the king: who (quicker then thought)
dispatcheth a fresh supply of succor, Hope, to his delivery. Hope mounted upon
a swift horse, Desire; comes amain: and with the Sword of Gladness puts Sorrow
to flight; so quits him from the gulf of Despair. Once again is the Citizen
of heaven freed: now Hope sets him (being weary) on his own horse, Desire:
himself leads him with the Cord of Promised mercy: Fear comes after with a
switch made of Remembrance of sins, and so sets him forward to Jerusalem.

Hereupon the King of Babylon calls a Council; where some grieve, others rage,
all Hell rores, that they had lost a prisoner, of whom they lately thought
themselves so sure. There is not more joy with the Angels in heaven, then there
is sorrow with the devils in hell, for this Sinners conversion. But yet all is
not well, as the Watchman certifies the King of Omnipotence. The Soldier is
mounted upon Desire, Hope leads him, and Fear drives him amain: but I doubt
he comes too fast, because he has neither Bridle nor Saddle. Hereon the Kings,
that has everlasting care of all Christian souls, sends forth two of his
grave Counselors to him, Temperance and Prudence; Temperance gives him a
Bridle, that is Discretion; and Prudence a Saddle, that is Circumspection. This
is not all: Fear and Hope give him two Spurs; on the left heel Fear of
punishment, on the right, Expectation of bliss. Knowledge cleares his Eye,
Diligence opens his Ear, Obedience strengthens his Hand, Devotion rectifies
his Foot, Faith encourages his Heart. And if he want any thing, Prayer offers
him her service, to wait upon him as a faithful messenger; promising that
whenever he sends her to the King with a Petition, she will bring him back a
Benediction.

Thus as in a little Tablet you see the whole world; that all of us must be
Soldiers on earth militant, that will be Conquerors in heaven triumphant. But
are there not enemies in the flesh, so well as enemies in the Spirit? Is
mystical armor only necessary to a Christian, and is there no use of
material? No; Aequu^est Deum illis esse propitium, qui sibi non sunt
aduersarij; it is just, that God should be a friend to the^, that are not
enemies to themselves. I know prayers are good weapons: and Exo. 17. there was
more speed made to victory by lifting up of Moses hands, then of Ioshu's word.
He that would overcome his enemies on earth, must first prevail with his best
friend in heaven. If the mercy and strength of God be made thine by prayer,
fear not the adverse powers. To. 8. We shall be conquerors through him that
loved us. But is it enough to bend the knee, without stirring the hand? Shall
war march against us with thundering steps; and shall we only assemble our
selves in the Temples, lie prostrate on the pauements, lift up our hands and
eyes to heaven, and not our weapons against our enemies? Shall we beat the air
with our voices, and not their bosoms with our swords? only knock our own
breasts, and not knock their heads? Sure, a religious conscience never taught a
man to neglect his life, his liberty, his estate, his peace. Piety and
Policy are not opposites: he that taught us to be harmless as Doves, bad us
also be wise as Serpents. Give way to a fiction: fables are not without their
useful morals. A boy was molested with a dog; the Friar taught him to say a
Gospel by heart, and warranted this to allay the dogs fury. The mastiffe
spying the boy, flies at him: he begins (as it were) to conjure him with his
Gospel. The dog (not capable of religion) approaches more violently. A neighbor
passing by, bids the boy take up a stone: he did so, and throwing at the dog,
escaped. The Friar demands of the lad, how he sped with his charm. Sir (quoth
he) your Gospel was good, but a stone with the Gospel did the deed. The Curs of
Antichrist are not afraid of our Gospel, but of our stones: let us fight, and
they will fly.

Fight say you; why who strikes us? Yield that no enemies do, are we sure that
none will do? When our security has made us weak, and their policy has
made the^ strong, we shall find the^ (like that troublesome neighbor) knocking
at our door early in the morning, before we are up; when it will be too late for
us to say, If we had known of your coming, we would have provided better
cheer for you. They thank you, they will take now such as they find, for they
purpose to be their own caruers, and the worst morsels they swallow shall be
your hearts. Let us therefore like good housekeepers, who^ such vnbidde^ guests
come, have always a breakfast ready for the^: which if we give the^ heartily,
they shall have small stomach to their dinners.

Be you but ready for war, and I durst warrant your peace. Whilst you are
dissolute, they grow resolute. Ludouicus Viues reports, that the young nobles
and gallants in a city of Spain were fallen to such leuitie of carriage; that
in stead of marching to the sound of a Drum, they were dancing leuolto's to the
Lute in a Ladies chamber: their Beauers were turned to Beuer hats. Every one
had his mistress, and spent his time in courting Venus; but Mars was shut out
at the back gate. The ancient Magistrates observing this, consulted what
should become of that country, which these men must govern after they were
dead. Hereupon they conferred with the women, their daughters, the Ladies: whom
they instructed to forbear their wonted favors, to despise the fantastical
amorists, and to afford no grace to them that had no grace in themselves. This
they obeyed diligently, and wrought so effectually, that the Gentlemen soon
began to spy some difference betwixt Effeminatenes and Noblenes. And at last
in honorable and serviceable designs excelled all their Ancestors. If we had
in England such Ladies, (though I do not wish them from Spain) we should
have such Lords. Honor should go by the Banner, not by the Barue: and
Reputation be valued by valor, not measured by the acre: there would be no
ambition to be carpet-Knights.

How necessary the readiness of Arms, and of men practiced to those Arms,
has been to the common good; what Nation has not found, either in the habit
to their safety, or in the privation to their ruin? Only we bless our
selves in our peace; and say to them that advise us to military preparations,
as the Devils said to Christ, that we come to torment them before their time.
But let them rest, that thus will rust: and for your selves, worthy Gentlemen,
keep your Arms bright; and thereby your names, your virtues, your souls: you
shall be honored in good men's hearts, whilst wanton and effeminate Gulls shall
weaue and wear their own disgraces. Spernite vos sperni: there are none that
think basely of you, whose bosoms are acquainted with other then ignoble
thoughts. But I have held you too long in the gates, unless I could promise
you the sight of a better City. Yet enter in, and view it with your eyes: it
has already entered your ears; God grant it may enter all our hearts. So your
selves shall be renowned, our Peace secured, and the Lords great Name
glorified, through Jesus Christ.

Yours to be commanded in all Christian services, THO. ADAMS.
THE SOVLDIERS HONOR. Wherein by diverse inferences and gradations it is
euinced, that the Profession is just, necessary, and honorable: to be
practiced of some men, praised of all men. Together with a short Admonition,
concerning Munition, to this honored City.
IVDG. 5. VER. 8. They chose new gods: then was war in the gates: was there a
shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?

My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly
among the people. Bless ye the Lord.


IT was a custom in the Heathen world, after victory to sing songs of Triumph.

This fashion was also observed among the Jews; as we frequently find it.
After a great conquest of the Philistines, the people of Israel sung; Saul has
slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand. When Joshua had overthrown
those five Kings; Josh. 10.12.
at whose prayer the Sun stood still, and the day was made longer then ever
the world saw before, or since; the people sung, The Sun stood still in
Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aialon. When Israel had crossed the red
Sea with dry feet, and the returning waters had drowned their pursuing
enemies; Moses and the people sung this Song, Exodus 15.3.
The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his Name, etc. Here Debora having
conquered Sisera, with his nine hundred Chariots of iron, she sung this
triumphant Song to the Lord; Praise ye the Lord for the auenging of Israel:
Hear O ye Kings, I will sing to the Lord.

I have chosen two strains of this Song; from which, as they shall teach me,
so I purpose to teach you, to bless the Lord that teaches us all. So the
Psalmist; It is the Lord that teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to
fight. This Lord give me a tongue to sing it, you ears to hear it, and us all
hearts to embrace it.

In all I observe two generals, which express the nature of the two verses.
There is great Affliction. There is great Affection.

The Affliction; They chose new gods: then was war in the gates, etc. The
Affection; My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people: Bless ye the Lord. In the Affliction, me thinks I
find three points of war: The Alarm; They chose new gods. The Battle; Then
was war in the gates. The Forlorn hope; Was there a shield or a spear seen
among forty thousand in Israel?


Here is 1. Superstitio populi, the Apostacy of the people; they chose new
gods. This I call the Alarm; for Impietas ad arma vocat, Ungodliness calls to
war. If we fight against God, we provoke God to fight against us. Then 2.
Inflictio Belli, a laying on of punishment: God meets their abomination with
desolation; the hand of Justice against the hands of unrighteousness; then was
war in the gates: This I call the Battle. Then 3. Defectus remedij, a
destitution of remedy: Was there a shield or spear secne among forty
thousand in Israel? Sin had not only brought war, but taken away defense;
in praelia trudit inermes, sent them unarmed to fight. And this I call the
Forlorn hope. You see the particulars: now ordine quidque suo.

The Alarm.
They chose new gods. Their Idolatry may be aggrauated by three circumstances
or degrees. They are all declining, and downwards: there is Malum, Peius,
Pessimum; evil, worse, and worst of all.

1. They chose. Here is Electio, non compulsio; a frank choice, no compelling:
They voluntarily took to themselves, and betook themselves to other gods.
Naaman begged mercy for a sin, to which he seems enforced, if he would
reserve the favor of his King, and peace of his estate: and therefore cried,
2. King. 5.18.
Be merciful to me in this; when I bow with my master in the house of Rimmon,
in this the Lord pardon me. But here is spontanea malitia, a wilful
wickedness; they chose. There is Evil, the first degree.

2. Gods. What? a people trained up in the knowledge of one God: Jehovah, I am;
and there is none besides me. Vnissimus (says Bernard) si non est vnus, non
est; if he be not one, he is none. The Bees have but one king, flocks and
herds but one leader, the sky but one Sun, the world but one God. Immemsus
Deus est, quia scilicet omnia mensus.
Innumerabilis est, vnus enim Deus est.
Says the Epigrammatist. God is therefore innumerable, because he is but one.
It was for the Heathen, that had (says Augustine) mentes amentes, intoxicate
minds and reprobate hearts, to have plurimos deos, a multitude of gods. They
had gods of the Water, gods of the Wind, gods of the Corn, gods of the Fruits:
Aug.
Nec omnia commemoro, quia me pig et, quod ill is non pudet. Neither do I
mention all, because it grieves me to speak, what they were not ashamed to
do. Prudentius says, they had so many things for their god, as there were
things that were good. Quicquid humus, pelagus, coelum mirabile gignunt,
Id duxere deos, colles, freta, flumina, flammas.
Insomuch, that (...). But Israel knew, that vnicus Deus, there was but one
God; that others were dij titulares, gods in name; theirs only Deus tutelaris,
Deuteronomy. 32.31.
God in power. Their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves
being judges. Do these bring other gods in competition with him? Peius, this
is worse.

3. New gods. Will any Nation change their gods? no: the Ekromites will keep
their god, though it be Belzeebub: the Ammonites will keep their god, though
it be Melchom: the Syrians will stick to their god, though it be Rimmon: the
Philistims will not part with their god, though it be Dagon. And shall Israel
change Jehovah, viuentem Deum, the living God? Pessimum; this is worst of all.

These be the wretched degrees of Isreal's sin: God keep England from such
Apostacy. We have one God: let the Romists choose them another: as the
Canonists style their Pope, Dominus Deus noster Papa; Ephesians. 4.6.
our Lord God the Pope. But we have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; one
God, and Father of all, who is above all, and thr^^gh all, and in us all. We
have one God in professi^n: this God grant, that we have but one in affection.
But vnum colimus ore, multos cord: we worship one with our mouths, many in
our hearts. Tot sunt nostrae deitates, quot cupiditates: we have so many gods,
as we have lusts. Honor is the amb^tious man's god: Pleasure the voluptuous
man's god: Riches the covetous man's god. Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus
habet. This is the Trinity the world worships. These three Tyrants, like those
three Romans, Caesar, Crassus, and Pompey, have shared the world between them;
and left God least, that owes all.

The people of Israel, when they had turned beast, and calued an Idol, cried
in triumph, These are thy gods, Exodus 32.4.
O Israel. So we may speak it with horror and amazement of soul, of these
three Idols; These are thy gods, O England. The Idols of the Heathen were
Silver and Gold, says the Psalmist. It is but inuerting the sentence: Mutato
nomine nos sumus fabula; change but the names, and we^ are the subject or whom
the tale is told. Their Idols were Silver and Gold; and Silver and Gold are our
Idols. He that railed on Belsebub, pulled all Ekrom about his ears: he that
slighted Melchom, provoked the Ammonites. But he that condemns Mammon,
speaks against all the world.

But if God be our God, Mammon must be our slave: for he that is the servant of
God, must be the master of his money. If God be our King, he must be our King
only: for the Bed and the Throne brook no riualls. When the Soldiers had
chosen Valentinian Emper^^, Theodoret.
they were consulting to join with him a partner. To whom Valentinian replied;
It was in your power to give me the Empire, when I had it not: now I have it,
it is not in your power to give me a partner. God must be our God alone. Aequum
est deos fingere, ac Deum negare. It is all one to choose new gods, and to deny
the true God. If therefore we will have Nouum deum, a new god; we shall have
Nullum Deum, no God. No, let the Heaten choose new gods; thou O Father of
mercy, and Lord of heaven and earth, be our God for ever. This is the Alarm:
we come now to

The Battle.
Then was war in the gates. If Israel give God an Alarm of wickedness, God
will give them a Battle of wretchedness. If thou, O Israel, wilt peccare in
extremo tuo, God will punire in extremo suo: if thou sin in thy extremity,
God will punish in his extremity. Idolatry is an extreme impiety; therefore
against it the gate of heaven is barred. 1. Cor 6.9.
Know ye not, that no Idolater shall inherit the Kingdom of God? The
Idolater would thrust God out of his Throne, therefore good reason that God
should thrust him out of his Kingdom. The punishment is also extreme: and
has in it a great portion of misery, though not a proportion answerable to
the iniquity. For it deserves not only war and slaughter in the gates of
earth, but eternal death in the gates of hell. But not to extend the
punishment beyond the proposed limits; nor, where it offers the company a
mile, to compel it to go with us twain: let us view it, as it is described.
And we shall find it aggrauated by three circumstances. A Natura. War;
there is the Nature of it. A Tempore. Then; there is the Time of it. A Loco. In
the gates; there is the Place of it.
There is Quid, Quando, Vbi. What, When, and Where. War, that is the Quid.
Then, that is the Quando. In the gates, that is the Vbi. Then was war in the
gates.

The Nature of it; What, war.
War is that miserable desolation, that finds a land before it like Eden; and
leaves it behind it like Sodom and Gomorrah, a desolate and forsaken
wilderness. Let it be sowed with the seed of man and beast, as a field with
wheat; war will eat it up. Bellum, quasi minime bellum: or rather in
vicinitie to the name, mos belluarum. For men, Solummodo iustum, quibus
necessarium: not just, but when it is necessary, and cannot well be avoided.
Not to be waged by a Christian without observation of Saint Augustines rule.
Esto bellando pacificus. In war seek peace: though thy hand be bloody, let
thy heart be peaceable. Pacem debet habere voluntas, bellum necessitas. Let
necessity put war into the hands: religion keep peace in the heart. In it
self it is a miserable punishment. This is the Nature; What.

The time, or Quando: Then.
When was this war? Tempore Idolatrico; in the time of Idolatry. They chose
new gods; Then. When we fight against God, we incense him to fight against us.
Indeed we have all stricken him: which of us has not offered blows to that
sacred Deity? Our oaths proffer new wounds to the sides of Jesus Christ: and
our merciless oppressions persecute him through the bowels of the poor. Saul,
Saul, why pesecutest thou me? Act. 9.4.
Saul strikes upon earth, Jesus Christ suffers in heaven. Yet if timely
repentance step in, we escape his blows, though he has not escaped ours. He
is ready to say, as Cato to the man that hurt him in the Bath, (when in sorrow
he asked him forgiveness) Non memini me percussum; I do not remember that I
was stricken.

But if Isreal's sins strike up alarm, Isreal's God will give battle. If they
choose new gods, the true God will punish. Then was war.

It is a fearful thing when God fights. When God took off the
chariot-wheeles of the Egyptians, Exodus 14.25.
they cried; Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for
them against the Egyptians. The heathen gods could not defend their friends,
nor subdue their enemies, nor avenge themselves. Mars vltor galeam quoque per
didit, and res
Non potuit seruare suas.
Their stout god of war might loose his helmet, his target, the victory;
unable to deliver himself. But God is the Lord of Hosts: Psalm. 62.11.
God has spoken once: twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God.
Once, twice, yea a thousand times have we heard it, read it, seen it, that God
is powerful. That as Augustine: Verba toties inculcata, vera sunt, viua sunt,
sana sunt, plana sunt. Things so often repeated and pressed, must needs be
plain and peremptory. God has soldiers in heaven, soldiers on earth,
soldiers in hell, that fight under his press. So that he has Mill nocendi
arts; a thousand ways to avenge himself.

In heaven he has armies; of fire to burn Sodom: of floods to drown a
world: of haile-stones to kill the Amorites: of stars, as here Debora sings.
They fought from heaven: Ver. 20.
the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. And whilst Israel slew
their enemies at their Generals prayer; Josh. 11.
the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aialon. Yea
there are heavenly soldiers. 2. King. 19.35.
Luke 2. Suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host.
One of these celestial soldiers slew in one night above an hundred thousand
Assyrians.

Below he has Seas to drown Pharaoh; Swallows of the earth to devour
Corah. With fierce Lions, fell Dragons, hissing Serpents, crawling Worms, he
can subdue the proudest Rebels.

In hell he has an army of fiends, though bound in chains that they shall
not hurt the faithful; yet let loose to terrify the wicked. There was an
evil Spirit to vex Saul; foul Spirits in the Gospel, made some deaf, others
dumb, and cast many into fire and into waters.

Thus stands the wicked man environed with enemies: God and man, Angels and
Devils, heaven and earth, birds and beasts, others and himself, maintain
this war against himself. God may be patient a long time; but Laes a
patientia fit furor, patience too much wronged becomes rage: and Furor arma
ministrat, wrath will quickly afford weapons. Serior esse solet vindicta
seuerior.

The sorest vengeance is that which is long in coming; and the fire of
indignation burns the hoter, because God has been cool and tardie in the
execution. Impiety and Impunitie are not sworn sisters but if Wickedness
beat the Drum, Destruction will begin to march. The ruined Monuments and
Monasteries in those Provinces, seem to tell the passengers; Hic fuit
hostilitas, war has been here. We may also read in those rude heaps, Hic
fuit iniquitas, Sin has been here. It was Idolatry rather then war that
pulled down those walls. If there had been no enemy to raze them, they
should have fallen alone, rather then hide so much superstition and impiety
under their guilty roofes. In the tenth of this book, when the Israelites
served Baalim and Ashtaroth, Ver. 6.
the gods of Syria, and the gods of Sidon, then was the anger of the Lord hot
against them, and he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the
hands of the children of Ammon. Then those enemies destroyed their Cities, and
depopulated their Countries: making them spectacles of Cruelty and Justice;
Cruelty of man, Justice of God. This is the Time, When.

The Place, or Vbi.
In the gates. This is an extreme progress of war, to come so near as the
Gates. If it had been in terra inimicorum, in the land of their enemies: a
preparation of war a great way off: Sonus hostilitatis, the noise of war.
As Ierem. 6. Behold a people comes from the North, a Nation shall be raised
from the sides of the earth. Their voice roareth like the Sea: and, we have
heard the fame thereof. Here is war, but coming, raising, roaring: audiuimus
tantum; we have only heard the noise of it.

Yea, if it had come but to the coasts, and invaded the borders: as the
Philistines did often forage the skirts of Israel; yet it had been somewhat
tolerable: for then vidimus tantum; we have but seen it only. Ostendisti
populo grauia. Psalm. 60. Thou have shown thy people grievous things: showed,
but not inflicted: shaken the rod, but not scourged us. But here venit ad
limina bellum; war is come to their thresholds, to the Zenith and heart of
the land; to defy them in the very gates. And now they more then hear, or see
it; sentiunt, they feel it.

The Gates in Israel, were those places where they sat in Justice: as we may
frequently read, they gave judgment in the Gates. 2. King. 7.
They distributed the Corn in the Gates. They distributed the Corn in the
Gates, where that unbelieving Prince was trodden to death. And Absalon sat in
the Gates, and said to every man that had a Controversy: 2. Sam. 15.3.
See thy matters are good and right; but here is no man deputed of the King to
hear thee. So that Pacis loca bellum occupat; War possesses the places of
Peace, and thrusts her out of her wonted residence and presidence, the Gates.
In the Gates? War is not then in the right Vbi: as they said of Pope Sixtus;
because he delighted in bloody wars, that he ill became the Seat of Peace:
according to that Epitaph on him.

Non potuit soeuum vis vlla extinguere Sixtum,
Audito tandem nomine Pacis obit
No war could kill Sixtus: but so soon as ever he heard of peace, he
presently died. War is got very far, when it possesses the Gates.

You now see the punishment. Happy are we, that cannot judge the terrors of
war, but by report and hearsay: That never saw our Towns and Cities
burning; our houses rifled, our Temples spoiled, our wives ravished, our
children bleeding dead on the pauements, or sprawling on the merciless pikes.
We never heard the groans of our own dying, and the clamours of our enemies
insulting, confusedly sounding in our distracted ears: the wife breathing out
her life in the arms of her husband; the children snatched from the breasts of
their mothers; as by the terror of their slaughters to aggrauate their own
ensuing torments. We have been strangers to this misery in passion, let us
not be so in compassion. Let us think we have seen these calamities with our
neighbors eyes, and felt them through their sides.

When Aeneas Syluius reports the fall of Constantinople; the murdering of
children before the parents eyes, the Nobles slaughtered like beasts, the
Priests to^^^ in pieces, the holy Virgins incestuously abuse^ he cries out, O
miseram vrbis faciem; Oh wre^^hed face of a City. Many of our neighbors have
been whirled about in these bloody tumults: they have heard the dismal cries
of cruel adversaries, Kill, Kill; the shrikes of women and infants; the
thunders of those murdering pieces in their ears; their Cities and Temples
flaming before their eyes; Aeneid. II.
their streets swimming with blood: when Permisti caede virorum
Semianimes voluuntur equi.
Men and horses confusedly wallowing in their mingled bloods.

Only to us the iron gates of war have been shut up: we sit and sing under
our own Figge-trees; we drink the wine of our own Vineyards; Psalm. 144.14.
There is no breaking in, nor going out, no complaining in our strectes: We
have the Peace of God, let us be thankful to the God of Peace. But it is good
to be merry and wise: Let not our peace make us secure. The Jews, in their
great Feast, had some malefactor brought forth to them: Matthew. 27.15.
so let it be one good part of our solemnity, to bring forth that malefactor,
Security; a rust grown over our souls in this time of peace, and send him
packing. We have not the blessings of God by entaile, or by lease; but hold
all at the good will of our Landlord: and that is but during our good
behavior. We have not so many blessings, but we may easily forfeit them by
disobedience. When we most feared war, God sent peace: now we most brag of
peace, God prevent war.

Do not our sins give an alarm to Heaven, and shall not Heaven denounce
war against us? Nulla pax impijs, Esa. 57.21.
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. 2. King. 9.22.
Ioram said, is it peace, Iehu? But he answered, What peace so long as the
whoredoms of thy mother Iezebel and her witchcrafts are so many? They are our
sins, that threaten to loose us our best friend, God: and if God be not our
friend, we must look for store of enemies. Our great iniquities hearten our
adversaries: they profess to build all their wickedness against us, upon our
wickedness against God. If they did not see us choose new gods, they would
never have hope to bring war to our gates. If we could prevail against our
own evils* we should prevail against all our enemies. The powers of Rome,
the powers of Hell should not hurt us, if we did not hurt our selves. Let us
cast down our Iesabels, that bewitch us; those lusts, whereby we run a
whoring after other gods: and then Peace shall stand Centinell in our Turrets;
Psalm. 147.
God shall then strengthen the bars of our gates, and establish peace in our
borders. Let us, according to that sweet Singers doctrine, Psalm. 34.14. Depart
from evil, and do good; then seek peace, and pursue it. Yea, do well, and
thou shall not need to pursue it; Peace will find thee without seeking.
Augustine, Fiat iustitia, and habebis pacem; Live righteously, and live
peaceably. Quietness shall find out Righteousness, wheresoever she lodges.
But she abhors the house of evil: Peace will not dine, where Grace has not
first broken her fast. Let us embrace Godliness; Phil. 4.7.
and the Peace of God that passes all understanding, shall preserve our hearts
and minds in Jesus Christ. The Lord fix all our hearts upon himself; that
neither our selves, nor our children after us, nor their generations, so long
as the Sun and Moon endures, may ever see War in the Gates of England.
Thus we have run thorough the Battle, and considered the terrors of a
bloody War; and now come to

The Forlorn Hope.
Was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel? Was there?
There was not: This question is a plain negative. Here is Defectus remedij,
the want of help: great misery, but no remedy: not a Spear to offend; no,
not a Shield to defend. War, and war in the Gates, and yet neither
offensive nor defensive weapon? Miserrima priuatio, quae omnem tollit ad
habitum regressum. A miserable destitution, which admits of no restitution,
that can never be restored to the former habit. It takes away all, both
present possession, and future possibility; Rem and Spem, Help, and Hope.

But suppose, that only some one company had wanted, yet if the rest of the
forces had been armed, there were some comfort. No, not a shield nor spear
among many, among a thousand, among many thousand, among forty thousand: An
Host of men, and not a weapon? grievous exigent! If it had been any defect but
of armor, or in any other time but the time of war, or only in one City of
Israel, and not in all. But is there war, and war in the gates, and do
many, even thousands, want? what, armor enough? so they might easily; nay, but
one shield, one spear? miserable calamity!

They were in great distress under the reign of Saul,1. Sam. 13. The spoilers
came out of the Camp of the Philistines, 1. Sam. 13.22.
in three companies, etc. Yet it came to pass in the day of battle, that
there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that
were with Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was
there found. Here was a great want; three bands of the enemies, and but two
swords: yet there were then two; and it so pleased God that those two were
enough. As the Apostles said to Christ, Luke 22.^8.
Ecce duo gladij; Master, here are two swords: and he answered, It is enough.
But two swords for so many, and against so many; a word of great misery. But
God says, Satis est, those two are enough, a word of great mercy. He can give
victory with two swords, with one sword, with no sword: and so he did here,
that convinced Israel might see, it was the Lord that fought for them; and so
be moved to bless the Lord.

You see now all the parts of the Affliction: the Alarm in sin, the Battle
in war, and the Forlorn hope in the want of remedy. Two useful
observations may hence be deduced.

1. That war at some times is just and necessary; indeed just when it is
necessary; as here. For shall it come to the gates, and shall we not meet it?
Yea shall we not meet it before it come near the gates? There is then a
season when war is good and lawful. Saint Augustine observes, that when the
Soldiers, among the rest of the people, came to John the Baptist to be
catechized: What shall we do? He did not bid them leave off being soldiers,
but taught them to be good soldiers. Do violence to no man, Luke 3.14.
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages. Milites instruit,
militare non prohibet: he directs them to be good men, not forbids them to be
warlike men.

God himself is termed a Man of war: and he threatens war: Exodus 17.16.
The Lord has sworn that he will have war with Amalek from generation to
generation. Judge. 3.
Many of the Philistines, Canaanites, and Sidonians were left to teach Israel
war. Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis. Too much warmth of prosperity
hatcheth up luxury. There must be some exercise, lest men's spirits grow
restie. The standing water turns to putrefaction.
And virtue is no virtue but in action.
Sings the divine Poet. Idleness does neither get, nor save, but loose. If
execise be good, those are best which tend to most good. The exercises of war
step in here, to challenge their deserved praise. As with wooden wasters men
learn to play at the sharp: so practice in times of peace makes ready for
the time of war. It is good to be doing, that when Satan comes, inueniat
occupatum; he may find thee honestly busied. The bird so long as she is upon
wing, flying in the air, is safe from the fowler: but when the sits lasie on a
tree, pruning her feathers, a little shot quickly fetches her down. So long
as we are well exercised, the devil has not so fair a mark of us: but idle,
we lie prostrate objects to all the shot of his temptations. Now there are two
cautions obserueable in the justness of wars. 1. that they be undertaken
iusta causa, upon just and warrantable cause. 2. that they be prosecuted bono
animo, with an honest mind.

1. The Cause must be just. For Frangit and attollit vires in milite causa.

The cause does either encourage or discourage the soldier, indeed it makes
or marres all. This just cause is threefold, well comprised in that verse,
Paxpopuli, Patriaeque salus, and Gloria Regni.

The peace of the people, the health of the Country, and the glory of the
Kingdom.

1. The Peace of the people: for we must aim by war to make way for peace.
We must not desire truce to this end, that we may gather force against an
unjust war: but we desire a just war, that we may settle a true peace. So
Ioab heartned his brother Abishai and the choice men of Israel against the
Syrians. 2. Sam. 10.12.
Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our People, and for the
Cities of our God.

2. The health and safety of our Country: Periclitantur aliqui, ne pereant
omnes, Some must beendangered, that all may not be destroyed. And I would here,
that the dull and heavy spirits of our rotten worldlings would consider.
Quorum causa; for whose sake these worthy men spare neither their pains nor
their purses, in this noble exercise. Even for theirs; theirs, and their
childrens, that so contemptibly judge of them.

If ware should be in the gates, whither would you run for defense, where
shroud your selves, but under their Colors which you have despised? Who should
keep the Usurers money from pillaging? all his Obligations, Morgages, and
Statutes from burning? Who should keep the foggie Epicure, in his soft chair
after a full meal fast asleep? Who should maintain the nice Lady in her
Caroch, whirling through the popular streets? Who should reserve those
delicate parlours, and adorned chambers from fire and flames? Who should save
Virgins from rauishment, children from famishment, mothers from astonishment?
City and Country, Temples and Palaces, Traffickes and Markets, Ships and
Shops; Westminster Hall and the Exchange, two of the richest acres of ground in
England, from plowing up; from having it said, I am seges vbi Troia fuit, corn
grows were London stood; all from ruin; who but the Soldier under God?
Judge. 7.18.
The sword of God, and the sword of Gideon?

3. The Glory of the Kingdom, and that is Euangelium Christi, the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. Wars for God are called Gods battles. The destruction of their
cities that revolt from God to Idols, and the whole spoil, is for the Lord: it
is the Lords battle, and the Lords spoil. Deuteronomy. 13. Saul thus encouraged
David to war; 1. Sam. 18.17.
Be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lords battles. The most and best
warriors were called the Sons of God. So Abraham, Moses, David, Joshua,
Gedeon; and that Centurion was a man of war, whose praise Christ so sounded
forth in the Gospel, Mat. 8.10.
I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. And the best wars are
for God: so Christians bear in their Ensigns the Cross, to show that they
fight for the honor of Jesus Christ.

When therefore there is hazard to loose the peace of the people, the safety
of the Country, the glory of all, the Gospel of our Savior Christ; here is
just cause of war. They that go forth to fight upon these terms, shall
conquer. Causa iubet melior superos sperare secundos.

A good cause gives assurance of victory. God shall martial that army, yea
himself will sight for them.

2. The next caution, after a good ingression, is to be sure of a good
prosecution. We say of the Surgeon, that he should have a Ladies hand, and
a Lions heart: but the Christian soldier should have a Ladies heart, and a
Lions hand. I mean, though he deal valiant blows, yet not destroy without
compassion. Fortitudo virtus bellica, man suetudo virtus bella. Though
manfulnesse be a warlike virtue, yet gentleness is a Christian virtue. The
sword should not be bloudied, but in the heat of battle. And after victory,
when a soldier looks on the dead bodies of his enemies, pity should sit in
his eyes rather then insultation. He should not strike the yielding, nor prey
upon prostrate fortunes.

I know that diverse aspersions are cast upon men of this rank, They think
that many take arms, Non vt seruiant, sed vt soeuiant; not to serve for their
Country, but to rage and forage: making their Cote-armour a defense for
drinking, whoring, swearing, dicing; and such disorders. As if it were
imposible, that a tender conscience should dwell in one bosom with a valiant
heart. Isidor.
Olim castra quasi casta dicebantur; quia castratur in ijs libido. The Camp
seemed to take the denomination, says he, from chastity; because in the
wars lust was beaten down. But now Venus is gotten into the arms of Mars.
Militat omnis amans, and habet sua castra Cupido.

Cupid has displayed his Colors, and pitched his Tent in the midst of the
Army; as if it were the only bravery of a Soldier, to drink valiant
healths to his Mistress. One writes of the Turks, that though they are the
most monstrous beasts at home in peace, and sin even against nature: yet in
wars caute and cast viuunt, they live charily and chastely. Not as the Friars
say, Caute si non cast: the Turks are better then the Friars in this. Vitia
sua domi deponunt, says he: they leave all their naughtiness behind them at
home. But he adds withal to our reproach, Christianus assumit: the Christians
there take up those vices, as if they found them sown in a pitched field. That
there is often, says he, Grauior turba meretricum, quam militum: it is hard to
judge, whether the number of soldiers or of harlots be greater. Hence it is
said, that Rara fides pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur.

There is so little fidelity and piety in men that follow the wars. These
be the common inuectiues against Soldiers.

But now do not many tax them, that are worse themselves? Who can endure to
hear an Usurer tax a Pillager? an Epicure find fault with a Drinker? a
man-eating Oppressor with a gaming Soldier? Quis tulerit Gracchum de seditione
loquentem?

Who can abide to hear Gracchus declaine against sedition? or the Fox preach
peace to the Geese? Say that some are faulty: must therefore the whole
Profession be scandalized? Will you despise the word of God, because some that
preach it are wicked men? no; Dent ocyus omnes,
Quas meruere pati, sic stet sententia poenas.
Lay the fault where it should lie: be they only blamed that deserved it. Some
persons may be reproueable, but the Profession is honorable.

The martialist may be a good Christian: in all likelihood should be the best
Christian. Mors semper in oculo, therefore should be semper in animo. How
should death be out of that man's mind, that has it always in his eye? His
very calling teaches him to expound Saint Paul; who calls the Christians life
a Warfare. His continual dangers to the good soldier, are as it were so many
meditations of death. If he die in peace, he falls breast to breast with
virtue. If in war, yet he dies more calmely then many an Usurer does in his
chamber. Though he be conquered, yet he is a Conqueror: he may loose the day in
an earthly field, but he winnes the day against Sin, Satan, and Hell; and
sings with Paul, like a dying Swan; 2. Tim. 4.7.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
now there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.

2. The other inference that may hence be deduced, is this, That Munition and
Arms should at all times be in readiness. How grievous was it, when Iabin had
such an Host, and not a shield or spear among forty thousand in Israel? For
our selves, we have not our Peace by Patent; we know not how long it will
continue: let us provide for War, in trayning up some to military practices.
If War do come, it is a labor well spent: if War do not come, it is a
labor very well lost. Wise men in fair weather repair their houses against
Winter storms; the Ant labors in harvest, that she may feast at Christmasse.
Sen.
Diu apparandum est bellum, vt vincas celerius; Be long in preparing for war,
that thou may overcome with more speed: Longa belli praeparatio celerem
facit victoriam; A long preparation makes a short and quick victory.

Tut we say, if that day comes, we shall have Soldiers enough; we will all
fight. O dulce bellum inexpertis; They that never tried it, think it a
pleasure to fight. We shall fight strangely, if we have no weapons; and use
our weapons more strangely, if we have no skill: Veget. de re militari, lib. 1.
cap. 20.
Non de pugna, sed de fuga cogitant, qui nudi in acie exponuntur ad vulnera;
Their minds are not so much of fighting, as on flying, that are exposed to the
fury of war without weapons; neither will all be soldiers that dare talk
of wars: Non dat tot pugna socios, quot dat mensa conviuas; All that are your
fellow guests at the Table, will not be your fellow soldiers in the Field.

Could any tongue forbear to tax the rich men of this honorable City, if
their houses be altogether furnished with Plate, Hangings, and Carpets, and not
at all with Weapons and Armor, to defend the Commonwealth? How fondly do
they love their Riches, that will not lay out a little to secure the rest? When
the Turk invaded the Greek Empire; before the siege was laid to
Constantinople, the Metropolitan City, the Emperor sollicites the subjects
to contribute somewhat to the repair of the walls, and such military
provision and prevention: But the subjects drew back, and pleaded want.
Hereupon the Turk enters, and conquers: and in ransacking the City, when he
found such abundance of wealth in private houses, he lift up his hands to
Heaven, and blessed himself, that they had so much riches, and would suffer
themselves to be taken, for not using them.

So if ever London should be surprised by her enemies, which the wonted mercies
of our God defend for ever; would they not wonder to find such infinite
treasures in your private houses, when yet you spent none of them to provide
shield or spear, munition to defend your selves? What scope can you imagine,
or propound to your own hearts wherein your riches may do you service? You
can tell me, nay I can tell you. You reserve one bag for pride, another for
belly-cheare, another for lust, yet another for contention and suits in law. O
the madness of us Englishmen! we care not what we spend in civil iarres,
that yet will spend nothing to avoid foreign wars. They say, the Jew will
spend all on his Pasches, the Barbarian on his Nuptials, and the Christian on
his quarrels, or lawsutes. We need not make our selves enemies by our riches,
we have enough made to our hands. Christ says; Luke 16.9.
Make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness. Make to your selves
friends by your charity, not adversaries by your litigation. Seek peace,
says the Prophet, and pursue it: seek peace, war will come fast enough. And
if it do come, it will hardly be made welcome. The Spaniards have often
threatened, often assaulted; ever been prevented, ever infatuated. Take we
heed, if they do prevail, they will be revenged once for all. God grant we
never try their mercy. Whether they come like Lions rampant, or like Foxes
passant, or like Dogs couchant, they intend nothing but our ruin and
desolation.

O Lord, if we must fall by reason of our monstrous sins, let thine own hand
cast us down, not theirs: for there is mercy in thy blows. When that woeful
offer was made to David, of three things; Choose thee one of them, that I may
do it unto thee. Either seven years famine, or three months persecution, or
three days plague. He answered unto Gad, 2. Sam. 24.14.
and by him unto God: I am in a wonderful strait: but suddenly resolves; Let
us now fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are great; and let me
not fall into the hands of man. If it be thy will, O Lord to plague us, take
the rod into thine own hands: do thou strike us. -- liceat perituro viribus
ignis,
Igne perire tuo; clademque authore leuare.
Why should thou sell us into the hands of those Idolatrous Romists, that
will give thine honor to stocks and stones; bless this or that Saint and not
be thankful to thy Majesty, that gives them the victory. For thine own
sake, be merciful to us; yea thou have been merciful: therefore we praise
thee; 1. Cor. 15.57.
and sing with thy Apostle: Thanks be to God, which gives us the victory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

I have held you long in the Battle: it is now high time to sound a Retreat.
But as I have spoken much of Isreal's Affliction, so give me leave to speak one
word of the Prophetesses Affection: and of this only by way of exhortation. My
heart is set on the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly
among the people: Bless ye the Lord. Here is considerable Both Subiectum in
Quo. Both Obiectum in Quod.
The Subject in which this Affection resides: and the Object on which this
Affection reflects.

The Subject wherein it abides is Cor, the Heart: a great zeal of love. Not
only Affectio cordis, but Cor affectionis: not only the Affection of the
Heart, but the Heart of Affection. My heart is set.

The Object on which it reflects is double; Man and God, the excellent
creature, and the most excellent Creator: the men of God, and the God of men.
Upon Men; My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people. Upon God; Bless ye the Lord.

Among men two sorts are objected to this love: Superiors in the first place,
Inferiors in the later. To the Commanders primarily, but not only: for if they
offered themselves willingly among the people, as we read it: then certainly
the people also willingly offered themselves, as the other translations read
it: Those that were willing amongst the people. You see, here is a foundation
laid for a great and ample building of discourse; but I know you look to the
glass, therefore promise nothing but application. And that

1. To the Governors of our Israel; that they offer themselves willingly to
these military designs: not on compulsion; Quoniam probitate coacta, gloria
nulla venit. His brows deserve no wreathed Coronet that is enforced: come with
a willing mind. In every good work there must be Sollicitudo in effectu, and
Feruor in affectu: cheerfulness in the affection, and carfulness in the
action. God loves a cheerful giver: so thou gainest no small thing by it, but
even the love of God. Whatsoever good thing thou do, says Augustine, do it
cheerfully and willingly, and thou do it well. Si autem cum tristitia
facis, de te sit, non tu facis: if thou do it heavily and grudgingly, it is
wrought upon thee, not by thee: thou art rather the patient then the agent in
it. God could never endure a lukewarm affection. Reuelat. 3. No man was
admitted to offer to the building of the Tabernacle, that did it grudgingly. Of
every man that gives it willingly with his heart, Exodus 25.2
ye shall take my offering. In all thy gifts show a cheerful countenance,
says the Wiseman: in all, whether to God or man. Saint Chrysostom gives the
reason; Cum tali vultu respicit Deus, cum quali tu facis.God respects it with
such a countenance as thou performest it. Gods service is Libera seruitus,
where not necessity but charity serves. Non complacet Deo famulatus coactus.
God could never endure forced service. Do all then with willingness of heart.

Think with a reverend courage of your noble Ancestors, how their prowess
renowned themselves and this whole nation. Show your selves the legitimate and
true borne children of such fathers. The fame of Alexander gave heart to Julius
Caesar, to be the more noble a warrior. Let the consideration of their valor
teach you to shake off cowardice. They fought the battles, that you might
enjoy the peace. You hold it an honor to bear Arms in your Scutchions; and
is it a dishonor to bear Arms in the Field? The time has been, when all
honor in England came a Mart or Mercurio; from Learning or Chivalry, from
the Pen or the Pike, from Priesthood or Knighthood.

It would be an unknown encouragement to goodness, if honor still might not
be dealed but upon those terms. Then should many worthy spirits get up the
High-gate of preferment: and idle Drones should not come nearer then the
Dunstable highway of obscurity. It was a monstrous story, that Nicippus his
Sheep did bring forth a Lion: but it is too true, that many of our English
Lions have brought forth Sheep. Among birds you shall never see a Pigeon
hatched in an Eagles neast: among men you shall often see noble progenitors
bring forth ignoble cowards.

But let virtue be renowned, rewarded, wheresoever she dwells. Though Bion was
the son of a Courtesan, I hope no man will censure him with Partus sequitur
ventrem. Non genus sed genius: non gens sed men's. Never speak of thy blood,
but of thy good: not of thy Nobility, thou art beholding to thy friends for
it, but of thy virtue. Even the Duke fetches the honor of his name from the
wars; and is but Dux, a Captain. And it seems the difference was so small
between a Knight and a common Soldier, among the Romans; that they had but
one word, Miles, to express both their names.

You then that have the places of Government in this honorable City, offer
willingly your hands, your purses, your selves, to this noble Exercise. Your
good example shall hearten others: be not ashamed to be seen among the people;
upon such did Debora set her heart. Alexander would usually call his meanest
soldiers, friends and companions. Tullie writes of Caesar, that he was never
heard speaking to his Soldiers; Ite illuc, Go thither: but Venite hu^, come
hither: I will go with you. The inferior thinks that labor much easier,
which he sees his Captain take before him. Malus miles qui Imperatorem gemens
sequitur: He is an ill Soldier that follows a good Leader with a dull pace.
So Gedeon to his Soldiers, Judge. 7.17.
Judge. 7. Look on me, and do likewise: when I come to the outside of the
Camp, it shall be that as I do, so shall ye do. So Abimelech to his men of
Arms, Judge. 9.48.
Judge. 9. What ye have seen me do, make have, and do as I have done. The
good Captain is first in giving the charge, and last in retiring his foot.
He endures equal toil with the common Soldiers: from his example they all
take fire, as one Torch lights many. And so much for the Governors.

2. Now for you that are the materials of all this, let me say to you without
flattery* Go forth with courage in the fear of God, and the Lord be with
you. Preserve unity among your selves: left as in a Town on fire, whiles all
good hands are helping to quench it, thieves are most busy to steal booties:
So whilst you contend, murmur, or repine one at the honor of another, that
subtle thief Satan, through the crack of your divisions, step in, and steal
away your peace.

Offer your selves willingly; and being offered step not back. Remember that
Turpe est militem fugere; it is base for a Soldier to fly. When Bias was
environed with his enemies, and his soldiers asked him, what shall we do? He
replied, Go ye and tell the living that I die fighting, and I will tell the
dead that you did escape flying. Our Chronicles report, that when William the
Conqueror landed at Pemsey near to Hastings in Sussex, he commanded all his
ships to be sunk: that all hope of returning back might be frustrate. You
have begun well; go on, be perfect, be blessed.

And remember always the burden of this song, which every thing that has
breath must sing; Bless ye the Lord. Those heavenly Soldiers that waited on
the nativity of Jesus Christ, Luke. 2.13.
sung this song; Glory be to God on high. Upon this Lord the heart of Debora,
of Israel, of us all, should be set. It is he that teaches us to fight, and
fights for us.

To conclude with an observation of a reverend Divine: England was said to have
a warlike Saint, George; but Bellarmine snibbes Iacobus de Voragine for his
leaden Legend of our English George. And others have inueighed against the
authentike truth of that story. Sure it is their malice, that have robbed
England of her Saint. Saint James is for Spain, Saint Denis for France, Saint
Patricke for Ireland; other Saints are allotted and allowed for other
Countries: only poor England is bereaved of her George: they leave none but
God to revenge our quarrels. I think it is a favor and an honor, and we
are bound to thank them for it. Let them take their Saints, give us the Lord;
Bless ye the Lord. So let us pray with our Church, Give peace in our time O
Lord; for there is none that fights for us, but thou O God. To this merciful
God be all glory, obedience, and thanksgiving, now and for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

