AN HOLY PANEGYRIC.

A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross upon the anniuersarie Solemnity of the
happy Inauguration of our Dread Sovereign Lord King JAMES, Mar. 24. 1613.

By J. H. D. D.

LONDON Printed by John Pindley for SAMVEL MACHAM. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir JOHN SVVINERTON, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City
of London, All grace and happiness.
RIght Honorable, Mine own forwardness (whereof it repents me not) has
sent forth other of my labors unbidden; but this, your effectual importunity
has drawn forth into the common light. It is an holy desire that the eye may
second the ear in any thing that may help the soul: and we, that are fishers
of men, should be-wanting to our selves, if we had not baits for both those
senses. I plead not the disadvantage of a dead letter, in respect of that life
which elocution puts into any discourse Such as it is, I make it both public
and yours. I have caused my thoughts, so near as I could to go back to the
very terms wherein I expressed them, as thinking it better to fetch those
words I have let fall, then to follow those I must take up. That therefore
which it pleased your Lo to hear with such patient attention, and with so good
affection to desire, I not unwillingly suffer abroad; that these papers may
speak that permanently to the eyes of all our countrymen, which in the passage
found such favor in the ears of your citizens, and such room in so many
heart's. Besides your first and vehement motion for the press, your known
love to learning deserves a better acknowledgement, and no doubt finds it from
more worthy hands. And if my gratulation would add any thing, those should
envy you which will not imitate you. For the rest, God give your Lo. a wise,
understanding, and courageous heart, that you may prudently and strongly menage
these wild times, upon which you are fallen: and by your holy example and
powerful endeavors, help to shorten these raines of licentiousness: That so
this city, which is better taught then any under heaven, may teach all other
places how to live; and may honor that profession which has made it renowned,
and all Gods Church joyful: The welfare and happiness whereof, and your Lo.
in it, is unfeignedly wished, by

Your Lordships humbly devoted, Ios. HALL.

AN HOLY Panegyric.
1. SAM. 12. 24, 25. Therefore fear you the Lord, and serve him in truth with
all your hearts, and consider how great things he has done for you. But if you
do wickedly, ye shall perish both ye and your King.
I Hold it no small favor of God (right Honorable and beloved) that he has
called me to the service of this day; both in the name of such a people, to
praise him for his Anointed, and in his name to praise his Anointed to his
people. The same hand that gives the oportunite, vouchsafe to give success to
this business. That which the jews sinned in but desiring, it is our
happiness to enjoy. I need not call any other witness then this day, wherein
we celebrate the blessing of a King, and (which is more) of a King higher then
other Princes by the head and shoulders. And if other years had forgotten this
tribute of their loyalty and thankfulness, yet the example of those ancient
Roman Christians (as Eusebius and Sozomen reporr) Decimum quem que annum
Imperatores Romani magna festiuitate celebrant. Sozom. l 1. 24. Idem Eusebius. de
vita Constable.
would have taught us, that the tenth complete year of our Constantine,
deserves to be solemn and Iubilar. And if our ill nature could be content to
smother this mercy in silence, the very Lepers: of Samaria should rise up
against us and say, We do not well; this is a day of good tidings, and we
hold our peace. My discourse yet shall not be altogether laudatory, but as
Samuels, led in with exhortation, and carried out with threatening. For this Text
is a composition of duties, favors, dangers: of duties which we o^^e, of
favors received, of dangers threatened. The duties that God Idokes for of us,
come before the mention of the favors we have received from him, (though after
their receipt) to teach us, that as his mercy, so our obedience should be
absolute: and the danger follows both, to make us more careful to hold the
favors, and perform the duties; And me thinks there cannot be a more excellent
mixture. If we should hear only of the favors of God, nothing of our duties,
we should fall into conceitednesse: if only of our duties without recognition
of his savors, we should prove vncheerfull; and if both of these, without
mention of any danger, we should presume on our favors, and be slack in our
duties. prepare therefore your Christian ears and hearts for this threefold
cord of God, that (through his blessing) these duties may draw you to
obedience, the dangers to a greater awe, and the favors to further
thankfulness.

The goodness of these outward things is not such as that it can privilege
every desire of them from sin Monarchy is the best of governments, and likest
to his rule, that sits in the assembly of Gods. One God, Juxta Homer. (...) etc.
one King, was the acclamation of those ancient Christians: and yet it was
mis-desired of the Israelites: We may not ever desire that which is better in
it self, but that which is better for us; Neither must we follow our conceit
in this judgment, but the appointment of God: Now, though God had appointed in
time, both a Scepter and a Law giver to Judah, yet they sinned in mending the
pace of God, and spurring on his decree. And if they had staid his leisure; so
that they had desired that which was best in it self, best for them, appointed
by God, and now appointed, yet the manner and ground offended: For out of an
humor of innovation, out of discontent, out of distrust, out of an itch of
conformity to other Nations, to ask a King, it was not only a sin as they
confess: verse. 29. but (ragnah rabbah) a great wickedness as Samuel tells
them. verse. 17. and (as oftentimes we may read Gods displeasure in the face of
the heaven) he shows it in the weather. God thunders and raynes in the midst
of wheat harvest. The thunder was fearful, the rain in that hot climate and
season strangely unseasonable: both to be in the instant upon Samuels speech,
was justly miraculous. The heathen Poets bring in their fained God thundering
in applause; I never find the true God did so. This voice of God brake Psalm.
29.
these Cedars of Lebanon, and made these Hindes to calue: and now they cry
Peccauimus, ver. 19 If ever we will stoop, the judgments of God will bring us
on our knees. Samuel takes vantage of their humiliation, and according to the
golden sentence of that Samian Jnter (...) Pythagorae Oneratis superponendum
onus; id est, ad virtutem incedentibus augmentanda praecepta; Tradentes se otio
relinquendos. Hier. aduers. Ruffin.
wiseman, that bids us lay weight upon the laden, (how ever Hierom take it in
another sense) he lades them with these three duties; Fear, service,
consideration.

Fear and service go still together. Serve the Lord in Psalm. 2.
fear, says David. Fear the Lord and serve him, says Joshua; Josh. 24. 14.
And, fear ever before service, for that unless our service proceed from
fear, it is hollow and worthless. One says well, that these inward
dispositions are as the kernel; outward acts are as the shell; he is but a
deaf nut therefore, that has outward service, without inward fear; Fear God
(says Solomon) first, and Eccl. vlt.
then, keep his commandments. Behold, the same tongue that bad them not
fear, verse. 20. now bids them fear; and the same spirit that tells us they
feared exceedingly (verse. 18.) now enioynes them to fear more. What shall we
make of this? Their other fear was at the best Initiall; for now they began to
repent; and as one says of this kind of fear, that Job. de Combis Compend.
Theol.
it has two eyes fixed on two diverse objects, so had this of theirs. One eye
looked upon the rain and thunder; the other looked up to the God that sent it;
The one of these it borrowed of the slavish or hostile fear (as Basil calls
it,) the other of the filial; for the slavish fear casts both eyes upon the
punishment; the filial looks with both eyes on the party offended. Now then
Samuel would rectify and perfect this affection, and would bring them from the
fear of slaves, through the fear of penitents, to the fear of sons: and
indeed one of these makes way for another. It is true that perfect love thrusts
out fear: but it is as true, that fear brings in that perfect love, which is
joined with the reverence of sons. Like as the needle or bristle (so one
compares it) draws in the thread after it, or as the potion brings health. The
compunction of fear (says Gregory) Greg. 3. Dial. c. 34. Compunctio
formidinis tradit animum compunctioni dilectionis.
fits the mind for the compunction of love. We shall never rejoice truly in
God, except it be with trembling: Except we have quaked at his thunder, we
shall never joy in his sun shine. How seasonably therefore does Samuel, when
he saw them smitten with that guilty and servile fear, call them to the:
reuerentiall fear of God; Therefore fear ye the Lord? It is good striking,
when God has stricken; there is no fishing so good as in troubled waters. The
conscience of man is a nice and sullen thing, and if it be not taken at fit
times, there is no meddling with it. Tell one of our gallants in the midst of
all his iollity and reuells, of devotion, of piety, of judgments; he has the
Athenian question ready, What will his babbler say? Let that man alone till God
have touched his soul with some terror, till he have cast his body on the
bed of sickness, when his fether is turned to a kerchiefe, when his face is
pale, his eyes sunk, his hands shaking, his breath short, his flesh consumed,
now he may be talked with, now he has learned of Eli to say, speak Lord for
thy servant hears. The conuexe or out-bowed side of a vessel will hold
nothing; it must be the hollow and depressed part that is capable of any
liquor. Oh, if we were so humbled with the varieties of Gods judgments as we
might, how sauoury should his counsels be, how precious and welcome would his
fear be to our trembling hearts? whereas now, our stubborn sencelesnesse
frustrates (in respect of our success, though not of his decree) all the
threatenings and executions of God.

There are two maine affections, Love, and Fear, which as they take up the
soul where they are, and as they never go a sunder, (for every love has in it
a fear of offending and forgoing; and every fear implies a love of that,
which we suspect may mis-carry) so each of them fulfils the whole law of God.
That love is the abridgement of the Decalogue both our Savior, and his blessed
Apostle have taught us: It is as plain of Fear; The title of Job is, A just
man, and one that feared God; justice is expressed by Fear. For what is
justice, but a freedom from sin? And the fear of the Lord hates evil, says
Solomon. Pro. 8. 13.
Hence Moses his (...) Thou shall Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
fear, is turned by our Savior ((...)) Thou shall worship, Mat. 4. 11 (...)
or adore. And that which Esaias says, In vain they fear me, Isay 29. 13.
(...) Mat. 15. 9.
our Savior renders, In vain they worship me; as if all worship consisted in
Fear. Hence it is probable that God has his name in two languages from
((...),) Fear, and the same (...) Plut. Caesare. Act. 23. 10. Heb. 5. 9.
word in the Greek signifies both Fear and Religion. And Solomon when he
says The fear of the Lord is (...) the beginning (as we turn it,) of
wisdom, says more then we are a ware of; for the word signifies as well
Caput or Principatum; the head or top of wisdom; yea (says Siracides) it is
the crown upon the head; it is the root of the same wisdom, whereof (...)
Eccles. 1. 23. (...) Eccl. 1. 6. (...). v. 20.
it is the top-branch, says the same Author. And surely this is the most
proper disposition of men toward God; for though God stoop down so low as to
vouchsafe to be loved of men, yet that infinite inequality, which there is
between him and us, may seem not to allow so perfect a fitness of that
affection, as of this other, which suites so well betwixt our vileness, and
his glory, that the more disproportion there is betwixt us, the more due and
proper is our fear. Neither is it less necessary then proper, for we can be
no Christians without it; whether it be (as Hemingius distinguishes it well)
timor cultus, Hem. in Ps. 25.
or culpae, either our fear in worshipping, or our fear of offending; the one
is a devout fear, the other a careful fear. The latter was the Corinthians
fear, whose godly 2. Cor. 7. 11.
sorrow when the Apostle had mentioned, he adds, Yea what indignation, yea
what fear, yea what desire? The former is that of the Angels, who hide their
faces with their wings; yea of the Son of God, as man, who fell on his face to
his father. And this is due to God, as a father, as a master, as a benefactor,
as a God infinite in all that he is. Let me be bold to speak to you, with the
Psalmist, Come ye children, hearken to me, and I will teach Psalm. 34. 11.
you the fear of the Lord. What is it therefore to fear God; but to
acknowledge the glorious (the invisible) presence of God in all our ways, with
Moses his eyes (...): to be Heb. 11. Sic semper Deum praesentem intelligit ac
si ipsum qui praesens est in sua essentia vide. rit. Bern. form. bon. vitae.
awefully affected at his presence with Jacob (quam tremendus?) to make an
humble resignation of our selves to the holy will of God with Eli, It is the
Lord; and to attend reverently upon his disposing with David, Here I am, let
him do to me, as seems good in his eyes. 2. Sam. 15. 26.
This is the fear of the Lord. There is nothing more talked of, nothing less
felt. I appeal from the tongues of men to their hands; the wise heathen taught
me to do so, Uerbarebus proba. The voice of wickedness Senec. Epist. Psalm.
36. 1.
is actual, says the Psalmist, wickedness says there is no fear of God
before his eyes. Behold wheresoever is wickedness, there can be no fear of
God; these two cannot lodge under one roof, for the fear of God drives out
evil (says Ecclesiasticus.) As therefore Abraham Ecclus. 1. 26.
argues well from the cause to the effect; Because the fear of God is not in
this place, therefore they will kill me: So David argues back from the effect to
the cause, They imagine wickedness on their bed, etc. therefore the fear of
God is not before them. I would to God this argument were not too
demonstratiue. Brethren, our lives shame us. If we feared the Lord, durst we
dally with his name, durst we tear it in pieces? Surely we contemn his
person, whose name we contemn. The Jews have a conceit, that the sin of
that Israelite which was stoned for blasphemy, was only this, that he named
that ineffable name of four letters Jehovah. Shall their fear keep them from
once mentioning the dreadful name of God, and shall not our fear keep us
from abusing it? Durst we so boldly sin God in the face, if we feared him?
Durst we mock God with a formal flourish of that, which our heart tells us
we are not, if we feared him? Durst we be Christians at Church, Mammonists
at home, if we feared him? Pardon me, if in a day of gratulation, I hardly
temper my tongue from reproof; for as the Jews had ever some malefactor
brought forth to them in their great feast; so it shall be the happiest piece
of our triumph and solemnity, if we can bring forth that wicked profaneness,
wherewith we have dishonored God, and blemished his Gospel, to be scourged,
and dismissed with all holy indignity. From this fear, let us pass as
briefly, through that which we must dwell in all our lives, the service of God.
This is the subject of all sermons, mine shall but touch at it. You shall see
how I hasten to that discourse, which this day and your expectation calls me to.

Divine Philosophy teaches us to refer, not only our speculations, but our
affections to action. As therefore our service must be grounded upon fear, so
our fear must be reduced to service. What strength can these Masculine
dispositions of the soul yield us, if with the Israelites brood they be
smoothered in the birth? Indeed the worst kind of fear is that we call
servile; but the best fear, is the fear of servants. For there is no servant
of God, but fears filially. And again God has no son but he serves. Even
the natural son of God, was so in the form of a servant, that he served
indeed; and so did he serve that he endured all sorrow, and fulfilled all
righteousness. So every Christian is a son and heir to the King of heaven,
and his word must be, I serve. We all know what service means. For we all
are, or were (I imagine) either servants of masters, or servants of the
public, or masters of servants, or all these. We cannot therefore be
ignorant either what we require of ours, or what our superiors require of us.
If service consisted only in wearing of liueries, in taking of wages, in
making of courtesies, and kissing of hands, there were nothing more easy, or
more common. Al of us wear the cognizance of our christianity in our baptism,
all live upon Gods trencher in our maintenance, all give him the complements of
a fashionable profession. But, be not deceived, the life of service is work;
the work of a Christian is obedience to the Law of God. The Centurion when he
would describe his good servant in the Gospel, needed say no more but this; I
bid him do this, and he does it. Service then briefly is, nothing but a
readiness to do as we are bidden; and therefore both Solomon, and he that
was greater then Solomon, describes it by keeping the commandments; and the
chosen vessel gives an everlasting rule: His servants ye are to whom Romans 6.
16.
ye obey. Now I might distinguish this service into habitual, and actual.
Habitual; for as the servant, while he eats or sleeps, is in service still;
so are we to God: Actual, whether universal in the whole carriage of our
lives (which Zachary tells us is in holiness, and righteousness, holiness
Luke 1. 75.
to God, righteousness to men) or particular, either in the duties which are
proper to GOD, Invocation and Attendance on his ordinance (which by an
excellence is termed his service) or in those which are proper to us, as we
are pieces of a Family, Church, commonwealth; the stations whereof GOD has so
disposed, that we may serve him in serving one another. And thus you see I
might make way for an endless discourse; but it shall content me (passing over
this world of matter) to glance only at the generality of this infinite theme.

As every obedience serves God, so every sin makes God serve us. One said
wittily, that the angry man made himself the judge, and God the executioner.
There is no sin that does not the like. The glutton makes God his cator, and
himself the guest, and his belly his god, especially in the newfound feasts
of this age, wherein profuseness and profaneness strive for the tables end.
The lascivious man makes himself the lover, and (as Viues says of Mahumet)
God the Pandar. The covetous Lud. viues de verit. Relig. l. 4
man makes himself the Usurer, and God the broker. The ambitious makes God his
state, and Honor his God. Of every sinner does God say justly, seruire me
fecisti. Thou have made me to serve with thy Esaias 43. 24.
sins. There cannot be a greater honor for us then to serve such a master,
as commands heaven, earth, and hell: Whom Non reputes magnum quod Deo seruis,
sed maximum reputa, quod ipse dignatur te in seruum assumere sibi. Bernard.
it is both dishonor and baseness not to serve. The highest style that King
David could devise to give himself (not in the phrase of a frivolous French
complement, but in the plain speech of a true Israelite) was, Behold I am thy
servant; Psalm. 116.
and he that is Lord of many servants of the Devil, delights to call himself
the servant of the servants of God. The Angels of heaven Revel. vlt.
rejoice to be our fellows in this service. But there cannot be a greater
shame then to see Eccles. 10. 7.
servants ride on horseback, and Princes walking as servants on the ground. I
mean to see the GOD of heaven made a lacquey to our vile affections, and in
the lives of men, to see God attend upon the world, Brethren, there is service
enough in the world, but it is to a wrong master. In mea patria Deus venture,
(as In mea n. patria Deus venture est, and in diem viuitur and sanctior est ille
qui ditior est.
Hierome said;) Every worldling is a Papist in this, that he gives (...)
service, to the creature, which is the lowest Hier. ad Chrematium.
respect that can be; Yea so much more humble then (latria) as it is more
absolute, and without respect of recompense. Yea, I would it were uncharitable
to say, that many besides the savages of Calecut, place Satan in the throne,
and God on the footestoole. For as Witches and Sorcerers converse with evil
spirits in plausible and familiar forms, which in ugly shapes they would
abhor; so many a man serves Satan under the forms of gold and silver, under
the images of Saints and lightsome Angels; under glittering cotes, or glorious
titles, or beauteous faces, whom they would defy as himself. And as the
freeborn Israelite might become a servant, either by forfaiture upon trespass,
or by sale, or by spoil in war; so this accursed servitude is incurred the
same ways, by them which should be Christians. By forfaiture: for though the
debt and trespass be to God, yet (tradet lictori) he shall deliver Mat. 18.
34.
the debtor to the Iaylor. By sale, as Ahab sold himself to 1. Kin. 21. 20.
work wickedness: sold under sin, says the Apostle. By spoil. Beware
least any man make a spoil of you (...) says Paul to his Colossians. Col. 2.
8.
Alas what a miserable change do these men make, to leave the living God,
which is so bountiful, that he rewards a cup of cold water with eternal
glory, to serve him that has nothing to give but his bare wages; and what
wages? The wages of sin is death; And what death? not the death of the body,
in the seuering of the soul, but the death of the soul, in the separation
from God; there is not so much difference betwixt life and death, as there is
betwixt the first death and the second. Oh woeful wages of a desperate work.
Well were these men, if they might go unpaid, and serve for nothing; but as
the mercy of God will not let any of our poor services to him go unrewarded;
so will not his justice suffer the contrary service go unpaid; in flaming
fire rendering vengeance to them 1. These. 1. 8.
that know not God, and those that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.
Beloved, as that worthy Bishop said on his Ambrose.
deathbed, we are happy in this, that we serve a good Master; how happy
shall it be for us if we shall do him good service, that in the day of our
account we may hear, Euge serve bone, well done good servant, enter into thy
masters joy.

Now he that prescribes the act (service,) must also prescribe the manner;
(Truly, totally.) God cannot abide we should serve him with a double heart
(an heart and an heart) that is hypocritically. Neither that we should serve
him with a false heart, that is, niggardly and unwillingly: but against
doubling, he will be served in truth, and against haluing, he will be served
with all the heart. To serve God and not in truth is mockery. To serve him
truly and not with the whole heart is a base dodging with God. This (...)
eye-seruice is a fault with men: but let us serve God, but while he sees us, it
is enough. Behold he sees us every where. If he did not see our heart, it were
enough to serve him in the face; and if the heart were not his, it were too
much to give him a part of it; but now that he made this whole heart of outs,
it is reason he should be served with it; and now that he sees the inside of
the heart, it is madness not to serve him In truth. Those serve God, not in
truth, which Ep. 108. Quidam veniunt vt audiant non vt discant, Aliqui cum
pugillaribus veniunt non vt res excipiant sed verba.
as Seneca says of some auditors, come to hear, not to learn: which bring
their tablets to write words, not their hearts for the finger of God to write
in. Whose eyes are on their Bible, whiles their heart is on their Countbooke;
which can play the Saints in the Church, Ruffians in the Tavern, Tyrants in
their houses, Cheators in their shops; those Dames which under a cloak of
modesty and devotion hide nothing but pride, and fiendishnesse. Those serve
God, not with all their heart; whose bosom is like Rachels tent, that has
(Teraphim) Idols hid in the straw; or rather like a Philistims Temple, that
has the Arc and Dagon under one roof; That come in ever with Naamans
exceptiues, Only in this: Those that have let down the world like the spies
into the bottom of the well of their heart, and cover the mouth of it with
wheare: I mean, that hide great oppressions, with the show of small
beneficences: Those which like Salomons false Curtizan, cry (Diutdatur) and are
willing to share themselves betwixt God and the world. And certainly, this is
a noble policy of the Devil, because he knows he has no right to the heart,
he can be glad of any corner; but with all he knows, that if he have any,
he has all; for where he has any part, God will have none. This
base-mindednesse is fit for that evil one. God will have all, or nothing. It
was an heroical answer, that Theodoret Theod. l. 4. c. 4.
reports of Valentinian, whom when the soldiers had chosen to be Emperor,
they were consulting to have another joined with him. No (my soldiers) said
he, it was in your power to give me the Empire, while I had it not: but now
when I have it, it is not in your power to give me a partner. We our selves
say, the bed and the throne can abide no riualls. May we not well say of the
heart, as Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one? Alas it is even too little for
God; what do we think of taking an Inmate into this cottage? It is a favor
and happiness, that the God of glory will vouchsafe to dwell in it alone.
Even so (O God) take thou up these rooms for thy self; and enlarge them for
the entertainment of thy spirit: Have thou us wholly, and let us have thee. Let
the world serve it self. O let us serve thee, with all our hearts.

God has set the heart on work to fear, the hands on work to serve him, now
(that nothing may be wanting) he sets the head on work to consider; and that,
not so much the Judgments of God, (yet those are of singular use, and may not
be forgotten) as his mercies, What great things he has done for you, not
against you. He that looked upon his own works, and saw they were good, and
delighted in them, delights that we should look upon them too, and applaud
his wisdom, power, and mercy, that shines in them. Even the least of Gods
works are worthy of the observation of the greatest Angel in heaven, but (the
magnalia dei) the great things he has done, are more worthy of our wonder, of
our astonishme^t. Great things indeed that he did for Israel; he meant to make
that Nation a precedent of mercy; that all the world might see what he could
do for a people. Heaven and earth conspired to bless them. What should I
speak of the wonders of Egypt? Surely I know not whether their preservation in
it, or deliverance out of it, were more miraculous. Did they want a guide?
himself goes before them in fire. Did they want a shelter? his cloud is spread
over them for a covering. Did they want way? The sea it self shall make it;
and be at once a street, and a wall to them. Did they want bread? Heaven it
self shall power down food of Angels. Did they want meat to their bread?
The wind shall bring them whole driftes of quails into their tents. Do they
want drink to both? The very Rock shall yield it them. Do they want suites
of apparel? Their very clothes shall not wax old on their backs. Do they
want advise? God himself shall give his vocal Oracle between the Cherubins.
Do they want a law? God shall come down upon Sinai, and deliver it in fire,
thundering, smoke, earthquakes, and write it with his own finger, in tables of
stone. Do they want habitations? God shall provide them a land that flows
with milk and honey. Are they persecuted? God stands in fire between them and
their harms. Are they stung to death? The brazen serpent shall cure them. Are
they resisted? The walls of Jericho shall fall down alone; hailestones brain
their enemies. The Sun shall stand still in heaven, to see Ioshuahs revenge
and victory. Oh great and mighty things that God did for Israel!

And if any Nation under heaven could either parallel or second Israel in the
favors of God, this poor little Island of ours is it. The cloud of his
protection has covered us. The bloud-red sea of persecution has given way to
us, and we are passed it dryshod. The true Manna from heaven is rained down
abundantly about our tents. The water of Life gusheth forth plenteously to us:
The better law of the Gospel is given us from heaven by the hands of his
Son: The walls of the spiritual Ierocho are fallen down before us, at the
blast of the trumpets of God; and cursed be he that goes about to build them
up again. Now therefore, that we may come more close to the task of this day;
Let me say to you, as Samuel to his Israelites, Consider with me what great
things the Lord has done for us: and as one wished that the envious had eyes
in every place, so could I seriously wish, that all which have ill will at our
Sion, had their ears with me but one hour, that if they belong not to God,
they might burst with Judas, which repine with Judas at this seasonable cost of
the precious ointment of our praises.

If I should look back to the ancient mercies of God, and show you that this
kingdom (though divided from the world) was one of the first that received the
Gospel: That it yielded the first Christian Emperor that gave peace and honor
to the Church: The first and greatest lights that shone forth in the darkest of
Popery, to all the world; and that it was the first kingdom that shook
Antichrist fully out of the saddle. I might find just matter of praise and
exultation, but I will turn over no other Chronicles but your memory. This day
alone has matter enough of an eternal gratulation. For this is the communis
terminus, wherein Gods favors meet upon our heads; which therefore represents
to us, both what we had, and what we have. The one to our sense, the other to
our remembrance. This day was both Queen Elizabeth's Initium gloriae, and King
James his Initium regni. To her Natalitium salutis, as the passion-dayes of the
Martyrs were called of old; and Natalis Imperij to him. These two names show us
happiness enough to take up our hearts and tongues for ever. And first, why
should it not be our perpetual glory and reioicing, that we were her
subjects? Oh blessed Queen, the mother of this Nation, the nurse of this
Church, the glory of womanhood, the envy and example of foreign Nations, the
wonder of times, how sweet and sacred shall thy memory be to all posterities?
how is thy name not Parables of the dust as Job 13. 4. (...)
the Jews speak; not written in the earth as Jeremie speaks, but in the
living earth of all loyal hearts, never to be razed. And though the foul
mouths of our Adversaries stick not to call her miseram foeminam, as Pope
Clement did; nor to say of her, as Euagrius says uncharitably of Justinian
Euagr. l. 5. c. 1.
the great lawgiver (ad supplicia iusto dei iudicio apud inferos luenda
profecta est;) and those that durst bring her on the stage living, bring her
now dead (as I have heard by those that have seen it) into their processions,
like a tormented Ghost, attended with fiends and firebrands, to the terror of
their ignorant beholders: Yet, as we saw she never prospered so well, as when
she was most cursed by their Pius. 5. so now we hope she is rather so much
more glorious in heaven, by how much they are more malicious on earth. These
arrogant wretches, that can at their pleasure fetch Solomon from heaven to
hell, and Traian and Falconella from hell to heaven; Campian and Garnet from
earth to heaven, Queen Elizabeth from earth to hell, shall find one day that
they have mistaken the keys, and shall know, what it is to judge, by being
judged. In the mean time, in spite of the gates of Rome, Memoria iustae in
benedictionibus. To omit those virtues which were proper to her sex, by which
she deserved to be the Queen of women, how excellent were her Masculine graces
of learning, valor, wisdom, by which she might justly challenge to be the
Queen of men. So learned was she, that she could give present answers, to
Ambassadors in their own tongues, or if they listed to borrow of their
neighbors, she paid them in that they borrowed. So valiant, that her name
like Ziscaes drum, made the proudest Romanists to quake. So wise that
whatsoever fell out happily against the common Adversary in France,
Netherlands, Ireland, Didymus veridicus.
it was by themselves ascribed to her policy. What should I speak of her long
and successful government, of her miraculous preseruations, of her famous
victories, Onimium dilecta Deo cui militat ether: and coniurati veniunt ad
classica venti. Claud.
wherein the waters, winds, fire and earth fought for us, as if they had been
in pay under her, of her excellent laws, of her careful executions. Many
daughters have done worthily, but thou Pro. 31. 29.
surmountest them all. Such was the sweetness of her government, and such the
fear of misery in her loss, that many worthy Christians desired their eyes
might be closed before hers; and how many thousands therefore welcomed their
own death, because it prevented hers. Every one pointed to her white hairs,
and said with that peaceable Leontius, When this snow melts there will be a
flood. Never Soz l. 3. c. 19. (...); etc.
day except always the fifth of November, was like to be so bloody as this; not
for any doubt of Title (which never any loyal heart could question, nor any
disloyal ever did, besides Dolman) but for that our Esauites comforted Dolm.
p. 1. p. 216 p. 2. p. 117.
themselves against us, and said, The day of mourning for our mother will come
shortly, then will we slay our brethren. What should I say more? lots were cast
upon our land; and that honest Politician (which wanted nothing but a gibbet to
have made him a Saint) Father Parsons, took pains to set down an order, how
all English affairs should be marshalled, when they should come to be
theirs. Consider now the great things that the Lord has done for us. Behold
this day, which should have been most dismal to the whole Christian world,
he turned to the most happy day, that ever shone forth to this Island. That
now we may justly insult with those Christians of Antioch ((...) Theod. 3. 15.
(...)) Where are your prophesies, O ye fond Papists? Our snow lies here
melted, where are those floods of blood that you threatened? Yea, as that
blessed soul of hers gained by this change of an immortal crown, for a
corruptible; so (blessed be the name of our God) this land of ours has not
lost by that loss. Many think that this evening the world had his beginning.
Surely a new and golden world began this day to us, and (which it could not
have done by her loins) promises continuance (if our sins interrupt it not) to
our posterities. I would the flattery of a Prince were treason; in effect it
is so: (for the flatterer is ((...)) a kind murderer.) I would it were so in
punishment. If I were to speak before my sovereign King and master, I would
praise God for him, not praise him to himself. A preacher in Constantines
Eusebius. de vitae Constable. l. 4. c. 4.
time says Eusebius (ausus est imperatorem in os beatum dicere) presumed to
call Constantine an happy Emperor to his face; but he went away with a check;
such speed may any parasite have, which shall speak, as if he would make
Princes proud, and not thankful. A small praise to the face may be adulation,
(though it be within the bounds:) a great praise in absence, may be but
justice. If we see not the worth of our King, how shall we be thankful to God
that gave him? Give me leave therefore freely to bring forth the Lords
Anointed before you, and to say with Samuel, See you 1. Sam. 10. 24.
him whom the Lord has chosen.

As it was a great presage of happiness to Mauritius Euagr. l. 5. 6. 21
the Emperor, that an ((...)) a familiar Devil removing him from place to
place in his swathing bands, yet had no power to hurt him; So, that those early
conspiracies, wherewith Satan assaulted the very cradle of our dear Sovereign,
prevailed not, it was a just bodement of his future greatness and beneficial
use to the world. And he that gave him life and crown together, and
miraculously preserved them both: gave him graces fit for his Deputy on earth,
to weild that crown, and improoue that life to the behoof of Christendom.
Let me begin with that (which the heathen man required to the happiness of any
state) his learning and knowledge, wherein I may safely say he exceeds all
his 105. predecessors. Our Conqueror King Malmesbur.
William (as our Chronicler reports) by a blunt proverb that he was wont to
use against unlearned Princes made his son Henry a Beau-clerc to those times.
But a candle in the dark will make more show, then a bonefire by day. In these
days so lightsome for knowledge to excel (even for a professed student) is
hard, and rare. Never had England more learned Bishops, and Doctors; which of
them ever returned from his Majesty's discourse without admiration? What King
christened has written so learned volumes? To omit the rest, his last (of this
kind) wherein he has so held up Cardinal Bellarmine, and his master Pope
Paulus, is such, that Plessis and Mouline (the two great lights of France)
profess to receive their light in this discourse, from his beams; and the
learned Jesuit Salkeild, could not but be converted with the necessity of
those demonstrations; and I may boldly say, Popery (since it was) never
received so deep a wound from any work, as from that of His. What King ever
moderated the solemn acts of an University in all professions, and had so
many hands clapped in the applause of his acute, and learned determinations?
Briefly, such is his entire acquaintance with all sciences, and with the
Queen of all, Divinity, that he might well dispute with the infallible Pope
Paulus 5us. for his triple crown; and I would all Christian quarrels lay upon
this duel. His justice in governing matcheth his knowledge how to govern; for
as one that knows the commonwealth cannot be unhappy, wherein (according to
the wise heathens rule) law is Plato.
a Queen, and will a subject, he has ever indeauoured to frame the
proceedings of his government to the laws, not the laws to them. Witness
that memorable example, whereof your eyes were witnesses. I mean the
impartial execution of one of the ancientest Barons of those parts, for the
murder of a mean Subject. Wherein not the favor of the block might be
yielded, that the dishonor of the death might be no less then the pain of
the death. Yet who will not grant his Mercy to be eminent amongst his virtues,
when Parsons himself yields it? And if a virtue so continuing, could be
capable of excess, this might seem so in him. For, that which was said of
Anastasius the Emperor, that he would Euagr. l. 3. c. 34
attempt no exploit (though never so famous) if it might cost the price of
Christian blood, and that which was said of Mauricius, that by his Euagr. l 6.
c. 1
good will he would not have so much as a Traitor dye; and that of Vespasian,
Sueton. Vesp.
that he wept even for just executions; and lastly that of Theodosius, Socr.
l. 7. c. 22
that he wished he could recall those to life again that had wronged him;
may in some sense, be justly verified of our merciful Sovereign. I pray GOD
the measure of this virtue may never hurt himself, I am sure the want of it
shall never give cause of complaint to his adversaries. But among all his
Heroical Graces, which commend him as a man, as a Christian, as a King; Piety
and firmness in Religion calls me to it, and will not suffer me to defer the
mention of it any longer. A private man unsettled in opinion, is like a loose
tooth in the head, troublesome and vse-lesse, but a public person unstayed,
is dangerous. Resolution for the truth is so much better then knowledge, by how
much the possessing of a treasure, is better then knowing where it is. With
what zeal did his Majesty fly upon the blasphemous novelties of Vorstius? How
many solicitations, threats, promises, profers has he trampled under his
feet in former times, for but a promise of an indifferent conniuencie at the
Romish religion? Was it not an answer worthy of a King, worthy of marble and
brass, that he made unto their agent for this purpose, in the times of the
greatest peril of resistance. That all the Watson. B. Barl. answer to Parsons.
p 115. E. Com. Northamp. lib.
crowns and kingdoms in this world should not endure him to change any jot of
his profession? Has he not so engaged himself in this holy quarrel, that
the world confesses Rome had never such an Adversary? and all Christian
Princes rejoice to follow him as their worthy leader, in all the battles of
God; and all Christian churches in their prayers and acclamations, style him,
in a double right, Defender of the faith, more by desert, then inheritance.

But because as the Sunnebeames, so praises are more kindly, when they are cast
oblique upon their objects then when they fall directly; let me show you him
rather in the blessings we receive from him, then in the graces which are in
him. And not to insist upon his extinguishing of those hellish feudes in
Scotland, and the reducing of those barbarous borderers to civility and order,
(two acts worthy of eternity, and which no hand but his could do) Consider
how great things the Lord has done for us, by him, in our Peace, in our
freedom of the Gospel, in our Deliverance.

Continuance detracts from 1
the value of any favor. Little do we know the price of peace. If we had
been in the cotes of our forefathers, or our neighbors, we should have known
how to esteem this dear blessing of GOD. Oh, my dear brethren, we never knew
what it was to hear the murdering pieces about our ears; to see our churches
and houses flaming over our heads; to hear the fearful cracks of their falls
mixed with the confused outcries of men, killing, encouraging to kill, or
resist, dying; and the shriekings of women and children; we never saw tender
babes snach't from the breasts of their mothers, now bleeding upon the stones,
or sprauling upon the pikes; and the distracted mother ravished, ere she may
have leave to dye. We never saw men and horses lie wallowing in Tum vero and
genitus morientum and sanguine in alto. Armaque corporaque and permisti caede
virorli Semianimes voluuntur equi. Virg. Aen. 11.
their mingled blood, and the ghastly visages of death deformed with wounds. The
impotent wife hanging with tears on her armed husband, as desirous to dye with
him, with whom she may not live. The amazed runnings to and fro of those that
would feign escape, if they knew how, and the furious pace of a bloody victor;
The rifling of houses for spoil, and every soldier running with his load,
and ready to fight with other for our booty; Themiserable captive driven
manicled before the usulting enemy. Never did we know how cruel an
Adversary is, and how burdensome an helper is in war. Look round about you.
All your neighbors have seen and tasted these calamities. All the rest of the
world have been whirled about in these woeful tumults: only this Island, has
like the center stood immovable. Only this Isle has Nam cum trisiis hyems
alias produxerit vndas, Tum Nilum retinent ripae. Claud. Epigr.
been like Nilus, which when all other waters ouer-flow, keeps within the
banks. That we are free from these and a thousand other miseries of war,
Whether should we ascribe it, but next under God, to his Anointed, as a King,
as a King of Peace? For both Anarchy is the mother of division, as we see in
the state of Italy, wherein, when they wanted their King, all ran into civil
broiles; The Venetians with them of Rauenna, Otho. Fris. l. 7. c. 29.
Verona and Vincentia, with the Paduans and Taruisians; The Pisans and
Florentines, with them of Luca and Sienna; and besides; every King is not a
Peacemaker: Ours is made of Peace. There have been Princes, which, as the
Antiochians Socr. l. 7. c. 22
said of Julian, (taking occasion by the Bull which he stamp't in his coin)
have gored the world to death. The breasts of some Princes have been like a
Thunder-cloud, whose vapors would never leave working till they have vented
themselves with terror to the world; Ours, has nothing in it, but a gracious
rain to water the inheritance of God. Behold He, even He alone, like to Noah's
Dove, brought an Olive of peace to the tossed Arc of Christendom; He like
another Augustus, before the second coming of CHRIST has becalmed the world,
and shut the iron gates of war; and is the bond of that peace he has made.
And if the Peacemaker both does bless and is blessed; how should we bless
him, and bless God for him, and hold our selves blessed in him?

Now what were peace 2
without religion, but like a Nabals sheepe-shearing; like the fatting of an
Epicurian hog; the very festival revels of the Devil. But for us; we have
Gloria in excelsis Deo, sung before our Pax in terris; in a word, we have
Peace with the Gospel. Machiauell himself could Discors. l. 1. c. 20 Due
continuoue successions di principi virtuosi fanno grandi effetti.
say in his Discourses, that two continued successions of virtuous Princes
(fanno grandi effetti) cannot but do great matters. We prove it so this day;
wherein religion is not only warmed but locked in her seat so fast, that the
gates of hell shall never prevail against it. There have been Princes, and
that Plato 8. de Repub.
in this land, which (as the heathen Politician compared his Tyrant) have been
like to ill Physicians, that have purged away the good humors, and left the
bad behind them; with whom any thing has been lawful, but to be religious.
Some of your gray hayres can be my witnesses. Behold, the evils we have
escaped, show us our blessings. Here has been no dragging out of houses, no
hiding of Bibles, no creeping into woods, no Bonnering or Butchering of Gods
Saints, no rotting in dungeons, no casting of infants out of the mothers belly
into the mothers flames; nothing but Gods truth abundantly preached,
cheerfully professed, encouraged, rewarded. What Nation under heaven yeeldes
so many learned Divines? What times ever yielded so many preaching Bishops?
When was this City (the City of our joy) ever so happy this way, as in these
late successions? Whither can we ascribe this health of the Church, and life
of the Gospel, but, next to GOD, to His example, His countenance, His
endeavors. Wherein I may not omit how right he has trod in the steps of that
blessed Constantine, in all his religious proceedings. Let us in one word
parrallel them. Constantine caused fifty Volumes of the Scriptures Eusebius. de
vitae Constable. l. 4. c. 36.
to be fair written out in parchment, for the use of the Church. King James
has caused the books of Scriptures to be accurately translated, and
published by thousands. Constantine made a zealous edict against Nouatians, Lib
3. 61. 62.
Valentinians, Marcionites. King James, besides his powerful proclamations and
sovereign laws has effectually written against Popery, and Vorstianisme.
Constantine took Lib. 3. 63.
away the liberty of the meetings of heretics: King James has by wholesome
laws inhibited the assemblies of Papists and seismatickes. Constantine Lib. 1.
c. 37. In media istoru^ frequentia accongressu adesse and vna considere non
dedignatus.
sat in the midst of his Bishops, as if he had been one of them. King James
besides his solemn conferences, vouchsaues (not seldom) to spend his meals
in discourse with his Bishops, and other worthy Divines. Constantine charged
his sons (vt plane and sine fuco Christiani essent) that they should be
Christians in earnest. King James Basil. dor.
has done the same in learned and Divine precepts which shall live till time
be no more. Yea, in their very coins is a resemblance. Constantine had his
picture stamped upon his Lib. 4. 15.
metals, praying. King James has his picture with a prayer about it. O Lord
protect the Kingdoms which thou have united. Lastly, Constantine built
Churches; one in Jerusalem, Lib. 3. 43. and 24
another in Nicomedia. King James has founded one College, which shall help
to build and confirm the whole Church of God, upon earth. Ye wealthy Citizens
that love Jerusalem, cast in your store after this royal example, into the
sanctuary of God, and whiles you make the Church of God happy, make your
selves so. Brethren, if we have any relish of Christ, any sense of heaven, let
us bless God for the life of our soul, the Gospel, and for the spirit of this
life, his Anointed.

But where had been our peace, or this freedom of the 3
Gospel, without our Deliverance? and where had our deliverance bin without
him? As it was reported of the Oak of Mamre, that al religions rendered their
yearly worship there. Socr. l. 2. c. 3.
The Jews, because of Abraham their Patriarch, the Gentiles because of the
Angels that appeared there to Abraham. The christians because of Christ that
was there seen of Abraham, with the Angels; So was there to King James in his
first beginnings, a confluence of all sects, with papers in their hands, and
(as it was best for them) with a Rogamus domine, non pugnamus, like the
subjects of Theodosius. Ribera in prophet. min. ex Joseph. Antiq. lib. 9 vlt.
Samaritani Iudaeos cognatos appellare soliti quamdiuillis been erat. At vbi
contra, etc.
But our cozens of Samaria, when they saw that Salomons yoke would not be
lightened, soon flew off in a rage. What portion have we in David? And now
those, 1. King. 12.
which had so soft looked up to heaven in vain, resolve to Flectere si nequeo,
etc.
dig down to hell for aid. Satan himself met them, and offered (for saving
of their labor) to bring hell up to them. What a world of Sulphur had he
provided against that day? What a brewing of death was tuned up in those
vessels? The murderous Pioners laugh't at the close felicity of their project;
and now beforehand seemed in conceit to have heard the crack of this hellish
thunder, and to see the mangled carcasses of the heretics flying up so
suddenly, that their souls must needs go upward toward their perdition; the
streets strawed with legs and arms; and the stones braining as many in
their fall, as they blew up in their rise. Remember the children of Edom, O
Lord, in Psalm 137. 7.
the day of Jerusalem, which said, Down with it, down with it, even to the
ground. O daughter of Babel, worthy to be destroyed, blessed shall he be that
serves thee, as thou would have served us. But he that sits in heaven
laugh't as fast at them; to see their presumption that would be sending up
bodies to heaven before the resurrection, and preferring companions to Elias in
a fiery Chariot; and said (vt quid fremuerunt?) Consider now how great things
the Lord has done for us; The snare is broken, and we are delivered. But how?
As that learned Bishop well applied Solomon to this purpose, Diuinatio in
labijs regis. Pro. 16 10. B. Barlow page 350.
If there had not been a a divination in the lips of the King, we had been
all in jaws of death. Under his shadow we are preserved alive, as Jeremy
speaks. It is true, God could have done it by other means, but he would do
it by this, that we might owe the being of our lives to him, of whom we held
our well-being before. Oh praised be the God of heaven for our deliverance!
Praised be God for his Anointed, by whom we were delivered. Yea how should we
call to our fellow creatures; The Angels, Saints, heavens, elements, meteors,
mountains, beasts, trees, to help us praise the Lord for this mercy. And (as
the (...).

Suet. addit neque me liberosque meos cariores habebo quam Caium and eius
sorores.


Oath of the Roman soldiers ran) how dear and precious should the life of
our Caesar be to us, above al earthly things? How should we have the base
unthankfulness of those men, which can say of him, as one said of his Saint
Martin, Martinus Clodoueus Otho Firs. l. 4. c. 32.
bonus in auxilio, charus in negotio; who whiles they owe him all grudge him
any thing. Away with the mention of outward things: all the blood in our body
is due to him, all the prayers and well-wishes of our souls are due to him,
How solemnly Festival should this day be to us, and to our posterities for
ever? How cheerfully, for our peace, our religion, our Deliverance, should we
take up that acclamation which the people of Rome used in the Coronation of
Charles the great, Carolo Iacobo a Deo Fris. l. 5. c. 31.
coronato, magno and pacifico Britannorum Imperatori, vita and victoria. To
Charles James crowned of God, the great and peaceable Emperor of Britanie,
Life and Victory. And let GOD, and his people say Amen.

These were great things indeed, that God did for Israel; great that he has
done for us; Great for the present, not certain for the future. They had not,
no more have we, the blessings of God by entayle, or by lease. Only at the
good will of the Lord; and that is, during our good behavior. Sin is a
forfaiture of all favors. Jf you do wickedly, you shall perish. It was not
for nothing, that the same word in the original signifies both sin and
punishment; These two are inseparable. There is nothing but a little prioritie
in time between them. The Angels did wickedly, they perish't by their fall
from heaven. The old world did wickedly, they perish't by waters from heaven.
The Sodomites did wickedly, they perish't by fire from heaven. Corah and his
company did wickedly, they perish't by the earth. The Egyptians did wickedly,
they perish't by the Sea. The Canaanites did wickedly, they perish't by the
sword of Israel. The Israelites did wickedly, they perish't by pestilence,
serpents, Philistims. What should I run my self out of breath, in this
endless course of examples? There was never sin but it had a punishment,
either in the Actor, or in the Redeemer. There was never punishment, but was
for sin. Heaven should have no quarrel against us; Hell could have no power
over us, but for our sins. Those aie they that have plagued us, those are
they that threaten us.

But what shall be the judgment? Perishing. To whom? To you and your King. He
does not say, If your King do wickedly you shall perish, as sometimes he has
done. Nor if your King do wickedly he shall perish, although Kings are
neither privileged from sins, nor from judgments. Nor if you do wickedly,
you only shall perish; but if ye do wickedly, ye and your King shall
perish. So near a relation is there betwixt the King and Subject, that the
sin of the one reaches to the judgment of the other, and the judgment of
the one, is the smart of both. The King is the head; the Commons the stomach;
if the head be sick, the stomach is affected. David sins, the people dye. If
the stomach be sick, the head complains. For the transgression of the people
are many Princes. What could have snatched from our Head that sweet Prince, of
fresh and bleeding memory, (that might justly have challenged Othoes name,
Mirabilia mundi) Otho. 3. Fris. 6. 26.
now in the prime of all the worlds expectation, but our traiterous
wickednesses? His Christian modesty upon his deathbed could charge himself.
(No, no, I have sins enough of mine own to do this:) But this very accusation
did clear him, and burden us. O glorious Prince, they are our sins that are
guilty of thy death, and our loss. We have done wickedly, thou perishedst. An
harsh word for thy glorified condition. But such a perishing, as is incident to
Saints; (for there is a Perire de medio, as well as a Perire a facie,) a
perishing from the earth, as well as a perishing from God. It was a joyful
perishing to thee. Our sins have aduantaged thy soul, which is partly
therefore happy, because we were unworthy of thee; but they have robbed us of
our happiness in thee. Oh our treacherous sins, that have offered this
violence to that sweet hopeful sacred person! And do they not yet still
conspire against him that is yet dearer to us, the root of these goodly
branches, the breath of our nosthrils, the Anointed of God? Brethren, let me
speak it confidently. As every sin is a Traitor to a man's own soul, so
every wicked man is a Traitor to his King. Yea every one of his crying sins
is a false hearted rebel that hides ponder and pocket-dags for the precious
life of his Sovereign. Any states man may learn this even of Machiauell
himself, which I confess when I red, I thought of the Devil confessing
Christ. That Ossernanza del culto diuiao ecagione della grandezza delle.

Cosi il dispregio diqua, etc. Discorsd. 1. c. 11


the giving of God his due is the cause of the greatness of any state; and
contrarily, the neglect of his service the cause of ruin; and if any profane
Zosimus shall doubt of this point, I would but turn him to Euagrius his
Discourse to Euagr. l. 3. c. 41.
this purpose, where he shall find instances of enough particulars. What ever
politic Philosophers have distinguished, betwixt bonus vir, and ciuis, I say,
that as a good man cannot be an ill Subject, so a lewd man can no more be a
good Subject, then evil can be good. Let him sooth, and swear what he will,
his sins are so many treasons against the Prince and State, for Ruin is from
iniquity, says Ezechiel. Alas, what Ezec. 7. 19.
safety can we be in, when such miscreants lurk in our houses, iet in our
streets; when the Country, City, Court, is so full of these spiritual
conspiracies? Ye that are Magistrates; not for Gods sake only, but for your
Kings sake, whose deputies ye are, as he is Gods; not for religion only, but
for very policy, as you tender the dear life of our gracious sovereign; as
you regard the sweet peace of this State, and Kingdom; the welfare of this
Church; Yea, as ye love your own life, peace, welfare, Rouse up your spirits,
awaken your Christian courage, and set your selves heartily against the
traitorly sins of these times, which threaten the bane of all these. Cleanse
ye these Augean stables of our drunken Tauernes, of our profane stages, and of
those blind Vaults of professed filthiness, whose steps go down to the
Chambers of Death; yea, to the deep of Pro. 7. 27. 9. 18
Hell. And ye, my holy brethren, the messengers of God, if there be any sons
of thunder amongst you, if ever ye ratled from heaven the terrible judgments
of God against sinners, now do it; for (contrary to the natural) the deep
winter of iniquity is most seasonable for this spiritual thunder. Be heard
above, be seen beneath. Outface sin, out-preach it, outliue it. We are
stars in the right hand of God, let us be like any stars save the Moon,
that has blots in her face; or the star wormwood, Reu. 8. 11.
whose fall made bitter waters; or Saint Iudes planets, that wander in
irregularities. Iud. 13.
Let the light of our lives shine in the faces of the world; and dazzle them
whom it shall not guide. Then shall we with authority speak Cum imperio
doceiur quod prius agitur quam dicatur. Greg. 23. in Job.
what we do, when we do that which we speak. We can never better testify
our thankful and loyal respects to so good a King, in whose favor is our
life, and by whose grace we are vpheld against the unworthy affronts of this
sacrilegious age, then by crying down, by living down those sins which
threaten our happiness in him. And ye, beloved Christians, whose faces seem
worthily to congratulate the joy of this day, if ye would approve your selves
good subjects to our King, labor to be good subjects to His King, the King of
heaven. Away with those rebellious wickednesses which may be prejudicial to
our peace. In vain shall we testify our loyalty by these outward ceremonies
of rejoicing, if we be faulty in the substance. To what purpose shall we
ring our bells, if in the mean time we hold fast Salomons (funes peccatorum)
cords of sin; yea the Prophets Pro. 5. 22.
cart-ropes of iniquity; and thereby pull down judgment upon our heads? To
what purpose shall we kindle Bonfiers in our streets, if we kindle the flames
of Gods displeasure against us by our sins? To what purpose shall ye feast one
another in your houses, if you shall feast the fiends of hell with your wilful
sins? Daemonum cibus ebrietas, Hierome says well, Drunkenness, luxury,
fornication, Hier. de filio prodigo. Daemonum cibus ebrietas, luxuria,
fornicatio and vniuersa vitia.
and every sin is the very diet and dainties of the Devil. For Gods sake
therefore, for your Kings sake, for your own souls sake, Be good, that you
may be loyal. Oh my brethren, let us not with old Toby suffer our eyes to be
blinded with the Swallows dung of this world. Let us not dare to make a
willing shipwreck of conscience, for the venture of a little ballast of gain.
Away with our pride, usury, oppression, false weights, false oaths, false
faces; Do no more wickedly, that we perish not.

They are our sins which as they threaten to lose us our best friend above,
(the God of our salvation) so they harten our adversaries against us on earth.
Their hopes, their designs, their wickedness to us, has been professed to be
built upon ours to God. If they did not see we did evil, they durst not hope
we could perish. Authority has wisely and seasonably taken order for
disarming of wilful Recusants. What should weapons do in the hands of
disloyalty? Oh that it could take order to strip us of our sins, which will
else arm God and his creatures against us! The gates of Rome, the gates of
hell, could not hurt us, if we did not hurt our selves. Oh that we could so
love our selves, as to part with all our plausible and gainefull evils, that we
would this day renew our holy covenants with God, and keep them for ever! How
would he still feed us with the finest of the wheat? How would he that (as
this day) when we feared a tempest, gave us an happy calm, prevent a tempest
Dum nontiniet in sereno patitur tempestatem. Hier. dial. aduers. Pelag.
in our calm when we fear not? How safely should our children play, and we
feast in our streets? How memorable a pattern of mercy should this Hand be to
all posterities? What famous Trophies of victory would he erect over all
Antichristianisme amongst us? How freely and loud should the Gospel of God
ring every where in the ears of the generations yet unborn? How sure should
we be, long and long to enjoy so gracious, and dear a Sovereign, so
comfortable a peace, so happy a government? even till this Eve of the
Annunciation of the first coming of Christ, overtake the Day of the
Annunciation of his second coming, for our redemption. Which God for his
mercies sake, for his Christ's sake vouchsafe to grant to us*

Amen.
FINIS.

