ONE of the SERMONS PREACHED AT WESTMINSTER, On the day of the public Fast
(April 5. 1628) To the Lords of the High Court of Parliament And by their
appointment Published.

By the B. of EXCETER.

LONDON, Printed for Nath Butter. 1628.

ESAIAS 5. the 4. and 5. VERSES. What could have heene done more to my Vineyard
that I have not done in it? Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth
Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes, And now go to, I will tell you, what I
will do to my Vineyard; I will take away the Hedge thereof.
IT is a piece of a Song (for so it is called Verse. 1. Alas, what should songs
do to an heavy heart, Pro. 25. 20. or Music in a day of Mourning, Howling
and Lamentation is fitter for this occasion? Surely, as we do sometimes weep
for joy; So do we Sing also for sorrow, Thus also does the Prophet here; If
it be a Song, it is a Dump; Esayes Lachrymae; fit for that (Sheminith) grauis
symphonia, as Tremelius turns it, which some sad Psalms were set unto: 1.
Chron. 55 21.
Both the Dittie, Psalm. 6. 1.
and the Tune are doleful: Psalm. 12. 1.
There are in it three passionate strains; Favors, Wrongs, Revenge:
Blessings, Sins, Judgment; Favors and blessings from God to Israel; Sins
(which are the highest wrongs) from Israel to God; Judgments, by way of
revenge, from God to Israel; and each of those follow upon other; God begins
with favors to his people; They answer him with their sins, he replies
upon them with Judgments; and all of these are in their height; the favors of
God are such as he asks. What could be more; the sins are aggrauated by those
favors; what worse then wild Grapes and disappointment? And the Judgments
must be aggrauated to the proportion of their sins, what worse then the Hedge
taken away, the Wall broken, the Vinyard trodden down, and eaten up: Let us
follow the stepps of God, and his Prophet, in all these; And when we have
passed these in Israel, let us seek to them at home: What should I need to
crave attention; the business is both Gods, and our own.

God and we begin with favors; favors not mean and ordinary; not
expressed in a right-downe affirmation, but in an expostulatorie, and
selfe-conuincing Question; What could have been done more to my Vineyard that
I have not done to it? Every word is a new obligation. That Israel is a
Vineyard is no small favor of God, that it is Gods Vineyard, is yet more; that
it is Gods Vineyard so exquisitely cultiuated, as nothing more could be either
added, or desired, is most of all:

Israel is no vast Desert, no wild Forest, no moorish Fenne, no barren Heath,
no thornie Thicket but a Vineyard; a Soil of use and fruit. Look where you
will in Gods Book ye shall never find any lively member of Gods Church
compared to any but a fruitful Tree; Not to a tall Cypress the Emblem of
unprofitable Honor, nor to a smooth Ash the Emblem of unprofitable Prelacie,
that does nothing but bear Keys: nor to a double-coloured Poplar, the Emblem
of Dissimulation; nor to a well shaded Plane, that has nothing but Form; nor
to a hollow Maple, nor to a trembling Aspe; nor to a prickly Thorn; shortly,
not to any Plant whatsoever whose fruit is not useful and beneficial; Hear
this then ye goodly Cedars, strong Elmes, fastgrowing Willowes, sappie
Sycomores, and all the rest of the fruitless trees of the earth, I mean all
fashionable and barren professors whatsoever, ye may shoot up in height, ye
may spread far, shade well, show fair, but what are ye good for? Ye may
be fit for the Forest, Ditches, Hedgrowes of the World; ye are not for the
true saving soil of Gods Israel; that is a Vineyard; there is place for none
but Vines; and true Vines are fruitful: He that abides in me brings forth
much fruit, says our Savior, John 15. 5.

And of all fruits, what is comparable to that of the Vine? Let the Vine it
self speak in Iothams Parable, Iud. 9. 19. Should I leave my Wine which
cheareth God and man? How is this? God cheared with Wine? It is an high
hyperbole; Yet seconded by the God of truth; I will drink no more of the fruit
of this Vine, till I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom, Mat. 26. 29.
It must needs be an excellent liquor which is used to resemble the joys of
heaven: Yea, the blood of the Son of God, that celestial nectar, which to
morrow shall cheer our Souls, is it otherwise resembled then by the blood of
the Grape? He is Vitis vera, the true Vine this is his juice.

Alas; would God we had not too much cause to complain of the pleasure of this
fruit; Religion, Reason, Humanity savor not to the palate of many in
comparison of it? Wine is a mocker, says Solomon: How many thousands does it
daily cheat of their Substance, of their Patrimony, of their Health, of their
Wit, of their Sense, of their Life, of their Soul? Oh that we had the grace to
be sensible of our own scorn, and danger; But this is the honor of the
fruit, and the shame of the man: the excess is not more our sin, then the
delicacie is the praise of the Grape; For sweetness of verdure, then all
Plants will yield to the Vine; so tastfull, so pleasing, so delightful unto
God are the persons, the graces, the endeauours of his Israel. Their persons
are, (...). Romans 12. 1. Their Love is better then Wine Cant. 4. 10. Their Alms
are (...), a sweet smelling savor, Philip. 4. 18. Their prayers as evening
Incense; of a most fragrant composition; and, for the rest of their words; The
roof of their mouth is like the best Wine, Cant. 7. 9. Acceptance has wont
to be the encouragement of forwardness; Honorable and beloved, how should
this harten us in our holy stations, in our conscionable actions; Whiles we
continue Vines it is not in the power of our imperfections, to lose our
thanks; The delicatest Grape cannot be so rellish-some to the palate of man,
as our poor weak obediences are to the God of mercies. Thou have ravished my
heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart; says Christ of his
Church, Cant. 4. 9. The Vine is a noble plant, but a feeble and tender one;
Other trees grow up alone out of the strength of their own sap; this grouels
on the ground, and rots if it have not an Elm to prop it; Like as Man, the
best creature, is in his birth most helpless; and would presently die without
outward succors; Such is the Israel of God; the worthiest piece of Gods
Creation; yet of it self impotent to good; here is no growth, no life but from
that Divine Hand; Without Me can ye do nothing: They are no Vines that can
stand alone; those proud Spirits, as they have no need of God, so God has no
interest in them; His Israel is a Vineyard; and the Vine must be propped.

As a Vineyard, so Gods Vineyard. The Church shall be sure not to be
Masterlesse: There is much waste ground that has no Owner; our Globe can tell
us of a great part of the World, that has no name but Incognita, not known,
whether it have any inhabitant; but a Vineyard was never without a Possessor;
till Noah the true Ianus planted one, there was no news of any; Come into some
wild Indian Forest all furnished with goodly Trees, you know not whether ever
man were there; Gods hand we are sure has been there; perhaps not man's; but
if you come into a well dressed Vineyard, where you see the Hillockes equally
swelling, the stakes pitched in a just height and distance, and the Vines,
handsomely pruned, now it is easy to say (as the Philosopher did when he found
Figures) Here has bin a man, yea a good husband. There is an universal
providence of God over the World; but there is a special eye, and hand of God
over his Church: In this God challenges a peculiar interest that is his (as
we heard worthily this Day) in a double right, of Confederation, of
Redemption; Israel is my Son, yea my first borne, says God to Pharaoh: Thou
have brought a Vine out of Egypt, thou have cast out the heathen and planted
it, says the Psalmist, 80. 8.

Oh the blasphemous diffidence of foolish men! Can we, dare we impute ill
husbandry to the God of Heaven? Has God a Vineyard, and shall he not tend it?
Shall he not mightily protect it? Go on, ye Foxes, ye little Foxes, to
spoil the tender Grapes; Go on ye Boares of the Wood to waste this Vineyard,
and ye wild beasts of the field to devour it; our sins, our sins have
given this scope to your violence, and our calamity: But ye shall once know
that this Vineyard has an Owner; even the mighty God of Jacob; every cluster
that you have spoiled shall be fetched back again from the bloody Wine Press
of his wrath: And in spite of all the gates of Hell, this Vine shall flourish.
Even so, Return we beseech thee, O God of Hosts; look down from Heaven and
visit this Vine: and the Vineyard which thy right hand has planted: and the
branch that thou made strong for thy self.

Ye have seen Israel a Vineyard, and Gods Vineyard* now cast your eyes upon
the favors that God has done to his Vineyard Israel; such, as that God
appeals their own hearts for Judges; What could have been done more to my
Vineyard that I have not done? Mark, I beseech you; He does not say, What
could have been done more then has been done, but, more, that I have not
done; challenging all the acts done to his Vineyard for his own; as the Soil
is his, so is all the Culture; He that else where makes himself the Vine, and
his Father the Husbandman, here, makes Israel the Vine, and himself the
Husbandman; nothing is, nothing can be done to his Church that passes not his
hands: My Father still works, says he, and I work. This work, this care
knows no end, no limits. Many a good Husband ouer-taskes himself, and
undertakes more, then his eye can ouerlooke, or his hand sway; and therefore is
feign to trust to the menagement of others; and it speedes thereafter. But the
Owner of this Vineyard is every where; and works where ever he is; nothing can
pass his eye, every thing must pass his hand; This is the difference betwixt
Salomons Vineyard, and his that is greater then Solomon; Solomon lets out his
Vineyard to Keepers, Cant. 8. 11. Christ keeps his in his own hand; He uses
indeed the help of Men, but as Tools, rather then as Agents, he works by
them, they cannot work but by him; Are any of you great Ones, Benefactours to
his Church (a rare style I confess in these not dative but ablative times) ye
are but as the hands of the Subalmoners of Heaven: God gives by you: Are any
great Potentates of the earth secret or open persecutours of his Church: Ashur
is the rod of my wrath, says God; They are but as Gods pruning Knives, to make
his Vine bleed out her superfluous juice: God cuts by them: He is the Author
of both, men are the instruments. To him must we return the praise of his
mercy in the one, and in the other, the awe of his judgments, what ever is
done to his Church, God does it himself. Neither does he say, What could I
have done more that I have not done, as our former Translation reads it, with a
reference to his absolute power; according whereto, we know that he can do more
then he does, more then he will do, but ((...)) Quid faciendum; What could
have been done more in respect of the exigence of the occasion; Would God set
his omnipotent Power upon it, we know he could make all the World Israel; he
could make all Israel Saints, he could have made Devils men, men Angels. But
God uses not to proceed according to the rule of an absolute Omnipotency, but
according to the Oeconomie of his most holy, most wise, most just Decrees:
Whereby he has chalked out unto men those ways, and helps of salvation,
which he sees fit for the attainment of that end; these are they wherein he
has not been failing to his Israel.

Of these he says, What could have been done more that I have not done? See
what notice God takes, and what reckonings he keeps of all the good that he
does to any Church or people; he files up all his blessings; He is bountiful
not profuse; open-handed, but not so as that his largess makes him
respectlesse or forgetful of his beneficences; he gives not like the picture
of Fortune, blindfolded; or, like an Almoner in a throng, he knows not to
whom; he notes both the man and the favor; In our gifts, our left hand may not
know what our right hand does, because our weakness is subject to a
proud-selfe-conceit, and a mis-opinion of too much obligation in the Receiver;
but he, whose infinite goodness is not liable to any danger of those
infirmities which follow our sinful nature, sets all his mercies on the score,
and will not balke one of the least. He that could say to Israel I took thee
from among the Pots, and to David, I took thee from following the Ewes great
with Lamb; do ye not think he still says to his Anointed, I brought you
from weak in the Cradle to strong in the Throne; I kept you from treacherous
hands; I returned you safe from the dangers of your Southern Voyage I have
given you not the hands and knees, but the hearts of your Subjects. Do I not
think he says to me, I brought thee from the ferule to a pastoral staff;
to another, I brought thee from the bench of Justice to the seat of Honor; to
an other I delivered thee from the Sword of thine Enemy, from the bed of thy
sickness, from the walls of thy restraint, from the Powder Mine; I made thee
Noble, thee Rich, thee Potent; I made this Country populous, that City
wealthy, this Kingdom strong, Be sure, if we be forgetful, God will not
mis-reckon his own mercies: Our favors are (like our selves) poor and
impotent, worthy to be scribled upon the Sand, that they may be washed off
with the next wave, his, are full of goodness, and infinite compassion, fit
for the Marble of an eternal remembrance. Honorable and beloved, Why do not
we keep one part of the Tally, as he keeps the other, that so we may hold
eeuen reckonings with our munificent God? How should we meditate continually
of the gracious and wonderful works of his bounty, knowing that God has so
done his great works, that they ought to be had in perpetual memory; How
should we gratefully recount his favors, and call the World about us, with
the sweet singer of Israel; Come hither, and hear all ye that fear God, and
I will tell you what he has done for my soul, Psalm. 56. 16. O God it is a
just quarrel that thou have against us for our unthankfulness; the
familiarity of thy blessings have drawn them into neglect. Alas, thy mercies
have not been sown, but buried in us; We have been gulfes to swallow them,
not repositories to keep them; How worthily do we smart, because we forget.
How justly are thy judgments seen upon us, because thy mercies are not. Away
with this wretched ingratitude; Oh love the Lord, Psalm. 31. 23.
all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful, and plentifully
rewards the proud doer.

What then is it, O Lord, what is it that thou have done, then which more could
not be done for thy Vineyard? Thou best know thine own mercies, and can
best express them: thou that would not have us search into thy counsels,
would not have us ignorant of thy favors: those are particularized in the
foregoing words: In thy choice. In thy fence, In picking, In planting, in
oversight, in pressing;

First, there is the advantage of the place chosen; where has he settled his
Vineyard but upon a very fruitful Hill? A double advantage, An hill, and very
fruitful: Hills are held best for Vines; the decliuitie whereof gives much
strength to the reflection; so as the most generous Vines are noted to grow upon
the hills. Yet, there are barren hills; nothing but heaps of unprofitable sands;
this is a fruitful hill, yea superlatiuely fruitful, the home of the Son of
oil, as it is in the original; that is, by an Hebraisme; an hill eminently
fat and fertile.

But what would it avail the ground to be fruitful, if it be unfenced, that
the wild Bore, or the Foxes may spoil it: as good no fruit as to no purpose.

Lo then here, Secondly, both an hedge, and, least that should not be
sufficient, a Wall.

But to what purpose should it be fenced with stones without, if it be choked
with stones within; As therefore thirdly the stones were laid together in the
Wall, for defense; So they were gathered off from the soil to avoid offense.

But to what purpose is the fruitfulness, fencing, stoning, if the ground
yield a plentiful Crop of Briars, Thistles, Weeds? Iniussa virescunt gramina;
ill Weeds grow fast; here is therefore, Fourthly, the maine favor to this
Vineyard, that the owner has planted it with choicest Vines; It is the praise
of the Earth, to softer any Plant that is put into the bosom of it; it is the
chief care of the Husbandman to store it with Mants of worth:

Now all this provision of soil, Fencing, Stoning, Planting, were nothing
without a continual ouer-sight; the wise owner therefore. Fifthly, builds, not a
Bower, not a Banqueting house, for pleasure, but a Tower for suruay; and that
not in some obscure Angle, but in the midst of the Vineyard, that he may view
the carriage of his laborers, and descrie the first danger of the annoyances.

Lastly, to what purpose were all this choice, Fencing, Stoning, Planting,
ouer-sight, if when the Grapes are grown to their due ripeness, they should
not be improued to an useful Vintage, this must be done by the Wine Press;
That is set up: and now, what can remain, but the setting under of Vessels to
receive the comfortable juice, that shall flow from these, so well husbanded
clusters.

All this has God done for his Vinyard, what could have been done more?

Not to dwell in the mysts of Allegories; God himself has read this Riddle.
The Vineyard of the Lord of hoasts is the house of Israel: Verse 7.
And the house of Israel is his Church. The Church is Gods hill, conspicuous
for his wonderful favors (though not ever) even to the eye of the World; not
an hidden vnheeded Valley. A fruitful Hill, not by nature, but by grace;
Nature was like it self, in it, in the World; God has taken it in from the
barren Downs, and gooded it: his choice did not find but make it thus.

Thus chosen he has fenced it about with the hedge of Discipline, with the
wall of his Almighty protection.

Thus fenced he has ordained, by just censures to pick out of it those
stones of offense, which might hinder their holy proceedings, and keep down
the grouth of the Vines; whether scandalous Men, false Opinions, or evil
Occurrences.

Thus cleared, he has planted it with the choysest Vines of gracious motions,
of wholesome Doctrines,

Thus planted, he has ouerlookt it from the Watchtowre of Heaven, in a
careful inspection upon their ways, in a provident care of their preservation.

Thus ouer-looked, he has endeavored to improve it by his seasonable
Wine Press in reducing all these powers and favors, to act, to use; whether
by fatherly corrections, or by suggesting meet opportunities of practice; And
now having thus chosen, fenced, cleared, planted, watched, and ordered to
strain his Vines, he says most justly what could have been done more that I
have not done?

Certainly it is not in the power of any humane apprehension to conceive what
act could be added to perfect his culture, what blessing could be added to the
indearing of a Church. If he have made choice of a people for his own; If he
have blessed them with good government, with safe protection, If he have
removed all hindrances of their proficiencie; If he have given them wholesome
instructions, and plide them with solicitations to good; If his provident eye
have been ever over them for their deliverances; If lastly, he have used both
fair and foul means to wring from them the good juice of their obedience;
Say men are Angels. What could have been done more? What Church so ever in the
World can make good to it self these specialities of mercy, Let it know that
God has abated nothing to it of the height of his favor.

These are the favors wherewith God has begun to Israel, now turn your ears
to the answer that Israel returns to God, see the mercies of a good God
requited with the rebellions of a wicked people; wherefore when I looked that
it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? A woeful issue of
such blessings: wild grapes, and that with the disappointment of Gods
expectation.

Two usual faults does God find with any vicious Tree; No fruit, Ill fruit, The
one in omission of good, the other, in commission of sin: The fig tree in the
way is cursed for the one; Israel here taxed for the other.

What then are these wild, or as Pagnine renders it vuae putidae, rotten
Grapes? God has not left it to our guess, but has plainly told us v. 7. in
an elegant parenomasie I looked for ((...)) judgment and behold ((...)) a
wound or scab: that is oppression) I looked for (...) Justice, and behold
((...)) clamor. Generally what ever disposition or act, vncultured nature
does, or would produce of it self, that is a wild grape: Particularly, the
Holy Ghost has here instanced in several sins, so styled: A self-greatning
oppression, verse. 8. A settled drunkenness and wilful debauchednesse, verse.
11. A determined resolution of wicked courses, verse 18. A nicknaming of good
and evil, verse 20. A self conceitednesse in their own ways, verse 21.
Briberie in their Judges, 1. 23. Pride in their women 3. 16. obdured
infidelity in all 6. 10. Wild grapes indeed, such as corrupted nature yields
without a correction, without an alteration: she her self is wild; she can
yield but what she has, what she is; Please your selves who list in the
opinion of your fair, and sweet, and plausible disposition; ye shall find
nature at her best but a wild Vine; In me that is in my flesh there dwells no
good; says the chosen Vessel: Wild grapes, for the harshnesse and fowrenesse
of the taste; for the odiousness of their Verdure to the palate of the
Almighty, the best fruits of nature are but glorious sins, the worst are
horrible abominations: Such are the wild grapes of Israel; which yet could not
have been so ill if God had not been put into an expectation of better, and
if this expectation had not bin crossed with disappointment: Wherefore, when I
looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? Had
only Maples, or Thorns, or Willowes grown there, God would not have looked for
Grapes; had only wild Vines grown there; GOD would not have looked for
pleasing clusters, but now that God furnished the Soil with Noble and Generous
Plants, with what scorn, and indignation does he look upon wild Grapes?
Favors bestowed raise expectation, and expectation frustated doubles the
judgment: The very leaves and the high way drew a curse upon the Fig Tree; Woe
be to thee Chorazin, Woe be to thee Bethsaida. Son of man what shall be done
to the Vine of all trees? Woe be to thee O Vineyard of Israel: I will take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; I will break down the
wall, and it shall be trodden down.

My speech should now descend to the woeful vengeance, that God threats to and
inflicts upon his Israel; A fit Theme for so heavy a day; the Hedge of good
government and wholesome Laws shall be trodden down; the wall of Divine
Protection shall be broken; the beasts of the Field and Forest shall be let
in; the Grapes devoured, the Trees brouzed and trampled upon, the roots
extirpate; to the full and final vastation of Israel; to the scorn and
hissing of all Nations, to the just terror of all the World, whiles that
dearling people which was once the example of Gods mercy, is now becomne the
fearful spectacle of his fury, and revenge; suruiuing only in some few
abhorred, and despised Vagabonds, to show that there was once such a Nation:
But the time and occasion call my thoughts homeward, and inuit me rather, to
spend the rest of my hour, in paralleling Isreal's blessings, sins, threats
of judgment with our own: Wherein our interest shall be a sufficient motive
of our attention; Gather you together therefore, gather you, O Nation, not
worthy to be loved; and cast back your eyes upon those incomparable favors,
wherewith God has provoked, and indeared this Island; in which, I dare boldly
say we are, at the least, his second Israel. How has he chosen us out of all
the Earth, and divided us from the rest of the World, that we might be a
singular pattern, and strange wonder of his bounty; what should I speak of
the wholesome temper of our Clime; the rich provision of all useful
Commodities; so as we cannot say only as Sanchez did, I have moisture enough
within my own shell, but as David did, Poculum exuberans, My cup runs over
to the supply of our Neighbor Nations; what speak I of the populousness of
our Cities, the defencednesse of our shoares; these are nothing to that
heavenly treasure of the Gospel, which makes us the Vineyard of God and that
sweet peace, which gives us the happy fruition of that saving Gospel: Albion
do we call it? nay (as he rightly) Polyolbion; richly blessed; O God, what,
where is the Nation, that can emulate us in these favors?

How has he fenced us about, with the hedge of good Discipline, of wholesome
Laws, of gracious Government; with the brazen wall of his Almighty, and
miraculous protection; Never Land had more exquisite Rules of Justice, whether
mute, or speaking: He has not left us to the mercy of a rude Anarchie, or a
tyrannical violence, but has regulated us by Laws of our own asking, and
swayd us by the just Scepters of moderate Princes*

Never Land had more conuincing proofs of an Omnipotent Tuition; whether
against foreign Powers, or secret Conspiracies; Forget if ye can the year of
our Invasion, the Day of our Purim; Besides the many particularities of our
deliverances filed up by the pen of one of our worthy Prelates.

How has he given us means to remove the rubs of our growth; and to gather
away the stones of false doctrine, of heretical prauitie, of mischievous
machinations that might hold down his truth: And, which is the head of all,
How has he brought our Vine out of the Egypt of Popish Superstition, and
planted it; In plain terms; how has he made us a truly-orthodoxe Church;
eminent for purity of doctrine, for the grave and reverend solemnity of true
Sacraments, for the due form of government, for the pious and Religious form
of our public Lyturgie; with what plenty has he showred upon us the first
and latter rain of his heavenly Gospel? With what rare gifts has he graced
our Teachers? With what pregnant spirits has he furnished our Academies? With
what competencie of maintenance has he heartned all learned Professions? So as
in these regards; we may say of the Church of England, Many Daughters have done
virtuously, Prou. 31. 29.
but thou excellest them all.

How has the vigilant eye of his providence out of his door of Heaven watched
over this Island for good? not an hellish Pioner could mine under ground, but
he espied him; not a dark Lantern could offer to deceive midnight, but he
descryes it; not a plot, not a purpose of evil could look out, but he has
discovered it; and shamed the Agents, and glorified his mercy in our
deliverance.

Lastly, how infinitely has his loving care labored to bring us to good? What
sweet opportunities, and encouragements has he given us of a fruitful
obedience? and when his fatherly counsels would not work with us, how has he
scruzed us in the Winepresse of his heavy afflictions; one while, with a
raging Pestilence, another while, with the insolence and preualence of enemies,
one while with unkindly seasons, another while, with stormy and wracking
tempests, if by any means he might fetched from us the precious juice of true
penitence, and faithful obedience; that we might turn and live; If the press
be weighty, yet the wine were sweet.

Lay now all these together, And what could have been done more for our
Vineyard, O God, that thou have not done? Look about you, Honorable and
Christian hearers, and see whether God have done thus with any Nation; Oh
never, never was any people so bound to a God: Other neighboring Regions would
think themselves happy in one drop of those blessings which have powered down
thick upon us: Alas, they are in a vaporous and marish vale, whiles we are
seated on the fruitful Hill; they lie open to the massacring Knife of an
enemy, whiles we are fenced: they are clogged with miserable encumbrances,
whiles we are free; Briers, and Brambles ouerspread them, whiles we are
choicely planted; their tower is of offense, their winepresse is of blood. Oh
the lamentable condition of more likely Vineyards then our own; who can but
weep and bleed to see these woeful calamities that are fallen upon the late
famous and flourishing Churches of Reformed Christendom? Oh, for that Palatine
Vine, late inoculated with a precious bud of our Royal Stem; that Vine not
long since rich in goodly clusters; now the insultation of Boares, and prey of
Foxes; Oh for those poor distressed Christians in France, Boheme, Silesia,
Morauia, Germany, Austria, Valtoline, that groan under the tyrannous yoke of
Antichristian oppression; how glad would they be of the crummes of our Feasts;
how rich would they esteem themselves with the very gleanings of our
plentiful crop of prosperity; How do they look up at us, as even now
Militantly triumphant, whiles they are miserably wallowing in dust and blood;
and wonder to see the Sunshine upon our hill, whiles they are drenched with
storm and tempest in the Valley?

What are we, O God, what are we, that thou should be thus rich in thy
mercies to us, whiles thou art so severe in thy judgments unto them? It is too
much, Lord, it is too much, that thou have done for so sinful and rebellious a
people.

Cast now your eyes aside a little, and, after the view of Gods favors, see
some little glimpse of our requital; say, then, say, O Nation not worthy to be
beloved; What fruit have ye returned to your beneficent God? Sin is impudent;
but let me challenge the impudent forehead of sin it self; Are they not
sour and wild Grapes that we have yielded? Are we less deep in the sins of
Israel, then in Isreal's blessings? Complaints, I know, are unpleasing, how ever
just; but now, not more unpleasing the^ necessary, Woe is me, my mother, Ier.
15. 10.
that thou have horn me a man of contention. I must cry out in this sad day of
the sins of my people.

The Searchers of Canaan, when they came to the brook of Esheol, they cut down
a branch, with a cluster of Grapes, and carried it on a staff between two, to
show Israel the fruit of the Land, Numb. 13. 23. Give me leave, in the search
of our Israel, to present your eyes with some of the wild grapes that grow
there, on every hedge: And what if they be the very same that grew in this
degenerated Vineyard of Israel?

Where we meet first with oppression; a Lordly sin, and that challenges
precedencie (as which is commonly incident to none but the great (though a
poor oppressor (as he is unkindly) so he is a monster of mercilesnesse.) Oh
the loud shrieks and clamours of this crying sin! What grinding of faces,
what racking of Rents, what detention of wages, what enclosing of Commons, what
engrossing of Commodities, what griping exactions, what strayning the
advantages of greatness, what unequal leuies of Legal payments, what
spightfull Suits, what Depopulations, what Vsuries, what violences abou^d every
where?

The sighs, the tears, the blood of the poor pierce the Heavens, and call
for a fearful retribution; This is a sour Grape indeed, and that makes God
to wring his face in an angry detestation.

Drunkenness is the next; not so odious in the weakness of it as in the
strength: Oh woeful glory; strong to drink: Woe is me, how is the World tum'd
beast? What bouzing, and quaffing, and whiffing, and healthing is there on
every bench; and what reeling and staggering in our streets? What drinking by
the Yard, the Die, the Dozen? What forcing of pledges. What quarrels for
measure; and form? How is that becomme an excuse of villainy, which any villainy
might rather excuse. I was drunk, How has this torrent, yea this deluge of
excess in meats and drinks drowned the face of the Earth, and risen many
Cubits above the highest Mountains of Religion and good Laws? Yea would God I
might not say that which I fear; and shame, and grieve to say, that even some
of them which square the Arc for others, have been inwardly drowned, and
discovered their nakedness. That other inundation, scoured the World, this
impures it, and what but a Deluge of fire can wash it from so abominable
filthiness.

Let no Popish Eaues-dropper now smile to think what advantage I give by so
deep a censure of our own profession; Alas, these sins know no difference
of Religions; would God they themselves were not rather more deep in these
foul enormities; we extenuate not our guilt; what ever we sin, we condemn
it as mortal; they palliate wickedness with the fair pretense of Venialitie;
shortly; They accuse us, we them, God both:

But where am I? How easy is it for a man to loose himself in the sins of
the time? It is not for me to have mine habitation in these black Tents; Let
me pass through them running: Where can a man cast his eye not to see that
which may vex his soul?

Here Briberie and corruption in the seats of Judicature: their Periuries at
the Bar; here partiality and unjust conniuencie in Magistrates, there
disorder in those that should be Teachers; Here Sacrilege in Patrons, there
Simoniacall contracts in unconscionable Leuits; Here bloody Oaths and
Execrations, there scurrile profaneness. Here cozening in bargains, there
breaking of promises; Here persfidious Underminings, there flattering
supparasitations: Here pride in both Sexes, but especially the weaker, there
Luxury and Wantonness.

Here contempt of Gods Messengers, there neglect of his Ordinances, and
violations of his Days: the time and my breath would sooner fail me then this
woeful Bedroll of wickedness:

Yet alas, were these the sins of Ignorance, of Infirmity, they might be
more worthy of pity then hatred; But oh, the high hand of our presumptuous
offenses, we draw iniquity with the strings of vanity, up to the head, up to
the ear, and shoot up these hateful shafts against heaven* Did we sit in
darkness and the shadow of death, as too many Pagan and Popish Regions do,
these works of darkness would be less intolerable: but now, that the beams
of the glorious Gospel have shined thus long, thus bright in our faces; Oh me,
what can we plead against our own confusion? Oh Lord, where shall we appear,
when thy very mercies aggrauate our sins, and thy judgments.

Why should thou not expect fruit from a Vineyard so chosen, so husba^ded,
and woe worth our wretchedness that have thus repayd thee; Be confounded in thy
self, O my Soul, be confounded to see these deplored retributions; Are these
Grapes for a God? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unjust;
Has he for this made us the mirror of his mercies to all the World, that we
should so shamefully turn his graces into wantonness? Are these the fruits of
his choice, his Fencing, his Reforming, his Planting, his watch Tower, his
Winepresse? Dan 9. 4.
O Lord; the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenants, and mercies to
them that love thee, we have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have
rebelled, by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments; Oh Lord,
righteousness belongs to thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this
day; we know, we acknowledge how just it may be with thee to pull up our
hedges, to break down our Wall, to root up our Vines; to destroy and
depopulate our Nation, to make us the scorn and Proverb of all Generations;
But O our God, Let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy Jerusalem,
Dan. 9. 16, 19.
thy holy Mountain. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord harken, and do:
defer not for thine own sake, O our God, for thy City, and thy people are
called by thy Name:

But alas, what speak I of not deferring, to a God of mercy, who is more
forward to give, then we to crave; and more loath to strike then we to smart,
and when he must strike, complains, Why will ye dye O house of Israel? Let
me rather turn this speech to our selves; the delay is ours; Yet it is not
too late, either for our return, or his mercies; The decree is not (to us)
gone forth, till it be executed; As yet our Hedge stands, our wall is firm,
our Vine grows; These sharp monitions, these touches of Judgment have been
for our warning, not for our ruin; Who knows if he will not return, and yet
leave a blessing behind him: Oh that we could turn unto him with all our
heart, with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning; Oh that we could
truly and effectually abandon all those abominable Sins, that have stirred
up the Anger of our God against us; and in this our day, this day of our
solemn humiliation, renew the Vows of our holy and conscionable obedience:
Lord God, it must be thou only that must do it; Oh strike thou our flintie
hearts with a sound remorse, and melt them into tears of penitence for all our
sins; Convert us unto thee, and we shall be converted; Lord hear our Prayers,
and regard our tears, and reform our Lives, and remove thy Plagues, and renew
thy loving countenance, and continue and add to thine old mercies, Lord affect
us with thy favors, humble us for our Sins; terrify us with thy Judgments;
that so thou may hold on thy favors, and forgive our Sins, and remove thy
Judgments; even for the sake of the Son of thy love Jesus Christ the
righteous, to whom, etc.

FINIS.
Postscript.
SInce it seemed good to that Great Court, to call this poor Sermon (amongst
others, of greater worth) into the public Light; I have thus submitted to
their pleasure: And now, for that they pleased to bid so high a rate, as their
command, for that mean piece; I do willingly give them this my other Statue
into the bargain.

This work preceded (some little) in time, that which it now follows in
place, not without good reason: Authority sends forth that, this, will: and my
will has learned ever to give place to authority. Besides my desire to save
the labor of Transcriptions, I found it not unfit, the World should see, what
preparatiue was given for so stirring a Potion; neither can there be so much
need, in these languishing times, of any discourse, as that which serves to
quicken our mortification; wherein I so much rejoice to have so happily met
with those Reverend Bishops, who led the way and followed me, in this holy
Service. The God of Heaven make all our endeauours effectual to the saving of
the souls of his people.

AMEN.
A SERMON PREACHED TO HIS Majesty, on the Sunday before the Fast, (being
March. 30.) at White Hall.

In way of preparation for that holy Exercise.

By the B. of EXCETER.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Nath. Butter, and are to be sold at his shop at
St. Austins gate. 1628.

GALAT. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, etc.
HE that was once tossed in the conflue^ce of two Seas, Acts 27. 41. was once
no less straited in his resolutions betwixt life and death, Philip. 1. 23.
Neither does my Text argue him in any other case here; As there he knew not
whether he should choose, so here he knew not whether he had. I am
crucified, there he is dead: yet I live, there he is alive again; Yet not I,
there he lives not; but Christ in me, there he more then lives. This holy
correction makes my Text full of wonders, full of sacred riddles. 1. The living
God is dead upon the cross, Christ crucified; 2. St. Paul who dyed by the
sword, dies on the cross. 3. St. Paul who was not Paul till after Christ's
death, is yet crucified with Christ. 4. St. Paul thus crucified yet lives. 5.
St. Paul lives not himself, whiles he lives; 6. Christ who is crucified, lives
in Paul; who was crucified with him.

See then here both a Lent, and an Easter; A Lent of mortification, I am
crucified with Christ. An Easter of resurrection, and life, I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me: The Lent of my Text will be sufficient (as proper)
for this season; wherein my speech shall pass through three long stages of
discourse: Christ crucified, St. Paul crucified, St. Paul crucified with
Christ. In all which, your Honorable and Christian patience, shall as much
shorten my way, as my care shall shorten the way to your patience.

Christ's cross is the first lesson of our infancy, worthy to be our last, and
all: The great Doctor of the Gentiles affected not to fly any higher pitch.
Grande crucis sacramentu^, as Ambrose. This is the greatest wonder that ever
earth, or heaven yielded. God in carnate was (...), 1 Timothy 3. 16.
but God suffering, and dying was so much more, as death is more penal then
birth: The Godhead of man, and the blood of God are two such miracles, as the
Angels of heaven can never enough look into, never admire enough.

Ruffine tells us that among the sacred characters of the Egyptians, the cross
was anciently one, which was said to signify eternal life; hence their
learneder sort were converted to, and confirmed in the faith. Surely, we know
that in Gods Hieroglyphics, eternal life is both represented, and exhibited
to us by the Cross. That the Cross of Christ was made of the tree of life, a
slip the Angels gave to Adams son, out of Paradise, is but a Jewish legend;
Galatine may believe it, not we; but; that it is made the tree of life to all
believers, we are sure; This is the only scale of heaven; never man ascended
thither, but by it. By this, Christ himself climbd up to his own glory.
Dominus regnauit a ligno, as Tertullian translates that of the Psalm; Father
glorify thy name, that is says he, Duc me ad crucem, Lift me up to the tree,
not of my shame, but of my triumph. Behold, we preach Christ crucified (says
St. Paul) to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks, foolishness; but to
them which are called, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God 1 Cor.
1. 23. Foolish men, that stumble at power, and deride wisdom. Vpbraid us now
ye fond Jews and Pagans, with a a crucified Savior; it is our glory, it is
our happiness; which ye make our reproach: had not our Savior dyed, he could
have bin no Savior for us; had not our Savior dyed, we could not have lived;
See now the flagge of our dear Redeemer, this Cross, shining eminently, in
loco pudoris, in our forheads: and if we had any place more high, more
conspicuous, more honorable, there we would advance it. O blessed Jesus, when
thou art thus lifted upon thy cross, thou drawest all hearts unto thee: there
thou leadest captivity captive, and give give gifts unto men. Ye are
deceived O ye blind Jews and Paynimes, ye are deceived; It is not a gibbet,
it is a throne of honor, to which our Savior is raised. A throne of such
honor, as to which heaven and earth, and hell, do and must veil. The Sun
hides his awful head, the earth trembles, the rocks rend, the graves open,
and all the frame of nature does homage to their Lord in this secret, but
divine pomp of his crucifixion* And whiles ye think his feet and hands
despicably fixed, behold, he is powerfully trampling upon hell and death, and
setting up trophies of his most glorious victory; and scattering everlasting
Crowns, and Scepters unto all believers: O Savior, I do rather more adore
thee, on the Caluary of thy passion, then on the Tabor of thy transfiguration,
or the Oliuet of thine ascension: and cannot so affectuously bless thee for
Pater clarifica, Father glorify me, as, for, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me; since it is no news for God to be great, and glorious; but, for
the eternal and everliving God, to be abased; to be abased unto death, to the
death of the cross, is that which could not but amaze the Angels, and confound
Devils, and so much more magnifies thine infinite mercy, by how much an
infinite person would become more ignominious. All Hosannaes of men, all
Alleluiahs of Saints and Angels come short of this Maiesticke humiliation:
Blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
to the Lamb for ever, and ever, Revel. 5. 13. And ye (honorable and beloved)
as ever ye hope to make music in heaven, learn to tune your harpes to the
note and ditty of these heavenly Elders; Rejoice in this, and rejoice in
nothing but this cross; not in your transitory honors, titles, treasures, which
will at the last leave you inconsolately sorrowful; but in this cross of
Christ; whereby the world is crucified to you, and you to the world. Oh clip
and embrace this precious cross with both your arms, and say with that
blessed Martyr, Amor meus crucifixus est, my love is crucified. Those that have
searched into the monuments of Jerusalem, write that our Savior was crucified
with his face to the West; which howsoever spightfully meant of the Jews, (as
not allowing him worthy to look on the holy City and Temple) yet, was not
without a mystery; His eyes look to the Gentiles etc.
Oculi eius super Gentes recipient says the Psalmist; As Christ therefore on
his cross looked toward us sinners of the Gentiles; so let us look up to him;
Let our eyes be lift up to this brazen serpent, for the cure of the deadly
stings (of that old serpent: See him, O all ye beholders; see him hanging upon
the tree of shame, of curse, to rescue you from curse, and confusion, and to
feoffe you in everlasting blessedness: see him stretching out his arms to
receive, and embrace you; hanging down his head to take view of your misery,
opening his precious side to receive you into his bosom, opening his very
heart to take you in thither, pouring out thence water to wash you, and blood
to redeem you: O all ye Nazarites that pass by, out of this dead Lion, seek
and find the true honey of unspeakable, and endless comfort.

And ye great Masters of Israel, whose lips profess to preserve knowledge,
leave all curious and needless disquisitions, and with that divine and
extaticall Doctor of the Gentiles, care only to know, to preach, Christ and
him crucified.

But this, though the sum of the Gospel, is not the maine drift of my Text:
I may not dwell in it, though I am loath to part with so sweet a meditation:
From Christ crucified turn your eyes to Paul crucified; you have read him
dying by the sword; hear him dying by the cross; and see his moral,
spiritual, living crucifixion.

Our Apostle is two men, Saul and Paul; The old man, and the new; in respect of
the old man he is crucified and dead to the law of sin; so as that sin is
dead in him; neither is it otherwise with every regenerate. Sin has a body, as
well as the man has, (who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.
24. A body that has limbs, and parts; Mortify your earthly members, says
our Apostle, Colos. 3. 5. Not the limbs of our humane body, which are made of
earth, (so should we be hosts naturae, as Bernard) but the sinful limbs,
that are made of corruption, Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection,
etc. The head of sin is wicked devices; the heart of sin, wicked desires;
the hands and feet of sin, wicked executions; the tongue of sin, wicked
words; the eyes of sin, lustful apprehensions; the forehead of sin,
impudent profession of evil; the back of sin, a strong supportation and
maintenance of evil; all this body of sin is not only put to death, but to
shame too; so as it is dead with disgrace; I am crucified. St. Paul speaks not
this singularly of himself, but in the person of the renewed; sin, does not,
cannot live a vital, and vigorous life in the regenerate. Wherefore then (say
you) was the Apostles complaint (...) etc. wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Mark, I beseech you; it was the body of
sin; not the life of sin; a body of death, not the life of that body; Or if
this body had yet some life, it was such a life, as is left in the limbs when
the head is struck off; some dying quiuerings, rather as the remainders of a
life that was, then any act of a life that is: Or, if a further life, such a
one as in swounds, and fits of epilepsie, which yields breath, but not sense;
or if some kind of sense, yet no motion, or if it have some kind of motion in
us, yet no manner of dominion over us. What power, motion, sense, relics of
life are in a fully crucified man? such a one may waft up and down with the
wind, but cannot move out of any internal principle.

Sin and grace cannot more stand together in their strength, then life and
death: In remiss degrees all contraries may be lodged together under one
roof; Saint Paul swears that he dies daily, yet he lives; so the best man
sins hourly, even whiles he obeyes; but the powerful and ouer-ruling sway
of sin is incompatible with the truth of regeneration. Every Esau would be
carrying away a blessing; No man is willing to sit out. Ye shall have strong
drinkers, as Esaias calls them, Esaias 5. 22. Neighing stallions of lust, as Jeremy
calls them, Ier. 5. 8. Mighty hunters in oppression, as Nimrod, Genesis 10. 9.
rotten talkers, Ephesians 4. 9. which yet will be challenging as deep a share
in grace, as the conscionablest: Alas how many millions do miserably delude
themselves with a mere pretense of Christianity; aliter vivunt, aliter
loquuntur, as he said of the Philosophers. Vain hypocrites, they must know
that every Christian is a crucified man: How are they dead to their sins,
that walk in their sins? how are their sins dead in them, in whom they stir,
reign, flourish? Who does not smile to hear of a dead man that walks? Who
derides not the solecisme of that Actor, which expressed himself fully dead by
saying so? What a mockery is this? eyes full of lust, itching ears, scurrilous
tongues, bloody hands, hearts full of wickedness, and yet dead? Deceive not
your solues dear Christians, if ye love them; This false death is the way to
the true eternal, incomprehensibly-wofull death of body and soul: If ye will
needs do so, walk on ye falsely dead, in the ways of your old sins, be
sure, these paths shall lead you down to the chambers of everlasting death;
if this be the hanging up of your corruptions, fear to hang in hell. Away with
this hateful simulation; God is not mocked; Ye must either kill, or dye. Kill
your sins; or else they will be sure to kill your souls, apprehend,
arraigne, condemn them; fasten them to the tree of shame; and, if they be not
dead already, break their legs and arms, disable them to all offensive
actions; as was done to the thieves in the Gospel; so shall you say with our
blessed Apostle, I am crucified.

Neither is it thus only in matter of notorious crime, and gross wickedness,
but thus it must be in the universal carriage of our lives, and the whole
habitual frame of our dispositions; In both these, we are, we must be
crucified. Be not deceived my brethren, it is a sad and austere thing to be a
Christian; This work is not frolic, iouiall, plausible; there is a certain
thing called true mortification, required to this business; and who ever heard
but there was pain in death? but, among all deaths, in crucifying? what a
torture must there needs be in this act of violence? what a distention of the
body, (whose weight is rack enough to it self?) what strayning of the joints?
what nayling of hands and feet? Never make account to be Christians without
the hard taskes of penitence. It will cost you tears, sighs, watchings,
selfe-restraints, selfe-struglings, selfe-denyalls: This word is not more harsh
then true; Ye delicate hypocrites, what do ye talk of Christian profession,
when ye will not abate a dish from your belly, nor spare an hours sleep from
your eyes, nor cast off an offensive rag from your backs for your God? In
vain shall the vassals of appetite challenge to be the servants of God: Were
it that the Kingdom of God did consist in eating, and drinking, in pampering
and surfets, in chambering and wantonness, in prancking and vanity, in talk
and ostentation: Oh God how rich should thou be of subjects, of Saints? But
if it require abstinence, humiliation, contrition of heart, subiugation of our
flesh, renunciation of our wills, serious impositions of laborsome devotions; O
Lord, what is becomne of true Christianity? where shall we seek for a
crucified man? Look to our Tables, there ye shall find excess and riot;
Look to our backs, there ye shall find proud disguises, look to our
conversation, there ye shall find scurrile and obscene iollity: This liberty,
yea this licentiousness is that, which opens the mouths of our adversaries, to
the censure of our real impiety; That slander which Julian could cast upon
Constantine, that (...) led him to (...) delicacie, to intemperance, the very
same do they cast upon us: they tell us of their strict Lents, frequent
fastings, Canonical hours, sharp penances, their bashful shrifts, their
painful scourgings, their solitatie Cells, their woolward and barefoot
walks, their hard and tedious pilgrimages, whiles we (they say) deny nothing
to back or belly; fare full, lie soft, sit warm, and make a wanto^ of the
flesh, whiles we profess to tend the spirit. Brethren, hear a little the
words of exhortation: The bragges of their penal will worship shall no whit
move us; All this is blown away with a Quis requisiuit? Baals Priests did more
then they, yet were never the holyer: But for our selves, in the fear of God
see that we do not justify their crimination; whiles they are in one extreme,
placing all Religion in the outside, In touch not, taste not, handle not; let
not us be in the other, not regarding the external acts of due humiliation: It
is true that it is more easy to afflict the body, then to humble the soul; A
dram of remorse is more then an ounce of pain: O God, if whippings, and
haire-clothes, and watchings would satisfy thy displeasure, who would not
sacrifice the blood of this vassal (his body) to expiate the sin of his
soul? who would not scrub his skin, to ease his conscience? who would not
freeze upon an hardle, that he might not fry in hell? who would not hold his
eyes open, to avoid an eternal unrest and torment? But such sacrifices and
oblations, O God, thou desire not; The sacrifice of God is a broken spirit; a
broken and a contrite heart O God, thou will not despise; Yet it is as true,
that it is more easy to counterfeit mortification of spirit, then humiliation
of body; there is pain in the one, none in the other: He that cares not
therefore to pull down his body, will much less care to humble his soul; and
he that spares not to act meet and due penalties upon the flesh, gives more
color of the souls humiliation. Dear Christians, it is not for us to stand
upon niggardly terms with our Maker, he will have both; He that made both,
will have us crucified in both; The old man does not lie in a limme, or
faculty, but is diffused through the whole extent of body and soul, and must
be crucified in all that it is. (...) says the chosen vessel, I beat down
my body; my body, as well as my spirit; Give me leave ye Courtiers and
Citizens; Lent is wont to be a penitential Time; If ye have soundly and
effectually shriuen your selves to your God, let me enjoin you an wholesome
and saving penance for the whole year, for your whole life. Ye must curb
your appetites, ye must fast, ye must stint your selves to your painful
devotions; ye must give peremptory denyalls to your own wills; ye must put
your knife to your throat in Salomons sense. Think not that ye can climb up
to heaven with full panches, reaking ever of Indian smoke, and the surfets of
your gluttonous crammings and quaffings; Oh easy and pleasant way to glory;
From our bed to our glass, from our glass to our board; from our dinner to
our pipe, from our pipe to a visit, from a visit, to a supper, from a supper to
a play, from a play to a banquer, from a banquet to our bed: Oh remember the
quarrel against damned Dives; he fared sumptuously every day; he made
neither Lents, nor Embers (...) as he said, every day was gaudie and festival,
in rich suits, in dainty morsels, and full draughts, Intus mulso, Wine within,
Oil without.
foris oleo, as he said; now all the world for a drop, and it is too little.
Vae saturis, woe to the full, says our Savior; but even nature it self could
abhominate, bis de die saturum, One that is full twice a day. One of the sins
of our Sodom is fullness of bread: What is the remedy? It is an old word, that
hunger cures the diseases of gluttony. Oh that my words could prevail so far
with you, Honorable and beloved Christians, as to bring austere abstinence and
sober moderation into fashion; The Court and City have led the way to excess,
your example shall prescribe, yea administer the remedy; Cic. de Fin.
The heathen man could say, he is not worthy of the name of a man that would
be a whole day in pleasure; what, and we always? In fasting often, says St.
Paul; what, and we never? I fast twice a week, says the Pharisee, and we
Christians, when? I speak not of Popish mock-fasts, in change, not in
forbearance; in change of courser cates of the land, for curious dainties of
the water, of the flesh of beasts, for the flesh of fish; of untoothsome
morsells for soruitiunculae delicatae, as Hierome calls them; Let me never
feast, if this be fasting; I speak of a true, and serious maceration of our
bodies, by an absolute and total refraining from sustenance; which howsoever
in it self it be not an act pleasing unto God, (for well may I inuert St.
Paul, neither if we eat not, are we the better, neither if we eat, are we the
worse, 1 Cor. 8. 8.) yet, in the effect it is; singular sanctitatis aratrum,
as that Father terms it; The plow bears no Corn, but it makes way for it; it
opens the soil, it tears up the briers, and turns up the furrows; Thus does
holy abstinence; it chastises the flesh, it lightens the spirit, it disheartens
our vicious dispositions, it quickens our devotion. Away with all factious
combinations; Every man is master of his own maw; Fast at home, and spare
not, leave public exercises of this kind to the command of Sovereign powers;
Blow the trumphet in Zion, sanctify a fast, says Joel 2. 15. Surely this
Trumpet is for none but Royal breath; And now (that, what I meant for a suit,
may be turned to a just gratulation) how do we bless the God of heaven, that
has put it into the heart of his Anointed to set this sacred trumpet to his
lips: Never was it, never can it be more seasonable then now. Now that we are
fallen into a war of religion; Now that our friends and Allies groan either
under mis-cariage, or danger; Now that our distressed neighbors implore our
help in tears, and bood; Now that our God has humbled us with manifold
losses; Now, that we are threatened with so potent enemies; Now that all
Christendom is embroyled with so miserable and perilous distempers; Oh now it
has seasonably pleased your Majesty to blow the Trumpet in Zion, to sanctify
a fast, to call a solemn Assembly; The miraculous success that God gave to
your Majesty and your Kingdom, in this holy exercise, may well encourage an
happy iteration; How did the public breath of our fasting prayers cleanse the
air before them? How did that noisome pestilence vanish suddenly away, as that
which could not stand before our powerful humiliations? If we be not strained
in our own bowels, the hand of our God is not shortened; O Daughter of Zion,
Ier. 6. 26.
gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thy self in ashes, make thee mourning
and most bitter lamentation; Fast and pray and prosper: And in the mean time,
for us, let us not think it enough to forbear a meal; or to hang down our
heads like a bulrush for a day; but let us break the bands of wickedness, and
in a true contrition of soul vow and perform better obedience. Oh then, as
we care to auert the heavy judgments of God, from our selves, and our land,
as we desire to traduce the Gospel with peace, to our posterity; Let each man
humble one; Let each man rend his heart, with sorrow for his own sins, and the
sins of his people; Shortly, let every man ^ansacke his own soul, and life,
and offer and holy violence to all those sinful corruptions which have stirred
up the God of heaven against us; and never leave til in truth of heart, he can
say with our blessed Apostle, I am crucified.

Ye have seen Christ crucified, St. Paul crucified, see now both crucified
together, I am crucified with Christ; It is but a cold word, this, I am
crucified; it is the company that quickens it: He that is the life, gives it
life, and makes both the word, and act glorious, I am crucified with Christ.

Alas! there is many a one crucified, but not with Christ; The covetous, the
ambitious man is selfe-crucified; he plots a crown of thorny cares for his
own head; he peirces his hands and feet with toylesome, and painful
undertakings, he drencheth himself with the vinegar, and gall of
discontentme^ts, he gores his side, and wounds his heart with inward vexations:
Thus the man is crucified, but with the world, not with Christ.

The envious man is crucified by his own thoughts; he needs no other gibbet,
then another man's prosperity; because another person, or counsel is
preferred to his, he leapes to hell in his own haltar; This man is crucified,
but it is Achitophels cross, not Christ's.

The desperate man is crucified with his own distrust, he pierces his own
heart with a deep, irremediable, vnmittigable, killing sorrow; he pays his
wrong to Gods justice with a greater wrong to his mercy, and leapes out of an
inward hell of remorse, to the bottomless pit of damnation. This man is
crucified; but this is Iudases cross, not Christ's.

The superstitious man is professedly mortifyde; The answer of that Hermit in
the story is famous, why do thou destroy thy body? because it would destroy
me; He uses his body, therefore, not as a servant, but a slave; not as a
slave, but an enemy: He lies upon thorns, with the Pharisee; little ease is
his lodging, with Simeon the Anachoret; the stone is his pillow, with Jacob,
the tears his food, with exiled David; he lanceth his flesh with the
Baalites, he digges his grave with his nails; his meals are hunger, his
breathings sighs, his linen haire-cloth, lined and laced with cords, and
wires; lastly, he is his own willing tormentor, and hopes to merit heaven by
selfe-murder. This man is crucified, but not with Christ.

The Felon, the traitor is justly crucified, the vengeance of the law will not
let him live; The Jesuitical incendiary, that cares only to warm himself by
the fires of States, and Kingdoms, cries out of his suffering; The world is
too little for the noise of our cruelty, their patience; whiles it judges of
our proceedings, by our laws, not by our executions; but if they did suffer
what they falsely pretend, (as they now complain of ease) they might be
crucified, but not with Christ, they should bleed for sedition, not conscience:
They may steal the name of Jesus, they shall not have his society; This is not
Christ's cross, it is the cross of Barabbas, or the two malefactors ((...))
Mark 15. 7. All these and many more are crucified, but, not as St. Paul was
here, with Christ. How with Christ? In partnership, in person: In partnership
of the suffering; every particularity of Christ's crucifixion is reacted in us.
Christ is the model, we the metal; the metal takes such form as the
model gives it: so are we spread upon the cross of Christ, in an unanswerable
extension of all parts, to dye with him, as the Prophet was upon the dead
child, to revive him. Superstitious men talk of the impression of our
Saviors wounds in their Idol St. Francis: This is no news; St. Paul; and
every believing Christian has both the lash^^, and wounds, and transfixions of
his Jesus wrought upon him; The crown of thorns pierces his head, when his
sinful conceits are mortified; His lips are drencht with gall, and vinegar,
when sharp and feuere restraints are given to his tongue: His hands and feet
are nailed; when he is by the power of Gods Spirit disabled to the wonted
courses of sin; His body is stripped, when all color and pretenses are taken
away from him; shortly, his heart is pierced, when the life blood of his
formerly-raigning corruptions is let out. He is not true Christian that is not
thus crucified with Christ.

Woe is me, how many fashionable ones are not so much as pained with their
sins; It is no trouble to them to blaspheeme, oppress, debauch. Yea, rather
it is a death to them to think of parting with their dear corruptions; The
world has bewitched their love; That which Erasmus says of Paris, that after
a man has acquainted himself with the odious sent of it (hospitibus magis ac
magis adlubescit) it grows into his liking more and more; is too true of the
world, and sensual minds: Alas, they rather crucify Christ again, then are
crucified with Christ. Woe to them that ever they were; for being not dead with
Christ, they are not dead in Christ; and being not dead in Christ, they cannot
but dye eternally in themselves; For the wages of sin is death: death in
their person, if not in their surety. Honorable and beloved, let us not think
it safe for us to rest in this miserable and deadly condition; As ye love your
souls, give no sleep to your eyes, nor peace to your hearts, till ye find
the sensible effects of the death, and Passion of Christ your Savior, within
you, mortifying all your corrupt affections, and sinful actions, that ye may
truly say with St. Paul, I am crucified with Christ.

Six several times do we find that Christ shed blood; In his Circumcision,
In his Agony, In his Crowning, In his Scourging, In his Affixion, In his
Transfixion. The instrument of the first was the Knife; Of the second,
vehemence of Passion; Of the third, the Thorns; Of the fourth, the Whips; Of
the fifth, the nails; Of the last, the Spear: In all these we are, we must be
partners with our Savior.

In his Circumcision; when we draw blood of ourselves by cutting off the
foreskinne of our filthy (if pleasing) corruptions. Colos. 2. 11.

In his Agony, when we are deeply affected with the sense of Gods displeasure
for sin, and terrified with the frowns of an angry Father.

In his crowning with thorns, when we smart, and bleed with reproaches for the
name of Christ; when that which the world counts honor, is a pain to us, for
his sake; when our guilty thoughts punish us, and wound our restless heads,
with the sad remembrance of our sins.

In his scourging, when we tame our wanton, and rebellious flesh, with wise
rigor, and holy severity.

In his Affixion, when all the powers of our souls, and parts of our body, are
strictly hampered, and vnremoueably fastened upon the Royal Commandments of
our Maker, and Redeemer.

In his Transfixion, when our hearts are wounded with divine love (with the
Spouse in the Canticles) or our consciences, with deep sorrow.

In all these, we bleed with Christ; and all these (save the first only)
belong to his crucifying. Surely, as it was in the old Law ((...)) without
blood shed there was no remission (Heb. 9. 22.) so it is still, and ever, in
the new. If Christ had not thus bled for us, no remission; If we do not thus
bleed with Christ, no remission.

There is no benefit, where is no partnership. If Christ therefore bled with
his agony, with his thorns, with his whips, with his nails, with his spear,
in so many thousand passages, as tradition is bold to define, and we never
bleed, either with the agony of our sorrow, for sin; or the thorns of holy
cares for displeasure; or the scourges of severe Christian rigor, or the
nails of holy constraint, or the spear of deep remorse; How do we, how can
we, for shame, say, we are crucified with Christ?

Divine St. Austin, Epist. 120. ad Honoratum.
in his Epistle, or book rather to Honoratus, gives us all the dimensions of
the Cross of Christ; The latitude he makes in the transuerse; this (says he)
pertaines to good works; because on this his hands were stretched.

The length was from the ground to the transuerse, this is attributed to his
longanimitie, and persistance, for on that, his body was stayed, and fixed.

The height was in the head of the cross, above the transuerse; signifying the
expectation of supernall things.

The depth of it, was in that part, which was pitched below within the earth,
importing the profoundnesse of his free grace, which is the ground of all his
beneficence. In all these must we have our part with Christ; In the transuerse
of his Cross, by the ready extension of our hands to all good works of piety,
justice, charity. In the Arrectary, or beam of his Cross, by continuance, and
uninterrupted perseverance in good; In the head of his cross, by an
high-eleuated hope, and looking for of glory; In the foot of his cross, by a
lively and firm faith, fastening our souls upon the affiance of his free
grace, and mercy; And thus shall we be crucified with Christ, upon his own
Cross.

Yet lastly, we must go further then this, from his Cross to his person.

So did St. Paul, and every believer, dye with Christ, that he died in Christ:
For, as in the first Adam we all lived, and sinned; so in the second all
believers dyed, that they might live.

The first Adam brought in death to all mankind, but, at last, actually dyed
for none but himself; The second Adam dyed for mankind, and brought life to
all believers. See thou thy Savior therefore hanging upon the Cross, all
mankind hangs there with him; as a Knight or Burgess of Parliament voices his
whole Borough, or Country: what speak I of this? The arms and legs take
the same lot with the head; Every believer is a limme of that body; how can he
therefore, but dye with him, and in him? That real union, then, which is betwixt
Christ and us, makes the cross and passion of Christ, ours. So as the thorns
pierced our heads, the scourges blooded our backs, the nails wounded our hands
and feet, and the spear gored our sides, and hearts: By virtue whereof, we
receive justification from our sins, and true mortification of our
corruptions. Every believer, therefore, is dead already for his sins, in his
Savior; he needs not fear that he shall die again. God is too just to punish
twice for one fault; to recover the sum both of the surety, and principal: All
the score of our arerages is fully struck off, by the infinite satisfaction of
our blessed Redeemer; Comfort thy self, therefore thou penitent, and faithful
soul, in the confidence of thy safety; Thou shall not die but live, since thou
art already crucified with thy Savior; He dyed for thee, thou dyedst in him;
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that iustifies?
Who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed; yea rather, that is risen again,
and lives gloriously at the right hand of God, making intercession for us: To
thee o blessed Jesus, together with thy Coeternall Father, and holy Spirit,
three persons in one infinite, and incomprehensible Deity; be all praise,
honor, and glory, now, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

