CHRISTIAN MODERATION. In two Books.

By JOS: EXON.

LONDON, Printed by MILES FLESHER, and are to be sold by NATHANIEL BUTTER.
MDCXL.

TO ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE WHERESOEVER: But especially to those of this WESTERN
DIOCESE: AND THEREIN To the Honorable NOBILITY, the Reverend and Learned
CLERGY, the Worshipful GENTRY, the honest and Faithful COMMONALTY OF The
Counties of Devon and Cornwall. J. Exon Wishes the continuance, and increase
of (that whereof he treates) All CHRISTIAN MODERATION Both in Opinion, and
Practice.

THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST BOOK. Moderation in Practice.
. 1. OF the use and necessity of Moderation in general.. 2. Practical
Moderation in matter of pleasure. Wherein first of the pleasures of the palate.
1. Of the excess of them. 2. Of the other extremity of defect.
. 3. Of some extremities in other usages of the body.. 4. Of the extremes in
the cases of lust.. 5. The liberty that God has given us in the use of his
creatures, both for necessity and lawful delight.. 6. The just bounds of
Moderation in the liberal use of Gods creatures. And therein our limitation,
in our respects to God.. 7. The limitation of our liberty in respect of the
pleasures themselves: first for the kind, then for the quantity, and quality of
them.. 8. The moderation of the pleasure of conjugall society.. 9. The
limitation of all our pleasures in the manner of using them.. 10. Motives to
Moderation in the use of all our pleasures.. 11. Of the Moderation of our
desires in matter of wealth, and honor, etc. Motives to that moderation.. 12.
Of the moderation of our Passions: and therein first of our sorrow. The
cautions requisite thereto. Of the kinds of sorrow: and first of worldly
sorrow. The temperaments thereof.. 13. Of spiritual sorrow; and the moderation
thereof.. 14. Of the moderation of the passion of Fear. The dangerous effects
of that passion. Particularly of the fear of death. Strong motives for the
remedy of it.. 15. Of the moderation of the passion of Anger; The ill effects
of it. The distinction of Zealous and vicious anger. Arguments for the
mitigation of our anger.
The second Book. Moderation in matter of Judgment.
. 1. OF the danger of immoderation in matter of judgment, and of the remedy in
general.. 2. Lukewarmnesse to be avoided in Religion.. 3. Zeal required in
the matters of God, but to be tempered with discretion and charity.. 4. Rules
for Moderation in Judgment. The first Rule: To distinguish of persons.. 5.
Second Rule: To distinguish of truths and errors.. 6. Third Rule: The avoidance
of curiosity in the disquisition of truths. Therein of the simplicity of former
times, and the over-lashing of ours.. 7. Fourth Rule: To rest in those
Fundamental Truths which are revealed clearly in the Scriptures.. 8. Fifth
Rule: To be remiss and facile in un-importing verities. First in our opinion..
9. And then also in our censure of the otherwise minded.. 10. Sixth Rule: Not
to rely upon the trust of an Opposite in relating the state of an opinion, or
person. Examples of the injurious practices this way.. 11. Seventh Rule: Not to
judge of an adversaries opinion by the Inferences pretended to follow upon it;
which are commonly very hainously aggravated. The ingenuous proceedings of the
Ancient Churches herein.. 12. Eighth Rule: To keep opinions within their own
bounds; not imputing private men's conceits to whole Churches.. 13. Ninth Rule:
We may not draw the actions or manners of men to the prejudice of their cause..
14. Tenth Rule: That we must draw as near as we safely may to Christian
adversaries in lesser differences. The cautions of complying with them.. 15.
Eleventh Rule: To refrain from all railing terms, and spightfull provocations
of each other in differences of Religion.. 16. Twelfth Rule: That however our
judgments differ in lesser verities, we should compose our affections toward
unity and peace.
FINIS.
REcensui dissertationem hanc de Moderatione Christiana, duabus partibus
absolutam, quarum altera de Moribus agit, altera de Doctrina; utraque and bonis
moribus, and doctrinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae consentanea.

October. 4. 1639. Imprimatur. Jo: ALSOP.

CHRISTIAN MODERATION.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of Moderation in matter of Practice.
. 1. Of the use and necessity of Moderation, in general.
I Cannot but second, and commend that great Clerk of Paris, Brom. sum. praedic.
who (as our witty countryman Bromiard reports) when King Jews of France
required him to write down the best word that ever he had learnt, called for a
fair skin of parchment, and in the midst of it, wrote this one word, MEASURE,
and sent it sealed up to the King: The King opening the sheet, and finding no
other inscription, thought himself mocked by his Philosopher, and calling for
him, expostulated the matter; but when it was showed him that all virtues, and
all religious and worthy actions were regulated by this one word, and that
without this, virtue it self turned vicious, he rested well satisfied: And so
he well might; for it was a word well worthy of one of the seven Sages of
Greece; from whom indeed it was borrowed, (...) Ne^uid nimis.

So Pythagoras; (...).


and only put into a new coat. For, whiles he said of old (for his Motto)
Nothing too much, he meant no other but to comprehend both extremes under the
mention of one: neither in his sense is it any paradox to say, that too little
is too much; for as too much bounty is prodigality, Non est ergo tempera^tia,
in solis reseca^dis superfluis, est and in admittendis necessariis. Bern. de
Consid. l. 1. c. 8.
so too much sparing is niggardliness: so as in every defect there is an
excess; and both, are a transgression of Measure. Neither could ought be
spoken, of more use or excellency; For, what goodness can there be in the
world without Moderation, whether in the use of Gods creatures, or in our own
disposition and carriage? Without this, Justice is no other then cruel rigor;
mercy, unjust remissness; pleasure, brutish sensuality; love, frenzy; anger,
fury; sorrow, desperate mopishnesse; joy, distempered wildness; knowledge,
saucy curiosity; piety, superstition; care, wracking distraction; courage, mad
rashness; Shortly, there can be nothing under heaven, without it, but mere
vice and confusion: Like as in nature, if the elements should forget the temper
of their due mixture, and incroach upon each other by excess, what could
follow but universal ruin? or what is it that shall put an end to this great
frame of the world, but the predominancy of that last devouring fire? It is
therefore Moderation, by which this inferior world stands: since that wise and
great God, who has ordained the continuance of it, has decreed so to
contemper all the parts thereof, that none of them should exceed the bounds of
their own proportion, and degree, to the prejudice of the other. Yea, what is
the heaven it self, but (as Gerson compares it well) as a great clock
regularly moving in an equal sway of all the Orbs, without difference of
poyse, without variation of minutes, in a constant state of eviternall
eavennesse, both of being and motion: Neither is it any other, by which this
little world of ours, (whether of body or mind) is upheld in any safe, or
tolerable estate; when humors pass their stint, the body sickens; when
passions, the mind.

There is nothing therefore in the world more wholesome, or more necessary for
us to learn, then this gracious lesson of moderation: without which, in very
truth a man is so far from being a Christian, that he is not himself. This is
the center, wherein all both divine, and moral philosophy meet; the rule of
life, the governesse of manners, the silken string that runs through the
pearlchain of all virtues, the very Ecliptic line, under which reason and
religion moves without any deviation: and therefore most worthy of our best
thoughts, of our most careful observance.

. II. Practical moderation in matter of the palate: And therein, first of the
excess: and then, of the other extremity in defect.
WHat then is there incident into the whole course of humane life, but matter
of practice, or matter of speculation and judgment? and both these are swayed
and ordered by Moderation.

Practical Moderation shall lead the way, as that which is most worthy; and
whereto the speculative is for the most part, reduced; and whereby it is mainly
governed. This, howsoever it reaches to the managing of all the inward
dispositions of the soul, and all the outward carriages of life, and may
therefore admit of so many severalties of discourse, as there are varieties of
desires, inclinations, actions, passions of man: Yet shall, for the tractation
of it, be confined to some few of those noted heads, which we meet with in
every turn of this our earthly pilgrimage.

The chief employment of Moderation is in the matter of pleasure, which like
an unruly and headstrong horse is ready to run away with the rider, if the
strict curb of just moderation do not hold it in; the indiscreet check
whereof, also, may prove no less perilous to an unskilful manager: Pleasures,
whether in matter of diet, and other appurtenances of life, or in matter of
lust.

We begin with the first; wherein the ex^reams of both kinds are palpable, and
worthy both of our full consideration, and careful accordance.

How prone we are to excess in these pleasures of the palate, appears too
well, in that this temptation found place in paradise it self: the first
motive that inclined our liquorous Grandmother Eve, was, that she saw the tree
was good for food; and then follows, that it was pleasant to the eyes; her
appetite betrayed her soul: and after, Genesis 6.
when in that first world men began to be multiplied, that Giantly brood of
men-eaters (if we may believe Berosus) procured abortions, Beros. Baylonic.
to pamper their gluttony with tender morsells: Afterward, even in the holy
Seed, we find an Isaac apt to misplace the blessing for a dish of Venison, and
his son Esau selling his birthright for a mess of broth. Psa. 78.29.
We find Israel tempting God in the desert, and longing to be fed with flesh,
Number. 11.10.
and cramming it in till it came out of their nostrils. We find too many under
the Gospel, whose belly is their God, and therein, their bane. By unsatiable
greediness have many been dead, ^cclus. 37.^2.
says Ecclesiasticus; and how many do we see daily that dig their graves
with their teeth; Prove. 23.2.
and do therefore perish, because they do not put their knife to their
throat? And as for immoderation in drinking, the first news that we hear of
wine, is in Noah's drunkenness, he was the true Ianus, the inventer of the
scruzing of the Grape to his cost; whom if the Heathens celebrated, we justly
censure, as beginning this glory in shame: The next was in Lots incest and
stupidity; and ever since, wine is a mocker, Prove. 2.10
as wise Solomon well styles it. The Heathen have made a God of it, and give it
the title of Freedom; (...). Liber pater
Abuse has made it a Devil and turned that liberty into licentiousness; Ephesians.
5.18.
whereupon some foolish heretics have absurdly ascribed it to that hellish
original; wine, says the Apostle, wherein is excess; How many have our eyes
been witnesses of, whom their unruly appetite, this way has turned into
beasts, how many into monsters of wickedness? Certainly, a drunkard is, in, at
all. Neither is there any vice under heaven, from which he can secure himself:
Schicard. de Jur. Reg Hebr. V. Bell. Gentilis Rex Pirg^ndicus, etc.
It is memorable that our Jewish Doctors tell us of a certain Gentile King,
who lighting upon eleven of their learned, and holy Rabbis, put them to their
choice, whether they would eat swines flesh, or drink of their Ethnic wine,
or lie with harlots; swines flesh they hated, harlots they professed to
abhor, wine they yield unto; but, by that time they had awhile plied that
bewitching liquor, all came alike to them, both the flesh of swine, and of
harlots were easily admitted. Experience yields us so woeful instances of the
lamentable effects of drunkenness, every day, that we need not dwell upon
particulars.

The other extreme, is more rare, and though faulty enough, yet less
brutish: How many have all ages afforded who out of a fear of complying too
much with their appetite, have not stuck to offer hard measure to nature; not
thinking they could be godly enough, except they were cruel to themselves. It
is hard to believe the reports of the rigorous austerity of some of the
ancient; One of whom, Macarius could profess to Euagrius that in twenty years
he had not taken his fill of bread, or water, or sleep. Another, Socrat. l. 4.
c. 18.
Arsenius would not give himself so much ease as to sit, or stand in taking
repast, but was still wont to eat walking: professing that he would not
gratify his body so much, as to yield it so much ease, and holding the time,
but lost, which he bestowed in feeding. And for the quality of their
sustenance; what shall we say to the diet of some votaries? Vita 5. Laur.
Amongst whom Laurence Bishop of Dublin was wont to eat no other bread, then
that which was mixed with lie, in emulation of him that said, I have eaten
ashes as bread. Ps. 102.10.
Friar Valentine went beyond him, Lib. confor. 8.
who for ten years together did eat nothing but only bread dipped in the juice
of wormwood. I shall not need to press any other instance of this kind, then
that which St. Jerome gives of Paul the first hermit, who living in a cave,
within the desert, was beholden to a Palm Tree both for his diet and clothes;
whereto he adds, Quod ne cui impossible, Hieron. in vit. Pauli.
etc. which that it may not seem impossible to any man, I take the Lord Jesus,
and all his Angels to witness, that I have seen Monks, whereof one shut up
for thirty years together, that lived only with Barley bread, and muddy water.
Thus he. Had not these men placed a kind of holiness in crossing their
palate, they might have fared otherwise. When Francis of Assise was bidden to
the great Cardinal Hostiensis to dinner, he poures down upon that curious
Damask cloth (spread for better viands) before them, all those scraps of alms
out of his sleeve, which his good Dames of the City had given him; Panis
eleemosynae panis sanctus. Confor. Fruct. separatur.
and could say, that if the Cardinals cheer were better, yet his was holyer.
Yet even these parcells might be delicate ( panis desideriorum) in comparison
of Daniels pulse, or the Baptists locusts, or the Fuilletans salads. That which
Eusebius casts upon St. James, De se Petrus. Solo pane and olivis, raroque
oleribus ator. Clem. de gestis Petri.
we see now practiced by the Carthusians, and Minimes, abstinence from flesh:
some antiquity of tradition has dieted St. Peter with lupines, St. Matthew
with berries, and herbs; howsoever, I know those Saints had fared better; the
one feasted his Master at his own house; the other fed on fish and honeycomb
at his Masters last table, and saw the sheet let down with all varieties of
dainties; and heard, Arise Peter, kill and eat. And if we yield so much to
Baronius as to grant that St. Paul was alvvaies abstemious, (though it
follows not, as Lorinus well, because for thirty days he complied with
Nazarites in the Temple) it is more then we owe him; since it is not like he
that prescribed wine to Timothy, a younger man, would forbear it himself, upon
the like or greater necessities. This we are sure of, (...).
that this chosen vessel was careful to beat down his body; and that many
of those ancient Worthies, the great patterns of mortification, stinted their
flesh with the straitest. Socrat. l. 4. c 18.
Good Hilarion in stead of barley, could threaten to feed this ass of his with
chafe: Bern. Meditat. devotiss.
and devout Bernard professes how much wrong he had done to himself, by this
well-meant rigor, in disabling him for better services; complaining that he had
by this means turned a virtue into vice, and killed a subject, whiles he
meant to subdue an enemy: Conform. l. 2. fruct. ^. p. 211.
And even their St. Francis himself at his death could confess too late, that
he had used his brother Body too hardly. O quantum distamus ab his qui tempore
Antonii suere Monachi! Bern. Apolog. ad Gul. Abbat.


A faint imitation of which severity, we find in those, who now adays turn
religious abstinence into change of diet; and therein place no little merit.
For my part, I cannot yield there is more delicacy in flesh then in other
dishes; I remember it was the word of that wise Statesman of Rome, that it was
never well with them, since a fish was sold for more then an Ox; and that
famous glutton could say of old; That is the best flesh, which is no flesh; and
all experience shows that oil, wine, shell-fishes, are more powerful to stir
and inflame nature then other duller liquors; and viands of flesh, which are of
more gross, and heavy nourishment; neither was it for nothing that the
Mythologists fained Venus to be bred of the Sea. Jesunia nostra vini copia
natant, pis cium varietate carnium superant deliciat*
The ingenuity of Lindanus can confess how little these kinds of fasts differ
from the most exact gluttonies. Let the fond Ebionites, Encratites, Manichees,
hate the very nature of some meats; I am sure they are all alike to their
maker; 1 Cor. 15.
There is one flesh of Fish, says the holy Apostle: That which goes into the
body defiles not the man, says our Savior. How ever therefore these
differences are fit for civil considerations, and in that regard are in all
due obedience to be strictly observed, yet in spiritual respects they come not
within any view, as those which the Creator of Sea and Land has left both in
themselves, and to him equally indifferent.

. III. Of some extremities in other vsages of the body.
THe like austerity has been affected of old in other usages of the body,
whether in apparel, lodging, 3. Genus (...) ex Thalm. Drus. T^ihaeres.
restraint of recreations. It is well known how some over-devout amongst the
seven kinds of Pharisees, guarded their fringes with thorns, and knocked their
heads against the walls, till the blood issued forth. August. l. 5. contr.
Faustum.
And even amongst the Manichees ^n St. Austins time, there were some more
strict then their fellows, which called themselves Mattarios, who gloryed to
lie upon hard mattes, not envying Faustus his Featherbeds. Conform. p. 105.
Vidi tunica^ B. Francis. and S. Clarae, grossi^r and rudior erat tunica S.
Clarae.
It was a great competition betwixt two pretended Saints, St. Francis and St.
Clare, whether should have the rougher coat: Although all was one to that
incurious Saint of Assise, for had his coat been better, it had gone to the
next beggar; wherein I cannot but wonder at the difference of humors in two
that go for their Saints: Socr. l. 1. c. 13.
It is spoken to the praise of Anthony the Hermit that he never saw himself
naked; whereas to the wonder of the others mortification, it is said, that
other forenamed Saint of theirs, stripped himself stark naked, before the Bishop
of Assise, Con^o^m. p. 211.
and in that form (like a Mahumetan Dervis) ran through the streets. Yet these
are but small self-penances in comparison of some others: Theod. l. 4. c. 28.
Our story tells us that the Monk Acepsemas lay threescore years close hid in
a blind room, where he never spoke with any man, Socrat. l. 4. c. 18.
never was seen of any man. But Didymus went yet beyond him who in his whole
life of ninety years never conversed with any. Yet these might pass their
time with ease, in comparison of an Hilarion, Sozom. l. 3 c. 13.
who put himself into a little-ease; so penal a lodging that he could neither
stand upright for the height, nor stretch out his legs for the length: or a
Symeon Stylites, that chained himself to an hollow pillar of the like in
capacity. Yet all this task was tolerable, in respect of the cruel piety of
those men, that stuck not to tew and lancinate their bodies; like that
Superianus the Scholar of Lacharis, of whom Suidas speaks, that would scourge
himself into learning; such were the famous whip-stocks in the time of Gregory
the tenth, Binius Anno. 1275.
which out of Italy passing into Germany, astonished the beholders with their
bloody shoulders, affecting glory and merit in that selfe-martyrdome.

And though the dangerous opinions which attended this practice in the first
authors, were condemned, as heretical, yet the usage itself is continued in
Spain, and some other parts; and, not without a secret kind of horror,
applauded by the multitude, as an undoubted argument of serious and deep
mortification: And what marvel, when that which is acted in the streets but
once, by a few muffled penitents, is pretended to be done in cells and closets
as in a set course of discipline, by the most of their strict votaries: But all
these, and what ever acts of penance, must yield to that of Goderannus, (a
soldier of Christ, Jo: Capgrave de S. Henrico Herem.
as our Capgrave styles him) who when the Host, given by his St. Hugh to a
leprous man in the height of that loathsomness, was rendered again, with the
interest of some other odious ejections, did that, which in favor of the
queasie stomach of my reader, I must conceal: Only this, that their Saint
which beheld it, could say, that S. Laurence his Gridiron was far more
tolerable. Cinore and cilicio recubabat agrotus, rogarunt discipuli ut si^eret
villa stramenta supponi, respondit, Non decet christia^^m nisi in ci^ere and
cilicio mori. Sever. Sulp. l. 2.
To shut up all, S. Martin would needs die in sackcloth and ashes. Such hard
usages have some zealous self-enemies put upon their bodies; no doubt in a
mis-grounded conceit of greater holiness, and higher acceptance at the hands
of God; from whom they shall once hear that old question in the like case to
the Jews, Who required this of you? As if God took pleasure in the misery of
his best creature, and had so ordered it, that Grace could not consist with
prosperity and contentment.

We have seen then both those extremities wherewith men are mis-carried in
matter of the palate, and some outward usages of the body.

. IV. Of the extremes in the cases of lust.
AS for the delight of the marriage bed which some salacious spirits have
thought fit in an eminence or propriety to call pleasure, how far it has
bewitched men it is too apparent. How many are thus drunk with their own wine!
spending their bodies to satisfy those sensual desires wherewith they are
impotently transported; Cig^lus.
like that bird of whom Suidas speaks, which dies in the very act of his
feathering. Certainly, there is no such Tyran in the world as lust, which,
where it prevails enslaveth the soul, and sends his best subjects, not to
the mill with Sampson, or to the distaffe with Hercules, but to the chambers of
death, Prove. 7.27.
to the dungeon of hell. In tan^um Graci and Romani hoc quondam vicio
labo^arun^, ut and clarissimi philosophoru^ Graecia haberen^ public
concubinos, etc. Hieron. in illa Es. 2. and pu^ris alienis adhaeserunt.
The witty Athenians could enact a Law for Bigamie; and Socrates himself, who
was by the Oracle named for the wisest man of his time, and the greatest master
of his passions, could be content to practice that, wherein he was well
punished; And how their famous Philosophers were affected, I had rather S.
Jerome should speak then I: And the Turks at this day, whom their Alcoran
restraines from wine, yet are by their law let loose to this full scope of
sensuality. What speak I of these, when the very Patriarks, and Princes of Gods
peculiar people were palpably exorbitant in this kind; 2 Samuel 12.8
The man after Gods own heart (in respect of the sincerity of his soul)
divided himself betwixt six partners of his bed; Munster in praecept. Mosaica.
Schicard. de Jur. Reg. Hebr.
the mistaking of which permission has drawn the modern Jews into a false
opinion of no less then eighteen wives allowed still to their Princes: But for
his son Solomon (in other things the wisest under heaven) from whom the
East^rne Potentates have borrowed their Seraglio's, what stint was there of his
bedfellowes? he could not so much as know all their faces. Neither was it for
nothing that the all^wise God saw it fit in his royal law, to give us two
Commandments against lust, and but one only against murder or theft;
Doubtless (as Gerson well observes) because he saw us naturally more prone to
these wanton desires, then to those violent.

Contrarily, there have not wanted some, who out of a strong affectation of
continency, and an over-valuation of the merit of virginity, have poured too
much water upon the honest flames of their lawful desires, and have offered a
willing violence to nature; Not to speak of Origin, and some others that have
voluntarily evirated themselves (a practice justly cried down by some
Councels) such were Amnon the Heremite, and Pelagius the Monk in the
Ecclesiastical history, who the first day of their marriage took up a
resolution of the continuance of a virginal chastity (a fashion which some
improbable legends have have cast upon S. John the beloved Disciple in his
mis-imputed marriage in Cana) and retired to an agreed solitariness. Many
formal votaries have made profession of no less continency, but with what
success I take no pleasure to relate: Non (...) adducam quanta sit turba
monasteriorum (...) quibus (...) nulla viget disciplina pietatis, ut prae his
lupanaria si^^, and magis sobri^, and magis pudica. Illustr. Ep. Grunnio.
Let an indifferent man speak; Erasmus in an Epistle to his Grunnius: who tells
us of store of Monasteries, such, as in comparison whereof the stews were more
sober, more modest. Out of their own ingenuous casuists, out of the woeful
complaints of their Alvarez, Pelagius, S. Brigit, Gerson, others, it were easy
to tell shameful tales if we made disgrace our aim; it shall be enough to
desire any reader to inform himself of the reason alleged in the Council of
Ments, Council. Mogunt. sub Stephano. c. 10. Bin.
under Pope Stephen, of so strict an inhibition to their clergy, not to admit
of so much as their sister to come within their doors; and to take notice of
that old byword, Rivet. resp. ad Sylv. S. Petra.
In Hispania preti etc. I take no joy to discover the miserable nakedness of
Christians; Inordinate minds where is no restraint of Grace, are apt to run
thus wild, whether amongst them, or us; but there, so much more, as there is
less allowance of lawful remedies; A point, which some of the most ingenuous
spirits of the Roman correspondence have seriously wished to have recommended to
wiser consideration, and redress.

. V. The liberty that God has given us in the use of his creatures.
I Meant to dwell only so long in the extremes, as to make my passage to the
mean, which is the sole drift of our endeavor. There is therefore betwixt
excess and defect, whereof we have spoken, a lawful and allowed latitude of
just pleasure, which the bounty of our good God has allowed to his dearest
creature, man; whereof it is meet for us to take knowledge. To begin with the
Palate. He who is the author of appetite, has provided, and allowed means to
satisfy it, not with asparing hand, as for mere necessity; but sometimes also
liberally, for delight. I have often wondered to see how providently the great
Housekeeper of the world has taken seasonable order for the maintenance of
all his creatures; so as, their mouths are not sooner ready then their meat.
Whether in man or beast, conception is immediately seconded with nourishment,
neither is the issue brought forth into the light of the world, before there be
bottles of milk ready prepared for the sustenance.

The birds (except some domestic) hatch not their young in the dead of winter,
but when the growing Spring has yielded a meet means of their food. In the
very silk-worme I have observed, that the small, and scarce-sensible seed,
which it casts, comes not to life and disclosure until the mulbery (which is
the slowest of all trees) yields her lease for its necessary preservation: And
the same God, who has given the creature life, appetite, meat, has by a
secret instinct directed them to seek it; so as the whelp, even before it can
see, hunts for the teat; and those shell-fishes to which nature has denied
means of ^ight or smelling, yet can follow, and purchase their food. And if
^ll thy creatures, O God, vvait upon thee, that thou may give them their meat
in due season; if thou openest thy hand, and they are filled with good; how
much more magnificent art thou to that creature, for whom thou made all the
rest? Thou, who at the first broughtst him forth into a world furnished
beforehand with all varieties, have been graciously pleased to store him
stil^ with all things that might serve for the use of meat, medicine,
delicacy: Had thou only intended our mere preservation, a little had been
enough; Nature is neithe^ vvanton nor insatiable. Ambros.
We know what those Brachmanni are reported to have said, to the great
Conqueror of the world, in shamin^ his conquest by their own: W^ know what
the Roman commander said to his Soldiers in ^ just indignation at their
niceness; Pescen. Niger.
Ye have the river Nilus running by you, and do you ask for wine? and how he
upbraided them with this scornful taxation; Blush for shame, those that
overcome ^ou, drink water. We know what ^he wise and just Socrates returned
^o Archelaus, tempting his fidelity with large proffers: Go, said he, ^ell
your Master, that four gilles of flower are sold at Athens for an ^alf-peny,
and that our wells yield ^s water for nothing: But now, ^ince our liberal
Creator has ^hought good to furnish our Ta^les, with forty kinds at the
least of beasts, and Fowls; with two hundred (as they are computed) of
fishes, besides the rich, and dainty provenues of our gardens, and orchards,
and the sweet juice of our Canes, and the Cells of our hives, what should this
argue, but that he (who made nothing in vain, and all for man) intended to
provide, not for our necessity only, but for our just delight? The Father of
the faithful, though he promised only to comfort the hearts of his great, and
divine guests with a morsel of bread, Genesis 18.5.
yet he entertaines them with a tender and fat calfe, with butter and milk, the
delicates of those homelyer times. But this, in all likelihood, Genesis 21.8.
was but small cheer in comparison of that which he prepared for the celebrity
of his son Isaacs weaning, which is by Moses styled a great Feast: Viz.
Abimelec. Genesis 26.30
After this, when his son Isaac feasted a King, do we not think there were all
the choice services, the times would afford? Sampson, Jud. 14.17
though by Gods destination a Nazarite, yet kept his wedding Feast seven days
long: Samuel, a Prophet of God, feasted thirty persons, and reserved a choice
bit for his best guest: What speak I of this? 1 Samuel 9.22.
When every new moon was wont to be celebrated with a solemn feast by Gods
people: and David shelters himself under this excuse, for his absence from the
Table of Saul. I might well have silenced all the rest, if I had only mentioned
Great Solomon's both practice, Eccles. 2.24, 25.
and counsel. There is nothing better (says he) for a man, then that he
should eat and drink; and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his
labor; This also I saw that it was from the hand of God; for who can eat? or
who can hasten hereunto more then I? Certainly this challenge is unanswerable;
Neither has the Spirit of God thought it unfit to give us a Bill-of-fare of
that mighty King; and to record in those holy Archives, the particulars of his
daily expenses of Meal, flower, oxen, sheep, besides Hearts, Roe-bucks,
fallow-deere, and fatted fowls, which the Monarchs of all ages may admire,
none can emulate.

What speak I yet of this, when he that was greater then Solomon, sanctified
feasting by his own blessed example? He, the Lord of glory that took up wi^h a
manger for his cradle, and (after the Carpenters cottage) owned no house but
heaven, is invited to a Bridal feast, (the jolliest commonly of all meetings)
carries his train with him, helps on the cheer by turning water into the
richest wine. Had he been so sour, as some sullen Hypochondriaques (who place
holiness in a dull austerity) would fancy him, it had been an easy answer,
They want wine; all the better, water is more fit; this safe liquor will send
the guests home coolely tempered; but now, as one that would be known to be a
favourer of honest and moderate delight, he bids, Fill the waterpots with (that
which he would make better) Wine. Neither was it any rare or strange matter
for our Savior to honor, and bless other feasts with his presence; Matthew
the Publican, Mat. 9.10.
when he was called from his Tole-booth to a Discipleship, and was now to be
matriculated into the family of Christ, entertained his new Master with a
sumptuous banquet; Luke 5.29.
himself (now an Evangelist) speaks modestly of his own cheer, as if it had
been but common fare, but S. Luke tells us, It was a great feast. What should
I speak of the Tables of Zacheus, of Simon the Pharisee, of Martha and Mary? so
did our Savior in a sweet sociablenesse of carriage, apply himself to a free
conversation with men, in the cheerful use of Gods good creatures, that his
envious maligners took occasion hereupon to slander him with the unjust and
blasphemous imputation of ((...)) a wine-bibber, a friend to Publicans and
sinners. He that made the creatures, can best tell how to use them; his
practice is more then all laws; Those men therefore are not more injurious to
themselves, then to the divine beneficence, who in an opinion of greater
sanctity, abridge themselves of a moderate participation of those comfortable
helps, God has allowed them; and sit sullenly at a liberal board with their
hat pulld over their eyes, not so much as removing their napkin from their
trencher, unjustly scrupling their conscience with Touch not, taste not, handle
not. There are times of abstinence; and not of a private fast only, Council.
Salegunstad. Anno 1022.
but much more of a Bannitum j^junium, as that Council styled it; solemn and
sacred; There are out of civil grounds, wholesome laws for either forbearance,
or change of diet; far be it from us to detrect our strict obedience to these.
Surely, unless we will take up that lawless resolution of Disrumpamus
vincula, (Let us break their bonds, and cast their cords from us) we must be
content to be tied by the teeth; Sivis be^e comedere jejuns. Confor. 8.
and in these cases to determine with Friar Giles, that the best diet is to
eat nothing; but where we are left open from all just restraint of divine and
humane laws, to pine our selves in an affectation of holiness, and so
partially to carve unto our selves, as if all things were not clean unto the
clean: it is but a wayward and thanklesse austerity.

The like may be said for other usages of the body, in matter of attire, sleep,
lodging, recreation. Socrat. l. 6. c. 20.
Socrates the historian tells of Sisinnius the witty Bishop of the
overstrait-laced sect of the Novatians, a man of singular temperance, and
moderation, yet somewhat more spruce, liberal, and costly in his apparel, and
more nice in his frequent bathings, then ordinary; that being asked where he
found it written that a Priest for his daily array should be suited in white,
answered, Yea, tell me first, where you find it written that a Bishop should be
clothed in black; you cannot show me this, I can show you the other, for
Solomon says, Let thy garments be white: How fitly the Text is applied, I
labor not; sure I am that no wise man need to be more nice then a Novatian;
and that the Kingly Preacher in that liberal concession of his gives large
scope to our lawful liberty, in the use of Gods blessings; he allows (within
the compass of our callings) rich suits to the back, sweet oils for the head,
comfortable drinks for the stomach: Neither ought we to be scant, where God
meant to be bountiful. And, if he have made us the Lords of the world, why are
we wilful beggars? Wherefore has he given the warm fleece to the sheep, the
rich hides to the Bever and Ermin, the curious case to the silkworm, the soft
and fair feathers to the fowls of the air, but, after their own use, for
ours? Wherefore has he clothed the trees with cotton, or the fields with
flax? wherefore has he enriched the earth with variety of sweet and delicate
flowers, with precious metals, and with more precious stones, the sea with
beautiful and costly pearls? why has he treasured up such orient and
pleasing colors in grains and fishes, if not for the use and behoof of man?
what other creature knows wherefore they serve? or, how can our blessed Creator
be any other then a greater loser by our either ignorance or willing neglect?

As for the comfort of conjugall society, what other did our good God intend in
the making of that meet helper? He that made those creatures, could have made
many more, and having set this stint to his creation, he that made the woman of
the man, could as well have made man of man, and could in the infiniteness of
his wisdom have appointed thousands of ways for the multiplication of
mankind; but now having thought meet to pitch upon the traducing of man, by
this living rib of his own, he has holily ordained that they two shall be one
flesh; not only, as two bodies animated with one soul, but rather, as one
body animated with two united spirits; so as it is equally lawful for them to
enjoy each other in a mutual, and holy communion, and to enjoy themselves in
their single and personal contentments. How safely then may we take wise
Solomon's word, for this innocent and sweet conversation: Let thy fountain be
blessed, Prove. 5.18, 19.
and rejoice with the wife of thy youth; let her be as the loving hind, and
pleasant Roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished
always with her love: And when toward the latter end of his days, Eccl. 7.26.
he had found more bitter then death the woman whose heart is snares and nets,
and her hands as bands; Yet even then, he renues this charge in the height of
his mortification. Eccles. 9.9.
Live joyfully with the wife whom thou love, all the days of the life of thy
vanity, which he has given thee under the Sun all the days of thy vanity; for
that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which thou take under the
Sun.

. VI. Together with our liberty, the just bounds of our moderation, in the
liberal use of Gods creatures: and therein our limitation in respects to God.
SO then that God, who has given us meat, drink, apparel, wife, children,
recreations, and what ever other conveniences of this life, intended no other,
but that we should make our use, and have the fruition of these comforts; and
if he meant not that we should take some pleasure in the fruition of them,
wherefore are they given us as blessings? or what place is there for our
thankfulness?

If I may take no pleasure in one food above another, what use is there of my
taste? what difference do I make betwixt a course crust, and the finest of the
wheat? why am I more bound to God for giving me wine then water, many dishes
then one, better then worse? or how can I be more sensible of my obligation?

If I may not take contentment in the wife of my youth, wherefore is she mine?
what is left to me to counterpoyse those household distractions, which do
unavoidably attend the state of matrimony? If I may not joy in my children,
what difference is there to me betwixt my own, and other men's, save that my
care is more without hope of requital? And if I may not take pleasure in my
recreation, how is it such? what difference is there betwixt it and work? Yea,
if I may not take pleasure in the works of my calling, what difference is there
betwixt a slave and me?

But the same God who has allowed us to take pleasure in all these has also
thought good to set bounds, and stints to our pleasure, which we may not
exceed; he has indulged to us a lawful freedom, not a wild licentiousness:
If we pass our limits, we sin. Now because in our natural pronenesse to
excess there is nothing more difficult, then to keep within due compass, and
to be at once delighted and holy, it highly concerns us to take notice of
those just boundaries, within which our freest pleasure must be ranged.

First then, we cannot offend in our delectations, if we be sure to take God
with us; more plainly, we shall safely partake of our pleasures, if we receive
them as from God, if we enjoy them in God, if we refer them to God: From God,
as the author and giver of them; in God, as the allower and sanctifier of them;
to God, as to the end, and scope of them: the least deviation from any of
these, makes our delights vicious. We receive them as from God, when we know
them to be allowed of him, and granted to us, by him: Herein therefore lawful
pleasures differ from sinful; we have his vvarrant for the one, for the other
his inhibition. The act may be alike in both, but differs both in the subject,
and ground of it; Gods institution justifies that act in a lawful conjugall
society, which he abhorres and condemns in a stranger: Marriage is made in
heaven, adultery is brewed in hell. The teeth kept the same pace under the law
in eating the clean flesh, and the unclean; and still do, in the morsells of
sufficiency, and surfeit; The first draught of the wine, which is for
refreshing, goes down the same way, with the lavish, and supern^^erary
carowses of drunkenness: That holy God, whose will is the rule of goodness,
cannot give any approbation of evil; If then I can boldly present my pleasure
in the face of God, and say, Lord, this is the delight thou have allowed me,
the liberty thou give, I take; here is thy word, and my deed; my heart cannot
but sit down in a comfortable assurance.

We enjoy them in God, whiles we can enjoy God in them, not suffering our
selves so to be possessed of them, as that we should let go the sweet hold of
the divine presence, and complacency: the very thought whereof must necessarily
exclude all disorder, and excess. It is the brand which St. Jude sets upon the
sensual false-teachers of his time, Jude 12.
feeding without fear; and the Prophet Esaias to the same purpose, ^say. 5 12.
The Harp and the Viole, the Tabret and the Pipe, and wine are in their feasts;
but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his
hands. If then we be so taken up with any earthly pleasures, that they do
either banish God from our hearts, or steal our hearts from God; our tables
are made snares to us, and our wives in stead of ribs become thorns in our
sides. For me, let me rather want delights then be transported by them from
better joys; they shall not pass with me for pleasures, but for torments,
that shall rob me of the fruition of my God.

We refer them to God, when we partake of them with an intuition of the glory
of him, from whom we receive them, and in whom we enjoy them; not making any
pleasure its own end, wherein we shall rest, but the way to a better; Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, (says the Apostle) do all to the
glory of God. We do well to look up to heaven, and to say grace at our meals,
but I have read of an holy man, that was wont to give thanks for every morsel
that he put into his mouth; and I could envy his holy and free thoughts; but
sooner could I take up the resolution of that votary, who professed that he did
in every creature of God find both edification, and matter of devotion; and
when one showed him a lewd, and debaucht ruffian, and asked him what good he
could pick out of such a prospect? Yes, said he, I can so far enjoy his
wickedness, as to be thankful to God, for giving me that grace which he
wants. Shortly, let me never have any pleasure, upon which I cannot pray to God
for a blessing, and for which I cannot return my thanksgiving.

. VII. The limitation of our liberty, in respect of the pleasures themselves,
first for the kind, then for the quantity, and quality of them.
OUr pleasures cannot be amiss, whiles they have these respects to God. There
are also considerable limitations, which they have within themselves.

The first whereof must be, that they be in their very kind lawful; for as
there is no dish whereof we may warrantably surfeit; so there are some whereof
we may not taste: Genesis 3.3.
for our first parents to but set their teeth in the forbidden fruit, yea to
touch it, was not free from evil: Any morsel of an unclean meat, under the
law was no less sinful, then the whole dish: The wholsomest of all foods, if
taken in excess, may destroy nature; Melchior Suerinensis Episc. ex ducibus
Brunswic. Krantz. Metrop. l. 10. c. 36.
in so much as we find one that dyed of strawberries, the most harmless fruit
that the earth bears; but the least measure of poison is too much: Whereto we
may also add, that the same thing may be poison to one, which to another is
either meat or medicine, even as it is in bodily diets: A Turk eats in one day
so much opium with pleasure, as would be the bane of many western
Christians; and Erasmus professes that fish was death to him, which to others
is both nourishing and delicate. For a Socrates to ride upon a stick, or to
learn to fiddle, or dance in his old age, was a sight as uncouth, as it was
in his boys becoming, and commendable. It is said of Thales Milesius, one of
the great sages of Greece, that he was pressed to death in a throng at their
Gymnick sports; any wise man would presently ask, what that wise man did
there? To personate an history on an Academicall theater may be a mutual
delight to the actor, and beholders, but for a professed divine to do it, can
be no other then unmeet, and that which is justly forbidden in some Synodes.
The vvilde Carnevalls abroad, however they may be tolerated in the young laity
by their indulgent Confessors, yet for persons that profess to be Clerks, or
religious votaries (what pretenses soever may be set upon it by favorable
Casuists) cannot but be extremely faulty.

The kind yielded to be lawful, and meet, both in it self, and to the person
using it, there must be due consideration had of the quality, quantity, manner,
circumstances that are able to make even good things evil.

For the first, Both religion and right reason require, that we should not be
wanton, and overdelicate in our contentments; that our pleasures should be like
our selves, masculine, and temperate. It was a check that fell seasonably from
Vespasian, and recorded to his great honor by Suetonius, that when a young man
came to him curiously perfumed, I had rather (said he) thou had smelt of
garlic: and that praise is no mean one, Gers. Sermon de B. Ludovico.
which Gerson the Chancellor of Paris gives to King Lewis the Saint, that he
regarded not of how dainty composition his excrement were made, neither meant
to be a cook for the worms. Surely that curiosity of mixture, whereby not the
eye and the palate, but the sent also must be feasted, is more fit for
Sybarites, then for Christians; Dissolved pearls are for the draught of Aesop
the Tragedians son, or Anthonies great Mistress: Let a Vitellius or Heliogobalus
hunt over Seas and Lands for the dainty bit of this birds tongue, that fishes
roe, or that beasts sweet bread; the Oysters of this coast, the scollops of
that other, this root, that fruit: What do Christians with this vain Apician
like gluttony? Heliogab. Aelius Lamprid.
It was a fit rule for that monster of the gut (whom even the Roman luxury
censured) that those dishes please best, which cost most. I have both heard and
read, that when some of our English Merchants in Germany, entertained Martin
Luther with some other of his Dutch friends, at their table, when amongst other
liberal dishes, he saw a Pastie at the first cutting up, reeking upwards, and
filling the room with an hot and spicy steame, in stead of thanks, he frowned,
and angerly said, Now woe be to them that bring these delicacies into our
Germany. It is not easy to set stints to the quality or price of diets: for
that which to one nation, or person may pass for mean and course, may to
another be costly and delicious. If we may believe relations, Jo: Pory, Append.
to Leo's hist. of Africa.
in Angola dogs flesh is held for the daintiest meat, in so much as one
mastive has been exchanged there for twenty slaves, the price of 120* ducats;
our Frogs, Snailes, Mushroms, would somewhere be accepted for a good service:
and we know what the Tartars are wont to esteem of their Cosmo, whiles we make
a face at the mention of it. Laercius tells us, that when Plato in a thrifty
discourse with rich Aristippus was saying, that an halfpenny was enough to
furnish a temperate man's dinner, well then, said he, and fifty drams are no
more then so, to me. Custom of the place, care of health, regard to our
ability, are fit moderators of every man's palate; but the true Christian is
governed by an higher law, giving only such way to his appetite, as may well
consist with due mortification. Cibus sit vilis Monachorum and Vespertinu^, ut
and sustineat and non noceat. Reg. Columb. c. 3.
It was the rule which Columbanus (of whom there are many momuments in these
Western parts) gave to his followers; Let the diet of Monks be course, and
late, so as it may sustain, and not hurt. We are no Rechabites, no votaries,
free from all yokes (of this kind) save the Almighties, which is no other then
an holy temperance: He has allowed us the finest of the wheat, and wine that
makes glad the heart, we are not tied to Prodicus his sauce, which is the fire;
nor to Bernards, which is salt and hunger; Genesis 27.4.
we may with old Isaac call for savoury meat, such as we love. P^^^i^ est non
(...) frequenti^ ^^^c ga^diorum, etc. B^rn. Ep. 17^.
Happy are we, if we know how to use our blessings, and have learned so to
order our appetite, as that we make it neither a slave nor a vvanton.

For the quantity, Pleasure is honey; Eat not too much honey, says Solomon; that
is to be tasted on the top of the finger, not to be scoped up with the whole
hand; we may be too great niggards to our selves this way, denying those helps
to nature whereby it may be more cheerfully enabled unto good: 1 Samuel 14.29.
Jonathan complained justly that Saul's rash vow of not tasting any food, that
day, had troubled the Land; See I pray you how mine eyes are enlightened,
because I tasted a little honey; Qui carnem suam supra modum affligit, civem
suum occidit: si plus quam oportet alimentis reficit, hosiem nu^rit. Hugo.
Instit. Monast. in reg. D. August. c. 3.
how much more, if the people had eaten freely to day had they prevailed? It
was the rule of a great p^^terne of strict devotion, If abstinence go beyond
the bounds of a virtue, it turns vice: and our Alensis well, If our fast must
be afflictive, yet with due moderation; neither is it required that a man
should fast his utmost, but so much as may well stand with the conservation of
nature in her meet vigor: Alens. To. 4. q. 28. mem 6. Et si jejunium, etc.
Neither are we tied to the old man's diet in Suidas, salt and two barly-cornes;
(...).
or to the liberal allowance which Francis of Assise made to his St. Clare, an
ounce and half of bread in a day: (...). Suid.
neither need we be driven (as Socrates counseled poor Eschines) to borrow
of our selves: but on the other side, we may not let loose the reins of our
appetite, and as gluttons are wont to do, cram in so much to breakfast, that
we have no stomach to supper. Not in surfeiting and drunkenness, says the
blessed Apostle. It seemed a strange thing to Anacharsis the Scythian, as
Laertius observes, to see the Greeks drink in small cruzes at the beginning of
their feasts, and in large bowls at the latter end, (an order ill imitated by
the lavish Healthists of our time) as if they intended not satisfaction, and
refreshing of nature, but wilful excess. If the bounty of God allow us to be
sometimes merry, in our moderate feasts, Es. 5.22.
yet never mad; he is so far from crowning any man for drinking (as it is said
Alexander the Great did his Promachus) that he has passed a woe unto them that
are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink: Well may
we say of our cups as was wont to be said of the Ionians, they are good
servants, ill freemen, and masters. Too much oil puts out the lamp; both
reason and health are drowned in over-deep cups: Our body is as a well-set
clock which keeps good time; if it be too much or indiscreetly tampered with,
the larum runs out before the hour. The like care of avoiding extremity must
be had in all other delights. The very Heathen Orator could say, He is not
worthy of the name of a man, that would be a whole day in pleasure. Quaet. si
ex toto cor de ridere non licet? Negatur. Reg. Basilii c. 32.
Sleep and recreations are as necessary as meat, but both must know their
stint. If a Bear or a Dormouse grow fat with sleep, I am sure the mind of man
is thus affamished: Slothfulness, says Solomon, Prove. 19.15.
casts into a deep sleep, Genesis 2.21. 2 Samuel 4.5 1 King. 3.20. Mat. 25.5.
and an idle soul shall suffer hunger. It was a dead sleep wherein Adam lost
his rib, Ishbosheth his life, the Harlot her son, the foolish Virgins their
entrance. How long then will thou sleep, O sl^ggard? when will thou arise out
of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep; so shall thy poverty come as one that travaileth, and thy want
as an armed man.

As for sports, when they take up so much time and labor as to turn trades,
they have lost themselves, and perhaps marred their Masters. It was a just
exception that Salustius took to Sempronia, not that she danced, but that she
danced too well: and our story tells us, when rich Clisthenes would choose a
fit match for his only daughter, and amongst other suitors the son of
Terpander* the Athenian was most likely to speed, the young man to ingratiate
himself the more, after dinner danced some Attick Jigges, with much cunning
and activity; Well, well, said Clisthenes, Terpanders son, you have danced
away your marriage. If the Iron be blunt, the edge must be whetted, says
Solomon; but if we shall wear away all the steel with too much whetting, the
tool must needs be left unprofitable.

. VIII. The limitation, and moderation of the pleasure of conjugall society.
BUt the greatest danger of immoderation is in matter of lust; an impetuous
passion, and that which commonly bears down reason before it; and too often
even there, Vix ^l^qua sanctimonialium sine devoto carnali.

Alv. Pel. de Planctu. l. 2.73.


where the strongest resolutions, and most religious vows have made head
against it: Insomuch as Alvarez Pelagius sticks not to confess, that there was
scarce any of the holy sisters in his time sine devoto carnali; and Dominicus a
Soto professes he cannot deny, Curent in unaqu^que civitate locum meretricibus
assignandum ab hominum frequentia, and a majoribus Ecclesiis remotum.

In council. Mediolan. ^. habito a Carolo Boromaeo.


that their Clergy abounds with concubinaries and adulterers. What should I
mention the toleration and yearly rent of public stews? these known
Curtizans in Spain, and Italy, pay to their great Landlords for their lust;
whereas amongst the Abassines, wages are given them out of the common purse;
Yea, even those, who are allowed lawful remedies, Jo. Pory (...) supra.
shall find it task enough, Tatianus, nihil d^fferre a ^a^rimonio
Scortationem s^d idem esse. Epiph. h^eres. de Tatianis.
so to order their desires, as they may not offend in their application. To
deny the lawfulness of matrimonial benevolence were to cast mire in the face
of our Creator; yet there may be such deordination in the acts thereof, as may
draw sin into the marriage bed; Facitior est saepe, etc. ficut ^^bri^, pot^s,
and ignis (...) magis succenduntur. Gers. Reg. morales de Luxuria.
in so much as Gerson can tell us, there is less difficulty in forbearing
these desires, then in curbing, and moderating them once admitted: For pleasure
ever, as both S. Ambrose and Hierome have observed, draws on a strong appetite
of it self; and (as Chrysologus well) is like a dog, beat him off, he flees
away, make much of him, he follows us the more. Munster. in praecept. Mos.
The Jews note that in four places of the law they are admonished to increase
and multiply; and therefore hold, that after twenty years of age, who so finds
(the Iezer) in himself, is bound under pain of sin to marry; Somewhat of kin
to the divinity of that old Physician at Basil, Erasm. Epist. Da^eli Stibaro.

Medicus senex Basileae in publica professione docui^, etc.


of whom Erasmus speaks, who taught in his public Lecture, that this (
Increase and multiply) was our Saviors last legacy to the world, which we had
thought had been (Pacem meam do vobis) My peace I give to you, and that it were
pity that any fruitful soil should lie fallow; positions wildly licentious,
and such as leave no place for a gracious Eunuchisme for the kingdom of
heaven. Virginal chastity is a grace worthy of our fervent prayers, worthy of
our best endeavors. I hear the great Apostle of the Gentiles say, He that gives
his virgin in marriage does well, 1 Cor. 7.38.
but he that gives her not in marriage does better; And why should not every
one (where there is a difference of meliority) strive toward the best? All may
strive, but all can not attain. He that is able to receive it, let him receive
it, says our Savior. But he that cannot receive the blessing of single
chastity, may receive the blessing of chaste marriage: an institution, which if
it had not been pure and innocent, had never been made in Paradise, by the
all-holy Maker of Paradise, both in earth, and heaven. In the managing, and
fruition whereof, we may not follow brutish appetite, and lawless
sensuality; but must be overruled with right reason, Christian modesty, and
due respects to the ends of that blessed ordinance.

Our strictest Casuists will grant, that for the conservation of mankind, even
a votary may, yea must marry, and we have in our times known those, who for the
continuation of a lineall succession of some great families, have been fetched
from their cells to a Bride-chamber: As for the remedy of incontinency, 1 Cor.
7.5.
our Apostle has passed a plain ((...)) Come together again.

As for the pleasure of conjugall society, I do not find a more clear
decision, Salm^ron Tom. 5. Tract. 9. de temporibus luctus. Fideli, cui Christus
omn^a mundavit, iila turpitudo and absorp^io non est peccatum, nam ut ait
Apostolus, Omnia munda mundis u^ egregie expon^t Clem l. 3. Strom. in fine. Ad
haec volupta^ aut d^lectatio quae na^uraliter censequi^^a opus generationis
quae omni animan^i ingenita est a Deo, nec prop^er se c^petitur, pecc^^u^ ullum
non est; quemad^^^du^ and delecta^io quae consequ^^^^ ed^nte^ and biben^e^, aut
somnu^ capien^e^ non censetur illicita; Non solu^ erg^ nuptiae non sunt
peccatu^, sed ille qui esset solutus and liber a vo^^, nec velle^ se continere,
crim^u non effugeret, si uxorem ^on quaereret, potius qu im ^ri, i. vinci a
libidine, etc. Salmer. To. 5. Tract. 9. etc.
then that of the voluminous Jesuit Salmeron. To a faithful man (says he)
unto whom Christ has made all things clean, that turpitude, and absorption
(of reason) which commonly attends the act of matrimonial knowledge is not a
sin; for as the Apostle teaches, All things are clean unto the clean, as
Clemens in the third book of his Stromata worthily expounds it; Moreover, that
pleasure or delectation which does naturally follow the act of generation,
which is by God naturally inbred in every living creature, and is not desired
merely for its own sake, is no sin at all; even as the delight which
accompanies eating, and drinking, and sleeping, is not judged unlawful: So
therefore it is not only to be granted that marriage is no sin; but he that is
at liberty, and free from any vow, and has not a will to contain himself,
shall not acquit himself of a grievous sin, if he seek not a wife; for of such
like S. Paul says, If they do not contain, let them marry; for it is better
to marry then to burn: that is, as S. Ambrose interprets it, B. Ambr. To. 4.
to be overcome of lust. Thus far Salmeron. And to the same purpose the learned
Chancellor of Paris determines, that however those meetings which have no other
intuition but mere pleasure, cannot be free from some venial offense; yet that
he who comes to the marriage bed, Non sine renitentia, and dolor quodam animi,
quod sine usu matrimonii vivere non possit, etc.
not without a certain renitency and regret of mind that he cannot live
without the use of matrimony, offends not. Shortly then, howsoever it be
difficult, if not altogether impossible to prescribe fixed limits to all ages
and complexions; yet this we may undoubtedly resolve, that we must keep within
the bounds of just sobriety, of the health, and continued vigor of nature, of
our aptitude to Gods service, of our alacrity in our vocations; not making
appetite our measure, but reason; hating that Messaline-like disposition, which
may be wearied, not satisfied; affecting to quench, not to solicit lust; using
our pleasure as the traveller does water, not as the drunkard, wine; whereby he
is enflamed and enthirsted the more.

. IX. Of the limitation of our pleasures in the manner of using them.
THus much for the just quantity of our lawful delights; the manner of our
using them remains; Whether those of the board, or of the bed, or of the
field; one universal rule serves for them all: we may not pursue them either
over-eagerly, or indiscreetly. If we may use them, we may not set our hearts
upon them; and if we give our selves leave to enjoy them, yet we may not let
our selves loose to their fruition: Carelessness is here our best posture; 1
Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
They that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not; they that have wives, as if they
had none; they that buy, as if they possessed not; they that use the world, as
if they used it not, says the blessed Apostle. Far be it from a Christian
heart so to be affected with any earthly delight, as if his felicity dwelt in
it, his utter dejection and misery in the want of it: that as Phaltiel did his
wife, he should follow it weeping. Ber^*
It was a good charge that the holy man gave to his votary, that he should not
totus comedere; Cant. 5.2.
and the Spouse in the Divine Marriage-song can say, I slept, but my heart
waketh: thus, whiles we shall take our pleasure, our pleasure shall not take us.

Discretion must be the second guide of our pleasure: as in other
circumstances, so especially in the choice of meet places, and seasons. Nullo
modo placuit bis in die saturum fieri. Cic. Tuscul. l. 1.
It was a shameless word of that brutish Cynick, that he would plantare
hominem in foro; The Jews made it a matter of their 39. lashes, Schicard. de
jure reg. Hebr.
for a man to lie with his own wife in the open field: and if it were
notoriously filthy for Absalom, to come near to his Fathers Concubines in the
darkest closet, surely to set up a tent upon the roof of the house, and in the
sight of the Sun, and all ^srael to act that wickedness, was no less then
flagitious villainy. The very love feasts of the primitive Christians were
therefore cried down, by the Apostle, because they were misplaced; Have ye
not houses to eat and drink in? ^1 Cor. 11.
and so were the vigils in the succeeding ages. If markets, if sports, be never
so warrantable, yet in a Church, not without a foul profanation: So likewise
there are times, which do justly stave off even those carnal delights, which
else would pass with allowance: The Priests under the law whiles they did eat
the holy bread, (which was in their several courses twice in the year) must
abstain from the society of their wives; the like charge does the Apostle
impose upon his Corinthians, Defraud not one another, 1 Cor. 7.5.
except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting
and prayer. It was a commendable resolution of good Vriah, The Ark of God, and
Israel, and Judah abide in tents, 2 Samuel 11.11.
and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields,
shall I then go in to my house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife?
As thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing. When a
solemn fast is indicted, for a man to entertain his friends with a feast, is
no better then an high impiety and disobedience; neither can it be worthy of
less then a just mulct and censure in those, who cast their liberallest
invitations upon those days which by the wholesome laws both of Church and
Commonwelth are designed to abstinence; Alphons. Varg. stratagem. Jes. c. 11.
and it is a strange charge that Alfonsus de Vargas lays upon the Jesuits,
Eccles. 3.4, 5.
that, upon a slight pretense, made no bones of a fat capon on Good Friday:
There is a time for all things, says wise Solomon; there is a time to embrace,
and a time to refrain from embracing; A time to mourn, and a time to dance.
If then our pleasure shall be rightly differenced, for the kind, and where
that is allowable, ordered aright for the measure, quality, manner of enjoying
it, we shall be safely cheerful, and our life holily comfortable.

. X. Motives to Moderation in the use of all our pleasures.
BUt, because it is no easy task to keep our hearts in so meet a temper, and
to curb in our appetite from a lawless immoderation, it will be necessary for
us seriously to consider, First, the shortness of them; They are like to that
time, on whose wings they are carried, fugitive and transient; gone whiles they
come, and as the Apostle speaks, in their very use perishing. Lysimachus, when
in his extremity of drought he had yielded himself and his crown to the
Scythians, for a draught of water, Good God (says he) how great a felicity
have I forgone for how short a pleasure? Who ever enjoyed full delight a day?
or if he could, what is he the better for it to morrow? He may be worse, but
who ever is the better for his yesterdayes feast? Sweet meats, and fat morsels
glut the soonest; and that which was pleasant in the palate, is noisome in the
maw, and gut. As for those bodily delights wherein luxurious men place their
chief felicity, alas! what poor abortions they are, dead in the very
co^ception, not lasting out their mention, what vanishing shadows, what a short
nothing? And how great a madness is it to place our contentment upon mere
transitorinesse, to fall in love with that face which cannot stay to be saluted?

2 The unprofitablenes of them: Onerat quippe talis cibus voluptatis,
irritatque famem non sa^ia^. Gers. sermon. ad eccles. cautelam. Paupertas nemini
malum nisi repugnanti. Senec. Ep. 123. (...).
It is easy to name thousands that have mis-carried by the use of pleasures,
who, with Ulysses his companions have been turned into swinish beasts, by the
cups of this Circe; but show me the man that ever was the better for them: we
have known want, like to the hard soil of Ithaca, breed good wits; but what can
fullness yield, save fat guts, ill humors, dull brains? The observation is as
true as old, that the flesh is nourished with soft, but the mind with hard
meats: The Falconer keeps his hawk sharp that would fly well; and the horses
are breathed, and dieted, that would vvin the bell, and the wager. Sampson
was not so strong, nor David so holy, nor Solomon so wise, as not to be
foiled with these assaults. It was one strain in Moses his song, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Iesurun is waxed fat and kicked; Thou did drink of the pure blood of the
grape: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with
fatness: then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of
his salvation. How many brave hopes have we known dashed with youthly
excess? how many high, and gallant spirits effeminated? Hannibal could
complain that he brought men into Campania, Quan^o inferius delectamur, a^to a
supern^ amore disjungimur. Bern. de inter. domo. c. 45.
but carried women out again. Who ever knew any man that by the superfluity of
earthly contentments grew more wise, more learned, more virtuous, more devout?
Whereas it is no rare thing to find those, whom a strait and hard hand has
improved in all these; Eccles. 7.2, 3.
It is better to go to the house of mourning, says Solomon, then to go to
the house of feasting: Sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadness of
the countenance the heart is made better. If Jobs children do but meet at a
kind banquet, their father is feign to expiate their feast with sacrifice; for
seldom is ever jollity without excess; whereas in a sad austerity there is no
fear of over-lashing.

Thirdly, as there is no profit in the immoderation of these momentany
pleasures, so no little pain in the loose: This hony-bagge has ever a sting
attending it; so as we are commonly plagued (as Bernard well) in that wherein
we were mis-delighted. Fishes and fowls are well pleased with their baits,
but when the hook or gin seizes them, they are too late sensible of their
misery. I have known potions, that have been very pleasant in the mouth, which
have wrought churlishly in the guts; such are these pleasures: What fruit
have you (says the Apostle) in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Brom.
sum p^aed. V. Gula.
The world deals with too many (as our Bromiard observes) like a bad
neighbor, that makes a man drunk purposely, to defeat him of his purse or
patrimony, when the liquor is evaporated, the man awakes, and finds himself a
beggar: Could we foresee the issue of these sinful delights, we durst not but
fall off. Had any man beforehand said, Death is in the pot, which of the
children of the Prophets durst have been so hardy as to put in his spoone? It
was a good answer of a well meaning novice, who when he was told because
that he was tender and delicate, he could never endure the hardship of a
strict profession, answered, Yes, I will therefore endure it the rather, for
being so tender and delicate, much less shall I be able to endure the pains
of hell. Could we then fore-consider the everlasting torments, which attend
the momentany pleasures of sin; We would say to the best and most plausible of
them, as Sir Thomas is reported to have said to his wife, Cambde^s remains.
Gentle Eve I will none of your apple: and would be loath (as that Philosopher
said in the like case) to buy repentance (yea torment) at so dear a rate.

. XI. Of the mo^eration of our desires in matter of wealth and honor, etc.
NExt to the moderation of our pleasures is that of our desires, if not rather
before it; for whereas there are three acts of our sensitive appetite, in
respect of good, loving, desiring, delight: Love makes way to our desires, and
delight follows it; but because the desires we now speak of, are rather
covetous, then love-some; of outward abilities, rather then bodily pleasures,
we cannot repent of this order of their tractation. And surely, of the two, our
desires are much more insatiable and boundless then our delights. Jo: de
Neapoli q. 28.
A gluttons belly is much sooner filled then his eye: For that only can quiet
the appetite of an intellectual nature, To^us iste mundus sensibilis ad animae
ventrem quid est nisi b^lus exiguus, etc Ger. Sermon. ad eccles. cautel.
which is all and infinitely good; all other things do rather whet then
satiate our longings. All this sensible world (as Gerson well) is but as one
little morsel to the stomach of the soul, and if a thousand worlds could be
let down they cannot fill it; Cor vix ad unius milvi r^fectionem sufficere
posset, and totus mundus ei non sufficit. Bern. de interiore domo. c. 63.
for the mind is by receiving enlarged to receive more; and still cries like
the daughters of the horse-leech, Give, Give. Every soul (as St. Austin
wittily) is either Christ's spouse, Aug. Gun. ad literam.
or the Devils harlot: I add, if Christ's spouse, she takes up with him, Phil.
3.8.
and accounts all things in the world but dung, yea but loss in comparison of
him: If the Devils harlot, she runs wild after every gaudy pleasure, and
profit; like the barren womb, Prove. 30.16.
in Solomon, which never says, It is enough. So then the true Christian soul,
as it can say with David, Ps 73.25.
whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is nothing in earth that I desire
besides thee; so it can say with St. Paul, Phil. 4.11* 12.
I have learned both to want and to abound, to be full and to be hungry, and in
whatsoever estate to be therewith content. Our desires therefore are both the
surest measures of our present estate, and the truest prognostics of our
future: Upon those words of Solomon, As the tree falls so it shall lie, Bernard
wittily, How the tree will fall thou shall soon know by the store, and weight
of the boughs; Our boughs are our desires, on which side soever they grow and
sway most, so shall the soul fall. It was a word too good for him that sold
his birthright for a mess of pottage, I have enough my brother: Jacob
himself could have said no more; this moderation argues a greater good then it
self; for as nothing comes amiss to that man who holds nothing enough, Cui
nihil satis est, nihil rurpe est. Timo^heus in Aristophontum prodigum. Aelian.
1 Timothy 6.10.

Si vis cum laetitia animi vivere, nol^ multa habere.

Bern. ubi supra. c. 45.


( since the love of money is the root of all evil) so he that can stint his
desires is canon-proofe against tentations; whence it is that the best and
wisest men have still held themselves shortest: Even he that had more then
enough, could say, Give me not overmuch. Who knows not the bare feet and
patched cloaks of the famous Philosophers amongst the heathen? Plut. in vit.
Laz. Bayf. de re vest.
Plutarch wonders at Cato, that being now old, and having passed both a
Consul-ship and Triumph, he never wore any garment that exceeded the worth of
an hundred pence. It was the wish of learned Erasmus, after the refused offers
of great preferments, that he might so order his expenses, that he might make
all eaven at his death; so as when he dyed, he might be out of every man's debt,
and might have only so much money left, as might serve to bring him honestly to
his grave: And it was little otherwise (it seems) with the painful and
eminent Master Calvin, who after all his power and prevalence in his place, was
found at his death to be worth some forty pounds sterling; a sum which many a
Master gives his groom for a few years service: Yea, in the very chair of
Rome, Bin. in vita Clem. 4. Anno. 1268.
(where a man would least look to meet with moderation) we find Clement 4.
when he would place out his two daughters, gave to the one thirty pounds in a
Nunnery, to the other three hundred in her marriage; Bin. Anno. 1410.
And Alexander the 5. who was chosen Pope in the Council of Pisa, had wont to
say he was a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, Bin. in vita Celestini Electi.
Ann. 1294.
and a beggarly Pope: The extreme lowliness of Celestine the 5. who from an
Anachorets cell was fetched into the Chair, (and gave the name to that Order)
was too much noted to hold long; he that would only ride upon an ass; (whiles
his successors mount on shoulders) soon walks on foot to his desert, and
thence to his prison. Adrian 4. Nihil si^i in vita infoelicius accidisse, quam
quod imperarit.
This man was of the diet of a brother of his, Pope Adrian, who caused it to be
written on his grave, that nothing fell out to him in all his life more
unhappily, then that he was advanced to rule: These are, I confess, mere
Heteroclites of the Papacy; the common rule is otherwise; Henr. a Token in
Sylv. loc. com. Hoppin. de Orig. Templ.
to let pass the report which the Archbishop of Lions made in the Council of
Basil of those many Millions, Reditus Romani computati ab Henrico 3. ad
tantumascenderunt quantum reditus regis, viz. l. x. millia marcarum puri
reditus, praeter alia emolumenta. Florilegus. Ann. 1245.
which in the time of Pope Martin came to the Court of Rome out of France
alone; and the yearly sums registered in our Acts, which out of this Island
flew thither, above the Kings revenues: we know in our time what millions of
gold Sixtus 5. who changed a neat-heards cloak for a Franciscans cowle,
Ciracella in ejus vit. cit. a Rivetio contr. Sylv. S. Pet^a.
(and therefore by virtue of his order might touch no silver) raked together in
five years space. The story is famous of the discourse betwixt Pope Innocent
the 4. and Thomas Aquinas; When that great Clerk came to Rome, and looked
somewhat amazedly upon the mass of Plate, and treasure which he there saw; Lo,
said the Pope, you see, Thomas, we cannot say as S. Peter did of old, Silver
and gold have I none; No, said Aquinas, neither can you command as he did, the
lame man to arise and walk. There was not more difference in the wealth of the
time, Sicut Paulus ditissimus pauper dicebat, Sicut nihil habentes, and omnia
possidentes. Ambros. de vitiorum, virtutumque conflictu.
then in the virtue. It was an heroical word of S. Paul; As having all things,
yet possessing nothing; and a resolution no less, that rather then he would be
put down by the brag of the false-teachers among the Corinthians, he would lay
his fingers to the stitching of skins for Tent-making. What speak I of these
meannesses, Heb. 11 37, 38.
when he tells us of holy men, that wandered about in sheepskins, and goats
skins, in deserts, and mountains, and caves of the earth? Yea what do I fall
into the mention of any of these, when I hear the Lord of life, the God of
glory, who had the command of earth, and heaven, say, The foxes have holes, and
the birds of the air have nests, but the son of man has not where to lay his
head? It was a base and unworthy imputation, that has been cast upon him by
some ignorant favorers of wilful poverty, that he lived upon pure alms. If
our blessed Savior, and his train had not a common stock, wherefore was Judas
the purse-bearer? and why in that office did he repine at the costly ointment
bestowed upon his Master, as that which might have been sold for 300, pence to
the use of the poor, if himself had not wont to be a receiver of the like
sums in a pretense of distribution? wherein had he been a thief, if he had
not both wont, and meant to lurch out of the common Treasury? Certainly, he
that said, It is better to give then to receive, would not fail of the better,
and take up with the worse: and he who sent his Cators to Sichem to buy meat,
Joh. 4 8.
would not go upon trust with Samaritans: Now, he that shall ask how this
stock should arise, may easily think that he who commanded the fish to bring
him tribute-mony, had a thousand vvayes to make his own provision: Amongst
which, this is clear and eminent; His chosen vessel could say, 1 Cor. 9.14.
Even so the Lord has ordained that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel. Lo this was Christ's own ordination, was it not therefore his
practice? and if any man would rather cast it upon our Saviors care for the
provision of succeeding times, he may soon learn, that when the blessed Son
of God sent his Disciples as Legates from his own side, to preach the Gospel,
without scrip, or money, the word was, dignus est, The labourer is worthy of his
wages: he says not, The beggar is worthy of his alms: This maintenance was
not of beneficence, but duty: So as Salmeron observes well, Salmer. Tom. 5.
tract. 5.
neither Christ nor his Apostles were in any want; they earned what they had,
and they had what was sufficient: And if that gracious Messiah begged water of
the Samaritan woman, at Jacobs well, it was because he thirsted after the
salvation of her, and her neighbors; and would take this occasion to bestow
upon them the waters of life, which they had not otherwise known, or
desired; I hear where he asked for water, a common element, and that for
which the giver was no whit the poorer, I would feign hear where he asked
for bread, where for meat: I find where he gave bread more then once, to
thousands, and fish to boot; but where ever did he ask a morsel, or finne?
shortly then, he who could have commanded all the pomp and royalty of the
whole world, would appear in the form of a servant, that he might sanctify a
mean and moderate condition to us. It is true, there can be no certain
proportion of our either having, or desiring; since the conditions of men are
in a vast difference; for that coat which is too big for a dwarf, will not
so much as come upon a Giants sleeve: and it is but just and lawful for every
man to affect so much, as may be sufficient, not only for the necessity of his
person, but for the decency of his estate; the neglect whereof may be sordid,
and deservedly taxable. It is said of Gregory the great, that he sharply
reproved Paschafius Bishop of Naples; for that he used to walk down to the
Seaside, attended only with one or two of his Clergy, without that meet port
which his place required. Surely, he that goes below himself, disparageth his
vocation, and whiles he would seem humble, is no other then careless: But all
things considered, he that can cut eavenest between want and excess, is in
the safest, easiest, happiest estate: Senec. de Tranquillit.
A truth, which if it were duly entertained, would quit men's hearts of a world
of vexation, which now they do willingly draw upon themselves; for he that
resolves to be rich, and great, as he must needs fall into many snares of sin,
so into manifold distractions of cares. It was a true word of wise Bion, in
Laertius, who when he was asked, what man lived most unquietly, answered, He
that in a great estate affects to be prosperous: In all experience, he that
sets too high a pitch to his desires, lives upon the rack; neither can be
loosed, till he remit of his great thoughts, and resolve to clip his wings and
train, and to take up with the present. Very seasonable and witty was that
answer, which Cyneas in the story gave to ambitious Pyrrhus, when that great
Conqueror began speech of his designs: Well, said Cyneas, when thou have
vanquished the Romans, what vvilt thou then do? I will then (said Pyrrhus)
sail over to Sicily; And what will thou do, said Cyneas, when that is vvon?
then will we said Pyrrhus, subdue Africa; Well, and when that is effected,
what vvilt thou (said Cyneas) then do? Why then, said Pyrrhus, we will sit
down and spend the rest of our time merrily, and contentedly: And what
hinders thee, said Cyneas, that without all this labor and peril, thou can
not now do so beforehand? Certainly, nothing lies cross the way of our
contentation, but our own thoughts; and those the all-wise God leaves there on
purpose for the just torture of great hearts. It was a truly Apostolical, and
divine counsel that the chosen vessel gives to his Hebrews; Heb. 13.5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness; and be content with such
things as ye have: which unto his Timothy he limits to food and raiment; 1 Timothy 6.8.
and backs it irrefragably with a reason fetched from our first and last estate;
1 Timothy 6.7
For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we shall carry
nothing out. Lo, we begin and end with nothing; Under the Antiochi the
Levites took upon them to be Kings, and turned Saduces, and died violently.
B^ought. ex Fen Gers.
and no less then all can sat us while we are: Oh the infinite avarice and
ambition of men! the Sea has both bottom, and bounds, the heart of man has
neither. There are those, as our Bromiard observes, who in a fair pretense of
mortification, like soaring Kites, Tertullus Patric us Romanus locuples,
pa^rimonium dedi^ Benedicto, etc. regn^^ po^ius quam coenobia vir sanctus
posteris (...) Volater.
fly up from the earth, and cry, Fie, Fie, in their flight, as if they scorned
these lower vanities, and yet when they have done, stoop upon the first carrion
that comes in their eye: False Pharisees that under the color of long prayers
devour widows houses; Pharisaicall votaries that under color of wilful
poverty, Mendicantes autem fratres et si praedia non sunt iustituti habere,
tamen nihil haben^es omnia possident. Krantz. Metrop. l. 7. c. 47.
sweep away whole Countries into their Corban. Amongst the very Mahumetans
under the name of sanctity, the Scirifii in Africa, in our very age, the sons
of Scirifius Hascenus, desire no more patrimony from their father, but a drum,
and an ensign; and thus furnished, Caesar a Branchedoro Monita Polit.
(religion being their sole pretext) they run away with the large kingdoms of
Fez, and Morocco. And what other spirit possessed Friar Campanella, a poor
Dominican in our time, who durst think of changing his cowle for a crown,
aiming at no less in his secret treaty with the Turks, then the now divided
Empire of Italy? How no less rise then insatiable are these desires of men?
One plots for a Lordship, another for a Coronet. One has swallowed a crozier,
another a Scepter; a third a Monarchy, and a fourth all these: Of all the
ambitions that have come to my notice, An. 1311. Sept. 16. ut Waremundus de
Erenb^rgh in ve^isimil. de regni subsid. Idem Branchedorus ibid.
I do most wonder at that of Maximilian the first, who being Emperor affected
also to be Pope; and for that purpose, in his letter written to the Baron of
Lichtenstein, offered the sum of three hundred thousand Ducats, besides the
pawn of four rich and preciously stuffed chests, together with the sumptuous
pall of his Princely investiture; whereof (said he) after we are seized of the
Papacy, we shall have no further use: Though why not (says Waremundus) as
well as Pope Boniface the eight, Vrspergens Cuspin. in vita Alberti. vide
Orationem praemonitoria^ Caes. Branchedori.

M^gnitudo non habet cer^um modum. Sen. Epist. 43.


who girded with his sword, and crowned with an Imperial Diadem came abroad
magnificently amongst the people and could openly profess, I am both Caesar
and Pope. Vain men! whither do our restless desires carry us, unless grace
and wiser thoughts pineon their wings? Which if we do seriously affect; there
is a double remedy of this immoderation; The first is the due consideration of
our own condition, both in the shortness and fickleness of our life, and the
length and weight of our reckoning. Alas, if all the world were mine, how
long could I enjoy it? Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy soul,
as was said to the rich projector in the parable, and then whose shall all
these things be? Were I the great King of Babylon, when I see the hand
writing my destiny upon the wall, what should I care for the massy bowls of
my cupboord, or the golden roof of my Palace? what fool was ever fond of
the orient colors of a bubble? who ever was at the cost to gild a mud-vvall?
or to embroyder that tent which he must remove to morrow? Such is my condition
here; I must alter, it cannot. It is the best ceremony that I could note in all
the pack of those Pontifical rites, that an herald burns tovve before the
new Pope in all the height of his pomp, and cries Holy Father, thus passes the
glory of the world: Thus, even thus indeed, the glory passes; the account
passes not so soon: It is a long reckoning that remains to be made for great
receipts: for we are not the owners; we are the baylifes or stewards of our
whole estates: In the day of our great Audit, there is not one penny but must
be calculated; and what can the greatness of the sum (passed through our
hands) then avail us, other then to add difficulty to the computation, and
danger to the accountant? When Death shall come roughly to us in the style that
Benedict did to Totilaes servant, Depon^ quod portas, nam non est tuum.
Lay down that thou bear, for it is not thine own; and the great Master of
the universal family of the world shall call us to a red rationem, for all
that we have received; Woe is me, Melius est minus ege* e quam plus habere. una
ex reg. Aug.
what pleasure shall it be to me that I had much? What is the poor horse the
better for the carriage of a rich sumpter all day, when at night he shall lie
down with a galled back? I hear him that wished to live Croesus, wishing to
die a beggarly Cynick, that was not worth his shroud: The cheer goes down
well, till it come to the shot; when that goes too deep, we quarrel at our
excess. Oh our madness to dote upon our future repentance!

The second remedy, is the due consideration of the object of our desires:
Alas, what poor stuff is this wherewith we are transported? what is the
most preciovs metal of either color, but thick clay, Habac. 2.6.
as the maker himself calls it? What is the largest territory but an insensible
spot of contemptible earth? what are the greatest commands, but a glorious
servitude? what the highest offices, but golden fetters? what the highest
titles, but air and sound? And if the fond minds of worldlings can set other
glosses on these bewitching contentments, yet, as when a man that has eaten
saffron, breathes upon a painted face, he presently descryes and shames the
false complexion; so when the truly rational and judicious shall come to spend
his thoughts upon the best, and all of these garish and glittering allurements,
he shall speedily detect their vanity, and bewray their dissembled
unworthiness.

. XII. The moderation of our passions: and therein first of our sorrow.
THe moderation of our passions challenges the next room; In the pursuit
whereof (since their variety is great) it were easy to pass our bounds; but
we shall moderate our discourse, and select some of the most impetuous: As for
love and joy, they have so much affinity with pleasure and delight whereof we
have already treated, that we shall spare the labor of their further mention.

Sorrow shall take the first place; a passion that has been guilty of much
blood. We have read and heard of some few, that have dyed of joy; as Chilon of
Sparta, when he embraced his son returning with honor; Tertul. de Anima. c.
52.
and Clidemus the Athenian, when he was crowned by the Players; these
Tertullian instances in; So Pope Leo the tenth (if we believe Iovius) is said
to dye for the joy of taking Millaine; so Senas the General of the Turkish
galleys, dyed for the joy of the return of that son, whom he had given for
lost; It was with these, as with them, whom we have seen choked with those
cordial waters, which they have received for the remedy of their qualmes: But
our experience tells us of a thousand for one, that have been killed with
grief: Not perhaps in a sudden violence (which kind of death Caesar esteemed
more easy) but in a lingering, and languishing form of murder; Pro 17.12
for a broken spirit dries and bones, says Solomon; Pro. 15.13.
and by the sorrow of the heart, the spirit is broken. This is our child's part
which was beset us in Paradise before we were: By the mothers side, In sorrow
shall thou bring forth; By the fathers, In sorrow shall thou eat of it, all the
days of thy life: Sorrow in birth, sorrow in life, and in death sorrow. The
shadow does not more inseparably follow the body, then this does our existence;
so as he that meant to say Thrice miserable, mistook not much, when he said,
Thrice man. (...).
If we look upon those who have had the greatest share in Gods love, we shall
find them to have drunk deepest of this cup. The great mirror of patience can
say, Job. 30.27 28, 29.
My bowels boiled and rested not; the days of affliction prevented me. I went
mourning without the Sun; I am a brother to Dragons, and a companion to owls.
And the sweet singer of Israel warbles out sad strains of complaint, Ps. 18.4.
in this kind; The sorrows of death compassed me about, Ps, 116.3.
and the pains of hell gat hold on me; Ps. 119.28
And again, Es. 21.3.
My soul melts for very heaviness. Jer. 4.19.
Esaias cries out of his loins; Esa. 38.14.
Jeremy of his bowels; and good Ezekiah chatters like a Crane or Swallow, and
mournes like a Dove. What speak I of these, when I hear the Lord of life and
glory say, My soul is exceeding heavy, Mar. 14.34
even to the death.

Now this sorrow is ever out of the sense of some evil: Evil, whether of sin,
or of punishment; Of sin, whether of others, or our own. Punishment, as
bodily sickness, death of friends, worldly losses; all these are just grounds
of sorrow. Ps. 119.136.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law, says
holy David. And do we not think he sorrowed more for his own sins? Ps. 6.6.
There is no rest in my bones, says he, because of my sin, And all the night
long I make my bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears.

Punishment does not more necessarily follow upon sin, then sorrow follows
punishment; David's eye is consumed because of his grief. Psalm. 6.7.
Ezekiah turns him to the wall and weeps; And whiles St. Paul charge not to
mourn immoderatly for the dead, he supposes just tears due: Garments were
allowed to be torn by Gods people at the death of friends; and at the Parents
death, after thirty days wearing, it was their guise to lay down those rent
garments, never to be sown up again; we pity and grieve at the
childishness of those innocent babes, that can play at wink and hide about
their Fathers hearse: And for afflictions, whether of body or estate, how are
they such, if we feel them not? and how do we feel them, if we sorrow not?
The sense of pain argues life, as St. Ambrose well. Jer. 5.3.
It is ill taken by the Almighty from his people that he had stricken them but
they grieved not; this is (what lies in us) to disappoint God of his purpose;
and to put our selves into the posture of Solomon's drunkard; Pro. 23.2.
They have stricken me (does he say) and I was not sick, they have beaten me,
and I felt it not; we are wont to censure that child for stubborn and
graceless, that sheds no tears when he is whipped: It cannot be well with us,
if we sorrow not; Blessed are they that mourn. But there are certain just
conditions and cautions of our grief, which we cannot exceed or neglect,
without offense both to God, and to our selves. 1. Caution of sorrow.


Whereof the first shall be, that the cause of our sorrow be just: not fancied,
not insufficient; For we have known some that have brewed their own grief,
who with Simeon Stylites have voluntarily chained up themselves in their own
pillar, when they might have enjoyed free scope of comfortable liberty. How
many melancholique pieces have with mere imaginations made their lives
miserable, and worn out their days in the bitterness of their soul; only
out of those conceits which the bystanders have hooted at, as either
impossible, or ridiculous? One thinks himself loathsomly deformed, another
disgraced and infamous; a third dying or dead: One thinks himself transmuted
into some beast: another possessed by some ill spirit. What form cannot this
humor put on? I leave these kind of complainants to good counsel and
Ellebore. Others there are, who have indeed real crosses, but far below
their sorrow, passionately lamenting even small afflictions: so we have seen a
child, when he has taken a heedlesse and harmless fall, bewray his grief
with loud crying, and in a foolish anguish knocking his head against that
ground, which he accuses for his miscarriage: Thus we find certain Armenians,
Prateol. Elench. Haeres. V. Chazinzarii.
styled of old by the name of Chazinzarii, who kept a yearly fast, called
Arzibur, in the sad memory of the dog of Sergius, their Martyr, (of that
name) devoured by a wolf; which attendant of his, was wont to go before his
Master, and by some dumb signs, call forth the disciples to their devotions:
It was an affliction to Rachel that she had no children, Genesis 30.
but she had no reason so to be affected with it, as to say, Give me children,
or else I dye: Jonah had cause to be sorry for the loss of his Gourd, but he
had no reason to say, It is better for me to dye then to live: These
dispositions are like unto a new cart, which screaks, and cries, even whiles it
has no burden but his own wheels, whereas that which is long used, and well
liquored, goes silently away with an heavy load.

2. Caution of our sorrow.
Our second caution therefore must be, that even our just sorrow be moderate;
for the quantity, not more then enough. Ambros. de obitu Satyri fiatris.
It was a rule of the Lycians (as St. Ambrose tells us) if a man would mourn
above his stint, to put him into a woman's habit; 1 These. 4.13.
we may mourn for the dead, but not as men without hope: David mournes, at
least enough, 2 Samuel 12.21.
for his sick child, but when he perceives it once dead, he rises up, and
washes, anointeth and refreshes himself, and changes his apparel, and
comes into the Lords house to worship. Has good Melaina lost her husband,
Hieron. Epist.
and her children at once? her tears are just, but she dries them up at last
with this resolution, that she shall now the more freely betake her self to
her devotion. Have we lost our worldly goods? they had not been goods, if they
were not vvorth our grief for their miscarriage; if, as our riches have
wings, they be flowne up to heaven, (being taken away by the same hand that
gave them) it is good reason our sorrow should give way to our submission and
obedience: and we should say with Job, The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. As then on the one side we may not so
obdure our selves, as to be like the Spartan boys, which would not so much as
change a countenance at their beating; so on the other side, we may not be
like to those Anticks of stone, which we see carved out under the end of
great beams in vast buildings, which seem to make vvry and vvrencht faces, as
if they were hard put to it, with the weight, when as indeed they bear
little or nothing.

Our third Caution is, that the measure of this sorrow be proportioned,
whether it be more or less, according to the cause of the sorrow; for it may
be so moderate, as to be unproportionable. Grief for crosses should be small,
and impassionate; grief for sin can hardly be too much: and as those crosses,
and those sins differ in degree, so should the degrees of our sorrow; he
therefore that grieves more for a cross, then for his sin; or grieves
equally for a small cross and a greater, offends in the undue proportion of
his sorrow: Shortly then, there is a worldly sorrow, and there is a spiritual;
both which must know their just limits; right reason and true Philosophy
teaches the one, the other Divinity.

I have lost my goods; were they mine first? perhaps I was but their keeper, or
bearer, not their owner; I see the groom that keeps the horse is not much
troubled to flea him; what does he lose but his labor in tending him? What was
the mule in Plutarch, after his lying down in the water, troubled with the
melting of that burden of salt, which he carried? or what pains is it to the
silly ass, that the treasure which he bore is taken off, and laid up in his
Masters chest?

I see many sweating in the mint upon several employments, they have money
enough under their hands, what are they the richer? or do they greeve to see
it carried away in full sacks from their fingering? My goods are lost; were
they not only lent me for a time, till they should be called for? were they not
delivered into my hands, only to be paid back upon account? if the owner
require them at his day, what harm is done? so that my reckoning be eaven,
how can I complain to be eased of a charge?

I have lost my goods by shipwreck; It is well that my self have escaped; how
have I heard and read of Philosophers, who have voluntarily cast their gold
into the Sea; the winds have done that for me, which their hands did for
themselves? perhaps that very wealth had been my undoing, which at least, can
do no harm where it is; why did I trust such friends as wind and water, if I
did not look to be disappointed?

I have lost my goods by casualty of fire; even that casualty was not without a
providence: He that sent that fire, meant to try me by it; he had not sent it,
but that he knew there was dross of worldliness and corruption to be thus
purged out of me: It is a worse flame that I have deserved; and if by this
lesser and momentany fire, the mercy of God has meant to prevent that greater,
and everlasting, I have reason (as the Martyrs were wont) to embrace the flame.

I have lost my goods by robbery, cosenage, oppression; I would be loath to be
in his case that has thus found them: Let him mourn that has thus purchased a
curse: for me, I have but forceably transferred my charge, where it will be
woefully audited for. It is all one to me whether it be fire, or water, or
fraud, or violence that has robbed me; there is one and the same hand of God
in all these events: let me kiss that hand which strikes me with these
varieties of rods, and I shall say, It is good for me that I was afflicted.

My friend, my wife, my child is dead; say rather they are departed: I can
scarce allow it to be a death, where they decease well: prosectio est, Non mihi
peri^, sed praei^, etc. Bern. Epist 270.
quam tu putas mortem, as Tertullian of old. It is a mere departure of those
partners which must once meet, and from those friends which must soon follow
and overtake us. Sorrow is so proper for a funeral that the Jews were wont to
hire mourners, rather then they would want them: Even our blessed Savior
bestowed tears upon the Exequies of him, whom he meant presently to raise: it
is not for us to be too niggardly of this warm dew; but those tears which are
shed at the decease of good souls, should be like those drops of rain which
fall in a Sunshine, mixed with rays of comfort. Let them put no stint to
their sorrow who think there is no rest, no happiness after death: but for us,
Nullas habeant lachrymarum ferias, nullam ^ristitiae requiem consequantur, qui
nullam putant requiem, mortuorum. Nobis vero quibus mors non na^urae sed vitae
istius sinis, etc. Amb. de obitu frat. Satyri.
who know death to be only the end of our life, not of our being; yea rather
the change of a better life for worse; we have reason to dry up our tears, and
in some sort to imitate the pattern of those nations, which were wont to
mourn at the birth of their children, and rejoice and feast at their death: a
practice, which in part was taken up by the Jews themselves, Monumentarii
Ceraulae. Apul. Mat. 9.23. Eccl. 7.1.
who with their mourners mixed also musicians in their Funeral banquets, and
countenanced by great and wise Solomon, The day of death is better then ones
birth day.

Shortly then, I have parted with a good child, but to a better Father, to a
more glorious patrimony: whether now is the child's gain, or the Fathers loss
greater? and what can it be but self-love that makes me more sensible of my
own loss, Aut absorbendus, aut premendus omnis dolor. Ambros. ut supra.
then my childs glory? It is my weakness therefore, if I do not either
swallow, or stifle my sorrow.

I have lost my health and am seized with sickness and pain: This, this, next
to death is the King of sorrows; all earthly crosses veil to it, and confess
themselves trifles in comparison: Suidas.
what ease can I now find in good words more then Callicon found to his head
in that chafe, wherewith he stuffed his earthen pitcher, which he made his
pillow? vvhiles the thorn is ranckling in my foot, what ease can I find in a
poultesse? Know, O weak man, there is that in a Christian heart which is a
more then sufficient cordial against sickness, pains, death, and that can
triumph over the vvorst extremities. This is the victory, which overcomes a
world (of miseries) even our faith. Romans 5.3.
Not so only (says the chosen vessel) but we glory or rejoice in
tribulations: For, lo, our faith is it which puts true constructions upon our
pains. Health it self would not be vvelcome to us, if we did not know it
good; and if we could be persuaded that sickness were good, or better for us,
why should not that be equally vvelcome? It was a good speech of that
Hermit, who when he heard a man praying vehemently for the removal of his
disease, said, (Fili, rem tibi necessariam abjicere audes?) Alas, son, you
go about to be rid of a necessary commodity. The Christian heart knows it is
in the hands of him who could as easily avert evil, as send it; and whose love
is no less, then his power; and therefore resolves, he could not suffer, if
not for the better. The parent is indulgent to his child, were his love well
improved; if he would not suffer his son to be let blood in a plurifie, whiles
the Physician knows he dies if he bleed not? An ignorant pesant has dug up
a lump of precious Ore, Aug. in Psalm. 83. Torcul^ria paran^ur avis, and olivis,
nec ^va vinum, etc.
do we not smile at him, if he be unwilling the finer should put it into the
fire? The press is prepared for the grapes and Olives, and (as Austin well)
neither of them will yield their comfortable and wholesome juice without an hard
strayning; would not that fond Manichee make himself ridiculous, that should
sorbid to gather, much more to wring them? Shortly then, am I visited with
sickness? it is not for me (like a man that is overloaded with too heavy a
burden) to make ill faces; but to stir up my Christian resolution, and to
possess my soul in patience, as well knowing that the vessel that would be
fit for Gods cup-board, must be hammered with many strokes; the corn for Gods
table must pass under the sickle, the flayle, the mill; the spices for Gods
perfume must be bruised and beaten.

In ^umme; worldly crosses cannot affect us with too deep sorrow, if we have
the grace and leisure to turn them round, and view them on all sides; for if
we find their face sour, and grisly, their back is comely and beautiful: No
chastening for the present seems to be joyous, Heb. 12.11
but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby: wherefore lift up the
hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.

. XIII. Of spiritual sorrow and the moderation thereof.
NOt so rise, but more painful is the spiritual sorrow, whether for the
sense of sins, or the want of grace. 2 Cor. 7.10
This is that which the Apostle styles ((...)) a godly sorrow, vvorking
repentance to salvation, not to be repented of: the tears whereof, the
Almighty puts up in his bottle, and keeps them for most precious, it is seldom
when this grief exceeds; too many are so afraid of enough, that they are
vvilling to learn of their confessors, Fr^ a Vict. Relect.
that a mere velleity of sorrow is sufficient to true repentance: But give me
not an attrition, but a contrition of heart; give me a drouping head, red eyes,
blubbered cheeks, a macerated body met with a pensive soul, give me sackcloth
and ashes, fastings, watchings, prostrations, ejulations, when I have offended
my God; and let me be let loose to my free sorrow: Zech. 12.10.
Let me be in bitterness (as Zechariah expresses it) as one that is in
bitterness for his only son. Not, but that it is possible to drink too deep
of this bitter cup: We have known those, who have pined themselves away, in a
continual heaviness, refusing all possible means of comfort, out of a sense
of their sins, whose whole life has been like a gloomy winters day, all
over-cast with clouds, without the least glimpse of a Sun shine; we have
seen them that have thus lived and dyed disconsolate, raving, despairing:
Experience makes this so true, that we may well conclude, that even the best
spiritual sorrow must be moderated, the worst shunned; every sorrow for sin
is not good: there is a sorrow that looks at the punishment through the sin,
not regarding the offense; but the smart of evil; this would not care for the
frown of God, if he would not strike, as that which indeed fears not God;
but hell; as that which apprehends only lashes and torm^nts: this is incident
even to devils, and damned souls; all which cannot but naturally abhor
pain and torture: What malefactor was ever in the world, that was not
troubled to think of his execution? There is a sorrow that looks not at the
punishment, but the sin, regarding, not so much the deserved smart, as the
offense; that is more troubled with a Fathers frown, then with the whip in a
strangers hand; with the desertions of God, then with the fear of an hell:
Under this sorrow, and sometimes perhaps under the mixture of both, does God
suffer his dearest ones to dwell for a time, numbering all their tears, and
sighs, recording all their knocks on their breasts, and strokes on their
thighs, and shakings of their heads, and taking pleasure to view their
profitable, and at last happy self-conflicts.

It is said of Anthony the holy Hermit, that having been once in his desert,
beaten and buffeted by Devils, he cried out to his Savior (O bone Jesus ubi
eras?) O good Jesus where were thou, whil^s I was thus handled? and received
answer, Iuxta te, sed expectavi certamen tuum: I was by thee, but stayed to see
how thou would behave thy self in the combat. Surely, so does our good God
to all his: Exodus 3.7.
he passes a ( videndo vidi) upon all their sorrows, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and will at last give an happy issue with the temptation; In the mean time it
cannot but concern us, to temper this mixed sorrow of ours with a meet
moderation: Hear this then thou drouping soul, thou are dismayed with the
haynousnesse of thy sins, and the sense of Gods anger for them; do thou
know with whom thou have to do? Exodus 34.6, 7.
have thou heard him proclaim his own style? The Lord, the Lord, merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquities and transgressions, and sins; and can
thou distrust that infinite goodness? Lo, if there were no mercy in heaven,
thou could not be otherwise affected; Look up and see that glorious light
that shines about thee; Ps. 130.7.
With the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plentious redemption. And is
there plentious redemption for all, and none for thee? Because thou have
wronged God in his justice, will thou more wrong him in his mercy? and because
thou have wronged him in both, will thou wrong thy self in him? Know, O thou
weak man, Ps. 36.5.
in what hands thou art. He that said, Thy mercy O Lord is in the heavens, and
thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds; said also, Ps. 108.4.
Thy mercy is great above the heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the clouds.
It is a sure comfort to thee, that he cannot fail in his faithfulness and
truth; thou art upon earth, and these reach above thee, to the clouds, but if
thy sins could be so great and high, as to overlook the clouds, yet his
mercy is beyond them, for it reaches unto heaven; and if they could in an
hellish presumption reach so high as heaven, yet his mercy is great above the
heavens; higher then this they cannot. If now thy heinous sins could sink
thee to the bottom of hell, yet that mercy which is above the heavens, can
fetch thee up again: Thou art a grievous sinner; we know one that said he was
the chief of sinners, who is now one of the prime Saints in heaven: Look upon
those whom thou must confess worse then thy self: Cast back thine eyes but
upon Manasseh, 2 King. 21.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9.11, 16.
the lewd son of an holy Parent; See him rearing up Altars to Baal, worshipping
all the host of heaven, building Altars for his new Gods, in the very courts of
the house of the Lord* causing his sons to pass through the fire, trading
with witches, and wicked spirits, seducing Gods people to more then Amoritish
wickedness, filling the streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood: say if thy
sin can be thus crimson; yet, behold this man a no less famous example of
mercy then wickedness: And what? Psalm. 77.
7
is the hand of God shortened that he cannot now save? Or, 8
has the Lord cast off for ever? 9
and will he be favorable no more? 10
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? 11
has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender
mercies? O man, say justly, on: This is mine infirmity; thine infirmity sure
enough; and take heed, if thou persist to distrust, that it be not worse: These
misprisons of God are dangerous; The honor of his mercy is justly dear to
him; no marvel if he cannot endure it to be questioned; when the temptation is
blown over, hear what the same tongue says, Ps. 103.8, 9, 10, 11.
The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plentious in mercy. He
will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever: He has not
dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our iniquities: For as
the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that
fear him. Oh then, lay hold on the large, and illimited mercy of thy God, and
thou art safe: What cares the debtor for the length of a bill that is crossed?
what cares the condemned person for the sentence of death, whiles he has his
pardon sealed in his bosom? Thou art an heinous sinner: Wherefore came thy
Savior? wherefore suffered he? If thy sin remain, wherefore serves his
blood? If thy debt be still called for, wherefore was thine obligation
cancelled? If thou be still captive to sin and death, wherefore was that dear
ransom paid? why did he stretch forth his blessed hands upon the cross, but
to receive thee? why did he bow down his head but to invite thee? why was his
precious side opened, but that he might take thee into his heart? Thou
despisest him, if thou trustest him not; Judas and thou shall sin more in
despairing, then in betraying him. Oh then, gather heart to thy self, from the
merits, from the mercies of thine All-sufficient Redeemer, against all thy
sinfulness: For, who is it that shall be once thy Judge? before what Tribunal
shall thou appear, to receive thy sentence? Is it not thy Savior that sits
there? He that dyed for thee, that he might rescue thee from death; shall he,
can he doom thee to that death from which he came to save thee? Comfort thy
self then with these words, and if thou would keep thy soul in an equal
temper, as thou have two eyes, fix the one of them upon Gods justice to keep
thee low and humble, and to quit thee from presumption: fix the other upon his
transcendent mercy, to keep thee from the depth of sorrow and desperation.

. XIV. Of the moderation of the Passion of Fear.
SOrrow is for present and felt evils; Fear is only of evils future: A
passion so afflictive, that even the expectation of a doubtful mischief that
may come, is more grievous to us sometimes, then the sense of that mischief,
when it is come. Anth. Torquemade 3. journee. Sim. Gou^art hist. memorab.
That which Torquemade reports of a Spanish Lord in his knowledge, I could
second with examples at home, of some, who have been thought otherwise valiant,
yet, if they had been but locked up in a chamber, would either break the
doors, or offer to leap out of the windows; yet not knowing of any danger
imminent: And if in an imaginary, or possible evil, fear have these effects,
what shall we expect from it in those which are real and certain? It is
mavelous, and scarce credible, which both histories and eyes can witness in
this kind; James Osorius, a young Gentleman of Spain, born of a noble Family,
one of the Courtiers of Charles the fifth, being upon occasion of a wicked
design of lust to an honorable Lady, emprisoned, with an intent of his
execution the next day, was suddenly so changed with the fear of the arrest of
death, that in the morning when he was brought forth, none of the beholders
knew him; his hair was turned so white, as if he had been fourscore years
old: upon sight whereof, the Emperor pardoned him, as having been enough
punished with the fear of that which he should have suffered. Levin. Lemnius de
Miraculiox
Levinus Lemnius a late Philosopher (in whom my younger age took much delight)
recounts the story, and discourses probably upon the natural reasons of this
alteration. The like report is made by Julius Scaliger, of a Kinsman of
Franciscus Gonzaga, Citat. 2 Simone Goulart. Hist^ire Memorab.
in his time imprisoned upon suspicion of treason, who with the fear of
torture and death, was in one nights space thus changed. And Coelius Rodiginus
tells us of a Falconer, who climbing up to a rocky hill for an hawks nest, was
with the breaking of a rope (wherewith he was raised) so affrighted, that
instantly his hair turned. What need we more instances? My self have seen
one, to whom the same accident was said to have befalne, though now the color
were (upon the fall of that weak fleece) altered. What speak we of this? Death
it self has followed sometimes, upon this very fear of death; so as some have
dyed lest they should dye. Montague gives us an instance of a Gentleman, at the
siege of S. Paul, who fell down stark dead, in the breach, without any touch
of stroke, save what his own heart gave him: Yea, how have we known some,
that have dyed out of the fear of that, whereof they might have dyed; and yet
have escaped? A passenger rides by night over the narrow plank of an high and
broken bridge, and in the morning dies to see the horror of that fall he might
have had. There is no evil whether true or fancyed, but may be the subject of
fear: There may be a Pisander so timorous, Suid.
that he is afraid to see his own breath: Florilegus An. 1589.
and our Florilegus tells us of a Jews King of France, so afraid of the sea,
that he said it was more then an humane matter to cross the water; and durst
not pass betwixt Dover and VVhitsands, till he had implored the aid of St.
Thomas of Canterbury: but all these fears have a relation to that utmost of
all terribles; and if other evils, as displeasure, shame, pain, danger,
sickness, be the usual subjects of fear also, yet Death is the King of
fear: I am of the mind of Lucretius therefore, Lucret. Inprimis timor est
Acheron^is agendus, Funditus humanam qui vitam turbat ab imo.
although to a better purpose, that if a man would see better days, he must
free his heart from that slavish fear of death, wherewith it is commonly
molested. In what a miserable servitude are those men, Ea gensita mortem
horret, ut ad thuris odorem efferentur, quod in* funeribus solet accendi.
Erasm. Epist. Grunnio.
whereof Erasmus speaks to his Grunnius, who so abhor the thought of death,
that they cannot abide the smell of Frankincense, because it is wont to be
used at funerals? They who are ready to swound at the sight of a coffin; and
(if they could otherwise choose) could be content not to lie in a sheet,
because it recalls the thought of that, wherein they shall be once wrapped? It
concerns a wise man to obdure himself against these weak fears, and to resolve
to meet Death boldly, in the teeth: Nothing is more remarkable in all the
passages of our blessed Savior, then that which S. Luke records of him, Luke
9.51.
that when he was to go up (his last) to Jerusalem, where he must die, ((...))
he steadfastly set his face to that fatal journey: The word implies a
resolution of courage against some evil to be conflicted with. Maldonate would
have the Metaphor fetched from the custom of Bulls, who when they must fight,
are wont to fetch up a kind of sprightly terror into their countenance; Vultum
corrugan^es obfirmant. Mald. in loc.
at least, it imports a firm purpose of an undaunted spirit to grapple with
some foreexpected evil: thus must we learn to do against our last enemy.

Tell me then, thou weak man, thou fear death: will it not come if thou
fear it not? will it come the later for thy fear? Is not thy life thus made
miserable before it come?

Is not this the condition, upon which thou receivedst life, to part with it
when it should be called for? art thou discontent at thy being? do thou
murmur that thou art a man, because therein thou art mortal? Does any thing
befall thee different from the best, and all of thy kind? Look back upon all
that have been before thee, where are those innumerable numbers of men which
peopled the earth but in the last century of years? see whether the great
Monarchs of the world speed any otherwise: and could thou expect less, upon
the many and sensible warnings of thy mortality? what language have thy
sicknesses, and decays of nature spoken to thee, but this (of a true
harbingers) Death is coming? And how well should thou be pleased with his
approach? Say that thou were sentenced to live some hundreds of years, with
thine infirmities to boot, what a burden would thou be to thy self? how more
discontented would thou be that thou might not die? why art thou not as
well displeased that thou must be old? And when would thou part that thou
might avoid it? Thou fear death; How many heathens have undergone it with
courage? Shall I see a bold Roman spurring his horse, to leap down into a
dreadful Gulf, for the benefit of those from whom he cannot receive thanks?
Shall I see a Cleombrotus, casting himself resolutely from the rock, to enjoy
that separate life of the soul which Plato discoursed of? Shall I hear a
Canius (of whom Seneca speaks) jeering his tyran, and his death together, and
more regarding the victory of his game, then the loss of his life? shall I
hear of some Indian wives, that affect and glory to cast themselves into the
fire with the carcasses of their dead husbands? shall I see Turks filling up
ditches with their wilfully-slaughtered bodies, for the fruition of their
brutish paradise; And shall I be cowardly, where Pagans are valiant?

Yea, how many have I known that have eagely sought for death and cannot find
it? how many, who upon frivolous occasions by self-dispatches have cast away
that life, which they could not otherwise be rid of? what conceit soever I have
of the price of life, their undervaluation of it has been such, that they
have parted with it for nothing; they have run to meet that death, which I fly
from, as formidable and ugly?

Thou fear death: Look upon the examples of those holy men, who have
tendered themselves to the painfullest martyrdom; see Ignatius resolving to
challenge the Lions; see the tender virgins, daring the worst cruelty of
Tyrants, and embracing death in his worst forms; see silly Mothers, in an
ambition of a crown of life, running with their children in their arms, to
overtake death; see those resolute Saints that might have been loosed from
their wheels, and racks, with proffers of life and honor, and scorned the
exchange? Do I profess their faith, do I look for their glory, and shall I
partake nothing of their courage?

Thou art afraid of death: what a slaughter do thou make every hour of all
other creatures? what meal passes thee, wherein some of them do not bleed
for thee? yea, not for need, not for use, but for sport, for pleasure, do
thou kill them daily, without pity, without scruple: Alas, we made them not,
they are our fellows; he that made us, made them too: How much are we less to
God, then they are to us? Do we see so many thousands of them then dye for us,
and shall we think much to return our life to our Creator?

Thou art afraid of death: Thou mistakest him; thou think him an enemy, he
is a friend; If his visage be sour, and hard, he is no other then the grim
porter of Pararadise, which shall let thee into glory: Like unto Peter's good
Angel, he may smite thee on the side, but he shall lead thee out of thy
prison, through the Iron gates into the City of God. Were there an absolute
perition in our dissolution, we could not fear it too much; now that it does
but part us a while for our advantage, what do we fear but our gain? The
stalk and ear arises from the grain, but it must rot first: Oh our
foolishness, if we be unwilling that one grain should putrify for the
increase of an hundred!

Thou art afraid of death: Have thou well considered from how many evils it
acquites thee? All the tumults of State, all the bloody cruelties of war, all
the vexations of unquiet neighbors, all secret discontentments of mind, all
the tormenting pains of body are hereby eased at once; thou shall no more
complain of; racking convulsions, of thy wringing collicks, of the dreadful
quarry that is within thy reins, and bladder, of thy belking goutes, of thy
scalding fevers, of thy galling ulcers, of the threats of thine Imposthumes,
the stoppings of thy strangury, the giddiness of thy vertigo, or any other of
those killing diseases, wherewith thy life was wont to be infested: here is a
full Supersedea^ for them all; what reason have thou to be afraid of ease?

Lastly, thou fear death; Is it not that thy Savior underwent for thee? did
thy blessed redeemer drink of this cup, and art thou no willing to pledge him?
His was a bitter one in respect of thine; for it was besides, spieed with the
wrath of his Father due to our sins; yet he drank it up to the very dregs
for thee, and will thou shrink at an ordinary drought from his hand? And why
did he yield to death, but to overcome him? Why was death suffered to seize
upon that Lord of life, but that by dying he might pull out the sting of death?
1 Cor. 15.56.
The sting of death is sin; So then, death has lost his sting, now thou
may carry it in thy bosom; it may cool thee, it cannot hurt thee. Temper
then thy fear with these thoughts; and that thou may not be too much
troubled with the sight of death, acquaint thy self with him beforehand;
present him to thy thoughts, entertain him in thy holy and resolute
discourses: It was good counsel that Bernard gave to his novice, that he
should put himself (for his meditations) into the place where the dead body^
were wont to be wash^, and to settle himself upon the bear, whereon they were
wont to be carried forth: so feeling and frequent remembrances could not but
make death familiar; and who can startle at the sight of a familiar
acquaintance? at a stranger we do; especially if he come upon us on a sudden;
but if he be a daily and entire guest, he is at all hours welcome, without
our dismay, or trouble.

. XV. Of the moderation of the passion of anger.
OF all the passions that are incident to a man, there is none so impetuous, or
that produces so terrible effects, as anger; for besides that intrinsecall
mischief, which it works upon a man's own heart, (in regard whereof Hugo said
well, Pride robs me of God, envy of my neighbor, anger of my self) what
bloody Tragedies does this passion act every day in the world, making the whole
earth nothing but either an Amphitheater for fights, or a shambles for
slaughter? so much the more need is there, of an effectual moderation of so
turbulent an affection: Our school has wont to distinguish it; there is a
zealous anger, Ira per zelum, Ira per vicium.
and there is a vicious: The great Doctor of the Gentiles, when he says, Be
angry, and sin not, Ephesians. 4.26.
shows there may be a sin-lesse anger; He that knew no sin was not free from
this passion, when he whipped the money changers (twice) out of the Temple:
Surely, if we be not thus angry, we shall sin. If a man can be so cool, as
without any inward commotion to suffer Gods honor to be trod in the dust, he
shall find God justly angry with him for his want of anger. I know not whether
it were a praise that was given to Theodosius, Socrat. l. 7. c. 22.
that never any man saw him angry; so as it may fall, an immunity from anger
can be no other then a dull stupidity: Moses was a meek man, as any upon
earth; yet, was he not angry when he smote the Egyptian? was he not angry,
when upon the sight of Isreal's Idolatry, he threw down and brake the Tables
of God, which he had in his hand?

There is so little need of quenching this holy fire, that there is more need
of a bellows to blow it up, that it might flame up to that perfect height, of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.139.
My zeal has consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words: Oh
the truly heavenly fire that burnt in that sacred bosom! he does not say, my
zeal has warmed me, but has consumed me; as if it were his highest
perfection to be thus sacrificed and burnt to ashes; neither does he say,
because my friends have forgotten thy words, but, Because my enemies: Every man
can be troubled with a friends miscarriage, but to be so deeply affected for an
enemy, must needs be transcendently gracious. It is the vicious anger we must
oppose in our selves: In it self that passion is neither good nor evil: it is
either, as it is used: Like as we are wont to say of the planet Mercury, that
the influences are either good or evil, according to his conjunction with
stars of either operation; our anger then proves vicious, when it offends,
either in the cause, or the quantity; when the cause is unjust, or the quantity
excessive: The cause is unjust, when we are angry with a man for a thing that
is good, for an indifferent thing, for a thing that is trivial: Kain is angry,
because his brothers sacrifice is accepted; Pharaoh was angry with Israel,
because they would be devout, and go serve God in the wilderness: when the
man of God reproves Jeroboam and his Altar, he in a rage stretches forth his
hand for a revenge; Jer. 36.23.
Iehoiakim when he hears some lines of Ieremia^s scroll, cuts it with a
penknife and casts it into the fire in a fury; and Ahab professes to hate
Michaiah because he never prophesied good to him; whiles he should have hated
himself, that would not deserve any news but evil: So that Tyran Cambyses,
because Praxaspes reproved him for his drunkenness, shoots his son to the
heart, and says, Herod. Seneca.
See what a steady hand I have when I am drunk! this we feel every day; Let a
man never so discreetly reprove a swearer, or drunkard, or unclean person, or
any other enormious sinner, he straight flies out into a raging anger, and
verifies the old word, veritas odium: Am I become your enemy, Gal. 4.16.
because I told you the truth? says S. Paul to the Galathians: It may be
possible (which wise Solomon observes) that he who rebukes a man, afterward,
may find more favor, then he that flattereth: but in the mean time whiles
the blood is up, that anger which a man should turn inward upon himself for
his sin, he spends outwardly upon his reprover: To be angry for good, is
devilish; to be angry for that which is neither good nor evil, or that which
is slight and frivolous, is idle and absurd: for whereas anger is a kindling
of the blood about the heart, how unfit is it that it should be set on fire
with every straw? and wherefore serves our reason, if not to discern of those
objects, wherewith it is, or is not, meet for us to be affected? Thus the
Jewish Doctors tell us, that Pharaoh was angry with his baker and butler, for
no other cause, but for that there was a fly in his cup, and a little grain of
gravel in his bread: It is our Saviors word upon the Mount, Mat. 5.22. (...).
He that is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment: the well governed heart must be like a strong oak, which is not
moved but with a blustering wind; not like an aspen leaf, that shakes with
the least stirring of the air. Now, even where the cause is just, yet the
quantity may offend: And the quantity shall offend, if it be either too long,
or too vehement. ^lum^ cas i^as g^runt. Plaut.
Those leaden angers can never be but sinful, which lie heavy, and go slowly
away. What shall be done to thee, thou false tongue? Ps. 120.3, 4
says the Psalmist: even sharp arrows of the mighty, with codes of Juniper:
And why of Juniper? S. Jerome tells us, that of all wood, that keeps fire the
longest; in so much that the coals raked up in ashes, will (as he says) hold
fire for a whole year: those therefore which were formerly turned ( carbones
desolatorii) are now translated justly, coals of Juniper. It must be only a
lying, false, slanderous tongue that is a fit subject for coals of Juniper;
even the same that is no less fit for the fire of hell: what should these
Juniper fires do in Christian hearts, against offending brethren? I find in
Suidas, certain fishes that are called ((...)) which carry their coler in their
heads: such should Christians be, not letting it settle in their hearts, but
venting it at their tongues. The charge of the Apostle is, that we should not
let the Sun go down upon our anger; much less may we let it rise again:
nightly anger is like the Serene in other countries, unwholesome, if not deadly;
but to year and day our wrath, is more then brutish, and partakes too much of
him that is a manslayer from the beginning.

And as our anger may not be too long, so not too intense, and vehement, whiles
it lasts: it is not for a Christians wrath to be like the Dog Star, which when
it rises, scorches the earth, and burns up the fruits; or like a Comet, that
still portends war and death: but rather, like unto one of those gliding
stars, that we see in a winters night, which, as it is, blazes not long, and
hurts nothing, so ends in a cool, and not unwholesome moisture. Our anger
therefore must be tempered with mercy, and charity, otherwise, it is like to a
fire under an empty kettle, which burns the vessel to no purpose: Prove. 27.4.
Such wrath is cruel, such anger outrageous. Now, for the moderation of this
dangerous passion, it is not for me to prescribe Athenodorus his Alphabet, that
remedy is so poor, that the very prescription is enough to move anger; rather
let me commend that of Bernards, Consideration; and that not so much when we
are once provoked, for that is too late; and the assaults of this passion are
too sudden: but as wise Princes are wont in the midst of peace, to provide for
war; so must we in the calmest state of our minds, prepare against this
inward turbulency.

Art thou therefore subject to choler? Look upon that passion with sober eyes;
see whether it be any other but a short fit of madness: Look upon the person
of a man thus transported, see his eyes red, glaring, sparkling; his cheeks
now pale as ashes, then fiery and swollen up as with a poison; his head and
hands shaking, his lips quivering, his mouth foaming, his tongue doubling, his
feet unconstantly shifting, and the whole man (which Hippocrates notes as the
effect of a most desperate disease) become utterly unlike himself: See in
another, how well this form does become thy self; Look upon thy self, be
sensible of thine own distemper, thou shall find anger justly fetched from
angor, vexation: thou shall find it (it is Austins comparison) like to
vinegar, which discolours the vessel it stands in; thou shall find thou
can not take up a coal to throw at another, but thou shall burn thy own
fingers; thou shall find that, while thou stingest others, thou shall make a
drone of thy self; and that of Solomon shall be verified of thee, Anger
rests in the bosom of fools. Eccles. 7 9.


Look to the effects of it, thou shall find it utterly disables thee from
good; Jam. 1.20.
The wrath of man does not work the righteousness of God, as St. James: Thou
shall find it exposes thee to all mischief; Prove. 25.28.
for he that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a City that is broken
down, and without walls, says Solomon. What enemy may not rush into such a
City at pleasure? Just such advantage does thine anger give to thy spiritual
enemies; and therefore St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.26.
when he charges us not to suffer the Sun to go down upon our anger; adds,
Give no place to the Devil; as if this continuing passion did open the gates
of the heart, for Satan's entrance and free possession.

Thou shall find this the great makebate of the world, the beginner of all
quarrels; Pr. 30.33.
For as the churning of the milk brings forth butter, and the wringing of
the nose brings forth blood, so the forcing of wrath brings forth strife,
says wise Solomon. Wrath then brings forth quarrels, and quarrels bloodshed,
manslaughter, murders: What is it that has so drowned Christendom in blood,
but the anger of discordant Princes? what but this is guilty of so many brutish
duells, so many bloody massacres? And where thine anger shall stay when it is
once broke loose, it is not in thy power to determine; I am sure if it stays
not the sooner, Genesis 49.7.
it ends in a curse. Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath
for it was cruel.

Look but upon the the temper of well governed Heathens, and be ashamed to
hear an Archtyas say to his Bailey, I had punished thee if I had not been angry;
or that Philosopher say to Xenocrates, whip this boy, for I am angry: or to see
a greater Philosopher then he, who when he had discoursed against anger, and
showed how unfit the passion is for a wise man; one of his auditors purposely
spit in his face, from whom he received no other answer, but this, I am not
angry, but I doubt whether I should not be so: or to see a Pisistratus not more
troubled with railing words of an adversary, then if an hood-winkt man had
reeled upon him heedlesly in his way: or to hear a Socrates profess himself
no more affected with the scolding of his Xantippe, then with the creaking of a
Cart* wheel; and when he was uncivilly washed from her chamber, to say only,
After such thunder, I looked for rain: or to hear a Cato say, that he could
and did pardon all offenders but himself: and when Lentulus spat in his face,
to hear no other language fall from him, then, I will now say those men are
deceived, that deny Lentulus to have a mouth: or to hear a Cleanthes, when one
called him ass, to say only, he should be then fit to carry Zenoes budget: or
to see a Crates, when Nicodromus struck him with his fist, only to put a board
before his forehead with a jeering inscription. It were easy to weary a reader
with instances of this kind: And shall mere Pagans that were without God in the
world, have such rule over their passions, and shall a Christian, who
professes a more divine philosophy, and whose first lesson is to deny
himself, and to mortify all evil and corrupt affections, give the reyns to the
wild and unruly eruptions of his rage? how shall these heathens in profession,
justly condemn us professed Christians, who are in practice heathenish?

Lastly, look but upon the terms wherein thou stand with God; how
grievously do thou provoke him every day to his face? one of thy offenses
against that infinite Majesty, is more then thou can be capable to receive
from all thine enemies upon earth: yet, how silently does he pass over all thy
heinous affronts, and bids his sun to shine, and his rain to fall, as well
upon thy ground, as the holiest owners? how graciously does he still invite
thee to repentance? how sweetly does he labor to win thee with new mercies?
and do thou call thy self the son of that Father, whom thou will not imitate?
Do thou pray daily to him to forgive thee, as thou forgivest others, whiles
thou resolvest to forgive none, whom thou can plague with revenge? Look upon
thy dear Redeemer, and hear him, whiles his cruel executioners were racking
out his hands and feet, and nailing them to the tree of shame and curse,
crying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; and can thou
give thy self out for a disciple to this Savior, if for every offense of thy
brother, thou break forth into raging imprecations, railing speeches, furious
actions? Lay all these seriously to thy heart in the midst of thy greatest
tranquillity, and have them ready before thine eyes, for the next onset of thy
passion; and withal, plie thy God with thy prayers, that he who molded thy
heart at first, would be pleased to temper it aright; to cool these sinful
inflammations by the power of his grace, Ps. 76.10.
that so he may make good in thee that happy word of the Psalmist; Surely, the
wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.
Amen.

FINIS.
The second Book. Of Moderation in matter of Judgment.
. I. Of the danger of immoderation in matter of Judgment, and of the remedy in
general.
AS it would be an hard competition betwixt intellectual errors, and
practical, whether are the more heinous; so would it be no less difficult to
determine, whether moderation in matter of judgment, or of practice be more
necessary; and whethers neglect be more dangerous; For surely, if the want of
moderation in practice do most distract every man in his own particular, the
want of moderation in judgment distracts the whole world from it self; whence
it is, that we find so miserable divisions all the earth over; but especially,
so woeful schisms and breaches in the Christian world; wherein we see one
Nation is thus d^vided from another, ^^ta cs^ ut dic: solet differentia i^ter
artifices, sicut inter Incologices doctores. G^^. de propos. ab Ep. hae
r^t^candis.
and each one nation no less divided from it self. For it cannot be, since
every man has a mind of his own not less different from others, then his
face, that all should jump in the same opinion; neither can it stand with that
natural self-love, wherewith every one is possessed, easily to forsake the
child of his own brain, and to prefer another man's conceit to his own;
hereupon, therefore, it comes to pass, that whiles each man is engaged to that
opinion, which either his own election, or his education has feoffed him in,
new quarrels arise, and controversies are infinitely multiplied; to the great
prejudice of Gods truth, Dispendio litis carcre non mediocre est lucrum. Amb.
de Offic. l. 2. c. 21.
and to the lamentable violation of the common peace; would to God we could as
well redress, as bewail this misery, wherewith Christendom is universally
infested; howsoever it shall not be utterly thankelesse to endeavor it; The
remedy must go in the same pace with the disease; Whereas therefore there are
two things which are guilty of this mischief, Error in doctrine, and Distemper
in affection; the former I must leave to the conviction of those Polemicall
discourses, which have been so learnedly written of the several points of
difference, as, I suppose, no humane wit or industry can give any further
addition thereto; Only I shall touch some such general symptoms, as are
commonly incident into these controversies of religion; My maine drift is to
dwell upon the latter; and to labor the reducing of men's to a wise and
Christian Moderation concerning differences in judgment.

. II. Luke-warmenesse to be avoided in Religion.
Far be it from us to allow luke-warmenesse in the matters of God; a
disposition, which the Almighty professes so much to hate, that he could
rather be content the Angel of the Church of Laodicea should be quite cold,
then in such a mambling of profession; And indeed, what temper is so offensive
to the stomach as this mean? fit only for a medicinal potion (whose end is
ejection) not for nourishment; Those, whose devotion is only fashionable,
shall in vain hope to be accepted; It is a true word of Saint Austen, Non amat
qu^ no^ Zelat Aug. contr. Adimant. c. 13.
There is no love where there is no zeal; and what cares God for heartlesse
followers, that are led only by example and form? such there are, that yawne
not out of any inward cause, but because they see others gape before them; As
they say in the Abassine Churches, S. Por. prolegom. to the ^frian hi^t.
Gerard. her. p. 1558.
if one man neese, all the rest do, and must follow. Men like unto moss, which
takes still the property of the bark, it grows upon; if upon the Oak, it
cooles and binds, if upon the Pine and Fur, it digests and softens; or like
unto the Herborists Dodder, which is no simple in it self, but takes both his
name, and temper from the herb out of which it arises; if out of Time, it is
Epithimium: if out of the Nettle, it is Epiurtica; That great Lawgiver of old
would have a punishment for neuters; and well are they worthy, when the
division is maine and essential; such men are merely for themselves, which
have the truth of God in respect of persons; not caring so much what is
professed as by whom; Suidas tells us of Musonius, so well reputed of; Suid.
verbo Musonius.
that no further question was made of any man, if it appeared he was Musonius
his friend; too many affect no other worth in themselves, then a dependence
upon others, holding it enough that they are the clients of this famous Doctor,
of that great Saint: such men like as we have heard of some Apothecaryes, which
only by taking the vapor of some drugge in the stamping of it, have been
wrought upon, hold it sufficient for them to have received in, the very air,
and empty titles of disciples, without respect to the grounds, and substance of
the Doctrine.

The rule which the blessed Apostle gave for our settlement in some cases is
wont by a common misconstruction to be so expressed, as if it gave way to a
loose indifferency; Romans 14.5 (...).
The vulgar reads it, Let every one abound in his own sense, as leaving each
man to his own liberty, in those things of middle nature; whereas his words,
in their original, run contrary; Let every one be fully persuaded in his own
mind; requiring a plerophory of assurance, and not allowing an unsettled
hesitation in what we do; and if thus, in matters of the least importance, how
much more in the great affairs of Religion? Gal. 4.18.
Here it holds well (which is the charge of the Apostle) It is good to be
zealously affected in a good thing always* Nothing is more easy to observe,
then that, as ^t uses to be with stuffes, that in their first making, they are
strongly wrought, afterward, in process of time they grow to be slight, both
in matter and work, so it falls out in religious professions; In the first
breaking out of a reformation, there appears much heat and forwardnes, which
in time abates, and cools, so as the professor grows to the temper of our
Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury, whom Pope Urban of old, greets in the style
of a fervent Monkea, Girald. Cambrens. Itinerar.
warm Abbot, a luke warm Bishop, a Key-cold Archbishop, or like unto those
kites, of whom our writers say, Thaum^turg. not. c. 2^.
that in their first years they dare prey upon greater Fowls, Melanct.
postil. de baptist. Christi, Metuendum est etiam in postrema mundi aetate magis
hunc errorem grassaturum esse, quod aut nihil sint religiones, aut differant
tantum vocabulis etc.
afterward they sieze upon lesser birds, and the third year fall upon flies.
Whence it is that Melancthon could fore-guesse, that the time should come
wherein men should be tainted with this error, that either religion is a
matter of nothing, or that the differences in religions are merely verbal;
Far be it from us thus to degenerate from our holy Ancestors, whose zeal
made them true Holocausts to God, and sent up their souls in the smoke of
that their acceptable sacrifice, into heaven, that, those truths which they
held worthy bleeding for, we should slight as not worth pleading for. Spalat.
part. 3^.
We cannot easily forgive that wrong which our late SPALATENSIS did to our
freshbleeding martyrs, whom even before by revolt, he blamed of lavishnesse,
as if they might well have spared that expense of blood; although we may well
suppose he redeemed his error by dying, for the same truths, for which they
fried alive, as he dead, We know what Saint BASIL answered to that great
man, who would have persuaded him to let fall his holy quarrel: Those says
he, that are trained up in the Scriptures, Qui divinis innutriti sunt eloquiis
etc.
will rather dye then abate a syllable of Divine Truth. It is said of
VALENTINIAN, Suid. v. (...).
that when the rude SCYTHIANS made ^n incursion into the territories of the
Roman Empire, he, so ore-strayned his Lungs, in calling upon his troops,
that he presently dyed; so vehement must we be, when any maine thing is in
Question, neither voice nor life must be spared, in the cause of the Almighty.
The gloss that is put upon the act of Innocent, the 4. in the Council of
LIONS, Bin. in vita Innocentii.
who graced the Dignity of Cardinall-Shippe with a red Hatte, is that it was
done with an intention (as MARTINUS POLONVS construes it) to signify they
should be ready to shed their blood for Christ, and his Gospel, might well
fit every Christian, perhaps somewhat better, then those delicate mates of
Princes; whom should we imitate, but him, whose name we bear, Psalm. 69.9.
Io. 2.17.
who fulfilled that of the Psalmist his type, The zeal of thine house has
even eaten me up?

. III. Zeal required in the matters of GOD; but to be tempered with
discretion and charity.
WE must be zealous, we must not be furious: It is in matter of religion, as
with the tending of a still; if we put in too much fire, it burns; if too
little, it works not; a middle temper must be kept, an heat there must be,
but a moderate one; we may not be in our profession, like a drowzy Judge upon a
Grecian Bench, who is feign to bite upon beans, to keep himself from
sleeping; Suid. v. (...)
neither may we be like that Grecian player, who acted mad Ajax, upon the
stage; but we must be soberly fervent, and discreetly active; S. Paul's
spirit was stirred within him, at Athens, to see the Idol-altars amongst those
learned Philosophers; and it breaks out of his mouth, in a grave reproof; I
do not see him put his hand furiously to demolish them, and if a Iuventius and
Maximinian in the heat of zeal, Theodor. l. 3 cap. 15.
shall rail on wicked Julian at a feast, he justly casts their death not upon
their religion, but their petulancy: It was a wel-made decree in the Council
of Eliberis, Cancil. Eliber. c 60.
that if any man did take upon him to break down the idols of the heathen,
Miles q. praesidiarius Rom* felem quam Aegyptii colebant. ut Deum interfecit
hinc tantus exortus tumultus ut 7000 militum Praesidiariorum trucidati sint.
Melanct. Postill. Fer. 2. post advent. ex Diodoro Sic.
and were slain in the place, he should not be reckoned amongst the Martyrs.
There must be then, two moderators of our zeal; Discretion, and charity,
without either, and both of which, it is no other then a wild distemper; and,
with them, it is no less then the very life blood of a Christian, or the
spirits of that blood; From the common acts of both these, joined together,
shall result these following maxims, as so many useful rules of our Christian
moderation.

. IIII. Rules for Moderation in Judgment.
THe first is, The first rule. To distinguish of persons.
that we must necessarily distinguish betwixt persons that are guilty of
errors; Aug. de utilitate cred. c. 1.
for, as Saint Austen well, it is one thing to bean heretic, another thing to
be misled by an heretic; and, I may well add, (according to our construction)
it is one thing to be an heretic, another thing to be an Haeresiarch: these
three degrees there are, even in the most dangerous errors of doctrine. There
is a broacher, and deviser of that wicked opinion; There are abettors and
maintainers of it once broached; There are followers of it so abetted; and all
these, as they are in several degrees of mischief, so they must all undergo
an answerable, whether aggravation, or mitigation of our censure; Those, who by
false teachers are betrayed into that error, wherein now, either by breeding,
or by misinformation they are settled, are worthy of as much pity, as dislike.
Those, who out of stiffenesse of resolution, and stomach of side-taking, shall
uphold, and diffuse a known error, are worthy of hatred and punishment; But
those, who out of ambition, or other sinister respects, shall invent, and
devise pernicious doctrines, and thereby pervert others, for their own
advantages, are worthy of a Maranatha; and the lowest hell; we do easily
observe it thus, in all real offenses of an high nature; Absalom contrives the
conspiracy against his father; the Captains second, and abet it; the
common people follow both of them in acting it; he should be an ill judge of
men and actions; who should but equally condemn the author of the treason, and
those, that follow Absalom with an honest and simple heart; neither is it
otherwise in the practice of all those Princes, who would hold up the
reputation of mercy and justice; whiles the heads of a sedition are hanged up,
the multitude is dismissed with a general pardon: And, if in all good and
commendable things, the first inventor of them is held worthy of a statue, or
record, when as the following practisers are forgotten, why should there not be
the like difference in evil? Those poor souls therefore, who do zealously
walk in a wrong way, wherein they are set by ill guides, may not be put into
the same rank with their wicked mis-leaders: As we have reason to hope God will
be merciful to the well-meant errors of those filly ones, so must we enlarge
the bowels of our compassion to their miscarriage; whiles in the mean time, we
may well pray with the Psalmist, that God would not be merciful to those that
offend of malicious wickedness.

. V. The second Rule for Moderation,
SEcondly, To distinguish of tru^hes and errors.
we must distinguish between truths necessary, and truths additionall or
accessory, truths essential, and accidental truths, truths fundamental,
and truths superedified; and in them truths weighty and important, and
truths slight and merely scholasticall; for these are worthy of a
farre-different consideration; Those truths which are of the foundation, and
essence of religion are necessarily to be known, believed, embraced of all
men, and the obstinate opposers of them are worthy of our careful avoydance,
and hardest censure: Truths important (though not fundamental) are worthy of
our serious disquisition and knowledge. All other truths are commendable, and
may be of good use in their kinds and places, but so, as that he who is either
ignorant of them, or otherwise minded, concerning them, has his own freedom;
and must not, (so he trouble not the common peace) forfair our charitable
opinion. We see it is thus in the body; there are some vital parts; a wound
received in them, is no less then mortal, there are other which, though
useful and serviceable, and such as make up the integrity of the body; yet
such as wherein the main fort of life does not consist; these cannot be hurt
without pain, but may be hurt without much peril; there are yet besides
these, certain appendances to the outward fabric of the body, which serve
both for decency and convenience; the loss whereof may be with less danger,
but not with less smart then of some limme; to tear off the hair, or to beat
out a tooth is far from manslaughter, yet an act of violence; and a breach
of peace: it is no otherwise in the body of religion; a limme may be maimed,
Columban. c. 5. Pauca sunt necessaria vera.
or a joint displaced, yet the heart whole, some appendance may be violated,
and yet the body whole; It is a true word that of Columbanus of old, that
necessary truths are but few: Not many stones need to make up the foundation
of Christian faith, twelve will serve; whereas many quarreis, perhaps may be
laid in the superstructure. There are some things (says Gerson) which are De
necessitate fidei; whereof we may not doubt, other things are De pietate, vel
devotione fidei, wherein there is more scope of belief; that which he speaks
of historical verities, is no less true in doctrinall; I know no book so
necessary for these times, as that De paucitate credendorum; nor any one
Article of our belief more needful, then that we need not believe more then
the Apostles; Other points may be the care of Scholars, need not be of
Christians. It was the observation of wise and learned Erasmus, which has
run oftentimes in my thoughts; The Doctrine of the Church, Doctrina Christi
quae prius nesciebat (...) coep^t a Philosophy praesidiis pendere, hic erat
primus, etc.

Eras praefat. ad opera Hilarii.


says he, which at the first was free from quarrels, began to depend upon the
aids, and defenses of Philosophy; this was the first degree of the Churches
declination, to the worse, wealth began to come upon her, and power grew with
it; the authority of Emperors, taking upon them to intermeddle in the affairs
of religion, did not much help to further the sincerity of the faith; At last,
it came to sophistical contentions; thousands of new Articles brake forth;
From thence it grew to terrors and threats; and since to blows; Lo, the
miserable degrees of the Churches disturbance; we have almost lost religion and
peace in the multiplicity of opinions; It is worth observing, by what degrees
it pleased God to communicate to us men, his will and our duty; At the first,
we hear of no charge given to our first parents, but of refrayning from the
tree of knowledge: Afterward, (as the Jewish Doctors teach) there were six
only precepts imposed on Adam, and his seed; The first, against Idolatry, that
he should worship no other Gods: The second, of his veneration of the only
true God: The third against bloodshed: The fourth against wild and incestuous
lusts: The fifth, against stealth: The sixth, concerning due administration of
Justice. After these, one yet more was added to Noah, and his sons of not
eating flesh alive, viz. in the blood of it; yet after this, one more was given
to Abraham, Genesis 9.4.
concerning Circumcision; At last the complete Law is given, in Ten words, to
Moses in Horeb; The judicials are for commentaries upon those moral statutes.

With these Gods people contented themselves; till traditions began to be
obtruded upon them, by presumptuous teachers; these, our Savior cries down,
as intolerable, insolent depravations of the Law; The Messiah is come: with how
few charges does he load his people? That they should believe, repent, deny
themselves, constantly profess him, search the Scriptures; follow peace, love
one another, and Communicate in his remembrance. And his Apostles with only,
Go, teach and baptize; and strive who shall serve best. After his glorious
Ascension into heaven, the Apostles assembled in their Council at Jerusalem,
lay no other new weight upon the Gentile-Converts, but to abstain from
pollutions of Idols, from fornication, things strangled, and blood; When the
Church was well enlarged, and settled, what did the four Generals Councels
offer to the world, Nunquam audivimus Petrinos aut Paulinos aut
Bartholomaeanos, etc. sed ab initio una praedicatio Apostolorum. Epiph. l. 1.
but the condemnation of those four heresies, which then infested the Church?
Time and busy heads drew on these varieties of conclusions, and deductions,
which have bred this grievous danger, and vexation to Gods people; in so much,
as, it is now come to that pass, that as he said of old, it is better to live
in a Commonwealth where nothing is lawful, then where every thing; so, it may
no less justly be said, that it is safer to live where is no faith professed,
then where every thing is made matter of faith; The remedy must be, that our
judgments revert to that first simplicity of the Gospel, from which, the
busy and quarrelsome spirits of men have drawn us; and that we fix and rest
there.

. VI. The third rule of Moderation, viz. The avoydance of curiosity.
TO which end it shall be requisite, thirdly, to avoid curiosity in the search,
or determination of immateriall, and superfluous truths. I know not whether
the mind of man be more unsatiable in the desire of knowledge, or more
unweariable in the pursuit of it; which we are all apt to affect upon several
grounds; Bern. Sermon. in Cant. 36.
for, as Bernard well, some would know that they might be known, this is
vanity; others, that they might sell their knowledge, this is baseness; some,
that they may edify others, this is Charity; some that they may be edified,
this is wisdom; and some, lastly, would know only that they may know, this is
fond curiosity; a vicious disposition of the soul, which does not more show it
self in the end, then in the object of our knowledge; for surely, to seek
after the knowl^dge of those things, which are necessary or useful, Aug. de
utilitat. Cred. c. 11.
can be no other then praiseworthy; There are (says Saint Austen) two kinds
of persons very commendable in religion: the former, those who have found the
truth, the latter, those who do studiously inquire for it: It is most true of
those truths which are important, and essential; Nesciunt necessaria, quia
superflua did^erunt. F. Senec. Gars de neglig. Pra^latorum.
but to spend our se^ves in the search of those truths, which are either
unrevealed, or unprofitable, it is no other then a labor ill lost; yet alas,
these are they which commonly take up the thoughts of men; Alens. Tom. 2. q.
86. m. 3.
How busily have some disputed whether Adam if he had continued in his
inocence, should have sl^pt, or no; or whether he would have needed that
repose? Others, Ibid. q. 88.
whether if Adam in his innocence had known his wife, after she was conceived
of child, he had in this sinned; or no: Others, Ibid. q. 89.
if he had begotten children in the state of innocence, Ibid. q. 89.
whether they should immediately upon their birth, have had the use of their
limbs, and members, for their present provision, as other creatures have?
Others; whether in that first estate there should have been more males or
females, borne? Others what space there was betwixt the Creation of Angels and
man, Ibid. memb. 11.

Am^s. ^e resist. gratia. c. 8. Mela^ct. ^polog. advers. P^ri^. Sophi^l.


and their fall? Thus a Peter Lombard is devising a distinction betwixt mo^o
quodam, and quodam modo; and a Io: Mayor disputed whether a man may equitare
fine equo; Suid. v. Matreas.
and Matreas (as Suidas has it) in a Poem that he frames of Aristotle's
doubts; makes this one, How the Sun should in his setting go down into the
Ocean, and not swim. Thus an overleasured Italian has made a long discourse;
Gers. Epist. ad quendam fratrem minorem. Quis non horreat profanas noc itates
and verbo^um and sensuum? Bern. Epist. 190.
how a man may walk all day through the streets of Rome in the shade: Thus, a
Licentiate of Paris takes upon him to defend, That there is something God
really, which is not formally God; Another, that there are other priorities and
posteriorities in the divine Persons, besides those of their origination;
Another, that the divine Persons are distinguished per absoluta: Another, (...),
ut de nugatore Hermippus.
as our Bradwardine and Io. Mayor and Vasquez, that God is in vacuo: And, in
our days, Hurtado de Mendoza, a Spaniard, strains his wit to prove the
possibility of an infinity of magnitude; and what subtle disq^isitions, and
long volumes are spent upon a certain middle knowledge in God, between his
knowledge of simple intelligence, D. Twiss de S^t^ntia media, etc.
(which is of what may be or is fit to be) and that of vision (which is his
knowledge of what shall be) Betwixt which two some have placed a third, a
mid-knowledge of future-conditionate-Contingents. And lastly, what a world of
work is on foot, betwixt the Scotists on the one side, and the Thomists and
Dominicans on the other, concerning Gods foreknowledge of Evil; and concerning
the real existence of future things in eternity, and other the like
sut^leties. Good Lord! where will the mind of man take up? how restless, how
boundless, are the brayn^s of curious men? and especially in this last age;
for, surely, it is a true word of Gerson, Gers. contra superstitiosos. q.
observe.
Mundus senescens patitur phantasias; the world now in his old age is full of
fancies; It is with it, as it is with u^; the sleep of the aged must needs be
so much fuller of imaginations, as they have lived to see more obj^cts to
furnish them; Non est s^^ens hodie qui novitates n^n inv^nit. De planct. Eccl.
l. 2.
justly may we take up that complaint of Alvarez Pelag^us: He is nobody for
knowledge now a days that devises not some novelty: Festus sclandered Saint
Paul, when he said, too much learning had made him mad: certainly, it is no
sclaunder to say of too many, that too much learning (as it is used) has made
them foolish and wanton in their speculations; (...).
there cannot be a truer sentence then that of the Grecians ((...)) Wisdom
consists not in the knowledge of many things, Praestat pro^a igno^atione
d^tin^ri quam falsa opinione mancipori.

Chrysostom. in Math. 24. Hom. 76.


but of things profitable; Our forefathers, as they came short of us in
knowledge, so they went beyond us in piety, and peace; The Jewish Doctors say
of Father Abraham, that he had no master but his own reins; those (holy
David said) were his teachers also; Experto creed, aliquid amplius invenies, in
sylvis quam i^ l^bris. B^rn. Epist. He^^t^o Murdach. Epist. 106.
and devout Bernard tells his friend Murdach, with an Experto creed, that he
shall find more in the woods, then in his books; the trees and stones (says
he) shall teach thee that, which thou can not hear from thy masters, think
thou not, thou may suck hon^e from the rock, and oil out of the hardest
stone? Marvelous is the improvement both of the means and measure of
knowledge, in these last days, in comparison of the former; Erasm. Epist. l.
22. Joan. Episc.
Of old (says Erasmus) there were no schools of Divinity, and Augustine was
held an invincible Logician, for that he had read Aristotle's Categories; At
last, Divinity came to the height, if not beyond it; the sacred Scriptures,
with the ancient authors, were laid aside, etc. The time was, when Synodes were
feign to enact, that none should be promoted to Ecclesiastical Benefices,
Council. Raven.
but those which could competently read, and sing; Nor to Canon-ships in
Cathedrals but those which could read, Council. Sabin^n, in Hisp. 1322.
sing, and competenly construe; Not to holy Ord^rs, but those that could
Literaliter loqui. The world is w^ll mended with us, since our King Alured
translated Gregory's Pastorale, out of Latin, into Saxon; that it might be
understood of the Bishops, and Priests; Alured praefat adversum a se lib.
Pastor. Greg. D. Henr. Spelman Volum. 1. Synod. Brit.
and in his Preface to it, writes thus: Knowledge was so utterly lost from
among the English Nation, that there were very few on this side of Humber, that
could so much, as understand their own common prayers, in the English tongue;
or transl^te any writing out of Latin in^o English; surely there were so ^ew,
that I do not remember one on the South-part of Thames, when ^ ^^gan to reign.
Thus Alured: Anno C. 700. D. Henr. Spelm. Conc. Brit.
Before whose time, W^^^redus King of Kent was feign to su^signe his
Characters, Episcopus ignorans Grammaticam deponatur.
wi^h a Cros^e, professing to do it pro^gror^ntia literarum; And the (...)
wa^, A ^^shop that is i^^^ran^ of his Grammar is to b^ d^p^^^^. Now (blessed be
G^d) k^^w^^dge abounds every (...)* The Pr^sse has help^ (...) it all the
world over; whi^^ whiles it was only tran^m^tted by the labor of a single
pen, must needs be more sparingly imp^rted; and as it uses to b^ in other
cas^s) plenty has bred wantonness, and prodigal expense of w^^; whereby we are
grown to such excess, that it were happy (except men had more rule of their
(...) there were less (...) the world, and (...): we have reason in this
regard to envy the safe and quiet simplicity of our forefathers, who
contented themselves with the honest plaine-song of that, whereof we affect
to run upon infinite descant; Gers. Tract. de Cantichordo.
It is well observed by Gerson, that it falls out oftentimes, there is more
fervor of devotion, where there is less natural knowledge; whence we find
great praise of sanctity given to some eminent persons, who came short even of
ordinary skill: Bern. Sermon. in cant. 26.
Bernard says of his devout brother Gerard, that he had no learning at all;
but that he had a clear understanding, and an illuminated spirit: and Sozomen,
Sozom. l. 1. c. 13.
when he speaks of Antony the Hermit, says, he neither had any skill in
learning, neither did greatly esteem it; but cared only to have a pure and
holy mind, as that which was more ancient, and more worthy then any learning
in the world; And Paul the simple, a man famous both for sanctimony, and
miracles, had so little knowledge, as that (which I have stood amazed to read)
he asked whether the Prophets were before Christ, and his Apostles, or after:
The truth is, Gers. Tract. 8 super Magnif.
religion (as the Chancellor of Paris well) is not a school of Learning, but a
discipline of living, and he is much more acceptable to God, that has so much
knowledge as does enable him to worship and serve that Di^ine Majesty devoutly,
Sed mu^tos videostudiosos, paucos religiosos: amant lectionem, non religionem;
imo amore lectionis in odium incidunt religionis. Hugo. l. 2. Miscel. c. 52.
and to live ^olily, then he who with Bere^g^t^u^ could dispute of Omne
scibt^e, (...), with Solomon, could d^scou^^^ of all things from the moss^
(...) the wall, to the highest Cedar; Gregory s^id truly, nothing can be
offered to God more rich and precious then a good will: and Phocyons law is
magnified for a divine one; Let virtue and goodness take place, and let all
other things pass for trifles.

That therefore which was wont to be said of Pythagoras, that h^e reduced the
speculative Philosophy to use, and, that which was said of the Cynicks, that
without regard of Logic, and natural Philosophy, Tempore ^eteris Ecclesiae
Romanae, populus non curs^abat ad videndum illud quod Sacerdos ostendit, sed
prostratis humi corporibus, animis incoelum erectis, gratias agebaut Christo
redemptori, qui nos suo san guine lavit, sua morte redemit, etc. Eras. de
Amabilitate concordiae Eccles. Basil. 1596.
they were all for Morality; I could be apt to wish in our divine Philosophy;
It were happy for the Church of God, if laying aside all curious disquisitions
of impertinent truths, we would apply our selves wholly to the knowledge and
maintenance of those only points, which are necessary to salvation; and to the
zealous practice of those things which we assuredly know; Leaving the rest to
those Schoole-divines, who have both faculty, and leisure to discuss them.

. VII. The fourth rule of Moderation; to rest in those fundamental truths
which are revealed clearly in the Scriptures.
NOw that we be not left upon uncertaineties in this quest of saving truth, it
will be requisite for us to know, and resolve, fourthly, that all these
fundamental verities, necessary to salvation, are clearly laid before us, in
the sacred monuments of divine Scriptures: in them is the full, and easy
direction of a Christians both belief, and practice; Vid. libr. Ordinat.
It is the question appointed by our Church to be proposed to every Candidate
of holy Orders, whether he believe this truth; and his engagement thereupon
punctually follows; and if here be enough to make the man of God perfect, much
more an ordinary Christian; There are indeed unfadomable depths in that Ocean,
wherein we shall vainly hope to pitch our anchor; but all necessary truths need
not much line: In those things which are clearly laid down in Scripture, Aug.
de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
(says Saint Austen) are found all those points which contain faith, and
rules of living, viz. Hope and Charity; And need we care for more then these?
Let me believe well, and live well, let who list take thought for more: what a
madness were it to forsake the living waters, and to dig for our selves
Cisternes that will hold no water? what a disease in our appetite, when we
have wholesome provision laid before us, to nauseate all good dishes, and to
long for mushromes, whereof some are venomous, all unwholesome? It was the
Justice of Lacedaemon, Plut. customs of Laced.
that when Terpander the Musician added one string more to his Harp then
ordinary, Gal. 1.8.
banished him the City; The great Doctor of the Gentiles could say; If we or
an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel to you, let him be accursed; he
does not say a contrary Gospel, but another; such as that Evangelium aeternum
of the Friars, such as that Symbol of the twelve new Articles, in Pius his
profession; Vide relat. Colloq. Chamier.
It had some color that Tannerus the Jesuit held in the public disputation
with Hunnius; who stoutly defended it to be a matter of faith that Tobye had a
Dog; because it rested upon the authority of that, which he supposed
Canonical scripture, the indubitate truth whereof, is the first principle of
Christianity; how ever some particular clauses, in themselves considered, may
carry no such weight; but to obtrude a necessity of new and traditionall
truths, besides those which God has revealed, what is it but to make our
selves more wise and careful then our Maker? Woe be to those men, on whose
heads lies so much innocent blood of Orthodox Christians, which has been shed
for those causes, which God never owned; Woe be to those Anathemaes which are
spent upon true-beleeving souls: Eras. Epist. Colleg. So^bon.
such as can say in sincerity of heart and clearenesse of judgment with
Erasmus, Either acquit me with the Apostle, or condemn the Apostle with me.

. VIII: The fifth rule of moderation, To be remiss and facile in unimporting
verities, both in our opinion and censure.
NOw, as we cannot be too stiff and zealous for the maintenance of those
truths, which are necessary and pure De fide, as Gerson styles them; so fifthly,
it is required to Christian Moderation, that in all collateral, Gers. declar.
defect.
and unimportant verities, we should be remiss, and easy both in our
opinion, and censure; Not too peremptorily resolving, not too eagerly pressing,
not too sharply judging: In maine matters it is good to take up that
resolution of Gregory, Gers. assert: ^o. Parui utilius rasci scandalum
permittitur quam veriritas deseratur.

Eras. Senatui Paris. Malui nempe solus ab utriusque partis insanioribus
dilace^ari quam esse tutus in part damnata. Aug. in Psa. 16.


commended by Gerson, that it is more profitable to endure a scandal (through
breach of peace) then an abandoning of truth; and that honor of Roterdam, I
had rather be torn in pieces by the furious abettors of both sides, then be
safe and quiet on the wrong part; but in points of a baser alloy, Saint Austens
rule is not more wise then modest; I may think one thing, another man may
think another, I do neither prescribe to him nor he to me; Learned and wise
Erasmus observed well; Eras. l. 22 Colleg. Sorb.
there are many things which do no harm, while they are neglected, but when
they are once stirred, raise up grievous Tragedies in the world; Even in the
poorest matters, what broils are raised by contradiction? what fearful
blood-sheds has this Island yielded, Vide Act. and Mon. and Bromiard. v. Honor.
for but the carrying of a Cross? what stirs have been in the whole Christian
Church for the difference of an Easter day? what broils for a few poor
harmless Ceremonies? Io. I^slerus Scaphus de diuturnitate belli Eu^harist,
As for the Sacramentarian quarrels, Lord, how bitter have they been, how
frequent, how long, in six several successions of learned conflicts? Hospin.
de sestis (...).
As if we Christians meant to imitate those Heathens which dwelt about the
Marshes of Triton, the Auses and Machlyes, amongst whom the manner was, when
they kept their anniversary feast to the honor of Minerva, that their Virgins
divided themselves into troops, and entertained each other, with stones and
clubs; and if any of them received a deaths-wound, in the fray, she was
straight cried down, as no maid; In these cases, the very victory is
miserable, and such (as Pirrhus said of his) as is enough to undo the
Conqueror; As good Physicians then, when they desire to recover their patient,
labor to make peace amongst the humors, so must we do in a sick Church;
and, if we cannot compose them by a discreet moderation; Suidas v. Hebraei.
yet, at least, it will be fit to hold off from a passionate side-taking, It is
noted by Suidas, that Heber was not amongst the builders of Babels Tower, and
therefore his language was not altered; and it is worth observing, Number. 26.11.
that Corahs sons perished not in the common destruction of their parents,
and kinsfolks; for that they fled from the conspirators, to Moses; If we would
find favor as Storkes, we must not consort with Cranes.

Now that we may be capable of this peaceable temper we must be free from
these two vices, pride and pertinacy; whereof the one, forestals the heart with
an overweening of our selves, and our opinions; not enduring a contradiction;
the other obdures it against any means of reformation; resolving to hold the
conclusion in spite of the premises; For the first; only by pride comes
contention, Prove. 13.10.
says wise Solomon; this is it, that makes a man scorn the common tracke; and
lifts him up with the conceit of his own abilities, and of the validity of
his own grounds; not without a contemptuous undervaluing of all others; we
find it thus in all experience; for my part, I never met with any (as worthy
Master Green-ham has noted before me) if but a schismatic spirit, whom I
have not sensibly discerned thus tainted; take but a separist, a blew-aporn'd
man, that never knew any better school then his shop-bord; if he do not
think himself more truly learned, then the deepest Doctor, and a better
interpreter of Scripture, then the greatest Divine, I am no less mistaken,
then he; hence it is, that they affect a singularity, and keep aloof from
others, both in practice and opinion; Wherein a proud man is like unto oil,
which will ever swim aloft, and will by no means mix with water; Contrarily,
the only disposition that fits the heart for peace, (indeed all other graces)
is humility: That cloth which the Fuller would perfectly whiten, yields it
self to be trampled upon; They are low pits, wherein the stars may be seen
by day; They are the valleys, and not the shelving hills that soke in the
waters of heaven: The Jewish Doctors say well, Pirke Aboth.
that in a true disciple of Abraham, there must be three things; a good eye, a
meek spirit, an humble soul, the first frees him from envy, the second from
impatience, and the third from pride; these two last will teach him to
acknowledge, and admire other men's better faculties, and to abase his own, to
be ready to submit to clearer reason, and irrefragable authority; Potho
Prunie^sium Episcopus, 1150. i^ ^ib. de statu Dom. Dei Hospin. de Orig. f^st.
Christ.
and modestly to distrust his own. It was a word worthily commended in Potho a
good Bishop near 500 years ago. Are we more learned, and more devout then
the Fathers? or do we presume proudly to determine of those things, which
their wisdom thought meet to be praetermitted? Surely, he that bears this
mind cannot easily err, cannot err dangerously: Eras. Epist. Illustr.
Quantum apud alios valeat Ecclesiae authoritas nescio: Certe apud me tantum
valet ut cum Arianis and Pelagianis sentire possim, si probass^t Ecclesia quod
illi docuerunt, Bilibaldo.
^t is possible I confess to go too far, in our relyance upon others
judgments; I cannot like that of Erasmus, who professes to his Bilibadus,
that he ascribed so much to the authority of the Church, that if she had
thought meet to have allowed the opinion of Arius, or Pelagius, he should have
assented thereunto; This is too much servility; In these manifest and maine
truths, we have no reason to make flesh our arm. If all the world should face
me down, that the Sun shines not, I would be pardoned to believe my eyes:
And if all the Philosophers under heaven should with Zeno defend, that there is
no motion, I would with Diogenes, Laert.
confute them by walking; But in all those verities which are disputable, and
free for discourse, let me ever be swayed by the sacred authority of that
Orthodoxe Church wherein I live.

Pertinacy is the next, which indeed is the only thing that makes an
heretic; Let the error be heinous, yet if there be not a perverse stiffenesse
in the maintenance of it, it amounts not to the crime of heresy: much less is
it so in case of a relenting schism; Eras. Ep^st. l. 22. Coll. Sorb.
It was a good speech of Erasmus: I cannot be an heretic unless I will; and
since I neither am, nor will be so, I will endeavor to use the matter so, as
that I may not be thought to be one. The course is preposterous, and
unnatural, that is taken up by quarrelsome spirits; f^rst, they pitch their
conclusion, and then, hunt about for premises to make it good, this method is
for men that seek for victory, not for truth; for men, that seek not God, but
themselves: whereas the well-disposed heart, being first, upon sure grounds,
convinced of the truth which it must necessarily hold, cares only in essential
verities, to guard it self against erroneous suggestions; and in the rest is
ready to yield unto better reason; He is not fit to be a gamester, that cannot
be equally content to lose and win; and in vain shall he profess morality,
A literato quodam and experto viro accepi perniciosam esse in omni art vel
doctrina assertionem audacem and extremam Gers. de vita, spir. animae etc.
lect. 4. corol. 11.
that cannot with Socrates set the same face upon all events, whether good, or
evil: In all besides necessary truths, give me the man that can as well yield
as fight; in matters of this nature, I cannot like the spirits of those
Lacedemonian Dames which gave the shields to their sons, with the peremptory
condition of ((...); Suidas.
) surely, he is better accepted of God, that in these frayes of indifferency
does peaceably lay down the Bucklers, then he, that lays about him with the
greatest ostentation of skill, and valor: In things of this kind, meekness
may do God more service then courage; They say milk quenches wildfire better
then any other liquor: and we find in all experience, that the pores are
better opened with a gentle heat, then with a violent. The great Apostle was
content to become all things to all, that he might win some: How was he all
to all if he did not sometimes remit of his right to some; Call. 2.
He that resists Peter, the Prime Apostle, to his face, in the case of a
perilous temporizing, yet gave way to James, and the other brethren, to
purify himself, with the four votaries in the Temple: Act. 21.18*21, 26.
shortly then as he is a wise man that knows when it is time to yield, Non
turpe est sententiam mutare, sed in malo perseverate funestum and exitiosum.
Gre Naz. orat. 32.
so is he a peaceable son of the Church, that yields when he sees it time,
and by this means provides for his own comfortable discharge, and the
public tranquillity: that can be in necessaries truths an Oak, and a Reed
in truths indifferent.

. IX. Remissness in matter of Censure.
IN matters of this nature, whereof we treat, true moderation requires the
peaceable Christian to be not more yielding in his Opinion, then favorable in
his Censures of the contrary-minded: for it is a fearful violation both of
Charity and justice, to brand an adversary in matter of slight Opinions, with
the odious note of Sect, or Heresy; and no less Presumption, to shut that man
out of Heaven, whom God has enrolled in the Book of Life. Gerson. declar.
desect.
In all other things (says the Chancelour of Paris) besides those which are
merely matters of Faith, the Church may either deceive, or be deceived, and
yet hold Charity still: Gavant. Praxis compend. visit.
And as it is a good rule that is given to Visitors, that they should be
sparing in making Decrees, lest the multitude of them should bring them into
contempt; so it is a rule no less profitable to spiritual Governors, Ne
temere vibret fulmen excommunicationis
which Erasmus relates out of Gerson, that they should not rashly throw about
the thunderbolts of their Censures. We cannot be too severe in the maine
matters of Religion (though not without that wise Item of Cicero, Nihil quod
crudele, utile. Offi^. 1.3.
that nothing that is cruel can be profitable) the remissness wherein may be
no other, then an injurious mercy; but in things of slighter condition, we
must be wiser then to draw a Sword to kill Flies; neither is it for us to call
for Scorpions, where a Rod is too much.

It is remarkable, that of Galienus, who when his Wife had complained to him of
a Cheater, that had sold Glasse-pearles to her for true, made as if he would
have cast him to the Lions; the Offender looking for those fierce beasts, was
only turned loose to a Cock. In some cases, shame and scorn may be a fitter
punishment then extreme violence. We may not make the Tent too big for the
Wound, nor the Plaster too broad for the Sore. Aug. Alipio, Epist. 239.


It was grave counsel that S. Austin gave to his Alipius, that heed must be
taken, lest whiles we go about to amend a doubtful complaint, we make the
breach wider. And that rule was too good for the Author, John 22. apud Navar.
^n Man. c 17.
John 22. that in a case uncertain, we should rather determine within the
bounds, then exceed them. Even in plain convictions, violence must be the
last remedy; as in outward bodily extremities (by Hippocrates his
prescription) Ignis and Ferrum must be last tried; Erasm. Godes^cho.
for generous spirits (as Erasmus well) desire to be taught, abide not to be
forced; it is for Tyrants to compel, for Asses to be compelled; and as Seneca
observes, a good natured Horse will be governed by the shadow of the Wand,
whereas a sullen restie Jade will not be ordered by the Spur.

S. Paul puts it to the choice of his Corinthians; Will ye that I come to you
with a Rod, or with the spirit of meekness? as loath to use the Rod, unless
he were constrained by their wilful disobedience. Much have they therefore to
answer for, before the Tribunal of Heaven, who are apt to damn Christians
better then themselves; sending all the Clyents of the North-westerne Grecian,
Russian, Armenian, Ethiopick Churches, down to Hell, without redemption, for
varying from them, in those Opinions, which only themselves have made
fundamental. And herein are we happy, that we suffer for our Charity,
rather choosing to incur the danger of a false Censure from uncharitable men,
then to pass a bloody and presumptuous Censure upon those, who (how faultily
soever) profess the dear name of our common Savior. Let them, if they
please, affect the glory of a Turkish Justice, in killing two Innocents, M.
Blunts observation in his journey to the Levant.
rather then sparing one Guilty; let us rather choose to answer for Mercy, and
sooner take then offer an unjust or doubtful Violence.

. X. The sixth rule of Moderation: Not to believe an opposite, in the state of a
Tenet, or person.
Sixthly, to a man of Peace, nothing is more requisite then a charitable
distrust, viz. That we should not take an adversaries word for the state of
his opposite.

They were, (...), Suid.
amongst the rest, two necessary charges that Erasmus gave to his Goclenius,
To be sober, and incredulous: For as there is nothing that rayses so deadly
hostility as Religion, so no Criminations are either so rife, or so heinous,
as those which are mutually cast upon the abettors of contrary opinions: We
need not go far to seek for lamentable instances; Let a man believe Andrew
Iurgivicius, he will think the Protestants hold no one Article of the
Apostles Creed; Let him believe Campian, he shall think we hold God to be
the Author of Sin; That the Mediator between God and man (JESUS) dyed the
second death; That all sins are equal; and many more of the same Bran. If
he shall believe Cardinal Bellarmine, he shall condemn Erasmus as a Patron
of Arrians; Luther as an enemy to the holy Trinity, and to the
Consubstantialitie of the Son of God; Melanctbon and Scheckius, as Fautors of
the Tri-theists; Calvin, as an advocate of Samosatenians; Bullinger of
Arrianisme, Beza of Nestorianisme: If he will believe our Countreyman Gifford,
he shall think Calvin's doctrine in no thing better, in many things worse then
the Alcoran; If he will believe I. Gualterius, a Jesuit Divine, he shall
think never any Heresy has, since the first noise of the Gospel, arisen in
the Church of God, whereof the Reformed part is not guilty; here he shall
suppose to find Simon Magus, falsely pretending the Churches reformation;
Cerinthus destroying the use and utilitie of Baptism; Ebion impugning the
integrity of the blessed Virgin; In beastly licentiousness, Nicholaitans; In
mutilation of Scripture, Saturnians; In the vain jactation of Scripture,
Basilides; in the contempt of the divine Law, Carpocrates; in condemning of
fastings, Gnostics; in maintaining the impossibility of keeping the Law,
Ptolomeus; Secundian heretics, in allowing uncleanness; Marcosian
heretics, in a proud boast of perfection; Montanists in dissolving the bonds
of wedlock, and corrupting Baptism: what should I blurre too much paper, with
the abridgement of so uncharitable a discourse; shortly he shall believe that
all our learned Divines have done nothing, but patcht together all those old
rags of obsolete Errors, which they have raked up out of the dunghils of
anciently damned heretics; and to make up his mouth, Vide and Martin. Cromerus
de falsa relig. Luther. l. 1.
shall go away with an opinion of an hundred several foul errors in John
Galvin; and seventy eight no less heinous in Martin Luther. Should a stranger
come now, to take up this Book, which he supposes penned by a Christian
Divine (and one therefore, which should not dare to lie) how can he conceive
other, then that the Reformed Doctrine is nothing but a Chimericall Monster,
composed of divellish Lies and hellish Heresies? To look nearer home; what
terms and imputations some rigid followers of Luther have (in imitation of
their over-blunt and passionate Master) cast upon their opposers, I do
purposely forbear to specify, as willing rather to lay my hand upon these
scarres, then to blazon the shame of Brethren. Now as it will become every man
(according to S. Hierome's counsel) to be impatient in the suspicion of
Heresy, if any of the parties accused shall be called forth, and charged with
these prodigious Crimes of Opinion, he is straight ready to fly in the face
of the Slanderer, and calls Heaven and Earth to be witness of his utter
detestation of those Errors, which are maliciously affained to him; Whitak.
respons. ad Campian.
and is ready to say as our learned Whitakers said in the same case to
Campian; Nisi omnem, etc. unless thou had utterly cast off all, both
Religion to God, and Reverence to men, and had long since made shipwreck of
thy Conscience, and had put off even all humanity it self, thou would
neve suffer thy self to be guilty of such horrible wickedness, as to upbrayd
such monstrous opinions to us. It is a true word of Gerson, Gers. de Praecept.
Decalogi, c. 8.
That in a pennyworth of strife there is not an halfe-penny-worth of love; And
we say truly, Ill will never said well; God forbid that the same man should be
in the same cause, accuser, witness, and judge; what would become of
innocence, where malice and power should be met? How short a cut is that, which
the spightfull author of the war of the fifth Gospel takes, ^o convince all
gainesayers: Westphalus, says he, calls Calvin heretic, Calvin calls
Westphalus heretic, therefore they are both heretics. Schlusselburgius
brands the Calvines for Sacramentarian heretics; the Calvinists brand
Schlusselburgius for an Vbiquitarian heretic, therefore both are heretics:
And may not any Mahumetan thus refell the whole profession of Christianity?
Those that style themselves Catholics, call the Reformed heretics; The
Reformed call them heretics; therefore both are heretics: The Roman
Christians brand the Greek Church with heresy, the Grecians equally cen^ure
the Roman, therefore they are all heretics; And cannot we as easily pay him
again in his own Coin: The Turkish Mahumetan calls the Persian heretic,
the Persian calls the Turkish so; therefore both are in their own Religion,
heretics: God forbid, that a man should be ever such, as an enemy would have
him seem to be: Would we think it fair and just, to be so dealt with before
the awful Tribunal of Heaven? Would we have the Arch-Enemie of Mankind
believed in all his suggestions against our innocence? Why should we then
admit of this wrong in each other? At a contentious Bar, where wrangling
fomentors of quarrels are wont to aggravate all advantages, this liberty (I
know not how justly) has been given, that they commonly frame large bills of
complaint, and suggest wrongs that were never done: but for Divines in the
causes of God, who pretend to plead for truth, before God and his Angels, to be
thus lavish in their Criminations, (...) 1 Cor. ^3.
it is an high violation of Christian charity, and justice. Surely this
practice is no more ^e^, then justifiable; should I fetch it so far as from
the times of our blessed Savior, whose divine perfection could not free him
from the imputation of a Conjurer; of a wine-bibber and glutton; of a friend to
Publicans and sinners, of an enemy to Caesar; should I follow the times, and
deduce it to his Proto-martyr, Saint Steven? we shall find him loaded with the
accusation of blasphemy against God and Moses, against the Law and the Temple.
After him we shall find the chosen vessel, Saint Paul, charged by Tertullus,
(...).
for a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition; And even among the Christians
themselves, Act. 24.5.
what foul charges of libertine doctrine are laid upon them by false teachers;
As for the succeeding ages of the Primitive Church, had we either leisure, or
will, to swell up our discourse with an abridgement of Ecclesiastical History,
we might easily weary the Reader with woeful varieties in this kind: Who
knows not the impossible crimes that were cast upon the Primitive Christians,
of promiscuous lust, of worshipping an Asses head, and such absurd
calumniations. Amongst Christians themselves, to let go all the rest, it is
memorable what quarrels there were in the Synod of Ephesus, betwixt Cyrill
Bishop of Alexandria, and John of Antioch: the Churches subject to these
eminent Pastors, stuck not to strike each other with mutual Anathemaes;
Theodoret, something unhappily, thrusts his Sickle into the harvest of Antioch;
against whom (by the instigation of Euoptius) Cyrill bitterly inveighes;
Theodoret accuses Cyrill of Apollinarisme: Cyrill accuses Theodoret of
Nestorianisme; this broyle drew the Eastern world into parts; so as afterward
when Theodoret would have entered into the Synod of Chalcedon, the Egyptian
Bishops and other reverend Prelates, cried out, we eject Cyrill, if we admit
Theodoret; The Canons disclaim him, God opposes him. The same violence was
again renewed in the eighth Action; the Bishops loudly crying out, he is an
heretic, he is a Nestorian; away with the heretic: but at the last, when the
matter was thoroughly scanned, and it was found that the good Bishop had
subscribed both to the Orthodoxe Creeds, and to Leo's Epistle; with one
unanimous consent they received him in* with this acclamation, Theodoret is
worthy of his place in the Church; Let the Church receive her Orthodoxe Bishop.

It is worthy of immortal memory, that we find reported of Athanasius: There
was a great quarrel betwixt the Eastern, and Western Churches, about the
Persons and subsistences in the Deity; each upbraided other with heresy: The
Western would profess three Persons in the blessed Trinity; but would not
endure to hear of three Subsistences; and were thereupon by the Eastern
Churches, censured for suspicion of Sabellianisme: Contrarily, the Eastern
would yield three subsistences, but would not abide three Persons, and were
therefore accused by the Western Churches of Arianisme: The breach was
fearful, till wise and holy Athanasius found a way to let them see they were
good friends, and knew not of it. And if we should go about to instance in
particular men, the Catalogue would be endless. How Chrysostom and
Epiphanius, Jerome and Ruffinus, blurred each other, all the world knows:
Saint Austen, besides all his other wrongs, complains that sixteen Articles
were sclanderously imposed upon him, by the Pelagians, on purpose to draw envy
upon the doctrine of divine Praedestination: what foul and gross opinions
were by adversary pens cast upon the Waldenses, and Albigenses; and our
Wicklef, and his followers, is shamefully apparent in too many Histories. And
still as Satan is ever himself in these last times, (wherein by how much the
more Charity freezeth, malice burns so much the more) how familiar it is, even
for Christian adversaries, to speak nothing of each other, but sclanders:
Siquis a bellis quae jam seculis aliquot obres nihili, plus quam Ethnice
geruntur, deterreat, notatur a sycophantis quasi sentiat cumiis qui negant
ullum b^ll^m gerendum Christianis. Eras. l. Epist. 23.
Erasmus reckons up amongst many false imputations cast upon him by some
spightfull Friars, this for one, that he had said, All the miracles our
Savior did, upon earth, were done by Magic; And that (which yet Bellarmine
seriously charges him withal) he held all war whatsoever absolutely
unlawful; a slander which himself punctually refutes. How trivially common it
is, Paulo Volezio.
that Luther was the son of an Incubus, the Disciple of the Devil, and that
he who had been his Master, proved his executioner* That Calvin was
stigmatized for a buggerer; Beza (upon occasion of some young Poems for mere
trial of wit) a profligate lover of his Andibertus; and, at last (which he
lived to confute) a revolter from his profession. Did I list to rake in the
sinkes of Staphilus, Surius, Bolseck, Gualterius; I could both weary, and amaze
my Reader with nasty heaps of, as tedious, as false criminations of this kind.

Amongst our own: How do the Opposites in the five Belgic Articles, cast
ink in each others faces, while the one part, upbrayds the other with
Manicheisme, and Stoicisme, the other them again with Pelagianisme, and
Socinianisme: within our own territories; one objects Arianisme perhaps too
justly on some hands) to the opini^n of p^rity; another (too wildly)
Antichristian^sme, to the only ancient and true government of the Church. Now
God forbid, that either Church, or man should be tried, and judged by his
adversary: This were no other then that the arraigned innocent should be
sentenced by the executioner. And if in a civil judicature there be required
sworn and able Judges, just Laws, clear evi^en^e, select jurors, recorded
proceedings; how much more ought this to be expected in those pleas of
Religion, which concern the eternal state of the soul, the safety of the
Church, and the glory of our Creator and Redeemer.

It is the rule of the Apostle, that Charity thinks not evil: if therefore an
ingenuous adversary shall out of an inward self conviction, acquit his
Opposite of an unjust charge, we have reason to take it for a granted truth;
and to make our advantage of it: If then, an Erasmus shall say, that it cannot
be denied, that Luther has intimated monitions of diverse things, which it were
happy for the Christian world to have reformed, and which, indeed, were not
longer to be endured; as he does to his Laurinus: If he shall say, that many
things pass current in the ancient Fathers, which in Luther are condemned as
Errors, as in his Epistle to

If he shall say, that those things which Luther urges, if they be moderatly
handled, come nearer to the vigor of Evangelicall prescriptions, as he does
to his Iodocus Julius. If a Ferus, or Cassander; if a Cusanus, or Contarenus;
if a Caietan or Montanus, or Cudsemius, or Franciscus a Sancta Clara, or any
other temperate adversary, shall set favorable states to our Controversies,
and give ju^tly-charicable testimonies to our personal innocences, we have no
less cause to accept their suffrages, then their partners have to credit them:
still waters represent any object in their bottom, clearly; those that are
either troubled, or agitated, dimly and imperfectly. But as for matter of
crimination, surely, an enemies tongue is no sclander; And if a cruel
Inquisitor shall send a Martyr to his stake, ugly dressed, and painted over
with Devils; a wise and charitable spectator thinks never the worse of the man,
for a forced disguise, but sees in that heretic a Saint, and in those Devils,
beautiful Angels of God; As we may not believe an adversary in reports, so
not in the pretended consequences of opinion.

. XI. The seventh rule of Moderation, Not to judge of an adversaries opinion by
the inferences pretended to follow upon it.
SEventhly therefore, there cannot be a more useful rule for our moderation in
judgment, then this, That we may not take that for a man's Opinion, which an
adversary will say, does by necessary inference follow upon it; but only that,
which himself professes to maintain: It is that which, with worthy and
moderate Bucer, the learned Bishop of Sarisbury has also intimated in his
grave advise concerning the Lutheran differences; And the like occurrences in
the judgment o^ the four learned French Divines, concerning the peace with
the Lutheran Churches, and meet to be througly considered. For the force of
Consecutions is many times very deceitful, and such, as may easily betray our
discourse. There are indeed such Consequences as are plainly necessary, and
those which in their first sight, carry in them no less certainty then the
principles from which they were immediately derived: Of this nature are they
which are Reciprocally deduced from their certain, and intrinsecall causes, to
their effects; such as, The Sun is risen, it is therefore day: He is God,
therefore Omnipotent, Omniscient. There are others, which may perhaps seem to
us no less necessary, as following upon some premises by an undoubted force
of reason; which yet, another thinks he can by some cleanly distinction,
commodiously evade, and yet hold that ground which we laid for that
ratiocination; such is that of Gualterius the Jesuit: Theodore Beza denies
that the body of Christ can be substantially in many places at once; Therefore
he denies Gods Omnipotence. The Protestant ascribes to God more then a mere
permission of evil, therefore he makes him the Author of sin. Contrarily,
no mean one of ours, inferres a Papist makes Christ a creature, therefore he
is an Arrian; Makes Christ of meal, therefore not of the blessed Virgin,
therefore an Apollinarist. Consequences, which the disputant thinks to make
good, but the accused, on either part detests. Thus the honest and ingenuous
Christian is drawn from a commendable search of necessary truths, into a wild
chase of envious inferences: And now the quarrel is, indeed, fallen off from
Divinity, and is removed to the Schools of Logique, natural Philosophy,
Metaphysics; and not he that has the most truth must carry it, but he that
can bring the most skillful Sophistry. What is it, that distracts the Reformed
Churches of Christendom, but this injurious conceit of inconsequent
inferences? The humanity of Christ, says one part, is omnipresent, therefore
says the other, no humanity at all, since this is only proper to the Deity.
The ubiquity of Christ's humane nature is denied, says the other; therefore the
personal union is destroyed. Away with these rigid illations, when we have to
do with brethren; Each holds his own; Citat. a D. Davenant Sent. de pace
procur.
both disclayme the inferences, and in their sense may. For as learned Bucer
gravely; It is our part to see not what does of it self follow, upon any
Opinion, but what follows in the conscience of those, who hold that opinion,
which we think contrary to a fundamental Article. Were this rule held, how
happy were the Church, how certain our peace? when we have done our best,
there will be errors enough in the Church; we need not to make them more. This
was not the fashion in the plain dealing world of the first ages of
Christianity; No heresy was then feoffed upon any man, but upon open and
acknowledged conviction; and if he cleared himself from the maine crimination,
he was pronounced innocent. Look into the records of times. The contagion of
Arrius, beginning at the obscure Church of Baucalis, soon reached to
Alexandria, and there instantly infected seven hundred virgins, twelve
Deacons, seven Priests, and offered to diffuse it self into the very
Episcopal Throane; at last by Miletus his relation, the Archbishop Alexander
is made acquainted with the rumor of that heresy; he presently sends for
Arrius, and charges him with the crime; That impudent mouth sticks not to
confess his wicked error, but there openly casts up the poison of his damnable
doctrine before his Governor. The holy Bishop, no less openly reproves him;
urges and aggravates the sacrilegious impiety of his opinion; And finding him
to second his error with contumacies, expels him from his Church, follows him
(as was meet) with seventy letters of caution to other Churches; yet still the
mischief spreds: The godly Emperor Constantine is informed of the danger; he
calls a Synod; Arrius with his all wicked Pamphlets, is there cried down, and
condemned to banishment. I do not find those holy fathers nibling at
consequences, strained out of his Thalia, or some other of his abominable
papers, but charging him with the rightdowne positions of heresy; such as
these blasphemies, concerning Christ; Time was, when he was not; He was made
of things that were not; He was not begotten of the Substance of the Father; In
time, not from Eternity; not true God of God, but created of nothing. Here were
no tricks of inferences, no quirkes of Sophismes, no violent deduction of
unyeelded sequels; the heresy proclaimed it self, and was accordingly
sentenced. Such were the proceedings with the Apollinarists, in the third
Council of Rome; and in the first General Council of Constantinople, with
the Macedonians; and where not in the cases of heresy? And if (for all the
rest) we would see a model of the old Theological simplicity, in the censures
of this nature, we need but to cast our eye upon that profession of faith, and
Anathemat^me, which Damasus ingeniously wrote to Paulinus, whether Bishop of
Thessalonica, as Theodoret would have it, or, as others, ^in. Conci^. p. 1.
Romans 3. sub Damas^.
of Antioch; we pronounce Anathema, says he, to those who do not with full
liberty proclaim the Holy Ghost to be of one power, and substance with the
Father, and the Son. We pronounce Anathema to them who follow the error of
Sabellius, saying, That the Father is one and the same person with the Son. We
pronounce Anathema to Arrius, and Eunomius, who with a like impiety, but in a
form of words unlike, affirm the Sun and the holy Spirit to be creatures.
We pronounce Anathema to the Macedonians, who coming from the stock of
Arrius, have not varyed from his impiety, but from his name. We pronounce
Anathema to Photinus, who renewing the heresy of Ebion, confesses our Lord
Jesus Christ made only of the Virgin Mary. We pronounce Anathema to those,
that maintain two Sons, one before all worlds, the other after the assuming
of flesh from the Virgin: Thus he. Is there any man here condemned for an
heretic, but he who dirctly affirms, confesses, maintains opinions truly
damnable? Neither indeed is it just or equal, that a man should, by the malice
of an enemy, be made guilty of those crimes, which himself abhorres: What I
will own, is mine; what is cast upon me, is my adversaries; And if I be by
deductions fetched into such error, the fault is not in my faith, but in my
Logic; my brain may err, my heart does not. Away then, ye cruel Tortors of
Opinions, Dilaters of Errors, Delators of your brethren, Incendiaries of the
Church, haters of peace, Away with this unjust violence; Let no man bear more
then his own burden; Press an ^^ring brother (if ye please) in way of
Argument, with such odious Consectaries, as may make him weary of his Opinion;
but hate to charge him with it as his own; frame not imaginary monsters of
error with whom you may contend: He that makes any man worse then he is,
makes himself worse then he.

. XII. The eighth rule of Moderation, To keep opinions within their own
bounds, not imputing private men's conceits to whole Churches.
Eighthly, it will be requisite to a peaceable moderation, Non debet plurimorum
malum tendere in aestimationem cunctorum. Greg. Moral. l. 26.28.
that we should give to every opinion his own due extent, not casting private
men's conceits upon public Churches, not fathering single fancies upon a
Community; All men cannot accord in the same thoughts, there was never any
Church under heaven, in which there was not some Ahimaaz, that would run alone.
In all waters, lightly, there are some sorts of fish that love to swim against
the stream, there is no reason that the blame of one, or few should be
diffused unto all. If a Pope John the 22 shall maintain that the souls of the
blessed shall sleep till the resurrection; If a Dominicus a Soto shall hold,
that the whole Christian faith shall be extinguished in the persecutions of
Antichrist; shall we impute these opinions to the Sea, or Church? If an
Alphonsus a Castro shall hold heretics and Apostates, after they are once
baptized, to be true members of the Catholic Church; Or a Catharinus, or
Vasquez shall teach the Commandment that forbids worshipping of Images, to be
merely temporary; If a Durant shall revive Pelagianisme, in denying that there
is any need of the divine aid, either of general or special concourse in
humane actions; If a Richardus Armachanus shall second the Novatians, in
teaching that there is no pardon to be obtained by the penitent, for some
heinous sins; If an Occham shall teach that the visible signs are not of the
Essence of a Sacrament; Or a Johannes Parisiensis, or Cornelius a Lapide
(little differing from the condemned error of Rupertus Tuitiensis) shall teach,
that the Sacramental bread is hypostatically assumed by the word. Is there any
so unjust Arbiter of things, as to upbrayd these Paradoxes to the Roman Church,
who professes their dislike? Thus if a Knox, or Buchanan, or Goodman, shall
broach exorbitant and dangerous opinions, concerning the Successions and rights
of Kings, and lawless power of subjects; Why should this be laid in our dish,
more then a Suarez, or Mariana in theirs? If a Flaccius Illiricus shall uphold
a singular error concerning Grace, and Original sin; If some ill-advised
followers of Zuinglius shall hold the Sacramental elements to be only bare
signs, serving merely for memory, and representation; If some Divines of ours
shall defend the rigid opinions concerning Predestination; If some
fantastical heads shall cry down all decent Ceremonies, and all set forms
of devotion; why should the Church suffer double in those things which it
bewayles? Surely, as the Church is a collective body, so it has a tongue of
her own speaking by the common voice of her Synodes; in her public
Confessions, Articles, Constitutions, Catechismes, Liturgies; what she says in
these, must pass for her own: but if any single person shall take upon him
(unauthorised) to be the mouth of the Church, his insolence is justly
censurable; And if an adversary shall charge that private opinion upon the
Church, he shall be intolerably injurious: Indeed, as it is the best harmony
where no part, or Instrument, is heard alone, but a sweet composition; and
equal mixture of all, so is it the best state of the Church, where no
dissenting voice is heard above, or besides his fellows; but all agree in one
common sound of wholesome doctrine. But (such as man's natural self-love is)
this is more fit to be expected in a Platonicall speculation, then in a true
reality of existence: for whiles every man is apt to have a good conceit of his
own deeper insight, and thinks the praise, and use of his knowledge lost,
unless he impart it; (...) comes to pass, that not containing themselves
within their own privacies, they vent their thoughts to the world, and hold it
a great glory to be the Authors of some more then common-piece of skill; And
to say truth, the freedom and ^ase of the Press has much advanced this
itching, and disturbing humor of men whiles only the pen was employed,
books were rare; neither was it so easy for a man either to know another
opinion, or to diffuse his own; now, one only day is enough to fill the world
with a Pamphlet, and suddenly to scatter whatsoever conceit, beyond all
possibility of revocation. So much the more need there is, for those that sit
at the helm, This is seasonably and happily done by an Order of the
Star Chamber lately made.
whether of Church, or State, to carry a vigilant eye, and hard hand over these
Common tel-tales of the world, and so to restrain them (if it were possible)
that nothing might pass their stamp, which should be prejudicial to the
common peace, or varying from the received judgment of the Church. But if this
task be little less then impossible, since by this means every man may have
ten thousand several tongues at pleasure; how much more happy were it, that
the sons of the Church could obtain of themselves so much good nature, and
submissive reverence, as to speak none but their mothers tongue? The form of
tongues in the first descent of the Holy Ghost, was fiery and cloven; and that
was the fittest for the state of the first plantation of the Gospel,
intimating that fervor, and variety, which was then both given, and requisite:
Now, in the enlarged and settled estate of his Evangelicall Church, the same
spirit descends, and dwells in tongues, cool and undivided, Cor unum, via una,
One heart, one way, was the Motto of the Prophet, when he foretells the future
coalition of Gods people: And one mind, one mouth was the Apostles to his
Romans. Romans 15.6 2 Cor. 13.11.
Let us walk by the same Rule. Let us mind the same thing; Philip. 3.16.
is his charge to his Philippians. But if any wrangler affect to be singular,
and will needs have a mind of his own, let him stand but for what he is,
let him go only for a single figure, let him not, by a misprision, take up the
place of thousands.

. XIII. The ninth rule of Moderation: The actions and manners of men must not
regulate our judgments concerning the cause.
NInthly, neither does it a little conduce to Moderation, to know, that the
facts and manners of men may not be drawn to the prejudice of the cause: for,
Sententia impia, vita luxuriosa. Non been vivit qui non recte credit. Calixtus.
Benedict. Episc.
howsoever it commonly holds, that impious opinions and loose life go still
together; yet it is no trusting to this rule, as if it did not admit of
exceptions. There have been those, whose errors have been foul, and yet
their conversation faultlesse. Bernard. Epist. 193.
I remember what Bernard said of Peter Abailardus, that he was John without,
and Herod within: And of Arnoldus of Brixia, Epist. 195.
Would God his doctrine were so sound, as his life is strict: Epist. 196.
And elsewhere; Whose conversation is Honey, his opinion Poison; whose head is
a Doves, his tail a Scorpions. Epiphanius, when he speaks of the heretic
Hierax (an heretic with a witness, who denied the resurrection of the flesh,
Epiphan. haeres. 67.
which he granted to the soul) could say, He was a man truly admirable for his
exercise in piety, and such an one, as besides the governance of his own,
could draw other men's souls to the practice of Godliness. And Augustine
speaking somewhere of Pelagius and some others of his Sect (I remember)
acknowledges, that the carriage of their life was fair, and unblamable: And
those that are the bitterest enemies to the Waldenses, or poor men of Lions,
give great testimony to the integrity and inoffensivenesse of their
conversation.

So on the contrary, there are many whose Religion is sound, but their life
impure. As Caesar said of old, We have enough of these Birds at home. Such, as
like Ants, follow the track of their fellows to their common hillocke; going
on those right ways of Opinion, whereinto example and education have put them,
yet stayning their profession by lewd behavior. I have read, that a rich Jew
being asked why he turned Christian, Bromiard. V. Fides.
laid the cause upon the virtue of our Faith. And being asked, how he did so
well know the virtue of such faith; because (said he) the nation of Christians
could not possibly hold out so long, by virtue of their works, for they are
stark naught; therefore it must needs be by the power of their Faith.
Certainly it were woe with us, if lives should decide the truth of Religion,
betwixt us and unbelievers, betwixt us and our ignorant forefathers: These are
not therefore fit umpires betwixt Christians competitioning for the truth. The
Jew was the sounder for religion, yet the Samaritan was more charitable, than
either the Levice, or Priest. It were strange, if in the corruptest Church,
there were not some conscionable; and no less, if in the holiest, Nullum malum
Punicum in quo non aliquod gra number supput^e.
there be not some lawless and inordinate; there is no Pomgranate wherein
there is not some grains rotten. The sanctity of some few cannot boulster out
falsehood in the common belief; neither can the disorder of Orthodox
believers, disparage that soundness of doctrine, which their life b^lyes. And
if our Savior give us this rule for discerning of false Prophets; By their
fruits you shall know them; Man. 7.17, 18, 19.
doubtless, that fruit was intended chiefly for their doctrine; their lives
were fair, their carriage innocent; (for they came in sheep clothing.) What
was that other then honest simplicity? yet their fruits were evil: Salmeron.
1. ^rolegom.
but withal, as a good and holy life is (as he said well) a good Commentary
to the sacred Volume of God; so their out-breaking iniquities were a good
Commentary upon their vicious doctrines; both ways were their fruits evil.
And if mere outward carriage should be the sole rule of our trial, nothing
could be more uncertain then our determination: How many Dunghills have we
seen, which whiles they have been covered with Snow, could not be discerned
from the best Gardens? How many sour Crabs, which for beauty have surpassed
the best Fruit in our Orchard? As in matter of reason, experience tells us,
that some falsehoods are more probable then some truths; so is it also in
matter of practice; no face seems so purely fair as the painted. Truth of
Doctrine is the Test whither we must bring our profession for matter of
trial; and the sacred Oracles of God are the Test, whereby we must try the
truth of Doctrine.

. XIIII. The tenth rule of Moderation: That we must draw as near as we
safely may, to Christian adversaries, in cases of lesser differences.
IT will perhaps seem a Paradox to some, which I must lay down for a tenth
rule of Moderation, viz. That we must endeavor to draw as near as we may to
Christian adversaries, in the differences of Religion: For some men, whose
zeal ^^ carries them beyond knowledge, are all for extremities, and think
there can never be distance enough betwixt themselves and those that oppose
them in the controversies of doctrine, or discipline. For the righting of our
conceits in this point, we shall need a double d^stinction; one of the Persons,
the other of the limits of our approach, or remoteness. Of the Persons first;
for there are Hosts, and there are Inimici. The former are they, who profess
open hostility to the whole cause of Christianity; as Jews, and Turks: The
latter are Adversaries within the Bosom of the Church; such as, according with
us in the maine essential Truths, maintain stiff differences in matters of
great consequence, both in the judgment and practice of Religion. To the first
of these, we do justly profess public and universal defiance; hating all
communion with them, save that of civil commerce, which is not unlawful with
the most savage Infidels. And in this name, do we deservedly cry down those
favors, which these avowed enemies of Christ receive at Rome, even from the
hands of him, who pretends to succeed the most fervent Apostle, that once said,
Lord, thou know I love thee: Besides the benefit of a favorable
entertainment, we know the Pope on his Coronation day vouchsafes to receive a
Present from their hands; Lib. sacrar. ceremon.
no less then that holy Book of God, which their cursed impiety prophaneth,
and which, in requital, condemns their impiety; whiles those that profess
the same Creed more sincerely then himself, In locis Italiae and adjacentium
Insularum nullus Haereticus quovis praetextu domicilium contrahere, habitare,
aut morari possit. Greg. 15. Anno 1622.
are rigorously expelled, and cruelly martyred. Our stomach does not so far
exceed our Charity, but we can pray for those miscreant Jews: they once for
all cursed themselves, His blood be upon us and our children; we are so
merciful to them, that we can bless them, in praying that his blood may be
upon them for their Redemption. Pro Iudaeis est orare, sed non st^cten^do
genua. Greg. Fer. 6. post Palman.


And as we can pray for their Conversion, so we cannot but commend the Order,
which is held in some parts of Italy, that, by the care of the Ordinary,
Gav^nt. Enchirid. tit. Conc^o.
Sermons are made on their Sabbaths in those places, where the Jews are
suffered to dwell for their Conviction; but whiles we wish well to their
souls, we hate their society. Gavant. ex Silvio. V. Haebr. ex Provinc.
Mediol.


I like well that piece of just prohibition, That Christian women should not
be Nurses to the Children of Jews, in their Houses; but I cannot brook the
Liberty following, that out of their Houses, by License from the Ordinary,
they may: My reason is but just, because their proud detestation goes so high,
as to an absolute forbiddance of any office of respect from theirs to us, and
yet allows the same from ours to them. So, by their Law, Munster. Praecept.
Mosaica negat.
a Jewish woman may not be either Midwife, or Nurse to one of ours; yet giving
way to our Women, to do these services to theirs. Ib. Munst.
Not to speak of the same fashion of Garments (which however forbidden by the
Law, they have now learned for their own advantage, to dispense with) what a
curiosity of hatred it is, Ib. Munst.
that if one of us Gentiles should make a Jews fire on their Sabbath, it is
not lawful for them to sit by it: And why should we be less averse from
that odious generation? They have done violence to the Lord of Life, our
blessed Redeemer; what have we done unto them? Blood lies still upon them;
nothing upon us, but undue mercy.

But as to the latter kind of Adversaries, we must be advised to better
terms; if any of them who call themselves Christians, have gone so far, as
directly and wilfully to raze the foundation of our most holy Faith; (...).
and being selfe-condemned, through the clear evidence of truth, shall
rebelliously persist in his heresy; Into the secret of such men, let not my
soul come, my glory be thou not joined to their assembly. Genesis 49.6.
I know no reason to make more of such a one, then of a Jew or Turk in a
Christians skin. I cannot blame that holy man, who durst not endure to be in
the Bath with such a monster; Theed. lib. 4. c. 14. and Cassiod. l. 7. c. 16.
or those of Samosata, who in imitation of this fact of Saint John, let forth
all the water of that public Bath, wherein Eunomius had washed, and caused new
to be put therein. Socrat. l. 7 c. 3. Islud aggressus non de more catholicae
Ecclesiae.
I cannot blame Theodosius a Bishop of Phrygia, (however Socrates pleases to
censure him) that he drove the Macedonian heretics, not out of the City
only, but out of the Country too. Sozem. l. 7. c. 1.
I cannot blame Gratianus the Emperor, that he interdicted all assemblies to
the Manichees, Photinians, Eunomians; And if he had extended his Banne against
those other forenamed heretics, it had been yet better for the Church. Sozom.
Ibid. c. 2.
Hierom's word is a good one; It is not cruelty that we thus do for Gods
cause, but Piety. But if there be any, who with full consent embrace all the
Articles of Christian Belee^e, and yet err (not contumaciously) in some such
dangerous consequences, as do in mine understanding (though not their own)
threaten ruin to the foundation by them yielded; as I dare not exclude them
from the Church of God, so I dare not profess to abhor their Communion. God
forbid we should shut up Christian brotherhood in so narrow a compass, as to
bar all misbeleevers of this kind, out of the family of God. Do but turn
over that charitable and irrefragable discourse of Christianography. Let your
eyes but walk over those ample territories and large regions, which in most of
the parts of the habitable world (but especially in Europe, Africa, and Asia)
profess the blessed name of God, our Redeemer, and look to be saved by his
blood; and then ask your heart, if you dare entertain so uncharitable a
thought, as to exclude so many millions of weak, but true believers, out of
the Church below, or out of heaven above: you shall there see Grecians,
Russians, Georgians, Armenians, Iacobites, Abassines; and many other sects
serving the same God, acknowledging the same Scriptures, believing in the same
Savior, professing the same faith in all fundamental points, aspiring to the
same Heaven; and like Bees, though flying several ways, and working upon
several meadows, or gardens, yet in the evening, meeting together in the same
hive.

Now, if I lived in the community of any of these diverse sects of Christians,
I should hold it my duty to comply with them in all (not unlawful) things; and
if any of them should live in the community of our Church, I should labor by
all good means to reclaim him from his erroneous opinion, or superstitious
practice; and when I had wrought upon him my utmost, rather then let go my
hopes and interest in him, I would go as far to meet him (without any
angariation, save that of charity) as the line of a good conscience would
permit me; herein following the sure pattern of our blessed Apostle, 1 Cor.
9.19.20.21.22.
whose profession it is, Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my
self servant unto all, that I might gain the more: unto the Jews I became as
a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; And to them under the Law, as under the
Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law; To them that are without
Law, as without Law, (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak, I became
weak, that I might gain the weak. I am made all things, to all men, that I
might by all means save some.

I do much fear the Church of Rome has a hard answer to make one day, in
this particular; Who imperiously, and unjustly challenging unto it self the
title of the Church Catholic, shuts all other Christian professions out of
doors, refusing all Communion with them, and so neglecting them, as if they
had no souls; or those souls cost nothing; Amongst the rest, I shall give but
two instances. Dam. a Goes. histr. Ethiop.


The great Prince of the Abassine Christians having heard of the fame of the
Europaean Churches, sends some of his nation, of whom he had a great opinion,
to Rome, to be informed of the substance and rites of Religion there professed;
Zago Zaba was one of the number; they with great labor and hazard arrived
there, made known their great errand; but were so far slighted, that they
were not so much as admitted to Christian society, and after many years vain
hope, were turned home disregardfully, not much wiser then they came, without
any other news, save of the scorn and insolence of those, who should have
instructed them. A carriage much suitable to that, which they still bear to the
Greek Church; a Church which, as for extent, it may compare with theirs; so
for purity of doctrine, I dare say (if that be her voice, which her last
Patriarch Cirill of Constantinople has acquainted the world with all (as I was
also confidently assured, by the late learned Bishop of Saribaris) as far
exceeding the Roman Church, as the Roman does the Russian, or Ethiopick, which
it most contemns: Let any the most curious eye trave^l over that learned
confession of faith, (...).

See this question shortly but fully handled by my L. Grace of Canterb. in his
late convictive answer to A. C. sect. 9. p. 24.25.26.

And largely discussed by the Archbish. of Spalat. De Repub. Eccles. l. 7. c.
10. number. a 119. ad 187.


which after all devises, and illusions is proved sufficiently to be the
genuine act of that worthy Patriarch, and by him published in the name of the
whole Greek Church, and let him tell me what one blemish, or mole he can
find in that fair body; save only that one clause, concerning the third
person of the blessed Trinity; The holy Spirit proceeding from the Father by
the Son; wherein there can be no danger, whiles he adds, in the next words,
Being of the same substance with the Father and the Son; and concludes; These
three Persons in one Essence we call the most holy Trinity, ever to be blessed,
glorified and adored of every creature. This error of his Greek Church, as it
is now minced, is rather a Problem of Scholasticall Divinity, then an heresy
in the Christian faith. In all the rest, show me any the most able, and sincere
Divine in the whole Christian world, that can make a more clear, and absolute
declaration of his faith, then that Greek Church has done, by the hand of her
worthy, and renouned Prelate; yet how uncharitably is she barred out of doors
by her unkind sister of Rome? How unjustly branded with heresy? in so much,
as it is absolutely forbidden to the Grecian Priests to celebrate their Masses,
Ne Graeci Latinomore, etc. Ex Pio 5. Anno 1566. Gavant.
and divine Services, in the Roman fashion: Neither may the Romans officiate in
the Grecian manner, under the pain of perpetual suspension; And if a woman of
the Latin Church be given in marriage to a Greek, Gavant. ex Congr. Episc.
20. Febr. 1596.
she may not be suffered to live after the Grecian fashion; A solaecisme, much
like to that of the Russian Churches, who admit none to their Communion (be he
nver so good a Christian) if he do not submit himself to their matriculation,
by a new Baptism. Sure, those Christians that thus carry themselves toward
their dear brethren (dearer perhaps to God then they) have either no bowels,
or no brains, and shall once find by the difference of the smart, whether
ignorance, or hard-heartednesse, were guilty of this injurious measure.

Next to the persons, the limits of this approach or remoteness are
considerable, which must be proportioned according to the condition of them
with whom we have to deal. If they be professed enemies to the Christian name,
Philip. 3.2.
Beware of dogs, beware of the concision, says the Apostle of the Gentiles.
Justly must we spit at these blasphemers, who say they are Jews and are not,
but are the Synagogue of Satan. Revel. 2.9.
If they be colored friends, but true heretics; such as do destroy,
directly, and pertinaciously, the foundation of Christian religion; the
Apostles charge is express, Tit. 3.10.
Haereticum hominem devita, A man that is an heretic, after the first and
second admonition avoid and reject; and such an one as he may be, that adds
blasphemy to heresy, it might be no real mistaking (though a verbal) of that
wise and learned Pontifician, who misreading the vulgar, made two words of one,
and turned the Verb into a Noune, De vita; Supple, Toll: put an heretic to
death: A practice so rise in the Roman Church, against those Saints, who, Act.
24.14.
in the way, which they call heresy, worship the Lord God of their Fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law, in the Prophets, in the
Apostles, that all the world takes notice of it; seeming, with the raped
Evangelist, to hear the souls, from under the Altar, crying aloud, Revel. 6.9
10.
How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood, on
them that dwell upon the earth? Surely were we such as their uncharitable
(...) mis-construction would make us, their cruelty were not excusable before
God, or men: but now, as our innocence shall aggravate their condemnation
before the just Tribunal in heaven; so our example shall condemn them, in the
judgment of all impartial Arbiters here on earth: For what Client of Rome was
ever sentenced to death by the reformed Church, merely for matter of religion?
what are we other to them, then they are to us? the cause is mutually the
same; only our charity is more, our cruelty less. Neither is this any small
testimony of our sincere innocence; It is a good rule of Saint Chrysostom, if
we would know a Wolf from a Sheep (since their clothing (as they use the
matter) will not difference them) look to their fangs, if those be bloody;
their kind is enough bewrayd; for who ever saw the lips of a Sheep besmeared
with blood? It is possible to see a Campian at Tiburne, or a Garnets head upon
a pole; Treasonable practices, not mere Religion, are guilty of these
executions: But however, our Church is thus favorable in the case of those
heresies, which are either simple, or secondary, and consequentiall; yet in the
cases of heretical blasphemy, her holy zeal has not feared to shed blood:
witness the flames of Ket, and Legate, and some other Arrians in our memory;
And the zealous prosecution of that Spanish Cistertian, whom we heard and saw
(not long since) belching out his blasphemous contumelies against the Son of
God, who after he was given over to the secular power for execution, was by
the Spanish Ambassador Master Gondemor, carried, back into Spain by leave
from King James, of blessed memory: in which kind also Master Calvin did well
approve himself to Gods Church, in bringing Servetus to the stake at Geneva;
As for those which are heretics only by consequence, and interpretation,
heedlesly undermining that foundation which they would pretend to establish, as
we may not, in regard of their Opinions in themselves, utterly blot them out of
the Catalogue of brethren, so we must heartily endeavor all good means for
their reclamation; strive to convince their errors; labor with God for them
in our prayers, try to win them with all loving offices, neither need we doubt
to join with them in holy duties, until their obdurednesse and wilful
pertinacy shall have made them incapable of all good counsel; and have drawn
them to a turbulent opposition of the truth: for, as it is in actual offenses,
that not our sin, but our unrepentance damnes us; so it is in these matters
of opinion, not the error, but the obstinacy incurres a just condemnation. So
long therefore, as there is hope of reformation, we may, we must comply with
this kind of erring Christians; but not without good cautions. First, that it
be only in things good or indifferent. Secondly, That it be with a true desire
to win them to the truth. Thirdly, that we find our selves so thoroughly
grounded, as that there be no danger of our infection: for we have known it
fall out with some, as with that noble Grecian of whom Xenophon speaks, who
whiles he would be offering to stay a Barbarian, from casting himself down
from the rock, was drawn down with him for company, from that precipice. Saint
Austen professes that this was one thing, that hardened him in his old
Manicheisme; That he found himself victorious in his disputations, with weak
adversaries, such men in stead of convincing, yield; and make themselves
miserable, and their opposites foolishly proud, and mis-confident. Fourthly,
that we do not so far condescend to complying with them, as for their sakes
to betray the least parcel of divine Truth. I^ they be our friends, it must be
only, usque ad aras, there we must leave them. That which we must be content
to purchase with our blood, we may not forgo for favor, even of the dearest.
Fifthly, that we do not so far yield to them, as to humor them in their
error, as to obfirme them in evil; as to scandalize others. And lastly, if
we find them utterly incorrigible, that we take off our hand and leave them
unto just censure.

As for differences of an inferior nature; Staphil. desens contra Illiricum.
if but ( De venis capillaribus and minutioribus theologicarum quaestionum
spinetis, as Staphilus would have theirs:) or, if of matters rituall, and such
as concern rather the Decoration, then the health of Religion; it is fit they
should be valued accordingly; neither peace, nor friendship should be crazed
for these, in themselves considered. But if it fall out through the peevishnes
and self-conceit of some cross dispositions, that even those things, which
are in their nature indifferent, (after the lawful command of Authority) are
blazoned for sinful, and heinous, and are made an occasion of the breach of
the common peace, certainly it may prove that some schism (even for trivial
matters) may be found no less pernicious, then some heresy. If my coat be
rent in pieces, it is all one to me whether it be done by a Bryer or a nail,
or by a knife. If my vessel sink, it is all one whether it were with a shot,
or a leake: The less the matter is, the greater is the disobedience, and the
disturbance so much the more sinful. No man can be so foolish, as to think
the value of the Apple, was that which cast away mankind; but the violation
of a Divine Interdiction. 1 Pet. 2.13.
It is fit therefore that men should learn to submit themselves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: But if they shall be wilfully refractary,
they must be put in mind, that Korahs mutiny was more fearfully revenged,
then the most grievous idolatry.

. XV. The eleventh rule of Moderation; To refrain from all railing terms, and
spightfull provocations in differences of Religion.
IT shall be our eleventh rule for Moderation, that we refrain from all
railing terms, and spightfull provocations of each other in the differences of
Religion. A charge too requisite for these times; wherein it is rare to find
any writer, whose ink is not tempered with gall, and vinegar, any speaker,
whose mouth is not a quiver of sharp, and bitter words. Psalm. 64.3.
It is here, as it is in that rule of Law; The breach of peace is begun by
menacing, increased by menacing, but finished by this battery of the tongue.
H^spin. de festis Ethnic.
Wherein we are like those Egyptians of whom the Historian speaks; who having
begun their devotion with a fast, whiles the Sacrifice was burning, fell upon
each others with blows, which having liberally dealt on all hands, at last
they sat down to their feast: thus do we; after professions of an holy zeal,
Ex utraque p^rte suut qui pug^are cup^^tus Cic. Tyroni suo Epist. l. 16.
we do mercilesly wound each other with reproaches, and then sit down, and
enjoy the contentment of our supposed victory. Every provocation sets us on,
and then (as it uses to be with scolds) every bitter word heightens the
quarrel; Men do, as we use to say of Vipers, when they are whipped, spit out
all their poison. Erasmus taxat Hilarium quod Arrium appellat Satanam and
Antichristum. Praefat. ad Hilar.
These uncharitable expressions, what can they bewray, but a distempered heart,
from which they proceed, as the smoke and sparks flying up show the house to
be on fire; or as a corrupt Spittle shows exulcerate lungs: By this means it
falls out that the truth of the cause is neglected, whiles men are taken up
with an idle, yet busy, prosecution of words; Like as in thrashing the straw
flies about our ears, but the corn is hid. And it has been an old
observation, that when a man falls to personal railing, it argues him drawn
utterly dry of matter, and despayring of any farther defense; as we see and
find that the dog which running back, falls to bauling, and barking has done
fighting any more. Mr. Blunts voyage to the Levant.
I have both heard and read that this practice is not rare amongst the Jews,
to brawl in their public Synagogues, and to bang each other with their holy
Candlesticks and censers; in so much that this scandal has endangered the
setting off some of theirs to Mahometisme: And I would to God it were only
proper unto them, and not incident unto too many of those, who profess to be
of the number of them, to whom the Prince of Peace said, My peace I leave with
you. It is the caveat which the blessed Apostle gives to his Galathians, and in
them to us; If ye bite, and devour one another, Gal. 5.15.
take heed ye be not consumed one of another. Lo here, it is the tongue that
bites; and so bites, as that (after the fashion of a mad dogs teeth) both
rage and death follows. And if any man think it a praise (with the
Lacedaemonian in Plutarch) to bite like a Lion, let him take that glory to
himself, and be as he would seem, Psalm. 17.12.
like a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as a young Lion, that lurketh in
secret places: But withal let him expect that just doom of the God of Peace,
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Adder, Psa. 91.13
the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under feet. Certainly it is
in vain for us to expect any other measure from the exasperated, and unruly
minds of hostile brethren, Eteocles and Polynices.
whose hatred is commonly so much greater, as their interest is more: They
whose fires would not meet after death, are apt in life to consume one another.

This is the stale and known Machination of him, whose true title is, The
accuser of the brethren. That old Dragon, when he saw the woman flying to the
wilderness to avoyde his rage; Revel. 12.15.
what does he? He casts out of his mouth water, as a flood after the woman,
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood: what are these waters
which he casts out of his mouth, but sclanderous accusations, lyings,
detractions, cruel persecutions of the tongue? And shall we that profess the
dear name of one common Savior, so far second the great enemy of mankind,
as to derive some cursed Channels from those Hellish floods of his, for the
drenching of the flourishing valleys of Gods Church? Shall we rather imitate
him then the blessed Archangell of God, who contending with the Devil, and
disputing about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
accusation, Jude 9.
but said, The Lord rebuke thee: Nay, shall we dare to do that to Brethren,
which the Angel durst not do to the Devil?

When we hear and see fearful thundering, and lightning, and tempest, we are
commonly wont to say, that ill spirits are abroad; neither doubt I but that
many times (as well as in Jobs case) God permits them to raise these dreadful
blustrings in the air, right so when we see these flashes, and hear these
hideous noyses of contention in Gods Church, we have reason to think that
there is an hand of Satan in their raising, and continuance. For, as for God,
we know his courses are otherwise. 1 Kings 19.11.
When it pleased him to make his presence known to Elijah; first there passed
a great and strong wind, which rent the Mountains, and brake the Rocks in
pieces, but the Lord was not in the Wind. After that Wind, came an
Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake: After the Earthquake a
Fire, but the Lord was not in the Fire; but after the Fire, came a still small
Voice, and therein was the Almighty pleased to express himself; Lo, Ambro.
in Psalm. 45.^
as Saint Ambrose observes well, the Devil is for noise, Christ for silence.
He that is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, delights in the style of the Lamb
of God; and is so termed, both by John the Baptist, his forerunner, in the
days of his flesh, and by John the Evangelist, his Apostle, in the state of
his glory: Neither was the holy Spirit pleased to appear in the form of a
Falcon, or Eagle, or any other bird of Prey, but of a Dove; the meekness and
innocence whereof, our Savior recommended for a Pattern to all his followers:
Nunquid Ovis Lupum persequitur? non, sed Lupus Ovem, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 19. in
Matthew.


If there be any therefore, who delight to have their Beakes or Tallons imbrued
in blood, let them consider of what spirit they are; sure I am, they are not of
his, whose so zealous charge it is; Coloss. 3.12.
Put on (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering; 13.
Forbearing one another, forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave you, even so also do ye: 14.
And above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness; 15.
And let the Peace of God rule in your hearts.

. XVI. The twelfth rule of Moderation: That how-ever our judgments differ, we
should compose our affections toward Unity and Peace.
WHich divine counsel of the blessed Apostle leads me to the twelfth and last
rule of Moderation, viz. That if we cannot bring our judgments to conspire in
the same truth with others, yet we should compose our affections to all peace,
to all tender respects and kind offices to our dissenting Brethren. Contra quam
Lutheranus, q. apud Prolaeum. A Calviniana fraternitate Libera n^s Domine.
P^olaeus. Fascic. c. 1. q. 7. (...). So^rat. l. 2. c. 30.
What if our brains be diverse? yet let our hearts be one. I cannot but commend
the exemplarie disposition of the Christians of Constantinople, in the days of
Constantius; when the famous Church of the Resurrection was there to be
erected; the Novatians, men, women, children, (though a Sect diversely affected)
brought Stones and Mortar to the building of it; joining with the Orthodox
Christians, against the Arrians; communicating with them in three other
Churches; and were upon the point of a full unity and concord, had not some
few wrangling spirits, of the Novatian party put in a Claw, and crossed so
fair hopes. Had the matter been so slight as he conceived, it was good
counsel which the Emperor gave to Bishop Alexander, Socr. l. 1. c. 4.
Ac tametsi etc. Although you, says he, differ from each other in a point of
small moment (as we cannot all be of one mind in every thing) yet it may be
so ordered by you, that there may be a sincere concord betwixt you; and that
there be a mutual communion and consociation betwixt all your people. And the
same temper has been laudably observed and professed by diverse late Worthies
in the Church. Concerning the administration of the Sacrament to the sick in
case of extremity, Calvin in an Epistle to Olevianus, gives reasons of that
practice, but withal adds; Scis, frater, Epist. 363.
alium esse apud nos morem; You know, brother, the fashion is otherwise with
us; I bear with it, because it is not availeable for us to contend. Luther,
though a man of a hot and stiff spirit, yet writing to the Cities and Churches
of Helvetia, has thus; Honestis, ac prud. Dom. Consulibus, etc. Tiguri,
Bernae, Basileae, Schafhusii, Saugalli, etc. An 1537. Vid. Hosp. and D. Paraeum
in Iren.
Insuper ut dilectio and amicabilis concordia, etc. Moreover, that there may be
a perfect and friendly love and concord betwixt us, we shall not fail to do
whatsoever lies in our power, especially I, for my part, will utterly blot out
of my thoughts, all the offense that I had conceived, and will promise all love
and fidelity to you: And shuts up with a fervent prayer; that God, by the
grace of his holy Spirit, would glue their hearts together, through Christian
love; and purge out of them all the dross and dregs of humane diffidence, and
divellish malice and suspicion, to the glory of his holy Name, the salvation of
many Souls, to the despite of the Devil, Subs^ripti. V. P. Add^ctus. Mart.
Iucherus.
of the Pope, and all his adherents. And before that time, in the Conference of
the Divines on both parts at Marpurge, Oct. 3. 1529. passing through all the
points wherein there seemed any difference, and sticking only at the last,
concerning the Sacrament, they shut up thus, Quanquam vero, etc. And although
we could not at this time agree, whether the true Body and Blood of Christ be
in the Bread and Wine corporally, yet each part shall hold and maintain (so
far as his Conscience will allow) true Christian love with other, and both
parts shall continually pray unto Almighty God, that he will by his Spirit
confirm us in the true sense and understanding thereof: To which were
subscribed the names of those ten eminent Divines following; Luther,
Melanchton, Iustus Jonas, Osiander, Brentius, Agricola, Oecolampadius,
Zuinglius, Bucer, Hedio. Thus, Thus it should be amongst Divines, amongst
Christians, who hope to meet in one Heaven. If it must be with us, as with the
Sava and Danuby, two famous Rivers in the East, that they run threescore miles
together in one Channel, with their waters divided in very color, from each
other; yet let it be (as it is in them) without noise, without violence. If we
be children, as we pretend, of our Father Abraham, let us take up his
peaceable suggestion to his Nephew; Genesis 13.8.
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, betwixt thee and me, betwixt thy
Heard-men and my Heard-men, for we are brethren. Macarius was, in his time,
accounted a very holy man; yet I read, that after he had macerated himself
with long devotion, he had an answer from God, of the acceptance of his
Prayers; but withal an intimation, that after all his endeavors, he came
short of the merit of two Women in the City, which were two Wives of two
Brethren, which had lived fifteen years together in one house, without the
least discord.

This sweet and peaceable disposition cannot but be graciously accepted of God,
betwixt us that are Brethren, in the wide House of his Church. It is not for
Christians to be like unto Thistles, or Tazels, which a man cannot touch,
without pricking his fingers; but rather to Pitosella, or Mouseeare in our
Herball, which is soft and silken in the handling, although if it be hard
strained, it yields a juice that can harden Metalls to cut Iron. But if we
meet with a kind of men, who are disposed to be quarrelsome, like to that
Cercyon in Suidas, Suidas. V. Cercyon.
who would needs wrestle with every man he met; the best way is to do as some
have advised, when we are provoked to fight with women, to run away. Shun
profane and vain babbling, 2 Timothy 2.16.
(says the Apostle) as for peace, if it fly from us, we must run after it;
Follow peace with all men, as he to his Hebrews: Heb. 12.14.
But if after all our quickest paces, it will not be overtaken; if we still
fall upon those, who are enemies to peace; rabid children, who love to hear
themselves cry; Salamanders, who love the fire of contention; muddie Eeles,
who delight most in troubled waters, be they such as are under our power,
wherefore are Censures, but for such spirits? Even he that could say, Shall I
come to you with a Rod, or with the spirit of meekness? said also, Gal. 5.12.
I would they were even cut off that trouble you. It is well commended by the
Historian in Proclus, Bishop of Constantinople, Socr. l. 7: c. 40.
that he showed himself mild and gentle to all, and by this means won more
then others did by roughness and severitie; and it is a sure rule, Mesius est
propter misericordiam rationem reddere qua propter crudelitatem.
that it is an easier account that shall be given for mercy, then for
cruelty: And certainly, this course is first to be taken; The Chirurgian
strokes the arm, before he open's the Vein: But where lenity prevails
not, we are cruel to the Church, if we strike not home; when singing will
not still the Child, the Rod must: If they be such as are without the reach
of our Authority, we must first do our best, to make them sensible of the
wounds they give to our common Mother, and those Rubs which they lay in the way
of the Gospel; since it cannot be otherwise now, then the Historian notes in
those first Ages of the Church, Quinetiam dogmatum discrepantia, quorum alia ex
aliis nascebantur, impedimento fuit, quo minus complures, qui fidem Christianam
recipere animum induxerant, eam recip^rent.
that the difference of Opinions, whereof one arose out of another, was a great
hinderance to many, in pitching upon our holy Profession: And as Optatus, of
old, betwixt our Licet and their Non licet, Christian souls cannot choose but
stagger, and be distracted; And withal, to mind them of the palpable Wrongs
we do to our selves, and the Advantages we give to common enemies. It was a
worthy and just intimation, which Saint Gregory Nazianzene gives, to this
purpose, unto the Synod of Constantinople; What can be more absurd (says he)
then whiles we decline the enemies fight, to betake our selves to mutual
assaults of each other, and by this means to waste and weaken our own forces?
Or what can be a greater pleasure to our adversaries, then to see us thus
bickering with our selves? But if neither the respect to the Glory of the God
of Peace, nor to the peace and welfare of the dear Church and Spouse of
Christ, nor of themselves, can prevail any thing; what remains, but to mourn
in silence for the irreparable breaches of the sacred Walls of Jerusalem, and
together with our zealous prayers for the opposed peace of Sion, to appeal to
the justice of that holy and righteous Lord God of Israel, with

Increpa Domine bestias calami, Rebuke, O Lord, the beasts of the Reed, and
scatter the people that delight in War. Amen.

FINIS.

