THE ART OF DIVINE ME DITATION: Profitable for all Christians to know and
practice; Exemplified with a large Meditation of eternal life.

By JOSEPH HALL.

Imprinted at London by Humfrey Lownes, for Samuel Macham, and Matthew Cook:
and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Tigers head. 1606.

To the right Worshipful, Sir Richard Lea, Knight, all increase of true honor
with God and men.
SIr, ever since I began to bestow my self upon the common good, studying
wherein my labors might be most serviceable; I still found they could be no
way so well improued, as in that part which concerns devotion, and the
practice of true piety: For on the one side I perceived the number of
Polemicall books, rather to breed, than end strifes; and those which are
doctrinall, by reason of their multitude, rather to oppress than satisfy the
Reader; wherein if we write the same things, we are judged tedious; if
different, singular. On the other part respecting the Reader, I saw the
brains of men never more stuffed, their tongues never more stirring, their
hearts never more empty, nor their hands more idle. Wherefore after those
sudde^ Meditatio^s which passed me without rule, I was easily induced by their
success (as a small thing moves the willing) to send forth this Rule of
Meditation; and after my Heaven upon earth, to discourse (although by way of
example) of heaven above. In this Art of mine, I confess to have received
more light from one obscure namelesse Monk which wrote some 112. years ago,
then from the directions of all other writers: I would his humility had not
made him niggardly of his name, that we might have known whom to have
thanked. It had been easy to have framed it with more curiosity: But God and
my soul know, that I made profit the scope of my labor, and not applause:
and therefore (to choose) I wished rather to be rude than unprofitable: If now
the simplicity of any Reader, shall bereave him of the benefit of my
precepts, I know he may make his use of my example. Why I have honored it
with your name, I need not give account to the world; which already knows your
worth and deserts, and shall see by this, that I acknowledge them: Go you on
happily (according to the heavenly advise of your Iunius) in your worthy and
glorious profession; still bearing your self as one that knows virtue the
truest nobility, and Religion the best virtue: The God whom you serve shall
honor you with men, and crown you in heaven. To his grace I humbly commend
you: requesting you only to accept the work, and continue your favor to the
Author.

Your Worships humbly devoted, IOS. HALL.

THE SVMME OF THE Chapters.
THE benefit and uses of Meditation. Cap. 1

The description and kinds of Medit. Cap. 2

Concerning Meditation Extemporal. Cap. 3

Cautions of Extemporary Medit. Cap. 4

Of Meditation deliberate: wherein first the quality of the person: of whom is
required;

1 That he be pure from his sins. Cap. 5

2 That he be free from worldly thoughts. Cap. 6

3 Constant In the time set. Ca. 7 In continuance. Ca. 8

Of other necessary circumstances: and,

1 Of the place fit for meditation. Cap. 9

2 Of the time. Cap. 10

3 Of the site and gesture of body. Cap. 11

Of the matter and subject of Medit. Ca. 12

The order of handling the work it self. Cap. 13

The entrance into the work 1. Common entrance, which is prayer. Ca. 14 2. The
particular and proper entrance into the matter, which is in our choice thereof.
Cap. 15

The proceeding of our Meditation, therein a Method allowed by some Authors,
rejected. Cap. 16

Premonitions concerning our proceeding in the first part of Med. C. 17

The practice of Meditation: the first part whereof in the understanding:
therein,

1. We begin with some description of that which we meditate of. Ca. 18

2 An easy and voluntary division of the matter meditated. Cap. 19

3 A consideration of the causes thereof in all the kinds of them. Ca. 20

4 The Consid. of the Fruits and Effects. Cap. 21

5 The Consid. of the subject wherein, or wherabout it is employed. Cap. 22

6 Consid. of the Appendances and qualities of it. Cap. 23.

7 Consid. of that which is contrary to it, or diverse from it. Cap. 24

8 Of Comparisons and similitudes whereby it may be most fitly set forth to us.
Cap. 25

9 The Titles and Names of the matter considered. Cap. 26

10 Consid. of fit Testimonies of Scripture concerning our Theme. Cap. 27

Of the second part of Meditation, which is in the affections: wherein is,

1 First required, a taste and relish of what we thought upon. Ca. 28

2 A complaint bewayling our want and untowardness. Cap. 29

3 A hearty wish of the soul for what it complains to want. Ca. 30

4 An humble confession of our disability to effect what we wish. Cap. 31

5 An earnest Petition for that which we confess to want. Cap. 32

6 A vehement enforcement of our Petition. Cap. 33

7 A cheerful confidence of obtaining what we have requested and enforced.
Cap. 34

The conclusion of our Meditation, in what order. Cap. 35

First, with thanksgiving for what we are confident to be granted. Ibid.

Secondly, with a Recommendatio^ of our souls and ways to GOD. Cap. 36

The Epilogue; reproving the neglect, and exhorting to the use of Meditation.
Cap. 37

THE ART OF DIVINE MEDITATION.
Chap. I.
IT is not, I The benefit and uses of Meditation.
suppose, a more bold than profitable labor, after the endeavors of so many
co^te^platiue men to teach the Art of Meditation: An heavenly business, as any
belongs either to man or Christian; and such as whereby the soul does
unspeakably benefit it self: For by this do we ransacke our deep and false
hearts, find out our secret enemies, buckle with them, expel them, arm our
selves against their reentrance. By this we make use of all good means, fit
our selves to all good duties; by this we descrie our weakness, obtain
redress, prevent tentatio^s, cheer up our solitarines, temper our occasions
of delight; get more light to our knowledge, more heat to our affections, more
life to our devotion: by this we grow to be (as we are) strangers upon earth,
and out of a right estimation of all earthly things, into a sweet fruitio^ of
invisible comforts: by this, we see our Savior with Steven, we talk with God
as Moses* and by this we are ravished with blessed Paul into Paradise; and see
that heaven which we are loath to leave, which we cannot utter. This alone is
the remedy of security and worldlines, the pastime of Saints, the ladder of
heaven, and in short the best improuement of Christianity: Learn it who can,
and neglect it who list; he shall never find joy, neither in God nor in
himself, which does not both know and practice it. And how ever of old some
hidden Cloysterers have engrossed it Which are universal to al Christians and
not to be appropriated to some professions.
to themselves, and confined it within their Celles: who indeed professing
nothing but contemplation, through their immunitie from those cares which
accompany an active life, might have the best leisure to this business; Yet
seeing there is no man so taken up with action, as not sometimes to have a free
mind; and there is no reasonable mind so simple, as not to be able both to
discourse somewhat, and to better it self by her secret thoughts; I deem it
an envious wrong to conceal that from any, whose benefit may be universal:
Those that have but a little stock, had need to know the best rules of
thrift;

Chap. 2.
THe rather for that whereas The description and kinds of Meditation.
our Divine Meditation is nothing else but a bending of the mind upon some
spiritual object, through diverse forms of discourse, until our thoughts come
to an issue; and this must needs be either Extemporall, and occasioned by
outward occurrences offered to the mind, or Deliberate, and wrought out of our
own heart; which again is either in Matter of Knowledge for the finding out
of some hidden truth, and conuincing of an heresy by profound traversing of
reason, or in Matter of Affection, for the enkindling of our love to God: the
former of these two last we sending to the Schools and masters of
Controversies, search after the later; which is both of larger use, and such as
no Christian can reject, as either unnecessary, or ouer-difficult. For both
every Christian had need of fire put to his affections, and weaker judgments
are no less capable of this divine heat, which proceeds not so much from
reason as from faith.

One says, (and I believe him) that Gods School is more of Affection, than
Understanding: Both lessons very needful, very profitable; but for this our
age, especially the later: For if there be some that have much zeal, little
knowledge, there are more that have much knoweledge without zeal. And he that
has much skill and no affection, may do good to others by information of
judgment, but shall never have thank either of his own heart, or of God; who
uses not to cast away his love on those, of whom he is but known, not loved.

Chap. 3.
OF Extemporal Meditation Concerning Meditation Extemporall.
there may be much use, no rule: forasmuch as our conceits herein vary
according to the infinite multitude of objects, and their diverse manner of
profering themselves to the mind; as also for the suddenness of this act.
Man is placed in this Stage of the world to view the several natures and
actions of the creature; To view them, not idly, without his use, as they do
him: God made all these for man, and man for his own sake; Both these purposes
were lost, if man should let the creatures pass carelessly by him, only seen,
not thought upon: He only can make benefit of what he sees; which if he do
not, it is all one, as if he were blind, or brute. Whence it is, that wise
Solomon puttes the sluggard to school unto the Ant; and our Savior sends the
distrustful to the Lilly of the field.

In this kind was that Meditation of the Divine Psalmist, which upon the view
of the glorious frame of the Heavens, was led to wonder at the merciful
respect GOD has to so poor a creature as man. Thus our Savior took occasion
of the water fetched up solemnly to the Altar, from the Well of Shilo, on the
day of the great HOSANNAH, to meditate and discourse of the Water of life. Thus
holy and sweet AUGUSTINE, from occasion of the watercourse near to his
Lodging, running among the pebbles, sometimes more silently, sometimes in a
baser murmr, and sometimes in a shriller note, entered into the thought and
discourse of that excellent order which God has settled in all these inferior
things; Thus that learned and heavenly soul of our late Estye, when we sat
together, and heard a sweet consort of Music, seemed upon this occasion
carried up for the time beforehand to the place of his rest, saying, not
without some passion, What Music may we think there is in heaven? Thus
lastly (for who knows not that examples of this kind are infinite?) that
faithful and reverend Deering, when the Sun shined on his face, now lying on
his deathbed, fell into a sweet meditation of the glory of God, and his
approaching joy. The thoughts of this nature are not only lawful, but so
behooueful, that we cannot omit them, without neglect of God, his creatures,
our selves. The creatures are half lost if we only employ them, not learn
something of the^: GOD is wronged if his creatures be unregarded; our selves
most of all if we read this great volume of the creatures, and take out no
lesson for our instruction.

Chap. 4.
WHerein yet Cautions of Extemporal Meditation.
cautio^ is to be had that our Meditatio^s be not either too farre-fetcht, or
sauouring of Superstition. Farre-fetcht I call those, which have not a fair and
easy resembla^ce unto the matter from whence they are raised: in which case
our thoghts prove loose and heartles; making no memorable impression in the
mind. Superstitious, when we make choice of those grounds of Meditation, which
are forbidden us as Teachers of Vanity; or employ our own devices (though well
grounded) to an use above their reach; making them upon our own pleasures, not
only furtherances, but parts of Gods worship; in both which, our Meditations
degenerate, and grow rather perilous to the soul: Whereto add, that the
mind be not too much cloyed with too frequent iteratio^ of the same thought;
which at last breeds a weariness in our selves, and an unpleasantness of
that conceit, which at the first entertainment promised much delight. Our
nature is too ready to abuse familiarity in any kind: and it is with
Meditations, as with Medicines; which with ouer-ordinary use lose their
Soueraignety; and fill, in stead of purging. God has not straited us for
matter, having given us the scope of the whole world; so that there is no
creature, event, action, speech which may not afford us new matter of
Meditation. And that which we are wont to say of fine wits, we may as truly
affirm of the Christian heart; that it can make use of any thing. Wherefore as
travelers in a foreign country make every fight a lesson; so ought we in
this our pilgrimage: Thou see the heaven rolling above thine head in a
constant and immovable motion; the stars so ouer-looking one another, that
the greatest show little, the least greatest, all glorious; the air full of
the bottles of rain, or fleeces of snow, or diverse forms of fiery
Exhalations: The sea under one uniform face full of strange and monstrous
shapes beneath; the earth so adorned with variety of plants, that thou can
not but tread on many at once with every foot; besides the store of creatures
that fly above it, walk upon it, live in it: Thou idle Truant* do thou
learn nothing of so many masters? have thou so long read these capital letters
of Gods great book, and can thou not yet spell one word of them? The brute
creatures see the same things, with as clear, perhaps better eyes: if thine
inward eyes see not their use, as well as thy bodily eyes their shape, I know
not whether is more reasonable, or less brutish.

Chap. 5.
DEliberate Meditation Of Meditation Deliberate: Wherein first,
is that we chiefly inquire for; which both may be well guided, and shall be
not a little furthered by precepts; part whereof the labors of of others shall
yield us, and part the plainest mistress, Experience: Wherein order requires of
us first the qualities The qualities of the person.
of the person fit for meditation, the^ the circumstances, manner and
proceedings of the work.

The hill of Meditation may not be climbed with a profane foot; Of whom is
required: First, that he be pure from his sins.
But as in the delivery of ye law, so here, no beast may touch Gods hill, lest
he die: only the pure of heart have promise to see God: sin dimmeth and
dazeleth the eye that it cannot behold spiritual things: The guard of heavenly
Soldiers was about Elishaes servant before, he saw the^ not before through the
scales of his infidelity: The soul must therefore be purged, ere it can
profitably meditate. And as of old they were wont to search for, and thrust out
malefactors from the presence, ere they went to sacrifice; so must we our sins,
ere we offer our thoughts to God. First, says David, I will wash my hands in
innocence, then I will compass thine altar. Whereupon not unfitly did that worthy
Chancellor of Paris, make the first staire of his Ladder of Contemplation,
Humble Repentance. The cloth that is white (which is wont to be the color of
innocence) is capable of any Dye; the black, of none other: Not that we
require an absolute perfection (which as it is incident unto none, so if it
were, would exclude all need and use of Meditation) but rather an honest
sincerity of the heart, not willingly sinning, willingly repenting when we have
sinned; which, whosoever finds in himself, let him not think any weakness a
lawful bar to Meditation. He that pleades this excuse is like some simple
man, which being half starued with cold, refuses to come near the fire,
because he finds not heat enough in himself.

Chap. 6.
NEither may the Secondly, that he be free from worldly thoughts.
soul that hops to profit by meditation, suffer it self for the time
inta^gled with the world; which is all one, as to come to GODS flaming bush on
the hill of visions, with our shoes on our feet. Thou see the bird, whose
feathers are limed, unable to take her former flight: so are we when our
thoughts are clingd together by the world, to soar up to our heaven in
Meditation: The pair of brothers must leave their nets if they will follow
Christ: Elisha his oxen, if he will attend a Prophet: It must be a free and a
light mind that can ascend this Mount of Contemplation, ouercomming this
height, this steepness: Cares are an heavy lode, and uneasy; these must be
laid down at the bottom of this hill, if we ever look to attain the top.
Thou art loded with housholde-cares, perhaps public; I bid thee not cast them
away: even these have their season, which thou can not omit without
impiety: I bid thee lay them down at thy Closet door, when thou attemptest
this work: Let the^ in with thee, thou shall find them troublesome companions,
ever distracting thee from thy best errand thou would think of heaven; thy
Barn comes in thy way, or perhaps thy Count-booke, or thy Cofers, or it may
be thy mind is before hand travailing upon the morrowes journey. So while
thou think of many things, thou think of nothing; while thou would go
many ways, thou stand still. And as in a crowde, while many press forward
at once through one door, none proceeds: so when variety of thoughts
tumultuously throng in upon the mind, each proves a bar to the other, and
all an hinderanceto him that entertaines them.

Chap. 7.
ANd as our Clyent of Thirdly that he be constant: and that, First*
Meditation must both be pure and free in undertaking this task, so also
constant in continuing it; Constant both in time and in matter: Both in a set
course and In his set Times.
hour reserved for this work, and in an unwearied prosecution of it once
begun. Those that meditate by snatches and uncertain fittes, when only all
other imploiments forsake the^, or when good motions are thrust upon them by
necessity, let them never hope to reach to any perfection. For those feeble
beginnings of lukewarm grace, which are wroght in them by one fit of serious
meditation, are soon extinguished by intermission, and by mis-wonting perish:
This days meal (tho large and liberal) strengthens thee not for to morrow;
the body languishes if there be not a daily supply of repast: thus feed thy
soul by meditation; Set thine hours and keep them, and yield not to an easy
distraction. There is no hardness in this practice, but in the beginning; use
shall give it, not ease only, but delight. Thy companion entertaines thee this
while in loving discourses, or some inexpected business offers to interrupt
thee. Never any good work shall want some hinderance: Either break through
thy lettes, except it be with inciuility or loss; or if they be importunate,
pay thy self the time that was unseasonably borrowed; and recompense thine
omitted hours with the double labors of another day: For thou shall find, that
differring breeds (beside the loss) an indisposition to good; So that what
was before pleasant to thee, being omitted, to morrow grows harsh; the next
day unnecessary; afterward odious. To day thou can, but wilt not; to morrow
thou could, but listest not; the next day thou neither wilt nor can bend
thy mind on these thoughts: So I have seen friends that upon neglect of duty
grow ouerly, upon ouerlinesse, strange; upon strangenes, to utter defiance.
Those whose very trade is Divinity (me thinks) should omit no day without his
line of Meditation: those which are secular men, not many; remembering that they
have a common calling of Christianity to attend, as well as a special vocation
in the world: and that other being more noble and important, may justly
challenge both often and diligent service.

Chap. 8.
ANd as this Co^stancy Secondly, that he be Constant in the Continuance,
requires thee to keep day with thy self, unless thou will prove bankrupt
in good exercises; so also that thy mind should dwell upon the same thought
without flitting, without weariness, until it have attained to some issue of
spiritual profit: Otherwise it attempteth much, effects nothing. What
auailes it to knock at the door of the heart, if we depart ere we have an
answer? What are we the warmer if we pass hastily along by the hearth, stay
not at it? Those that do only travel through Afric become not Blackemores,
but those which are borne there, those that inhabit there: We account those
damsels too light of their love, which betroth themselves upon the first
sight, upon the first motion: and those we deem of much price, which require
long and earnest soliciting: He deceiues himself that thinks grace so easily
won; there must be much suit and importunity ere it will yield to our
desires. Not that we call for a perpetuity of this labor of Meditation;
Humane frailty could never bear so great a toil. Nothing under heaven is
capable of a continual motion without complaint: It is enough for the
glorified spirits above, to be ever thinking, and never weary: the mind of man
is of a strange metal; if it be not used, it rusteth; if used hardly, it
breaks: briefly, is sooner dulled, than satisfied with a continual
meditation: whence it came to pass, that those ancient Monks who intermeddled
bodily labor with their conte^platio^s, proved so excellent in this divine
business; when those at this day, which having mewd and mured up themselves
from the world spend themselves wholly upon their beads and Crucifixe,
pretending no other work but meditation, have cold hearts to God, and to the
world show nothing but a dull shadow of devotion: for that (if the thoughts
of these later were as divine as they are superstitious) yet being without al
interchangeablenes, bent upon the same discourse, the mind must needs grow
weary, the thoughts remiss and languishing, the objects tedious: while the
other refreshed themselves with this wise variety, employing the hands, while
they called of the mind, as good Comedians so mix their parts, that the
pleasantnes of the one, may te^per the austerenes of the other; whereupon they
gained both enough to the body, and to the soul more than if it had been all
the while busied.

Besides, the excellency of the object lets this assiduity of meditation;
which is so glorious, that like unto the Sun, it may abide to have an eye
cast up to it for a while, will not be gazed upon* whosoever ventureth so
far, loses both his hope and his wits. If we hold with that blessed Monica,
that such like cogitations are the food of the mind, yet even the mind also
has her satietie, and may surfeit of too much. It shall be sufficient
therefore, that we persevere in our meditation without any such affectation of
perpetuity, and leave without a light fickleness; making always not our
houre-glasse, but some competent increase of our devotion, the measure of our
continuance; knowing, that as for heaven, so for our pursuit of grace, it
shall avail us little to have begun well, without perseverance: and withal
that the Soul of man is not always in the like disposition: but sometimes is
longer in settling through some unquietness, or more obstinate distraction;
sometimes heavier, and sometimes more active, and nimble to dispatch. Saving
our just quarrel against him for the Council of Constance.
Gerson (whose authority I rather use, because our adversaries disclaim him
for theirs) professes, he has been sometimes four hours together working his
heart, ere he could frame it to purpose: A singular pattern of unwearied
constancy, of an unconquerable spirit; whom his present unfitness did not so
much discourage, as it wherted him to strive with himself till he could
overcome. And surely other victories are hazzardous, this certain, if we will
persist to strive: other fights are upon hope, this upon assurance; whiles our
success depends upon the promise of God, which cannot disappoint us: Persist
therefore, and prevail; persist till thou have prevailed: so that which thou
beganst with difficulty, shall end in comfort.

Chap. 9.
FRom the qualities of the person, Of the Circumstances of Meditation.
we desce^d toward the action it self: where first we meet with those
Circumstances which are necessary for our predisposition to the work; Place,
Time, Site of body.

Solitariness of Place And therein, First, Of the place.
is fittest for Meditation: Retire thy self from others, if thou would talk
profitably with thy self. So JESUS meditates alone in the Mount, Isaac in the
fields, John Baptist in the desert, David on his bed, Chrysostom in the bath,
each in several places; but all solitary. There is no place free from God,
none to which he is more tied: one finds his closet most convenient, where his
eyes being limited by the known walls, call in the mind after a sort from
wandering abroad; Another finds his soul more free when it beholds his
heaven above and about him; It matters not so we be solitary and silent; It
was a witty and Divine speech of Bernard, that the spouse of the foul, CHRIST
JESUS, is bashful, neither willingly comes to his bride in the presence of a
multitude; And hence is that sweet inuitation which we find of her; Come my
well-beloved, let us go forth into the fields, let us lodge in the villages:
Let us go up early to the vines; let us see if the Vine flourish, whether it
has disclosed the first grape, or whether the Pomegranates blossom; there
will I give thee my love. Abandon therefore all worldly society, that thou
may change it for the company of GOD and his Angels; The society, I say, of
the world, not outward only, but inward also. There be many that sequester
themselves from the visible company of men, which yet carry a world within
them; who being alone in body are haunted with a throng of fancies: as Jerome,
in his wildest desert, found himself too often in his thoughts amongst the
daunces of the Roman dames; This company is worse than the other: for it is
more possible for some thoughtfull men to have a solitary mind in the midst of
a market, than for a man thus disposed to be alone in a wilderness; Both
companies are enemies to Meditation; Whither tends that ancient counsel of a
great Master in this Art, of three thingsrequisite to this business, Secrecy,
Silence, Rest: whereof the first excludes company, the second noise, the third
motion. It cannot be spoken how subject we are in this work, to distraction;
Like Salomons old man whom the noise of every bird wakeneth: sensual delights
we are not drawn from with the threefold cords of judgment; but our spiritual
pleasures are easily hindered. Make choice therefore of that place, which shall
admit the fewest occasions of withdrawing thy soul from good thoughts: wherein
also even change of place is somewhat prejudicial; and I know not how it falls
out, that we find God nearer us in the place where we have been accustomed
familiarlie to meet him: Not for that his presence is confined to one place
aboueothers, but that our thoughts are through custom more easily gathered to
the place where we have ordinarily conuersed with him.

Chap. 10.
ONe Time cannot Secondly, of the Time.
be prescribed to al: For neither God bound to hours; neither does the
contrary disposition of men agree in one choice of opportunities: the golden
hours of the morning some find fittest for Meditation, when the body newly
raised, is well calmed with his late rest, and the soul has not as yet had
from these outward things any motives of alienation: Others find it best to
learn wisdom of their reins in the night* hoping, with Job, that their
bed will bring them comfort in their meditation; when both all other things
are still; and themselves wearied with these earthly cares, do out of a
contempt of them, grow into greater liking and love of heavenly things: I have
ever found Isaacs time fittest, who went out in the evening to meditate. No
precept, no practice of others can prescribe to us in this circumstance: It
shall be enough, that first we set our selves a time; secondly, that we set
apart that time, wherein we are aprest for this service: And as no time is
prejudiced with unfitness, but every day is without difference seasonable for
this work, so especially Gods day; No day is barren of grace to the searcher
of it, none alike fruitful to this; which being by God sanctified to himself,
and to be sanctified by us to God, is privileged with blessings above others:
for the plentiful instruction of that day stirtes thee up to this action, and
filles thee with matter; and the zeal of thy public service warms thy heart
to this other business of devotion. No MANNA fell to the Israelites on their
Sabbath; our spiritual MANNA falls on ours, most frequent: If thou would have
a full soul, gather as it falls; gather it by hearing, reading, meditation:
spiritual idleness is a fault this day, perhaps not less than bodily work.

Chap. 11.
NEither is there esse variety Of the Site and gesture of the body.
in the Site and gesture of the body: the due composednes whereof is no little
advantage to this exercise; even in our speech to God, we observe not always
one and the same position; sometimes we fall groueling on our faces, sometimes
we bow our knees, sometimes stand on our feet, sometimes we lift up our hands,
sometimes cast down our eyes. God is a Spirit, who therefore being a severe
obseruer of the disposition of the soul, is not scrupulous for the body;
requiring not so much, that the gesture thereof should be uniform as reverent:
No marvel therefore, though in this, all our teachers of meditation have
commended several positions of body, according to their disposition and
practice; Gerson.
One sitting with the face turned up to heauen-ward, according to the precept
of the Philosopher, who taught him, that by sitting and resting, the mind
gathers wisdom: Guliel. Paris.
Another leaning to some rest toward the left side, for the greater quieting
of the heart: Dionys. Carthus.
A third standing with the eyes lift up to heaven, but shut for fear of
distractio^s; But of all other (me thinks) Isaacs choice the best, who
meditated walking. In this let every man be his own master; so be we use
that frame of body that may both testify reverence, and in some cases help to
stir up further devotion; which also must needs be varied according to the
matter of our Meditation. If we think of our sins, Ahabs soft pase, the
Publicans dejected eyes, and his hand beating his breast, are not unseasonable:
If of the ioies of heaven, Steuens countenance fixed above, and David's hands
lift up on hie, are most fitting; In all which the body, as it is the
instrument and vassal of the soul, so will easily follow the affections
thereof; and in truth then is our devotion most kindly, when the body is thus
commanded his service by the spirit, and not suffered to go before it, and by
his forwardness to provoke his master to emulation.

Chap. 12.
NOw time and order call us from Of the matter and Subject of our meditation.
these circumstances to the matter and subject of Meditation: which must be
Divine and Spiritual; not evil, nor worldly. O the carnal and unprofitable
thoughts of men! We all meditate; one how to do ill to others; another how to
do some earthly good to himself; another to hurt himself, under a color of
good; as how to accomplish his lewd desires, the fulfilling whereof proves the
bane of the soul, how he may sin unseen, and go to hell with least noise
of the world: Or perhaps some better minds bend their thoughts upon the search
of natural things; the motions of every heaven, and of every star; the
reason and course of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; the manifold kinds of
simples that grow out of the earth, and creatures that creep upon it; with
all their strange qualities, and operatio^s; Or perhaps the several forms of
government, and rules of State take up their busy heads, so that while they
would be acquainted with the whole world, they are strangers at home; and
while they seek to know all other things, they remain unknown of themselves:
The God that made them, the vileness of their nature, the danger of their
sins, the multitude of their imperfections, the Savior that bought them, the
heaven that he bought for them, are in the mean time as unknown, as
unregarded, as if they were not.

Thus do foolish children spend their time and labor in turning over leaves to
look for painted babes, not at all respecting the solid matter under their
hands. We fools, when will we be wise, and turning our eyes from vanity with
that sweet singer of Israel, make Gods Statutes our song, and meditation in
the house of our pilgrimage?

Earthly things profer themselves with importunity; Heavenly things must with
importunity be sued to. Those, if they were not so little worth, would not be
so forward; and being so forward, need not any meditation to solicit them:
These by how much more hard they are to entreat, by so much more precious they
are being obtained; and therefore worthier our endeavor: As then we cannot go
amiss, so long as we keep our selves in the tracke of Divinity; while the
soul is taken up with the thoughts, either of the Deity in his essence, and
persons (sparingly yet in this point, and more in faith and admiration then
inquiry) or of his attributes, his justice, power, wisdom, mercy, truth; or
of his works, in the creation, preservation, government of all things,
according to the Psalmist, I will meditate of the beauty of thy glorious
Majesty, and thy wonderful works; so most directly in our way, and best
fitting our exercise of Meditation are those matters in Divinity, which can
most of all work compunction in the heart, and most stir us up to devotion:
Of which kind are the Meditatio^s concerning CHRIST JESUS, our Mediator, his
Incarnation, Miracles, Life, Passion, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension,
Intercession, the benefit of our Redemption, the certainty of our Election,
the graces and proceeding of our sanctification, our glorious estate in
Paradise lost in our first Parents, our present vileness, our inclination to
sin, our several actual offenses; the te^tations and sleights of evil
Angels, the use of the Sacraments, nature and practice of faith and repentance:
the miseries of our-life, with the frailty of it, the certainty and uncertainty
of our death, the glory of Gods Saints above, the awfulnes of judgment, the
terrors of hell, and the rest of this quality: wherein both it is fit to have
variety (for that even the strongest stomach does not always delight in one
dish) and yet so to change, that our choice may be free from wildness and
inconstancy.

Chap. 13.
NOW after that we have The order of the work it self.
thus orderly suited the person and his qualities, with the due circumstances
of Time, Place, disposition of body, and substance of the matter discussed; I
know not what can remain, besides the maine business it self, and the manner
and degrees of our prosecution thereof; which above all other calls for an
intentive Reader, and resolute practice; Wherein, that we may avoid all
niceness and obscurity (since we strive to profit) we will give direction for
the Entrance, Proceeding, Conclusion of this Divine work.

Chap. 14.
A Goodly building The Entrance into the work.
must show some magnificence in the gate: and great personages have seemly
Vshers to go before them; who by their uncovered heads command reverence and
way; Even very Poets of old had wont, before their Ballads, to implore the aid
of their Gods: And the heathen Romans entered not upon any public civil
business, without a solemn apprecation of good success: How much less should
a Christian dare to undertake a spiritual 1. The common entrance, which is
Prayer.
work of such importance, not having craved the assistance of his GOD? which
(me thinks) is no less, than to profess he could do well without Gods
leave. When we think evil, it is from our selves, when good from God. As
prayer is our speech to God, so is each good Meditation (according to Bernard)
GODS speech to the heart; The heart must speak to God, that God may speak to
it. Prayer therefore, and Meditation are as those famous twins in the story,
or as two loving Turtles, whereof separate one, the other languishes.

Prayer makes way for Meditation; Meditation gives matter, strength, and life
to our prayers. By which, as all other things are sanctified to us, so we are
sanctified to all holy things: This is as some royal Eunuch to perfume and
dress our souls, that they may be fit to converse with the King of heaven.

But the prayer that leads in Meditation would not be long, requiring rather
that the extension and length should be put into the vigor and feruencie of it;
for that it is not here intended to be the principal business, but an
introductio^ to another; and no otherwise than as a Portall to this building of
Meditation: The matter whereof shall be, that the course of our Meditation may
be guided aright and blessed; that all distractions may be avoided; our
judgments enlightened, our inventions quickened, our wills rectified, our
affections whetted to heavenly things, our hearts enlarged to Godward, our
devotion enkindled; so that we may find our corruptions abated, our graces
thriue^, oursoules and lives every way bettered by this exercise.

Chap. 15.
SVch is the common Particular and proper entrance into the matter, which is in
our choice thereof.
entrance into this work: There is another yet more particular and proper;
wherein the mind recollecting it self, makes choice of that Theme or matter
whereupon it will bestow it self for the present; settling it self on that
which it has chosen: which is done by an inward inquisition made into our
heart of what we both do, and should think upon: rejecting what is
inexpedient and unprofitable: In both which, the soul, like unto some noble
Hauk, lets pass the Crows, and Larkes, and such other worthless birds that
cross her way, and stoopeth upon a foul of price, worthy of her flight: after
this manner,

What will thou muze upon, O my soul? thou see how little it auailes thee to
wander and roue about in uncertainties: thou find how little savor there is
in these earthly things, wherewith thou have wearied thy self; Trouble not thy
self any longer (with Martha) about the many and needless thoughts of the
world: None but heavenly things can afford thee comfort: Up then my soul, and
mind those things that are above, whence thy self art: Amongst all which,
whereon should thou rather meditate than of the life and glory of Gods
Saints. A worthier employment thou can never find, than to think upon that
estate, thou shall once possess, and now desire.

Chap. 16.
HItherto the Entrance; after The proceeding of our meditation.
which our Meditation must Proceed in due order, not troubledly, not
preposterously: It begins in the understanding, ends in the affections; It
begins in the brain, descends to the heart; Begins on earth, ascends to
heaven; Not suddenly, but by certain stairs and degrees, til we come to the
highest.

I have found a subtle And therein a Method allowed by some authors, rejected
by us.
Scale of Meditation, admired by some professors of this Art, above all other
humane devises; and far preferred by them to the best directio^s of Origin,
Austen, Bernard, Hugo, Bonauenture, Gerson, and whosoever has been reputed of
greatest perfection in this skill: The several stairs whereof (lest I should
seem to defraud my Reader through envy) I would willingly describe, were it
not that I feared to scarre him rather with the danger of obscurity, from
venturing further upon this so worthy a business: yet, lest any man perhaps
might complain of an unknown loss, my Margent shall find room for that,
which I hold too knotty for my Text.

The scale of Meditation of an Author, ancient, but namelesse.
* Degrees of Preparation. 1. Question. What I think. should think.
2. Excussion. A repelling of what I should not think. 3. Choice, or Election.
Of what most necessary. expedient comely.

* Degrees of proceeding in the understanding. 4. Commemoration. An actual
thinking upon the matter elected. 5 Conseleration. A redoubled Commemoration of
the same, till it be fully known. 6. Attention. A fixed and earnest
consideration: whereby it is fastened in the mind. 7 Explanation. A clearing of
the thing considered by similitudes. 8 Tractation. An extending the thing
considered to other points: where all questions of doubt are discussed. 9.
Diindication. An estimation of the worth of the thing thus handled. 10.
Cons^tion A confirmation of the estimation thus made 11. Rumination. A sad and
serious Meditation of all the former, till it may work upon the affections.
From hence to the degrees of affection.


In all which, (after the incredible commendations of some practicioners) I
doubt not but an ordinary Reader will easily epsy a double fault at the least,
Darkness and Coincidence; that they are both too obscurely delivered, and
that diverse of them fall into other, not without some vain superfluity. For this
part therefore which concerns the understanding, I had rather to require only
a deep and firm Consideration of the thing propounded; which shall be done, if
we follow it in our discourse, through all, or the principal of those places
which natural reason does afford us: wherein let no man plead ignorance, or
fear difficulty: we are all thus far borne Logicians; Neither is there in
this so much need of skill, as of industry. In which course yet, we may not be
too curious in a precise search of every place, and argument without omissio^
of any (though to be fetched in with racking the inue^tio^). For as the mind, if
it go loose and without rule, roues to no purpose; so if it be too much fettred
with the gives of strict regularity moves nothing at all.

Chap. 17.
ERe I enter Premonitions concerning our proceeding in the first part of
Meditation.
therefore into any particular tractatio^, There are three things whereof I
would premonish my Reader, concerning this first part which is in the
understanding. First, that I desire not to bind every man to the same uniform
proceeding in this part. Practice and custom may perhaps have taught other
courses more familiar, and not less direct: If then we can, by any other
method, work in our hearts so deep an apprehension of the matter meditated,
as it may duly stir the affections, it is that only we require.

Secondly, that whosoever applies himself to this direction, think him not
necessarily tied to the prosecution of all these Logical places, which he
finds in the sequel of our Treatise, so as his Meditation should be lame and
imperfect without the whole number: for there are some Themes which will not
bear all these; as when we meditate of God, there is no room for Causes or
Comparisons; and others yield the^ with such difficulty, that their search
interrupteth the chief work intended: It shall be sufficient if we take the most
pregnant, and most voluntary.

Thirdly, that when we stick in the disquisitio^ of any the places following,
as if meditating of Sin, I cannot readily meet with the Material and Formal
Causes, or the Appendances of it, we rack not our minds too much with the
inquiry thereof; which were to strive more for Logique, than devotion: But
without too much disturbaunce of our thoughts, quietly pass over to the next.
If we break our teeth with the shell, we shall find small pleasure in the
kernel.

Now then, for that my only fear is, lest this part of my discourse shall
seem over perplexed unto the unlearned Reader; I will in this whole process,
second my rule with his example; that so what might seem obscure in the one,
may by the other be explaned; and the same steps he sees me take in this, he
may accordingly tread in any other Theme.

Chap. 18.
FIrst therefore The practice of Meditation; wherein First, we begin with some
description of that we meditate of.
it shall be expedient to consider seriously, what the thing is whereof we
meditate.

What then, O my soul, is the life of the Saints, whereof thou studiest? who
are the Saints, but those which having been weakly holy upon earth, are
perfectly holy above? which even on earth were perfectly holy in their Savior,
now are so in themselves? Which, ouercomming on earth, are truly canonized in
heaven? What is their life, but that blessed estate above, wherein their
glorified soul has a full fruition of God?

Chap. 19.
THe nature whereof after Secondly, follows an easy and voluntary division of
the matter meditated
we have thus shadowed out to our selves by a description, not curious always,
and exactly framed according to the rules of art, but sufficient for our own
conceit; the next is (if it shall seem needful, or if the matter will bear,
or offer it) some easy and voluntary division, whereby our thoughts shall have
more room made for them, and our proceeding shall be more distinct.

There is a life of nature, when thou, my soul, dwell in this body, and
informest thine earthly burden: There is a life of grace, when the spirit of
God dwells in thee; There is a life of glory, when thy body being united to
thee, both shall be united to God; or when, in the mean time, being separated
from thy companion, thou enioyest God alone: This life of thine therefore, as
the other, has his ages, has his statures; for it enters upon his birth, when
thou passest out of thy body, and changest this earthly house for an heavenly:
It enters into his full vigor, when at the day of the common resurrection, thou
resumest this thy companion, unlike to it self, like to thee, like to thy
Savior, immortal now, and glorious. In this life there may be degrees, there
can be no imperfection: If some be like the sky, others like the stars, yet
all shine; If some sit at their Saviors right hand, others at his left, all
are blessed; If some vessels hold more, all are full; none complaynes of want,
none enuies at him that has more.

Chap. 20.
WHich done it shall be requisite 3. A consideration of the causes thereof in all
kinds of them.
for our perfiter understanding, and for the laying grounds of matter for our
affection, to carry it through those other principal places, and heads of
reason, which nature has taught every man, both for knowledge and
amplification: The first whereof are the Causes of all sorts.

Whence is this eternal life, but from him which only is eternal; which only
is the fountain of life, yea, life it self? Who but the same God that gives
our temporal life, gives also that eternal? The Father bestows it, the Son
merits it, the holy Ghost seals and applies it: Expect it only from him, O my
soul, whose frecelectio^ gave thee the first title to it, to be purchased by
the blood of thy Savior. For thou shall not therefore be happy, because he
saw thou would be good; but therefore art thou good, because he has
ordained thou shall be happy: He has ordained thee to life; he has given
thee a Savior to give this life unto thee; faith, whereby thou might
attain to this Savior; his word, by which thou might attain to this
faith; what is there in this, not ^is? And yet not so his ^^mply, as that it is
without thee: without thy merit indeed, not without thine act; Thou live
here through his blessing, but by bread; thou shall live above through his
mercy, but by thy faith below, apprehending the author of thy life: And yet
as he will not save thee without thy faith, so thou can never have faith
without his gift; Look up to him therefore, O my soul, as the beginner and
finisher of thy salvation; and while thou magnifiest the Author, be ravished
with the glory of the work: which far passes both the tongue of Angels,
and the heart of man: It can be no good thing that is not there; How can they
want water that have the spring? where God is enjoyed in whom only all things
are good, what good can be wanting? And what perfection of bliss is there
where all goodness is met and united? In thy presence is the fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore: O blessed reflection of
glory! we ^^e there, as we are seen: In that we are seen, it is our
glory; in that we see, it is Gods glory; Therefore does he glorify us, that
our glory should be to his. How worthy art thou, o Lord, that through us thou
should look at thy self!

Chap. 21.
THE next place 4. The Consid. of the Fruits and Effects.
place shall be the Fruits and Effects following upon their several causes:
which also affoords very feeling and copious matter to our Meditation; wherein
it shall be ever best, not so much to seek for all, as to choose out the
chiefest.

No marvel then if from this glory proceed nonspeakeable joy, and from this
joy the sweet songs of praise and tha^ksgiuing. The spirit bids us, when we
are merry, sing: How much more then, when we are merry without all mixture
of sorrow, beyond all measure of our earthly affections, shall we sing
joyful Hallelu-iahs, and Hosannahs to him that dwells in the highest
heavens? Our hearts shall be so full that we cannot choose but sing, and we
cannot but sing melodiously; There is no jar in this Music, no end of this
song. Oblessed change of the Saints; they do nothing but weep below, and now
nothing but sing above; we sowed in tears, reap enjoy; there was some comfort
in those tears, when they were at worst; but there is no danger of complaint
in this heavenly mirth; If we cannot sing here with the Angels, On earth peace,
yet there we shall sing with them, Glory to God on hie; and joining our voices
to theirs, shall make up that celestial consort, which none can either hear or
bear part in, and not be happy.

Chap. 22.
AFter which 5. Consideration of the Subject, wherein, or wherabout it is.
comes to be considered the Subject either wherein that is, or whereabout that
is employed, which we meditate of: As,

And indeed, what less happiness does the very place promise, wherein this
glory is exhibited? which is no other than the Paradise of God: Here below we
dwell, or rather we wander in a continued wilderness; there we shall rest us
in the true Eden; I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse. Kings use not
to dwell in Cottages of clay; but in Royal Courts sit for their estate: How
much more shall the King of heaven, who has prepared for men so fair mansions
on earth, make himself an habitation suitable to his Majesty: Even earthly
Princes have dwelt in Cedar and Yuory: but the great City, Holy Jerusalem, the
palace of the hiest has her wall of Jasper, her building of gold, her
foundation of precious stones, her gates of pearl: How glorious things are
spoken of thee, O thou City of GOD! We see but the pauement, and yet how
goodly it is! The believing Centurion thought himself unworthy that Christ
should come under his roof; yet then were thou, O Savior, in thine humbled
estate, in the form of a servant: How then stall I think my self worthy to
come under this roof of thine, so shining and glorious? O if this clay of mine
may come to this honor above, let it be trampled upon and despised on earth.

Chap. 23.
Sixthly, shall 6. Consid* of the Appendances, and Qualities of it.
follow the Appe^dances, and Qualities, which cleave unto the Subject, whereof
we meditate: As,

But were the place less noble and maiesticall, yet the company which it
affords, has enough to make the soul blessed: For not the place gives
ornament to the guest, so much as the guest to the place. How loath are we to
leave this earth, only for the society of some few friends in whom we
delight? which yet are subject every day to mutual dislikes: what pleasure
shall we then take in the enjoying of the Saints? when there is nothing in
them not amiable, nothing in us that may cool the feruor of our love. There
shall thou my soul, thy self glorified, meet with thy dear Parents and
friends alike glorious, never to be severed: There shall thou see and converse
with those ancient worthies of the former world; the blessed Patriarchs and
Prophets, with the crowned Martyrs and Co^fessors; with the holy Apostles, and
the Fathers of that Primitive, and this present Church, shining each one
according to the measure of his blessed labors. There shall thou live
familiarly in sight of those Angels, whom now thou receiuest good from, but
see not. There (which is the head of all thy felicity) thine eyes shall see
him whom now thine heart longs for (that Savior of thine) in the only hope
of whom now thou live. Alas how dimmely, and a far off do thou now
behold him? how imperfectly do thou enjoy him? while every temptation
bereaues thee, for the time, of his presence. I sought him whom my soul
loves: I sought him, but I found him not; his back is now toward thee many
times through thy sins, and therefore thou hardly discernest him: Otherwhile and
ofter thy back is turned to him through negligence, that when thou might
obscurelie see him, thou do not: Now thou shall see him, and thine eyes thus
fixed shall not be removed. Yet neither could this glory make us happy, if
being thus absolute, it were not perpetual. To be happy, is not so sweet a
state, as it is miserable to have been happy. Least ought therefore should be
wanting behold, this felicity knows no end, fears no intermission, and is
as eternal for the continuance, as he that had no beginning. O blessedness,
truly infinite! Our earthly joys do scarce ever begin; but when they begin,
their end borders upon their beginning. One hour sees us oft-times joyful and
miserable: Here alone is nothing but eternity. If then the divine Prophet
thought one day in Gods earthly house, better than a thousand other-where; what
shall I compare to thousands of millions of years in Gods heavenly Temple?
Yea, millions of years are not so much as a minute to eternity, and that
other house not a cottage to this.

Chap. 24.
Seventhly, our 7. Of that which is Diverse from it, or Contrary to it.
thoughts leaving a while the consideration of the thing as it is in it self,
shall desce^d unto it as respectively with others; and therefore first shall
meditate of that which is Diverse from it, or Contrary unto it.

What do thou here then, O my soul? What do thou here groueling upon
earth? where the best things are vanity; the rest no better than vexation.
Look round about thee, and see whether thine eyes can meet with any thing but
either sins or miseries. Those few and short pleasures thou scest, end ever
sorrowfully; and in the mean time are intermingled with many grieuances. Here
thou hear one cry out of a sick body, whereof there is no part which
affords not choice of diseases; This man lays his hand upon his consuming
lungs, and complayneth of short wind; that other, upon his rising spleen, a
third shakes his painful head; another roares out for the torment of his
reins or bladder; another for the racking of his goutie joints; one is
distempered with a watery dropsy, another with a windy Colicke, a third with a
fiery ague, a fourth with an earthen Melancholy; one grouels and fometh with
the falling sickness, another lies bed rid half senseless with a dead
Palsy: There are but few bodies that complain not of some disease; and that
thou may not look far, it is a wonder if thy self feel not always one of
these evils within thee. There, thou hear another lament his losses: either
his estate is impaired by suretyship, or stealth, or shipwreck, or oppression;
or his child is unruly, or miscarried; or his wife dead or disloyal; Another
tormented with passions; Each one is some way miserable: But that which is yet
more irksome; thy one ear is beaten with cursings and blasphemies; thy other
with scornful, or wanton, or murdering speeches; thine eyes see nothing but
pride filthiness, profaneness, blood, excess; and whatsoever else might vex a
righteous soul: and if all the world besides were innocent, thou find
enough within thy self, to make thy self weary, and thy life loathsome: Thou
need not fetch cause of complaint from others; thy corruptions yield thee
too much at home; ever sinning, ever presuming; Sinning even when thou have
repented, yea, even while thou repentest, sinning. Go to now, my soul, and
solace thy self here below, and suffer thy self besotted with these goodly
co^tentme^ts; worthy of no better while thou fixest thy self on these: see if
thou can find any of these above; and if thou can meet with any distemper,
any loss, any sin, any complaint, from thy self or any other above, despise
thine heaven as much as now thou love the earth. Or if all this cannot enough
commend unto thee the state of heavenly glory, cast down thine eyes yet lower,
into that deep and bottomless pit, full of horror, full of torment, where there
is nothing but flames, and tears, and shrikes, and gnashing of teeth; nothing
but fiends and tortures: where there is palpable darkness, and yet perpetual
fire; where the damned are ever boiling, never consumed; ever dying, never
dead; ever complaining, never pitied; where the Glutton, that once would not
give a crust of bread, now begs for one drop of water; and yet alas, if whole
rivers of water should fall into his mouth, how should they quench those
rivers of brimstone that feed this flame? where there is no intermission of
complaints, no breathing from pain, and after millions of years, no
possibility of comfort: And if the rod wherewith thou chastisest thy children,
O Lord, even in this life be so smart and galling, that they have been brought
down to the brim of despair; and in the bitterness of their soul have
entreated death to release them: What shall I think of their plagues in whose
righteous confusion thou insultest; and say, Aha, I will avenge me of mine
enemies? Even that thou shall not be thus miserable, O my soul, is some kind
of happiness; but that thou shall be as happy, as the reprobate are miserable,
how worthy is it of more estimation, than thy self is capable of?

Chap. 25.
AFterthis oppositio^ 8. Of co^parisons and similitudes whereby it may be most
fitly set forth.
the mind shall make comparison of the matter meditated with what may nearest
resemble it; and shall illustrate it with fittest similitudes, which give no
small light to the understanding nor less force to the affection.

Wonder then, O my soul, as much as thou can, at this glory; and in
comparison thereof, contemn this earth, which now thou treadest upon; whose
joys, if they were perfect, are but short; and if they were long, are
imperfect: One day when thou art above, looking down from the height of thy
glory, and seeing the sons of men creeping like so many Ants on this molehill
of earth, thou shall think: Alas how basely I once lived! was yonder silly
dungeon the place I so loved, and was so loath to leave! Think so now
beforehand; and since of heaven thou can not, yet account of the earth, as
it is worthy: How hartlesse and irksome are ye, O ye best earthly pleasures,
if ye be matched with the least of those above? How vile are you, O ye
sumptuous buildings of kings, even if all the entrails of the earth had agreed
to enrich you, in compason of this frame not made with hands? It is not so hie
above the earth in distance of place, as in worth and majesty: we may see the
face of heaven from the heart of the earth; but from the nearest part of the
earth who can see the least glory of heaven? The three disciples on mount
Tabor, saw but a glimpse of this glory shining upon the face of their Savior;
and yet being ravished with the sight, cried out, Master, It is good being
here; and thinking of building of three Tabernacles, for Christ, Moses, Elias,
could have been content themselves to have lien without shelter, so they might
always have enjoyed that sight: Alas, how could earthly Tabernacles have
fitted those heavenly bodies? They knew what they saw, what they said they
knew not: Lo these 3. disciples were not tra^sfigured; yet how deeply they were
affected, eue^ with the glory of others? how happy shall we be, when our selves
shall be changed into glorious? and shall have Tabernacles not of our own
making, but prepared for us by God? and yet not Tabernacles, but eternal
mansions. Moses saw God but a while, and shined; How shall we shine that shall
behold his face for ever? What greater honor is there than in Souereignty?
what greater pleasure than in feasting? This life is both a kingdom and a
feast. A kingdom: He that ouercomes, shall rule the nations, and shall sit
with me in my Throne: O blessed promotion, Oh large dominion, and royal seat!
to which Salomons throne of yuory was not worthy to become a footestoole. A
feast; Blessed are they that are called to the Marriage supper of the Lamb:
Feasts have more than necessity of provision, more than ordinary diet; but
marriage-feasts yet more than common abundance; But the marriage feast of the
Son of God to his blessed spouse the Church, must so far exceed in all
heavenly munificence and variety, as the persons are of greater State and
Majesty: There is new wine, pure Manna, and all manner of spiritual dainties;
and with the continual cheer, a sweet and aunswerable welcome; while the
bridegroom lovingly cheares us up, Eat, O Friends, drink and make you merry,
O well-beloved: yea, There shall thou be my soul not a guest, but (how unworthy
soever) the Bride her self; whom he has everlastingly espoused to himself
in truth and righteousness; The contract is passed here below, the marriage is
co^summate above, and sole^nized with a perpetual feast: So that now thou
may safely say, My well-beloved is mine, and I am his: Wherefore hearken, O my
soul, and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own people, and
thy fathers house, (thy supposed home of this world) so shall the King have
pleasure in thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.

Chap. 26.
THE very Names, and 9. The Titles and Names of the thing considered.
Titles of the matter considered, yield no small store to our Meditation which,
being commonly so imposed that they secretly comprehend the nature of the thing
which they represent, are not unworthy of our discourse.

What need I seek these resemblances, when the very name of life implies
sweetness to men on earth; even to them which confess to live with some
coffeehouse? Surely the light is a pleasant thing, and it is good to the
eyes to see the Sun: yet when Temporal is added to Life, I know not how this
addition detracteth something, and does greatly abate the pleasure of life; for
those which joy to think of Life grieve to think it but Temporal: So vexing
is the end of that whose continuance was delightful; But now when there is
an addition, above Time, of Eternity, it makes life so much more sweet, as it
is more lasting; and lasting infinitely, what can it give less than an
infinite contentment? Oh dying and false life, which we enjoy here, and scarce
a shadow and counterfeit of that other: What is more esteemed than glory?
which is so precious to men of spirit, that it makes them prodigal of their
blood, proud of their wounds* careless of themselves: and yet alas, how pent
and how fading is this glory, affected with such dangers and deaths? hardly
after all Trophies and monuments, either known to the next sea, or suruiuing
him that dies for it: It is true glory to triumph in heaven; where is neither
envy, nor forgetfulness.

What is more dear to us than our Country? which the worthy and faithful
Patriotes of all times, have respected above their parents, their children,
their lives; counting it only happy to live in it, and to die for it: The
banished man pines for the want of it; the trauailer digests all the
tediousness of his way, all the sorrows of an ill journey, in the only hope
of home; forgetting all his foreign miseries, when he feels his own smoke.
Where is our Country but above? Thence thou came, O my soul; thither thou
art going, in a short, but weary pilorimage: O miserable men, if we account
our selves at home in our pilgrimage, if in our journey we long not for home!
Do thou see men so in love with their native soil, that even when it is all
deformed with the desolations of war, and turned into rude heaps, or while
it is even now flaming with the fire of civil broiles, they covet yet still to
live in it; preferring it to all other places of more peace and pleasure; and
shall thou seeing nothing but peace and blessedness at home, nothing but trouble
abroad, content thy self with a faint wish of thy dissolution? If heaven were
thy Iayle, thou could but think of it uncomfortably. Oh what affection can
be worthy of such an home?

Chap. 27.
LAstly, if we 10. Co^sid. of fit testimonies of Scripture, concerning our
Theme.
can recall any pregna^t Testimonies of Scripture concerning our Theme, those
shall fitly conclude this part of our Meditation: Of Scripture; for that in
these matters of God, none but divine authority can command assent, and settle
the conscience: Witnesses of holy men may serve for colors; but the ground
must be only from God.

There it is (says the spirit of God, which cannot deceive thee) that all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes; there shall be no more death, nor sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: yea, there shall not only
be an end of sorrows, but an abundant recompense for the sorrows of our life;
as he that was rapt up into the third heaven, and there saw what cannot he
spoken, speaks yet thus of what he saw: I count that the afflictions of this
present time are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed to us: It was
showed to him what should hereafter be showed to us; and he saw, that if all
the world full of miseries were laid in one balance, and the least glory of
heaven in another, those would be incomparably light yea (as that divine
Father) that one days felicity above, were worth a thousand years torment
below; what then can be matched with the eternity of such joys? Oh how
great therefore is thy goodness, O Lord, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee, and done to them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!

Chap. 28.
THE most Of our second part of Meditation: which is, in the affections.
difficult and knotty part of Meditation thus finished, there remains that
which is both more lively, and more easy to a good heart; to be wrought
altogether by the affections; which if our discourses reach not unto, they
prove vain, and to no purpose; That which follows therefore, is the very
soul of Meditation, whereto all that is past serves but as an instrument. A
man is a man by his understanding part: but he is a Christian by his will and
affections. Seeing therefore, that all our former labor of the brain, is only
to affect the heart; after that the mind has thus trauersed the Wherein is
required a Taste and relish of what we have thought upon.
point proposed through all the heads of reason, it shall endeavor to find in
the first place some feeling touch, and sweet relish in that which it has
thus chewed; which fruit, through the blessing of God will voluntarily follow
upon a serious Meditation. David says, Oh taste and see how sweet the Lord
is: In Meditation we do both see and taste; but we see before we taste: sight
is of the understanding; taste, of the affection; Neither can we see, but we
must ^aste; we can not know ^right, but we must needs be affected: Let the
heart therefore first conceive and feel in it self the Sweetness or
bitterness of the matter meditated; which is never done without some passion;
nor expressed without some hearty exclamation.

Oh blessed estate of the Saints: O glory not to be expressed, even by those
which are glorified! O incomprchensible salvation! What savor has this earth
to thee? Who can regard the world that believes thee? Who can think of
thee, and not be ravished with wonder and desire? Who can hope for thee, and
not rejoice? Who can know thee, and not be swallowed up with admiration at
the mercy of him that bestows thee? O blessedness worthy of Christ's blood to
purchase thee! worthy of the continual songs of Saints and Angels to
celebrate thee! How should I magnify thee! How should I long for thee! how
should I hate all this world for thee?

Chap. 29.
AFter this Secondly, a Complaint; bewailing our wants and untowardness.
Taste shall follow a Complaint, wherein the heart bewayleth to it self his
own poverty, dullness, and imperfection; chiding and abasing it self in
respect of his wants and indisposition: wherein Humiliation truly goes before
glory. For the more we are cast down in our conceit, the higher shall GOD lift
us up at the end of this exercise, in spiritual reioicing.

But alas, where is my love? where is my longing? where art thou, O my soul?
what heaviness has overtaken thee? How has the world bewitched and
possessed thee, that thou art become so careless of thine home, so senseless
of spiritual delights, so fond upon these vanities? Do thou doubt whether
there be an heaven? or whether thou have a God, and a Savior there? O far
be from thee this Atheism; far be from thee the least thought of such
desperate impiety: Woe were thee if thou beleeuedst not: But O thou of little
faith; do thou believe there is happiness, and happiness for thee, and
desire it not, and delightest not in it? Alas, how weak and unbelieving is
thy belief? how cold and faint are thy desires? Tell me, what such goodly
entertaineme^t have thou met withal here on earth, that was worthy to withdraw
thee from these heavenly joys? what pleasure in it ever gave thee contentment?
or what cause of dislike find thou above? Oh no, my soul, it is only thy
miserable drowzinesse, only thy security: The world, the world has besotted
thee, has undone thee with carelessness. Alas if thy delight be so cold,
What difference is there in thee from an ignorant Heathen, that doubts of
another life; yea, from an Epicure that denies it? Artthou a christian, or art
thou none? If thou be what thou professest, away with this dull and senseless
worldliness; away with this earthly vnchearfulnesse; shake off at last this
profane and godless security that has thus long weighed thee down from
mounting up to thy ioies; Look up to thy GOD, and to thy crown, and say with
confidence, O Lord I have waited for thy salvation.

Chap. 30.
AFter this Complaint, Thirdly, an hearty wish of the soul for what it
co^plaineth to want.
must succeed an hearty and passionate Wish of the soul, which arises
clearly from the two former degrees; For that which a man has found sweet,
and comfortable, and complains that he still wants; he cannot but wish to
enjoy.

O Lord that I could wait and long for thy salvation; Oh that I could mind
the things above; that as I am a stranger in deed, so I could be also in
affection; Oh that mine eyes, like the eyes of thy first Martyr, could by the
light of faith see but a glimpse of heaven; Oh that my heart could be rapt up
thither in desire! How should I trample upon these poor vanities of the earth?
How willingly should I endure all sorrows, all torments? how scornefully
should I pass by all pleasures? how should I be in travel of my dissolution?
Oh when shall that blessed day come, when all this wretched worldlines removed
I shall solace my self, in my God; Behold, as the Heart brayeth for the rivers
of water, so pants my soul after thee, O GOD; My soul thirsts for God,
even for the living God; Oh when shall I come and appear before the presence of
God?

Chap. 31.
AFter this Wishing, 4. An humble Confession of our disability to effect what
we wish.
shall follow humble Confession, by just order of nature: For having bemoned
our want, and wished supply, not finding this hope in our selves, we must
needs acknowledge it to him, of whom only we may both seek and find; wherein it
is to be duly observed, how the mind is by turns depressed and lifted up:
Being lifted up with our Taste of joy; it is cast down with Complaint: lift up
with Wishes, it is cast down with Confession; which order does best hold it
in ure, and just temper; and makes it more feeling of the comfort which
follows in the Conclusion. This Confession must derogate all from our selves,
and ascribe all to God.

Thus I desire, O Lord, to be right affected toward thee and thy glory; I
desire to come to thee: but, alas, how weakly? how heartlesly? Thou know
that I can neither come to thee, nor desire to come but from thee. It is Nature
that holds me from thee; this treacherous Nature favors it self, loves the
world, hates to think of a dissolution, and chooses rather to dwell in this
dungeon with continual sorrow and complaint, than to endure a parting although
to liberty and joy: Alas, Lord, it is my misery that I love my pain: How long
shall these vanities thus besot me? It is thou only that can turn away mine
eyes from regarding these follies, and my heart from affecting them: Thou
only, who as thou shall one day receive my soul into heaven, so now
before-hande can fix my soul upon heaven and thee.

Chap. 32.
AFter Confession 5. An earnest Petition for that which we confess to want.
naturally follows Petition, earnestly requesting that at his hands, which we
acknowledge our selves unable, and none but GOD able to perform.

Oh carry it up therefore, thou that have created, and redeemed it, carry it up
to thy glory: Oh let me not always be thus dull and brutish; Let not these
scales of earthly affection always dim and blind mine eyes: Oh thou that
layedst clay upon the blind man's eyes, take away this clay from mine eyes,
wherewith alas they are so dawbed up, that they cannot see heaven: Illuminate
the^ from above, and in thy light let me see light. Oh thou that have prepared
a place for my soul; prepare my soul for that place; prepare it with
holiness, prepare it with desire: and even while it soiourneth on earth, let
it dwell in heaven with thee, beholding ever the beauty of thy face, the glory
of thy Saints and of it self.

Chap. 33.
AFter Petition, shall follow 6. A vehement enforcement of our Petiuon.
the Enforceme^t of our request from argument and importunate obsecration;
wherein we must take heed of complementing in terms with God; as knowing that
he will not be mocked by any fashionable form of suit, but requires holy and
feeling entreaty.

How graciously have thou proclaimed to the world, that who-euer wants wisdom
shall ask it of thee, which neither deniest nor vpbraidest: O Lord, I want
heavenly wisdom, to conceive aright of heaven; I want it and ask it of thee;
give me to ask it instantly, and give me according to thy promise abundantly.
Thou see it is no strange favor that I beg of thee; no other than that
which thou have richly bestowed upon all thy valiant Martyrs, Confessors,
servants from the beginning: who never could have so cheerfully embraced death
and torment, if through the midst of their flames and pain they had not
seen their crown of glory. The poor thief of the Cross had no sooner
craved thy remembrance when thou came to thy kingdom than thou promisedst to
to take him with thee into heaven: Presence was better to him than remembrance.
Behold, now thou art in thy kingdom, I am on earth: remember thine unworthy
servant, and let my soul in conceit, in affection, in conversation be this day
and for ever with thee in Paradise. I see, man walks in a vain shadow, and
disquieteth himself in vain; they are pitiful pleasures he enjoys, while he
forgets thee; I am as vain, make me more wise: Oh let me see heaven, and I
know I shall never ennie, nor follow them: My times are in thine hand: I am
no better than my fathers, a stranger on earth; As I speak of them, so the
next; yea, this generation shall speak of me as one that was; My life is a
bubble, a smoke, a shadow, a thought: I know it is no abiding in this
thorow-fare: Oh suffer me not so mad, as while I pass on the way, I should
forgette the end; It is that other life that I must trust to. With thee it is
that I shall continue; Oh let me not be so foolish as to settle my self on
what I must leave, and to neglect eternity; I have seen enough of this
earth, and yet I love it too much; Oh let me see heaven another while, and
love it so much more than the earth, by how much the things there are more
worthy to be loved; Oh God, look down on thy wretched Pilgrim; and teach me
to look up to thee, and to see thy goodness in the land of the living. Thou
that boughtest heaven for me, guide me thither; and for the price that it cost
thee, for thy love and mercies sake, in spite of all tentations, enlighten
thou my soul, direct it, crown it.

Chap. 34.
AFter this Enforcement, 7. A cheerful Confidence of obtaining what we have
requested and enforced.
does follow Confidence; wherein the soul after many doubtful and unquiet
bickerings, gathers up her forces, and cheerfully rouzeth up it self; and
like one of David's Worthies, breaks through a whole army of doubts, and
fetches comfort from the Well of life; which, though in some later, yet in all
is a sure reward from GOD of sincere Meditation.

Yea, be thou bold, O my soul, and do not merely crave, but challenge this
favor of God, as that which he owes thee: He owes it thee because he has
promised it, and by his mercy has made his gift, his debt; Faithful is he
that has promised* which will also do it* Has he not given thee not only
his hand in the sweet hopes of the Gospel, but his seal also in the
Sacraments? Yea, besides promise, hand, seal; has he not given thee a sure
earnest of thy salvation, in some weak, but true graces? Yet more: has he
not given thee besides Earnest, possession? while he that is the Truth and
Life, says, He that believes has everlasting life, and has passed from
death to life: Can thou not then be content to cast thy self upon this
blessed issue; If God be faithful, I am glorious; I have thee already, O my
life; God is faithful, and I do believe: who shall separate me from the love
of Christ? from my glory with Christ, who shall pull me out of my heaven? Go
to then, and return to thy rest, O my soul; make use of that heaven wherein
thou art, and be happy.

Thus we have found, that our Meditation like the wind, gathers strengthin
proceeding; and as natural bodies, the nearer they come to their places, move
with more celerity, so does the soul in this course of meditation, to the
unspeakable benefit of it self.

Chap. 35.
THe Conclusion The Conclus. of our Meditation, in what order it must be.
remains; wherein we must advise (like as Physicians do in their sweats and
exercise) that we cease not ouer-suddenly; but leave off by little and little.
The mind may not be suffered to fall headlong from this height, but must also
descend by degrees.

The first whereof, After our Confidence, shall be an hearty Gratulation,
First, with Thanksgiving.
and thanksgiving. For, as man naturally cannot be miserable, but he must
complain, and crave remedy; so the good heart cannot find it self happy,
and not be thankful: and this thankfulness which it feels and expresses,
makes it yet more good, and affects it more.

What shall I then do to thee for this mercy, Othou Savior of men? What
should I render to my Lord, for all his benefits? Alas, what can I give thee
which is not thine own before? Oh that I could give thee but all thine! Thou
give me to drink of this cup of salvation; I will therefore take the
cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord: Praise thou the Lord,
o my soul; and all that is within me, praise his holy name: And since here
thou beginnest thine heaven, begin here also that joyful song of
thanksgiving, which there thou shall sing more sweetly, and never end.

Chap. 36.
AFter this Secondly, with Recommendation of our souls and ways to God.
Thanksgiving, shall follow a faithful recommendation of our selves to God;
wherein the soul does cheerfully give up it self, and repose it self wholly
upon her Maker, and Redeemer; committing her self to him in all her ways,
submitting her self to him in all his ways, resolving in all things to
glorify him; and to walk worthy of her high and glorious calling.

Both which later shall be done (as I have ever found) with much life and
comfort, if for the full conclusion, we shall lift up our heart and voice to
God, in singing some Versicle of David's divine Psalms, answerable to our
disposition, and matter; whereby the heart closes up it self with much
sweetness and contentment.

This course of Meditation thus heartily observed, let him that practices it,
tell we whether he find not that his soul, which at the beginning of this
exercise did but creep and grouell upon earth, do not now in the Conclusion
soar aloft in heaven; and being before aloof off, do not now find it self
near to God, yea with him, and in him.

Chap. 37.
THus have I endeavored, An Epilogue.
(right Worshipful Sir) according to my slender faculty, to prescribe a
Method of Meditation: Not upon so strict terms of Necessity, that whosoever
goes not my way, erreth. Diverse paths lead ofttimes to the same end; and
every man abounds in his own sense: If experience and custom has made
another form familiar to any man, I forbid it not; as that learned Father
said of his Tralation, Let him use his own, not contemn mine. If any man be
to choose, and begin, let him practice mine, till he meet with a better
Master: If an other course may be better, I am sure this is good. Neither is it
to Reproouing the neglect,
be suffered, that like as fantastical men, while they doubt what fashioned
suit they should we are, put on nothing; so, that we Christians should neglect
the matter of this worthy business, while we nicely stand upon the form
thereof. Wherein give me leave to complain with just sorrow and shame, that
if there be any Christian duty, whose omission is notoriously shameful, and
prejudicial to the souls of professors, it is this of Meditation: This is the
very end God has given us our souls* we misse-spend them, if we use them not
thus. How lamentable is it, that we so employ them, as if our faculty of
discourse served for nothing, but our earthly provision? as if our reasonable
and Christian minds were appointed for the slaves and drudges of this body;
only to be the Caters and Cooks of our appetite.

The world filles us, yea, cloyes us: we find our selves work enough to
think; What have I yet? How may I get more? What must I lay out? What shall
I leave for posterity? How may I prevent the wrong of mine adversary, how may
I return it? What answers shall I make to such allegations? What
entertainment shall I give to such friends? What courses shall I take in such
suits? In what pastimes shall I spend this day, in what the next? What
advantage shall I reap by this practice; what loss? What was said, answered,
replied, done, followed?

Goodly thoughts, and fit for Spiritual minds! Say, there were no other
world; how could we spend our cares otherwise? Unto this only neglect, let
me ascribe the commonnesse of that Laodicean temper of men, or (if that be
worse) of the dead coldness which has stricken the hearts of many, having left
them nothing but the bodies of men, and visors of Christians; to this only,
They have not meditated. It is not more impossible to live Exhorting to the use
of Meditation.
without an heart, than to be devout without Meditation: Would GOD therefore
my words could be in this (as the wise man says the words of the wise are)
like unto Goades in the sides of every Reader, to quicken him up out of this
dull and lazy security, to a cheerful practice of this Divine Meditation. Let
him curse me upon his deathbed, if looking back from thence to the bestowing
of his former times, he acknowledge not these hours placed the most happily
in his whole life? if he then wish not he had worn out more days, in so
profitable and heavenly a work.

DEO SOLI GLORIA.

