A SERMON Preached at the happily-restored and reedified Chapel of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Exceter in his House, of S. John's.

On Saint Stephens day.

1623.

By IOS. HALL, Deane of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by F. Kyngston, for George Winder, and are to be sold at his
shop in S. Dunstons Churchyard. 1624.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY SINGVLAR good Lady, the Lady Elizabeth, Countess
of Exceter.
RIght Honorable: this poor Sermon both preached and penned at your motion
(that is to me your command) now presents itself to your hand, and craves a
place (though unworthy) in your Cabinet, yea, in your heart. That holy zeal
which desired it, will also improve it. The God, whom your Ld. has thus
honored in the care and cost of his house, will not fail to honor you in
yours.

For me, your Honor may justly challenge me on both sides; both by the
Druries, in the right of the first Petronage; and by the Cecils, in the right
of my succeeding devotions. In either, and both, that little I have, or am, is
sincerely at your Ladish. service, as who^ you have merited to be

Your Honors in all true observance and duty, IOS. HALL.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND REVEREND, Mr. Dr. HALL, Deane of Worcester, my worthy
and much respected Friend, all happiness, with my love in Christ Jesus.
Reverend Sir; this Sermon, I know, is at the Press before you expected: But I
thought (as this glorious Chapel occasioned it,) so it might minister
occasion of perpetual remembrance of the Chapel, by remaining its first
Monument. And although both these were confined to the private; the Chapel for
the Family of my Right Honorable Lord, the Earl of Exceter, who has given
the material thereof sufficient luster: and the Copy of the Sermon to the
Cabinet of my truly Noble, and virtuous Lady, his Countess; yet both these are
much and often required to the public; the Sermon to be an instruction, and so
it is; the Chapel, to be an example, and so it may be. The Sermon to teach
all, to be all glorious in their souls. The Chapel to teach some, who build
houses for their own habitation, to set up another for Gods Religion. The
Sermon was craved at the hands of my Honorable Lady, that it might come to the
Press; who, of her own pious disposition, gave forth the Copy; and for her
Noble esteem of your self, and of the worth of your Sermon, was willing and
desirous to give it way to the Printer. And this I thought good to impart unto
you, and to the courteous Reader, that you may be satisfied of the means how,
and the cause why it comes in public. And so praying for you, and desiring
your prayers for me, I remain

Your truly loving Friend, H. Baguley.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE reedified Chapel of the Right Honorable, the Earl
of Exceter, in his House of Saint John's.
HAGGAI 2. 9. The glory of the latter House, shall be greater then of the
former, says the Lord of Hosts, and in this place will I give peace, says the
Lord of Hosts.
AS we have houses of our own, so God has his; yea, as great men have more
houses then one, so has the Great God of Heaven much more; more, both in
succession (as here, the latter house, and the first) and in variety: He has
an house of flesh (Ye are the Temples of the living God;) An house of stone;
(Solomon shall build me an house;) An house immateriall in the Heavens, 2. Cor.
5. 1. Wherefore then has God an house? Wherefore have we ours; but to dwell
in? But does not he himself tell David, and so does Stephen the Protomartyr
(upon whose day we are fallen) tell the Jews, that He dwells not in Temples
made with hands? True; He dwells not in his House, as we in ours, by way of
comprehension; he dwells in it by testification of presence. So do we dwell in
our houses, that our houses contain us, that we are only within them, and they
without us. So does he dwell in his, that yet he is elsewhere, yea,
euerywhere, that his house is within him. Shortly, God dwells where he
witnesses his gracious presence, that, because he does both in the Empyreall
heaven, amongst his Angels and Saints, and in his Church upon Earth; therefore
his dwelling is both in the highest Heaven in perfect glory; and on Earth, in
the hearts and assembly of his children. As of the former, our Savior says;
Jn domo Patris mei, Jn my Fathers house are many Mansions. So also may we say
of the latter, There is much variety and choice in it; There was the Church of
the Jews, the Church of the Gentiles; There is a material, and a spiritual
house. In the one, Salomons, Zorobabels, such piles as this: In the other; so
much multiplicitie, as there are Nations, yea, Congregations that profess the
name of Christ. One of these was a figure of the other, the Material, under
the Law; of the Spiritual, under the Gospel. Ye see now the first house, and
the latter, the subject of our Text and discourse. The latter, commended to us
comparatively, positiuely. Comparatively with the former, Mayor gloria.
Positiuely, in it self, Jn this place will J give peace. Both, set out by the
style of the promiser, and avower; says the Lord of Hosts. All which challenge
your Christian attention.

As the first house (which was material) was a figure of the second, which is
spiritual: so the glory of that material, was a figure of the glory of this
spiritual. Now because all the life and glory of the spiritual, stands in
Christ the Messiah, the Prophet looks through the type of the material, at him
which shall beautify, yea, glorify the spiritual, of whose exihibition the
Prophet speaks, Adhuc modicum, Yet a little while, and J will shake the
Heavens. This Modicum was but some 500. and odd years; much to men, but a
modicum to the Ancient of days, with whom 1000. years are but one day. It is
in and by him, that this latter house under the Gospel, shall in glory
surpass that first under the Law. The Prophets had spoken gloriously of the
Temple that should be; and now, lest when the people should see the homely and
cottagelike reedification of Zerubbabel, they should be dis-hartned and
offended, the Prophet desires to draw their eyes from the stone and timber, to
the spiritual inside of the Evangelical Church, showing the glory of this
latter House, to exceed the former.

Some gross Interpreters have looked with Jewish eyes upon the outward fabric,
which was threefold: Salomons, Zorobabels, Herod's. Salomons, sumptuous and
magnificent; Zorobabels, mean and homely; Herod's, rich and maiesticall,
immodico sumptu, incredibili splendore, as one says. Salomons was before
defaced. Now because Zorobabels was so far from making this Word good, that
the people wept, when they saw the difference (which Calvin well observes, was
not without a special providence of the allwise God; else the Jews would so
have fixed their eyes upon the outward splendour, that they would never have
looked for the spiritual and inward Grace of the House of God:) therefore they
have taken it of Herod's temple; the walls and lining whereof were indeed
answerable to this Prophecy, more glorious. But this conceit, as it is too
carnal, so is quite dissonant from the context, both in regard of the
precedents, and subsequents. Of the precedents: For, how did the desire of all
Nations come to that Pile of Herod's? Of the subsequents: For, what peace was
under the Herodian Temple? First, the builder of it, was the chief oppressor
of the Jewish liberty: and then secondly, it gave occasion to the perpetual
misery of that people. Pilate would expilate the Treasures of it for aquae
ductae; which denied, cost the Jews much blood. Under Claudius, twenty
thousand slain in a Feast of unleavened bread. Jonathas the Priest slain by
thieves suborned by Foelix, in the very Temple; and ever after, it was the
harbor and spoil of Villains. What hills of Carcasses? What streams of
blood was in it at the last vastation? Enough to amaze any Reader: so as in that
79. years wherein it stood (longer it did not,) it was no better then a stage
of Tragedies, a shambles of cruelty. Of that therefore God could not say, Dabo
pacem; it was Templum adulterinum, as one calls it justly, and had neither
command nor promise: It was the Spiritual Temple, the Evangelical Church,
whose glory shall be greater then the Jewish, which shall be blessed with the
desire of the Nations, with the assurance of Peace. But why then does the holy
Ghost speak of Gold and Silver, the costly materials of an outward structure?
Even these very Metals are figurative: not that God cares so much for them, but
because we do; because our eyes use to be dazzled with this best parcel of
Earth; therefore when he would describe a glorious Church, he borrowes the
resemblance of Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Esaias 60. and even by these does
he set forth his New and Heavenly Jerusalem, Revel. 21. Wherein then is the
glory of Gods Evangelical House greater, then of the Legal? Yea, wherein is
it not greater? Whether ye look to the efficient, the matter, the duration,
the extent, the service. The efficient, that was built by man, tho directed by
God: In this, God himself is the Architect, not only giving the model, but
the frame. The matter, whether of structure, or ornament. The structure of the
one was of stone and wood: of the other, is of living stones. The ornament of
the one was Gold and Silver: of the other, divine Graces of Faith, Charity,
Hope, Sanctity, Truth, Piety, and all other virtues, to which, Gold itself
were but trash.

The duration of the one (even that longst-liued Temple of Solomon, though
called ((...)) domus seculi) was but 430. years. Of the other, beyond time, to
eternity. The extent of the one to be measured by a few Poles, yea (though ye
take in the Courts, and all) by a few Acres: Of the other, universal, so far
as the King of Heaven has any Land. The service in the one performed by a few
men, mortal, sinful, the blood of beasts shed upon the Altar: In the other,
performed by our eternal High Priest, after that higher order of Melchisedech;
offering up his own most precious blood for our redemption. In that, Christ
Jesus was obscurely figured: In this, really exhibited, borne, living, dying,
rising, ascending, preached, believed, lived, Every way therefore both in
efficient, matter, duration, extent, service, Maiorgloria.

Let no man tell me now of that just wonder of the world, the Jewish Temple;
white Marble without, lined with Gold within, Brazen pillars, Golden vessels,
costly vayles, an High Priesthood set forth with precious Stones, rich Robes,
exquisite Perfumes, curious Music, and what-euer that ancient goodly
institution had rare and admirable, I say the clay of the Gospel, is more
worth then the Marble of the Law; Evangelical Brass, more worth then legal
Gold; the rags of the Evangelical Priesthood, more excellent then the robes
of the Leuiticall. In short; the best of the Law is not comparable to the
basest of the Gospel.

John Baptist was the Ianus of both Testaments; he was to the Churches, as Noah
was to the Worlds; he saw both the first, and the latter. It is a great word
that our Savior says of him, that amongst those which were borne, or rather
(as ours read it better) begotten of women, there did not a greater then he
arise: but it is a greater word that he speaks of the Children of the new
Testament, that the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then he. I stand
not upon examining the comparison, whether it be ratione sanctitatis, or
officii; it makes either way for my purpose, therefore was John so great, The
least of the greatest is more, then the greatest of the least.
because he was the last of the law, and the first of the Gospel: and the old
rule is minimum maximi maius est maximo minimi; therefore is the least in this
Kingdom of Grace greater then he, because he is all, what John was half;
wholly under that Euangelium Gospel of the Kingdom.
Regni, which is able to advance him to a greater perfection, then that
Harbinger of Christ. What a favor then is it (Right Honorable and beloved)
that God has reserved us to these better days of his Gospel, wherein the
helps of salvation are more clear, obuious, effectual; wherein, as the glory
of the latter House exceeded the former; so the means of that incomprehensible
glory of the House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, lie more open
unto us? What should we do, but both vti, and frui, gladly use, and sweetly
enjoy this unspeakable blessing, which God has kept in store for us, and walk
worthy of so incomparable a mercy. The old Jews lived in the dawning of the
day, wherein they had but a glimmering of that Sun, which would rise. We
live after the highnoone of that happy day. If we walk not answerable to so
great a light, what can we look for, but utter darkness?

Ye shall now give me leave (Right Honorable) to carry these words in a meet
analogy to the present occasion. The Temples under the Law, were both a
figure, and a pattern of the Churches under the Gospel. Within this roof,
under which we now stand here, was both the former, and the latter house; and
even in these walls does God make his Word good, That the glory of this latter
House shall be greater, then of the former. The first foundation of it was, no
doubt, both pious and rich. I shall not need to fetch the Pedigrees of it from
Saint John Baptist in Consecrated by Heraclius, Patriarch of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, nor to discourse of either the devotion, or wealth of that
religiously-military Order, for whom these stones were first laid. Imagine the
Altar never so gay, the Imagerie never so curious; the Vestments never so rich;
the Pillars, Walls, Windows, Pauement, never so exquisite; yet I dare boldly
say, this present glory of this House in this comely whiteness, and
wellcontriued coarctation, is greater then the former. What care I? nay, What
does God care for the work of a Lapidary, or Painter, or Mason? One zealous
Prayer, one Orthodoxe Sermon is a more glorious furniture, then all the
precious rarities of mechanique excellencies. I do most willingly (as what
good heart does not?) honor the virtuous actions, and godly intentions of our
worthy forefathers, which (no doubt) it has pleased God in mercy to accept
and crown, but withal it must be yielded, that they lived under the tyrannous
injury and usurpation of those Pharisees, who kept the keys of knowledge at
their own girdles, and would neither draw for them, nor suffer them to draw
for themselves. Blessed be God for better conditions; the Well of life lies
open to us, neither are we only allowed, but invited to those heavenly
liquors, Jnebriamini O charissimi, Drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved,
Cant. 5. 1. This happy liberty of the saving Gospel of Jesus Christ, daily
and sincerely preached to us (Noble and beloved Christians) is worthy to be
more worth unto us, then all the treasures, ornaments, privileges, of this
transitory World; and this, since through the inestimable goodness of God, ye
do, and may find in this latter House. Well has God verified this Word in
your eyes and ears; The glory of the latter House shall be greater, then of
the former.

Hitherto the comparatiue praise of the latter House; the positive follows in
the promise of a gracious effect; In this place will I give peace: wherein I
know not whether the blessing does more grace the place, or the place the
blessing; both grace each other, and both bless Gods people; In this place
will I give peace. If ye look at the blessing it self, it is incomparable,
Peace; that whereby the Hebrews had wont to express all welfare in their
salutations, and wel-wishes; the Apostolical benediction dichotomizes all good
things into Grace and Peace; wherein, at the narrowest, by Grace, all
spiritual favors were signified; temporal, by Peace. The sweet Singer of
Israel could not wish better to Gods Church, then, Peace be within her walls:
and behold, this is it which God will give, Dabo pacem: I will give peace.
yea, our eyes should stoop too low, if they should fix here. The sweet
Quiristers of Heaven, when they sung that divine Caroll, to the honor of the
first Christmas, next to Gloria in excelsis Glory to God in the highest
heavens; in earth, Peace, etc.
Deo, said, In terris pax: Yet higher; the great Savior of the World, when he
would leave the most precious Legacy to his dear ones on earth, that they
were capeable of, he says, My peace I give you. And what he there gives, he
here promises, Dabo pacem, I will give it. But where? Whence? In this place.
Not any where; not every where; but in his own house, in his latter house, his
Evangelical House; as if this blessing were confined to his holy walls, he
says, In this place will I give peace. This flower is not for every syle; it
grows not wild, but is only to be found in the Garden of Sion. It is very
pregna^t which the Psalmist has, Psalm. 128. 5. and 134. 3. The Lord that made
Heaven and Earth, bless thee out of Sion. He does not say, The Lord that made
the Earth, bless thee out of Heaven; nor, The Lord that made Heaven, bless
thee out of Heaven; but, bless thee out of Sion. As if he would teach us,
that all blessings come, as immediately and primarily from heaven, so
immediately and secondarily from Sion, where this Temple stood. Some
Philosophers have held the Moon to be the receptacle of all the influe^ces of
the heavenly bodies, and the conueyances of the^ to this inferior World, so as
all the virtue of the upper Orbs and Stars are derived by her, to this
elementary Sphere. Such does both David and Haggai repute the house of God;
whither, as to Joseph's Storehouse, does God convey the blessings of peace, that
they may be thence transmitted to the sons of men. How, and why then does God
give peace in this his House? Because here (as Bernard well) Deus and audit,
and auditur, God hears, and is heard here; audit orantes, erudit audientes;
he hears his suppliants, and teaches his hearers. As this place has two
uses, it is both Oratorium, and auditorium: so in respect of both, does it
bless us with peace: our mouth procures it in the one, our care in the other;
God works in our hearts by both. In the first, God says, as our Savior cites
it, Domus me a domus orationis; My House shall be called, The House of Prayer.
And what blessing is it, even the best of Peace, that our prayers cannot
infeoffe us in? Solomon, when he would consecrate the Church he had built,
solemnly sues to God, that he would inuest it with this privilege of an
vniuersally-gracious audience; and nu^bring the occasions of distressed
Suppliants, makes it ever the foot of his request; (Then hearken to the prayer
that thy servant shall make toward this place; Hear thou in beauen, thy
dwelling place; and when thou hear, have mercy.) If ever therefore we would
have peace outward, inward, private, public, secular, spiritual: If we would
have peace in our estate, peace in our Land, peace in our Church, peace in our
souls, pray for it. And if ever we will pray for it, pray here, in Gods house,
for in this place will I give peace. In vain shall we look for it elsewhere,
if we ask it not here. It is true, we are bidden every where to lift up pure
hands to God: but they cannot be pure, that are profane; and they cannot be
but profane, that contemn the holy ordinances of God. He said well, In templo
vis orare, in te ara; for (Know you not, that your bodies are the Temples of
the living God?) but let me as truly return it; In te vis or are, in templo
ora? Would thou pray with effect at home? Pray at Church; else thy devotion
is but the sacrifice of fools; for he has said it, who has good reason to
appoint the circumstances of his own beneficence, Jn this place will J give
peace.

Will ye then see the reason why there is so much empty Caske in the Celler
of God? Therefore are men void of grace, because they are void of devotion. They
seek not God where he may be found; and therefore it is just with God not to
be found of them, where they pretend to seek him: for, Jn hoc loco; Jn this
place will I give peace.

Gerson distinguishes well in his Sermon de Angelis, that there is Duplex
Coelum, A double Heaven; Gloriae, and Ecclesiae; of Glory above, of the Church
below; the Church is the Heaven on earth; where God is seen, heard, spoken
unto. Where are his Saints (whose Assemblies are here;) where are his Angels:
(Let the woman have power on her head, because of the Angels, 1. Cor. 11.) As
the Jews then, whilst the Church of God was National, were wont (according
to command) to look toward the Temple, if they could not come to it, in their
devotions: So now that the Church is Catholic, or universal, and every of our
Churches is equally Gods house ((...);) we shall gladly with Peter and John, go
up to this Temple to pray; How can we look for a better encouragement, then
God gives us here, In this place will I give peace?

In the latter, as it is Auditoriu^, so I create the fruit of the lips to be
peace (says God.) Naturally we are all (even those that applaud themselves in
the best opinion of their harmeles, and fair disposition) enemies to God:
Enemies both actiuely and passiuely. Actiuely, (...) God-haters, Romans 1.
Passiuely, Filii irae, The sons of displeasure. We fell out in Adam, through
our own wilful Apostasy and disobedience; and we still stand out in the
maintenance of our inward corruption. There is no way to peace, but by
reconciliation; there is no way to reco^ciliation; but by the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, which is Euangelium pacis; The Gospel of peace.
there is no proper element for the Gospel of God, but the house of God; Locus
iste, Jn this place will J give peace. It is not (I know) for every heart to
apprehend, either the want of this peace, or the misery of this want. This is
one of those happinesses which is most bragged of, where it is least had. The
sensual Securitan pleases himself in the conceit of his own peace. All is well
at home; he quarrels not with himself, for he denies himself nothing, God
quarrels not with him; here are no checks of a chiding conscience; no frowns
of an angry Judge; nothing The beauty of peace.
but Pulchritudo pacis (as the Prophet speaks.) Alas, my beloved, call not
this peace, call it stupiditie; even Hell it self is not a Kingdom divided in
it self. There is no blessing, which I will give true peace.
is not also counterfeited, Pacem veram dabo, is the style of the Prophets,
Ier. 14. 13. This were a needless Epithet, if there were not a false peace;
such is this of carnal hearts. That Word of eternal Truth must stand: There
is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Have you seen a sore suddenly filled
up with unsound flesh, and fairly skinned over, without all offense to the
eye, which ere long will break out again, and bewray a secret, and so
much-morehardly-cured corruption? Such is a wicked man's peace. Have you seen a
slave sit quietly in the Gally, not struggling with his chain, not repining at
his Oar (necessitas fortiter, consuetudo facile?) Necessity has taught him
to bear it strongly, custom easily.
Have you heard a dying man profess, that he felt no pain? Such is a wicked
man's peace, of which he shall once say, though now all seem smooth, and
plausible; Jn pace amaritudo mea amarissima; Jn peace J had great bitterness,
Esaias 38. 17. Neither is the want of this peace less perceived, then the misery
of this want. Men see no difference in the face of Heaven, whatsoever they do;
their blasphemies and prayers find the same intertainement: therefore the
careless man resolves, I shall have peace, though I follow the ways of mine
own heart. Oh the miserable sottishness of wilful sinners! Sin lies (like
a sleeping Bandog) at the door of their heart; they look upon him, as if he
would never wake; or, as if though he should, yet he were so clogged, and
chained, and muzled, that there can be no danger of his hurt. Let God but rowze
him up a little, he shall bay them to despair; he shall fly upon them, and
pull out their throats: Then shall their troubled heart project terrible
things, and they shall feel what it is to live in the anger of a God. They
shall see the Almighty putting himself into the fearful forms of
vengeance; Who can stand before his indignation? And who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? His fury is powered out like fire, and the rocks are
thrown down before him, Nahum. 1. 6. And if his very love have drawn blood
of his dear ones: (Terrores Domini militant contra me, says holy Job: The
terrors of the Lord are set in array against me, Job 6. 4:) and he that bore
the chastisements of our peace, the Son of his love, could lay (My God, my
God, why have thou for saken me?) Oh, what shall be the Judgments of his
wrath? If this be the rod of children, Oh, what shall be the Scorpions for his
enemies? They shall see that gulf of fire ready to receive them into
everlasting burnings. They shall see the Devils their incessant tormentors,
ready to seize upon their guilty souls. Then, O then, shall they know, too
late, what an happiness it is, that God here promises, Dabo pacem. Would we
then avoid the unspeakable horror of this woeful condition? Would we find
the bed of our sickness and death, comforted with the sweet testimony of an
heavenly peace betwixt God and our souls? See whence we must fetch it; Jn this
place will J give peace. If ever we have it, we must have it from the blessed
ordinances of God, his Word and Sacraments, which this place can afford us. In
vain shall ye seek for this (dear Christians) in a licentious Tavern, in a
rich Counting House, in Chambers of dalliance, in full Tables, in Pompous
Courts; no, not in thrones of earthly Majesty. Alas, many of these are the
make-bates betwixt Heaven and us, most of them can mar, none of them can make
our peace. It is only the despised Ministry of the Gospel; the Word of
reconciliation, (as it is called, 2. Cor. 5. 19.) which sounds in Gods House,
that can do it. As ye love your souls therefore, as you would find peace at
the last, and would look with a comfortable assurance in the face of death and
judgment; as ye would see a gracious Mercy-seate in the dreadful Tribunal
of God, at the day of our last appearance, frequent the House of God; attend
reverently and conscionably upon the sacred Institutions of God; yield your
selves over to be wrought upon by the powerful Gospel of Jesus Christ. Oh, be
not you wanting unto God, he will not be wanting unto you, but will make good
this promise of his vnfaileable grace, Jn this place will I give peace.

It is a great word that is here spoken, Dabo pacem; and therefore it is
vndertake^ by an omnipotent Agent, I will give peace. If all the Angels of
Heaven should have said so, we should soon have replied, as Korah and his
company did to Moses and Aaron; Ye took too much upon you, Numbers 16. 3. This
work is not for any finite power; the style of peace, is the peace of God; the
style of God, the Mediator betwixt God and man, is, The Prince of Peace. He is
the true Solomon, the other was but typical. It is he only, that when the
Disciples were tossed with contrary winds and threatening billows, could
command the winds and waves to a calm. It is he only, that when his Church
is tossed with the winds and waves of raging and impetuous enmity, can give
outward peace. It is he only, that when the distressed soul is tossed with the
winds and waves of strong temptation, of weak diffidence, can give inward
peace Justly therefore does he challenge this act as his own, J will give
peace. We use to say, It is best treating of peace with a Sword in our hand.
Those who hauc the advantage of the war, may command peace: underlings must
stoop to such conditions, as the victor will yield. To show us therefore how
easily he can give peace, God styles himself the God of Hosts; a title wherein
he takes no small delight, referring not to the being of the creature, but to
their marshalling; not to their natural estate, but their military; neither
would God be looked at in it, as a Creator, but as a General. In but two of
the Prophets, Esaias and Jeremy, no less then an hundred and thirty times has
he this style given him. Every thing, as it has an existence from the Maker,
so an order from the Governor; and that order is no other then warlike, wherein
it does (militare Deo) serve under the colors of the Almighty. All creatures
are both mustred and trained, and placed in Garrison, and brought forth into
the field, in the service of their Creator; they are all excercitus pugnatorum.
If ye look into Heaven, there is a company of heavenly Soldiers, Luke 2.
Neither was there only the construction of Idolaters, vniuersa militia coeli,
to which these burnt Incense; but of Moses himself; Thus the Heaven and the
Earth were finished, and all the Host of them, Genesis 2. 1. If ye look to the
Earth, not men only, whom reason has fitted for such designs, but even the
brute, yea, the basest and indociblest of the brute creatures are ranged into
arayes: even the very Locusts, though they have no Leader, yet Egrediuntur per
turmas, They go forth by bands, Prou. 30. 27. And if ye look into Egypt
(where for the time was Seeds belli,) you shall find a Band of Frogs, that were
appointed to march into the very Bedchamber, the Bed, the Ouens, the Dishes of
Pharaoh; you shall find an host of Lice, of Flies, of Caterpillars, sent against
those Egyptian Tyrants. Elsewhere, ye shall find troops of Palmerwormes, of
Locusts, of Cankerwormes, of Caterpillars to set upon Israel, Joel 1. 4.
Shortly, where he means to preserve, the fiery Charrets and Horsemen of
Heaven shall compass Dothan. Where he means to destroy, the most despicable
of his creatures shall be armed, to the ruin of the proudest. Does Goliab
stalk forth to the defiance of the God of Israel? A Pebble out of the Brook
shall straw him on the ground. Does an Herod hear his flatterers gladly say,
Nec vox hominom sonat? Stay but a while, God sets his vermin upon him; all the
Kings Guard cannot master those Lice. He has Hornets for the Hiuites and
Canaanites, Exodus 23. Mice for the Philistims, Judge. 6* Rats for the couerous
Prelate: A Fly for Pope Adryan: A world of creatures for either defensive or
offensive services. Quare fremuerunt gentes? Why do the Heathen rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take council together against the Lord, and against his Anointed.
Presumptuous dust and ashes, that dare rise up against the God of hosts! If a
silly Ant out of a Molehill should march forth, and proffer to wrestle a fall
with a Giant, there were some proportion in this challenge, there is none of a
finite power to an infinite. Should all the powers of Hell band themselves with
those Who has resisted his will?
on earth, Quis restitit? What power have they of being, of motion, but from
him whom they oppose? How easily can he blow upon their enterprises? How easily
can he command these to their Dust, those to their Chains? Be confounded
therefore, O vain men, whose breath is in your Nosthrils (and that not your
own neither) when ye think of the power and Majesty of the God of Hosts.

And why are we dismayed with the rumors, or fears of the strongest
oppositions? Gebal and Ammon, and Amalec, the Philistims, with them that dwell
at Tire? Ashur also is joined to the incestuous children of Lot: ((...)) O thou
of little faith, why fear thou? The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our refuge, Psalm. 46. Come, all ye Bands of wickedness, and conspire
against the Scepter of the Kingdom (that is, the Gospel) of Jesus Christ. He
has his Armageddon, He has a Feast for the fowls of the Air, and the beasts
of the field, whom he has invited to the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of
Kings, Revel. 19. 8. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have
set themselves against me round about; Dominus suscepit; The Lord has
sustained me, and he is the Lord of Hosts.

Yea, why are we apalled, when we see the measures of the sons of Anak; the
spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places? If we look at their number, they
are Legions. If to their strength, they are Principalities and Powers. If to
their nature, they are spirits that rule in the air. We are men, flesh and
blood, single, weak, sinful. What ever we are, our God is in Heaven, and does
whatsoever he will; he is the Lord of Hosts; though Cowards in our selves,
yet in him we are more then Conquerors; he who is more then All power, then
All truth, has said it; The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his
Church. Thanks be to God, which gives us victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Lastly, he is the Lord of Hosts; his undertakings are infallible: Has he
said, that the glory of the Evangelical Church shall exceed the Legal? Has
he said, that, In this place he will give peace? How can the Church fail of
glory, or the soul of peace? His Word can be no more defective, then himself
impotent. Trust God with his own causes; trust him with thy self; do that he
bids; expect what he promises; haunt this House of his, wait on his ordinances.
The Lord of Hosts shall give thee that peace, which passes all understanding;
and with peace, glory, in that upper House of his not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

To the possession whereof, that God, who has ordained us, in his good time
mercifully bring us.

And now, O Lord God of hosts, make good thy promises to this House of thine.
Whenever any Suppliant shall in this place offer up his prayers unto thee,
hear thou in Heaven, thy dwelling place; and when thou hear, have mercy.
What Word soever of thine shall sound out of this place, let it be the savor
of life unto life to every hearer. What Sacrament soever of thine shall be in
this place administered, let it be effectual to the salvation of every receiver.

Thou that art the God of glory, and peace, give peace and glory to thy
Servants, for thy mercies sake, for thy Sons sake, even the Son of thy
love, Jesus Christ the Just. To whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, one
infinite God, be given all praise, honor, and thanks giving, now and for ever.

FINIS.

