Quo vadis?

A JUST CENSVRE of TRAVEL as it is commonly undertaken by the GENTLEMEN of our
Nation.

By IOS. HALL D. of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for Nathaniel Butter. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, my singular good Lord, EDWARD Lord DENNY, Baron of
WALTHAM.
Right Honorable,

I Fever any men had reason to be in love with the face of a foreign
entertainment, those are they, which were admitted to the attendance of the
truly Generous and Honorable, Lord HAY, your most noble son, in his late
embassage to France; in which number my unworthiness was allowed to make o^e;
who ca^ therefore well witness, that no man could either recei^e more honor
from a strange Country, or do more honor to his own. What wanted there that
might make men confess themselves more welcome then strangers? Neither doubt I
but that after many ages, France it self will wonder at the bountiful
express^ons of her own^ favors. But whiles others were ^nioying the noble
courtesies of the Time, my thoughts entertained themselves with searching into
the proof of that ordinary Travel, wherewith I saw men comm^nly affected;
which, I must needs confess, the more I saw, the less I liked. Neither is it
in the power of any foreign munificence, to make me think ours any where so
well^ as at home. Earthly commodities are no part of my thought: I looked (as I
ought) at the soul; which I ^ell saw, uses not only to gather (...) moss in
this rolling, but suffers the best graces it bath, ^o molder away insensibly in
such unnecessary agitation. I have now been twice abroad: both times (as
thinking my self worthy of nothing but neglect) I bent my eyes upon others, to
see what they did, what they got: my inquiry found our spiritual loss so
palpable, that now at last my heart could not choose but break forth at my
hand, and tell my Countrymen of the dangerous issue of their curiosity. I
meddle not with the common iourneyes to the miner all waters of the Spa; to
which many sick souls are beholden for a good excuse: who whiles they pretend
the medicinal use of that spring, can freely quaffe of the puddle of popish
superstition; poisoning the better part, in stead of helping the worse. These I
leave to the best Physician, Authority; which if it may please to undertake
the cure, may perhaps save as many English souls from infection, as that water
cures bodies of diseases. I deal only with those, that profess to seek the
glory of a perfect breeding, and the perfection of that, which we call
Civility, in Travel: of which sort I have (not without indignation) seen too
many lose their hopes, and themselves in the way; returning as empty of grace,
and other virtues, as full of words, vanity, mis-dispositions. I dedicate this
poor discourse to your Lo: as (besides my daily renewed obligations)
congratulating to you the sweet liberty and happy use of your home; who like a
fixed star may well ouer-looke these planets, and by your constant
settlednesse, give that aim to inferior eyes, which shall be in vain
expected from a wandering light. The God of beauen, to whose glory I have
intended this weak labor, give it favor in the ^ight of his Church, and
return it back; but with this good news that any one of the son^ of Iaphet,
is hereby persuaded to dwell ever in the tents of Sem: Unto that divine
protection, I humbly betake your Lo: Justly vowing my self

Your Lo: humbly devoted in a^l faithful and Christian observance, IOS. HALL.

QVO VADIS?
Sect. 1.
IT is an ouer-rigorous construction of the works of God, that in moting our
ISLAND with the Ocean he meant to shut us up from other regions; For God himself
that made the Sea, was the Author of Navigations, and has therein taught us to
set up a wooden bridge, that may reach to the very Antipodes themselves: This
were to seek coffeehouse in the bounty of God, who has placed us apart,
for the singularity of our happiness, not for restraint.

There are two occasions wherein Travel may pass, Matter of trafique, and
Matter of State. Some commodities GOD has confined to some countries, upon
others he has with a full hand powered those benefits, which he has but
sprinkled upon some. His wise providence has made one Country the Granary,
another the Celler, another the Orchard, another the Arsenall of their
neighbors, yea of the remotest parts. The earth is the Lords which he meant
not to keep in his hands, but to give; and he which has given no man his
faculties and graces for himself, nor put light into the Sun, Moon, Stars for
their own use, has stored no parcel of earth with a purpose of private
reservation. Solomon would never have sent his navy for Apes and Peacockes,
but yet held gold and timber for the building of Gods house, and his own,
worthy of a whole three years voyage: The sea and earth are the great Cofers
of God; the discoueries of Navigations are the keys, which whosoever has
received, may know that he is freely allowed to unlock these chests of nature,
without any need to pick the wards: Wise Salomons comparison is reciprocal.
A ship of Merchants that fetches her wares from far is the good Hus-wife of
the Commonwealth, and if she were so in those blind voyages of antiquity,
which never saw needle nor card, how much more thrifty must she needs be in
so many helps both of nature and Art? Either Indies may be searched for those
treasures, which God has laid up in them for their fardistant owners; Only
let our Merchants take heed, least they go so far, that they leave God
behind them; that whiles they buy all other things good cheap, they make not
an ill match for their souls, least they end their prosperous adventures in
the shipwreck of a good conscience.

Sect. 2.
And for matter of policy, nothing can be more plain then that our
correspondence with other nations cannot possibly be held up, without
intelligence of their estate, of their proceedings; The neglect whereof were no
other then to prostrate our selves to the mercy of an hollow friendship, and
to stand still, and willingly lie open whiles we are plaide upon by the wit of
untrusty neighborhood. Th^se eyes and ears of State are necessary to the
well-being of the head; In which number I do not include those private
Inter-lopers of intelligence, that lie abroad only to feed some vain Cameleons
at home with the air of News, for no other purpose, save idle discourse; but
only those profitable agents, whose industry either fitteth them abroad for
public employment, or imployeth them after due maturitie, in the fit services
of the Commonwealth: Neither my censure nor my direction reaches to either of
these occasions. It is the Travel of curiosity wherewith my quarrel shall be
maintained; the inconveniences whereof my own Senses have so sufficiently
witnessed, that if the wise parents of our Gentry could have borrowed mine eyes
for the time, they wou^d ever learn to keep their sons at home, and not
wil^ully beat themselves with the ^taffe of their age: upon them let my pen
turn a little, as those that are more then accessaries to this both private
and public mischief.

Sect. 3.
It is the affectation of too-early ripeness that makes them prodgall of their
childrens safety an^ hopes; for, that they may be wi^^ betimes, they send them
foo^^ to the world in the minority bo^ of age and judgment, like as fon^
Mothers use to send forth the^ daughters on frosting, early in col^ mornings
(though into the mi^ of a vaporous and foggy air) an^ whiles they strive for a
colo^ loose their health; If they were n^ blinded with ouer-weening a^ desire,
they could not but see (...) their unsettledness carries in it manifest peril
of mi^-carriag^ grant that no danger were thre^ned by the place, experience gi^
us, that a weake-limde child if (...) be suffered to use his legs too soon,
too much, lames himself for ever; bu^ if he wa^ke in uneven ground, he is no
le^se subject to maimes, then crookedness. Do they not see how easily a young
twig is bowed any way^ Do they not see that the Mid-wi^^ and the Nurse are wont
to frame the gristly head of the Infant to any fa^hion? May not any thing be
written upon a blanke? And if they make choice of this age, because it is most
docible, and for that they would take the day before them, why do they not
consider that it ^s therefore more docible of e^ill; ^ince wickedness is both
more (...) and more plausible then ^ertue, especially when it meets with an
vntutored judge; and ^inc^ ^here is so much inequality of ^he ^umber of both,
that it is not ^ore hard to find virtue, then to miss vice. Hear this then,
ye careless Ostriches, that leave your eggs in the open sand for the Sun to
hatch, without the fear of any hoo^e that may crush them in peec^s, have your
stomachs resolved to digest the hard news of the ruin of your children? Do
ye profess anmity to your own loins? then turn them (as ye do) loose to
these dangers, ere they c^n resist, ere they can discern; but if ye had rather
they should live and grow, bestow upon them the kindly heat of your bent
plumes, and shelter them with your own breast and wings, till nature have
opened a seasonable way to their own abilities.

Se^^. 4.
Yea let it be my just complaint in this place, that in the very
transplantation of our sons to the sa^er soil of our own Universities, and
Innes of Court, nothing is more prejudicial then speed. Perfection is the
child of Time; neither was there ever any thing excellent, that required not
meet leisure: but besides, how commonly is it seen, that those which had wont
to swim only with bladders, sink when they come first to trust their own
arms? These Lap-wings that go from under the wing of their damme with their
shell on their heads, run wild. If Tutors be never so careful of their early
charge, much must be left to their own disposition; which if it lead them not
to good, not only the hopes of their youth, but the proof of their age lies
bleeding. It is true, that as the French Lawyers say merrily of the Normans,
which by a special privilege are reputed of full age at 21. years, whereas
the other French stay for their five and twentieth, that Malitia supplet
aetatem; so may I say of the younglings of our time, that Precocitie of
understanding supplieth age and stature: but as it is commonly seen, that
those blossoms which overrun the spring, and will be looking forth upon a
FebruarySunne, are nipped soon after with an Aprill-frost, when they should
come to the knitting: so is it no less ordinary that these rathe-ripe wits
prevent their own perfection, and after a vain wonder of their haste, end
either in shame, or obscurity. And as it thus falls out even in our
Universities (the most absolute and famous Seminaries of the world) where the
Tutors eye supplies the parents; so must it needs much more, in th^se free and
honorable Innes (as they are called, for their liberty, Colleges for their
use) of our English Gentry, wherein each one is his own master in respect of
his private study and government: where there are many pots boiling, there
cannot but be much scumme. The concourse of a populous city affords many
brokers of villainy, which live upon the spoils of young hopes, whose very
acquaintance is destruction. How can these nouices, that are turned loose into
the maine, ere they know either coast, or compass, avoid these rocks and
shelues, upon which both their estates and souls are miserably wracked? How
commonly do they learn to roar in stead of pleading, and in stead of knowing
the laws, learn how to conternne them? We see, and rue this mischief, and
yet I know not how careless we are in preventing it.

How much more desperate must it then needs be to send forth our children into
those places which are professedly infectious, whose very goodness is either
impiety, or superstition? If we desired to have sons poisoned with
mis-be^eefe, what could we do otherwise? Or what else do those parents,
which have bequeathed their children to Antichristianisme? Our late journey
into France informed me of some ordinary factors of Rome, whose trade is the
transporting and placing of our popish nouices beyond the seas; one whereof
(whose name I noted) has been observed to carry over six several charges in
one ye^re. Are we so foolish to go their way, whiles we intend a contrary
period? Do we send our sons to learn to be chaste in the midst of Sodom?
The world is wide and open; but our ordinary travel is southward, into the
jaws of danger: for so far has Satan's policy prevailed, that those parts
which are only thought worth our viewing, are most contagious; and will not
part with either pleasure, or information, without some tang of wickedness.
What can we plead for our confidence, but that there is an household of
righteous Lot in the midst of that impure city; that there are houses in this
lericho, which have scarlet threeds shining in their windows; that in the most
corrupted air of Popery, some well reformed Christians draw their breath, and
sweeten it with their respiration. Blessed be God, that has reared up the
towers of his Sion, in the midst of Babylon. We must acknowledge, not without
much gratulation to the Gospel of Christ, that in the very hottest climates of
opposition, it finds many clients, but more friends; and in those places,
where author^tie has plea^ed to give more air to the truth, would have had
many more, if the Retormed part had happily continued that correspond^nce in
some circumstances wi^h the Roman Church, which the Church of Englan^ has
hitherto maintained. God is my record how ^r^e my heart is both from
pa^^^alitic, and pr^iudi^e. Mine eyes and ears can witness with wha^ approo^e
and applause diuer^ of the Catholics Royal (as they are termed) entertained
the new-tran^lated Liturgy o^ our Church, as maruelling to see such order and
regular devotion in them, whom they were taught to condemn for heretical.
Whose allowances I w^ll saw, might with a little help, have been raised
higher, from the practice of our Church, to some points of our judgment. But
if true religion were in those parts yet better attended, and our young
Traveler could find mo^e abettors, and examples of pie^ie, on whom we might
rely, yet how safe can it be to trust young eyes with the view and censure of
truth or ^alshood in religion? especially when truth brings nothing to this
bar, but extreme simplicity, and contrarily, ^alshood, a gaw die
magnificence, and proud majesty of pompous ceremonies, wherewith the hearts of
children and fools are easily taken. That Curtizan of Rome (according to the
mann^r of that profession) sets out her self to sale in the most tempting
fashion; here want no colors, no per^umes, no wanton dre^ses; whereas the
poor Spouse of Christ can on^y say of her self, I am black, but comely. When
on the one side they shall see such rich shrines, garish Altars, stately
Processions, when they shall see a Pope adored of Emperors, Cardinals preferred
to Kings, confessors made Saints, little children made Angels, in a word
nothing not outwardly glorious: on the other side, a service without welt or
guard, whose majesty is all in the heart, none in the face, how easily may
they incline to the conceit of that Parisian dame, who seeing the procession of
S. Genoueifue go by the streets, could say, (O que belle, etc.) How fine a
religion is ours in comparison of the Hugenots? Whereto must be added, that
(supposing they do not carry with them, but rather go to fetch the language
of the place) some long time needs be spent, ere they can receive any help to
their devotion; whiles in the mean season, their vnthriuing intermi^^ion is
assailed with a thousand suggestions: And who sees not that this lucrum cessans
(as the Ciuil^ans term it) offers an open advantage to a bu^^e adversary?

Sect. 6.
In a word, it has been the old praise of early rising, that it makes a man
healthful, holy, and rich; whereof the first respects the body, the second the
soul, the third the estate: all falls out contrary in an early travel. For
health: The wise providence of God has so contrived his earth, and us, that he
ha^h fitted our bodies to our clime, and the native sustenance of the place
unto our bodies. The apparent difference of diet (and of drinks especially)
falling into so tender age, must needs cause a jar in the constitution; which
cannot in all likelihood, but send forth distemper into the whole course of the
ensuing life. The stream runs like the fountain, and speeds well, if at
last, by many changes of soil it can leave an ill quality behind it: besides
that the mis-gouernance of diet, whereto their liberty lays them open in the
weakness of their pupillage, cannot but be extremely prejudicial. In this
point let experience be consulted with; her impartial sentence shall easily
tell us, how few young travelers have brought home, sound and strong, and (in
a word) English bodies. As for holiness, we lose our labor, if this discourse
prove not that it has none so great enemy as timely travel; at once do we
hazard to abandon God and our home: set an empty pitcher to the fire, it
crackes presently, whereas the full will abide boiling. It was the younger
son in the Gospel, who therefore turns unthrift, because he got his portion
too soon into his hands, and wandered into a far country. The eye of the
parent, and the ferule of the master, is all too little to bring our sons to
good. Where then there is neither restraint of evil, nor helps to grace, how
should their condition be other than hopeless? The soil does much in many
plants: the Persian Hyos^yamus if it be translated to Egypt, proves deadly; if
to Jerusalem, safe and wholesome: neither is it otherwise with some
dispositions, which may justly curse the place, as accessory to their undoing.
Lastly, for riches, not of the purse, (which is not here thought of) but of the
mind, what can be expected from that age, which is not capable of observation,
carele^^e of reposition? whereof the one gets, the other keeps the treasure of
our understanding. What is this age fit to look after but Butterflies, or
birds nests, or perhaps the gay coat of a Courtier? And if remarkable
considerations be put into it by others, they are as some loose pearls, which
for want of filing upon a string, shake out of our pockets; so as all the
wealth of a young Traveler is only in his tongue, wherein he exceeds his
mothers Parrat at home, both for that he can speak more, and knows that he
speaks.

Sect. 7.
And in truth, it is not only in travel, wherein we may justly complain of
the inconvenience of haste, but (that we may looke^ a little aside) in all the
important businesses of our life; especially in marriages and professions; The
ordinary haste in the one (before the face can descry the sex) fills the world
full of beggerie and impotence; and no less haste in the other, fills it as
full of ignorance and imperfection. For on the one side, where the vigor of
nature wants, what can be propagated but infirmity, or how can he skill to
live that wants experience? On the other, what plenty of water can there be,
where the lead of the cisterne is put all into the pipes? Where those that
should be gathering knowledge for themselves, spend it (like unthrifty heirs)
upon others, as fast as they get it. I am deceived, if I have not touched one
of the maine grounds of that universal decay of Arts and Men, wherewith the
world is commonly checked: They must be mightier and wiser, that know to
redress it.

Sect. 8.
But let us give our Traveler (that which Parents seldom care to give)
maturity of age; let him be as ripe as time can make him; what is the best
advantage which his absence can promise us: Let us lay the benefits of Travel
in the one sca^e, the inconveniences on the other, whethersoeuer ouerwaighes,
shall sway down the beam of our judgment. The private contentment of a man's
own heart in the view o^ foreign things, is but a better name of an humorous
curio^ity. If a man yield to run after his appetite and his eye, he shall
never know where to re^t, and after many idle excursions, ^hal lie down weary,
but vnsa^is^ied. For, give me a man that has seen ^udasses Lantern at S.
Dennises, the Ephe^ian ^iana in the Louure, the great vessel at Heydelberg,
the Amphitheater at ^ismes, the ruins and halfe-lettred monuments of the seven
hills, and a thousand such rarities; what peace has his heart above those,
that sit at home, and contemn these toys? And what if that man's fancy shall
call him to the stables of the great Mogol, or to the solemnities of Mecha, or
to the Library of the Moun^aine of the Moon, will he be so far the drudge
or Lacquay of his own imagination, as to undertake ^his pilgrimage? Or where
will he stay at last, upon his return? If he have smelt the ill-sented Cities
of France, or have seen fair Florence, rich Venice, proud Genua, Luca the
industrious: if then his thoughts shall tempt him to see the rich gluttons
house in Jerusalem, or inuit him to Asmere, or Bengala, must he go? And if
he can deny and chide his own unprofitable desires at the last, why began
he no sooner? That could not be forborne too early, which at last we^ repent
to have done: he therefore that travels only to please his fantasy, is like
some woman with child, that longs for that piece which she sees upon another
trencher, and swounds if she miss^ it; or some squire of Dames, tha^ doats upon
every beauty, and is every day loue-sicke anew: These humors are fitter for
controlment, than observation.

Sect. 9.
It is an higher faculty that Travel professes to advance, the supreme power
of our understanding, which if from hence it may be manifestly improued, he
should not be worthy to tread upon the earth, that would not emulate Drake,
and Candish, in compassing it: but (set aside the study of Civil Law, which
indeed finds bett^r helps abroad) all sciences (the word may seem proud, but
is true) may be both more fitly wooed, and more surely won within our four
seas: for what learning is that, which the Seas, or Alps, or Pyrenees have
engrossed from us? what profession either liberal, or manuary, wherein the
greatest masters have not been at least equalled by our hom^-bred Ilanders?
what has this, or the former age known more eminent for learning, then some
of ours, which have never trod on any but their own earth? And (as good
market-men by one handful judge of^ all the whole sack) why may we^ not find
cause to think so of the rest, if they would not be wanting to themselves? I
am sure the Vni uersities of our Island know no matches in all the world; unto
whose per^e^tion (that as they exceed others, so they may no less exceed
themselves) nothing wants, but severe execution of the wise and careful
laws of our Ancestors, and restraint o^ that liberty, which is the common
disease of the time. And why should not the child thrive as well with the
mothers milk, as with a strangers? Whether it be the envy, or the
pusillanimitie of us English, we are still ready to undervalue our own, and
admire forrainers; whiles other nations have applauded no professors more then
those which they have borrowed from us; neither have we been so unwise, as to
lend forth our best: our neighbors (which should be our corriuals in this
praise) shall be our Judges, if those f^w of our writers, which could be drawn
forth into the public light, have not set copies to the rest of the world, not
without just admiration. And how many stars have we of no less magnitude,
that will not be seen? Blessed be God (who has made this word as true, as it
is great) no nation under heaven so abounds with all variety of learning, as
this Island. From the head of Gods anointed does this sweet perfume distill to
the utmost skirts of this our region. Knowledge did never sit crowned in the
throne of majesty, and wanted either respect, or attendance. The double praise
which was of old given to two great nations, That Italy could not be put down
for arms, nor Greece for learning, is happily met in one Island. Those
therefore that cross the seas to fill their brain, do but travel Northward
for heat, and seek that candle which they carry in their hand.

Sect. 10.
Yea so far is our ordinary Travel from perfecting the intellectiue powers
of our Gentry, that it rather robs them of the very desire of perfection. For
what discouragements shall they find from the love of studies, in those parts
which are most sough^ to for civility? Who k^ow^^ not that they are grown to
that height of debauch^ment, as to hold learning a shame to Nobility;
esteeming it as a fit guard for the l^ng robe only, too base for their Tiss^es?
An opinion so sauouring of proud ignorance, and ignorant looseness^, tha^ I
cannot honor it with a confutation. Who would think that the reasonable soul
of men, not professedly barbarous, should be capable of such a monster? What
is learning, but reason improued? And can reason so far degenerate, as to
hate and contemn it self? Were these men made only for a sword, or a dog,
or an horse? Only for sport, or execution? I know not wherein Lewi^ the
eleventh showed himself vnwitty, but in the charge which he gave to his
son, to learn no more Latin, but, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit viuere:
and would this alone teach him to rule well? Does the Art of Arts (such is the
government of men) require no grounds but dissimulation, or ignorance? Even to
the feeding of hogs, or sheep, there is more and better skill necessary. How
v^like is this to a successor of Charles the great, whose word it had wont to
be, that he had rather abound in knowledge, then wealth? In the Court of our
King Henry the eight, a certain great Peer (of this diet) could say, it was
enough for Noblemens sons to wind their horn, and carry their Hawk fair;
that study was for the children of a meaner rank: To whom Pace justly
replied, that then Noblemen must be content that their children many wind
their horns, and carry their Hawks, while meaner men's sons do weild the
affairs of State. Certainly it is a blind and lame government that lackes
learning; whose subjects, what are they else, but as limbs of a body whose
head wants senses, which must needs therefore fail of either motion, or
safety? From hence it is, that so few of the foreign Noblesse are studious,
in comparison of ours; (in which regard I am not ashamed to recant that which
my vnexperience has (out of hearesay) written in praise of the Frenc^
education) and those few that have stolen the turning over of books, hide
their skill, left they should be made to blush at their virtue. What brave
Trophies and rich monuments has the pen of our gracious Sovereign raised of
himself unto all posterities? When ignorance and malice have shot their bolt,
the glory of his great wisdom, and knowledge, shall more fill the mouths and
affect the hearts of all succeeding ages, then of his greatness. Paul the
fifth, and his greatest Chaplains, Bellarmine and Perron, have felt the weight
of his hand; whereas the great King that styles himself Catholic, when he
comes to pass his censorious edict upon Cardinal Baronius (who in the
eleventh Tome of his History seemed too busy in fastening the title of the
Edicto del ^ey D^n Phelipped^ Espana co^tra el Tr^ct ad^ della Mon^r^^ia d^
S^cil^a e^xerid^ por Caesar Baronio Cardenal, on el T^mo vndecim^ de (...)
Annals Eccl^si^stic^s.
Kingdom of Sicilie upon the Pope) professes to ground his intelligence of
this wrong only upon others eyes; as if a book (though of a Cardinal) were
too mean an object for the view of Majesty: and as all subordinate greatness
flows from the head, so do commonly also the dispositions. Neither have the
Doctors of the Romish Church (upon whom the implicit faith of the Laity is
suspended) found it any ill policy, to cherish this dislike of bookishnesse in
the great; for, whiles the candle is out, it is safe for them to play their
tricks in the dark: and if the Assyrians be once blinded, how easily may they
be led into the midst of any Samar^a? If the light of knowledge might freely
^hine to the world, Popery would soon be ashamed of it self, and vanish
amongst the works of darkness. Now how well these examples, and this
conversation, shall whet the appetite unto good studies, it cannot be hard to
judge.

Sect. 11.
But perhaps it is not the learning of the school, but of the State, wherein
our Traveler hopes for perfection: The site and form of cities, the fashions
of government, the manners of people, the raising and rate of foreign
revenues, the deportment of Courts, the menaging both of war and peace, is
that wherein his own eye shall be his best intelligencer; The knowledge
whereo^ shall w^ll requite his labor, whether for discourse or for use. What
if I say, that (save the soothing up of our fancy in all this) these lessons
may be as well taken out at home: I have known some that have traveled no
further then their own closet, which could both teach and correct the greatest
Traveler, after all his tedious and costly pererrations, what do we but lose
the benefit of so many iournals, maps, hystoricall descriptions, relations, if
we cannot with these helps, travel by our own fireside? He that travels
into foreign countries, talks perhaps with a Peasant, or a Pilgrim, or a
Citizen, or a Courtier; and must needs take such information as partial
rumor, or weak conjecture can give him; but he that travels into learned and
credible Authors, talks with them who have spent themselves in bolting out the
truth of all passages; and who having made their labors public, would have
been like to hear of it, if they had mis-reported: The ordinary Traveler
propounds some prime Cities to himself, and thither he walks right forward,
if he meet with ought that is memorable in the way, he takes it up; but how
many thousand matters of note fall beside him, on either hand; of the knowledge
whereof he is not guilty; Whereas ^ome grave and painful Author has
collected into one view, whatsoever his country affords worthy of mark; having
measured many a foul step for that, which we may see dry-shod; and worn out
many years in the search of that, which one hour shall make no less ours,
then it was his own. To which must be added, that our imperfect acquaintance
may not hope to find so perfect information on the sudden, as a natural
inhabitant may get, by the disquisition of his whole life: Let an Italian or
French passenger walk through this our Island, what can his Tablebookes carry
home, in comparison of the learned Britain of our Camden, or the accurate
Tables of Speed? Or if one of ours should (as too many do) pass the Alps,
what pittances can his wild journey observe, in comparison of the Itenerary of
Fr. Schottus and Capugnanus: Or he that would discourse of the Royalties of the
French Lillies, how can he be so furnished by flying report, as by the
elaborate gatherings of Cassaneus, or of Degrassalius; What should I be
infinite? This age is so full of light, that there is no one country of the
habitable world, whose beams are not crossed and interchanged with other;
Knowledge of all affairs, is like music in the streets, whereof those may
partake, which pay nothing; We do not lie more open to one common snnne, then
to the eyes and pens of our neighbors; Even China itself, and Iaponia, and
those other remotest Isles, and continents (which have taken the strictest
order for closeness) have received such discoueries, as would rather satisfy
a Reader, then provoke him to amend them. A good book is at once the best
companion, and guide, and way, and end of our journey; Necessity drove our
forefathers out of doors, which else in those misty times had seen no light,
we may with more ease, and no less profit sit still, and inherit, and enjoy
the labors of them, and our elder brethen, who have purchased our knowledge
with much hazard, time, toil, expense; and have been liberal of their blood
(some of them) to leave us rich.

Sect. 12.
As for that verbal discourse, wherein I see some place the felicity of their
travel (thinking it the only grace, to tell wonders to a ring of admiring
ignorants) it is easy to answer; that table-talk is the least care of a wise
man; who like a deep stream desires rather to run silent; and as himself
is seldom transported with wonder, so does he not affect it in others;
reducing all to use, rather then admiration, and more desiring to benefit, then
astonish the hearer; withal, that the same means which enable us to know, d^
at o^ce furnish us with matter of dis^ourse, and for the form of our
expression, if it proceed not from that natural dexterity which we carry with
us, in vain shall we hope to bring it home; the change of language is rather
an hinderance to our former readiness; and if some have fetched new noses, and
lips, and ears from Italy (by the help of Tagliacotius, and his scholars)
never any brought a new tongue from thence. ^o conclude, if a man would give
himself leave to be thus vain and free, like a mill without a scluse, let
him but travel through the world of books, and he shall easily be able to
out-talke that tongue, whose feet have walked the furthest; what ^ath any eye
seen, or imagination devised, which the pen has not dared to write? Out of
our books can we tell the stories of the Monocelli, who lying upon their
backs, shelter themselves from the sun with the shadow of their one only
foot. We can tell of those cheapedieted men, that live about the head of
Ganges, without mea^, without mouths, feeding only upon air at their
nosthrils. Or of those headless Eastern people, that have their eyes in their
breasts (a mis-conceit arising from their fashion of attire, which I have
sometimes seen): Or of those Coromand^e, of whom Pliny speaks, that cover
their whole body with their ears: Or of the persecutors of S. Thoma^ of
Canterbury, whose posterity (if we believe the con^ident writings of
Degra^^alius) are borne with long and hairie tails, souping after them; which
(I imagine) gave occasion to that prouerbiall jest, wherewith our mirth uses to
vpbraid the Kentish: Or of Am^zons, or Pygme^s, or Satyrs, or the Samarcaudean
Lamb, which growing out of the earth by the navel, grazeth so ^ar^e as that
natural^ ^^ther will reach: Or of the bird Ruc, or ten thousand such miracles,
whether of nature, or euent^ Little need we to stir our feet to lea^^e to
tell either loud lies, or large ^ruth^. We have heard a bird in a cage ^ing
more change of ^otes, then others have done i^ the wild liberty of the wood^
And as for the present occurrences of ^he time, the world about us is so full
of Presses, that it may, and ^s grow^e so good a fellow, that it will, impart
what it knows to all the neighbors: whose relations, if sometimes o^ey swerve
from truth, we may well consider, what variety of report every accident will
y^^ld; and that therefore our ears abroad are no whit more credible, then our
eyes at home. Yea rather, as Tully could say, that at Antium he could hear the
news of Rome, better then at Rome; so may we oft-times better hear and see
the news of France, or Spain, upon our Exchange, then in their Paris, or
Madrill: Since (what liberty soever tongues may take to themselves) a discreet
man will be ashamed to subscribe his name to that, whereof he may be
afterward convinced.

Sect. 13.
Since therefore Travel cannot out-bid us in these highest commodities, which
concern the wealth of the mind; all the advantage it can afford us, must be
in those mixed abilities, wherein our bodies are the greatest partners, as
dancing, ^encing, music, vaulting, horsemanship; the only professions of the
mis-named Academies of other nations. Who can deny that such like exercises
are fit for young Gentlemen, not only for their present recreation, but much
more for the preparing of them to more serious action? Yet must these learn to
know their places: what are they else but the varnish of that picture of
Gentry, whose substance consists in the lines and colors of true virtue? but
the lace or facing of a rich garment? but the hang-byes of that royal court
which the soul keeps in a generous heart? He that holds Gentilitie
accomplished with these (though laudable) qualities, partakes more of his
horse, then his horse can possibly of him. This skill then is worthy of our
purchase, yet may not be bought too dear; and perhaps need not be fetched so
far. Neither my profession, nor my experience will allow me to^ hold
comparisons in this kind; but I have been heartened by no mean masters of
these Arts, to say that our Nation has yielded some in all these faculties,
which need not stoop unto the proudest ^orrainer: ours have no fault but one,
that they are our own; and what h^^h their Country offended, if their Art
offend not? It is an humorous giddiness to measure the goodn^^^e of any thing
by the distance of miles, and where there is equality of worth, to neglect the
nearest. I slander our Nation if it be not sick of this disease, in the
course of all sciences. And if neerenesse and presence be the cause of our
dislike, why do we not hate our selves, which are ever in our own bosoms?
Why do we not hate this fastidious curiosity, which is too close to us?
Perhaps perfection in these qualities is thinner sown amongst us, then some
other-where; so as our Island for want of work, and encouragement, affords not
such multitude of masters: but how can we complain of rareness, since if our
age yield us but one excellent in each kind, it is more then we are willing
to use? and if the fault were not in our selves, one candle may light a
thousand. To instance in the best: The horse is a noble cr^ature, which as it
is the str^ngth and pride of France, so wins the hearts and heels of that
Nation: The generality of their skill is nothing to a stranger; each pri^ate
man's cunning rests in himself; it is only the Teacher, whose ability may
concern us. And whereas there is a double kind of menage (as I have heard)
one for service, the other for pleasure; in the first our masters think they
cannot yield unto the best; in the latter, if they grant themselves exceeded,
how many men have taught their dog the same tricks, with no less
contentment? In both, we have the written directions of their greatest Artists;
who (for the perpetuity of their own honor) failed not to say their best.
And if these dead masters suffice not, we have had, we may have the best of
their living: The conscience of a man's excellency will abide no limits, but
spurs him forth to win admiration abroad; and if therewithal he can find
advancement of profit, how willingly does he change his home? We have had
experience of this in higher professions, much more in these under foot. One
obscure town of Holland in our memory, had by this means drawn together at
once the greatest lights of EVROPE, and made it self then no less renowned
for Professors, then it is now infamous for Schism. Fear of envy forbids me
to name those amongst us, which have honored this Island in the choice of their
abode. Where Art is encouraged, it will soon rise high, and go far, and not
suffer a channel of the sea to stay it from the presence of a more bountiful
patronage.

Sect. 14.
But let us grant these faculties so fixed upon any nation, that all our water
must necessarily be fetched at their Well; and add unto these a few wa^te
complements, and mimicall courtesies, which must needs be put into the match
of our ordinary travel: and now let us sit down, and see what we paid for
this stock, and count our winnings: What must our com^pleat Traveler stake
down for this goodly furniture o^ his Gentry? If not loss, danger; danger of
the best part, if not all; a double danger; of corruption of religion, and
deprauation of manners; both capital: And can we think these endowments so
precious, that they should be worth fetching upon such an hazard? Will any man
(not desperate) run into an infected house, to rifle for a rich suit? Will
any man put his finger into a fiery crucible, to pull out gold? It is wittily
taken of Chrysostom, when our Savior said, Ne exeat is in eremum; that he
says not, Go forth into the desert and see, but believe not; but gives an
absolute prohibition of going forth at al^, that they might be out of the
danger of misbeleefe. Tush, idle and melancholicke fears, say some of our
Gallants; wherefore serves discretion, but to sever good from ill? How ^asily
may a wise man pull a rose, and not prick his hand? How freely may he dip in
this stream, and not be drowned? Little do these peremptory re^oluers know,
either the in^inuatiue power of evil, or the treachery of their own heart in
receiving it, or the importunity of deceivers in obtruding it: They are the
worse for their travel, and perceive it not. An egg covered with salt, as our
Ph^losophers teach us, has the m^at of it consumed, whiles the shell is whole:
many a one receives poison, and knows not when he took it. No man proves
extremely evil on the sudden. Through many insensible declinations do we
^all from virtue; and at the first are so gently seized by vice, that we
cannot believe our accusers. It is mischief enough, if they can be drawn to
a less dislike of ill; which now by long acquaintance is grown so ^amiliar to
their eyes, that they cannot think it so loathsome, as at the first view. The
society of wilful Idolaters will now down with them, not without ease; and
good meanings begin to be allowed for the clokes of gross superstition.
From thence they grow to a favorable construction of the mis-opinions of the
adverse part, and can complain of the wrongful aggrauations of some
contentious spirits: and from thence (yet lower) to an indifferent conceit of
some more politic positions, and practices o^ the Romanists. Neither is ther^
their rest. Hereupon ensues an allowance of some of their do^trines, that are
more plausible, and less important, and withal a censure of us that are gone
too far from Rome. Now the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons begins to
mislike them: the daily and frequent consignation with the cross is not to no
purpose: The retired life of the religious (abandoning the world forsooth)
savors of much mortification; and confession gives no small ease and
contentment to the soul. And now by degrees, Popery begins to be no ill
religion: If there cannot be a false fire of mis-deuotion kindled in them, it
is enough, if they can be cooled in their love of truth; which how commonly it
falls out amongst us, I had rather experience should speak, then my self. Some
there are that by a spiritual Antiperistasis have grown hotter in their
zeal, by being encompassed with the outward cold of irreligion, and error,
who as they owe not this grace to themselves, so they are more for wonder then
imitation. If Daniel found a guard in the Lions den, shall another put
himself thither for ^helter? And if Peter walked upon the pauement of the
water, did the rest of the Disciples step forth and follow him? That valiant
champion of Christ (since we are fallen upon his name) who durst draw his
sword upon a whole troop, after all the protestations of his inseparablenesse
from his master, was yet infected with the air of the Highpriests Hall: and
whiles he but warmed himself at that fire, cooled in his respect to his
Savior. Although perhaps this contagion working (as it commonly does)
remissely, causes not any sudden alteration in our Traveler, but (as we say
of Comets and Eclipses) has his effect when the cause is forgotten. Neither is
there any one more apparent ground of that lukewarm indifferency, which is
fallen upon our times, then the ill use of our wanderings: for our Travelers
being the middle-ranke of men, and therefore either followers of the great, or
commanders of the meaner sort, cannot want conuenience of diffusing this temper
of ease, unto both.

Sect. 15.
All this mischief is yet hid with a formal profession, so as every eye
cannot find it: in others it dares boldly break ^orth to an open revolt. How
many in our memory, whiles with Dina^ they have gone fo^th to gaze, have lo^^
their ^pirituall chastity, and therewith both the Church, and themselves? How
many (like unto the brook ^^dron) run from ^ierus^lem through the vale of
^^hos^p^^t, ^^bert P^int^ in his pre^ace to the t^stimonies for the r^all
presence.
and end their course in the dead Sea? A popish writer of our Nation (as
himself thought) not unlearned, complaining of the obstinacy of us
heretics, despaires of prevailing, because he finds it to be long ago
fore-prophecied of us in the book of the Chronicles, At illi Protestants
audire noluerunt. 2 Chronicles. 24.
It is well that Protestants were yet heard of in the old Testament, as well as
I^suites; whose name, one of their own by good hap has (...) ^n I^s^am, l. ^.
c. (...) q. 19. Gret^er. contra Le^^^eum, c. ^. and 2. V r^ ai^ quida^ (...)
Iesu^ta^ ^n s^cris l^^^ris ^^p^riri.
found, Numb^ 26. 24. Like as Erasmus found Friars in S. Paul's time, inter
falsos Fratres. But it were better, if this man's word were as true, as it is
idle. Some of ours have heard to their cost, whose loss joined with the grief
of the Church, and dishonor of the Gospel, we have sufficiently lamented.
How many have we known stricken with these Asps, which have died sle^ping?
And in truth, whosoever shall consider this open freedom of the means of
seducement, must needs wonder that we have lost no more; especially if he be
acquainted with those two maine helps of our adversaries, importunity and
plausibilitie. Never any Pharisee was so eager to make a Proselyte, as our late
factors of Rome: and if they be so hot set upon this service, as to compass
sea and land to win one of us, shall we be so mad as to pass both their
sea and land, to cast our selves into the mouth of danger? No man sets foot
upon their coast, which may not presently sing with the Psalmist, They come
about me like Bees. It fares with them as with those which are infected with
the pestilence, who (they say) are carried with an itching desire of tainting
others. When they have all done, this they have gained, that if Satan were not
more busy and vehement then they, they could gain nothing. But in the mean
time there is nothing wherein I wi^h we would emulate them, but in this heat of
diligence, and viol^nt ambition of winning. Pyr^^us did not more en^ie the
valor of those old Roman soldiers, which he read in their wounds, and dead
faces, then we do the bus^e audacitie of these new. The world could not stand
before us, if our Truth might be but as hotly followed, as their falsehood. Oh
that our God, whose cause we maintain, would enkindle our hearts with the
fire of holy zeal, but so much as Satan has inflamed theirs with the fire of
^urie and faction. Oh that he would shake us out of this dull ^ase, and
quicken our slack spirits unto his own work. Arise, O North, and come, O
South, and blow upon our garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth. These
suitors will take no denial, but are ready (as the fashion was to do with rich
matches) to carry away men's souls whether they will or no. We see the proof
of their importunity at home: No bulwarks of laws, no bars of justice
(though made of three trees) can keep our rebanished fugitives from returning
from intermedling. How have their actions said in the hearing of the world,
that since heaven will not hear them, they will tr^e what hell can do? And if
they dare be so busy in our own homes, where they would seem somewhat awed
with the danger of justice; what (think we) will they not dare to do in
their own territories, where they have not free scope only, but assistance,
but encouragement? Never generation was so forward as the Jesuitical, for
captation of wills amongst their own, or of souls amongst strangers. What
state is not haunted with these ill spirits? yea what house? yea what soul?
Not a Princes CounsellTable, not a Ladies chamber can be free from their
shameless insinuations. It was not for nothing, that their great Patron Philip
the second King of Spain, called them Clerigos negotiadores; and that Marcus
Antonius Columna General of the Navy to Pius quintus, in the battle of
Lepanto, and Viceroy of Sicilie, could say to Father Don Alonso, a famous
^esuite, affecting to be of the counsel of his conscience, Voi altri padri di
^h^su ^auete la mente al cielo, le mani al mondo, l' anima al diauolo.

Sect. 16.
Yet were there the less peril of their vehemence, if it were only rude and
boisterous (as in some other sects) that so (as it is in Canon^shot) it might
be more easily shunned, then re^^sted: but here, the skill of doing mis^hiefe
contends with the power; their mis-zealous passions hide themselves in a
pleasing sweetness, and they are more beholden to policy, then strength. What
Gentleman of any note can cross our Seas, whose name is not landed in their
books before hand, in prevention of his person, whom now arrived, if they
find intractable through too much prejudice, they labor first to temper with
the plausible con^^rsation of some smooth Catholic of his own nation: the
name of his Country is warrant enough for his in^inuation. Not a word yet may
be spoken of religion; as if that were no part of the errand. So have we seen
an Ha^ke cast off at an Heron Shaw, to look and fly a quite other way, and
after many careless and ouerly fetches, to tower up unto the pr^y intended.
There is nothing wherein this fair companion shall not apply himself to his
welcome Countriman. At last, when he has possessed himself of the heart of his
new acquaintance, and got himself the reputation of a sweet ingenuitie, and
delightful sociablenesse; he finds opportunities to bestow some witty
scoffs upon those parts of our religion, which lie most open to advantage. And
now it is time to inuit him (after other rarities) to see the Monastery of
our English Benedictines, or (if elsewhere) those English Colleges, which the
devout beneficence of our well-meaning neighbors (with no other intention then
some covetous farmers lay faltca^s in their doue-cotes) have bountifully
erected. There, it is a wonder if our Traveler meet not with some one, that
shall claim kindred or Country of him in a more entire fashion. The society
welcomes him with more then ordinary courtesy: neither can he refuse (except
he will be uncivil) to be their guest. He cannot mislike the love of his
Countrymen, he cannot fault their carriage. And now that they have mollified
the stiffenesse of his prejudice, and with much tempering fitted him for their
mold, he is a task meet for one of their best workmen; who willingly
undertaking it, has learned to handle him so sweetly, as if he would have him
think it a pleasure to be seduced. Do ye think this Doctor will begin
first with the infallibility of their great Master, and persuade him that a
Necromancer, an Heretic, an Atheist, cannot err in Peter's Chair? or tell
him that he may buy off his sins as familiarly as he may buy wares in the
market? or teach him that a man may and must both make and eat his God to his
breakfast? This hard meat is for stronger mawes. He knows how first to begin
with the spoone, and to offer nothing to a weak stomach, but discourse of
easy digestion: As first, that a Ca^holike so l^uing and dying (by our
confession) may be saved: That there is but one Church, as but one Christ; and
that out of this Arc, there is no way but drowning: That this one Church is
more likely to be found in all the world, then in a corner; in all ages, then
in the last Century of years; in unity, then in division. And now comes in
the glorious brag of the Roman Universality, their inviolate Antiquity,
their recorded successions, their harmonious unity, their confessed
magnificence: That theirs is the mother Church, as to the rest of Christendom,
so especially to the English: How well a Monarchy (the best form of
government) beseemes the Church: How unlikely it is that Christ would leave his
Spouse in the confusion of many heads, or of none. And now, what are we but a
ragge torn from their cote? and where was our religion before Luther lay with
Bora? And what miserable subdiuisions are there in our Protestancie? and what a
gleaning are we to the harvest of Christendom? with infinite suggestions of
this nature; able (as they are plausibly vrg^d) to shake an ungrounded
judgment: which i^ they have so far prevailed, as that the hearer will abide
himself hood-winkt with this veil of the Church, how easily shall time lead
him into those hatefuller absardities?

Sect. 17.
In all which proceedings, these impostors have a double advantage: First, that
they deliver the opinion of their Church with such mitigation and favor, as
those that care to please, not to inform: forming the voice of the Church to
the liking of the hearer, not the iudg^ment of the hearer to the voice of the
Church: wherein it is not hard to observe, that Popery spoken and written are
two things; In discourse, nothing is more ordinary then to disclaim some of
their received positions, to blanch others. It is the malice of an adversary
that mis-reports them; they do not hold that images should be adored; that
the wood of the cross should be worshipped with the very same devotion that is
due to Christ himself; that the Church is the Judge of Gods writings; that
Panl the fifth cannot err; that a man may merit of his maker, much less
supererogate; that a mouse may run away with that which either is, or was God
Almighty; That it is lawful to kill an heretical King, and all other those
monsters of opinion, which their most classicke Authors have both hatched and
shamelesly thrust into the light of the world. They defy those ridiculous
Legends which we father upon their Church; and how much do they scorn S.
Francis his Bird, or his Wolf, or his Wounds, or his Apostles of Assise. Pope
Ioane was but a fancy: Never Pope was an heretic. If now we cry out of
impudence, and call their allowed writers to witness. Lo, even they also are
forged by us, and are taught to play booty on our side. Thus resolved to
outface all evidence, they make fair weather of their fowlest opinions, and
inueigh against nothing so much as the spightfulnesse of our slanders. It is
not possible that any wise stranger should be in love with the face of their
Church, if he might see her in her own likeness, and therefore they have
cunningly masked one part of it, and painted another, so as those features of
hers which are ugly and offensive, shall not appear to any but her own eyes.
And because books are dangerous blabs, and will be telling the generations to
come, how strangely that face is altered with Age and Art, therefore their
tongues are clipped also, and made to speak none but her own words. Out of
this license, and hope to win, they can fit their dishes to every Exemplar.
Epist. Scriptae ad D^minum Paulinum quondam datarium sub Ciementis 8^ beat^
m^mori^ Ponti^^cat^.
palate, and are so saucy, as to make the Church belie it self. Hence it was
that a Spanish Father could teach, that it is not of the necessity of faith, to
believe that the present Pope is the Vicar of Christ, and the Successor of
Peter. That Hostius the ^esuite could say, that the Pope abused his keys, and
the authority Ibid.
of the Church, in receiving Henry the fourth. That another of his fellows in
a discourse with a French Bishop, could disparage the decision of his Holiness
in comparison of a general Counsel. That Men^s the reader of divinity at
Valledolid following Ibid.
Salas the Jesuit, could affirm the lawfulnes of the marriage of religious
persons upon a doubtful revelation. That more then one of that order, have
dared to broach confession by letters, against the of Clement Bull the 8. And
if these men be no sparing of their contradictions to that Vice-god of theirs,
whose vassals they are by peculiar profession, how much more boldly will they
swim against the stream of any common opinion, that may concern the body of
that head?

Sect. 18.
Their second advantage is, that they regard not with what untruths they make
good their own assertions; It is all one with what mortar or rubbish they
build up a side. From hence flow the confifident reports, both of their
miracles to convince us, and their slanders to disgrace us. Father Hayndius, a
Jesuit of 33. years standing, amongst fifty two complaints, which (out of an
honest remorse) he put up against his own society, to their General Aquauiua,
finds this not the least, that his fellows s^amed not to seek the honor of
their order, by cogging of miracles. What packets fly about daily of their
Indian wonders? Even Card. Bellarmine can abide to come in as an auoucher of
these couzenages; who dares auerre that his fellow Xauier had not only healed
the deaf, dumb and blind, but raised the dead; Whiles his brother Acosta
after many years spent in those parts can pull him by the sleeue, and tell him
in his ear, so loud that all the world may hear him, Prodigia nulla
producimus, Lib. 4. de salut. Ind. c. 12. etc.
neque vero est opus. Of the same stamp are the daily-renued miracles,
revelations, vi^ions, wherewith any man's ears must needs be beaten amongst
them: Afric was at the best but barren of novelties, in comparison of Rome;
and yet the world is incredulous, if it will not suffer it self gulled with
these holy frauds. And no fewer are those lewd calumniations (the stuff of all
their inuectiues) whereby they labor to make us loathsome to the world: our
persons, our doctrines are loaded with reproaches; neither matters it how just
they are, but how spightfull; What other measure can be expected of us, when
their best friends have thus (upon some private dislikes) smarted from them.
Their own holy Fathers, Clement the eight, and Sixtus quintus, and with them
(the honor of the Jesuitical order) Cardinal Tollet, can all show bloody
wales in their backs, from their lashes. Their late Patron of famous memory,
whose heart they well-merited, and keep it (as their dear relic) enshrined
in their La-Flesche, was after his death in their pulpits proclaimed Tyran and
worse: no Examplar. ^pi^t. supr. cit.
marvel then if after the virulent declamations of our Gifford (their Gabriel)
and the malicious suggestions of others of that viperous brood, we have much
ado to persuade our neighbors, that we have any Churc^^s, Baptism, Liturgy,
Religion. I appeal then to all eyes and ears, how easy it is for a man that
will take leave to himself, of making what truth he lists, and defending them
by what vutruths he pleases, to lead a credulous heart whither he pleases.

Sect. 19.
But if the power of falsified reason prevail not, these desperate factors of
Rome (as I have been informed) have learned out of their acquaintance in the
Court of the Prince of darkness, to employ stronger aid. On some of their
hands, I fear, Magical delusions and deuillish incantations shall not want,
rather then they will want a client. Neither can this feeme strange to any,
that knows how familiarly the Roman Church professes the solemn practice of
coniuration; in such a fashion, as it does more then trouble the best Casuists,
to set down a perfect difference betwixt their sacred Magic, and the
Diabolical. From hence perhaps have proceeded those miraculous apparitions (if
at least they were any other but fancy, or fraud) wherewith some of our
death-sicke Gentlemen amongst them, have been frighted into Catholics. A
famous Divine of France, second to none for learning, or fidelity, told me
this one^ amongst other instances, of his own experience, which he yet lives
to justify: A Gentleman of the religion, whose wife was popishly devoted,
lying upon the bed of his sickness, in expectation of death, sends for this
Divine, his Pastor; the sick man's wife sends for a Jesuit; both meet at the
beds side; each persuades him to his own part; both plead for their religion
at this bar, before these Judges: after two hours disputation, not only the
Gentleman was cheerfully confirmed in that judgment which he had embraced,
but his wife also, out of the evidence of truth, began to incline to him, and
it: The Jesuit departed discontent; yet within some few hours after,
returning (when the coast was clearer) entreats some private conference with
the Gentlewoman; with whom walking in her garden, he did vehemently
expostulate, mixing therewithal his strongest perswa^^ons; at last to shut up
his discourse, he importuned her with many obsecrations, that she would
vou^hsafe to receive from his hands a little box which he there offered her,
and for his sake wear it about her continually: she condescended. No sooner
had she taken it, then she fell to so great a detestation of her husband,
that she could by no means be drawn into his presence, and within two days
after, in this estate she died. An act more worthy the sword of justice, then
the pen of an adversary. These courses are as secret as wicked: not daring
therefore peremptorily to accuse, I had rather leave these practices to further
inquiry. Sure I am that by their tongues Satan labors to inchant the world,
and has strongly deluded too many souls. And are we weary of ours, that we
dare tempt God, and offer our selves as challengers to this spiritual danger?
The Jesuits, amongst much change of houses, have two famous for the accordance
of their names; one called The Bow, at Nola; the other The Arrow, (La Flesche)
in France: though this latter were more worthy of the name of a whole Quiver,
containing not fewer then eight hundred shafts of all sizes. Their Apostate
Ferrier (if I shall not honor him too much) played upon them in this distich:

Arcum Nola dedit, dedit ill is alma Sagittam
Gallia; quis funem, quem meruere, dabit?
Nola the Bow, and France the shaft did bring:
But who shall help them to an hempen string?
This provision is for the care of Christian Provinces: but in the mean time,
what madness is it in us, not only to give aim to these rouing flights, but
to offer our selves to be their standing Butt, that they may take their full
aim and hit us level at pleasure. Do we not hear some of their own At
etiam nu^^ non animaduertimus quod Lati^^ sermonis ob^^n^^ impurissime Gallici
inuentutis mores ingenuos foedant, bonarum literarum praete^t ^pessimas edocent
arts, dum ingenia excolunt, animas perdunt, etc. Oration ad Curiam Parlamenti
super Henrici magni parricidali n^ce.
fellow-Catholikes in the midst of their awfullest Senate, the Parliament of
Paris, pleading vehemently against these factious spirits, and crying out
passionately of that danger (which will follow upon their admission) hoth of
lewd manners, and false doctrine, and do we in greater opposition fear
neither? and especially from English Jesuits? Some Countries yield more
venomous vipers then others; ours the worst. I would it were not too easy to
observe, that as our English Papists are commonly more Iesuitish, so our
English Jesuits are more furious, then their fellows. Even those of the
hottest climates cannot match them in fiery dispositions. And do we put our
selves out of our comfortable sunshine, into the midst of the flame of these
noted incendiaries? Do we take pleasure to make them rich with the spoil of
our souls, and because they will not come fast enough to fetch these boo^ies,
do we g^e to carry them unto their pillage?

Sect. 20.
The danger is in the men more then in their cause; and if this great Curtizan
of the world had not so cunning Pandars, I should wonder how she should get
any but foolish customers. The searcher of all hearts (before whose Tribunal I
shall once come to give an account of this Censure) knows I speak it not
maliciously; Him I call to witness that I could not find any true life of
Religion amongst those that would be Catholics. I meddle not with the errors
of Speculations, or Schole-points; wherein their judgment palpably offends,
I speak of the lively practice of Piety; What have they amongst them but a
very outside of Christianity, a mere formality of devotion; Look into their
Churches; there their poor ignorant Laity hope to present their best services
to God; and yet alas they say they know not what, they hear they know not
what, they do they they know not what; returning empty of all hearty
edification, and only full of confused intentions; and are taught to think
this sacrifice of fools meritorious. Look upon their Chemarim the sacred
actors in this religious scene, what shall you see but idle apishnesse in their
solemnest work, and either mockery, or slubbering? Look into their religious
houses; what shall you see but a trade of careless and lazy holiness; hours
obserued^, because they must, not because they would. What do they but lull
piety a sleep with their heartlesse and sleepy Vespers? Look into the private
closets of their devout Ignorants, what difference shall you see betwixt the
Image and the Suppliant? If they can hear their beads knacke upon each other,
they are not bid to care for hearing their prayers reflect upon heaven: Shortly
in all that belongs to God, the work done suffices, yea meriteth; and what
need the heart be wrought upon for a task of the hand? Look into the
melancholic cells of some austere Recluses; there you may find perhaps an
hairecloth, or a a whip, or an heardle; but show me true mortification, the
power of spiritual renouation of the soul? How should that be found there
when as that saving faith (which is the only purger of the heart) is barred
out as presumptuous: and no guest of that kind allowed, but the same which is
common to Devils. What Papist in all Chistendome has ever been heard to pray
daily with his family; or to sing, but a Psalm at home? Look into the
universal course of the Catholic life; there shall you find the Decalogue
professedly broken, Besides the ordinary practice of Idolatry; and frequence of
oaths; Who ever saw Gods day duly kept in any city, village, household under
the jurisdiction of Rom^? Every obscure Holy Day takes the wall of it, and
thrusts it into the channel. Who sees not obedience to authority so slighted,
that it stands only to the mercy of humane dispensation; and in the rest of
Gods Laws, who sees not how foul sins pass for venial? and how easily
venial sins pass their satisfaction: for which, a cross, or a drop of
holy water is sufficient amends. Who sees not how no place can be left for
truth, where there is full room given to equivocation. All this, though it be
harsh to the conscionable man, yet is no less pleasing to the carnal. The way
of outward fashionablenesse in religion, and inward liberty of heart cannot
but seem fair to nature; and especially when it has so powerful
angariation. It is a wonder if but one half of Christendom be thus won to
walk in it. Those which are either ungrounded in the principles of Religion,
or the unconscionable in the practice, are fit to travel into the^e miserable
errors, But though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin. Come ye
not to Gilgal; neither go ye up to Bethauen.

Sect. 21.
From the danger of corruption judgment. Let us turn our eyes to the
deprauation of manners; which not seldom goes before: Apples therefore fall
from the tree because they are worme-eaten, they are not worme-eaten because
they fall; and, as usually follows, Satan like the raven first seizes upon the
eye of understanding, and then preyes freely upon the other carcass. We may be
bad enough at home, certainly we are the worse for our neighbors. Old Rome
was not more jealous of the Grecian and African manners, then we have reason
to be of the Roman. It were well if we knew our own fashions, better if we
could keep them. What mischief have we amongst us that we have not borrowed?
To begin^^ at our skin; who knows not whence we had the variety of our
vain disguises? As if we had not wit enough to be foolish, unless we were
taught it. These dresses being constant in their mutabilitie, show us our
masters. What is it that we have not learned of our neighbors, save only to
be proud good cheap? Whom would it not vex to see how that other sex has
learned to make Antiks and monsters of themselves? Whence came their hips to
the shoulders, and their breasts to the navel; but the one from some
ill-shap't Dames of France, the other from the worse minded Curtizans of
Italy? Whence else learned they to daube these mudde-walles with Apothecaries
mortar; and those high washes, which are so cunningly lickt on, that the wet
napkin of Phryne should be deceived? Whence the frisled and poudred bushes of
their borrowed excrements? as if they were ashamed of the head of Gods making,
and proud of the Tire-womans? Where learned we that deuillish Art and practice
of duel, wherein men seek honor in blood, and are taught the ambition of
being glorious butchers of men? Where had we that luxurious delicacie in our
feasts, in which the nose is no less pleased, then the palate; and the eye no
less then either? wherein the piles of dishes make barricades against the
appetite, and with a pleasing encombrance trouble an hungry guest? Where those
forms of ceremonious quaffing, in which men have learned to make Gods of
others, and beasts of themselves; and lose their reason whiles they pretend to
do reason? Where the lawlesnesse (mis-called freedom) of a wild tongue, that
runs, with reins in the neck, through the bed-chambers of Princes, their
closets, their Counsell-Tables, and spares not the very cabinet of their
breasts, much less can be barred out of the most retired secrecy of
inferior greatness? Where the change of noble attendance, and hospitality,
into four wheels, and some few butterflies? Where the Art of dishonestie in
practical Machiauelisme, in false equivocations? Where the slight account of
that filthiness, which is but condemned as venial, and tolerated as not
unnecessary? Where the skill of civil and honorable hypocrisy, in those
formal complements, which do neither expect belief from others, nor carry
any from our selves? Where that unnatural villainy, which though it were burnt
with fire and brimstone from heaven, and the ashes of it drowned in the dead
sea, yet has made shift to reuine, and calls for new vengeance upon the actors?
Where that close Atheism, which secretly laughes God in the face, and thinks
it weakness to believe, wisdom to profess any religion? Where the bloody and
tragical science of King-killing; the new divinity of disobedience and
rebellion; with too many other evils, wherewith foreign conversation has
endangered the infection of our peace. Lo here, dear Countrymen, the fruit of
your idle gaddings: Better perhaps might be had; but he was never acquainted
at home, that knows not our nature to be like unto fire, which if there be
any infection in the room, draws it straight to it self: Or like unto ^et,
which omitting all precious objects, gathers up strawes and dust. Ilanders have
been ever in an ill name. Wherefore? save only for the confluence of
forrainers, which never come without the freight of their national
wickedness. The experience whereof, has moved some witty nations, both
ancient and present, to shut themselves up within their own bounds, and to
bar the intercourse of strangers, as those that thought best to content
themselves with their own faults. A corrupt disposition, out of a natural
fertility, can both beget and conceive evil alone; but if it be seconded by
examples, by precepts, by encouragements, the Ocean it self has not so much
spawne, as it: In all which regards, he has escaped well, that returns but
what he carried; but he is worthy of memory, that returns either more good,
or less evil. Some have come home perhaps more sparing, others more subtle,
others more outwardly courteous, others more capricious, some more tongue-free,
few ever better. And if themselves be not sensible of their alterations, yet
their Country and the Church of God feels and rues them.

Sect. 22.
Let me theref^re have leave to close this discourse with a double suit, one
to our Gentry; the other to supreme authority; both which shall come from the
bottom of an heart unfeignedly sacrificed to the common good; neither speak I
words, but my very soul unto both. To the former my suit is, that they would
be happy at home: God has given us a world of our own, wherein there is
nothing wanting to earthly contentment. Whither go ye then, worthy
Countrymen, or what feeke ye? Here grows that wealth, which ye go but to
spend abroad; Here is that sweet peace which the rest of the world admires and
enuies: Here is that gracious and well-tempered government, which no nation
under heaven may dare once offer to parallel: Here all liberal Arts reign
and triumph: And for pleasure, either our earth, or our sea yields us all those
dainties, which their native Regions enjoy but single. Lastly, here Heaven
stands open, which to many other parts is barred on the outside with ignorance
or mis-beleefe. And shall our wantonness contemn all this bounty of God, and
carry us to seek that, which we shall find no where but behind us, but within
us? Shall the affectation of some frivolous toys draw us away from the
fruition of those solid comforts, which are offered us within our own doors?
How many of ours, whom their just offense has cast out of the bosom of their
country, compare their exile with death, and can scarce abide to bid that
breath welcome, which they are forced to draw in a foreign air; and though
freedom of conscience entertain them never so liberally abroad, yet resolve
either to live or die at home; and do we suffer our folly to banish us from
those contentments, which they are glad to redeem with the hazard of their
blood? Are we so little in our own books that we can be content to purchase
outlandish supers^uities with the mis-carriage of our souls, with the danger
of mis-carriage, with the likelihood of danger? Are we so foolish, that whiles
we may sweetly enjoy the settled estate of our Primogeniture, we will needs
bring upon our selves the curse of Reuben, to run abroad like water; whose
quality it is, not ea^ily to be kept within the proper bounds? yea the curse of
Cain, to put our selves from the ^ide of Eden into the Land of Nod, that is, of
demigration? None of the least imprecations, which David makes against Gods
enemies, is, Make them unto like a wheel, o Lord: Motion is ever accompanied
with unquietness; and both argues, and causes imperfection, whereas the happy
estate of heaven is described by rest; whose glorious spheres in the mean
time, do so perpe^ually move, that they are never removed from their places.
It is not the least part either of wisdom, or happiness, to know when we are
well. Shall we^ not be shamelesly unthankful, if we cannot sing the note of
that great Chorister of God, My lot is fallen to me in a good ground? Has not
the munificence of God made this Island as it were an abridgement of his whole
earth, in which he has contrived (though in a lesser letter) all the maine and
material commodities of the greater world, and do we make a prison where God
meant a Paradise? Enjoy therefore (happy Countrymen) enjoy freely God and your
selves; enrich your selves with your own min^s, improve those blessed
opportunities which God has given you, to your mutual advantage; and care not
to be like any but your selves.

Sect. 23.
And if at any time these unworthy papers may fall betwixt the hands of my
Sovereign Master, or any of his grave and honorable ministers of State, let
the meandness of so weak and obscure solicitors presume to commend this
matter to their deepest consideration; and out of an honest zeal of the common
safety, sue to them for a more strict restraint of that dangerous liberty,
whereof too many are bold to carue themselves. Who can be ignorant of those
wise and wholesome laws, which are enacted already to this purpose? or of
those careful and just cautions, wherewith the licenses of Travel are ever
limited? But what are we the better for Gods own laws, without execution? Or
what are limits unto the lawless? Good laws are the hedges of the
Commonwealth: just dispensations are as gates, or styles in the hedge. If
every stragler may at pleasure cast open a gap in this fence of the State, what
are we the better for this quickset, then if we lay open to the common? Who
sees not how familiarly our young Recusants, immediately upon their disclosing,
are sent over for their full hatching and making? Italy, Spain, Artois, and
now of late France it self, prouides nests, and perches, and mewes for these
birds, with the same confidence, wherewith we breed our own at home; which,
when they are once well acquainted with the Roman lure, are sent back again,
fit for the prey. And as for those of our own feather: whereas the liberty of
their Travel is bounded chiefly with this double charge; one, that they have
no conversation or conference with Jesuits, or other dangerous persons; the
other, that they pass not into the dominions of the Kings enemies; both these
are so ^ommonly neglected, as if they were intended only for a verbal
formalitie, yea as if the prohibition meant to teach men what they should do.
Every of our nouices has learned to make no difference of men; and dare
breathe in the poisonous air of Italy it self, and touch the very pommell of
the chair of pestilence. It is this licentious freedom (which we mis-call
open-hearted ingenuitie) that undoes us. Do we not see the wary closeness of
our Adversaries, which will not so much as abide one of our books (a mute
solicitor) to harbor in any of their coasts? How many of the Italian or
Spanish Noblesse have we known allowed to venture their education in our
Courts or Universities? Do they lie thus at the lock, and do we open our
breast, and display our arms, and bid an enemy strike us where he list?
Since then we have no more wit, or care, then ^o be willingly guilty of our
own shame, oh that the hands of supreme authority would be pleased to lock
us within our own doors, and to keep the keys at their own girdle. And (to
speak truth) to what purpose are those strait and capital inhibitions of the
return of our factious fugitives into th^s Kingdom, if whiles the wicket is
shut upon them, that they should not come to us, the posterne be open to us,
that we may go to them? As all intercourse is perilous, so that is most,
which is by our own provocation. Here yet they dare but lurk in secret, and
take only some sudden snatches at a weak prey, like unto euening-wolues, that
never walk forth but under the cloak of the night; but in their own
territories, they can show the sun their spoils, and think this act worthy
of garlands and trophies. Here we have mastiues to secure our flocks: there
the prey goes straggling alone to the mouth of their dens, without protection,
without assistance, and offers to be devoured. Ye whom the choice of God has
made the great Shepherds of his people, whose charge it is to feed them by
government, suffer not their simplicity to betray their lives unto the fangs
of these cruel beasts; but chase them home rather, from the wilful search of
their own perdition, and shut them up together in your strong and spacious
folds, that they may be at once safe, and ye glorious.

Sect. 24.
Lastly, for those, whom necessary occasions draw forth of their own coasts
(that we may have done with those, which like foolish Papists go on
pilgrimage to see another block better dressed then that at home) let me say
to them, as Simeon that prophetical Monk said to the pillars which he
whipped before the Earthquake, Stand fast, for ye shall be shaken. And
therefore, as the Crane, when she is to fly against an high wind, does
ballace her self with stones in her bill, that she may cut the air with more
steadiness; so let them carefully fore-instruct, and poise themselves with the
sound knowledge of the principles of religion, that they may not be carried
about with every wind of doctrine. Whereto if they add but those lessons,
which they are taught by the State, in their letters of passage, there may be
hope, they shall bring back the same souls they carried. It was at least an
inclination to a fall, that Eve took boldness to hold chat with the Serpent.
And as subtle Lawyers desire no more advantage in the quarrel, which they
would pick at conueyances, then many words, so neither do our Adversaries.
Whiles our ears are open, and our tongues free, they will hope well of our
very denials. Error is cra^tie, and out of the power of his Rhetorical
insinuations, ofttimes carries away probability from truth. I remember in that
famous Embassy of the three Philosophers, which Athens sent to Rome,
Critolaus, Diogenes, and Carneades, there falling out many occasions of
discourse, wise Cato persuaded the Senate to a speedy dismission of those
(otherwise welcome) guests; because (said he) whiles Carneades disputes,
scarce any man can di^cerne which is the truth. There is more danger of these
spiritual Sophisters, by how much the business is more important, and their
subtlety greater. Let our passenger therefore (as that wise Grecian served his
fellows) stop up his ears with wax against these Sirens. Our Savior would
not give Satan audience even whiles he spoke true; because he knew that truth
was but to countenance error. There is ever true corn strowed under a
pit-fall: those cares are full and weighty, which we dress with lime to
deceive the poor birds in a snow. No fisher lets down an empty hook, but
clothed with a proper and pleasing bait. These impostors have no other errand,
but deceit. If he love himself, let him be afraid of their favors, and
think their frowns safer then their smiles. And if at any time (as no fly is
more importunate) they thrust themselves into his conversation, let him (as
those which must necessarily pass by a carrion in the way) hold his breath,
and hasten to be out of their air. And if they yet follow him in his flight,
let him turn back to them with the Angels farewell, Increpet te Dominus.

FINIS.

