Contemplations

UPON THE PRINCIPAL PASSAGES OF THE Holy Story.

The First Volume, In four Books.

By J. H. D. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. Bradwood for Sa. Macham 1612.

To THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY Prince of WALES, his Highnesses unworthy
servant dedicates all his labors, and wishes all happiness.
Most gracious Prince,
THis work of mine, which (if my hopes and desires fail me not) time may
hereafter make great, I have presumed both to dedicate in whole to your
Highness, and to parcel out in seuerals unto subordinate hands. It is no
marvel if Books have this freedom, when we our selves can and ought to be
all yours, while we are our own, and others under you. I dare say, these
Meditations, how rude soever they may fall from my pen, in regard of their
subject are fit for a Prince. Here your Highness shall see how the great
pattern of Princes, the King of Heaven, has ever ruled the World, how his
substitutes, earthly Kings, have ruled it under him, and with what success
either of glory, or ruin. Both your peace and war shall find here holy
and great examples. And if history and observation be the best Counselors
of your youth; what story can be so wise and faithful as that which God has
written for men, wherein you see both what has been done, and what should
be? What observation so worthy as that which is both raised from God, and
directed to him? If the propriety which your Highness justly has in the
work, and Author, may draw your Princely eyes and heart the rather to these
holy speculations, your servant shall be happier in this favor, than in all
your outward bounty; as one, to whom your spiritual progress deserves to be
dearer than his own life; and whose daily suit is, that God would guide your
steps aright in this slipperie age and continue to rejoice all good hearts in
the view of your gracious proceedings.

Your HIGHNESSES humbly devoted servant, IOS. HALL.

Contemplations. THE FIRST BOOK.

The Creation of the World. Man. Paradise. Cain and Abel. The Deluge.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS Earl of EXCETER, one of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy Counsel: All grace and happiness.
RIght Honorable, I knew I could not bestow my thoughts better than upon Gods
own history, so full of edification and delight: which I have in such sort
endeavored to do, that I shall give occasion to my Reader of some meditations,
which perhaps he would have missed. Every help in this kind deserves to be
precious. I present the first part to your Honor, wherein you shall see the
world both made, and smoothered again: Man in the glory of his creation, and
the shame of his fall: Paradise at once made and lost. The first man killing
his seed, the second his brother. If in these I shall give light to the
thoughts of any Reader, let him with me give the praise to him from whom that
light shone forth to me. To whose grace and protection I humbly commend your
Lordship: as

Your Honors unfeignedly devoted in all observance and duty, IOS. HALL.

Errata.
PAge 2. line 9. read imperfect. p. 18. l. 1. for mighty re. weighty. p. 19. l.
10. for whether r. whither. p. 21. l. 1 for incensible r. insensible. p. 27. l.
6. for which vile, read which is vile. p. 28. l. 8 for the r. their. p. 30. l.
3. for be otherwise r. be no otherwise. p. 42. l. antepen. for measure r.
pleasure. p 44. l. 7. for wrought r. taught. p. 47. l. penult. for as r. and.
p. 5^. l. 17. for these r. those. page 74. l. 12. for great y r. gently. p 91.
l. penult. for least r. lest. p. 100. l. 13 for quall r. equal p. 116. l. 5.
for whether r. whither. page 119 l. 16. for should Sarah r. should live in
Sarah. p. 123 l. 8. for neither r. either. p. 128. l. 1. for his r. this. pa.
130. l. 15. for any r. and. p. 147. l. 1. for for r. from. pa. 148. l. penult.
for profess r. profess not. pa. 154. l. 13. for these r. those. p. 181. l. 6.
for ears r. tears. pa 231. l 16 for really r real ly. p. 248. l. 16. for
affliction r. affection. p. 251. l. vl. for unbelieving r. unbeseeming. page
288. l. 6. for times r. time. p. 318. l. 5. for more proficiency r. mere
vnproficiency. Besides the reader must be entreated to pardon the
misse-pointing, especially of the three first books; as the want of stops,
page, 27. l. 10. p. 55. l. ^2. p. 56. l. 15. p. 57. l. 10. p. 64. l. vlt. p. 70.
l. 14. p. 71. l. 9. p. 77. l. 10. p. 98. l. 10. p. 111. l. penult. p. 121. l.
2. p. 125. l. 9. p. 132. l. 1. page 146. l. 2. p. 151. l. 3. pa. 174 l. 12. p.
180. l. 10. p. 190. l. 13. p. 194. l 17. p. 198. antepen. p. 221. l. 12. p.
233. l. 18. p. 243 l. 15. Through fault of the copy.

Contemplations.
THE FIRST BOOK.
The Creation.
WHat can I see, O God, in thy Creation but miracles of wonders? Thou made
something of nothing, and of that something all things. Thou which wast without
a beginning, gave a beginning to time, and to the world in time: It is the
praise of us men if when we have matter, we can give fashion; thou gave a
being to the matter, without form; thou gave a form to that matter, and a
glory to that form; If we can but finish a slight and vnperfest matter,
according to a former pattern, it is the height of our skill, but to begin
that which never was, whereof there was no example, whereto there was no
inclination, wherein there was no possibility of that which it should be, is
proper only to such power as thine; the infinite power of an infinite creator:
with us, not so much as a thought can arise without some matter, but here with
thee, all matter arises from nothing. How easy is it for thee to repair all
out of something, which could thus fetch al out of nothing? wherein can we
now distrust thee, that have proved thy self thus omnipotent? Behold to have
made the least clod of nothing, is more above wonder then to multiply a world;
but now the matter does not more praise thy power, then the form thy wisdom;
what beauty is here? what order? what order in working? what beauty in the
work.

Thou might have made all the world perfect in an instant, but thou would
not. That will, which caused thee to create, is reason enough why thou did
thus create. How should we deliberate in our actions, which are so subject to
imperfection, since it pleased thine infinite perfection (not out of need) to
take leisure. Neither did thy wisdom herein proceed in time only, but in
degrees: At first thou made nothing absolute; first thou made things which
should have being without life, then those which should have life and being;
lastly those which have being, life, reason: So we our selves in the ordinary
course of generation, first live the life of vegetation, then of sense, of
reason afterward. That instant wherein the heaven and the earth were created
in their rude matter, there was neither day nor light, but presently thou
made both light and day. Whiles we have this example of thine, how vainly
do we hope to be perfect at once? It is well for us, if through many degrees
we can rise to our consummation.

But (alas) what was the very heaven it self without light? how confused? how
formelesse? like to a goodly body without a soul, like a soul without thee.
Thou art light, and in thee is no darkness. Oh how incomprehensibly glorious
is the light that is in thee, since one glimpse of this created light gave so
lively a glory to al thy workmanship! This, even the brute creatures can
behold: That, not the very Angels. That shines forth only to the other
supreme world of immortality; this to the basest part of thy creation. There is
one cause of our darkness on earth, and of the utter darkness in hell, the
restraint of thy light. Shine thou O God, into the vast corners of my soul,
and in thy light I shall see light.

But whence, O God, was that first light? The sun was not made till the
fourth day, light the first. If man had then been, he might have seen all
lightsome; but whence it had come he could not have seen: As in some great
pond, we see the bancks full, we see not the springs whence that water
arises. Thou that made the Sun, made the light, without the Sun,
before the Sun, that so light might depend upon thee, and not upon thy
Creature. Thy power will not be limited to means. It was easy to thee to make
an heaven without a Sun, light without an heaven, day without a Sun, time
without a day: It is good reason thou should be the Lord of thine own
works. All means serve thee: why do we weak wretches distrust thee; in the
want of those means, which thou can either command, or forbear. How plainly
would thou teach us, that we creatures need not one another, so long as we
have thee? One day we shall have light again, without the Sun. Thou shall be
our Sun; thy presence shall be our light: Light is sown for the righteous.
This Sun and light is but for the world below it self; thine only for above.
Thou give this light to the Sun, which the Sun gives to the world: That
light which thou shall once give us, shall make us shine like the Sun in
glory.

Now this light which for three days was thus dispersed through the whole
heavens, it pleased thee at last to gather and unite into one body of the
Sun. The whole heaven was our Sun, before the Sun was created: but now
one star must be the Treasury of light to the heaven and earth. How thou
love the union and reduction of all things of one kind to their own head and
center.

So the waters must by thy command be gathered into one place, the sea; so the
upper waters must be severed by these aerie limits from the lower: so heavy
substances hasten downward, and light mount up: so the general light of the
first days must be called into the compass of one sun; so thou will once
gather thine elect from all coasts of heaven to the participation of one glory.
Why do we abide our thoughts and affections scattered from thee, from thy
Saints, from thine Anointed? Oh let this light which thou have now spread
abroad in the hearts of all thine, once meet in thee: We are as thy heavens in
this their first imperfection; be thou our Sun, into which our light may be
gathered.

Yet this light was by thee interchanged with darkness, which thou might as
easily have commanded to be perpetual. The continuance even of the best
things cloieth, and wearieth: there is nothing but thy self, wherein there is
not satiety. So pleasing is the vicissitude of things, that the intercourse
even of those occurrents which in their own nature are less worthy, gives
more contentment, then the unaltered estate of better. The day dies into night;
and rises into the morning again; that we might not expect any stability here
below, but in perpetual succession^: It is always day with thee above: the
night sauoreth only of mortality: Why are we not here spiritually as we
shall be hereafter? Since thou have made us children of the light, and of the
day, teach us to walk ever in the light of thy presence, not in the darkness
of error and unbelief.

Now in this thine enlightened frame, how fitly, how wisely are all the parts
disposed; that the method of the creation might answer the matter, the form,
both. Behold all purity above; below, the dregs and lees of all. The higher I
go, the more perfection; each element superior to other, not more in place
then dignity; that by these stairs of ascending perfection our thoughts might
climb unto the top of all glory, and might know thine empyreal heaven no less
glorious above the visible, than those above the earth. Oh how miserable is the
place of our pilgrimage, in respect of our home! Let my soul tread a while in
the steps of thine own proceedings; and so think as thou wroughtest: When we
would describe a man, we begin not at the feet, but the head: The head of thy
Creation is the heaven; how high? how spacious? how glorious? It is a wonder
that we can look up to so admirable an height, and that the very eye is not
tired in the way. If this ascending line could be drawn right forwards, some
that have calculated curiously have found it 500. years journey unto the
starrie heaven. I do not examine their art; O Lord, I wonder rather at thine,
which have drawn so large a line about this little point of earth: For in the
plainest rules of art and experience, the compass must needs be six times as
much as half the height. We think one Island great, but the earth
vnmeasurably. If we were in that heaven with these eyes, the whole earth (were
it equally enlightened) would seem as little to us, as now the least star in
the firmament seems to us upon earth: And indeed, how few stars are so little
as it? And yet how many void and ample spaces are there besides all the
stars? The hugeness of this thy work, O God, is little inferior for
admiraon to the majesty of it. But oh what a glorious heaven is this which thou
have spread over our heads? With how precious a vault have thou walled in this
our inferior world? What worlds of light have thou set above us? Those things
which we see are wondrous; but those which we believe and see not, are yet
more. Thou do but set out these unto view, to show us what there is within.
How proportionable are thy works to thy self? Kings erect not cotages, but set
forth their magnificence in sumptuous buildings: so have thou done, O King of
glory. If the lowest pauement of that heaven of thine be so glorious, what
shall we think of the better parts yet unseen? And if this Sun of thine be
of such brightness and majesty, oh what is the glory of the maker of it? And
yet if some other of thy stars were let down as low as it, those other
stars would be Suns to us; which now thou had rather to have admired in
their distance. And if such a sky be prepared for the use and benefit even of
thine enemies also upon earth, how happy shall those eternal Tabernacles be,
which thou have sequestered for thine own?

Behold then in this high and stately building of thine, I see three stages;
This lowest heaven for fowls, for vapors, for meteors: The second for the
stars: The third for thine Angels and Saints. The first is thine outward
Court, open for all: The second is the body of thy covered Temple, wherein are
those candles of heaven perpetually burning: The third is thine Holy of Holies.
In the first is tumult, and vanity: In the second immutability and rest: In the
third glory and blessedness. The first we feel, the second we see, the third we
believe. In these two lower is no felicity, for neither the fowls, nor stars
are happy. It is the third heaven alone, where thou, O blessed Trinity,
enioyest thy self, and thy glorified spirits enjoy thee. It is the
manifestation of thy glorious presence that makes heaven to be it self; This
is the privilege of thy children: that they he reseeing thee which art
invisible by the eye of faith, have already begun that heaven which the perfect
sight of thee shall make perfect above. Let my soul then let these heavens
alone till it may see, as it is seeene. That we may descend to this lowest and
meanest region of heaven, wherewith our senses are more acquainted; What maruels
do even here meet with us? There are thy clouds the bottles of rain,
vessels as thin as the liquor which is contained in them: there they hang, and
move, (though mighty with their burden:) How they are vpheld, and why they
fall, here, and now, we know not, and wonder; these thou make one while as
some aerie seas to hold water: an other while, as some aerie fornaces, whence
thou scatterest thy sudden fires unto all parts of the earth, astonishing the
world with the fearful noise of that eruption: out of the midst of water thou
fetchest fire; and hard stones out of the midst of thin vapors; another
while, as some steel glasses, wherein the Sun looks and shows his face in
the variety of those colors which he has not; There are thy streams of
light, blazing and falling stars, fires darted up and down in many forms,
hollow openings, and (as it were) gulfes in the sky; bright circles about the
moon, and other planets, snowes, hail: In all which it is enough to admire
thine hand, though we cannot search out thine action. There are thy subtle
winds, which we hear and feel, yet neither can see their substance, nor
know their causes; whence and whither they pass, and what they are, thou
know. There are thy fowls of all shapes, colors, notes, natures: whiles I
compare these with the inhabitants of that other heaven, I find those stars,
and spirits like one another: These meteors and fowls, in as many varieties,
as there are several creatures. Why is this? Is it because man (for whose sake
these are made) delights in change; thou in constancy? Or is it, that in these
thou may show thine own skill, and their imperfection* There is no variety
in that which is perfect, because there is but one perfection; and so much
shall we grow nearer to perfectness, by how much we draw nearer to unity,
and uniformity. From thence, if we go down to the great deep, the womb of
moisture, the well of fountains, the great pond of the world; we know not
whether to wonder at the Element it self, or the guests which it contains.
How does that sea of thine roar and foam and swell, as if it would swallow up
the earth? Thou stayest the rage of it by an incensible violence: and by a
natural miracle confinest his waves, why it mooues, and why it stays, it is
^o us equally wonderful: what living mountains (such are thy Whales) roll up
and down in those fearful billows: for greatness of number, hugeness of
quantity, strangeness of shapes, variety of fashions, neither air nor earth
can compare with the waters: I say nothing of thy hid treasures which thy
wisdom has reposed in the bowels of the earth and sea; How secretly, and how
basely are they laid up? secretly, that we might not seek them; basely, that
we might not over esteem them: I need not dig so low as these metals,
mineries, quarres, which yield riches enough of observation to the soul. How
many millions of wonders does the very face of the earth offer me? which of
these herbs, flowers, trees, leaves, seeds, fruits, is there? What beast, what
worm, wherein we may not see the footsteps of a Deity: wherein we may not
read infiniteness of power of skill: and must be forced to confess, that he
which made the Angels and stars of heaven, made also the vermin on earth: O
God the heart of man is too strait to admire enough even that which he treads
upon? What shall we say to thee the maker of all these? O Lord how wonderful
are thy works in all the world, in wisdom have thou made them all. And in all
these thou spakest, and they were done. Thy will is thy word, and thy word is
thy deed. Our tongue, and hand, and heart are different: all are one in thee;
which art simply one, and infinite. Here needed no helps, no instruments: what
could be present with the eternal: what needed, or what could be added to the
infinite? Thine hand is not shortened, thy word is still equally effectual; say
thou the word and my soul shall be made new again: say thou the word, and my
body shall be repaired from his dust. For all things obey thee; O Lord why do
I not yield to the word of thy counsel; since I must yield, as all thy
creatures, to the word of thy command?

Man.
But (O God) what a little Lord have thou made over this great world? The least
corn of sand is not so small to the whole earth, as man is to the heaven: when
I see the heavens, the sun, moon, and stars, O God what is man? Who would
think thou should make all these creatures for one, and that one, well-neere
the least of all? Yet none but he, can see what thou have done; none but he
can admire, and adore thee in what he sees; how had he need to do nothing
but this, since he alone must do it? Certainly the price and virtue of things
consists not in the quantity: one diamond is more worth then many quarries of
stone, one loadstone has more virtue then mountains of earth: It is lawful
for us to praise thee in our selves: All thy creation has not more wonder in
it, then one of us: other creatures thou made by a simple command; Man, not
without a divine consultation: others at once; Man thou did first form, then
inspire: others in several shapes like to none but themselves: Man after thine
own image: others with qualities fit for service; Man for dominion; Man had his
name from thee; They had their names from man; How should we be consecrated to
thee above all others, since thou have bestowed more cost on us then others?
What shall I admire first? Thy providence in the time of our creation? Or thy
power and wisdom in the act? First thou made the great house of the world
and furnishedst it: then thou broughtest in thy Tenant to possess it; The bare
walls had been too good for us, but thy love was above our desert: Thou that
made ready the earth for us before we were, have by the same mercy prepared
a place in heaven for us whiles we are on earth. The stage was first fully
prepared then was man brought forth, thither, as an actor, or spectator, that
he might neither be idle nor discontent, behold thou had addressed an earth
for use, an heaven for contemplation: after thou had drawn that large and
real map of the world; thou did thus abridge it into this little table of
man; he alone consists of Heaven and earth; soul and body. Even this earthly
part which vile in comparison of the other, as it is thine (O God) I dare
admire it, though I can neglect it as mine own, for lo; this heap of earth
has an outward reference to heaven, other creatures grouel down to their
earth, and have all their senses intent upon it; this is reared up toward
heaven, and has no more power to look beside Heaven, then to tread beside the
earth. Unto this, every part has his wonder. The head is nearest to heaven, as
in place, so in resemblance; both for roundnesse of figure, and for those
divine guests which have their seat in it; There dwell those maiesticall powers
of reason, which make a man; all the senses as they have their original from
thence, so they do all agree there to manifest the virtue: how goodly
proportions have thou set in the face; such as though oft-times we can give no
reason why they please, yet transport us to admiration; what living glasses are
those which thou have placed in the midst of this visage, whereby all objects
from far are clearly represented to the mind? and because their tenderness
lies open to dangers, how have thou defenced them with hollow bones, and with
prominent brows, and lids? And least they should be too much bent on what
they ought not, thou have given them peculiar nerves to pull them up toward the
seat of their rest? What a tongue have thou given him; the instrument not of
taste only, but of speech? How sweet and excellent voices are formed by that
little loose filme of flesh, what an incredible strength have thou given to the
weak bonds of the jaws? What a comely and tower-like neck, therefore most
sinewye because smallest. And lest I be infinite, what able arms and active
hands have thou framed him, whereby he can frame all things to his own
conceit. In every part beauty, strength, conuenience meet together. Neither is
there any whereof our weakness cannot give reason, why it should be otherwise.
How have thou disposed of all the inward vessels, for all offices of life,
nourishment, egestion, generation; No vain sinew, artery is idle. There is no
piece in this exquisite frame whereof the place, use, form, does not admit
wonder, and exceed it: Yet this body if it be compared to the soul, what is
it, but as a clay wall that encompasses a treasure, as the wooden box of a
Ieweller; as a course case to a rich instrument, or as a mask to a beautiful
face. Man was made last, because he was woorthiest. The soul was inspired
last, because yet more noble; If the body have this honor to be the companion
of the soul, yet withal it is the drudge. If it be the instrument, yet also
the clog of that divine part. The companion for life, the drudge for service,
the instrument for action, the clog in respect of contemplation. These external
works are effected by it, the internal which are more noble, hindered;
Contrary to the bird which sings most in her cage, but flies most and highest
at liberty. This my soul teaches me of it self, that it self cannot conceive
how capable, how active it is. It can pass by her nimble thoughts from heaven
to earth in a moment, it can be al things, can comprehend all things; know that
which is; and conceive of that which never was, never shall be: Nothing can
fill it, but thou which art infinite, nothing can limit it but thou which art
every were. O God which made it, replenish it, possess it. Dwell thou in it
which have appointed it to dwell in clay. The body was made of earth common to
his fellows, the soul inspired immediately from God; The body lay senseless
upon the earth like it self, the breath of lives gave it what it is, and that
breath was from thee. Sense, motion, reason, are infused into it, at once. From
whence then was this quickening breath? No air, no earth, no water was here
used to give help to this work: Thou that breathedst upon man, and gave him
the holy spirit: did also breath upon the body, and gave it a living
spirit, we are beholden to nothing but thee for our soul. Our flesh is from
flesh; our spirit is from the God of spirits. How should our souls rise up to
thee, and fix themselves in their thoughts upon thee who alone created them in
their infusion, and infused them in their creation? How should they long to
return back to the fountain of their being, and author of being glorious?
Why may we not say that this soul as it came from thee, so it is like thee; as
thou, so it, is one, immateriall, immortal, understanding spirit,
distinguished into three powers which all make up one spirit. So thou the wise
creator of all things would have some things to resemble their creator.
These other creatures are all body; man is body and spirit; the Angels are all
spirit, not without a kind of spiritual composition; Thou art alone after
thine own manner, simple, glorious, infinite; No creature can be like thee in
thy proper being; because it is a creature; How should our finite, weak,
compounded nature, give any perfect resemblance of thine? Yet of all visible
creatures thou vouchsafest Man the nearest correspondence to thee: not so much
in these natural faculties, as in those divine graces, wherewith thou
beautifiest his soul.

Our knowledge, holiness, righteousness was like the first copy from which they
were drawn; Behold we were not more like thee in these, then now we are
unlike ourselves in their loss; O God we now praise our selves to our shame,
for the better we were we are the worse, As the sons of some prodigal or
tainted ancestors tell of the lands, and Lordships which were once theirs;
only do thou whet our desires answerable to the readiness of thy mercies,
that we may redeem what we have lost; that we may recover in thee, what we
have lost in our selves, The fault shall be ours if our damage prove not
beneficial.

I do not find that man thus framed found the want of an helper. His fruition
of God gave him fullness of contentment, the sweetness which he found in the
contemplation of this new workmanship, and the glory of the author, did so
take him up, that he had neither leisure nor cause of complaint. If man had
craved an helper, he had grudged at the condition of his creation, and had
questioned that which he had, perfection of being. But he that gave him his
being, and knew him better then himself, thinks of giving him comfort in the
creature, whiles he sought none but in his maker; He sees our wants, and
forecasts our relief, when we think our selves too happy to complain: How
ready will he be to help our necessities, that thus prouides for our
perfection?

God gives the nature to his creatures, Man must give the name, that he might
see they were made for him, they shall be, to him what he will. In stead of
their first homage, they are presented to their new Lord, and must see of whom
they hold. He that was so careful of man's sovereignty in his innocence, how
can he be careless of his safety in his renouation?

If God had given them their names, it had not been so great a praise of Adams
memory to recall them as it was now of his judgment (at first sight) to impose
them, he saw the inside of all the creatures at first; (his posterity sees but
their skins ever since;) and by this knowledge he fitted their names to their
dispositions. All that he saw were fit to be his servants, none to be his
companions. The same God that finds the want, supplies it. Rather then man's
innocence shall want an outward comfort, God will begin a new creation. Not out
of the earth which was the matter of man, not out of the inferior creatures,
which were the servants of Man, but out of himself, for dearnesse, for
equality. Doubtless such was man's power of obedience, that if God had bidden
him yield up his rib, waking, for this use, he had done it cheerfully, but the
bounty of God was so absolute, that he would not so much as consult with man's
will, to make him happy. As man knew not while he was made, so shall he not
know while his other self is made out of him: that the comfort might be
greater, which was seen before it was expected.

If the woman should have bin made, not without the pain, or will of the man,
she might have been vpbrayded with her dependence, and obligation. Now she
owes nothing but to her creator: The ribbe of Adam sleeping, can challenge no
more of her, then the earth can of him. It was an happy change to Adam of a
ribbe, for an helper; what help did that bone give to his side? God had not
made it, if it had been superfluous: and yet if man could not have been
perfect without it, it had not been taken out.

Many things are vse-ful and convenient, which are not necessary, and if God
had seen man might not want it, how easy had it been for him which made the
woman of that bone, to turn the flesh into another bone? but he saw man could
not complain of the want of that bone, which he had so multiplied, so
animated.

O God, we can never be loosers by thy changes, we have nothing but what is
thine, take from us thine own, when thou will, we are sure thou can not but
give us better.

Paradise.
MAn could no sooner see, then he saw himself happy: His eyesight and
reason were both perfect at once, and the objects of both were able to make him
as happy as he would, when he first opened his eyes, he saw heaven above him,
earth under him, the creatures about him, God before him, he knew what all
these things meant, as if he had been long acquainted with them all: He saw the
heavens glorious, but far off, his maker thought it requisite to fit him with
a paradise nearer home. If God had appointed him immediately to heaven, his body
had been superfluous; It was fit his body should be answered with an earthen
image of that heaven which was for his soul: Had man bin made only for
contemplation, it would have served as well to have been placed in some vast
desert, on the top of some barren mountain; But the same power which gave him
an heart to meditate, gave him hands to work; and work fit for his hands;
Neither was it the purpose of the Creator that man should but live: mesure may
stand with innocence; he that rejoiced to see al he had made to be good,
rejoices to see all that he had made to be well; God loves to see his
creatures happy; Our lawful delight is his: they know not God that think to
please him with making themselves miserable.

The Idolaters thought it a fit service for Baal to cut and lance themselves;
never any holy man looked for thanks from the true God by wronging himself.
Every earth was not fit for Adam, but a Garden; a Paradise: What excellent
pleasures, and rare varieties have men found in gardens planted by the hands of
men? And yet all the world of men cannot make one twig, or leaf, or spire of
grass: When he that made the matter undertakes the fashion, how must it needs
be beyond our capacity excellent? No herb, no flower, no tree was wanting
there, that might be for ornament or use; whether for sight, or for sent, or
for taste. The bounty of God wrought further then to necessity: even to comfort
and recreation: Why are we niggardly to our selves when God is liberal? But
for all this; if God had not there conuersed with man, no abundance could have
made him blessed.

Yet behold that which was man's store house, was also his workehouse; His
pleasure was his task, Paradise served not only to feed his senses, but to
exercise his hands: If happiness had consisted in doing nothing, man had not
been employed; All his delights could not have made him happy in an idle life.
Man therefore is no sooner made, then he is set to work: Neither greatness
nor perfection can privilege a foulded hand; He must labor because he was
happy; how much more we, that we may be? This first labor of his was as
without necessity, so without pains, without weariness; how much more
cheerfully we go about our businesses, so much nearer we come to our
Paradise:

Neither did these trees afford him only action for his hands, but
instruction to his heart, for here he saw Gods sacraments grow before him; All
other trees had a natural use; these two in the midst of the Garden, a
spiritual; Life is the act of the soul, knowledge the life of the soul; the
tree of knowledge, and the tree of life then, were ordained as earthly helps
of the spiritual part: Perhaps he which ordained the end, immortality of
life; did appoint this fruit as the means, of that life; It is not for us to
inquire after the life we had; and the means we should have had, I am sure it
served to nourish the soul by a lively representation of that living tree,
whose fruit is eternal life, and whose leaves serve to heal the nations.

O infinite mercy, man saw his Savior before him; ere he had need of a
Savior, he saw in whom he should recover an heavenly life, ere he lost the
earthly; but after man had tasted of the tree of knowledge, he might not taste
of the tree of life; That immortal food was not for a mortal stomach: Yet
then did he most savor that invisible tree of life, when he was most
restrained from the other.

O Savior, none but a sinner can relish thee: My taste has bin enough
seasoned with the forbidden fruit, to make it capable of thy sweetness;
Sharpen thou as well the stomach of my soul by repenting as by believing, so
shall I eat in despite of AAdam, live for ever. The one tree was for
confirmation; the other for trial, one showed him what life he should have,
the other what knowledge he should not desire to have: Alas, he that knew al
other things, knew not this one thing, that he knew enough: how Divine a thing
is knowledge, whereof even innocence it self is ambitious? Satan knew what he
did, If this bayt had been gold, or honor, or pleasure, man had contemned it,
who can hope to avoid error, when even man's perfection is mistaken? He looked
for speculatiue knowledge, he should have looked for experimental: he thought
it had been good to know evil: Good was large enough to have perfected his
knowledge, and therein his blessedness.

All that God made was good, and the maker of them much more good; they good in
their kinds, he good in himself. It would not content him to know God, and
his creatures, his curiosity affected to know that which God never made, evil
of sin, and evil of death, which indeed himself made, by desiring to know
them; now we know well evil enough and smart with knowing it. How dear has
this lesson cost us that in some cases it is better to be ignorant; And yet do
the sons of Eve inherit this saucy appetite of their grandmother; How many
thousand souls miscarry with the presumptuous affectation of forbidden
knowledge:

O God, thou have revealed more then we can know, enough to make us happy,
teach me a sober knowledge and a contented ignorance.

Paradise was made for man, yet there I see the serpent; what marvel is it if
my corruption find the serpent in my closet, in my table, in my bed, when our
holy parents found him in the midst of Paradise: no sooner is he entered but he
tempts, he can no more be idle, then harmless, I do not see him at any
other tree; he knew there was no danger in the rest* I see him at the tree
forbidden. How true a serpent is he in every point; In his insinuation to the
place; in his choice of the tree, in his assault of the woman, in his
plausiblenes of speech to avoid terror, in his question to move doubt, in his
reply to work distrust, in his protestation of safety, in his suggestion to
envy and discontent, in his promise of gain.

And if he were so cunning at the first, what shall we think of him now,
after so many thousand years experience? Only thou, (O God) and these Angels
that see thy face are wiser then he; I do not ask why, when he left his
goodness, thou did not bereave him of his skill? Still thou would have him
an Angel, though an evil one, And thou know how to ordain his crait to
thine own glory; I do not desire thee to abate of his subtilty, but to make me
wise; Let me beg it without presumption, make me wiser then Adam; even thine
image which he bore, made him not (through his own weakness) wise enough to
obey thee; thou offeredst him al fruits, and restrainedst but one; Satan
offered him but one and restrained not the rest; when he chose rather to be at
Satan's feeding then thine, it was just with thee to turn him out of thy gates,
with a curse: why should thou feed a rebel at thine own board?

And yet we transgress daily, and thou shuttest not heaven against us: how is
it that we find more mercy then our forefathers? His strength is worthy of
severity, our weakness finds pity. That God from whose face he fled in the
garden, now makes him with shame to fly out of the garden: those Angels that
should have kept him, now keep the gates of Paradise against him; It is not so
easy to recover happiness, as to keep it, or leese it: Yea the same cause
that drove man from Paradise, has also withdrawn paradise from the world.

That fiery sword did not defend it against those waters wherewith the sins of
men drowned the glory of that place: neither now do I care to seek where that
paradise was which we lost, I know where that Paradise is, which we must care
to seek; and hope to find; As man was the image of God, so was that earthly
Paradise an image of heaven; both the images are defaced, both the first
paterns are eternal: Adam was in the first, and stayed not: In the second, is
the second Adam which said, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. There
was that chosen vessel, and heard, and saw what could not be expressed, by
how much the third heaven exceeds the richest earth, so much does that Paradise
whereto we aspire exceed that which we have lost.

Cain and Abell.
Look now (O my soul) upon the two first brethren, perhaps twins; and wonder
at their contrary dispositions and estates: If the privileges of nature had
been worth any thing, the first borne child should not have bin a reprobate.

Now that we may ascribe all to free grace, the elder is a murderer, the
younger a saint, though goodness may be repaired in our selves, yet it cannot
be propagated to ours: Now might Adam see the image of himself in Cain, for
after his own image begot he him, Adam slew his posterity, Cain his brother,
we are too like one another in that wherein we are unlike to God: Even the
cleerest grain sends forth that chafe from which it was fanned, ere the
sowing: yet is this Cain a possession, the same Eve that mistook the fruit of
the garden, mistook also the fruit of her own body, her hope deceived her in
both; so, many good names are ill bestowed; and our comfortable expectations in
earthly things do not seldom disappoint us, doubtless their education was
holy; For Adam though in Paradise he could not be innocent, yet was a good
man out of Paradise; his sin and fall now made him circumspect, and since he
saw that his act had bereaved them of that image of God which he once had for
them, he could not but labor by all holy endeavors to repair it in them.
That so his care might make a mends for his trespass: How plain is it, that
even good breeding cannot alter destiny? That which is crooked can none make
straight, who would think that brethren, and but two brethren: should not love
each other, Dispersed love grows weak, and fewness of objects uses to unite
affections: If but two brothers be left alive of many, they think that the
love of all the rest should survive in them; and now the beams of their
affection are so much the hoter, because they reflect mutually in a right line
upon each other: yet behold, here are but two brothers in a world; and one is
the butcher of the other. Who can wonder at dissentions amongst thousands of
brethren, when he sees so deadly opposition betwixt two, the first roots of
brotherhood: who can hope to live plausibly and securely amongst so many Cains,
when he sees one Cain the death of one Abel? The same devil that set enmity
betwixt man and god; sets enmity betwixt man and man, and yet God said; I will
put enmity between thy seed and her seed, our hatred of the serpent and his
seed is from God: Their hatred of the holy seed is from the serpent; Behold
here at once, in one person the seed of the woman and of the serpent, Cains
natural parts are of the woman; his vicious qualities of the serpent; The
woman gave him to be a brother, the serpent to be a manslayer, all
uncharitableness, all quarrels are of one author: we cannot entertain wrath,
and not give place to the Devil. Certainly, so deadly an act must needs be
deeply grounded.

What then was the occasion of this capital malice? Abels sacrifice is
accepted; what was this to Cain? Cains is rejected; what could Abel remedy
this? Oh envy; the corrasiue of all ill minds; and the root of all desperate
actions: the same cause that moved Satan to tempt the first man, to destroy
himself, and his posterity, the same moves the second man to destroy the third:

It should have been Cains joy to see his brother accepted; It should have
been his sorrow, to see that himself had deserved a reiection, his brothers
example should have excited, and directed him: Could Abel have stayed Gods fire
from descending? Or should he (if he could) reject Gods acceptance, and
displease his maker, to content a brother? Was Cain ever the farther from a
blessing, because his brother obtained mercy? How proud and foolish is malice?
which grows thus mad, for no other cause, but because God, or Abel is not
less good; It has been an old and happy danger to be holy; Indifferent
actions must be careful to avoid offense; But I care not what devil or what
Cain be angry that I do good, or receive good.

There was never any nature without envy; Every man is born a Cain; hating that
goodness in another, which he neglected in himself; There was never envy that
was not bloody; for if it eat not another heart, it will eat our own, but
unless it be restrained it will surely feed it self with the blood of others,
often times in act, always in affection. And that God which (in good) accepts
the will for the deed, condemns the will for the deed in evil. If there be an
evil heart, there will be an evil eye, and if both these, there will be an
evil hand

How early did Martyrdom come into the world? The first man that died, died
for religion; who dare measure Gods love by outward events, when he sees
wicked Cain standing over bleeding Abel; whose sacrifice was first accepted,
and now himself is sacrificed. Death was denounced to man as a curse; yet
behold it first lights upon a Saint, how soon was it altered by the mercy of
that just hand which inflicted it? If death had been evil, and life good;
Cain had been slain, and Abel had suruiued, now that it begins with him that
God loves, O death where is thy sting?

Abel says nothing, his blood cries: Every drop of innocent blood has a
tongue, and is not only vocal, but importunate, what a noise then did the
blood of my Savior make in heaven, who was himself the shepherd and the
sacrifice; The man that was offered, and the God to whom it was offered; The
spirit that herd both says, it spoke better things then the blood of Abel;
Abels blood called for revenge his for mercy; Abels pleaded his own innocence,
his, the satisfaction for all the believing world: Abels procured Cains
punishment, his, freed all repentant souls from punishment, better things
indeed, then the blood of Abel. Better, and therefore that which Abels blood
said, was good: It is good that God should be avenged of sinners, Execution of
justice upon offenders, is no less good, then rewards of goodness.

No sooner does Abels blood speak unto God, then God speaks to Cain; There is
no wicked man to whom God speaks not, if not to his ear, yet to his heart:
what speech was this? Not an accusation, but an inquiry, yet such an enquiry as
would infer an accusation, God loves to have a sinner accuse himself, and
therefore has he set his deputy in the breast of man, neither does God love
this, more then nature abhors it: Cain answers stubbornly: The very name of
Abel wounds him no less, then his hand had wounded Abel: Consciences that are
without remorse, are not without horror: wickedness makes men desperate; the
murderer is angry with God, as of late for accepting his brothers oblation, so
now for listening to his blood.

And now he dares answer God with a question, Am I my brothers keeper? where he
should have said, am not I my brothers murderer. Behold he scorneth to keep whom
he feared not to kill, Good duties are base and troublesome to wicked minds,
whiles even violences of evil are pleasant, Yet this miscreant which neither
had grace to avoid his sin, nor to confess it, now that he is convinced of
sin, and cursed for it, how he howleth, how he exclaimeth? He that cares not
for the act of his sin, shall care for the smart of his punishment. The
damned are weary of their torments, but in vain. How great a madness is it to
complain too late; He that would not keep his brother, is cast out from the
protection of God; he that feared not to kill his brother, fears now, that
whosoever meets him will kill him. The troubled conscience proiecteth fearful
things, and sin makes even cruel men cowardly: God saw it was too much favor
for him to dye: he therefore wills that which Cain wills; Cain would live; It is
yielded him, but for a curse, how often does God hear sinners in anger? He
shall live, banished from God, carrying his hell in his bosom, and the brand of
Gods vengeance in his forehead, God reiects him, the earth repines at him, men
abhor him; himself now wishes that death which he feared, and no man dare
pleasure him with a murder; how bitter is the end of sin, yea without end;
still Cain finds that he killed himself more then his brother, we should
never sin if our foresight were but as good as our sense; The issue of sin
would appear a thousand times more horrible, then the act is Pleasant.

The Deluge.
THe world was grown so foul with sin, that God saw it was time to wash it with
a flood. And so close did wickedness cleave to the authors of it, that when they
were washed to nothing, yet it would not off, yea so deep did it stick in the
very grain of the earth; that God saw it meet to let it soke long under the
waters. So under the Law, the very vessels that had touched unclean water must
either be rinced, or broken, Mankind began but with one, and yet he that saw
the first man, lived to see the earth peopled with a world of men, yet men grew
not so fast as wickedness, one man could soon and easily multiply a thousand
sins, never man had so many children, so that when there were men enough to
store the earth, there were as many sins as would reach up to heaven, whereupon
the waters came down from heaven, and swelled up to heaven again, If there
had not been so deep a deluge of sin, there had been none of the waters: From
whence then was this superfluity of iniquity? Whence, but from the unequal
yoke with Infidels? These marriages did not beget men, so much as wickedness;
from hence religious husbands both lost their piety, and gained a rebellious
and godless generation.

That which was the first occasion of sin, was the occasion of the increase
of sin, A woman seduced Adam, women betray these sons of God, the beauty of
the apple betrayed the woman, the beauty of these women betrayed this holy seed,
Eve saw and lusted, so did they, this also was a forbidden fruit, they lusted,
tasted, sinned, died; the most sins begin at the eyes, by them commonly Satan
creeps into the heart that soul can never be in safety that has not
couenanted with his eyes.

God needed not have given these men any warning of his judgment, They gave
him no warning of their sins, no respite: yet that God might approve his
mercies to the very wicked; he gives them an hundred and twenty years respite
of repenting, how loath is God to strike, that threats so long, he that
delights in revenge, surprises his adversary, whereas he that gives long
warnings desires to be prevented if we were not wilful, we should never smart.

Neither does he give them time only, but a faithful teacher. It is an happy
thing when he that teaches others is righteous; Noah's hand taught them as
much as his tongue. His business in building the Arc was a real sermon to
the world, wherein at once were taught mercy and life to the beleuers; and to
the rebellious destruction.

Me thinks I see those monstrous sons of Lamech coming to Noah, and asking
him, what he means by that strange work; whether he mean to sail upon the
dry land. To whom when he reports Gods purpose, and his, they go away laughing
at his idleness, and tell one another, in sport, that too much holiness has
made him mad: yet cannot they al flout Noah out of his faith, he preaches and
builds and finishes. Doubtless more hands went to this work than his: many a one
wrought upon the Arc, which yet was not saved in the Arc. Our outward works
cannot save us without our faith, we may help to save others, and perish our
selves: what a wonder of mercy is this that I here see? One poor family called
out of a world, and as it were eight grains of corn fanned from a whole barn
full of chafe: one hypocrite was saved with the rest, for Noah's sake, not one
righteous man was swept away for company; For these few was the earth
preserved still under the waters; and all kinds of creatures upon the waters;
which else had been all destroyed. Still the world stands, for their sakes, for
whom it was preserved; Else fire should consume that, which could not be
cleansed by water.

This difference is strange; I see the sauagest of all creatures, lions tigers;
bears by an instinct from God come to seek the Arc, (as we see Swine
foreseeing a storm, run home crying for shelter; men I see not; Reason once
debauched is worse then brutishness: God has use even of these fierce and
cruel beasts, and glory by them, even they being created for man, must live
by him, though to his punishment: how greatly do they offer and submit
themselves to their preserver; renewing that obeisance to this repairer of the
world which, they before sin, yielded to him that first stored the world: He
that shut them into the Arc when they were entered, shut their mouths also
while they did enter. The Lions faune upon Noah, and Daniel; What heart cannot
the maker of them mollify?

The unclean beasts God would have to live, the clean to multiply; and
therefore he sends to Noah seven of the clean, of the unclean two: He knew
the one would annoy man with their multitude, the other would enrich him; Those
things are worthy of most respect which are of most use.

But why seven? Surely that God that created seven days in the week, and made
one for himself; did here preserve of seven clean beasts, one for himself;
for Sacrifice: He gives us six for one in earthly things, that in spiritual
we should be all for him.

Now the day is come, all the guests are entered, the Ark is shut, and the
windows of heaven opened: I doubt not but many of those scoffers, when they
saw the violence of the waters descending, and ascending, according to Noah's
prediction, came wading middle-deep unto the Ark, and importunately craved that
admittance, which they once denied. But now, as they formerly rejected God, so
are they justly rejected of God: Ere vengeance begin, repentance is seasonable;
but if judgment be once gone out, we cry too late; while the Gospel
solicites us, the doors of the Arc are open; if we neglect the time of
grace, in vain shall we seek it with tears, God holds it no mercy to pity
the obstinate. Others more bold then they, hope to overrun the judgment,
and climbing up to the hye mountains look down upon the waters, with more
hope then fear: and now when they see their hills become Islands, they climb up
into the tallest trees there with palenes and horror at once look for death,
and study to avoid it, whom the waves overtake at last half dead with famine
and half with fear. Lo now from the tops of the mountains they descrie the
Ark floting upon the waters, and behold with envy that which before they
beheld with scorn.

In vain does he fly whom God pursues. There is no way to fly from his
judgments, but to fly to his mercy by repenting. The faith of the righteous
cannot be so much derided, as their success is magnified: How securely does
Noah ride out this uproar of heaven, earth, and waters? He hears the pouring
down of the rain above his head, the shrieking of men, and roaring, and
bellowing of beasts, on both sides him, the raging and threats of the waves
under him, he saw the miserable shifts of the distressed unbelievers; and in
the mean time sits quietly in his dry Cabin, neither feeling nor fearing
evil, he knew that he which owed the waters, would steer him, that he who
shut him in, would preserve him. How happy a thing is faith? What a quiet
safety, what an heavenly peace does it work in the soul, in the midst of all
the inundations of evil?

Now when God had fetched again all the life which he had given to his unworthy
creatures, and reduced the world unto his first form wherein waters were over
the face of the earth, it was time for a renouation of al things to succeed
this destruction; To have continued this deluge long, had been to punish Noah,
that was righteous; After forty days therefore, the heavens clear up, after
150. the waters sink down: How soon is God weary of punishing, which is never
weary of blessing; yet may not the Arc rest suddenly, If we did not stay
som-while under Gods hand we should not know how sweet his mercy is, and how
great our thankfulness should be, The Arc though it was Noah's sort against
the waters, yet it was his prison, he was safe in it, but pent up; he that
gave him life by it, now thinks time to give him liberty out of it.

God does not reveal all things to his best servants, behold he that told
Noah 120. years before, what day he should go into the Arc, yet foretells him
not now in the Arc what day the Arc should rest upon the hills, and he should
go forth; Noah therefore sends out his intelligencers, the Raven, and the Dove:
whose wings in that vaporous air might easily descry further then his sight:
The Raven of quick sent, of gross ^eede, of tough constitution, no foul was
so fit for discovery; the likeliest things always succeed not; He neither
will venture far into that solitary world for fear of want, nor yet come into
the Arc for love of liberty; but houers about in uncertainties. How many
carnal minds fly out of the Arc of Gods Church; and embrace the present
world: rather choosing to feed upon the unsavory carcasses of sinful
pleasures; then to be restrained within the strait lists of Christian
obedience.

The Dove is sent forth, a foul, both swift and simple. She like a true
citizen of the Arc, returns; and brings faithful notice; of the continuance
of the waters by her restless and empty return; by her Olive leaf, of the
abatement: how worthy are those messengers to be welcome, which with innocence
in their lives, bring glad tidings of peace, and salvation in their mouths?

Noah reioyces, and believes; yet still he waits seven days more: It is not
good to devour the favors of God too greedily; but so take them in, that we
may digest them: oh strong faith of Noah that was not weary with this delay;
some man would have so longed for the open air after so long closenes, that
upon the first notice of safety he would have uncovered, and voyded the Ark;
Noah stays seven days ere he will open; and well near two months ere he
will forsake the Arc; and not then, unless God that commanded to enter, had
bidden him depart. There is no action good without faith: no faith without a
word. Happy is that man which in all things (neglecting the counsels of flesh
and blood) depends upon the commission of his maker.

FINIS.
Contemplations. THE SECOND BOOK.

Noah. Babel. Abraham. Isaac sacrificed. Lot and Sodom.
Imprinted at London by Melch. Bradwood for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head-1612.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the LORD STANHOPE one of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel, All grace and happiness.
RIGHT Honorable: I durst appeal to the judgment of a carnal Reader (let him
not be preiudicate) that there is no history so pleasant as the sacred; set
aside the majesty of the inditer; none can compare with it, for the
Magnificence and Antiquity of the matter, the sweetness of compiling, the
strange variety of memorable occurrences: And if the delight be such, what
shall the profit be esteemed of that which was written by God for the salvation
of men: I confess no thoughts did ever more sweetly steal me and time away,
then those which I have employed in this subject, and I hope none can equally
benefit others, for if the mere relation of these holy things be profitable,
how much more when it is reduced to use: This second part of the world
repaired, I dedicate to your Lordship, wherein you shall see Noah as weak in
his Tent, as strong in the Arc, an ungracious son reserved from the Deluge to
his Fathers curse: modest piety rewarded with blessings, the building of
Babell, begun in pride, ending in confusion. Abraham's faith, fear, obedience,
Isaac bound upon the Altar under the hand of a Father that has forgotten both
nature, and all his hopes; Sodom burning with a double fire, from hell, and
from heaven: Lot rescued from that impure City, yet after finding Sodom in his
cave: Every one of these passages is not more full of wonder, then of
edification. That spirit which has penned all these things for our learning,
teach us their right use: and sanctifye these my unworthy meditations to the
good of his Church. To whose abundant grace I humbly commend your Lordship.

Your Lordships unfeignedly devoted in all due observance. Jos. Hall.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Noah.
NO sooner is NOAH come out of the Ark, but he builds an Altar: not an house
for himself, but an Altar to the Lord: Our faith will ever teach us to
prefer God to our selves; delayed thankfulness is not worthy of
acceptance, Of those few creatures that are least, God must have some; they
are all his, yet his goodness will have man know, that it was he, for whose
sake they were preserved; It was a privilege to those very bruit creatures
that they were saved from the waters, to be offered up in fire unto God; what a
favor is it to men to be reserved from common destructions, to be sacrificed
to their maker, and redeemer.

Lo this little fire of Noah, through the virtue of his faith, purged the
world, and ascended up into those heuens from which the waters fell, and caused
a glorious rainbow to appear therein for his security: All the sins of the
former world were not so unsavory unto God, as this smoke was pleasant. No
perfume can be so sweet as the holy obedience of the faithful. Now God that
was before annoyed with the ill savor of sin, smells a sweet savor of rest:
Behold here a new and second rest: First God rested from making the world, now
he rests from destroying it: Even while we cease not to offend, he ceases
from a public revenge.

His word was enough; yet withal he gives a sign; which may speak the
truth of his promise to the very eyes of men, thus he does still in his
blessed Sacraments, which are as real words to the soul: The rainbow is the
pledge of our safety; which even naturally signifies the end of a shower; all
the signs of Gods institution are proper, and fignificant.

But who would look after all this to have found righteous Noah the Father of
the new world, lying drunken in his tent? Who could think that wine should
overthrow him that was preserved from the waters? That he who could not be
tainted with the sinful examples of the former world, should begin the example
of a new sin of his own? What are we men, if we be but our selves? While
God vpholds us, no temptation can move us, when he leaves us, no temptation is
too weak to overthrow us? What living man had ever so noble proofs of the
mercy, of the justice of God? Mercy upon himself, justice upon others: What
man had so gracious approbation from his maker: behold he of whom in an
unclean world God said. Thee only have I found righteous, proves now
unclean, when the world was purged: The preacher of righteousness unto the
former age, the King, Priest, and Prophet of the world renewed is the first that
renues the sins of that world which he had reproved, and which he saw
condemned for sin: Gods best children have no fence for sins of infirmity:
Which of the Saints have not once done that, whereof they are ashamed? God that
lets us fall knows how to make as good use of the sins of his holy ones as of
their obedience: If we had not such patterns, who could choose but despair at
the sight of his sins?

Yet we find Noah drunken but once, one act can no more make a good heart
unrighteous, then a trade of sin can stand with regeneration, but when I
look to the effect of this sin, I can not but blush and wonder; Lo this sin,
is worse then sin; Other sins move shame but hide it, this displayes it to
the world, Adam had no sooner sinned, but he saw and abhord his own nakedness,
seeking to hide it even with bushes.

Noah had no sooner sinned, but he discouers his nakedness, and has not so
much rule o^ himself, as to be ashamed, one hours drunkenness bewraies that
which more then 600. years sobriety had modestly concealed; he that gives
himself to wine, is not his own: what shall we think of this vice, which robs
a man of himself, and lays a beast in his room? Noah's nakedness is seen in
wine, it is no unusual quality in this excess, to disclose secrets;
drunkenness does both make imperfections, and show those we have, to others
eyes, so would God have it, that we might be double ashamed, both of those
weaknesses which we discover, and of that weakness which moved us to discover.
Noah is uncovered; but in the midst of his own tent: It had been sinful
though no man had seen it: unknown sins have their guilt and shame, and are
justly attended with known punishments. Ungracious Cham saw it and laughed,
his Fathers shame should have been his; the deformity of those parts from which
he had his being; should have begotten in him a secret horror, and deiection,
how many graceless men make sport at the causes of their humiliation. Twice
had Noah given him life, yet neither the name of a Father, and preserver, nor
age, nor virtue could shield him from the contempt of his own.

I see that even God's Ark may nourish monsters* some filthy toades may lie
under the stones of the Temple, God preserues some men in judgment, better had
it been for Cham to have perished in the waters, then to live unto his Fathers
curse. Not content to be a witness of this filthy sight; he goes on to be a
proclaimer of it. Sin does ill in the eye but worse in the tongue: As all sin
is a work of darkness, so it should be buried in darkness. The report of sin
is oft-times as ill, as the commission; for it can never be blazoned without
uncharitableness; seldom without infection; Oh the unnatural and more then
Chammish impiety of those sons which rejoice to publish the nakedness of their
spiritual parents even to their enemies.

Yet it was well for Noah that Cham could tell it to none but his own; and
those, gracious and dutiful sons. Our shame is the less if none know our
faults but our friends. Behold how love covers sins, these good sons are
so far from going forward to see their fathers shame, that they go backward
to hide it, The cloak is laid on both their shoulders, they both go back with
quall paces, and dare not so much as look back lest they should unwillingly
see the cause of their shame, and will rather adventure to stumble at their
fathers body then to see his nakedness: How did it grieve them to think that
they which had so often come to their holy father with reverence must now in
reverence turn their backs upon him; and that they must now cloth him in
pity, which had so often clothed them in love: And which adds more to their
duty, they covered him, and said nothing. This modest sorrow is their praise,
and our example; The sins of those we love and honor, we must hear of with
indignation; fearfully and unwillingly believe, acknowledge with grief and
shame, hide with honest excuses, and bury in silence.

How equal a regard is this both of piety and disobedience? because Cham sinned
against his Father, therefore he shall be plagued in his children; Iapheth is
dutiful to his Father, and finds it in his posterity. Because Cham was an ill
son to his Father, therefore his sons shall be seruans to his brethren,
because Iapheth set his shoulder to Sems, to bear the cloak of shame,
therefore shall Iapheth dwell in the tents of Sem; partaking with him in
blessing, as in duty. When we do but what we ought; yet God is thankful to
us; and rewards that which we should sin if we did not: who could ever yet
show me a man rebelliously undutiful to his parents that has prospered in
himself, and his seed?

Babel.
HOW soon are men and sins multiplied? within one hundred years the world is
as full of both, as if there had been no deluge. Though men could not but see
the fearful monuments of the ruin of their Ancestors, yet how quickly had
they forgotten a flood? Good Noah lived to see the world both populous, and
wicked again. And doubtless oft-times repented to have been the preserver of
some whom he saw to traduce the vices of the former world, to the renewed: It
could not but grieve him to see the destroyed giants revive out of his own
loins, and to see them of his flesh and blood tirannise over themselves. In his
sight Nimrod casting off the awe of his holy grandfather, grew imperious and
cruel, and made his own kinsmen servants. How easy a thing it is for a great
spirit to be the head of a faction; when even brethren will stoop to
servitude; And now when men are combined together, evil and presumptuous
motions find encouragement in multitudes; and each man takes a pride in
seeming forwardest, we are the cheerfuller in good when we have the
assistance of company, much more in sinning, by how much we are more prone to
evil then good. It was a proud word (Come let us build us a city and a tower
whose top may reach to heaven.)

They were newly come down from the hills unto the plains, and now think of
raising up an hill of building in the plain, when their tents were pitched
upon the mountains of Armenia they were as near to Heaven as their tower could
make them; but their ambition must needs aspire to an height of their own
raising. Pride is ever discontented; and still seeks matter of boasting in her
own works.

How fondly do men reckon without God, Come let us build; As if there had
been no stop but in their own will: As if both earth and time had been
theirs: Still do all natural men build Babell; forecasting their own plots
so resolutely, as if there were no power to countermand them: It is just with
God that peremptory determinations seldom prosper: Whereas those things which
are fearfully and modestly undertaken, commonly succeed.

Let us build us a city, if they had taken God with them it had bin
commendable, establishing of societies is pleasing to him that is the God of
order: But a tower whose top may reach to Heaven, was a shameful arrogance, an
impious presumption; who would think that we little Ants that creep upon
this earth should think of climbing up to heaven, by multiplying of earth?

Pride ever looks at highest, the first man would know as God, these would
dwell as God; couetousnesnesse and ambition know no limits. And what if they
had reached up to heaven, some hills are as high as they could hope to be, and
yet are no whit the better; no place alters the condition of nature, an Angel
is glorious, though he be upon earth; and man is but earth though he be above
the clouds: The nearer they had been to heaven the more subject should they
have been to the violences of heaven; to thunders, lightnings, and those other
higher inflammations, what had been but to thrust themselves into the hands of
the revenger of all wicked insolences? God loves that heaven should be looked
at, and affected with all humble desires, with the holy ambitions of faith, not
with the proud imaginations of our own atchieuements.

But wherefore was all this? Not that they loved so much to be neighbors to
heaven, as to be famous upon earth; It was not commodity that was here sought,
not safety, but glory: whither does not thirst of fame carry men? whether in
good or evil: It makes them seek to climb to heaven, it makes them not fear to
run down headlong to hell: Even in the best things desire of praise stands in
competition with conscience, and brags to have the more clients. One builds a
Temple to Diana in hope of glory, intending it for one of the great wonders of
the world; another in hope of fame burns it. He is a rare man that has not
some Babel of his own, whereon he bestows pains and cost, only to be talked
of. If they had done better things in a vainglorious purpose; their act had
been accursed; if they had built houses to God, if they had given alms to
men, if they had sacrificed, prayed, lived well; the intent poisons the action;
but now both the act and the purpose are equally vain, and the issue is as vain
as either.

God has a special indignation at pride above all sins, and will cross our
endeavors not for that they are evil (what hurt could be in laying one brick
upon another?) but for that they are proudly undertaken: He could have
hindered the laying of the first stone; and might as easily have made the
trench for the foundation, the grave of the builders: But he loves to see what
wicked men would do; and to let fools run themselves out of breath; what
monument should they have had of their own madness, and his powerful
interruption, if the walls had risen to no height? To stop them then in the
midst of their course, he meddles not with either their hands, or their feet,
but their tongues; not by pulling them out, not by loosing their strings, not
by making them say nothing, but by teching them to say too much: Here is
nothing varied but the sound of letters, even this frustrates the work, and
befooles the workmen: How easy is it for God ten thousand ways to correct
and forestall the greatest proiects of men? He that taught Adam the first
words, taught them words that never were. One calls for brick, the other looks
him in the face, and wonders what he commands, and how and why he speaks such
words, as were never heard, and in stead thereof brings him mortar, returning
him an answer as little understood, each chides with other, expressing his
choler so, as he only can understand himself: From heat they fall to quiet
entreaties, but still with the same success. At first every man thinks his
fellow mocks him, but now perceiving this serious confusion their only answer
was silence, and ceasing; they could not come together, for no man could call
them to be understood; and if they had assembled nothing could be determined,
because one could never attain to the others purpose: No, they could not have
the honor of a general dismission, but each man leaves his trowell and
station more like a fool then he undertook it, so commonly actions begun in
glory, shut up in shame. All external actions depend upon the tongue, No man
can know others mind, if this be not the interpreter; hence as there were many
toungs given to stay the building of Babel, so there were as many given to
build the new Jerusalem, the Evangelical Church. How dear has Babel cost all
the world? At the first when there was but one language, men did spend their
time in Arts; (so was it requisite at the first settling of the world, and so
came early to perfection) but now we stay so long (of necessity) upon the shel
of tongues, that we can hardly have time to chew the sweet kernel of
knowledge: Surely men would have grown too proud if there had been no Babel:
It falls out oft-times that one sin is a remedy of a greater. Division of
tongues must needs slacken any work: Multiplicitie of language had not bin
given by the Holy ghost for a blessing to the Church, if the world had not
been before possessed with multiplicitie of languages, for a punishment: Hence
it is that the building of our Sion rises no faster, because our tongues are
divided; Happy were the Church of God if we al spoke but one language: Whiles
we differ, we can build nothing but Babel; difference of tongues caused their
Babel to cease, but it builds ours.

Abraham.
IT was fit that he which should be the father and pattern of the faithful
should be thoroughly tried for in a set copy every fault is important, and may
prove a rule of error: of ten trials which Abraham passed; the last was the
sorest: No son of Abraham can hope to escape temptations, while he sees that
bosom in which he desires to rest, so assaulted with difficulties. Abraham
must leave his country and kindred, and live among strangers; The calling of
God never leaves men, where it finds them, the earth is the Lords; and all
places are alike to the wise and faithful: If Chaldea had not been grossly
idolatrous; Abraham had not left it; no bond must tie us to the danger of
infection:

But whether must he go? To a place he knew not, to men that knew not him: it
is enough comfort to a good man, wheresoever he is, that he is acquainted with
God, we are never out of our way while we follow the calling of God. Never any
man lost by his obedience to the highest: because Abraham yielded, God gives
him the possession of Canaan: I wonder more at his faith in taking this
possession, then in leaving his own; Behold Abraham takes possession for that
seed which he had not; which in nature he was not like to have; of that land
whereof he should not have one foot, wherein his seed should not be settled of
almost five hundred years after, the power of faith can prevent time; and make
future things present; If we be the true sons of Abraham we have already
(while we soiourne here on earth) the possession of our land of promise:
while we seek our country, we have it.

Yet even Canaan does not afford him bread, which yet he must believe shall
flow with milk and honey to his seed: sense must yield to faith, woe were us, if
we must judge of our future estate by the present, Egypt gives relief to
Abraham, when Canaan cannot In outward things Gods enemies may fare better,
then his friends: Thrice had Egypt preserved the Church of God, in Abraham, in
Iaacob, in Christ; God oft-times makes use of the world for the behoof of his;
though without their thanks; as contrarily, he uses the wicked for scourges to
his own inheritance, and burns them; because in his good they intended evil.

But what a change is this? Hitherto has Sarah been Abraham's wife, now AEpypt
has made her his sister; fear has turned him from an husband to a brother;
No strength of faith can exclude some doubtings: God has said, I will make
thee a great nation, Abraham says, The Egyptians will kill me: He that lived
by his faith, yet shrinketh, and sins. How vainly shall we hope to believe
without al fear, and to live without infirmities? Some little aspersions of
unbelief cannot hinder the praise and power of faith; Abraham believed, and it
was imputed to him for righteousness; He that through inconsiderateness
doubted twice of his own life, doubts not of the life of his seed, even from
the dead and dry womb of Sarah, yet was it more difficult that his posterity
should Sarah, then that Sarahs husband should live in Egypt: This was above
nature, yet he believes it; Sometimes the believer sticks at easy trials,
and yet breaks through the greatest temptations without fear: Abraham was
old ere this promise and hope of a son; and still the older, the more
incapable; yet God makes him wait twenty five years for performance, no time
is long to faith which has learned to differ hopes without fainting and
irkesomnesse.

Abraham heard this news from the Angel, and laughed, Sarah heard it, and
laughed; they did not more agree in their desire, then differ in their
affection; Abraham laughed for joy; Sarah for distrust, Abraham laughed because
he believed it would be so; Sarah because she believed it could not be: the
same act varies in the manner of doing, and the intention of the doer, yet
Sarah laughed but within her self and is bewraied: How God can find us out in
secret sins; how easily did she now think, that he which could know of her
inward laughter, could know of her conception, and now she that laughed and
believed not, believes and fears.

What a lively pattern do I see in Abraham and Sarah, of a strong faith and
weak, of strong in Abraham and weak in Sarah: She to make God good of his
word to Abraham, knowing her own barrenness, substitutes an Hagar, and in an
ambition of seed, persuades to Poligamy. Abraham had never looked to obtain
the promise by any other then a barren womb, if his own wife had not
importunde him to take another: when our own apparent means fail, weak
faith is put to shifts; and proiects strange devises of her own to attain her
end. She will rather conceive by another womb then be childlesse: when she
hears of an impossibility to nature, she doubreth, and yet hides her
diffidence; and when she must believe, fears, because she did distrust:
Abraham hears and believes and expects and reioyces; he says not, I am old
and weak; Sarah is old and barren, where are the many nations that shall come
from these withered loins? It is enough to him that God has said it, he sees
not the means, he sees the promise. He knew that God would rather raise him up
seed from the very stones that he trod upon, then himself should want a
large and happy issue.

There is no faith where there is neither means or hopes. Difficulties and
impossibilities are the true objects of belief: Hereupon God ads to his name
that which he would fetch from his loins, and made his name as ample as his
posterity: never any man was a looser by believing: Faith is ever recompensed
with glory.

Neither is Abraham content only to wait for God, but to smart for him; God
bids him cut his own flesh; he willingly sacrifices this parcel of his skin
and blood, to him that was the owner of all: How glad he is to carry this
painful mark of the love of his creator. How forward to seal this covenant
with blood betwixt God and him, not regarding the soreness of his body in
comparison of the confirmation of his soul; The wound was not so grievous as
the signification was comfortable. For herein he saw that from his loins
should come that blessed seed which should purge his soul from all corruption:
well is that part of us lost, which may give assurance of the salvation of the
whole; our faith is not yet sound, if it have not taught us to neglect pain
for God, and more to love his Sacraments, then our own flesh.

Isaac sacrificed.
But all these are but easy tasks of faith, all ages have stood amazed at the
next: Not knowing whether they should more wonder at Gods command, or Abraham's
obedience, many years had that good Patriarch waited for his Isaac; now at
last he has joyfully received him, and that with this gracious acclamation.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called, and all nations blessed. Behold the son of
his age, the son of his love, the son of his expectation, he that might not
endure a mock from his brother, must now endure the knife of his Father; Take
thine only son Isaac whom thou love and get thee to the land of Moriah
and offer him there for a burnt offering.

Never any gold was tried in so hot a fire. Who but Abraham would not have
expostulated with God? What? Does the God of mercies now begin to delight in
blood? Is it possible that murder should become piety? Or if thou will needs
take pleasure in an humane sacrifice, is there none but Isaac fit for thine
Altar, none but Abraham to offer him? Shall these hands destroy the fruit of
mine own loins? Can I not be faithful unless I be unnatural? Or if I must
needs be the monster of all parents, will not Ismael yet be accepted? O God
where is thy mercy, where is thy justice? Have thou given me but one only
son, and must I now slay him? Why did I wait so long for him? Why did thou
give him me? Why did thou promise me a blessing in him? What will the
heathen say when they shall hear of this infamous massacre? How can thy name,
and my profession escape a perpetual blasphemy? With what face shall I look
upon my wife Sarah, whose son I have murdered* How shall she intertaine the
executioner of Isaac? Or who will believe that I did this from thee? How shall
not all the world spit at his holy cruelty, and say there goes the man that cut
the throat of his own son. Yet if he were an ungracious or rebellious child,
his deserts might give some color to this violence, but to lay hands on so
dear, so dutiful, so hopeful a son, is incapable of all pretenses.

But grant that thou which art the God of nature may either alter or neglect
it, what shall I say to the truth of thy promises? Can thy justice admit
contradictions; can thy decrees be changeable, can thou promise and
disappoint? Can these two stand together, Isaac shall live to be the father of
nations; and Isaac shall now dye by the hand of his Father? when Isaac is once
gone where is my seed, where is my blessing? O God if thy commands and purposes
be capable of alteration, alter this bloody sentence, and let thy first word
stand.

These would have been the thoughts of a weak heart, But God knew that he
spoke to an Abraham, and Abraham knew that he had to do with a God: Faith had
taught him not to argue, but obey; In an holy wilfulness he either forgets
nature, or despises her, he is sure that what God commands is good, that what
he promises, is infallible, and therefore is careless of the means, and trusts
to the end.

In matters of God, whosoever consults with flesh and blood shall never offer
up his Isaac, to God, there needs no counselor when we know God is the
commander; here is neither grudging nor deliberating, nor delaying: His faith
would not suffer him so much as to be sorry for that he must do. Sarah her
self may not know of Gods charge, and her husbands purpose, lest her affection
should have overcome her faith; lest her weakness now grown importunat,
should have said, Disobey God any die. That which he must do, he will do, he
that has learned not to regard the life of his son, had learned not to regard
the sorrow of his wise. It is too much tenderness to respect the censures and
constructions of others, when we have a direct word from God. The good
Patriarch rises early, and addresses himself to his sad journey. And now must
he travel three whole days to do this execution, and still must Isaac be in
his eye, whom all this while he seems to see bleeding upon the pile of wood,
which he carries; there is nothing so miserable as to dwell under the
expectation of a great evil; That misery which must be, is mitigated with
speed, and aggrauated with delay: All this while if Abraham had repented him,
he had leisure to return. There is no small trial, even in the very time of
trial: now when they are come within sight of the chosen mountain, the
servants are dismissed, what a devotion is this that will abide no witnesses,
he will not suffer two of his own vassals to see him do that, which soon
after all the world must know he has done, yet is not Abraham afraid of that
piety, which the beholders could not see without horror, without resistance,
which no ear could hear of without abomination. What stranger could have
endured to see the father carry the knife and fire, instruments of that death,
which he had rather suffer then inflict? The son securely carrying that burden
which must carry him.

But if Abraham's heart could have known how to relent, that question of his
dear, innocent and religious son had melted it into compassion, My father,
behold the fire and the wood, but where is the sacrifice? I know not whether
that word, My Father, did not strike Abraham as deep, as the knife of Abraham
could strike his son: yet does he not so much as think, (O miserable man that
may not at once be a son to such a God, and a father to such a son:) Still
he persists, and conceales, and where he meant not, prophesies, My son, God
shall provide a lamb for the burnt offering:

The heavy tidings was loath to come forth, It was a death to Abraham to say
what he must do: He knows his own faith to act this, he knows not Isaacs to
endure it, But now when Isaac has helped to build the Altar, whereon he must
be consumed; he hears (not without astonishment) the strange command of God,
the final will of his Father: My son thou art the lamb which God has
provided for this burnt offering; If my blood would have excused thee, how many
thousand times had I rather to give thee my own life, then take thine Alas I am
full of days, and now of long lived not but in thee; Thou might have
preserved the life of thy father and have comforted his death, but the God of
us both has chosen thee; He that gave thee unto me miraculously, bids me by
an unusual means to return thee unto him. I need not tell thee, that I
sacrifice all my worldly joys, yea and my self in thee, but God must be
obeyed; neither art thou too dear for him that calls thee: come on my son,
restore the life that God has given thee by me: offer thy self willingly to
those flames, send up thy soul cheerfully unto thy glory; and know that God
loves thee above others, since he requires thee alone to be consecrated in
sacrifice to himself.

Who cannot imagine with what perplexed mixtures of passions, with what changes
of countenance, what doubts, what fears, what amazement good Isaac received
this sudden message from the mouth of his Father, how he questioned, how he
pleaded; but when he had somewhat digested his thoughts, and considered that
the Author was God, the actor Abraham, the action a sacrifice, he now approoues
himself the son of Abraham; now he incourages the trembling hands of his
Father; with whom he strives in this praise of forwardnes, and obedience; now
he offers his hands and feet to the cords, his throat to the knife, his body to
the altar; and growing ambitious of the sword and fire, intreates his father to
do that, which he would have done though he had dissuaded him; O holy
emulation of faith! O blessed agreement of the sacrificer, and oblation:
Abraham is as ready to take, as Isaac to give, He binds those dear hands which
are more straightly bound with the cords of duty, and resolution; he lays his
sacrifice upon the wood, which now before hand burnt inwardly with the heavenly
fire of zeal and devotion.

And now having kissed him his last, not without mutual tears, he lifts up his
hand to fetch the stroke of death at once; not so much as thinking, perhaps God
will relent after the first wound; Now the stay of Abraham, the hope of the
Church lies on bleeding under the hand of a Father, what bowels can choose but
yearne at this spectacle; which of the sauagest heathens that had been now
upon the hill of Moriah, and had seen through the bushes the sword of a father
hanging over the throat of such a son would not have been more perplexed in
his thoughts, then that unexpected sacrifice was in those briers: yet he whom
it nearest concerned, is least touched, Faith has wrought the same in him,
which cruelty would in others, not to be moved; He contemns all fears, and
ouerlooks all impossibilities; His heart tells him that the same hand which
raised Isaac from the dead womb of Sarah, can raise him again from the ashes of
his sacrifice: with this confidence was the hand of Abraham now falling upon
the throat of Isaac who had given himself for dead, and rejoiced in the
change; when suddenly the Angel of God interrupts him, forbids him, commends
him.

The voice of God was never so welcome, never so sweet, never so seasonable as
now: It was the trial that God intended, not the fact; Isaac is sacrificed,
and is yet alive, and now both of them are more happy in that they would have
done, then they could have been distressed if they had done it. Gods charges
are often times harsh in the beginnings, and proceeding, but in the conclusion
always comfortable: True spiritual comforts are commonly late and sudden: God
differr's on purpose that our trials may be perfect, our deliverance welcome,
our recompense glorious: Isaac had never been so precious to his father if he
had not been recovered from death; if he had not been as miraculously
restored as given: Abraham had never bin so blessed in his seed, if he had not
neglected Isaac for God.

The only way to find comfort in any earthly thing is to surrender it (in a
faithful carelessness) into the hands of God: Abraham came to sacrifice, he
may not go away with dry hands: God cannot abide that good purposes should be
frustrate: lest either he should do that, for which he came or should want
means of speedy thanksgiving for so gracious a appointment. Behold a Ram
stands ready for the sacrifice, and as it were, proffers himself to this happy
exchange. He that made that beast, brings him thither, fastens him there: Even
in small things there is a great providence what mysteries there are in every
act of God? The only son of God upon this very hill, is laid upon the altar
of the cross; and so becomes a true sacrifice for the world, that yet he is
raised without impeachment, and exempted from the power of death: The Lamb of
God which takes the sins of the world is here really offered, and accepted:
One Savior in two figures; in the one, dying; restored in the other. So
Abraham whiles he exercises his faith, confirms it; and reioyces more to
foresee the true Isaac in that place offered to death for his sins, then to
see the carnal Isaac preserved from death for the reward of his faith.
Whatsoever is dearest to us upon earth is our Isaac; happy are we if we can
sacrifice it to God; those shall never rest with Abraham that cannot sacrifice
with Abraham.

Lot and Sodom.
BEfore Abraham and Lot grew rich, they dwelt together; now their wealth
separates them; Their society was a greater good then their riches: Many a one
is a looser by his wealth; Who would account those things good which make us
worse? It had bin the duty of young Lot to offer rather then to choose; to yield
rather then contend: who would not here think Abraham the nephew; and Lot the
uncle? It is no disparagement for greater persons to begin treaties of peace.
Better does it beseem every son of Abraham to win with love, then to sway with
power. Abraham yields over this right of his choice; Lot takes it, And behold
Lot is crossed in that which he chose, Abraham is blessed in that which was
left him, God never suffers any man to leese by an humble remission of his
right in a desire of peace.

Wealth has made Lot not only undutiful, but covetous, he sees the goodly
plains of Jordan, the richness of the soil, the commodity of the rivers, the
situation of the cities, and now not once inquiring into the conditions of the
inhabitants, he is in love with Sodom: Outward appearances are deceitful
guides to our judgment, or affections: they are worthy to be deceived that
value things as they seem: It is not long after that Lot paies dear for his
rashness. He fled for quietness with his uncle and fiends war with
strangers: Now is he carried prisoner with all his substance by great enemies;
Abraham must rescue him, of whom he was forsaken. That wealth which was the
cause of his former quarrels, is made a pray to merciless heathens. That place
which his eye couetously chose betraies his life and goods. How many Christians
whiles they have looked at gain, have lost themselves?

Yet this ill success has neither driven out Lot, nor amended Sodom; he
still loves his commodity, and the Sodomites their sins wicked men grow worse
with afflictions, as water grows more cold after an heat: And as they leave
not sinning, so God leaves not plaguing them, but still follows them with
succession of judgments: In how few years has Sodom forgot she was spoiled,
and led captive? If that wicked city had been warned by the sword, it had
escaped the fire; but now this visitation had not made ten good men in those
five cities: How fit was this heap for the fire, which was all chafe? Only
Lot vexed his righteous soul with the sight of their uncleanness; He vexed his
own soul, for who bad him stay there? yet because he was vexed, he is
delivered. He escapes their judgment, for whose sins he escaped. Though he
would be a guest of Sodom, yet because he would not entertain their sins,
he becomes an host to the Angels: Even the good Angels are the executioners of
Gods judgment: There cannot be a better or more noble act then to do justice
upon obstinate malefactors.

Who can be ashamed of that which did not mis-beseem the very Angels of God?
Where should the Angels lodge but with Lot, the houses of holy men are full of
these heavenly spirits, when they know not, they pitch their tents in ours, and
visit us when we see not, and when we feel not, protect us; It is the honor
of Gods Saints to be attended by Angels: The filthy Sodomites now flock
together, stirred up with the fury of Envy, and lust, and dare require to do
that in troops which to act single, had been too abominable, to imagine,
unnatural. Continuance and society in evil makes wicked men outrageous and
impudent: It is not enough for Lot to be the witness; but he must be the
baud also. ( Bring forth these men that we may know them.

Behold even the Sodomites speak modestly; though their acts and intents be
villainous. What a shame it is for those which profess impurity of heart, to
speak filthily? The good man craves and pleades the laws of hospitality; and
when he sees headstrong purposes of mischief chooses rather to be an ill
father; then an ill host: His intention was good, but his offer was faulty; If
through his allowance the Sodomites had defiled his daughters; it had been his
sin; If through violence they had defiled his guests; it had been only
theirs: There can be no warrant for us to sin, lest others should sin: It
is for God to prevent sins with judgment, it is not for men to prevent a
greater sin with a less: the best minds when they are troubled; yield
inconsiderate motions, as water that is violently stirred; sends up bubbles:
God meant better to Lot then to suffer his weak offer to be accepted: Those
which are bent upon villainy are more exasperated by disswasion; as some strong
streams when they are resisted by floodgates, swell over the banks.

Many a one is hardened by the good word of God; and in steed of receiving the
counsel, rages at the messenger: When men are grown to that pass, that they
are no whit better by afflictions, and worse with admonitions, God finds it
time to strike; Now Lots guests begin to show themselves Angels, and first
deliver Lot in Sodom, then from Sodom: First strike them with blindness, whom
they will after consume with fire: How little did the Sodomites think that
vengeance was so near them, while they went groping in the streets, and
cursing those whom they could not find, Lot with the Angels is in secure
light, and sees them miserable, and foresees them burning. It is the use of God
to blind and besot those whom he means to destroy: The light which they shall
see shall be fiery, which shall be the beginning of an everlasting darkness,
and a fire unquenchable: Now they have done sinning and God begins to judge:
Wickedness has but a time, the punishment of wickedness is beyond all time.
The residue of the night was both short and dangerous. Yet good Lot, though
sought for by the Sodomites, and newly pulled into his house by the Angels goes
forth of his house to seek his sons in law: No good man would be saved alone;
faith makes us charitable with neglect of all peril: He warnes them like a
Prophet, and aduises them like a Father, but both in vain, he seems to them
as if he mocked, and they do more then seem to mock him again. Why should to
morrow differ from other days? Who ever saw it rain fire? Or whence should
that brimstone come? Or if such showers must fall, how shall nothing burn but
this valley? So to carnal men preaching is foolishness, devotion idleness, the
Prophets mad men; Paul a babbler: These men's incredulity is as worthy of the
fire, as the others uncleanness. He that believes not is condemned already.

The messengers of God do not only hasten Lot, but pull him by a gracious
violence out of that impure city. They thirsted at once after vengeance upon
Sodom and Lots safety; they knew God could not strike Sodom, till Lot were
gone out, and that Lot could not be safe within those walls. We are all
naturally in Sodom, if God did not hale us out, whiles we linger we should
be condemned with the world. If God meet with a very good field, he pulls up
the weeds, and lets the corn grow, if indifferent, he lets the corn and
weeds grow together; if very ill, he gathers the few ears of corn, and burns
the weeds.

Oh the large bounty of God which reaches not to us only, but to ours: God
saues Lot for Abraham's sake, and Zoar for Lots sake; If Sodom had not been
too wicked, it had escaped: Were it not for Gods dear children that are
intermixed with the world it could not stand: The wicked owe their lives unto
these few good; whom they hate and persecute. Now at once the Sun rises upon
Zoar, and fire falls down upon Sodom: Abraham stands upon the hill and sees
the cities burning; It is fair weather with Gods children, when it is foulest
with the wicked. Those which burned with the fire of lust, are now consumed
with the fire of vengeance They sinned against nature, and now against the
course of nature; fire descends from Heaven and consumes them: Lot may not so
much as look at the flame, whether for the stay of his passage, or the horror
of the sight, or trial of his faith; or fear of commiseration. Small precepts
from God are of importance, obedience is as well tried, and disobedience as well
punished in little, as in much: His wife does but turn back her head, whether
in curiosity, or unbelief, or love, and compassion of the place; she is
turned into a monument of disobedience; what does it avail her not to be
turned into ashes in Sodom, when she is turned into a pillar of salt in the
plain? He that saved a whole city cannot save his own wife. God cannot abide
small sins, in those whom he has obliged. If we displease him, God can as
well meet with us out of Sodom: Lot now come into Zoar maruels at the stay of
her, whom he might not before look back to call; and soon after returning to
seek her beholds this change with wonder and grief: He finds salt in steed
of flesh, a pillar in steed of a wife; he finds Sodom consumed, and her
standing, and is more amazed with this, by how much it was both more near him,
and less expected.

When God delivers us from destruction, he does not secure us from all
a^flictions: Lot has lost his wife, his allies, his substance, and now betakes
himself to an uncomfortable solitariness.

Yet though he fled from company, he could not fly from sin: He who could not
be tainted with uncleanness in Sodom, is overtaken with drunkenness and
incest in a cave: Rather then Satan shall not want baits his own daughters will
prove Sodomites; Those which should have comforted, betrayed him: How little
are some hearts moved with judgments? The ashes of Sodom and the pillar of
salt were not yet out of their eye when they dare think of lying with their
own Father. They knew that whilst Lot was sober he could not be unchaste:
Drunkenness is the way to all bestiall affections, and acts. Wine knows no
difference either of persons or sins: No doubt Lot was afterward ashamed of
his incestuous seed, and now wished he had come alone out of Sodom; yet even
this unnatural bed was blessed with increase; and one of our Saviors worthy
Ancestors sprung after from this line. Gods election is not tied to our means;
neither are blessings or curses ever traduced; The chaste bed of holy parents
has often times bred a monstrous generation; and contrarily God has raised
sometimes an holy seed from the drunken bed of incest, or fornication; It has
been seen that weighty ears of corn have grown, out of the compass of the
tilled field: Thus will God magnify the freedom of his own choice: and let us
know that we are not borne, but made good.

FINIS.
Contemplations. THE THIRD BOOK.

Jacob and Esau. Jacob and Laban. Dinah. Judah and Thamar. Joseph.
Imprinted at London by Melch. Bradwood for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the LORD DENNY Baron of Waltham my singular good
Patron: All grace and happiness.
RIGHT Honorable, I know, and in all humility confess, how weak my discourse
is, and how unworthy of this divine subject which I have undertaken, which if
an Angel from heaven should say he could sufficiently comment upon, I should
distrust him. Yet this let me say, (without any vain boasting) that these
thoughts (such as they are) through the blessing of God, I have wouen out of my
self, as holding it (after our Saviors rule) better to give then to receive.
It is easier to heap together large volumes of others labors, then to work
out lesser of our own, and the suggestion of one new thought is better then
many repeated.

This part (which together with the Author is yours) shall present to your
Lordship, the busiest of all the Patriarchs, together with his trialls, and
success: wherein you shall see Esau stripped by fraud, of that which he
willingly sold, Jacobs hard adventures for the blessing, and no less hard
services for his wives and substance, his dangerous encounters ending joyfully,
the rape of his only daughter seconded with the treacherous murder of his sons,
Iudahs wrong to Thamar repayd by his own uncleanness: Joseph's sale,
imprisonment, honor, piety; The sin of his brethren well bestowed, well
answered. I so touch at the uses of all these, as one that know, it is easy to
say more, and impossible to say enough. God give a blessing to my endeavors,
and a pardon to my weaknesses; to your Lordship, an increase of his graces,
and perfection of all happiness.

Your Lordships humbly and officiously devoted in all duty. IOS. HALL.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Jacob and Esau.
OF all the Patriarchs none made so little noise in the world as Isaac; none
lived either so privately, or so innocently: Neither know I whether he
approved himself a better son or an husband. For the one; He gave himself
over to the knife of his Father, and mourned three years for his mother; for
the other he sought not to any handmaids bed, but in a chaste forbearance
reserved himself for twenty years space, and prayed. Rebecca was so long
barren, his prayers proved more effectual then his seed. At last she
conceived, as if she had been more then the daughter in law to Sarah; whose
son was given her, not out of the power of nature, but of her Husbands faith;
God is often better to us then we would: Isaac prays for a son; God gives him
two at once: Now, she is no less troubled with the strife of the children in
her womb, then before with the want of children: we know not when we are
pleased; that which we desire, oft-times discontents us more in the fruition;
we are ready to complain both full and fasting. Before Rebecca conceived she
was at ease: Before spiritual regeneration there is all peace in the soul: No
sooner is the new man formed in us, but the flesh conflicts with the spirit:
There is no grace where is no unquietness: Esau alone would not have striuen,
nature will ever agree with it self; Never any Rebecca conceived only an Esau;
or was so happy as to conceive none but a Jacob; She must be the mother of
both, that she may have both joy and exercise. This strife began early; Every
true Israelite begins his war with his being. How many actions which we
know not of, are not without presage and signification? These two were the
champions of two nations, the field was their mothers womb, their quarrel,
precedence and superiority: Esau got the right of nature; Jacob of grace: yet
that there might be some pretense of equality, lest Esau should outrun his
brother into the world, Jacob holds him fast by the heel: So his hand was
borne before the others foot: But because Esau is some minutes the elder, that
the younger might have better claim to that which God had promised he buys
that, which he could not win: If either by strife, or purchase, or suit, we
can attain spiritual blessings we are happy: If Iaacob had come forth first,
he had not known how much he was bound to God for the favor of his
advancement. There was never any meat except the forbidden fruit so dear
bought, as this broth of Iaacob; In both, the receiver and the eater is
accursed: Every true son of Israel will be content to purchase spiritual
favors with earthly; And that man has in him too much of the blood of Esau,
which will not rather dye then forgo his birthright. But what has careless
Esau lost, if having sold his birthright, he may obtain the blessing? Or what
has Iaacob gained, if his brothers venison may counteruaile his pottage? Yet
thus has old Isaac decreed; who was now not more blind in his eyes, then in
his affections: God had forewarned him that the elder should serve the younger,
yet Isaac goes about to bless Esau. It was not so hard for Abraham to
reconcile Gods promise and Isaacs sacrifice, as for Isaac to reconcile the
superiority of Jacob, with Esaus benediction: for Gods hand was in that, in
this none but his own: The dearest of Gods saints have been sometimes
transported with natural affections: He saw himself preferred to Ismael,
though the elder; he saw his father wilfully forgetting nature at Gods
command, in binding him for sacrifice; He saw Esau lewdly matched with
Heathens; and yet he will remember nothing, but Esau is my first borne; But
how gracious is God; that when we would, will not let us sin? And so orders
our actions, that we do not what we will, but what we ought; That God which had
ordained the Lordship to the younger, will also contriue for him the blessing;
what he will have effected, shall not want means: the mother shall rather
defeat the son, and beguile the Father, then the Father shall beguile the
chosen son of his blessing: what was Jacob to Rebecca more then Esau? or what
mother does not more affect the elder? But now God inclines the love of the
mother to the younger against the custom of nature, because the father loves the
elder, against the promise: The affections of the parents are divided, that the
promise might be fulfilled; Rebeccaes craft shall answer Isaacs partiality:
Isaac would unjustly turn Esau into Jacob, Rebecca does as cunningly turn
Jacob into Esau: her desire was good, her means were unlawful; God does often
times effect his just will by our weaknesses; yet neither thereby justifying
our infirmities; nor blemishing his own actions. Here was nothing but
countersaiting a fained person, a fained name, fained venison, a fained answer,
and yet behold a true blessing but to the man, not to the means: Those were so
unsound, that Jacob himself does more fear their curse then hope for their
success: Isaac was now both simple and old, yet if he had perceived the
fraud, Jacob had been more sure of a curse, then he could be sure, that he
should not be perceived; those which are plain hearted in themselves, are the
bitterest enemies to deceit in others: Rebecca presuming upon the Oracle of
God, and her husbands simplicity, dare be his surety for the danger, his
counselor for the carriage of the business, his cook for the diet, yea dresses
both the meat and the man: and now puts words into his mouth, the dish into
his hand the garments upon his back, the goats hair upon the open parts of
his body, and sends him in thus furnished for the blessing: Standing no doubt
at the door, to see how well her lesson was learned, how well her devise
succeeded. And if old Isaac should by any of his senses have discerned the
guile; she had soon stepped in, and undertaken the blame, and urged him with
that known will of God concerning Jacobs dominion, and Esaus servitude, which
either age or affection had made him forget. And now she wishes she could
borrow Esaus tongue as well as his garments, that she might securely deceive
all the senses of him, which had suffered himself more dangerously deceived
with his affection: But this is past her remedy: her son must name himself Esau
with the voice of Jacob. It is hard if our tongue do not bewray what we are,
in spite of our habit. This was enough to work Isaac to a suspicion, to an
inquiry, not to an incredulity: He that is good of himself will hardly believe
evil of another: And will rather distrust his own senses, then the fidelity
of those he trusted: All the senses are set to examine; none sticks at the
judgment but the ear; To deceive that, Jacob must second his dissimulation
with three lies at one breath: I am Esau, as thou badst me, my venison: one sin
entertained fetches in another, and if it be forced to lodge alone, either
departs, or dies: I love Jacobs blessing, but I hate his lie, I would not
do that wilfully, which Jacob did weakly, upon condition of a blessing: He
that pardoned his infirmity, would curse my obstinatenesse. Good Isaac sets his
hands to try whether his ears informed him aright; he feels the hands of him
whose voice he suspected: that honest heart could not think that the skin
might more easily be counterfaited, then the lungs: A small satisfaction
contents those whom guiltines has not made scrupulous: Isaac believes, and
blesses the yoonger son in the garments of the elder: If our heavenly Father
smell upon our backs the savor of our elder brothers robes, we cannot depart
from him unblessed: No sooner is Jacob gone away full of the joy of his blessing
then Esau comes in, full of the hope of the blessing: And now he cannot repent
him to have sold that in his hunger for pottage; which in his pleasure he shall
buy again with venison: The hopes of the wicked fail them when they are at
highest, whereas Gods children find those comforts in extremity which they
durst not expect. Now he comes in blowing, and sweating for his reward, and
finds nothing but a repulse: Lewd men when they think they have earned of God;
and come proudly to challenge favor, receive no answer but who art thou? Both
the Father and the Son wonder at each other, the one with fear, the other
with grief; Isaac trembled, and Esau wept; the one upon conscience, the other
upon envy: Isaacs heart now told him that he should not have purposed the
blessing where he did; and that it was due to him unto whom it was given, and
not purposed; hence he durst not reuerse that which he had done, with Gods
will, besides his own: For now he saw that he had done unwilling justice: God
will find both time and means to reclaim his own, to prevent their sins, to
manifest and reform their errors who would have looked for tears from Esau? Or
who dare trust tears, when he sees them fall from so graceless eyes? It was a
good word, Bless me also my father; Every miscreant can wish himself well:
No man would be miserable if it were enough to desire happiness: Why did he
not rather weep to his brother, for the pottage, then to Isaac for a blessing,
If he had not then sold, he had not needed now to beg: It is just with God
to deny us those favors which we were careless in keeping, and which we
under valewed in inioying; Esaus ears find no place for Isaacs repentance;
Except it were that he has done that by wile, which he should have done upon
duty. No motive can cause a good heart to repent that he has done well; how
happy a thing it is to know the seasons of grace, and not to neglect them; how
desperate to have known and neglected them, these tears were both late and
false; the tears of rage, of envy, of carnal desire; worldly sorrow causes
death: yet whiles Esau howles out thus for a blessing, I hear him cry out of
his fathers store (Have thou but one blessing my father) of his brothers
subtlety (was he not rightly called Jacob?) I do not hear him blame his own
deserts; He did not see, while his Father was deceived, and his brother crafty,
that God was just, and himself incapable, he knew himself profane, and yet
claims a blessing. Those that care not to please God, yet care for the outward
favors of God, and are ready to murmur if they want them, as if God were bound
to them, and they free. And yet so merciful is God, that he has second
blessings for those that love him not, and gives them all they care for. That
one blessing of special love is for none but Israel; but those of common
kindness are for them that can sell their birthright: This blessing was more
then Esau could be worthy of, yet like a second Cain, he resolves to kill his
brother, because he was more accepted, I know not whether he were a worse son,
or brother; He hopes for his fathers death, and purposes his brothers; and
vows to shed blood in steed of tears. But wicked men cannot be so ill as
they would; that strong wrestler against whom Jacob prevailed, prevailed with
Esau, and turned his wounds into kisses; an host of men came with Esau; an army
of Angels met Jacob, Esau threatened, Jacob prayed, His prayers, and presents
have melted the heart of Esau into love. And now in steed of the grimme and
stern countenance of an executioner, Jacob sees the face of Esau, as the face
of God. Both men and devils are stinted, the stoutest heart cannot stand out
against God, He that can wrestle earnestly with God, is secure from the harms
of men. Those minds which are exasperated with violence, and cannot be broken
with fear, yet are bowed with love; when the ways of a man please God, he
will make his enemies at peace with him.

Jacob and Laban.
ISAACS life was not more retired and quiet, then Jacobs was busy and
troublesome. In the one I see the image of contemplation, of action in the
other. None of the Patriarchs saw so evil days as he; from whom justly has
the Church of God therefore taken her name. Neither were the faithful ever
since called Abrahamites, but Israelites: that no time might be lost, he began
his strife in the womb; after that, he flies for his life from a cruel brother
to a cruel uncle. With a staff goes he over Jorden alone; doubtful and
comfortless, not like the son of Isaac. In the way the earth is his bed, and
the stone his pillow; Yet even there he sees a vision of Angels: Jacobs heart
was never so full of joy, as when his head lay hardest. God is most present
with us in our greatest deiection, and loves to give comfort to those that are
forsaken of their hopes.

He came far to find out an hard friend; and of a nephew becomes a servant.
No doubt when Laban heard of his sisters son, he looked for the Camels and
attendance that came to fetch his sister Rebecca, not thinking that Abraham's
servant could come better furnished, then Isaacs son; but now when he saw
nothing but a staff he looks upon him not as an uncle, but a master. And
while he pretends to offer him a wife as the reward of his service, he
craftily requires his service as the dowry of his wife.

After the service of an hard apprentiseship has earned her whom he loved; his
wife is changed, and he is, in a sort, forced to an unwilling adultery: His
mother had before in a cunning disguise substituted him, who was the younger
son, for the elder; and now not long after his father in law, by a like fraud,
substitutes to him the elder daughter for the younger: God comes oftentimes home
to us in our own kind; and even by the sin of others paies us our own, when
we look not for it. It is doubtful whether it were a greater cross to marry
whom he would not, or to be disappointed of her whom he desired. And now he
must begin a new hope, where he made account of fruition; To raise up an
expectation once frustrate, is more difficult, then to continue a long hope
drawn on with likelihoods of performance: yet thus dear is Jacob content to
pay for Rachel, fourteen years servitude: Commonly Gods children come not
easily by their pleasures: what miseries will not love digest and overcome? And
if Jacob were willingly consumed with heat in the day, with frost in the night
to become the son in law to Laban: What should we refuse to be the sons
of God?

Rachel whom he loved is barren Lea which was despised, is fruitful; How
wisely God weighs out to us our favors and crosses in an equal balance; so
tempering our sorrows that they may not oppress, and our joys that they may
not transport us: each one has some matter of envy to others, and of grief
to himself.

Lea enuies Rachels beauty, and love; Rachel enuies Leahs fruitfulness: Yet
Lea would not be barren, nor Rachel bleare eyed. I see in Rachel the image of
her grandmother Sara; both in her beauty of person, in her actions, in her
success: she also will needs suborne her handmaid to make her a mother; and
at last beyond hope, her self conceiueth: It is a weak greediness in us to
affect Gods blessings by unlawful means; what a proof and praise had it
been of her faith if she had stayed Gods leisure, and would rather have
endured her barrenness, then her husbands Poligamy: Now she shows herself
the daughter of Laban, the father for covetousness, the daughters for
emulation have drawn sin into Jacobs bed: He offended in yielding, but
they more in soliciting him, and therefore the fact is not imputed to Jacob,
but to them. In those sins which Satan draws us into, the blame is ours, in
those which we move each other unto, the most fault and punishment lies upon
the tempter. None of the Patriarchs divided his seed into so many wombs as
Jacob, none was so much crossed in his seed.

Thus rich in nothing but wives and children, was he now returning to his
fathers house, accounting his charge, his wealth. But God meant him yet more
good. Laban sees that both his family, and his flocks were well increased by
Jacobs service. Not his love therefore but his gain makes him loath to part.
Even Labans covetousness is made by God the means to enrich Jacob.

Behold his strait master entreats him to that recompense, which made his
nephew mighty, and himself envious: God considering his hard service paid him
his wages out of Labans folds. Those flocks and herds had but few spotted
sheep, and goats, until Jacobs covenant, then (as if the fashion had been
altered) they all ran into parted colors, the most and best (as if they had
bin weary of their former owner) changed the colors of their young, that they
might change their master.

In the very shapes and colors of brute creatures there is a divine hand,
which disposes them to his own ends. Small and unlikely means shall preuail
where God intends an effect. Little pilled sticks of hasell or poplar laid in
the troughs shall enrich Jacob with an increase of his spotted flocks; Labans
sons might have tried the same means, and failed: God would have Laban know
that he put a difference betwixt Jacob and him; that as for fourteen years
he had multiplied Jacobs charge of cattle to Laban, so now for the last six
years he would multiply Labans flock to Jacob? and if Laban had the more,
yet the better were Jacobs: Even in these outward things, Gods children have
many times sensible tastes of his favors above the wicked.

I know not whether Laban were a worse uncle, or father, or master he can like
well Jacobs service, not his wealth. As the wicked have no peace with God, so
the godly have no peace with men; for if they prosper not, they are despised;
if they prosper, they are enuyed. This uncle whom his service had made his
Father, must now upon his wealth be fled from as an enemy: and like an enemy
pursues him: If Laban had meant to have taken a peaceable leave, he had never
spent seven days iourny in following his innocent son: Jacob knew his
churlishnes and therefore resolved rather to be unmannerly, then iniuried, well
might he think that he whose oppression changed his wages so often, in his
stay would also abridge his wages in the parting; now therefore he wisely
prefers his own estate to Labans love: It is not good to regard too much the
unjust coffeehouse of wordly men, and to purchase unprofitable favor with
too great loss.

Behold Laban follows Jacob with one troup, Esau meets him with another, both
with hostile intentions, both go on till the utmost point of their execution:
both are prevented ere the execution. God makes fools of the enemies of his
Church, he lets them proceed that they may be frustrate, and when they are
gone to the utmost reach of their tether he pulls them back to their stake with
shame: Lo now Laban leaves Jacob with a kiss; Esau meets him with a kiss: Of
the one he has an oath, tears of the other, peace with both: Who shall need to
fear man that is in league with God?

But what a wonder is this: Jacob received not so much hurt from all his
enemies, as from his best friend. Not one of his hairs perished by Laban, or
Esau; yet he lost a joint by the Angel, and was sent halting to his grave: He
that knows our strength, yet will wrestle with us for our exercise; and loves
our violence and importunity.

Oh happy loss of Jacob, he lost a joint and won a blessing: It is a favor
to halt from God, yet this favor is seconded with a greater. He is blessed
because he would rather halt then leave ere he was blessed. If he had left
sooner, he had not halted, but he had not prospered. That man shall go away
sound, but miserable, that loves a limme more then a blessing. Surely if Jacob
had not wrestled with God, he had been foiled with evils: How many are the
troubles of the righteous.

Not long after, Rachel; the comfort of his life, dies. And when but in her
travel, and in his travel to his Father? when he had now before digested in
his thoughts the joy and gratulation of his aged father, for so welcome a
burden. His children, (the staff of his age) wound his soul to the death.
Reuben proves incestuous, Judah adulterous, Dinah ravished; Simeon and Leui
murderous, Er, and Onan stricken dead, Joseph lost; Simeon imprisoned; Benjamin,
the death of his mother, the Fathers right hand, endangered; himself driven by
famine, in his old age, to dye amongst the Egyptians, a people that held it
abomination to eat with him. If that Angel with whom he strove, and who
therefore strove for him, had not delivered his soul out of all adversity he
had been supplanted with evils, and had been so far from gaining the name of
Israel, that he had lost the name of Jacob, now what son of Israel can hope
for good days, when he hears his Fathers were so evil? It is enough for us
if when we are dead we can rest with him in the land of promise. If the Angel
of the covenant once bless us, no pain, no sorrows can make us miserable.

Dinah.
I Find but one only daughter of Jacob, who must needs therefore be a great
dearling to her father; and she so miscarries, that she causes her fathers
grief to be more then his love. As her mother Leah; so she has a fault in
her eyes, which was, Curiosity: She will needs see, and be seen; and whiles
she does vainly see, she is seen lustfully. It is not enough for us to
look to our own thoughts, except we beware of the prouocations of others: If
we once wander out of the lists that God has set us in our callings, there is
nothing but danger: Her virginity had been safe if she had kept home; or if
Sechem had forced her in her mothers tent; this loss of her virginity had been
without her sin; now she is not innocent that gave the occasion.

Her eyes were guilty of this temptation: Only to see, is an insufficient
warrant to draw us into places of spiritual hazard: If Sechem had seen her
busy at home his love had been free from outrage; now the lightness of her
presence gave encouragement to his inordinate desires. Immodesty of behavior
makes way to lust; and gives life unto wicked hopes: yet Sechem bewraies a good
nature even in filthiness; He loves Dinah after his sin, and will needs
marry her whom he has defiled. Commonly lust ends in loathing: Ammon abhors
Thamar as much, after his act, as before, he loved her; and beats her out of
doors, whom he was sick to bring in. But Sechem would not let Dinah fare the
worse for his sin. And now he goes about to intertain her with honest love,
whom the rage of his lust had dishonestly abused. Her deflowring shall be no
prejudice to her, since her shame shall redound to none but him, and he will
hide her dishonor with the name of an husband. What could he now do, but sue
to his Father, to hers, to her self; to her brethren, entreating that, with
humble submission which he might have obtained by violence. Those actions which
are ill begun, can hardly be salued up with late satisfactions; whereas good
entrances give strength unto the proceedings, and success to the end.

The young man's father, does not only consent but solicit; and is ready to
purchase a daughter either with substance, or pain: The two old men would
have ended the matter peaceably; but youth commonly undertakes rashly, and
performs with passion, The sons of Jacob think of nothing but revenge, and
(which is worst of all) begin their cruelty with craft, and hide their craft
with religion: A smiling malice is most deadly; and hatred does most ranckle
the heart when it is kept in and dissembled. We cannot give our sister to an
uncircumcised man; here was God in the mouth, and Satan in the heart: The
bloodiest of al proiects have ever wont to be colored with religion: because
the worse any thing is, the better show it desires to make; and contrarily,
the better color is put upon any vice, the more odious it is; for as every
simulation ads to an evil, so the best ads most evil: themselves had taken the
daughters and sisters of uncircumcised men; Yea Jacob himself did so; why
might not an uncircumcised man obtain their sister? Or if there be a
difference of giving and taking, it had bin well if it had not bin only
pretended. It had been an happy rauishment of Dinah that should have drawn a
whole country into the bosom of the church: but here was a sacrament intended,
not to the good of the soul, but to murder of the body: It was an hard task for
Hamor and Sechem not only to put the knife to their own foreskins, but to
persuade a multitude to so painful a condition.

The Sons of Jacob dissemble with them, they with the people. ( Shall not
their flocks and substance be ours?) Common profit is pretended; whereas only
Sechems pleasure is meant. No motive is so powerful to the vulgar sort, as the
name of commodity; The hope of this makes them prodigal of their skin and
blood; Not the love to the Sacrament, not the love to Sechem: sinister respects
draw more to the profession of religion, then conscience: if it were not for
the loaves and fishes, the train of Christ would be less. But the Sacraments
of God mis-receiued, never prosper in the end, These men are content to smart,
so they may gain.

And now that every man lies sore of his own wound, Simeon and Leui rush in
armed, and wound all the males to death: Cursed be their wrath for it was
fierce, and their rage for it was cruel: indeed, filthiness should not have
been wrought in Israel; but murder should not have bin wrought by Israel; if
they had been fit judges (which were but bloody executioners) how far does
the punishment exceed the fault? To punish above the offense is no less
injustice, then to offend one offends, and all feel the revenge: yea all,
(though innocent) suffer that revenge, which he that offended, deserved not.
Sechem sinned, but Dinah tempted him: She that was so light, as to wander
abroad alone, only to gaze, I fear was not over difficult to yield: And if
having wrought her shame, heee had driven her home with disgrace to her fathers
tent, such tyrannous lust had justly called for blood, but now he craves, and
offers, and would pay dear for but leave to give satisfaction.

To execute rigor upon a submisse offender is more merciless then just: Or if
the punishment had been both just and proportionable from another, yet from
them which had vowed peace and affinity, it was shamefully unjust. To
disappoint the trust of another, and to neglect our own promise and fidelity
for private purposes, adds faithlesnesse unto our cruelty. That they were
impotent it was through their circumcision: what impiety was this instead of
honoring an holy sign, to take an advantage by it? what shrieking was there
now in the streets of the city of the Hiuites? And how did the beguiled
Sichemites when they saw the swords of the two brethren, die cursing that
Sacrament in their hearts which had betrayed them? Even their curses were the
sins of Simeon and Leui; whose fact, though it were abhorred by their father,
yet it was seconded by their brethren. Their spoil makes good the others
slaughter. Who would have looked to have found this outrage in the family of
Jacob? How did that good Patriarch when he saw Dinah come home blubbered and
wringing her hands, Simeon and Leui sprinkled with blood, wish that Leah had
been barren as long as Rachel: Good parents have grief enough (though they
sustain no blame) for their childrens sins: What great evils arise from small
beginnings. The idle Curiosity of Dinah has bred all this mischief,
Rauishment sollowes upon her wandering, upon her rauishment murder, upon the
murder spoil: It is holy and safe to be jealous of the first occasions of
evil either done, or suffered

Judah and Thamar.
I Find not many of Jacobs sons more faulty then Judah; who yet is singled
out from all the rest, to be the royal progenitor of Christ; and to be honored
with the dignity of the birthright; that Gods election might not be of merit,
but of grace: Else howsoever he might have sped alone, Thamar had never been
joined with him in this line: Even Judah marries a Canaanite, it is no marvel
though his seed prosper not: And yet that good children may not be too much
discouraged with their unlawful propagation, the fathers of the promised seed
are raised from an ineestuous bed: Judah was very young, scarce from under the
rod of his Father, yet he takes no other counsel for his marriage, but from
his own eyes, which were like his sister Dinahs, rouing and wanton, what
better issue could be expected from such beginnings. Those proud Jews that
glory so much of their pedigree and name from this Patriarch, may now choose
whether they will have their mother a Canaanite, or an harlot: Even in these
things oft-times the birth follows the belly. His eldest son Er, is too wicked
to live; God strikes him dead ere he can leave any issue, not abiding any
sience to grow out of so bad a stock: Notorious sinners God reserues to his
own vengeance, He does not inflict sensible judgments upon all his enemies,
least the wicked should think there were no punishment abiding for them
elsewhere. He does inflict such judgments upon, some, least he should seem
careless of evil. It were as easy for him to strike all dead, as one: but he
had rather all should be warned by one, and would have his enemies find him
merciful, as his children just: His brother Onan sees the judgment, and yet
follows his sins. Every little thing discourages us from good. Nothing can
alter the heart that is set upon evil: Er was not worthy of any love; but
though he were a miscreant, yet he was a brother Seed should have been raised
to him; Onan justly leeses his life with his seed; which he would rather
spill, then lend to a wicked brother. Some duties we owe to humanity, more to
neernes of blood Ill deseruings of others can be no excuse for our injustice,
for our uncharitableness. That which Thamar required, Moses afterward, as from
God, commanded; the succession of brothers into the barren bed: Some laws
God spoke to his Church long ere he wrote them: while the author is certainly
known, the voice and the finger of God are worthy of equal respect. Judah
has lost two sons, and now does but promise the third, whom he sins in not
giving. It is the weakness of nature, rather to hazard a sin, then a
danger. And to neglect our own duty, for wrongful suspicion of others:
though he had lost his son in giving him: yet he should have given him: A
faithful man's promise is his debt, which no fear of damage can dispeuse with.

But whereupon was this slacknesse? Judah feared that some unhappiness in the
bed of Thamar was the cause of his sons miscarriage; whereas it was their fault
that Thamar was both a widow and childlesse. Those that are but the patients of
evil, are many times burdened with suspicions; and therefore are ill thought
of, because they fare ill: Afflictions would not be so heavy if they did not
lay us open unto uncharitable conceits.

What difference God puts betwixt sins of wilfulness, and infirmity? The
sons pollution is punished with present death, the fathers incest is
pardoned, and in a sort prospers.

Now Thamar seeks by subtlety, that which she could not have by award of
justice; the neglect of due retributions drives men to indirect courses;
neither know I whether they sin more in righting themselves wrongfully, or
the other in not righting them: She therefore takes upon her the habit of an
harlot, that she might perform the act; If she had not wished to seem an
whore, she had not worn that attire, nor chosen that place, immodesty of
outward fashion or gesture bewraies evil desires, the heart that means well,
will never wish to seem ill; for commonly we affect to show better then we
are. Many harlots will put on the semblances of chastity, of modesty, never the
contrary. It is no trusting those which do not wish to appear good. Judah
esteems her by her habit, and now the sight of an harlot has stird up in him a
thought of lust; Satan finds well that a fit object is half a victory.

Who would not be ashamed to see a son of Jacob thus transported with filthy
affections? At the first sight is he inflamed; neither yet did he see the
face of her, whom he lusted after, it was enough motive to him that she was a
woman; neither could the presence of his neighbor the Adullamite compose those
wicked thoughts, or hinder his unchaste acts.

That sin must needs be impudent, which can abide a witness: yea so has
his lust besotted him, that he cannot discern the voice of Thamar, that he
cannot foresee the danger of his shame in parting with such pledges. There is
no passion which does not for the time bereave a man of himself: Thamar had
learned not to trust him without a pawn; He had promised his son to her as a
daughter, and failed; now he promised a kid to her as an harlot, and
performs it, whether his pledge constrained him, or the power of his word, I
inquire not: Many men are faithful in all things, save those which are the
greatest, and dearest; If his credit had been as much endangered in the former
promise, he had kept it: Now has Thamar requited him. She expected long the
inioying of his promised son, and he performed not: but here he performs the
promise of the kid, and she stays not to expect it; Judah is sorry that he
cannot pay the hire of his lust, and now fears lest he shall be beaten with
his own staff, least his signet shall be used to confirm, and seal his
reproach; resolving not to know them; and wishing they were unknown of others.
Shame is the easiest wages of sin, and the surest, which ever begins first in
our selves. Nature is not more forward to commit sin, then willing to hide it.

I hear as yet of no remorse in Judah, but fear of shame. Three months has
his sin slept, and now when he is securest, it awakes and baits him. News
is brought him that Thamar begins to swell with her conception, and now he
swells with rage, and calls her forth to the flame like a rigorous judge,
without so much as staying for the time of her deliverance; that his cruelty in
this justice, should be no less ill, then the injustice of occasioning it. If
Judah had not forgotten his sin, his pity had been more then his hatred to
this of his daughters: How easy is it to detest those sins in others which
we flatter in our selves: Thamar does not deny the sin, nor refuse
punishment; but calls for that partner in her punishment, which was her partner
in the sin: the staff, the signet, the handkerchiefe accuse and convince
Judah, and now he blushes at his own sentence, much more at his act, and cries
out (she is more righteous then I) God will find a time to bring his children
upon their knees, and to wring from them penitent confessions: And rather then
he will not have them soundly ashamed, he will make them the trumpets of
their own reproach.

Yet does he not offer himself to the flame with her, but rather excuses her
by himself. This relenting in his own case shamed his former zeal: Even in
the best men nature is partial to it self: It is good so to sentence others
frailties, that yet we remember our own, whether those that have been, or
may be, with what shame, yea with what horror must Judah needs look vp-vpon
the great belly of Thamar, and on her two sons, the monuments of his
filthiness?

How must it needs wound his soul to hear them call him both Father, and
Grandfather, to call her mother, and sister: If this had not cost him many a
sigh, he had no more escaped his Fathers curse then Reuben did: I see the
difference not of sins, but of men: Remission goes not by the measure of the
sin, but the quality of the sinner; yea rather, the mercy of the forgiuer:
Blessed is the man (not that sins not, but) to whom the Lord imputes not his
sin.

Joseph.
I Marvel not that Joseph had the double portion of Jacobs land, who had more
then two parts of his sorrows: None of his sons did so truly inherit his
afflictions; none of them was either so miserable, or so great: suffering is
the way to glory: I see in him not a cleerer type of Christ, then of every
Christian, because we are dear to our Father, and complain of sins, therefore
are we hated of our carnal brethren: If Joseph had not meddled with his
brothers faults, yet he had been envied for his Fathers affection; but now
malice is met with envy: There is nothing more thankelesse or dangerous then
to stand in the way of a resolute sinner: That which does correct and oblige
the penitent, makes the wilful mind furious and reuengefull.

All the spite of his brethren cannot make Joseph cast off the livery of his
fathers love: what need we care for the censures of men (...) if our hearts
can tell us that we are in favor with God.

But what meant young Joseph to add unto his own envy* by reporting his
dreams? The concealment of our hopes or abilities has not more modesty, then
safety: He that was envied for his deerenesse, and hated for his intelligence,
was both envied and hated for his dreams. Surely God meant to make the relation
of these dreams, a means to effect that which these dreams imported. We men
work by likely means; God by contraries. The main quarrel was, ( Behold this
dreamer comes.) Had it not been for his dreams; he had not bin sold, if he
had not been sold, he had not bin exalted. So Joseph's state had not deserved
envy, if his dreams had not caused him to be envied. Full little did Joseph
think when he went to seek his brethren that this was the last time he should
see his Fathers house: Full little did his brethren think when they sold him
naked to the Ismaelites to have once seen him in the throne of Egypt. Gods
decree runs on; and while we, either think not of it, or oppose it, is
performed.

In an honest and obedient simplicity Joseph comes to inquire of his brethrens
health, and now may not return to carry news of his own misery: whiles he
thinks of their welfare they are plotting his destruction. ( Come let us slay
him,) Who would have expected this cruelty in them which should be the Fathers
of Gods Church: It was thought a favor that Reubens entreaty obtained for him
that he might be cast into the pit alive; to die there. He looked for brethren,
and behold murderers; Every man's tongue, every man's fist was bent against him:
Each one strives who shall lay the first hand upon that changeable cote, which
was died with their Fathers love, and their envy: And now they have stripped him
naked, and haling him by both arms, as it were: cast him alive into his grave.
So in pretense of forbearance, they resolve to torment him with a lingering
death: the sauagest robbers could not have been more merciless: for now
besides (what in them lies) they kill their Father in their brother. Nature if
it once degenerate, grows more monstrous and extreme then a disposition borne
to cruelty.

All this while Joseph wanted neither words nor tears, but like a passionate
suppliant (bowing his bare knees to them whom he dreamed should bow to him)
intreates and persuades by the deer name of their brotherhood, by their
profession of one common God, for their fathers sake; for their own souls sake
not to sin against his blood: But envy has shut out mercy; and makes them not
only forget themselves to be brethren, but men: What stranger can think of
poor innocent Joseph, crying naked in that desolate and dry pit (only saving
that he moystened it with tears) and not be moved? Yet his hard-harted
brethren sit them down carelessly, with the noise of his lamentation in their
ears, to eat bread; not once thinking by their own hunger, what it was for
Joseph to be affamisht to death.

Whatsoever they thought, God never meant that Joseph should perish in that
pit; and therefore he sends very Ismaelites to ransom him from his brethren;
the seed of him that persecuted his brother Isaac, shall now redeem Joseph from
his brethrens persecution: When they came to fetch him out of the pit, he now
hoped for a speedy dispatch; That since they seemed not to have so much mercy
as to prolong his life, they would not continue so much cruelty as to prolong
his death.

And now when he has comforted himself with hope of the favor of dying,
behold death exchanged for bondage: how much is servitude to an ingenuous
nature worse then death? For this is common to all; that, to none but the
miserable: Judah meant this well, but God better: Reuben saved him from the
sword; Judah from affamishing: God will ever raise up some secret favorers to
his own amongst those that are most malicious: How well was this favor
bestowed? If Joseph had died for hunger in the pit, both Jacob and Judah, and
al his brethren had died for hunger in Canaan. Little did the Ismaelitish
merchants know what a tresure they bought carried and sold; more precious then
al their balmes and mirrhes. Little did they think that they had in their
hands the Lord of Egypt, the Jewel of the world: Why should we contemn any
man's meannesse, when we know not his destiny?

One sin is commonly used for the vail of another: Joseph's coat is sent home
dipped in blood, that whiles they should hide their own cruelty, they might
afflict their Father, no less then their brother. They have devised this
really to punish their old father for his love, with so grievous a monument of
his sorrow.

He that is mourned for in Canaan as dead, prospers in Egypt under Potiphar;
and of a slave is made a ruler: Thus God meant to prepare him for a greater
charge; he must first rule Potiphars house, then Pharaohs kingdom: his own
service is his least good; for his very presence procures a common blessing: A
whole family shall fare the better for one Joseph: Virtue is not looked upon
alike with all eyes: his fellows praise him, his master trusts him, his
mistress affects him too much. All the spite of his brethren was not so great
a cross to him, as the inordinate affection of his mistress. Temptations on
the right hand are now more perilous, and hard to resist, by how much they are
more plausible and glorious; But the heart that is bent upon God, knows how to
walk steddily and indifferently betwixt the pleasures of sin; and fears of
evil: He saw, this pleasure would advance him: He knew what it was to be a
minion of one of the greatest Ladies in Egypt: yet resolves to contemn it: A
good heart will rather lie in the dust, then rise by wickedness. ( How shall I
do this, and sin against God.

He knew that all the honors of Egypt could not buy off the guilt of one
sin, and therefore abhors not only her bed, but her company: He that will
be safe from the acts of evil, must wisely avoid the occasions, as sin ends
ever in shame when it is committed, so it makes us past shame that we may
commit it; The impudent strumpet dare not only solicit, but importune, but in
a sort force the modesty of her good servant; She lays hold on his garment;
her hand seconds her tongue.

Good Joseph found it now time to flee; when such an enemy pursued him; how
much had he rather leave his cloak, then his virtue. And to suffer his
mistress to spoil him of his livery, rather then he should blemish her
honor, or his masters in her, or God in either of them.

This second time is Joseph stripped of his garment; before, in the violence of
envy, now of lust; before of necessity, now of choice: Before, to deceive his
father, now his master: for behold, the pledge of his fidelity which he left
in those wicked hands, is made an evidence against him of that which he refused
to do: therefore did he leave his cloak because he would not do that; of
which he is accused and condemned because he left it: what safety is there
against great adversaries, when even arguments of innocence are used to
convince of evil? Lust yielded unto is a pleasant madness, but is a desperate
madness when it is opposed: No hatred burns so furiously as that which arises
from the quenched coals of love.

Malice is witty to devise accusations of others out of their virtue, and our
own guiltiness: Joseph either pleades not, or is not heard.

Doubtless he denied the fact, but he dare not accuse the offender: There is
not only the praise of patience but oft-times of wisdom, even in unjust
sufferings: He knew that God would find a time to clear his innocence, and
to reward his chaste faithfulness.

No prison would serve him, but Paraohs. Joseph had lain obscure, and not been
known to Pharaoh, if he had not been cast into Paraohs dungeon: the
afflictions of Gods chidren turn ever to their advantages. No sooner is Joseph
a prisoner, then a guardian of the prisoners. Trust and honor accompany him
wheresoever he is: In his Fathers house, In Potiphars, in the Iayle, in the
Court; still he has both favor and rule.

So long as God is with him, he cannot but shine in spite of men The walls of
that dungeon cannot hide his virtues, the yrons cannot hold them. Paraohs
officers are sent to witness his graces, which he may not come forth to show,
the cup bearer admires him in the iayle, but forgets him in the Court. How
easily does our own prosperity make us forget either the deseruings, or
miseries of others. But as God cannot neglect his own, so least of all in
their sorrows. After two years more of Joseph's patience; that God which
caused him to be lift out of the former pit to be sold; now calls him out of the
dungeon to honor. He now puts a dream into the head of Pharaoh. He puts the
remembrance of Joseph's skill into the head of the cup bearer, who to pleasure
Pharaoh, not to requite Joseph; commends the prisoner, for an interpreter: He
puts an interpretation in the mouth of Joseph* he puts this choice into the
heart of Pharaoh of a miserable prisoner to make the ruler of Egypt. Behold
one hour has changed his fetters into a chain of gold, his rags into fine
linen, his stocks into a chariot, his iayle into a palace, Potiphars captive
into his Masters Lord; the noise of his chains into Abrech. He whose chastity
refused the wanton allurements of the wife of Potiphar, has now given him to
his wife the daughter of Potipherah. Humility goes before honor; serving and
suffering are the best tutors to government. How well are Gods children paid
for their patience? How happy are the issues of the faithful? Never any man
repented him of the advancement of a good man.

Pharaoh has not more preferred Joseph then Joseph has enriched Pharaoh; If
Joseph had not ruled Egypt and all bordering nations had perished* The
providence of so faithful an officer has both given the Egyptians their
lives, and the money, cattle, lands, bodies of the Egyptians to Pharaoh. Both
have reason to be well pleased. The subjects owe to him their lives, the King
his subjects, and his dominions, The bounty of God made Joseph able to give
more than he received. It is like, the seven years of plenty were not
confined to Egypt; other countries adioining were no less fruitful: yet in
the seven years of famine Egypt had corn when they wanted.

See the difference betwixt a wise provident frugalitie, and a vain ignorant
expense of the benefits of God: The sparing hand is both full and beneficial,
whereas the lauishment is not only empty, but injurious.

Good Jacob is pinched with the common famine. No piety can exempt us from the
evils of neighborhood. No man can tell by outward events, which is the
Patriarch, and which the Canaanite.

Neither does his profession lead him to the hope of a miraculous preservation.
It is a vain tempting of God to cast our selves upon an immediate provision,
with neglect of common means: His ten sons must now leave their flocks,
and go down into Egypt, to be their fathers purueyours. And now they go to buy
of him whom they had fold; and bow the knees to him for his life, which had
bowed to them before for his own life. His age, his habit; the place, the
language kept Joseph from their knowledge; neither had they called off their
minds from their folds, to inquire of matters of foreign state, or to hear that
an Ebrew was advanced to the highest honor of Egypt* But he can not but know
them, whom he left at their full growth, whose tongue and habit, and number
were still one: whose faces had left so deep an impression in his mind, ^t
their unkind parting: It is wisdom sometimes so to conceal our knowledge,
that we may not prejudice truth.

He that was hated of his brethren for being his fathers spy; now accuses
his brethren for common spies of the weaknesses of Egypt; he could not without
their suspicion have come to a perfect intelligence of his fathers estate, and
theirs, if he had not objected to them that which was not. We are not always
bound to go the nearest way to truth. It is more safe in cases of inquisition
to fetch far about, that he might seem enough an Egyptian, he swears
heathenishly. How little could they suspect, this oath could proceed from the
son of him, which swore by the fear of his father Isaac? How often have
sinister respects drawn weak goodness to disguise it self, even with sins?

It was no small joy to Joseph, to see this late accomplishment of his ancient
dream; to see these suppliants (I know not whether more brethren, or enemies)
groueling before him in an unknowing submission: And now it does him good to
seem merciles to them, whom he had found wilfully cruel; to hide his love
from them which had showed their hate to him, and to think how much he favored
them, and how little they knew it: And as sporting himself in their seeming
misery, he pleasantly imitates all those actions reciprocally unto them, which
they in despite and earnest, had done formerly to him; he speaks roughly,
reiects their persuasions, puts them in hold, and one of them in bonds. The
mind must not always be judged by the outward face of the actions. Gods
countenance is oft-times as severe, and his hand as heavy to them whom he best
loves. Many a one under the habit of an Egyptian has the heart of an
Israelite. No song could be so delightful to him, as to hear them in a late
remorse condemn themselves before him, of their old cruelty toward him, who
was now their unknown witness and Judge.

Nothing does so powerfully call home the conscience, as affliction; neither
need there any other art of memory for sin, besides misery. They had heard
Joseph's deprecation of their evil with tears, and had not pityed him; yet
Joseph does but hear their mention of this evil which they had done against
him, and pities them with tears, he weeps for joy to see their repentance,
and to compare his safety and happiness with the cruelty which they intended,
and did, and thought they had done.

Yet he can abide to see his brother his prisoner; whom no bonds could bind so
strong, as his affection bound him to his captive: Simeon is left in pawn,
infetters; the rest return, with their corn, with their money, paying nothing
for their provision; but their labor; that they might be as much troubled with
the benificence of that strange Egyptian Lord, as before with his imperious
suspicion. Their wealth was now more irkesom to them, then their need, and they
fear God means to punish them more in this superfluity of money, then in the
want of victuals. ( What is this that God has done to us?) It is a wise course
to be jealous of our gain; and more to fear, then desire abundance.

Old Jacob that was not used to simple and absolut contentments receives the
blessing of seasonable provision, together with the affliction of that heavy
message; the loss of one son, and the danger of another. And knows not
whether it be better for him to die with hunger, or with grief for the
departure of that son of his right hand: He drives off till the last;
Protraction is a kind of ease in evils that must come.

At length (as no plea is importunate as that of famine) Benjamin must go; one
evil must be hazarded for the redress of another what would it avail him to
see whom he loved, miserable? how injurious were that affliction to keep his
son so long in his eye till they should see each other die for hunger.

The ten brothers return into Egypt loaded with double money in their sackes,
and a present in their hands; the danger of mistaking is requited, by honest
minds with more then restitution. It is not enough to find our own hearts clear
in suspicious actions, except we satisfy others: Now has Joseph what he
would, the sight and presence of his Benjamin, whom he therefore borrowes of
his Father for a time, that he might return him with a greater interest of
joy: And now he feasts them whom he formerly threatened, and turns their
fear into wonder; all unequal love is not partial; all the brethren are
entertained bountifully, but Benjamin has a fiue-fold portion: By how much his
welcome was greater, by so much his pretended theft seemed more heinous, for
good turns aggrauate unkindness, and our offenses are increased with our
obligations: How easy is it to find advantages, where there is a purpose to
accuse: Beniamins sack makes him guilty of that whereof his heart was free:
Crimes seem strange to the innocent; well might they abjure this fact with the
offer of bondage and death: For they which carefully brought again that which
they might have taken, would never take that which was not given them. But thus
Joseph would yet dally with his brethren, and make Benjamin a thief that he
might make him a servant and fright his brethren with the peril of that their
charge, that he might double their joy, and amazedness in giving them two
brothers at once: our happiness is greater, and sweeter when we have well
feared, and smarted with evils.

But now when Judah seriously reported the danger of his old father, and the
sadness of his last complaint, compassion and joy will be concealed no longer;
but break forth violently at his voice and eyes. Many passions do not well
abide witnesses, because they are guilty to their own weakness: Joseph sends
forth his servants that he might freely weep. He knew he could not say, I am
Joseph, without an unbelieving vehemence.

Never any word sounded so strangely as this, in the ears of the Patriarchs.
Wonder, doubt, reverence, joy, fear, hope, guiltiness stroke them at once. It
was time for Joseph to say Fear not; No marvel if they stood with palenesse
and silence before him; looking on him, and on each other: the more they
considered, they wondered, and the more they believed, the more they feared: For
those words ( I am Joseph,) seemed to sound thus much to their guilty thoughts:
You are murderers, and I am a Prince in spite of you; My power and this
place, give me all opportunities of revenge; My glory is your shame, my life
your danger, your sin lives together with me. But now the tears and
gracious words of Joseph have soon assured them of pardon and love, and have
bidden them turn their eyes from their sin against their brother, to their
happiness in him, and have changed their doubts into hopes and joys; causing
them to look upon him without fear, though not without shame. His loving
imbracements clear their hearts of all iealousies; and hasten to put new
thoughts into them; of favor, and of greatness: So that now forgetting what
evil they did to their brother, they are thinking of what good their brother
may do to them: Actions salued up with a free forgiveness, are as not done;
and as a bone once broken is stronger after well setting, so is love after
reconcilement.

But as wounds once healed leave a scarre behind them; so remitted injuries
leave commonly in the actors a guilty remembrance; which hindered these brethren
from that freedom of joy which else they had conceived: This was their fault,
not Joseph's; who strives to give them all security of his love, and will be as
bountiful, as they were cruel. They sent him naked to strangers, he sends
them in new and rich liueryes to their Father; they took a small sum of
money for him, he gives them great treasures; They sent his torn cote to his
Father; He sends variety of costly raiments to his Father by them: They sold
him to be the load of camels; He sends them home with chariots. It must be a
great favor that can appease the conscience of a great injury. Now they return
home rich and joyful, making themselves happy to think, how glad they should
make their father with this news.

That good old man would never have hoped that Egypt could have affoorded such
provision as this. Joseph is yet alive: This was not food, but life to him. The
return of Benjamin was comfortable: but that his dead son was yet alive
after so many years lamentation, was tidings too happy to be believed, and
was enough to endanger that life with excess of joy, which the knowledge
thereof doubled. Ouer-excellent objects are dangerous in their sudden
apprehensions. One grain of that joy would have safely cheared him, whereof a
full measure ouer-laies his heart with too much sweetness. There is no earthly
pleasure, whereof we may not surfeit: of the spiritual we can never have
enough.

Yet his eyes revive his mind, which his ears had thus astonished. When he
saw the charets of his son, he beloeued Joseph's life, and refreshed his
own. He had too much before, so that he could not enjoy it: now he says, I
have enough, Joseph my son is yet alive.

They told him of his honor, he speaks of his life: life is better than
honor. To have heard that Joseph lived a servant, would have ioied him more,
than to hear that he died honorably. The greater blessing obscures the
less. He is not worthy of honor that is not thankful for life.

Yet Joseph's life did not content Jacob without his presence: ( I will go down
and see him ere I dye:) The sight of the eye is better then to walk in
desires; Good things pleasure us not in their being, but in our inioying.

The height of all earthly contentment appeared in the meeting of these two;
whom their mutual loss had more endeared to each other: The intermission of
comforts has this advantage, that it sweetens our delight more in the return,
then was abated in the forbearance. God does ofttimes hide away our Joseph for
a time that we may be more joyous and thankful in his recovery: This was the
sincerest pleasure that ever Jacob had, which therefore God reserved for his
age.

And if the meeting of earthly friends be so unspeakably comfortable; how
happy shall we be in the sight of the glorious face of God our heavenly
Father; of that our blessed redeemer, whom we sold to death by our sins, and
which now after that noble Triumph has all power given him in heaven and in
earth:

Thus did Jacob rejoice when he was to go out of the land of promise to a
foreign nation for Joseph's sake; being glad that he should loose his country
for his son. What shall our joy be, who must out of this foreign land of
our pilgrimage to the home of our glorious inheritance, to dwell with none but
our own; in that better and more lightsome Goshen-free from all the
incombrances of this Egypt, and full of all the riches and delights of God? The
guilty conscience can never think it self safe: So many years experience of
Joseph's love could not secure his brethren of remission: those that know they
have deserved ill, are wont to misinterpret favors, and think they cannot be
beloved: All that while, his goodness seemed but concealed, and sleeping malice;
which they feared in their Fathers last sleep would awake and bewray it self
in revenge: Still therefore they plead the name of their Father, though dead,
not daring to use their own: Good meanings cannot be more wronged, then with
suspicion: It grieves Joseph to see their fear, and to find they had not
forgotten their own sin, and to hear them so passionately crave that which
they had.

Forgive the trespass of the servants of thy Fathers God:) What a coniuration
of pardon was this? What wound could be either so deep, or so festered, as
this plaster could not cure? They say not, the sons of thy Father, for they
knew Jacob was dead, and they had degenerated; but the servants of thy Fathers
God: How much stronger are the bonds of religion, then of nature: If Joseph had
been rancorous, this deprecation had charmed him; but now it resolves him into
tears: They are not so ready to acknowledge their old offense as he to protest
his love; and if he chide them for any thing, it is for that they thought they
needed to entreat since they might know, it could not stand with the fellow
servant of their Fathers God to harbor maliciousness, to purpose revenge. Am
not I under God? And fully to secure them; he turns their eyes from themselves
to the decree of God, from the action to the event; as one that would have them
think, there was no cause to repent of that which proved so succesfull.

Even late confession finds forgiveness; Joseph had long ago seen their
sorrow, never but now heard their humble acknowledgment; Mercy stays not for
outward solemnities. How much more shall that infinite goodness pardon our
sins when he finds the truth of our repentance.

FINIS
Contemplations. THE FOVRTH BOOK.

The affliction of Israel. Or The Aegiptian bondage. The birth and breeding of
Moses. Moses called. The plagues of Egypt.
Imprinted at London by Melch. Bradwood for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head-1612.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable JAMES, Lord Hay: All grace and happiness.
RIGHT Honorable: All that I can say for my self is a desire of doing good;
which if it were as fervent in richer hearts, that Church which now we see
comely, would then be glorious: this honest ambition has carried me to neglect
the fear of seeming prodigal of my little: and while I see others talents
resting in the earth, has drawn me to traffic with mine in public. I hope
no adventure that ever I made of this kind shall be equally gainful to this
my present labor, wherein I take Gods own history for the ground, and work
upon it by what meditations my weakness can afford. The diuinenes of this
subject shall make more then amends for the manifold defects of my discourse;
although also the blame of an imperfection is so much the more when it lights
upon so high a choice. This part which I offer to your Lordship shall show you
Pharaoh impotently envious and cruel, the Israelites of friends become slaves,
punished only for prospering; Moses in the weeds, in the court, in the desert,
in the hill of visions; a Courtier in Egypt, a shepherd in Midian, an
Ambassador from God, a leader of Gods people, and when you see the prodigious
variety of the plagues of Egypt you shall not know whether more to wonder at
the miracles of Moses, or Pharaohs obstinacy. Finally, you shall see the same
waves made both a wall and a gulf in one boure; the Egyptians drowned, where
no Israelite was wetshod; and if these passages yield not abundance of
profitable thoughts, impute it (not without pardon) to the poverty of my weak
conceit; which yet may perhaps occasion better unto others. In all humble
submission I commend them (what they are) to your Lordships favorable
acceptance, and your self with them, to the gracious blessing of our God.

Your Lordships in all dutiful observance at command. IOS. HALL.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
The affliction of Israel.
Egypt was long an harbor to the Israelites; now it proves a Iayle; the
posteritye of Jacob finds too late, what it was for their forefathers to sell
Joseph, a slave into Egypt. Those whom the Egyptians honored before as Lords,
they now contemn as drudges: One Pharaoh aduances whom another labors to
depresse: Not seldom the same man changes copies, but if favors out-liue one
age they prove decrepit and hartlesse: It is a rare thing to find posterity
heirs of their fathers love: How should men's favors be but like themselves,
variable and inconstant? there is no certainety but in the favor of God, in
whom can be no change; whose love is entayled upon a thousand generations.

Yet if the Israelites had been treacherous to Pharaoh, if disobedient, this
great change of countenance had been just; now the only offense of Israel is
that he prospers; That which should be the motive of their gratulation, and
friendship, is the cause of their malice. There is no more hateful sight to a
wicked man then the prosperity of the conscionable; None but the spirit of that
true harbinger of Christ can teach us to say with contentment, He must
increase, but I must decrease.

And what if Israel be mighty and rich? ( If there be war, they may join
with our enemies, and get them out of the land) Behold they are afraid to part
with those whom they are grieved to entertain: Either staying or going is
offense enough, to those that seek quarrels; There were no wars, and yet they
say (If there be wars) The Israelites had never given cause of fear to revolt,
and yet they say, (Least they join to our enemies to those enemies which we
may have; So they make their certain friends slaves, for fear of uncertain
enemies. Wickedness is ever cowardly, and full of unjust suspicions; it makes a
man fear, where no fear is, fly when none pursues him. What difference there
is betwixt David and Pharaoh; The faith of the one says, I will not be afraid
for ten thousand that should beset me; The fear of the other says, Lest if
there be war, they join with our enemies; Therefore should he have made much
of the Israelites, that they might be his, his favors might have made them
firm; Why might they not as well draw their swords for him?

Weak and base minds ever incline to the worse; and seek safety rather in an
impossibility of hurt, then in the likelihood of just advantage: Favors had
been more binding then cruelties, yet the foolish Egyptian had rather have
impotent servants, then able friends. For their welfare alone Pharaoh owes
Israel a mischief; and how will he pay it?

( Come let us work wisely;) Lewd men call wicked policies wisdom, and their
success happiness: Herein Satan is wiser, then they, who both lays the plot,
and makes them such fools as to mistake villainy and madness, for the best
virtue.

Injustice is vpheld by violence, whereas just governments are maintained by
love: Taske-masters must be set over Israel; they should not be the true seed
of Israel, if they were not still set to wrestle with God in afflictions: Heavy
burdens must be laid upon them: Israel is never but loaded, the destiny of one
of Jacobs sons is common to all. To lie down betwixt their burdens: If they
had seemed to breath them in Goshen sometimes, yet even there it was no small
misery to be forrainers, and to live among Idolaters: But now the name of a
slave is added to the name of a stranger. Israel had gathered some rust in
idolatrous Egypt, and now he must be scoured, they had born the burden of Gods
anger, if they had not born the burdens of the Egyptians.

As God afflicted them with another mind then the Egyptians; (God to exercise
them, the Egyptians to suppress them;) so causes he the event to differ. Who
would not have thought with these Egyptians, that so extreme misery should not
have made the Israelites unfit both for generation and resistance; Moderate
exercise strengthens, extreme destroys nature: That God which many times
works by contrary means caused them to grow with depression, with persecution
to multiply; How can Gods Church but fare well, since the very malice of their
enemies benefits them. O the Sovereign goodness of our God that turns all our
poisons into cordials, Gods vine bears the better with bleeding.

And now the Egyptians could be angry with their own maliciousness, that this
was the occasion of multiplying them whom they hated, and feared; to see that
this service gained more to the workmen, then to their masters; The stronger
therefore the Israelites grew, the more impotent grew them alice of their
persecutours. And since their own labor strengthens them, now tyranny will try
what can be done by the violence of others: Since the present strength cannot
be subdued; the hopes of succession must be prevented: women must be suborned
to be murderers, and those whose office is to help the birth, must destroy it.

There was less suspicion of cruelty in that sex, and more opportunity of
doing mischief. The male children must be borne, and dye at once; what can be
more innocent then the child that has not lived so much as to cry, or to see
light? It is fault enough to be the son of an Israelite: the daughters may
live for bondage, for lust a condition so much (at the least) worse then
death, as their sex was weaker. O marvelous cruelty that a man should kill a
man, for his sexes sake. Whosoever has loosed the reins unto cruelty is
easily carried into incredible extremities.

From burdens they proceed to bondage, and from bondange to blood: from an
unjust vexation of their body, to an inhumane destruction of the fruit of their
body; As the sins of the concupiscible part, from slight motions grow on to
foul executions, so do those of the irascible; there is no sin whose
harbor is more unsafe then of that of malice: But often times the power of
tyrants answers not their will; evil commanders cannot always meet with
equally mischievous agents.

The fear of God teaches the mid wives to disobey an unjust command; they well
knew how no excuse it is for evil, I was bidden. God said to their hearts, Thou
shall not kill, This voice was louder then Pharaohs. I commend their obedience
in disobeying, I dare not commend their excuse, there was as much weakness in
their answer, as strength in their practice: as they feared God in not
killing, so they feared Pharaoh in dissembling: often times those that make
conscience of greater sins are overtaken with less. It is well and rare if we
can come forth of a dangerous action without any soil; and if we have escaped
the storm; that some after drops wet us not.

Who would not have expected that the midwiues should be murdered for not
murdering? Pharaoh could not be so simple to think these women trusty yet his
indignation had no power to reach to their punishment God prospered the
mid-wiues: who can harm them? Even the not doing of evil is rewarded with
good. And why did they prosper? Because they feared God; Not for their
dissimulation but their piety. So did God regard their mercy, that he
ragarded not their infirmity. How fondly do men lay the thank upon the sin
which is due to the virtue: true wisdom teaches to distinguish Gods actions,
and to ascribe them to the right causes: Pardon belongs to the lie of the
Midwiues, remuneration to their goodness, prosperity to their fear of God.

But that which the Midwiues will not, the multitudes shall do; It were strange
if wicked rulers should not find some or other instruments of violence: all
the people must drown whom the women saved; Cruelty has but smoked before,
now it flames up; secret practicing has made it shameless, that now it dare
proclaim tyranny. It is a miserable state where every man is made an
executioner: there can be no greater argument of an ill cause then a bloody
prosecution, whereas truth vpholds herself by mildness, and is promoted by
patience. This is their act, what was their issue? the people must drown their
males, themselves are drowned: they died by the same means by which they caused
the poor Israelitish infants to dye; that law of retaliation which God will
not allow to us, because we are fellow creatures, he justly practices in us.
God would have us read our sins in our judgments, that we might both repent
of our sins; and give glory to his justice.

Pharaoh raged before, much more now that he received a message of dismission:
the monitions of God make ill men worse: the waves do not beat nor roar any
where so much as at the bank which restraines them. Corruption when it is
checked, grows mad with rage. As the vapor in a cloud would not make that
fearful report, if it met not with opposition. A good heart yields at the
stillest voice of God: but the most gracious motions of God harden the wicked.
Many would not be so desperately settled in their sins, if the word had not
controlled them. How mild a message was this to Pharaoh, and yet how galling?
We pray thee let us go. God commands him that which he feared. He took
pleasure in the present servitude of Israel: God calls for a release. If the
suit had been for mitigation of labor, for preservation of their children, it
might have carried some hope, and have found some favor, but now God requires
that which he knows will as much discontent Pharaoh as Pharaohs cruelty could
discontent the Israelites ( Let us go) How contrary are Gods precepts to
natural minds? And indeed, as they love to cross him in their practice; so
he loves to cross them in their commands before, and his punishments
afterward; It is a dangerous sign of an ill heart to feel Gods yoke heavy.

Moses talks of sacrifice, Pharaoh talks of work. Any thing seems due work
to a carnal mind, saving Gods service: nothing superfluous, but religious
duties. Christ tells us there is but one thing necessary: nature tells us there
is nothing but that, needless. Moses speaks of devotion, Pharaoh of
idleness. It has been an old use, as to cast fair colors upon our own
vicious actions, so to cast evil a^persions upon the good actions of others.
The same Devil that spoke in Pharaoh, speaks still in our scoffers, and calls
religion hypocrisy, conscionable care, singularity. Every vice has a title,
and every virtue a disgrace.

Yet while possible taskes were imposed, there was some comfort. Their
diligence might save their backs from stripes. The conceit of a benefit to the
commander, and hope of impunitie to the labourer, might give a good pretense to
great difficulties: but to require taskes not faisible, is tyrannical, and
does only pick a quarrel to punish. They could neither make straw, nor find
it, yet they must have it. Do what may be, is tolerable; but do what cannot
be, is cruel. Those which are above others in place, must measure their
commands, not by their own wills, but by the strength of their inferiors. To
require more of a beast than he can do, is inhumane. The task is not done:
the taske-masters are beaten: the punishment lies where the charge is; they
must exact it of the people, Pharaoh of them. It is the misery of those which
are trusted with authority, that their inferiors faults are beaten upon their
backs. This was not the fault to require it of the taskemasters, but to
require it by the taske-masters, of the people. Public persons do either good
or ill with a thousand hands, and with no fewer shall receive it.

The birth and breediug of Moses.
IT is a wonder that Amram the father of Moses; would think of the marriage bed
in so troublesome a times when he knew he should beget children either to
slavery, or slaughter: yet even now in the heat of this bondage* he marries
Iochebed* the drowning of his sons was not so great an evil, as his own
burning; the thraldom of his daughters not so great an evil, as the subjection
unto sinful desires. He therefore uses Gods remedy for his sin; and refers
the sequel of his danger to God. How necessary is his imitation for those
which have not the power of containing? Perhaps we would have thought it better
to live childlesse: but Amram and Iochebed durst not incur the danger of a
sin, to avoid the danger of a mischief. No doubt when Iochebed the mother of
Moses saw a man-child borne of her, and him beautiful and comely, she sell
into extreme passion, to think that the executioners hand should succeed the
Mid-wiues. All the time of her conception, she could not but fear a son;
now she sees him, and thinks of his birth and death at once; her second
throws are more grievous than her first. The pains of travel in others are
somewhat mitigated with hope, and counteruailed with joy that a man-child is
borne; in her they are doubled with fear; the remedy of others is her
complaint: still she looks when some fierce Egyptian would come in, and
snatch her newborn infant out of her bosom; whose comeliness had now also
added to her affection.

Many times God writes presages of Majesty and honor, even in the faces of
children. Little did she think, that she held in her lap the deliverer of
Israel. It is good to hazard in greatest appearances of danger. If Iochebed had
said, If I bear a son they will kill him, where had been the great rescuer of
Israel? Happy is that resolution which can follow God hood-winkt, and let him
dispose of the event: When she can no longer hide him in her womb, she hides
him in her house; afraid lest every of his cryings should guide the executioner
to his cradle. And now she sees her treasure can be no longer hid, she ships
him in a bark of bulrushes, and commits him to the mercy of the waves, and
(which was more merciless) to the danger of an Egyptian passenger, yet does
she not leave him without a guardian.

No tyranny can forbid her to love him, whom she is forbidden to keep: Her
daughters eyes must supply the place of her arms and if the weak affection of
a mother were thus effectually careful, what shall we think of him whose
love, whose compassion is (as himself) infinite? His eye, his hand cannot but
be with us, even when we forsake our selves: Moses had never a stronger
protection about him, no not when all his Israelites were pitched about his
tent in the wilderness, than now when he lay sprauling alone upon the waves:
No water, no Egyptian can hurt him. Neither friend nor mother dare own him,
and now God challenges his custody. When we seem most neglected, and
forlorn in our selves, then is God most present, most vigilant.

His providence brings Pharaohs daughter thither to wash her self. Those times
look for no great state: A Princess comes to bath her self in the open
stream: she meant only to wash her self, God fetches her thither to deliver
the deliverer of his people. His designs go beyond ours. We know not (when
we set our foot over our threshold) what he has to do with us. This event
seemed casual to this Princess, but predetermined, and provided by God,
before she was: how wisely and sweetly God brings to pass his own purposes
in our ignorance and regardlesnesse. She saw the Arc, opens it, finds the
child weeping; his beauty and his tears had God provided for the strong
persuasions of mercy. This young and lively Oratorie prevailed. Her heart is
stroke with compassion, and yet her tongue could say, it is an Hebrews child.

See here the merciful daughter of a cruel father: It is an uncharitable and
injurious ground to judge of the child's disposition by the parents. How well
does pity beseem great personages? and most in extremities. It had been
death to another to rescue the child of an Hebrew; in her, it was safe and
noble. It is an happy thing when great ones improve their places to so much
more charity as their liberty is more.

Moses his sister finding the princess compassionate, offers to procure a
nurse, and fetches the mother, and who can be so fit a nurse as a mother? She
now with glad hands receives her child, both with authority and reward. She
would have given al her substance for the life of her son; and now she has
a reward to nurse him. The exchange of the name of a mother for the name of a
nurse has gained her both her son, and his education, and with both, a
recompense. Religion does not call us to a weak simplicity, but allows us as
much of the serpent, as of the Dove: Lawful policies have from God both
liberty in the use and blessing in the success.

The good Lady did not breed him as some child of alms, or as some wretched
outcast for whom it might be favor enough to live; but as her own son. In
all the delicacies, in all the learning of Egypt. Whatsoever the Court, or the
School could put into him, he wanted not; yet all this could not make him
forget that he was and Hebrew. Education works wondrous changes, and is of
great force either way, a little advancement has so puffed up some above
themselves, that they have not only forgot their friends, but scorned their
parents. All the honors of Egypt could not win Moses not to call his nurse,
mother: or weane him from a willing misery with the Israelites. If we had
Moses his faith, we could not but make his choice. It is only our infidelity
that binds us so fast to the world, and makes us prefer the momentany
pleasures of sin, unto that everlasting recompense of reward.

He went forth and looked on the burdens of Israel. What needed Moses to have
afflicted himself with the afflictions of others? Himself was at ease and
pleasure in the Court of Pharaoh. A good heart cannot abide to be happy alone;
and must needs, unbidden, share with others in their miseries. He is no true
Moses that is not moved with the calamities of Gods Church. To see an Egyptian
smite an Hebrew, it smote him, and moved him to smite. He has no Israelitish
blood in him, that can endure to see an Israelite stricken either with hand or
tongue.

Here was his zeal: where was his authority? Doubtless Moses had an
instinct from God of his magistracy; else how should he think they would
have understood what himself did not? Oppressions may not be righted by
violence, but by law. The redress of evil by a person unwarranted, is evil.
Moses knew that God had called him, he knew that Pharaoh knew it not: therefore
he hides the Egyptian in the sand. Those actions which may be approved unto
God, are not always safe with men: as contrarily, too many things go current
with men, that are not approved of God.

Another Hebrew is stricken, but by an Hebrew: the act is the same, the agents
differ: neither does their profession more differ, than Moses his proceedings.
He gives blows to the one: to the other, words. The blows to the Egyptian
were deadly; the words to the Hebrew, gentle and plausible. As God makes a
difference betwixt chastisements of his own, and punishments of strange
children: So must wise governors learn to distinguish of sins and
judgments, according to circumstances. How mildly does Moses admonish? Sirs,
ye are brethren. If there had been but any dram of good nature in these
Hebrews, they had relented: now it is strange to see that being so universally
vexed with their common adversary, they should yet vex one another: One would
have thought that a common opposition should have united them more, yet now
private grudges do thus dangerously divide them. Blows enough were not dealt by
the Egyptians, their own must add to the violence. Still Satan is thus busy,
and Christians are thus malicious, that (as if they wanted enemies) they fly
in one another faces. While we are in this Egypt of the world, all unkind
strifes would easily be composed if we did not forget that we are brethren.

Behold an Egyptian in the skin of an Hebrew: How dogged an answer does Moses
receive to so gentle a reproof? Who would not have expected that this Hebrew
had been enough dejected with the common affliction? But vexations may make
some more miserable, not more humble. As we see sickenesses make some
tractable, others more froward; It is no easy matter to bear a reproof well;
if never so well tempered; no sugar can bereave a pill of his bitterness: None
but the gracious can say, Let the righteous smite me.

Next to the not deserving a reproof is the well taking of it. But who is so
ready to except and exclaim as the wrong-doer? The patient replies not. One
injury draws on another, first to his brother, then to his reproouer.
Guiltiness will make a man stir upon every touch: he that was wronged,
could incline to reconciliation: Malice makes men incapable of good counsel;
and there are none so great enemies to justice, as those which are enemies to
peace.

With what impatience does a galled heart receive an admonition? This unworthy
Israelite is the pattern of a stomackfull offender, first he is moved to
choler in himself: then he calls for the authority of the admonisher: A small
authority will serve for a loving admonition. It is the duty of men, much more
of Christians to advise against sin; yet this man asks who made thee a
Judge, for but finding fault with his injury* Then, he aggrauates, and
misconstrues; Will thou kill me? when Moses meant only to save both. It was
the death of his malice only that was intended and the safety of his person.
And lastly he vpbraids with former actions; Thou killedst the Egyptian: What if
he did? What if unjustly? What was this to the Hebrew? Another man's sin is no
excuse for ours: A wicked heart never looks inward to it self, but outward to
the quality of the reprouer if that afford exception, it is enough. As a dog
runs first to revenge on the stone: what matter is it to me who he be that
admonishes me: let me look home into my self: let me look to his advise. If
that be good, it is more shame to me to be reproved by an evil man. As a good
man's allowance cannot warrant evil, so an evil man's reproof may remedy
evil: If this Hebrew had bin well pleased, Moses had not heard of his
slaughter; Now in choler all will out; And if this man's tongue had not thus
cast him in the teeth with blood, he had been surprised by Pharaoh, ere he
could have known that the fact was known.

Now he grows jealous, flees and escapes No friend is so commodious in some
eases as an adversary; This wound which the Hebrew thought to give Moses, saved
his life. As it is good for a man to have an enemy, so it shall be our wisdom
to make use of his most choleric objections. The woorst of an enemy, may
prove most sovereign to our selves. Moses flees, It is no discomfort for a
man to flee when his conscience pursues him not: Where Gods warrant will not
protect us, it is good for the heeels to supply the place of the tongue.

Moses when he may not in Egypt, he will be doing justice in Midian. In Egypt
he delivers the oppressed Israelite. In Midian the wronged daughters of
Iethro. A good man will be doing good, wheresoever he is; His trade is a
compound of charity and justice as therefore evil dispositions cannot be
changed with airs, no more will good. Now then he sits him down by a well in
Midian. There he might have to drink, but where to eat he knew not. The case
was altered with Moses, to come from the dainties of the court of Egypt, to the
hunger of the fields of Midian: It is a lesson that al Gods children must
learn to take out, to want and to abound. Who can think strange of penury,
when the great governor of Gods people once has nothing? Who would not have
thought in this case, Moses should have been hartlesse and sullen; so cast
down with his own complaints, that he should have had no feeling of others;
yet how hot is he upon justice? No adversity can make a good man neglect
good duties, he sees the oppression of the shepherds, the image of that other
he left behind him in Egypt: The maids, (daughters of so great a peer) draw
water for their flocks, the inhumane shepherds drive them away; rudeness has
no respect either to sex, or condition; If we lived not under laws this were
our case; Might would be the measure of justice: we should not so much as
enjoy our own water: unjust courses will not ever prosper: Moses shall rather
come from Egypt to Midian to beat the shepherds, then they shall vex the
daughters of Iethro: This act of justice was not better done than taken. Revel
requites it kindly with an hospital entertainment. A good nature is ready to
answer courtesies: we cannot do too much for a thankful man. And if a
courteous heathen reward the watering of a sheep in this bountiful manner,
how shall our God recompense but a cup of cold water, that is given to a
disciple? This savor has won Moses, who now consents to dwell with him,
though out of the Church. Curiosity or whatsoever idle occasions may not draw
us (for our residence) out of the bounds of the Church of God: danger of life
may; we love not the Church if we easily leave it: if in a case of life, we
leave it not (upon opportunity) for a time of respite, we love not our
selves. The worst part of Moses his requital was his wife, one of those whom
he had formerly protected.

I do not so much marvel that Iethro gave him his daughter (for he saw him
valiant, wise, learned, nobly bred) as that Moses would take her; a stranger,
both in blood and religion. I could plead for him necessity: his own nation
was shut up to him; if he would have tried to fetch a daughter of Israel, he
had endangered to leave himself behind. I could plead some correspondence in
common principles of religion; for doubtless Moses his zeal could not suffer
him to smother the truth in himself: he should have been an unfaithful
servant, if he had not been his masters teacher. Yet neither of these can
make this match either safe, or good. The event bewraies it dangerously
inconvenient. This choice had like to have cost him dear: she stood in his
way for circumcision; God stands in his way for revenge. Though he was now in
Gods message, yet might he not be for borne in this neglect. No circumstance,
either of the dearness of the solicitour* or our own engagement, can bear
out a sin with God: Those which are unequally yoked, may not ever look to
draw one way. True love to the person cannot long agree with dislike of the
religion. He had need to be more than a man, that has a Zipporah in his
bosom, and would have true zeal in his heart. All this while Moses his
affection was not so tied to Midian, that he could forget Egypt. He was a
stranger in Midian: what was he else in Egypt? Surely either Egypt was not his
home, or a miserable one; and yet in reference to it, he calls his son
Gershom, a stranger there. Much better was it to be a stranger there, than a
dweller in Egypt. How hardly can we forget the place of our abode or education,
although never so homely? And if he so thought of his Egyptian home, where was
nothing but bondage and tyranny, how should we think of that home of ours,
above, where is nothing but rest and blessedness?

Moses called.
FOrty years was Moses a courtier, and forty years (after that) a shepherd:
That great men may not be ashamed of honest vocations, the greatest that ever
were have been content to take up with mean trades. The contempt of honest
callings in those which are well borne, argues pride, without wit: How
constantly did Moses stick to his hook? and yet a man of great spirits, of
excellent learning, of curious education, and if God, had not (after his forty
years service) called him off, he had so ended his days. Humble resolutions
are so much more heroical, as they fall into higher subjects.

There can be no fitter disposition for a leader of Gods people, then constancy
in his undertakings, without either weariness, or change. How had he learned
to subdue all ambitious desires, and to rest content with his obscurity. So he
might have the freedom of his thoughts, and full opportunity of holy
meditations, he willingly leaves the world to others, and enuies not his
proudest acquaintance of the Court of Pharaoh. He that has true worth in
himself, and familiarity with God, finds more pleasure in the desers of
Midian, then others can do in the palaces of Kings.

Whiles he is tending his sheep, God appeared unto him, God never graces the
idle with his visions; when he finds us in our callings, we find him in the
tokens of his mercy: Satan appears to the idle man in manifold tentations, or
rather presents himself, and appears not. God was ever with Moses, yet was
he not seen till now. He is never absent from his, but sometimes he makes
their senses witnesses of his presence. In small matters may be great wonders.
That a bush should burn is no marvel, but that it should not consume in
burning, is justly miraculous: God chooses not ever great subjects wherein to
exercise his power. It is enough that his power is great in the smallest.

When I look upon this burning bush with Moses, me thinks I can never see a
woorthier, and more lively Emblem of the Church; That in Egypt was the furnace
yet wasted not. Since then how often has it been flaming, never consumed. The
same power that enlightens it, preserues it: and to none but his enemies is he
a consuming fire; Moses was a great Philosopher, but small skill would have
served to know the nature of fire, and of the bush: that fire meeting with
combustible matter could not but consume: If it had been some solid woood it
would have yielded later to the flame; but bushes are of so quick dispatch,
that the joy of the wicked is compared to a fire of thorns. He noted it a
while, saw it continued, and began to wonder. It was some marvel how it should
come there; but how it should continue without supply, yea without diminution
of matter, was truly admirable: Doubtless he went often about it, and viewed
it on all sides, and now when his eye and mind could meet with no likely
causes, so far off, resolves, I will go see it; His curiosity led him
nearer, and what could he see but a bush and a flame which he saw at first
unsatisfied? It is good to come to the place of Gods presence, howsoever; God
may perhaps speak to thy heart, though thou come but for nouelty: Even those
which have come upon curiosity have been often taken: Absence is without hope;
If Moses had not come, he had not been called out of the bush.

To see a fire not consuming the bush, was much; but to here a speaking fire,
this was more; and to hear his own name out of the mouth of the fire, it was
most of all. God makes way for his greatest messages by astonishment and
admiration: as on the contrary, carelesnes carries us to a more proficiency
under the best means of God: If our hearts were more awful, Gods messages
would be more effectual to us.

In that appearance God meant to call Moses to come; yet when he is come
inhibits him; ( Come not hither) We must come to God, we must not come too
near him, when we meditate of the great mysteries of his word, we come to
him: we come too near him when we search into his counsels. The Sun and the
fire say of themselves, Come not too near, how much more the light which none
can attain unto? We have all our limits set us: The Gentiles might come into
some outer courts, not into the inmost: The Jews might come into the inner
Court, not into the Temple: the Priests and Levites into the Temple, not into
the Holy of Holies; Moses to the hill, not to the bush. The waves of the sea
had not more need of bounds, than man's presumption. Moses must not come close
to the bush at all; and where he may stand, he may not stand with his shoes
on. There is no unholiness in clothes: God prepared them for man at first, and
that of skins* lest any exception should be taken at the hides of dead beasts.
This rite was significant. What are the shoes but worldly and carnal
affections? If these be not cast off when we come to the holy place, we make
our selves unholy* how much less should we dare to come with resolutions of
sin? This is not only to come with shoes on, but with shoes bemired with
wicked filthiness; the touch whereof profanes the pauement of God, and makes
our presence odious.

Moses was the son of Amram, Amram of Kohath, Kohath of Leui, Leui of Jacob,
Jacob of Isaac, Isaac of Abraham. God puts together both ends of his pedigree,
I am the God of thy father, and of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob. If he had said only,
I am thy God, it had been Moses his duty to attend awfully; but now that he
says I am the God of thy Father, and of Abraham etc. He challenges reverence
by prescription. Any thing that was our Ancestors, pleases us; their houses;
their vessels, their cote-armour; How much more their God? How careful should
parents be to make holy choises? Every precedent of theirs are so many
monuments and motives to their posterity. What an happiness it is to be
borne of good parents: hence God claims an interest in us, and we in him, for
their sake. As many a man smarteth for his fathers sin, so the goodness of
others is crowned in a thousand generations. Neither does God say, I was the
God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; but, I am. The Patriarchs still live after so
many thousand years of dissolution. No length of time can separate the souls
of the just from their maker. As for their body, there is still a real
relation betwixt the dust of it, and the soul: and if the being of this part
be more defective, the being of the other is more lively, and does more than
recompense the wants of that earthly half.

God could not describe himself by a more sweet name than this, I am the God
of thy father, and of Abraham, etc. yet Moses hides his face for fear. If he
had said, I am the glorious God that made heaven and earth, that dwell in light
inaccessible, whom the Angels cannot behold; or, I am God the auenger, just and
terrible, a consuming fire to mine enemies, here had been just cause of
terror.

But ^hy was Moses so frighted with a familiar compellation? God is no less
awful to his own in his very mercies. Great is thy mercy that thou may be
feared: for to them, no less majesty shines in the favors of God, than in
his judgments and justice. The wicked heart never fears God but thundering, or
shaking the earth* or raining fire from heaven; but the good can dread him in
his very sunshine: his loving deliverances and blessings affect them with
awfulnes Moses was the true son of Jacob, who when he saw nothing but
visions of love and mercy, could say, How dreadful is this place?

I see Moses now at the bush hiding his face at so mild ^ representation:
hereafter we shall see him in this very mount betwixt heaven and earth, in
thunder, lightning, smoke, earthquakes, speaking mouth to mouth with God, bare
faced, and fearelesse: God was then more terrible, but Moses was less strange.
This was his first meeting with God; further acquaintance makes him familiar,
and familiarity makes him bold: Frequence of conversation gives us freedom of
access to God; and makes us pour out our hearts to him as fully and as
fearelesly as to our friends. In the mean time now at first he made not so
much haste to see, but he made as much to hide his eyes: Twice did Moses hide
his face; once for the glory which God put upon him, which made him so shine,
that he could not be beheld of others; once for Gods own glory, which he
could not behold. No marvel. Some of the creatures are too glorious for
mortal eyes: how much more when God appears to us in the easiest manner, must
his glory needs overcome us? Behold the difference betwixt our present, and
future estate: Then, the more majesty of appearance, the more delight: when
our sin is quite gone, all our fear at Gods presence shall be turned into
joy. God appeared to Adam before his sin with comfort, but in the same form
which after his sin was terrible. And if Moses cannot abide to look upon
Gods glory when he descends to us in mercy, how shall wicked ones abide to see
his fearful presence when he sets upon vengeance. In this fire he flamed and
consumed not, but in his revenge our God is a consuming fire.

First Moses hides himself in fear, now in modesty. Who am I? None in all
Egypt or Midian was comparably fit for this embassage. Which of the Israelites
had been brought up a Courtier, a scholar, an Israelite by blood, by education
an Egyptian learned, wise, valiant, experienced? Yet, Who am I? The more fit
any man is for whatsoever vocation, the less he thinks himself. Forwardness
argues insufficiency. The unworthy thinks still, Who am I not? Modest
beginnings give hopeful proceedings, and happy endings. Once before, Moses had
taken upon him, and laid about him; hoping then they would have known that by
his hand God meant to deliver Israel: but now when it comes to the point, Who
am I? Gods best servants are not ever in an equal disposition to good duties.
If we find differences in our selves sometimes, it argues that grace is not
our own. It is our frailty, that those services which we are forward to,
aloof off, we shrink at, near hand, and fearfully misse-giue. How many of
us can bid defiances to death, and suggest answers to absent tentations, which
when they come home to us, we fly off, and change our note, and instead of
action, expostulate?

The plagues of Egypt.
IT is too much honor for flesh and blood to receive a message from heaven,
yet here God sends a message to man, and is repulsed: well may God ask, who is
man that I should regard him, but for man to ask who is the Lord, is a bold
and proud blasphemy. Thus wild is nature at the first; but ere God have done
with Pharaoh, he will be known of him, he will make himself known by him, to
all the world: God might have swept him away suddenly. How unworthy is he of
life, who with the same breath that he receives, denies the giver of it: But
he would have him convinced, ere he were punished; First therefore he works
miracles before him, then upon him. Pharaoh was now from a staff of protection
and sustentation to Gods people, turned to a serpent that stung them to death;
God shows him himself in this real emblem; doing that suddenly before him,
which Satan had wrought in him by leisure; And now when he crawles and winds,
and hisses, threatening peril to Israel, he shows him how in an instant, he
can turn him into a senseless stick, and make him if not useful, yet
fearelesse: The same God which wrought this, gives Satan leave to imitate it;
the first plague that he meant to inflict upon Pharaoh, is delusion: God can be
content the Devil should win himself credit, where he means to judge, and
holds the honor of a miracle well lost, to harden an enemy, Yet to show that
his miracle was of power, the others of permission; Moses his serpent deuours
theirs; how easily might the Egyptians have thought, that he which caused their
serpent not to be, could have kept it from being, and that they which could not
keep their Serpent from devouring, could not secure them from being consumed;
but wise thoughts enter not into those that must perish. All Gods judgments
stand ready, and wait but till they be called for. They need but a watchword
to be given them: No sooner is the rod lift up, but they are gone forth into
the world, presently the waters run into blood, the frogs and lice craule
about, and all the other troops of God come rushing in upon his adversaries:
All creatures conspire to revenge the injuries of God. If the Egyptians look
upward, there they have thunder, lightning, hayle, tempests, one while no light
at all, another while such fearful flashes as had more terror, then darkness.
If they look under them, there they see their waters changed into blood, their
earth swarming with frogs and grassehoppers: If about them, one while the flies
fill both their eyes and ears, another while they see their fruits destroyed,
their cattle dying, their children dead. If lastly they look upon themselves,
they see themselves loathsome with lice, painful and deformed with scabs, biles
and botches.

First God begins his judgment with the waters. As the river of Nilus was to
Egypt in steed of heaven to moisten and fatten the earth; so their confidence
was more in it then in heaven; Men are sure to be punished most and soonest, in
that which they make a corriuall with God. They had before defiled the rivers
with the blood of innocents; and now it appears to them, in his own color.
The waters will no longer keep their counsel: Never any man delighted in
blood, which had not enough of it, ere his end: they shed but some few
streams, and now behold whole rivers of blood: Neither was this more a
monument of their slaughter, past, then an image of their future destruction.
They were afterward overwhelmed in the red sea, and now beforehand they see
their rivers red with blood. How dependant and servile is the life of man,
that cannot either want one element, or endure it corrupted; It is hard to say
whether there were more horror, or annoyance in this plague. They complain of
thirst, and yet doubt whether they should dye, or quench it with blood. Their
fish (the chief part of their sustenance) dies with infection, and infecteth
more by being dead. The stench of both is ready to poison the inhabitants; yet
Pharaohs curiosity carries him away quite from the sense of the judgment, he
had rather send for his magicians to work feats, then to humble himself under
God for the remooual of this plague; And God plagues his curiosity with
deceit, those whom he trusts, shall undo him with prevailing; the glory of a
second miracle shall be obscured by a false imitation, for a greater glory to
God in the sequel.

The rod is lift up again, Behold, that Nilus which they had before adored,
was never so beneficial as it is now troublesome; yielding them not only a
dead, but a living annoyance: It never did so store them with fish, as now it
plagues them with frogs; Whatsoever any man makes his God, besides the true
one, shall be once his tormenter. Those loathsome creatures leave their own
element to punish them, which rebelliously detained Israel from their own. No
bed, no table can be free from them, their dainty Ladies cannot keep them out
of their bosoms; neither can the Egyptians sooner open their mouths, than
they are ready to creep into their throats; as if they would tell them that
they came on purpose to revenge the wrongs of their maker: yet even this wonder
also is Satan allowed to imitate. Who can marvel to see the best virtues
counterfeited by wicked men, when he sees the devil emulating the miraculous
power of God? The feats that Satan plays may harden, but cannot benefit. He
that has leave to bring frogs, has neither leave, nor power, to take them
away, nor to take away the stench from them. To bring them, was but to add to
the judgment; to remove them, was an act of mercy. God does commonly use
Satan in executing of judgment, never in the works of mercy to men.

Yet even by thus much is Pharaoh hardened, and the sorcerers grown insolent.
When the devil and his agents are in the height of their pride, GOD shames
them in a trifle. The rod is lift up: the very dust receives life: lice abound
every where, and make no difference betwixt beggars and Princes. Though Pharaoh
and his Courtiers abhorred to see themselves louzie, yet they hoped this
miracle would be more easily imitable: but now the greater possibility, the
greater foil. How are the great wonder-mongers of Egypt abashed that they can
neither make lice of their own, nor deliver themselves from the lice that are
made. Those that could make serpents and frogs, could not either make or kill
lice; to show them that those frogs and serpents were not their own
workmanship. Now Pharaoh must needs see how impotent a devil he served, that
could not make that vermin which every day rises voluntarily out of
corruption. Iannes and Iambres cannot now make those lice (so much as by
delusion) which at another time they cannot choose but produce unknowing, and
which now they cannot avoid. That spirit which is powerful to execute the
greatest things when he is bidden, is unable to do the least when he is
restrained. Now these corriuals of Moses can say, This is the finger of God.
Ye foolish Inchanters, was Gods finger in the lice, not in the frogs, not in
the blood, not in the serpent? And why was it rather in the less, than in the
greater? Because ye did imitate the other, not these. As if the same finger of
God had not been before in your imitation, which was now in your restraint: As
if ye could have failed in these, if ye had not been only permitted the
other. Whiles wicked minds have their full scope, they never look up above
themselves; but when once God crosses them in their proceedings, their want of
success teaches them to give God his own. All these plagues perhaps had more
horror than pain in them. The frogs creep upon their clothes, the lice upon
their skins, but those stinging hornets which succeed them, shall wound and
kill. The water was annoied with the first plague, the earth with the second
and third; this fourth fills the air, and besides corruption brings smart. And
that they may see this winged army comes out from an angry God, (not either
from nature, or chance) even the very flies shall make a difference betwixt
Egypt, and Goshen. He that gave them their being, sets them their stint. They
can no more sting an Israelite, than favor an Egyptian. The very wings of
flies are directed by a providence, and do acknowledge their limits. Now
Pharaoh finds how impossible it is for him to stand out with God, since all
his power cannot rescue him from lice and flies.

And now his heart begins to thaw a little: Go, do sacrifice to your God in
this land; or (since that will not be accepted) Go into the wilderness, but
not far: but how soon it knits again! Good thoughts make but a thorow-fare of
carnal hearts, they can never settle there: yea his very misse-giuing hardens
him the more: that now neither the murren of his cattle, nor the botches of his
servants can stir him a whit. He saw his cattle struck dead with a sudden
contagion; he saw his sorcerers (after their contestation with Gods messengers)
struck with a scabbe in their very faces, and yet his heart is not struck.
Who would think it possible that any soul could be secure in the midst of
such variety, and frequence of judgments? These very plagues have not more
wonder in them, than their success has. To what an height of obduration will
sin lead a man, and of all sins, incredulity? Amidst all these storms
Pharaoh sleeps, till the voice of Gods mighty thunders, and hail mixed with
fire rouzed him up a little.

Now as betwixt sleeping and waking, he starts up, and says, God is
righteous, I am wicked, Moses pray for us, and presently lays down his head
again. God has no sooner done thundering, than he has done fearing. All this
while you never find him careful to prevent any one evil, but desirous still
to shift it off when he feels it; never holds constant to any good motion;
never prays for himself, but carelessly wills Moses and Aaron to pray for
him; never yields God his whole demand, but higgleth and dodgeth, like some
hard chapman, that would get a release with the cheapest: First, they shall not
go; then, go and sacrifice, but in Egypt; next, go sacrifice in the
wilderness, but not far off; after, go ye that are men; then, go you and
your children only; at last, go all save your sheep and cattle. Wheresoever
mere nature is, she is still improuident of future good, sensible of present
evil, inconstant in good purposes, unable, through vnacquaintance, and
unwilling to speak for her self, niggardly in her grants, and vncheerfull.
The plague of the grasshoppers startled him a little; and the more, through the
importunity of his servants: for when he considered the fish destroyed with
the first blow, the cattle with the fifth, the corn with the seventh, the
fruit and leaves with this eighth, and nothing now left him but a bare
fruitless earth to live upon, and that, covered over with locusts, necessity
drove him to relent for an advantage: Forgive me this once; take from me this
death only. But as constrained repentance is ever short and unsound; the West
wind together with the grasshoppers blows away his remorse; and now is he
ready for another judgment. As the grasshoppers took away the sight of the
earth from him, so now a gross darkness takes away the sight of heaven too:
other darknesses were but privative, this was real and sensible. The Egyptians
thought this night long, (how could they choose, when it was six in one?) and so
much the more, for that no man could rise to talk with other, but was
necessarily confined to his own thoughts: One thinks, the fault in his own
eyes, which he rubs often times in vain: Others think that the Sun is lost
out of the firmament, and is now with-drawen for ever: Others, that all things
are returning to their first confusion: All think themselves miserable past
remedy, and wish (whatsoever had befallen them) that they might have had but
light enough to see themselves die.

Now Pharaoh proves like to some beasts that grow mad with baiting: grace
often resisted turns to desperateness; Get thee from me, look thou see my
face no more; whenever thou come in my sight, thou shall die. As if Moses
could not plague him as well in absence: As if he that could not take away the
lice, flies, frogs, grasshoppers, could at his pleasure take away the life of
Moses that procured them. What is this but to run upon the judgments, and
run away from the remedies? Evermore, when Gods messengers are abandoned,
destruction is near. Moses will see him no more till he see him dead upon the
sands; but God will now visit him more than ever: The fearefullest plagues God
still reserues for the vpshot: All the former do but make way for the last.
Pharaoh may exclude Moses and Aaron, but Gods Angel he cannot exclude:
Insensible messengers are used, when the visible are debarred.

Now God begins to call for the blood they owned him: In one night every
house has a carcass in it and (which is more grievous) of their first borne,
and (which is yet more fearful) in an instant. No man could comfort other;
every man was too full of his own sorrow, helping rather to make the noise of
the lamentation more doleful, and astonishing. How soon has God changed the
note of this tyrannical people! Egypt was never so stubborn in deniing
passage to Israel, as now importunate to entreat it: Pharaoh did not more force
them to stay before, than now to depart: whom lately they would not permit, now
they hire to go. Their rich jewels of silver and gold were not too dear for
them whom they hated; how much rather had they to send them away wealthy, than
to have them stay to be their executors? Their love to themselves obtained of
them the enriching of their enemies; and now they are glad to pay them well for
their old work, and their present journey: Gods people had staid like slaves,
they go away like conquerours, with the spoil of those that hated them: armed
for security, and wealthy for maintenance.

Old Jacobs seventy souls which he brought down into Egypt in spite of their
bondage and bloodshed, go forth six hundred thousand men, besides children.
The world is well mended with Israel since he went with his staff and scrippe
over Jordan. Tyranny is too weak, where God bids Increase and multiply. I
know not where else the good herb ouer-growes the weeds; the Church
out-strips the world. I fear if they had lived in ease and delicacie, they had
not been so strong, so numerous. Never any true Israelite lost by his
affliction. Not only for the action, but the time, Pharaohs choice meets with
Gods. That very night, when the 130. years were expired, Israel is gone,
Pharaoh neither can, nor can will to keep them longer; yet in this, not
fulfilling Gods will, but his own. How sweetly does God dispose of all second
causes, that whiles they do their own will, they do his?

The Israelites are equally glad of this haste: who would not be ready to go,
yea to fly out of bondage? They have what they wished; it was no staying for a
second inuitation. The loss of an opportunity is many times unrecoverable:
The love of their liberty made the burden of their dough light: who knew
whether the variable mind of Pharaoh might return to a denial, and (after
all his stubbornenesse) repent of his obedience? It is foolish to hazard where
there is certainty of good offers, and uncertainty of continuance. They go
therefore; and the same God that fetched them out, is both their guide and
protector. How carefully does he choose their way? not the nearer, but the
safer. He would not have his people so suddenly change from bondage to war.

It is the wondrous mercy of God that he has respect, as to his own glory, so
to our infirmities. He intends them wars hereafter, but after some longer
breathing, and more preparation; his goodness so orders all, that evils are not
ready for us, till we be ready for them. And as he chooses, so he guides
their way. That they might not err in that sandy and vntracked wilderness,
himself goes before them: who could but follow cheerfully when he sees God
lead him? He that lead the wise men by a star, leads Israel by a cloud: That
was an higher object, therefore he gives them an higher and more heavenly
conduct: This was more earthly, therefore he contents himself with a lower
representation of his presence. A pillar of cloud and fire: A pillar, for
firmness; of cloud and fire, for visibilitie and use. The greater light
extinguishes the less, therefore in the day he shows them not fire, but a
cloud: In the night nothing is seen without light; therefore he shows them
not the cloud, but fire: The cloud shelters them from heat by day; the fire
digests the rawnesse of the night. The same God is both a cloud and a fire to
his children, ever putting himself into those forms of gracious respects,
that may best fit their necessities.

As good motions are long ere they can enter into hard hearts, so they seldom
continue long. No sooner were the backs of Israel turned to depart, than
Pharaohs heart and face is turned after them, to fetch them back again. It
vexes him to see so great a command, so much wealth cast away in one night;
which now he resolves to redeem, though with more plagues. The same ambition
and covetousness that made him wear out so many judgments, will not leave
him, till it have wrought out his full destrustruction. All Gods vengeances
have their end, the final perdition of his enemies, which they cannot rest
till they have attained: Pharaoh therefore and his Egyptians will needs go
fetch their bane. They well knew that Israel was fitter to serve than to fight;
weary with their servitude, not trained up to war, not furnished with
provision for a field: Themselves captains and soldiers by profession,
furnished with horses, and chariots of war. They gave themselves therefore the
victory beforehand, and Israel either for spoil or bondage: yea the weak
Israelites gave up themselves for dead, and already are talking of their
graves. They see the sea before them; behind them, the Egyptians: they know
not whether is more merciless, and are stricken with the fear of both. O God,
how could thou forbear so distrustful a people! They had seen all thy
wonders in Egypt, and in their Goshen; they saw even now thy pillar before
them, and yet they did more fear Egypt than believe thee. Thy patience is no
less miracle than thy deliverance. But in stead of remoouing from them, the
cloudy pillar remooues behind them, and stands betwixt the Israelites and
Egyptians: as if God would have said, They shall first overcome me, O Israel,
ere they touch thee. Wonder did now justly strive with fear in the Israelites,
when they saw the cloud remove behind them, and the sea remove before them.
They were not used to such bulwarks. God stood behind them in the cloud; the
sea reared them up walls on both sides them. That which they feared would be
their destruction, protected them: how easily can God make the cruellest of his
creatures both our friends and patrons?

Yet here was faith mixed with unbelief. He was a bold Israelite that set
the first foot into the channel of the sea: and every step that they set in
that moist way, was a new exercise of their faith. Pharaoh sees all this, and
wonders; yet has not the wit or grace to think (though the pillar tells him so
much) that God made a difference betwixt him, and Israel. He is offended with
the sea, for giving way to his enemies, and yet sees not why he may not trust
it as well as they. He might well have thought that he which gave light in
Goshen, when there was darkness in Egypt, could as well distinguish in the
sea: but he cannot now either consider, or fear: It is his time to perish.
God makes him fair way, and lets him run smoothly on till he be come to the
midst of the sea; not one wave may rise up against him to wet so much as the
hoof of his horse. Extraordinary favors to wicked men are the forerunners of
their ruin.

Now when God sees the Egyptians too far to return, he finds time to strike
them with their last terror: they know not why, but they would return too
late. Those Chariots in which they trusted, now fail them, as having done
service enough to carry them into perdition. God pursues them, and they cannot
fly from him. Wicked men make equal haste both to sin, and from judgment:
but they shall one day find that it is not more easy to run into sin,
than impossible to run away from judgment: the sea will show them, that it
regards the rod of Moses, not the scepter of Pharaoh; and now (as glad to
have got the enemies of God at such an advantage) shuts her mouth upon them,
and swallows them up in her waves, and after she has made sport with them a
while, casts them up on her sands, for a spectacle of triumph to their
adversaries.

What a sight was this to the Israelites, when they were now safe on the shore
to see their enemies come floating after them upon the billows, and to find
among the carcases upon the sands, their known oppressors, which now they can
tread upon with insultation. They did not cry more loud before, than now they
sing. Not their faith, but their sense teaches them now to magnify that God
after their deliverance, whom they hardly trusted for deliverance.

FINIS.

