FRATRES SOBRII ESTOTE. 1. PET. 5.8. OR, An admonition to the Friars of this
Kingdom of Ireland, to abandon such heretical doctrines as they daily
publish to the corruption of our holy faith. the ruin of souls, and their
own damnation which steepeth not.

By PAUL HARRIS Priest.

GALAT. 4.16. Am I then become your enemy, telling you the truth?

Printed MDCXXXIV,

TO POPE VRBANUS VIII. The Epistle of Paul Harris Priest.
MOST blessed Father, in these later and worser days are risen up among us
from the Orders of the Begging Friars, men speaking perverse things, and
drawing many disciples after them, not only in the matter of the Eleaven
Propositions, but profiting unto the worse, they labor to transfer us from him
who has called us unto the grace of Christ, unto an other gospel, teaching
the people as well in public assem^lyes as private houses, these wretched and
profane doctrines: 1. Whosoever shall dye in the habit of S. Francis shall
never be prevented with an unhappy death. 2. Whosoever shall take the Scapular
of the Carmelites, and dye in the same, shall never be damned. 3. Whosoever
shall fast the first Saturday after they have heard of the death of Luissa a
Spanish Nun of the order of S. Clare, shall have no part in the second death.


The first of these lewd positions is taken out of the Chronicle of the Friar
Minors, (for so are the Franciscans called) tom. 1. and fathered upon S.
Francis as one of those Legacyes bequeathed by him unto his Order, and by the
Friars of his Order indifferently to be communicated to so many as shall before
their death desire to be put into their habit, which that it may be the better
known and notified unto the world, it is commonly printed under the Image of
S. Francis, and placed at our Altars, as both my self and many others have
beheld with our eyes in this city.

The second is recorded in a certain sheet of paper, not much unlike unto a
Ballad, printed by the Friar Carmelits: The title whereof is, An abridgment of
the Privileges of the holy Scapular granted by the most gracious Queen of
Heaven, MARY, unto the Order of the Carmelites. In which Compendium or Brief,
the institute of the holy Scapular (for so is it called) is laid down in these
words.

S. Simon Stoc the sixth General of all the Latins of this Order, did receive
not without a manifest sign of the Divine favor, this most sacred Scapular;
for when as he had along time with much earnestness besought of Almighty God,
that by some manifest token it might appear that the Friar Carmelites were in
the undoubted protection of the blessed Virgin, behold upon a certain night he
saw the Mother of God in great glory, who reached down unto him this divine
Scapular with these words: Dilectissime fili, hoc recipe tui ordinis scapulare,
meae confraternitatis signu^, tibi, et cunctis Carmelitis privilegium, in quo
quis moriens, non aeternum patietur incendium. Ecce signum salutis, salus in
periculis, saedus pacis, et pacti sempiterni: Most loving son, receive this
Scapular of thy Order, a token of my confraternity, to thee and to all
Carmelites; a privilege, in which who so dies shall not suffer ever lasting
fire, Behold the figne of s^lvation, safety in dangers, a league of peace and
an everlasting covenant etc. If more can be ascribed unto him who dyed for
mankind upon the Altar of the Cross, I leave it to holy Church to determine.
And such was the vision of S. Simon Stoc exhibited by the Carmelites unto the
Estate, in the castle of Dublin in the month of August 1633. by the hands of
Edmund Doyle Priest. And if any doubt heerof, they shall find the very
original with me when ever they shall be pleased to demand the same. And such
is the authentication of the Scapular of the Carmelites evangelized everywhere
by the Friars of that Order, and represented unto the eye at many of their
altars by tables of picture. Now if any desire to know what thing this Scapular
is, and have not seen the same, behold this description. The Scapular is only
two square pieces of cloth of the bigness of two trenchers, The sorme of a
Scapular.
the one before pendant upon the breast, the other behind upon the shoulders,
from whence it has the name of Scapular.

The third Proposition as touching the Saturdayes fast of Donna Luissa the
Nunn of S. Clare, is much insisted upon and most carefully taught by the
Cordeliers or Franciscan Friars, and particularly by Friar Thomas Babe, who
published the same the 29. of April, being the feast of S. Peter Martyr, and
S. Catherin of Siena, in the year of our Lord 1631. in the Cook-street of
Dublin in a public audience, whose exhortation to the people was to this
purpose. That for so much as a certain holy. Virgin called Luissa of the order
of S. Clare had a revelation, that whosoever should fast upon the next Saturday
after they heard of her death, should never dye in mortal sin, or of any evil
death. The aforesaid Friar Thomas Babe persuaded the people then present, to
undertake so holy a penance, moved wherewithal very many (and I say
signanter very many) as they did be loeve his doctrine, so did they most
carefully observe the same fast, among whom as chief of all the rest, Thomas
Flemming alias Barnwell Archbishop of Dublin for exaniple unto his flock, and
as a prime man of the same order observed most devoutly the same, as himself
has not bin ashamed diverse times to acknowledge: Neither was that doctrine
only then, but sundry other times also taught by that false Apostle Friar Babe
and his fellows in diverse other places of this City and Diocese.

Most holy Father, I meddle not with the matter of Indolgences, neither do I
intend, or ever did, to discourse of that argument. I only complain of these
wicked doctrines; and I do adjure your sanctity, in the Name of the crucified,
that you confirm your flock in these parts, that they be not led away with
these new doctrines from that faith in which our holy Mother the Church has
bred us from her breast. I say that we be no longer misled by these Mendicants
who seek to persuade us these carnal fancyes, more serviceable I confess
unto the belly, then any ways behoofeful unto the soul, but rather as the
Apostle wills us, that we abide in those things which we have learned, and
have been committed unto us, in no sort admitting these new Apostles as sent
from heaven, but rather avoiding them as seducers come from hell. For we fools
do verily believe, That he who was borne of the blessed and immaculat Virgin
God and Man, Jesus and Emmanuel, who suffered so many and so grievous torments
upon the Cross under Pontius Pilate, who arose glorious from the death, and
ascended into Heaven, that he and no other redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, that he and no other has cleansed us from our iniquityes, and wrought our
reconciliation for us. And that neither Paul, nor Apollo, nor the habit of S.
Francis, nor the Scapular of the Carmelites, nor Dame Luissa the Nun of S.
Clare, order (be she never so holy a woman) has washed us with her blood, or
was crucified for us.

Most holy Father, you have given unto us for the Pastor of our souls, a Friar
of the Order of S. Francis, by name Thomas Flemming alias Barnwell, consecrated
Archbishop of Dublin; to him our Diocesan were presented our complains and
grievances in the behalf of the Clergy of Dublin, against the most horrid and
blasphemous tenants beforementioned. I say two R. Priests in the name of the
rest personally appearing before our Archbishop, did present him not only with
the names of the delinquents, but a catalogue also of their witnesses and
proofs which passed on the 7. of March in the year 1631. in this City of
Dublin. But what answer received the two Priests from their Ordinary? Truly
none at all, neither to this day have they profited in that suit. For verily it
is to be feared that this disease (whose nature is to fret like a canker) has
invaded and infected the head no less then the rest of the body. And we are
the rather enduced to believe the same, for that we see these errors and
corrupt doctrines day lie more and more to prevail, and to enlarge themselves
especially among the ignorant and common people, alas too easy and flexible to
be led astray: for there are a number of Regulars, especially of the
Franciscans and Carmelites, false Apostles, who not only in pulpits preach
these ertors, but as the Apostle says, going from house to house, subvert
whole familyes, teaching what they ought not for filthy lucres sake. For no
small profit doubtless does arise unto these Poets and Inventours of fable,
insomuch as they may truly say with Demetrius the silver-smyth, Act. 19. De
hoc artificio nobis est acquisitio: Sirs you know that our gain is of this
occupation. For (say me) who in the world is there that believes any thing to
remain after death and ashes, who will not be glad to avoy de the pains of
hell? who desires not to enjoy a blessed eternity in Heaven? And I call Heaven
and Earth to witness, what thing is there more easiethen before death to
creep into a Friars habit? or what more tolerable then to fast one day, which
is no more then having one competent repast at noone, to for bear a supper at
night? Or what is there less troublesome then to carry two square pannicles or
clouts, the one upon his back, the other at his bosom, under his garments (I
wis) a carriage not so burdensome, nor comparably so painful, as was that
heavy became of the Cross which sweet In svs carried upon his back to mount
Calvary, and on which the salvation of the world did hang. Doubtless if future
glory in the world to come, and the assurance thereof in this life might with
so small a labor be purchased, who is so much an Euclio or streit handed? Who
so much a Lucian, or an Atheist, as would not willingly admit these blessed
Friars bringing such abundance of spiritual richesse with them, into his
treasury, into his garnell amongst his herds and flocks, yea into his whole
substance and means, not a sad or an unwilling, but a most joyful giver? Or
what woman careful of her souls health, will make spare of whatsoever is in
her custody or under her hands? her bracelets, her rings, chains, Jewels, her
chests of linen, her arkes of meal and malt in exchange of such immortal
benefits, and to have so propitious and present gods, albeit our Savior has
said: Quid commutationis homo dabit pro anima sua? Mar. 8. What exchange shall
a man give for his sold? The same truth has also said Math. 7. Angusta est
porta and via arcta quae ducit ad vitam aternam etc. Narrow is the gate and
streit is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. And
our Savior foreseeing that there would come in the last times of the world
such as would endeavor to enlarge that way, and to make that gate more wide,
he presently adds. Attendite a falsis prophets, etc. Take you heed of false
prophets that come to you in the clothing of sleep, but inwardly are ravening
wolfes, by their frui^s you shall know them. And what are the fruits sweet
Jesus) of these falso prophets among us at this day, but to make the gates of
Heaven to gape as wide as the gates of hell it self. For albeit the Apostle
has excluded from celestial glory not a few, saying, Hoc enim scitote
intelligentes etc. For understanding know this, that no fornicator, nor
unclean or covetousiperson, which is the fervice of Idols, has inheritance in
the Kingdom of Christ and of God: yet will our Friars admin them all, if they
once fast Dame Luissaes saturdayes fast. And albeit Christ our Lord excluded
the man who had not a wedding garment from his Kingdom, yet will the
Franciscan Friar let in any who is clothed with his habit, and so the
Carmelite such as are found with his Scapular about their shoulders. I say, all
these so qualifved shall be accepted of, and be admitted as well unto the
Dinner of the great King as unto the Supper of the Lamb. Who then can marvel
(these doctrines supposed as orthodox, yea as oracles) that we day lie see so
many to be buried in Friars weeds, so many men and women day lie to take the
Scapular, witness the register of the Friars Franciscan and Carmelices, in
which their names are carefully recorded, as perpetual Benefactors unto their
Orders. Nay, who is there especially among the Laity (O triste verbum!) who
dare so nurch trust to the sufferings of our Savior, and to the merits of his
death and passion, as they dare be found in the hour of death without that
thrice holy Scapular, that sign of salvarion, that safety in dangers, that
league of peace, and of aneverlasting covenant, in which who so dies, shall
never suffer eternal fire. All which attributions are incorporated unto the
said Scapular by the blessed Virgin, if Simon Stoc his revelation be
authenticke; yea many among us nor trusting to the habit alone, or unto the
Scapular alone, or to the Nuns fast alone, will before their death beee
furnished with them all three together, having wisely understood that of
Solomon, Proverh. 4. Funiculus triplex difficile rumpitur: A triple cord is not
easily broken. In which their proceeding me seems that yet they show some
weakness of faith; for if they did constantly believe every one of these three
promised salvations to be assured by divine revelation, as their teachers be
are them in hand, surely either any of them is sufficient, or all of them
together insufficient.

Neither does it boot the Friars to cloak these their errors by saying, That
these doctrines rightly understood, do not import every sinner by keeping such
a fast^, by taking such an Habit, or Scapular to be favied, but such only as
be contrite with all for their fins, and are washed in the blood of the
Redeemer. For neither do our Friars, in their Semons and exhortations, mention
any such condition, etc if they did, yet notwithstanding the whose doctrine of
the Sabbath fast, the Habit and the Scapular, (no lesseblazed by the Friars,
then superstitously believed of the people) would utterly vanish into smoke.
For why? a person so disposed and qualifyed, that is penitent for his fimes,
and relying upon the redemption of In sas CHRIST is apt for the Kingdom of
God, and to receive an inheritance among the Saints and Elect, say he be naked
of Habit and scapular, and not at all acquainted with Donna Luissa her
saturdayes fast: yea a man ending his days in the service of God, and as the
Divines say in the estate of grace can not miss of his salvation, had he but a
couple of Hawkes-bells about his neck, or if he dyed in his old boots as well
as in scapular or habit. If then the Friar thus expounds himself. He that dies
in the habit or scapular, shall undoubredly be saved, always provided that he
bein the love and favor of God, verily he might as well have spared so much
breath to have cooled his broth, I say, as to spend it upon such a gloss as
corrupts and quite over-throweth the text. No no, Mors in olla, There is
poison in the pot. For these preachers desire no thing less then to be so
understood in their sermons when they make their Panegyricks of the habit and
scapular unto the people, for by that means they might be in danger not only
to loose their offerings at the Altar, but that great authority and place which
they have in the hearts and affection of the Laity. No rather with all possible
endeavor they labor to be believed, that by the virtue of these rags,
either as causes isntrumental or infallible signs, salvation is to be
acquired. And heuce it is that the Carmelite Friars dedicate yearly a day of
great festivity, namely the 16. of July. unto the honor and reception of the
Scapular, as the Franciscans also do to that parcel of their habit which is
the Cord or Girdle. Ar which festival times it is lamentable to behold how much
the Divine Majesty by these beggars and their devotoes is profaned in his
creatures:yea truly the world might less admire in these dismal days the Sun
to be eclipsed, and the rocks to rent, then at the time of our Saviors
passion, beholding the benefit thereof so miserably defaced by these false
Teachers who in these days cannot be contented to rob the people of their
purses, but of their souls also.

And to the end, they and all those that read these my writings may understand,
that I will not inveigh without just cause or reprove in words what I am not
able by good Argument to confound: I seriously demand of our Friar, what
ground they have either from the divine Oracles, Ecclesiastical tradition, or
monuments of the Fathers, to promise this security and certitude of Salvation,
or to determine of the Sons of Adam in particular and by polle that their names
are written in the book of life. I say, while yet we are viatotes, et non in
statu, Pilgrims from our Lord, and not arrived at our country. I hear Solomon
one of the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost saying, Prove. 20. Quis potest dicere
mundum est cor meum? Who can say my heart is clean? I hear Job saying,
Etiamsi simplex fuero, etc. Job. 9. Albeit I be innocent, yet shall my soul
be ignorant thereof. I hear the Apostle saying, Philip. 2. Cum meta and
tremore vestram salutem operamini. Work your Salvation with fear and
trembling. I hear S. August. upon the 40. Psalm. saying, Scia quod justitia Dei
mei maneat, verum an justitia mea maneat an non, ignoro, terret me enim
Apostolus inquiens. Qui existimat se stare, videat ne cadat. I know that the
justice of my God remains, but whether my justice do remain or not, I am
ignorant. For the Apostle does terrify me saying, he who thinks he stands, let
him look to it he fall not. So S. Hierome in his 3. book upon the Prophet
Jeremy. Man sees in the face, God in the heart, and that which unto us does
some times seem clean, in Gods eyes is found filthy. Add hereunto the
testimony of S. Ambrose in his 5. Sermon upon the 118. Psalm. S. Chrysostom Homil.
87. upon John. S. Gregory lib. 6. epist: 22. S. Bid in his Comment. upon the
20. cap. of the Prove. But I may not ommit to set down at large what S. Bernard
that pillar of Gods Church in these later Centuryes has left written of this
argument, as in many other places, so especially in his 1. Sermon de
Septuagesima in these words; Who can say I am one of the Elect? I am one of
those that are predestined unto life: I am one of the children of God? Who, I
say, can say this? When as the Scripture cries out against him. Man knows
not whether he be worthy of love or hatred. Certainly therefore we cannot
have, but yet we are comforred with the trust of hope, that we may not by
anxiety of this dubitation be tormented above measure. So he. Lastly to this
cloud of testimonies out of the ancient fathers, I will add the uniforme
consent of the modern Fathers of the Council of Trent, condemning and
anathematizing this certitude of Salvation Can. 15. in these words. Si quis
dixerit hominem renatum and justificatum teneri ex side ad credendum se certo
esse in numero praedeslinatorum Anathem asit. If any shall say a man regenerate
and justified to be bound by faith to believe himself undoubtedly to be in the
number of the predestinate, let him be accursed: and in the Can. following, Si
quis magnum illud usque in finem perseverantiae donum se certo habiturum,
absoluta and infallibili certitudine dixerit nisi hoc exspeciali revelatione
didicerit) anathema sit. If any shall say, that by absolute and infallible
assurance he has that great gift of perseverance unto the end, unless he has
learned the same by special revelation, accursed be he. So the Council.

And sure no marvel. Since this presumption of Salvation is the very food and
fuel of all wickedness and impiety, the provocation and incitement to all
shameless lusts and pleasures, with which the soul once possessed what
further care is to be taken in matters of conscience: For say, That now I have
either gotten the habit of the Franciscans upon my back, or the Scapular of
the Carmelites hanging about my neck, (a most present antidote against hell
and damnation) what have I henceforth to do with the commandments of God and
Holy C^^rch? Why should I fear for the time to come to loose the reins unto
my unbridled passion, or to set sail which way the stream of my misplaced
desires do carry me headlong? I say what cause have I further to wage war
with vice, or longer to resist the sweet allurements of Evil. Yea what should
hinder me to say with Solomon (having run the same courses with him) Eccles. 2.
All things which my eyes have desired, I denied them not: neither did I forbid
my heart to enjoy all manner of pleasures.

These be the thoughts, these the labors of the mind, these the discourses of
the understanding which do often burst out into the lips and tongues of men
entangled in these intricacyes of error. And what Moses have we among us to
put himself as a wall and a bulwark for the house of Israel? Who shall
pacisie these congregations of Abiram? Who shall consume and burn up this new
fire of the sons of Aaron with a better flame? Where is Elias, or where is
Micheas to reprove these false Prophets, of pleasing but perilous lies. Where
is that Apostle of Christ? Who should confound these false Apostles with an
Apostolical zeal? Scarce is there one Peter to be found among us to oppose
himself to these Simons. Scarce one Paul to deliver up these Hymeneus and
Alexanders unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. For tell me, who
is there among the Clergy, at least in this our Northern Island, divided from
the rest of the world, that is either willing or able to go against these
Regulars, moving so irregularly out of their own proper spheres? Nay rather,
who is there among us not carried headlong by these their raptand violent
motions, into the aforesaid errors? If not in express terms of approbation,
at least by a shut up cye, and a sealed lip, of a silent connivance? One
circumvented by fraud, another detained by fear of displeasure, the third won
by benefits, the most or all of us drawn to a far more penicious
dissimulation then was that of Barnabas condemned by the Apostle. For albeit
the Priests of the Clergy in these parts are less refractary unto
Ecclesiastical discipline, yea truly far more obedient unto the laws and
behests of holy Church then the Regulars, yet not much more learned I confess,
and in number far inferior unto them, as may be seen in this principal
City of Ireland, in which there be only six pastors, but of Regulars not much
sewer then a hundred, albeit by reason of their ebbing and flowing, their
frequent excursions caused by their manifold negotiations in every corner of
the Kingdom, their out-gates beyond the seas, and back again returns, it is
as hard to desine what number they be of, as to count how many froggs there
were in the second plague of Egypt, yea to such a potency they are grown, and
that in a short space in this Kingdom of Ireland, that what cause soever they
take in hand, be it just or injust, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, they will,
nay they must be Conquerours; so united among themselves, so backed with
powerful friendships, so animated with foreign correspondencyes, not to
speak of ordinary consanguinityes and affinityes, foster-ships, and
gossip-fhips, so intayled not only to the Commons, but unto the greatest
Familyes, by taking in of Youths into their Convents, May des into their
Cloisters, furnishing Merchants with custom, purchasers with moneys upon
morgages and rent charges, absolurely ruling in all matters of Contracts and
matrimonial causes, managing the assay res of rich Widows, but seldom (I
confess) helping them to husbands. For so they might be debarred from Estates,
Legacyes, and Executorships
At the pillow of every rich man, especially when he is about to make his Will,
serving in that business both for ghostly Fathers, Council, and Cleark, by
reason of which employments, and what else may either be honorable or
profitable unto them, they are ascended unto that height of authority, that if
they should tell us, the crows were white, and the swans black. (though we
could not believe them) yet should we not dare to gainsay them, or to contest
with them.

For as it is the nature of plenty to beget prosperity, and this, pride, so our
Regulars at this day are arrived at such an unmeasurable greatness, through
plenty and popular estimation, as they are not only a terror unto the
inferior Pastors of Gods Church, but even unto Bishops and Cardinals. Nor will
I except thee O Pope Vrbanus! who not once (as we are credibly informed from
the city) have complained of their insupportable pride and insolences, saying
to such as complained of their injuryes: I marveil not that they wrong you, for
they wrong my self. And as these Regulars are awful unto the Clergy, so no
less fearful are they unto the Laity, who therefore yield them such
attribution, as either they hope their friendship to be an advantage unto them
in the prosequution of their ends, or they providently foresee how much the
malice of a powerful enemy may be prejudicial unto them in the same kind.
So as be who thou will, friend or foe, the Friar will benefit himself by thee.
If thou be his friend and well-willer; he gaynes by ^hy. love. If his
adversary, then also for fear of displeasure and offense, like unto those
Lawyers whom Cassiodorus upon the 73. Psalm. says, Apud causidicos etiam ipsum
silentium venale est, ac lingua little damnifica nisi funibus argenteis ligetur.
With Layers their very silence is vendible, andtheir ongues are harmefull
unless they be tied with silver chains. But truly as in the natural body,
when any one part or member grows into an exorbitant bignesfe beyond due
symmetry and proportion, the rest of the members become sick and feeble, and
the whole body (...) in the Ec^l^sihft^call or Politic. Sody may instand with
the safety thereof to permit so great a party, and so intrinsecall a faction as
are our Regulars in Ireland, to swell to such a bulk, as exceeding the bonds
of due proportion, they draw unto there selves the humors of the fest of the
body to the destruction of the whole.

Neither in writing these things most holy Father, is my meaning other, then
was the soop^ of that thrice renowned Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all
Ireland, commonly called by Writers, Armachanus; by the Inhabitants of this
Country, S. Richard of Dundalke, in his oration at Avinion, made before Pope
Innocentius Sci his Card^nalls in these words: Pater sanctissime etc. Most holy
Father, in the beginning of my Speech I do protest that I do not intend to
aver, or rashly affirm any thing which may be contrary unto the Christian
Faith, or Catholieke doctrine; and that my meaning is not to press or persuade
the destruction of the Mendicant Orders approved by holy Church and confirmed
by the Sea Apostolic, but rather to persuade, that they may be reduced and
brought ^acke again unto the purity of then first institution; always minded
to submit my self unto the censure of your Holiness. So Armachanus.

And so Imindefull of my duty and obforvance unto the thay-re of sl^^^^, am
bold to speak ^nnco my: Lord of such affay es us may conc^^^^ the w^ll^^are)
of souls, and the good of this Church of Ireland, in which I now have almost
lived for the space of these ^^^my years! And the rather I hold my self bound
so to (...), fo^^^at ^^mnot igno^an^, but know right we blow your How living
among so many protectors of R^ders, so muny Generals, so many Patrons, pro^ etc
agents for them; scarce shall you hear a word of sincere truth, without many
glosses and Commentaryes of most corrupt additions; yea and for one verity, a
mass of forged and devised fables, especially from these remote Regions, and
as you call them in Rome Tramontane Provinces. Yea such is the misery and
calamity of Princes and great Personages, as well Ecclesiastical, as Politic,
that seldom by the care do they conceive that birth which with all their
hearts they defire not to be vital and long-lived, that is, seldom hearing
what they would not hear. Such multitudes there are of parasites and
flatterers, who suggest unto their senses nothing but what is rare, glorious,
and above measure grateful, who for to please, they hold it but little
inferior to immortality.

Nevertheless such has been my breeding and education from mine infancy,
which together with my years has grown up with me, and is now confirmed in
more then a declining age, that I rather desire to live poor with the
Philosopher, and feed on coleworts in this my tubb, then to act the flatterer
with Aristippus, and surfeit on pleasures in the Court of Alexander. And
for so much as now for many years we have had your Ho. amost vigilant pastor,
and a lover of truth. I held it not so much to concern my self, as the whole
Church of Ireland, to intimate these no small or trivial matters unto you. For
as it is our parts to open, if not the imperfections and smaller excesses of
our brethren, (which, charity would rather have concealed, then revealed) yet
certes so soul, so into be rabble, so manifest adulterations of our holy faith,
we can not, we ought not, woe dare not smother, which happily if we should,
the very stones would cry and rore them out in your ears. So doubtless to you
holy Father it belongs to apply wholesome remedies to these diseases, to power
wine and oil into these wounds, to assuage the tempest of these raging Seas,
to chastise with your pastoral staff these butting rams, which lead the
following flock astray unto hurtful and uncouth pastures, orif they contemn
to hear your voice, to cut them off from the rest of the fold, by the
Ecclesiastical Sword of your censures, that the good be not infected by the
fellowship of the bad, the sound by the diseased.

These things are expected by the Church of Ireland from so great a Pastor, by
him to be governed, to be cherished, to be defended, to be enlarged. And so the
Prince of Pastors to his Vicar and to his flock on earth be ever propitious,
whose power over him and his writings is willingly acknowledged by

PAVL HARRIS.

A FAMILIAR DISPVTATION WITH THE FRIARS, PROPOVNDED BY THE AVTHOR
CAP. I.
AND thus gentle Friars, having (as you see) made my moan to Pope Vrbanus 8 of
your false and seditious doctrines, the pillars of your pride and ambition, and
no small revenew unto your Garnells, Cellars, and Kinchins. Give me leave to
ventilat and dispute the aforesaid cafe of the Habis, Scaputar, and Fast, a
little more familiarly with your selves as my equals. The end and butt I shoot
at (if God so bless my endeavors) is to undeceive such poor souls among us,
as hitherto have been inveigled and besotted with these your dreams and
pleasant fantasies: since it is my part no less to consute orror, then to
teach true doctrine, and to discover: such false: apostles, as seek to
transtorme themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And albeit some happily will
hold it a labor needl^sse, to oppose these senseless tenants, which like unto
ill plastred walls, threatening their owner nine, dan not long subsist: yet
others, (and peradventure with more reason) will also judge my endeavors
bootlesse, and to no purpose, for that in most men's opinions, these: doctrines
are so fastened, or rather (as I may say) so rivetted, and wedged into the heads
and hearts of the people, as it may rather become the labor of the Apostie,
then any other Paul to dissolve, and to remove the same, according to that of
divine Petrarch, alte radicates errores nonfacile est extirpare. De vi^sol.
lib. 1. Errors deeply rooted, are not easily pulled up. For So Much then as these
supernatural prerogatives ascribed unto the Hubit, Seapular, and Donna Luissa
her fast, are all of them built upon visions and revelations, and we are taught
by the holy Ghost from the mouth of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. That Satan can
transfigure himself into an Angel of light, and therefore are admonished by
the same Apostle not to be circumvented by him, whose operation consists in
all power and lying signs and wonders, and in all sedmong of Iniquity. I
demand then of you O Regulars, and especially of you Gray Friars and
Carmelites, how you come to know, that for so much as S. Fraugis, and S. Simon
Stec, might as well as many other Saints have been deluded, and abused by
Satan in this kind: that not withstanding these revelations of theirs, were
heavenly and divine, and for such, to be taken and believed, and not rather
illusions of that enemy of mankind, Cui mill sunt nomina, and will nocendi
arts, Who has a thousand names and means of deceiving. For say, that S.
Francis, and S. Simon Stec be canonized Saints, yet not all that is written by
them, or of them is canonized truths. And therefore as wicked men and women in
the Scriptures have been honored with divine visions, and revelations, as
Balaam, Pharaoh, Saul, Nebuch aduczar, Pelats wife, and the Sybills, so have
many of Gods servants been deceived by strong illusions to believe lies.
Examples whereof we have store as well in the Dialogues of S. Gregory written
above a thousand years ago, as in that more ancient legend of the holy men
and Eremites of Palestina, Egypt, and The^ais, written by Palladius within the
first four hundred years after Christ, to omit infinite others in historyes
of later times. Nay S. Francis himself seems not to have been privileged in
this kind, I say, from being abused with false revelations. For as we read in
the Chronicle of the Friar Minors: He having under him a Vicar general whose
name was Helias. It was revealed unto him by Almighty God, that the aforesaid
Friar should both dye out of the Order, and be damned, in respect whereof the
holy Faaher S. Francis did ever after so dis affect the aforesaid Friar, that
he could not endure to behold him. Yet not many linesafter in the very same
sap. it is reported how the same S. Francis had a revelation from heaven, that
the aforesaid Friar Helias should do penance for his sins, and not be
damned at all. This shall you read in the Chronicle of the Friar Minors, tom.
1. cap. 118. And such as will take pains to peruse S. Brigids revelations, and
conserre them with our legends of Saints lives, shall find innumerable
examples of like kind. One Saint having a revelation directly contrary to what
has been revealed unto another. Notwithstanding that there is but one God,
one truth. And we may be enduced or rather enforced to believe, that these
revelations, visions, and apparitions of S. Francis, and Simon Stoc (if any
such were) were mere satanicall illusions, and no divine revelations, for that
they promise that certitude and assurance of salvation in this life, which is
repugnant to sacred Writ, the uniforme consent of the Primitive Fathers, the
uniforme consent of General Counsels, and the belief both of our holy Mother
the Church, and all her obedient children even unto these times, as I have
abundantly proved in my Epistle to Pope Vrbanns, and not necessary here to be
repeated again. And therefore I will conclude this first point with that of
the Apostle, Golat. 1. That if an Angel from heaven shall come and preach unto
us contrary to what we have received, Anathema sir.

But yet to give scope to a more full and ample discourse of this Argument, let
us admit for the present that S. Francis, and Simon Stoc had received by divine
revelation: That whosoever shall dye in the habit of the one, and the scapular
of the other, should undoubtedly be saved, (for it may not be denied but such
certitude may be had by divine revelation) Examples we have of the Scriptures
of the two glorious Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul, of S. Mary Magdalen, and
some others, for the arm of our Lord is not shortened, nor his power abridged.
Yet (say I) conformable to the doctrine of holy Church (as afterward shall be
prooved) that this can be no assurance, or security unto others, who are not
partakers of the said visions, and revelations to believe that doctrine;
because what is of divine authority unto one, is but of humane and sallible
authority unto another. For say that Peter knows a thing to come by certain
and divine revelation, yet the same shall be to Patrick but only a humane
relation, received from the lips of Peter a mortal man, subject to error and
mistaking, to deceive, and to be deceived, and being but in via, and non in
termine, peccable in thought, word and deed: and therefore we see the Church
(whose wisdom is from the holy Ghost) never to canonize any person, though
reputed never so holy, while they are in the flesh, and till such time as their
sanctity be attested by signs, and wonders from heaven. As then S. Francis
before his conversion was of life and conversation like unto others of his
rank, and quality, and not much scrupulous of the offense of God, till he came
unto the age of twenty five, as may appear both by the first words of his
Testament. Quia cum essem in peccatis etc. as also by his life written by
Bonaveniure. So albeit I confess the ad and better part of his life, after his
conversion, and dedicating himself unto the service of God, was as a thread
more evenly ipun, then the former, yet not altogether without some knotes, as
may be known by his own confession, when on a time so journing in the palace
of the Cardinal De Sta Cruce and in the nightime being beaten of the
Devils, he repaired in the morning to the presence of the aforesaid Cardinal,
to whom he related what he had endured, and then added, Men that know me not,
repute me as a Saint, but behold how the devils who know me well, do handle
and chastise me for my sins. So he. Chron, fras, minor, toni, I, cap. 13. Out
of all which I do infer, that a vision, or revclation is not therefore
authentical, or to be believed, because such a person, who after ^is death was
canonized for a Saint, did in his lifetime avouch the same, either by word, or
writing, because it is necessary for my p^ucent assent unto such visions or
revelations, that the same be canonized for supernatural and infallible
truths, which cannot be but by authority of holy Church, which has canonized
for certain and infallible verities, no other men's works, sayings, or
writings, then those of the Prophets and Apostles, as that Angelical Doctor S.
Thomas has in these words, Innititur fide: nostra rev Lationi Apostolis and
prophetis factae qui canoric^s linos scripserunt, non autem revelationi si qua
fuit aliis doctoribus facta, 12 q. 1.8. 2d. 2dum. Our faith is grounded upon
revelation made unto the Apostles, and Prophets, who wrote the canonical
books, not to revelation (if any such was made) to other Doctors. For which
doctrine he cites also S. Aug. in his Epistle unto S. Hierom Epist. 14. in
these words: Solis enim scripturarum libris qui canonici appellaneny, didici
hune honorem defer, ^t unllum autherum little in scribendo errasse aliquid
firmissime credam. Alios autem it a lego ut quantalibet fanctitato, doctrinaque
prepolleant. non ideo verum putem, quod ipsi it a senserunt vel scripserunt.
Only to the books of Scripture, which are called canonical, I have learned to
give that honor, that I most firmly believe, that none of the Authors thereof
have erred in writing, but other writers I so read (that with how great
sanctity, or learning so ever they do excel,) I do not therefore believe a
thing to be true, because they have so judged, or so written. So S. Aug.

Now future glory in Heaven being a supernatural object, cannot by humane
knowledge or moral certitude be assured unto us, but either not all, or by
divine faith, which though not clear and evident, yet excels in certitude
and infallibility all scientificall knowledge whatsoever. And this I say to
answer those who happily in defense of their errors, in the aforesaid
revelations, will say, that albeit indeed they be not to be believed by a
divine and a supernatural faith, yet may they be certain unto us, exaio
tapite, that is, from some other topicall argument, which in truth is as much,
as if they said nothing, preaching an infallibility of the aforesaid visions,
and revelations, then brought unto cheir justification, they answer us with
nothing but historical legends (and I pray God not rather fabulous) and mere
humane possibilityes. When the poor soul in the mean time trusting unto
habits and scapulats, as Oracles of truth, and rocks of a sure foundation, at
the evening and perclose of life, finds it self irreparably deceived, and in
puncto descondit in infernum: in a moment for misbeliefe siukes down to hell,
whence neither the habit of S. Francis, nor the scapular of the Carmelites, nor
the saturday fast of Dame Luissa shall be able to fetch it our. And because
that Dives can not obtain of Abraham that one should come from the dead and
signify unto his brethren what entertainment these habit and scapular wearers,
sinde in the next world; Our Friars do the less regard what Moses and the
Prophets, what the Apostles, Fathers, and General Counsels teach, for not
being convicted of their ^^rours by experimental knowledge of the dead, they
less reck on of any other proof, demonstration, or argument, which not
withstanding we will not spare further to urge against them, or whatsoever
else may conferr to the demolition of this so desp^rat an error, possessing the
last act of man's life, and making the same most tragical. For as it is truly
said, Quod in bello non bis peceatur, A man shall never offend the second time
in war, and why? because by c^^ath the second error is prevented. So with
much more reason, yea with ruth and compassion may it be said of a Christian
dying in mi^ belief of a matter of such consequence, as concerns his eternal
woe or welfare, non bis peceatur. He cannot twice offend. An error concluded in
death 1^ singular, is solitary, and unaccompanyed, no reparation by repentance
to be hoped for, the door of life being also the door of mercy, which once
shut is never more to be opened.

Marvel not (good Reader) that I labor in confronting so horrid a doctrine:
for if by all my endeavors I draw but one soul by the ears out of this sink
and pit of error, it shall well become my profession, and the disciple of him
who sought the stray sheep, and finding it. brought it home into the fould upon
his shoulders, or at least I shall avovde that censure of S. Bernard, saying,
Cadit asinno, and invenit qui sublevet: sadit anima, and non est qui man um
apponat: The ass falls into the ditch, and there is one ready to pull him out:
the soul falls, and there is none to put to his helping hand. Bernard super
Cantica.

The absurdity then of this doctrine of the habit and scapular (befides what
hitherto has been said) may in this also appear. That if they perform what
they promise, and what their revelations do import. That is certitude and
assurance in this life of glory, and salvation in the next, they surpass in
esticacy all the Sacraments of the Church, what soever have been or dayned by
divine authority, and practiced by Christians since the Primitive times, until
the second coming of Christ. For the Sacraments of the New Testament by our
Saviors institution, do only confer grace and predent justification,
(having all their virtue, and e^ticacy from the merit of his passion) ex opere
operato, and non ponenti obicem, only as isntrumental causes conferred on
such partakers of them, as thorough their indisposition either of misbellefe or
complacencie in sin, do put no impediment or bar unto their spiritual and
supernatural operation. They who desire to see the proofs of this doctrine,
from Scriptures, from Counsels, the Greek and Latin Fathers, and the
Schoolmen, I remit them among many others, unto the second tome of
Tho-Waldensis, or William Lindanus his Panopli^, or The. Stapleton his
Doctrinalia, or Cardinal Bellarmine de sacramentis lib. 2. cap. 3.5. etc.

Now then (say I) albeit this be very much that our Savior has done for us in
the Institution of the Sacramonts, yet far more has S. Francis and Sirnon Stoc
done for us by the habit and scapular, because he who this day is cleansed from
his sins, and justified by the virtue and divine operation of the Sacraments,
may after again fall into the like, or more grievous sins, and for the fame
be damned, as of the, contrary: he who at this time abuses the Sacraments by
reason of the indispositions above mentioned, may afterward be penitent for
the same, and by the comfort and help of them attain his salvation, as may
clearly appear by the Apostles doctrine and admonition unto the Corinthians
as touching the use and abuse of the Eucharist, 1. Cor. 11. Now I say that by
our Friars doctrine, the habit and the scapular are far more effectual unto
salvation, then any one of the 7. Sacraments, or all of them put together. can
be. For whether the habit and the scapular work in the nature of the
Sacraments, by couferring the first or second grace ex opere operato, they do
over and besides confer the grace of perseverance, and the perfection of all
grace, which is glory. And this neither the baptiz^d, nor the conformed, nor
the houselled, nor the ordered, nor the penitent, nor the married, nor the
anointed can promise unto themselves, by which it is manifest; that in these
men's doctrines the Babis and the scapular infinitely excel all the virtue of
the Sacraments, and so accordingly to be held and estermed, as indeed in many
men's eyes and opinions at this day they are.

But now happily these patrons of the habit and scapular pressed, or rather
oppressed with the weight of these arguments, and being ashamed to ascribe the
divine work^ of the Sacraments unto shadows of no greater authority, or
antiqui^y, then the visions of S. Francis, and S. Simon Sto^ will happily tell
us by way of a qualification of these their absurd assertions. That the habit
and the scapular do indeed resemble the Sacraments: But how? only so far
forth as they are signs of future beatitude in the next world, without having
any virtue or efficacy of effecting what they do signify. For whereas the 7.
Sacraments of the Catholic Church are indeed signs, yet not base, and naked,
but withal operative, that is as secondary and isntrumental causes working
that grace which they signify, and signifying that grace which they work. The
habit and the scapular (will these men say) are signs of another kind only
foreshewing and signifying beforeha^d that happiness and glory which shall befall
al such as shall be found in the hour of death invested with them, albeit they
no way concur to the production of the aforesaid glory, either by
supernatural, physical, or moral influx. And of this kind of signs, we have
examples in the Scriptures not a few.

Such was the Rain bow Genes. 9. placed by Almighty God in the clouds after
the Flood, for a sign unto Noah and all mankind, that he would never more
destroy the world by water, albeit the Rainbow was no cause of any such effect
at all.

Such was the Fleece of Gideon both wett and dry. Judge. 6. a sign unto him
from God, that the Madianites and Amalekites should be conquered by his hand.

Such was the Sun 4. Reg. 20. going back ten degrees in the dial of King
Ez^chias a sign given unto him by the Prophet Elias, that he should recover of
his infirmity.

And to omit many other signs like unto these, of which the Scriptures are
plentiful, such was that sign of victor that appeared unto Constantin the
Great, being to encounter with Maxentius the tyrant when in the sky he saw a
most bright Cross with this circumscription, (...). In this overcome. Eusebius.
lib. 1. de vita Constant. Albeit not that sign of the Cross, which appeared
unto Constantin, but he in whose hands all victoryes are, seconded by humane
means, was the cause of gayning that battle.

And so indeed it is said of the divine scapular in that sayned revelation of
Simon Stec, Ecec signum salutis, salus in periculis, foedus pacis, and pacts
sempiterni: Behold the sign of salvation, safety in dangers, a league of
peace, and of an everlasting covenant. Say then, that we admit of this
qualification of theirs, and take it for granted, that the habit and scapular
be but bare signs only significative and not operative, and only of the
nature of those four signs last mentioned. Yet must we needs confess them to
be signs of far more excellency, and of a greater importment, in respect of
their supernatural object, which is glory, I mean then either the Rainbow in
the clouds, or Gideo^s Fleece upon the sloore, or the retrograde Sun in
Ezechias horologe, or Constantin his Cross with the Emblem thereof, In ^oc
vince, In this overcome. For that these were but signs and pledges of
temporal blessings, as security from inundations, victory in war, bodily
health, and the like.

But S. Francis legacy bequeathed unto his Friars is, that whosoever dies in
their habit, shall not perish of any unhappy death.

Simon St^^ of the scapular is, That whosoever dies therein, n^nquam patietur
incendium sempiternum, He shall never suffer eternal fire.

Dame Luissa her Saturday fast is, That who so performs it, shall not end his
days in mortal sin.

These (I wis) are signs not of any worldly benefits, or temporal blessings,
but of that Crown of immortality which attends all such as have been
victorious in this our Christian warfare. For if the soul that better part of
Man be of a divine being, and immortal as the best Philosophers have taught:
and if it be of that precious esteem with God, as he is said in the Scriptures
to be amator animarum, a lover of souls. And our blessed Savior the Redeemer
of souls, could say, Mar. 8. Quid enim proderit bomini? etc. What shall it
boot a man to ga^ne the whole world, and to loose his own soul? And if King
Ezechias was so tender of his corporal health, as he desired that the same
should be confirmed unto him by a sign from Heaven, which was a pledge far
more liefe and dear unto him then was that plastet of figs applied unto his
sore, a secon^lary cause of his health. No marveile then though a poor sinner
should prize a sign from Heaven, an assured pledge of eternal salvation,
before all other treasure upon earth, yea before all other helps and means
conducing thereunto.

Alas then, if it be true that these men tell us, Why was not S. Francis, and
Simon Stoe no sooner with us? Why did poors sinners miss these so precious
signs and pledges of their salvation for a thousand and two years since
Christ? Or why since there have been habits and scapulars from the days of S.
Basil, and S. Augustine, and S. Benedict, that none of them had that divine
influence, or signification as the gray habit of the Minors, and the two square
patches ex quolibet panno of the Car^^clites, the former not five hundred
years old, and the later not so much. But not to lament the times of greater
antiquity. Alas, and well away. Where was this blessed habit and scapular the
day wherein S. Bernard dyed, in which it is reported that of 30 thousand
persons, who then departed this life, only S. Bernard and two more were saved,
for so S. Vincentius the Dominican enformeth us in his 6. sermon de Septuag.
fro a vision made unto an holy Ermite, sometime Deane of Langres in France, as
also Martinus Polonus in his promptuary of examples, cap. 18. Or after that
time again, and within the date of these so mystical weeder, where were these
helps and divine comforts so far transcending all sacraments, and
sacramentalls, when as in the year of grace, 1343. a holy Ermite saw in a
vision the souls of men and women falling as fast into hell as ever snow came
down from the clouds, and only three to mount up to Heaven, namely the soul
of a Bishop and of a Charter House Monk, and of a Roman Widow. This shall you
read lib. de ^rt^ Carthusiensi in the time of Innocentius the sixth of that
name, Surely it seems that either in those days there wanted Preachers to
publish these miraculous graces of the habit and scapular, or people to believe
them. Or else we must say, that the shops wanted frises and woollen cloth to
make them of. Or Tailors to cut them out, which for my part I will as soon
believe, as the woods of Arden in Germany to want thieves and Freebooters, or
the Gardens of Egypt to want Leekes and Onions, which some of the Egyptians
worshipped as their gods, as may appear by that verse of Invenal. Sat. 15.

Porrum and cepe nefas violare, ac frangere morsu:
O sanctas gentes, quibus bac nascuntur in hor it is
Numina.
To chaw an Onion or a Leeke is held a foul offense: O holy people whose gods
do grow, but wot you whence? Their gardens.

And I pray God, That many among us, who would be esteemed very good and
perfect Christians, yield not more honor unto the creatures (albeit they make
them not their gods) then they ought, or may stand with the integrity of our
holy faith.

But to return to our Argument: (For I purpose to leave no reason pro, or
contra indiscussed, which may serve to discover the vanity of these aforesaid
Revelations, with which so many souls both have been, and are at this day
abused.) And first for that Legacy of S. Francis, grounded upon a vision, or
Revelation. That whosoever dies in his habit, shall never be prevented with an
unhappy death. I persuade my self, besides what already has been said, that
it is a mere fiction and an lmposture of his Friars of later times, untruly
fathered upon the Saint, for the maintenance of their bellyes.

And first it is held as most probable, That S. Francis had no certain or
particular habit at all, either of this or that cloth, or color: but only
course and of small price, such as might best sort with poverty, and penance,
as may appear by his rule cap. 2. in these words, Fratres omnes vestimentis
vilibus induantur, and possint eis repeciare de saccis and alijs pecijs cum
benedictione Dei. Let all the Friars be clad with course clothing, and they may
patch them with sackcloth, and other patches on Gods blessing. And this which
our Friars do hold to be a precept of the rule, or equipollent to a precept,
may seem to be confirmed by the practice of the Order, for see we not the
Capuchins to wear a distinct habit from the Cordeliers, agreeing in nothing
but only in color? The Capuchin having a large frise coat to the foot, with a
piece of course canvas square, one half yard upon the back, girded unto him
with a rude massy rope, with a great knot before, and unto this coat sowed a
steepled hood, or ca puch, from whence they have the name of Capuchins, of
well-neere two foot long, from the basis to the conus, and over this coat they
have a cloak of the same frise, coming little below the waste.

When as the Cordelier professing the same Order of S. Francis, and the same
rule, has a coat of much better frise, without that square canvas on the back,
with a hood or a capuch not steepled at all, but round, and fitted unto his
head, a girdle of a cord, from whence he has his name of Cordilier, the same
handsomely wrought with many artificial knots, orderly placed by equal
distances, a sleeve, O heavenly wide, which besides the arm will well contain
a couple of Cheeses quartered, or a Gamon of bacon a-piece, or as many Puddings
as would well near serve a whole Convent of Friars for their breakfast, and
over all this they have a cloak of the same frise descending almost unto the
foot. Observe then how different these habits be, and yet those Franciscans
again which are of the reformation of S. Diego, they have a distinct habit
both from the Capuchin and Cordelier. Since then each of these deny the other to
have the habit of S. Francis, I then demand of our Friars, which of these
habits? or is it all of them that has the blessing, that whosoever dies in
them shall never be prevented with an unhappy death? But what was the true
habit of S. Francis, or which of the reformations have got it, I make account
they will agree upon it when my fingers grow all of one length, and then
happily my self will be as credulous as others to believe them.

Now again it is to be observed, That this revelation of the habit is not to
be found in the life of S. Francis at all, notwithstanding his life was written
by many and most of them of his own family and order, as first and soon after
his death by S. Bonaventure, neither is it in the Bull of his canonization of
Pope Greg. 9. nor yet in the Roman Breviary or any other Legend of later time,
either of Lippolo, or Lippomannus, or Villiegas, or last of all by Friar Luke
Wadding, a Cordilier, living this day in Rome. In all which Legends of the
aforesaid authors, matters of far less cousequence (I wis) are not
forgotten, and yet not word of this great benefit of the habit to be read in
them.

Besides, is it not a thing to be admired and wondered at, that S. Francis
leaving such a golden legacy unto the world, that whosoever dyed in the habit
of his order should be saved, that himself was not careful to dye in the
same, as well for example unto posterity, as also to be partaker of that
security of salvation with other Christians. For we read in the first tome of
the Chronicle of the Priars Minors, cap. 71. That S. Francis when he perceived
the hour of his death approaching, stripped himself all naked, and then cast
himself upon the ground, making an exhortation to his (...) brethren to
persist constant in the love of God, and the profession of holy poverty, till
such time as the Guardian (whom he obeyed) understanding the desire of the holy
Father, taking presently an habit with the cord and linnea breeches, brought
them unto him, saying: Father, take this habit which I lend you with the cord
and breeches, that you may be buried there with to cover your nakedness. And
it is there said, that S. Francis contentedly took the breeches, but not the
habit, for that he desired to conform himself unto our Savior, who dyed
naked upon the Cross.

Lastly, how can this aforesaid revelation of the habit stand with any truth,
or probability, when as daily experience condem ^eth the same of crrour and
falsehood, and therefore more like to be some belly-invention of his disciples,
apostating from the rule and discipline of their Founder, then any wise
authorixed by S. Francis, who doubtless was a holy man, and who in his
lifetime did see, and did both condemn and lament with great grief of mind,
the manyfold disorders of his followers, and the prevarication of his rule, as
may appear by sundry passages of the history of the Friar Minors, whosoever
will take the pains to peruse the same.

I say then, that setting aside all other reasons, sense it self and
experience does sufficiently confute and convince of most into lienable
falsehood that doctrine of our Friar Minors, namely that whosoever dies vested
with their habit, shall never be prevented of an unhappy death. For first if it
be understood of temporal duasters, and calamityes in death, these frail
bodies of ours having so many windows to admit them, according to that of the
Tragedian, Eripere vitam nem^ non homini potest, at nemo mortem, mill ad hane
aditus patent. Seneca in Hippol. Every one may deprive us of life, but none can
debar us of death, which has a thousand gates. Among which calamityes
attending our ends, if sudden death be reckoned for one, (as it seems by the
doctrine of holy Church to be) we being taught to pray: A subitanea and
improvisa morte libera nos domine: From sudden and inexpected death deliver us
good Lord, What shall we say of that subtle Doctor among the Franciseans,
Johaunes Duns Scotus, who being Apoplecticus, or subject to the palsy, and
supposed in one of his fits to be dead, was buried alive, as appeared at the
return of his absent companion, who being acquainted with the nature of his
disease, caused his body to be taken up, which was found all broken and bruised
with striving to recover himself from his sepulcher, whose fate is reported by
Paulus I vi^^ in these words: Apoplexia correp^us Scot us panas persolvis It a
qu^dem at nimis festinato funere promortuo tumulatus, cum redeubte vita soro
morbi impetum natura discuteret, frustra ad petendaw opem mi^era^il^ mugitu
adito pulsatoque din sepulchri lapide eliso tandem capite pe^ier^t. Scotus
taken with an Apoplexy, had his punishment. so as buried for dead too hastily,
when as nature too late had disgested the force of his disease, and life
returning, in vain desiring holp, and yielding a miserable roaring, and often
beating the store of his grave, at length his head being violently bruised, he
perished. So Iovius. Whose fate wanted not also a Poet to express the same in
verse, as follows: Quod nulli hominum un quans accidit viator
Hic Scot us jaceo semel sepultus,
Et his mortuus: omnibus sophistis
Argutus magis, at que captiosus.
Ianus Vitalis apud lovium.
What chanced before to none,
I am forced to bemoane:
O thou that passest by,
Lo Scotus where J lie,
Who twice though being dead,
Was once but buried,
Of me some (doubt not) say,
And sure I think they may.
Each Sophist I out-went
In captious argument.


This and much more as touching the fate of Scotus may you read in Bzovius in
his continuation of Cesur Baronius his Annalls in the years 1494. But not to
wade into any further sea of examples. Spain will tell you how many Friar
Minots have been cast away by sh^pwrack in their voyages unto the Indyes, My
self in the year 1610, in the territoryes of Lerma in Cantle, with many
othors (the whole town in a manner going forth to the same) beheld the murdered
body of a Franciscan Friar, a stranger to that place, who was supposed to have
had moneys, and being robbed of them, was also slain, and his body hid among
the standing corn near unto the gate of the town of Le^ma. But some
peradventure will say, that sudden death is not to be numbered among unhappy, or
disasterous fates at all. For so much as we read, that Julius Casar disputing
of that argument the day before he was slain in the Senat-house, was of
opinion, that an inexpected death was to be preferred before any other. Sueton,
in Iulio. And a Princely writer of these times, in his exposition upon the
Lords prayer, seems not to disallow of that death which yields least trouble
unto the sense. So as in these men's opinions, not a sudden, but an unprovided
death is that which is to be misliked, conformable to that of Sapient 4. Iustus
si morte praeoccupatus fu^rit, in refrigerio e^it. The just man though he be
prevented by death, he shall be in a refreshing. And by their leaves, I would
say, that the death which is inexpected, may well be suspected, and feared to
be unprovided. And therefore (for my part) I pray God that death may knock at
my door along time before he enter, still leaning unto the old Intanyes, A
subitanea and improvisa morte libera nos Domine: From a sudden, and an unlooked
for death, good Lord deliver us. But to leave this point to those who have more
leisure to dispute it: whether a sudden death is to be numbered among miserable
deaths or no?

Let us come unto a second, wherein I demand, whether a death ins^icted by the
hand of Justice, may not justly be numbered among unhappy deaths. And I think
none will deny it, for so much as Peter has said, Nemo autem vestrum paetiatur
ut homicida, aut fur, etc. Let none of you suffer as a murderere or a thief,
etc. If then we find Friars of the order of S. Francis, who for their crimes
and demerits have been sentenced at the bar of Tribunalls, to in famous and
dishonorable deaths, How then have their habits privileged them? Or where is
that legacy of S. Francis, that who so dies in the habit of his Order, shall
never be prevented with an unhappy death? If any be so curious as to inform
himself in this affair. I shall not need to send him either unto the Italian
Guittiardin, or to Spanish and French History, or further then unto the Annalls
of England, and for no larger a time then betwixt the Norman Conqueror, and
King Henry 8. Where he shall find examples more then a good many, of that kind.
I say of Friars of the Order of S. Francis who have bin put to shameful deaths
by the hand of Justice. And the same neither for building of Churches, nor
ministering of Sacraments.

But some will say. That still I come short of the mark, and of what was
intended, so long as I insist only in these temporal calamiti^s that
accompany the death of the body, which with how terrible a countenance soever
they look upon their patients, by any misery, or casualty deprived together
with their life's, of the benefit of the, Sacraments, yet we know not but ev^n
in their last agony, or before continued unto their end thorough the abundant
mercy of God they might be found penitent, and truly contrite for their fins,
and so as (in that despicable and wretched a passage unto the eyes of the
world) they might be able to say, Transivimus per ignem and aquam, and eduxisti
nos in refrigerium. We have passed thorough fire and water, and thou have
brought us into a refreshing. So as still to make good that prophetical
prediction fathered upon S. Francis by his Friars, such as dye in their habit,
whether by death sudden, or deserved, they shall always dye happily. Since no
death is to be held absolutely miserable, excepting that one which carries with
it, Peccatum ad mortem. Of which the Apostle S. John. Est peccatum ad mortem,
non pro illo dico ut roget quis. 1. ^oh, 5. There is a sin unto death, I say,
that for it no man ask. Which sin by S. Augustines judgment is final
impenitency. I a^^irme (says he). That a sin to dea his to leave faith working
by charity, even till death. Decorrept. and gratia, cap. 12. And the same
doctrine he teaches De civicate Deilib. 21. cap. 24. So then the last refuge
of our Friars is, that setting apart ^ll other kinds of death, of which none
can be defined to be absolutely miserable, such as dye in their habit shall
never dye impenitent, but truly contrite for their sins, by which they shall be
se^ure from the second death, and the eternal separation from the blessed
vision of God. So S. Francis his supposed revelation of the habit, and Simon
Stoc of the scapular, do concur in this. In quo quis moriens, non patietur
incendium sempiternu^, In which whosoever dies shall never suffer eternal fire.

As then we have hitherto proved and instanced by many exaples, that
notwithstanding the habit of S. Francis, there has not wanted such as have
perished both by sudden, and infamous deaths. So now in the last place it
remains (to take away all tergiversation) to manifest unto the world (which
some will say is a hard tax,) That diverse Friars ending their days in the
habit of S. Francis, have bin subject even unto this last and worst kind of
death, joined with final impenitency and obduratnesse in sin, and consequently
according unto the doctrine of holy Church, can no ways be held to have dyed
happily. And albeit no man in this life may judge another man's servant, for
that as the Apostle says, he stan^s or falls unto his own Lord, to whom all
judgment both of quick and dead is reserved. And that ordinarily none comes
back from the next world to tell us, how they fare, according to that of Job.
16. Ecte enim brevi anni transennt, and semitam per quam non revertar ambulo.
Lo our years pass swiftly, and I walk the path by which I shall not
return. Notwithstanding in our Writers of the Acts and Monuments of Saints. we
find nothing more common, or familiar then visions or apparitions made unto the
living, as touching the estare and condition of the desunct: somerev ealed to
be in glory, some in Purgatory, others damned: As whosoever will peruse that
large vo umt of S. Brigids revelations, or Casarius, or Speculum exemplorum, or
Capgravins, or the Chronicle of S. Francis, or any of our later legendary
collectors, will witness with me. But setting all these aside, which for mine
own part, as I do not wholly reject, depriving them of all credit and
authority. So neither is my faith so strong, as to admit into my Creed very
much of what I read of that kind. Considering that if the belly has in all
times bin a great Master of Art, according to that of the Poet, Venture magister
artis, ingenijque largitor: The belly is a Master of Art, and a supplyer of
Invention. So above all other in the school of our Monks and Mendicants has
the same bin not only a Master of Art, but even Doctor Cathedrations, A Doctor
of the Chair, pablishing both by voice and writing whatsoever might be
serviceable unto the Genius of the place.

Omitting then all Visions, Revelations, and Apparitions. I hear our Savior
saying, that there is Spiritus blasphemia, there is a sin against the Holy
Ghost which shall never be forgiven, I hear the voice of the same truth saying
John 3. Such as believe not, are judged already. I hear the beloved Disciple
saying, 1. John 5. Est peccatum ad mortem, there is a sin unto death, for which
I say that none do pray. I hear S. Aug. saying De Civitate Deilib. 21. cap.
24. If there be any that persist till death in impenitency of heart, does the
Church now pray for them, that is, for the souls of them that are departed? I
hear also Concilium Braccarense primum cap. 34. forbidding to pray for such as
dye in desperation, or misbeliefe, or kill themselves. Tell me then you who
pretend to be observantes, and the most strict imitators of S. Francis, what
shall we say of such of your order, as have bin mnrdered in flagranti delicte?
you know my meaning. Of so many as have bin executed for Iudaisme by sentence
of the Inquisition? especially in Spain and Portugal, of which sort in
Lisboa, there was a Friar Minor in the year 1610. who was burned in his habit
upon a stage, and dying obstinate in his infidelity till the last breath, cried
loud and often in a lamentable, and dying voice, Deus, Deus men's, ad te de
luce vigilo. O God, O my God, from the light do I wake unto thee. What say you
to others of your Order, who preventing the course of nature have murdered
themselves? Have you forgotten? or can you ever forget that woeful spectacle
which happened in the person of Excuse me that in my Arcte. mastix I called him
George Barnwell,
Thomas Barnwel a Franciscan Friar, who upon S. John day in Christmasse, in the
year 1630, hanged himself in the Orchard of Temple Og, scarce two miles
distant from the city of Dublin, upon the bough of an apple tree, not only in
the habit of his order, but using for that execrable service, the cord of his
habit, with which he girt his loins? What voice is there then so wicked? or pen
so profane as to publish these men and the like to have dved happily? No
rather may they say, Quid profuit nobis habitus aut scapulare? What has the
habit or the scapular prosited us? or wherein have they helped us? for save
that in our lifetime they were beneficial unto cur bellyes, the confidence
that we had in them after death, has deprived both our bodies of Christian
burial, and our souls of the prayers and suffrages of the Church, and of all
faithful people.

Now then to conclude this Chap. with are capirulation of such argunents, as
have bin alleged in the precedent discourse, against the doctrine of
certainty of salvation by Habits, Scapulars, and the Luissian fast. First then
(gentle reader) thou have scene the same refuted a priore from authority of the
Church, Scriptures, Counsels, and Fathers. Secondly a posteriore thou have
beheld the absurdity and falsity thereof laid open before thee ad oculum, by
very sense and experience in all such kinds, sorts, and varietyes of death as
by Christians in all times have bin held miserable, unhappy and ignominious: of
all which, Friars in their Habits have bin sensible, and sufferers. And
therefore that doctrine of theirs must needs remain void of all truth. That
whosoever dies in their habit, shall never be prevented with an unhappy death.

And yet these be our Apostles, and Missionaryes sent from Rome to convert
Nations, and to reduce them to the Catholic faith. Such Apostles and
Preachers, as doubtless shall never turn any, unless it be fools into mad
men. Truly Friar Missionaryes, if these be the signs of your Apostleship, and
this the Gospel you preach, sooner shall you catch a Hare with a Tabor, then
convert a Protestant into a Roman Catholic. If among the savage Indyes you
preach these doctrines, I know not what credulity you may purchase: but if in
these parts you seek to gain souls, and to bring such as are astray into the
right way, doubt less it must be by other doctrines, then Habits and Scapulars.

Non obtusa adoo gestamus corda Britanni. We Britans live not in so gross
anayre, though much unto the North, but that we can discern of colors, who
preaches Christ, and who themselves: and if the former had bin till this day,
as well applied as the latter, happily that lapis scandali, that rock of
offense, at which so many have stumbled, had bin before this time removed. You
Mendicants enter here among us, with specious and glorious titles of
Legantine, and Missionary power. You tell us, you are sent to labor in the
Vineyard, to work in the harvest, but what says the Protestant? when he sees
all you labor is but to eat the grapes, and to cull out the best sheaves, when
they find all your preaching turned into begging, or at least there unto
tending. Mary (say they) These be those who preach themselves, and not Christ
Jesus. And say they not truly? You tell us you are sent from Rome to assist the
Priests and the Pastors ingoverning and feeding of their flocks, but verily in
all parts of this Kingdom, it is well understood what slockes you look after.
O how well it becomes the Francisean and the Dominican, after they have shamed
the poor people on a Sunday morning out of their means, the week after to
gadd thorough the Parishes, and to gather in their muttons, and heard them
together.

Compulerantque greges Coridon and Thirsis in unum. and after to expose them to
sale one with another at 12. pence the head, in every Barony of this Kingdom.
Gentlemen expecting when the Friars sheep pass by, or where they keep the
market, hoping what they got so easily, they will not rate too highly. And as
dextrous as they be in bringing home the strayed sheep, so no less diligent
are they in seeking the lost groat. It is a laudable custom of the Church
commanded by express Canons, that all Christians should communicate at least
once a year, and the same at Easter at the hands of their own Pastor, and
this is called the Paschall Communion, at which time as by the precept of holy
Church, all that are come to the years of discretion do participate the
blessed body and blood of our Savior in the holy Eucharist, so commonly does
every one according to their devotion and ability, make their offering: which
offering the good people in this Country commonly lay down upon the Altar,
and it is indeed the chief maintenance that the Pastor has for all the year
after. But think you this poor groat can escape the Friars gripe No, for now
the holy week approaching, the Friar Limitour beftirs himself, and the week
commonly before, and after Easter, he visits all the Parishes of his limits,
and he either addresses himself unto the Oratory of the Parish Priest, or else
himself makes a Rande^^us in some principal part of the Parish, where he says
Mass, hears confessions, receives all he can procure to make the Paschal
Communion with him, having all the year before prepared and persuaded the
people, that by reason of their Indults and privileges from Rome, they shall
as well satisfy the precept of the Church in communicating with him, as at the
hands of the I'astor. Neither dare the Parish Priest contest with him, for the
Friar is not unprovided of his friends, who will make good all his pretentions,
so as if the Priest give but the least opposition, he shall not only not
prevayle, but he shall have the frown of the best of his Parish happily all
the year after. And thus the groat lost by the Priest, is found by the Friar,
and where was it all this while, but upon the Altar, close by the Candlestick.
This is that good assistance, and this the help which the Parish Priest at
Easter gets by the Friars industry, who having found the groat, returns home,
and there rejoyeeth with his fellows, who in other Parishes have done the like
service, putting the surplus of their gettings into the hands of their syndieus
or Treasurer (of which every Convent has one) and I pray God such Treasures be
reserved for good purposes.

CAP. II. The Authors Apology, and a defense of his Writings.
BUT now I wot well what our Mendicants with all their faction both in private
and public speeches, will thunder out against me. Is it well done for a
Catholic man to discover the faults of Church men? A Priest of his brethren?
Were it not better that these enormityes were covered with Constantius his
purple robe, themto be ascan dall and a byword unto so many Atheists, and
misbelieving Sectaryes as these times do yield ^o Did not the Prophet David
when he heard of the overthrow of Saul and lonathar, and their slaughter upon
the mountains of Gilbon, cry out with great lamentation, Nolite enunciare in
Gath, neque annuncietia in compitis Ascalon, (...) forte latentu filin
Philistin, n^ exulten^ili^ incircumci sorum, O pisblish it not in Gath, nor
preach it in the streets of Ascalon, left peradventure the daughters of the
Philistines doerejoyce, and the daughters of the incircumcised triumph.

To all which and what else they can say against these my proceedings, I answer
with S. Gragary, Melius ast ut scandalum, or^^tur, quam ^t veritas relinquatur.
Better it is that scandal should arise, then that truth should be forsaken.
And is it possible (say I) to refixe error, and not to name it? to reprove
vice, and not to tell what color it is of? Have I done otherwise in these my
proceedings, then the Prophets of God, who opposed themselves unto such
Prophets, as for a piece of bread would prophecy pleasing things in the cares
of the people? Or then the Apostles of our Savior, who both by word and
writing did confound the false Apostles, who entered in among them to corrupt
the truth, and to adulterat the Gospel of the Kingdom? And has not this
been the practice of the Pastors of Gods Church in all times? Did not S.
Athanasius, S. Hilary, and S. Aug. most bitterly inveigh against the Arian
Heretics? S. Hierom against lovintan and Vigilantius? S. Beruard against
Abaylardus? Nay, not against false teachers only, but against vicious, and
corrupt livers also, have the aforesaid Fathers lanced out into the depth of
most sharp reprehensions, not sparing the vices either of Church, or Laymen, of
their days? And why should I in a like cause be fearful to imitate so great
examples? to rebuke such false Prophets as sacrifize not unto the Creator, and
his providence, but unto their own fishing-nets, lines, and hooks, the fancyes
and inventions of their own brains? To oppose such as call themselves Apostles
and are not, but are found liars? And why should I more fear the face, and
frowns of a Friar, then S. Antony of Padna, a principal Preacher among the
Friar Minor? or S. Bondventure some time general of their order, then S.
Francis himselso in stitutor of the same Order?

Of whom the first has these words. Heu quant ^ scissura, etc. Alas, how great
divisions, how great schisms, how great dissentions are there in Religion! and
truly where these be, there is nothing but contention in the Chapter House,
dissoluteness in the Quire, murmuration in the Oloyster, and wantonnossein the
Dormitary. So Antony de Padua in his Sermon upon Sexagesima Sunday.

S. Bonaventure. Cumsecundum patres laudantur wonachi in casollis, etc. When
as, according to the Fathers. The Monks are praised to have dwelt in cotts,
and poor habitations, What is the matter now, that you build high and stately,
houses, sumptuous Monasteryes, you purchase large and spacious Courts. When as
being poor and beggars you ought to be contemners of all worldly things. So S.
Bonaventure q. 6.

S. Francis was so far out of love with his own Friars, as seeing them in
his own days no less a bound in wickedness, then in number, he left off to
be thein general Minister, gave them over (as his words are) to the devils to
be their tormentors both in this world, and in the other for the prevatication
of that rule he instituted, and the transgression of the vows of their
profession All which and much more to the same purpose shall you read in the 1.
Tome of the Chronicle of the Friar Minors, the laft Chap.

What shall 1 say of Johannes Lanspergius, the Carthusian Monk, who in a
certain Sermon which he preached unto the Congregation of Friars, relating the
miserable condition of Regulars, he utrereth such things as are hardly to be
beloeved that a Catholic man would publish. I will report his words as they
lie, and they be these: Perijt religio, perijt reguluris bon^s, parumque abest
hodie apud nonnullos, ut monachum non recenseant inter Christiants. Religion is
perished, Regular honor is perished, and many are not far from accounting a
Monk searce among Christian men. So Lanspergius. and not many lines after: Non
absque gemitu lo quendum ast, etc. It is not to be spoken without grief, and
with the license of you and all good men. So great has been, and is at this
day the coldness of the most in religious Orders, so great their
dissoluteness, so great their discord, so great their faction, and to be
short, such self love, and so little mortification of their evil passions,
that it has obscured the very name of all good men; for if you look into
their lives, setting aside certain exterior signs and badges of religion in
their habits, nothing may you find or hear in them, wherein they go beyond
worldings, What marvayle then is it, if ou Lord has given us up to an hiss, to
a mock, a wonderment and laughingstock to all Nations? I say what marvel is
it if we be accounted inforiour both in name, and estimation to men of the
world, since what Monk is there who goes beyond them either in devotion,
piety, or moral honesty. So Lanspergius with much more to that purpose in the
place above alleged.

Laurentius Iustinianus sometime a Canon Regular, afterward Patrick of Venise,
De Obedientiacap. 19. Saint mute^ oenobia^ and utinam non numer osior pars) que
non sanctor um habitacula, sed latronum dicenda su^^ spelunce, spectacula
demonum, and officine vitiorum. There be many Convents, and I would to God not
the greater part, that are not to be called the habitation of Saints, but the
denns of thieves, the hant of devils, and the shops of vices.

S. Brigid (not the Virgin of Ireland, but the widow of Swedland, lib. 4.
Revel, cap.) much lamenteth the deformation of Religion in her time, I am
tristitia est, religiosorum Regulas setnore mutatas in detestabiles abusiones,
and minime teneri sient Aug. Dominicus, and Franciscus ex inspiratione spiritus
sancti dictaverunt. It is a heaviness to behold the rules of religious to be
changed into detestable abuses, and not to be observed as S. Aug. Dominick and
Francis have by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost stayed them down. The same S.
Brigid condemning the avarice of Regulars, brings in our Savior detesting
the same in these words: Recepetunt december mandata mea, and composucrunt in hos
unum verbum: Quid est hoc anum verbum? Porrige mann^, and a^ pecuni^m. I^o
nunquam sitiantur do obtentis. They have received ten commandments from me,
and they have reduced them all into one word, and what is that one word?
Forsooth stretch forth thy hand, and give money, yea they are never satisfied
with what they get. So S. Brigid.

And Thomas Walsingham a Monk of S. Benets order, and of the Abbay of S.
Albons, setting forth the condition of the Friar Mendicants in his time, a most
pious, and a learned Author, has these words: The begging Friars unmindfull
of their profession, have forgot to what end their orders were instituted,
because their Lawgivers, and Founders (most holy men) would therefore have
them poor, and altogether free from the possession of temporal things, that
they might have no impediment to hinder them from speaking the truth, or any
thing they might sear to loose for the same. But now while they envy such as
have possessions, approving the faults of greatment, nourishing the common
people in error, and eating the sins of them both, in seeking of possessions,
who have ^^nounced possessions, in hoarding up of money, who have sworn to
persevere in poverty; they call good, evil; and evil. good; seducing Princes
with flattery, the people with lies, and drawing both of them with themselves
astray, they have in such fort stained that their profession of truth, by their
unhappy lives, that in these days in every ones mouth it is a good argument,
holding as well in form as matter: This fellow is a Friar, and therefore a
Liar. Even as true as that, This thing is white, and therefore has a color.
But that we may not be thought to have written these things of malice, let all
of us acknowledge our selves to be in fault, and let us amond what willingly we
have done amiss, and beseech the God of peace and love, most devoutly, that
peace and truth may be in our days. So that holy Monk Thomas Walfingham in the
reign^ of Richard 2. fol 226. he lived in the days of Henry 6. and dyed in
the year 1440.

Atmathanus that glory of the Irish Church both for sanctity and learning,
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland, commonly known by the name
of S. Richard of Dundalks, speaking of the great disorders of the begging
Friars of his time, especially of the Franciscans, has these words, by which
may be understood how soon and even in those primitive and better times of
their observance, they deflected from the vowed rule of their Founder. When as
the rule of S. Francis (says Armachanus) commands after this manner, Pracipio
formiter fratribus universis etc. I do firmly command all Friars, that they
have not any suspected fellowships, or counsels with women, neither that they
once enter into the Monasteryes of Nuns, excepting those to whom especial
license is granted from the Sea Apostolic, neither that they be gossips of
men, or women, lest by such occasion among the Friars, or of the Friars,
scandal may arise. But of the contrary (says my Author) The Friars have
gotten license to hear the most secret counsels of women, of Ladies, and of
others without distinctio, yea with their heads very submissively bowed unto
the women heads, not following the footsteps of holy Job, who said, Pepigi
f^dus cum oculis m^^ne cogitarem de virgin: I made a covenant with mine eyes
that I should not think of a Virgin. So as now-a days thorough such
familiarity they can play the Philosophces with most beautiful Dames in their
chambers, by occasion whereof such seandalls thorough the world are risen of
the Friars, as I will not declare the same. So Armachanus in his Defensorium
Curatorum, about the midst, with much more to the same purpose: he deceased in
the Papal Court of Avignion, with opinion of great sanctity, in the year
1360. Call. Doce^b. But I must not omit what the said Author sets down in
that his Oration which he pronounced before Pope Innocentius 6. and his
Cardinals, against the Friars at Avignion as touching the abuse of their
privileges, making them an instrument of Covetousness in these words.

The Parishioner may reasonably judge, that as concerning due and profitable
penance to be enjoined him for his sins, the Pastor or Parish priest is a
judge less to be suspected, and more indifferent then the Friar. For that the
penitent cannot suspect, nor has any, ground to imagine, that his Pastor by
hearing his confession does expect any temporal lucre, or profit unto
himself, for so much as all things necessary for his maintenance according to
the Law of God, and holy Church, are annexed unto his office, But as for the
Friars it is not so, because as in that appellation which they made against me
in England, it is contained according unto their foundation, as they avouch,
that not withstanding they are privileged to hear the confessions of all such
as will confess unto them, they are bound to most strict poverty, and begging,
whereupon the Parishioner may probably suspect, that verily the hope of gain,
and of the relieving of his poverty, is the cause why the Friar hears his
confession, and thus he may reason with himself in his mind. Wherefore should
that beggar that sits there, hear my confession? and so defist from seeking
things necessary for his maintenance, unless he expected from me such a
supply? And for so much as poverty is a motive to sin, by means where of his
want may be supplied, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 30. Poverty and
riches give me not, but only so much as shall be necessary for my maintenance,
lest happily being full I may be emised to deny thee, and to say, who is the
Lord? and forced by poverty should steal and forswe are the name of my God. It
follows that forevery kind of sin, the Friar will impose upon, me
almes-deedes, by which his poverty may be relieved, and so shall not I be
spiritually cured. For our Savior, when as his Disciples asked him: Why could
not we cast him out I (speaking of the devil) he answered: This kind of
devil is not thrown out but by prayer and fasting, Math. 17. Whereupon it is
inferred, that as to every corporal disease, a particular medicine is to be
applied, which kind of medicine that beggar attending only his necessityes (as
I may well think) will never minister unto me. And this reason is thus
confirmed. For that it sufficiently appears, that since the Friars have
obtained a privilege of hearing confessions everywhere thorough the world they
have builded beautiful Monasteryc^, and Princely Palaces. The cause whereof
seems to be their grant of hearing Confessions: for that before such power
given unto them, they were not able to build such houses. Again it is never
heard, that tho Friars either for building of bridges, or repayring of
highways, or Parish Churches, do enjoyne alms upon their penitents. Neither
do the Friar Minors impose alms to be bestowed upon the Dominicans, nor the
Dominicans upon the Minors. Every one applying all unto themselves and unto
their own order. Wherefore it may be probably judged, that private lucce and
gain is the cause why such a begging Friar is so careful to hear the
confession of the Layman, that he neglects his time of begging, etc. So
Armachanus.

Cardinal Bellarmine (for learning and piety in this age not infetiour to
many, and I know not whether to any) lamenting the miserable face of religious
orders of these times, in a most devout treatise which he composed but a little
before his death, called Gemitus Columba, lib, 2. cap. 6. has these words:
Multiplicari coeperunt Regulares sine numero etc. Regulars have begun to be
multiplied without number, and many of them not called by God unto the estate
of perfection, but enduced by other motives, have replenished Monasteryes, and
that of Esaias is fulfilled: Thou have multiplied the Nation, but not increased
their joy. Hence so many, so grievous scandalls known unto all which yield
plentiful matter unto the Dove of bewayling the loosnesse, I will not say the
corruption of religious Orders themselves, as they be at this day. So the
Cardinal.

Ichannes Petrus Camus Bishop of Bellay, that great omament of the French
Church, both for piety and learning, in his book called The ^^^ltua^ Director,
part 4. cap. 7. in showing the difference twixt Pastors and Mercenaryes plainly
demonstrateth ou^ of the words of our Savior: That the Regulars who in these
times would be esteemed the only Masters in Israel, advancing themselves above
the ordinary Pastors of Gods Church, assuming unto themselves the first parts,
as in perfection of life, so in ruling and feeding that slock which our Savior
has purchased with his own blood, are in truth no Pastors at all, but plain
Mercenaryes, and hirelings, and for such only to be held and reputed: his
words are these, which proceeding from so grave an Author, are worthy both to
be read and pondered.

Pastors as well Bishops as Curats, are by state obliged to expose their lives
for the sheep committed unto their charge. Let us concerning this point give
care unto the divine sentence, which cannot be denied without impiety, nor
contradicted without blasphemy. There is no greater charity then to give his
life for his friends. Let us now add here unto the description of the true and
good Pastor delivered unto us in the 10. Chap, of the Gospel of S. John, from
the lips of our Savior himself: Bonus pastor animam sua^^ dat pro vibus suis:
The good Pastor or shepherd gives his life for his sheep, which is as much
as to say, is obliged to give it. Mercenarius out em, and qui nonest pastor:
But the hireling, and he that is not the shepherd. Behold how our Savior
distinguishes the Mercenary or hireling from the Pastor, and how he makes it
apparent that the Mercenary is not the Pastor, and that he who is Pastor is not
Mercenary: He adds, Mercenarius autem, and qui non est Pastor, cujus non suut
oves propria: The hireling, and who is not the shepherd, and the owner of the
sheep. In which words the Mercenary or hireling is plainly described to be the
party to whom the sheep appertain not. So as he who has no sheep of his own,
and serves notwithstanding the sheep, is no Pastor at all, but only a
servant, a mercenary fellow, and a mere hireling, without any flock of his
own. Let us follow the Text. Mercenarius videt Inpum venientem, etc. He that
is the Mercenary sees the Wolf coming, and flies, and the Wolf devoures and
disperseth the sheep. Now I would feign know who is he that flies? Whether the
Pastor and he that has curam animarium, the care of souls, or the Friar who
has no charge. He who is obliged by state and condition, and by divine law to
an actual resid^n^^? What storm soever happens, be it of plague, of war, of
famine, of persecution, of heresy, or any such like? Or he that is not typed
to any cure, or charge, and not having any obligation, may retire himself from
those afflicted places, may forsake his country, the place of his abode, and
live where he likes best, yea and who peradventure may think with himself,
that it is but to tempt God, to expose himself rashly to the hazard of his
life without any necessary obligation, according as it is written, Qui amat
periculum, peribit in illo. He who loves danger, shall perish therein. Let us
now put the last finger to this Evangelicall description of a Shepherd, and of
an hireling. The mercenary or hireling (says S. John) slyes, and he gives a
reason of his flight, Quia mercenarius ost, because he is an hireling, and
that the safety of the sheep concerns him not, because he is not charged with
them. But the true Pastor who understands that the blood of his sheep must be
required at his hands, and that their salvation becomes a part of his own,
amazed with so many threats uttered by the Prophets against the bad Pastors,
who abandon their flocks in time of necessity, he awakes his solicitude, he
revives his courage, he exposes himself to labor, and danger, inclining his
heart to all the justifications of our Lord, for the retribution which he
expects from him alone. Let us now observe how our Regulars behave themselves,
who are sent unto this work only by delegation, by mission, of assistance by
extraordinary commission, as troops of relief, and voluntary laborers. This
last sufficiently declares. Mercenarius autem fugit etc. The hireling flies,
because he is a hireling, and has no care of the the sheep. So as if he do
labor in feeding of them, his labor is but voluntary, and mercenary, and
accordingly (as it often happens) most pitifully performed. For as the
Regulars only govern such souls as of their own election, without any
obligation commit themselves unto their conduct, so on their part have they the
choice in this great harvest, of what ears of corn they please, in this great
draught of fishes, which they like best, casting the reft into the water, to
send them back unto their proper Pastors. In so much as the people do make use
of them so long as they please, so do not they serve the persons of the world,
but so long, and in such sort as they think best, the place of their residence
being that which is conformable unto their liking, like unto wandering stars,
(to use the phrase of the Apostle) whose influences work not so strong
impressions, for so much as they cast not their beams, but by way of passage,
whereas the sixed stars are the aim whereby all Mariners direct their
Navigations. So this most learned and holy Bishop.

Well then, understanding reader (Odi enim prophanum vulgar and weceo) Thou
see what authors, how many, and of what quality, who all flourished since the
coming in of the Mendicants) have sharpened both their tongues and pens,
against their disordered and wicked lives. Whereas then some (and those not of
vulgar apprehensions) have taxed me of indiscretion for inveighiug in my books
against the faults of Ecclesiastical persons, my self being of the same rank
and profession, for my part I undersland not their language. For I have always
heard that the maintaining of pubsique errors in doctrine, and not the
refuting of them, the committing of manifest impieties, and not the reproving
of them, to be scandalous. And the Apostle gave this charge unto Timothy:
Peccantes coram omnibus argue, ut et caeteri timorem habeant, I. Timoth. 5.
Such as sin publicly reprove, that others may fear. These men (I see) do
wish me much good, for they would have meo more wise, more learned, and more
virtuous then S. Bonaventure, then S. Vincent, then S. Anthony of Padua, then
S. Richard of Dundalke, then Thomas Walsingham, then Lanspergius, then
Laurentius Instinianus, then Cardinal Bellarmine, then Petrus Camus, Bishop of
Bellay, then many others, who have labored in this kind, and whom for
brevityes sake I am forced to omit. Might these then make to the life pictures
of our deformed Regulats, with their black pencills of a deep reproof, and
shall not I be permitted to draw one small line in their tables? Shall these to
the face of the world, and in the eyes of this sun, strip and whip the Friar at
their pleasure, and shall not I be licensed to lay on one single lash? Or is it
that they have received already their 40. stripes save one? Might these
spiritual Physicians make deep incisions, and lance them with words more
piercing then any two-edged sword, and may not I be allowed to rub their galled
backs with one dram of vinegar? Might these Prelars and Priests thunder in
every pulpit against their errors, and abuses, and not so contented, leave
their invectives in their works and monuments to be read of posterity? Mean
mutire nefas? And may not I utter one little word, but presently I shall
beserved with a citation from the spiritual Court, the Court of conscience?
Nolite annunciate in Geth, neque annuncietis in compitis Ascalon, etc. O
publish it not in Geth, nor preach it in the streets of Ascalon, lest
peradventure the daughters of the Philistines do rejoice, and the daughters of
the unci. cumcised triumph. For Lord, who sees not how mistaken, and misapplyed
that text is to the purpose that these men would draw it. Wist not David that
the death of Saul and Lonathas, and that victory in which the Philistines
prevayled against the house of Israel, could not be concealed from Goth, nor
Ascalon, or any other City, or habitation of the Churches enemies? But David
the more emphatically to express his grief in that desolation and heaviness
of the synagogue, in the slaughter other Princes and people, uses that manner
of threane or lamentation, aggravating that days calamity in consideration of
the great content, joy, and triumph that it would minister unto the Philistines
their victorious enemies.

So let us never persuade our selves, that our public errors either in
doctrine, or manners can be concealed from those who are of a diverse belief
from us, neither theirs from our knowledge, so long as we live together in the
same commonwealth, or border one upon another. I speak of public and
notorious excess^s, for I never was of opinion that any personal or private
delict, the concealment whereof is neither prejudicial unto the Church,
Commonwealth, or a third person may be manifested or disclosed, to which
doctrine all divines applaud, grounding the same upon diverse texts of holy
writ, among which this is one, Prove. 11. Qui ambulat fraudulenter, revelat
arcana, qui autem fidelis est celat amici commissum. He who walks
fraudulently, reveals secrets; but he that is faithful conceales the fault of
his friend. And in the Gospel, Math. 18. Si peccaverit in to frater etc. If
thy brother shall offend fend thee, go and rebuke him between thee and him
alone etc. See for this S. Thomas 22 2 ae. q. 68.1.3. and q. 70.1.2. And in
this sense no donbt it was that Constant in the Great, that first Christian
Emperor, most Christianly said: That if he saw an Ecclesiastical man to do
what was indecent, or amiss, he would cover him with his purple robe, meaning
he would so conceal his faults, as neither the delinquent should receive
dishonor, nor the Church scandal thereby. As for manifest and known
offenses, we hear what almighty God has said by his Prophet Esaias 58. Clama,
necesses, quasi tuba exalta vecem tuam etc. Cry out and cease not, advance thy
voice like a Trumpet, declare unto my people their wickedness, and unto the
house of Jacob their offenses: still by his Prophets complaying of such
Pastors, who like unto dumb dogs either could not, or would not open against
the manifest vices and corruptions of those to whom they were sent. And the
Apostle exhorts his scholar Timothy as to exhort, entreat, and beseech, so
to blame, reprove, and correct, and that by his own example, who so little
feared the face of man, as to comply with his Apostleship, he would freely and
publicly reprehend such as were manifest sinners, and especially false
teachers he would rouse out of their dens, and place the in the sight of the
sun. So 2. Tim. 3. having made a long Catalogue of public offenses and
offenders, which then infested the Church, concludes, Et hos devita ex his enim
sunt etc. And these avoid. For of these there be who rush into men's houses, and
lead away silly women into thraldom, laden with sins, and drawn away with
many desires, always learning, and never attayning the knowledge of the truth
etc. And this not only, or always in general, but sometimes he would descend
unto particulars, not sparing to rebuke notorious sinners by name. For example
in the Chap, following. Demas has for saken me, and is gone into Macedonia.
Alexander the Copper-s^^yth has she Wed me much evil, our Lord will reward
him according unto his Works.

And this I thought fit by way of an Apology to allege in my defense, as well
for this present Treatise now penned, as also for such other books, as I have
heretofore written against the most known, and notorious errors, and abuses of
the Mendicants, especially of this Country, and Kingdom, with which I will
conclude this Chapter.

CAP. III. The power of the Scapular and Habit ever the souls in Purgatory.
IF blessedness be the end and summum bonum of the reasonable creature,
consisting in the clear vision and full fruition of the Creator, as our holy
faith teaches us. Two ways after this life may a man be deprived of this
blessed vision thorough his own default: Either eternally, which is a full
separation of the creature from the blessed vision of God the Creator. Or a
suspension for some time. The former has with it an abdication unto eternal
punishment. Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aeternum. Depart from me ye
cursed into hell fire. The second has only a deputation unto the purging
fire. Si cujus opus arserit, detrimentum patietur: ipse enius salvus erit sic
samen quasi per ignem. If any man's work burn, he shall suffer detriment, but
himself shall be saved: yet so as by fire. Now if the doctrine of our Friars be
good divinity, all matters of the soul after this life are most sweetly
accommodated. First, for hell we have seen in the former. Chapter, the fire
thereof quite extinguished only by dying in the Carmelites Scapular, or the
Franciscans Habit, so as a soul furnished with either of those commodityes,
may say with the Poet: Contempt aeque jacent, and sine luce faces.

Now in this Chapter it is considerable whether they be not as forcible to
quench the flames of Purgatory, which if they do, I am labor in fine est. We
have no more to do, but like Ioviall lads to pass our days Lucanice in all
pleasures, and delights, and a fig for what may betide us after death. The
second doctrine then of our Carmelites is, that whosoever dies in the Scapular,
he is not only freed ab incendie sempiterne, from everlasting fire, but also ab
igne Purgateris, from the purging fire, at leftafrer his departure within eight
days after inclusive, and that is the longest term. For these be the words of
their pretended indulgence (I say pretended) for undoubtedly it was never
authorized by the Sea Apostolic. The works are these, as they lie in that
former abridgment of their privileges cited in the beginning of this work, and
falsty fathered upon Clement 7. Pope of that name. Die quo a saeculo hujusmodi
purgatorium accesserint ipsa virgo gloriosa Dei genitrix Maria sabbatho
sequenti post illorum confratrum, seu religioserum ac sororum obitus visitando,
a poenis Purgatory hujusmodi little animas liberabit. By reason of this double
Hujusmodi, I confess I am not so good a scholar, as to make any sensible
construction in English of these words, notwithstanding that I have both
learned my Grammar, and have my self composed one. But yet we find by their
sermons, conferences, books,and disputations, that upon those words the Friar
Carmelites conclude that by the benefit of the Scapular, every soul that is
adjudged unto Purgatory, whose body in death was invefted therewithal, by the
ministry and visitation of the blessed virgin, and under her conduct shall be
delivered thence the next saturday after their decease, which (as I said
before) must needs be at the longest term within eight days after death. Yet
since the pains of Purgatory are so grievous, happy (say I) be they who dye on
Friday night, because the day following they shall be delivered thence. Now you
must know that none have authority to give you this so holy a Scapolar, but
such a Priest as is of the Order of the Carmelites. They have also in the
aforesaid Treatise, another privilege granted (as they say) by Pope Nicholas
the 4. and Pope Innocentius the 4. (but it is not to be believed, but rather
what Thomas Walsingham writ, cited in the former chap. That to be a friar and a
liar is all one.) The privilege is this: That whosoever shall give an alms,
or an nights lodging unto a Carmelite, shall have a plenary indulgence of all
their sins.

Another privilege they father upon Pope Vibanus 6. and Nicholas 5. That
whosoever shall call the Friar Carm^lites, the brethren of the blessed virgin
of mount Carmel, shall have ten years of Indulgence. Here is no ambition to be
called the brethren of the blessed Virgin the Mother of God, and Uncles unto
our Savior? To the imitation of which spiritual kindred and alliance, it is
very like that our Ignatian Friars, or Jesuits, albeit with more modesty, do
call themselves the fellows or companions of our Savior. And of all Friars, I
know none of so conspicuous descents, and of so great a blood and houses, as
these two, the Carmelites to be the brethten of the blessed Virgin: The
Ignatians to be the companions of Jesus. But why not? since our Savior has
said, Math. 12. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father that is in Heaven, he
is my brother, and sister, and mother. Since then our Savior is contented to
admit into his kindred such as shall do the will of his Father without exception
of persons of what quility soever, from the Cedar to the Hyssop, from the Pope
to the Sexten, from the Prince to the Beggar. To what end are these
restrictions? these singularityes of styles and titles importing a limitation,
or rather a kind of an exclusion of their brethren from such spiritual
prerogatives, especially our Savior having left them to the general extent of
a Quieunque fecerit voluntatem patris mei: Whosoever shall do the will of my
Father, he is my brother, sister, and mother. For tell me, why should not a
cobbler under a stall, or a poor woman selling her bunch of radish about the
streets, who have a care to live in the fear of God, assume these stately and
honorable styles, as well as either Carmelise; or Jesuit? Albeit (I confess)
it would nothing become them so to do. Our Savior bids us, when we have done
our best endeavors, say we are unprofitble servants. The Pope calls him self
servum servorum dei, the servant of Gods servants. The Publican is commended
for not lifting his eyes to Heaven, but knocking his breast, and calling
himself a sinner. The Prodigal Child hold it too much to be called his
fathers son. The invited Guest is commanded to take the lowest place at the
table. And we know who said to the Apostles, contending which of them should be
the greatest. Quicunque voluer is inter vos mayor fieri, sit vester minister,
etc. Math. 23. He that would be the greatest among you, he shall be your
servant. And he that exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

And albeit it pleases our Savior sometimes to grace his followers with high
styles, and terms full of love and honor, as he who knows the worth and
merit of all his servants: as for example, to call them his friends, his
brethren, his fellow-heires, his children, his disciples, his servants. Yet it
becomes not poor silly and wretched man, who either knows his own misery in
this valley of tears or is more miserable in being ignorant thereof, to
approach nearer unto his Creator, then the Portall of Pulvis and cinis. Shall I
speak unto my Lord being but dust and ashes? not knowing whether in this life
he be worthy of love, or hatred, a vessel of honor or dishonor, but that
whatsoever good he has, is by grace from Heaven, and not of himself.

And so much for the power of the Carmelites Scapular in matters of Purgatory.
The sum of all whose doctrine in this point is: That the blessed Virgin the
Mother of God, descends from Heaven every Saturday (but whether before noone or
after, it is uncertain) to deliver all such as have dyed in the Scapular the
week before. The occasion of which supposed privilege (as far as I can
conjecture) was this: The Carmelite Friars hearing that the Franeiscans did
preach and publish unto the people: That S. Francis every year upon his feast
day (which falls upon the 4. of October.) comes down from Heaven, and descending
into Purgatory, carries away with him all those who the year before dyed in
his habit, and desiring by all means that their Scapular might not be
inferior, but rather in greater request and estimation then the habit, and
thinking a year too long a time for poor souls to be tormented in those
flames, they obtained a privilege (as they tell us, but most falsely) from the
Sea Apostolic, that their scapularists should stay no longer then a week at
the most, but every Saturday should be delivered thence. So as I do not a
little wonder wherefore the Friars of S. Francis Order in Limericke of late,
should with so great vehemence, and as it were with a new heat, set on foot
that former pre^ended indult of a yearly manumission upon S. Francis day of
all such as dyed in their habit be^o^e. The particulars of which history,
curious Reader, if thou desire to under stand, I will not spare to impart unto
thee, and that in such manne as was related unto me by them who were eye, and
c^re-witnesses of the whole business, with all the circumstances thereunto
belonging.

Philip Horrow Parish Priest of S. John Baptists in the South part of Limerick,
second Vicar general unto the Bishop of Limericke, whose name is Ri. Arthure,
preached upon S. Francis his day, the 4 of October, namely 1633, in the house
of the Franciscans, and among many other praises of S. Francis, said, that the
Saint did every S. Francis day descend from heaven to Purgatory, and deliver
from thence all the souls of such as have taken S. Francis habit in their
lifetime. This was contradicted by the Dominitans and the Jesuits of
Limericke, and thereupon the Vicar general Philip Horrow was called before the
Bishop, and before his adversaryes, and being questioned about that doctrine
which he had delivered, He said, for his part he did not firmly believe it,
but yet he cited two authors of the Franciscans for it. These were Onuphrins
Mariscal, and Bartholomens Pisanus, whereupon he and his adversaryes were
reconeiled, and by the Bishop enjoined not to speak any more of that opinion.
But the Guardian of the Franciscans in Limericke Friar Francis Wolf hearing
this, prepared himself to preach of that subject on the 29, of December last,
which is the Sunday infra oc^avan^ Nativitatis Domini, but the Bishop hearing
thereof (being most vigilant and careful of the peace and concord of his flock)
sent his Archdeacon Father Jordan Bourk, and Father William Sauvegan his
Chantor first to entreat the said Guardian, not to speak any word of that
controversy, and next to command him not to preach thereof. The which message
they delivered unto the said Guardian upon Saturday night before his Sermon,
and he with some colored speech made them believe he would obey: yet the next
morning, he preached the same opinion with great vehemence, and cum sale
mordicante against the other Regulars. Hereupon the Bishop called all his
Clergy of the City, and the Regulars together, the 15. of Ian. very late at
night, and there the Regulars, especially Friar Terence O Brian, Prior of the
Dominicans, in Limerick, and Friar William Crah, superior of the Jesuits also
in Limerick, accused the said Guardian of the Franciscans, as well for that
opinion, as also for his unseemely language against others that gainsayd that
doctrine, whereupon the said Guardian, after some frivolous excuses given by
him, was commanded by the Bishop, not to preach any more within his Diocese,
without his especial license. He cited no more Authors for the same opinion but
those which were cited by the Vicar Philip Horrow.

And thus have you the true relation of such troubles as happened among our
Churchmen of Limerick this last Winter about the privileges of the Franciscan
habit, in which as in a map, you first behold the venters and broachers of
false doctrines in the person of the Vicar general, and the Guardian of the
Franciscans. In the second place is presented unto you the office of a good
Pastor, and the careful performance of his duty in the Bish. of the Diocese.
Thirdly you are to observe the comendable obedience of the Vicar general unto
his Ordinary, being admonished of his fault. Fourthly you may note and detest
the intolerable pride and schismatic disobedience of Friar Francis Wolf,
Guardian of the Franciscans, who being praadmonished by the Diocesan not to
preach such doctrins; and countersayting a faygned obedience, did
notwithstanding transgress his commandment, to the notable scandal of Gods
Church, and the ruin of his own conscience. Lastly you may observe some
laudable opposition made againsterror, and false doctrine, by the accusation of
the Prior of the Dominicans, and the superior of the Jesuits.

Now I would know of our Friars, and especially of Friar Francis Wolf Guardian
of the Franciscans of Limericke, what privilege or indult they have from the
Pope to preach such doctrines as are inhibited them by the Bishop in whose
Diocese they live, contrary to the decree of the Council of Trent, sess. 5.
cap. 2. Si vero. And both the rule of S. Francis cap. 9. and the aforesaid
Council forbidding them at all to preach contradicente Episcopo, the Bishop
not giving way thereunto, sess. 24. cap. 4. But experience from time to time
has taught us, that they be too violent and headstrong to be ruled by any
Church law. Neither let the Reverend Bishop of Limericke be troubled with their
disobedience unto him. For the Pope himself shall not be able to command them
further then stands with their own good liking. To which purpose, it shall not
be from the purpose to set down what that reverend, pious, and learned Bishop
of Bellay in France, Johannes Petrus Camus observed at his being in Rome in the
late days of Clement 1. And I will use his own words as they lie in the 32.
Cap. of his book De operibus Monachorum.

Being on a time in Rome in the days of Pope Clement 8. whose memory is in
benediction, and in a sweet odor of sanctity, for his verity, equity, and
mansuetude, who being much urged, (not to say importuned) with many questions
and disputes touching the Habits and Beards of Cloyster-men, he had a
resolution to bring unto the rasor, and unto the hood, all such as call
themselves Regulars, and who live in communityes, and observe Monastic vows.
This gave such an Alarm to them who had taken the Cap and the Habit of secular
Clergy, the Jesuits, and Theatines, and an other sort who had made choice for
their character the long Beard, I mean the Conventualls, Carthufians, and
Capuchins, that it was much to be feared, that the good Pope (whose name is in
veneration thorough all Christianity) had not felt the effect of those mortal
Litanyes, with which some Monks do threaten those who are not favorable unto
them. For sure had he but touched the checkes of the one with the razor, and
had thrust the heads of the other into an hood, he had tried their resignation
and obedience to the quick. but to avoyde troubles, and jealousies, the good
Pope held it better to let that business sleep, then to taste the humors of
his froward and discontented children. So the Bishop.

But of much more terrible consequence was that other case which happened in the
same most blessed Popes days, my self being then in Spain, in Sevil of
Andalusia, about the year 1600, for Pope Clement 8. being to determine the
Controversy De Anxili^s, so long debated, and yet depending undecided twixt the
Dominicans and the Jesuits. The Jesuits to give a disturbance to that work,
and to cast it quite from off the Hingells (lest it should be judged against
themselves) cause it to be disputed thorough all their Colleges of Spain and
Portugal, and that in printed and public conclusions. Quod non erat de fids:
Quod Clement Papa octa^^^ cra^ caput Ecclesiae: That it was no point of faith,
That Pope Clement 8. was head of the Church. And because the Spaniards in their
disputes make use of their own language, yea much more then of the Latin: and
there being many Cavallero's, aed men of great fashion then present, as well as
of the vulgar, according to the manner of solemn disputations, there went a
tumultuous buz among the Laity in their meetings and conversations, Qu^
Diabolo, El santo padre no es Cabeza de Iglesia? What the di^ell, is not the
holy Father the Head of the Church? So as the Inquisition held it necessary
under pain of Censures, to inhibit those questions and disputes. And in truth
the good old Pope fearing by such disputations, to be disputed out of his
chair, was contented to surcease from any further process in that assayre.

CAP. IV. That the Regulars of this Kingdom are neither Roman Catholics,
Protestants, nor good Subjects, and therefore neither by the Church nor
commonwealth to be permitted to live among them.
FIrst that the Regulars are no Roman Catholics, it may appear by what has
already bin disputed in the matter of the Habit, Scapular, and the Luissian
Fast, ascribing salvation unto them, contrary to the faith of holy Church,
besides the maintenance of the Eleven Propositions, of which they have bin both
convicted and judged in their book lately made by Edmundus Vrsulanus, censured
and condemned at Rome, contrary to which censure the said book is allowed and
approved of by all the Friars of this Kingdom. And for so much as the Friars
are not conformable on the other side unto the Protestant Religion established
in this Kingdom. And I could never learn that his Majesty was pleased to
allow of any third Religion within his Dominions, I say, more then the
approbation of the Protestants, and some gracious tolleration of the
Catholic, no more then he is pleased to allow of Arianisme, Nestorianisme,
Pelagianisme, and the like heresies. In consideration whereof whenever it may
seem good unto the King and the State, what cause can be imagined, why the
Friars of this Kingdom may not be prosequuted as most pestilent heretics and
seducers? Neither is there want of presidents and examples in the Protestant
Churches, of such proceedings against infamous heretics. For so in Berne of
Helvetia was Valentinus Gentilis an Italian heretic adjudged unto the fire.
Servetus a Spaniard in Geneva. In the days of Queen Elizabeth, Hacket and
Legate executed in London for Arianisme: others in Norwich, Penry hanged at
Th^^ford. Greenwood and Bar^ in Lincolnes-Inn-fields; all of them for
maintayning and publishing of Brownisme. But if it be thought better to those
that sit at the helm of Government to show more mercy, then may they be sent
out into exile after their predecessors those false Monks Prebinus, Milianus,
Probinianus, who by Pelagius the Pope were banished into remote Islands, as we
read in Gratians decres. 16. q. 1. Prebinum. For one way or other it seems
necessary that the Kingdom should be purged of them, who to enrich themselves
and make-up their Monarchy, regard not what slyding stayres they make the
people to descend from Christianity, to Atheism. And albeit the beginnings
have bin marvailously neglected, and neither the cookarice crushed in the egg,
nor these Harpyes in their first hatch, yet better late then never, before they
grow to a stronger head, and not so easy to be suppressed. And so much briefly
for the exorbitant heresies of our Regulars, condemned both by the Catholic
and Protestant, by which separation from both, they have framed a new no.
Church unto themselves, worthy no where to be admitted.

In the second and last place I am to prove according unto my promise, That the
Friars of this Kingdom are no good subjects, and so also in that respect
rather deserving punishment, then either favor or protection from the State
under which they live. And so I argue. In those better and more religious times
of our Ancestors, and when the Catholic faith did most flourish in Great
Britain, ta^ne, and the Isles adjacent, Cum terra ^rat unius labij, when our
Kings, Bishops, Nobles, and Commons were all of one heart and lipp in the
worship and service of God; when the Canons, Laws, and behests of holy-Church
were in most rigorous observance, yet even then and in those days, no
Archbishop, Bishop, or Prelate took upon him, or might by virtue of any
Ecclesiastical calling or dignity, to banish either out of the Land, or any
one district Dioccesse, or County, any of the Kings subjects of what calling so
ever, or for what cause so ever. And albeit Metropolitans, Bishops, Arch
deacons, and other Prelates were of as great power, and as ample jurisdiction in
those times, as any of their successors have been since; yet notwithstanding
all suites against ecclesiastical persons, of what quality or degree soever,
in civil and secular causes, as debts, rents, revenewes, leases, inheritances,
and the like, were both commenced and determined in the Kings temporal Courts,
and not at all in the Bishops Consistoryes, as appears both by the ancient
Laws of these Kingdoms, and the consent of the learned professors thereof,
who all with one voice, as well Catholics as Protestants, do at this day
agree in the premises.

Notwithstanding all this, our new titulary Bishops, especially so many of them
as are sent unto us out of the Friaryes beyondseas, together with the whole
Regularism^ of this Kingdom, do stoutly maintain, both by doctrine and
practice the contrary. First, that they have power to banish; if they be
Archbishops, out of their Provinces; if Bishops, from out their Dioceses, not
only for offenses, but even ad nutum, and indicta causa, at their own will and
pleasure, without either examination or determination of cause, any of the
Kings subjects, as well of the temporal, as ecclesiastical estare. Secondly,
they teach, and practically maintain, that whenever the Defendant is a
Clergy man, not only in ecclesiastical ^anses; but as well in temporal and
civil, as debts, morgages, leases, rents, etc. they are to be impleaded before
the Bishop of the Diocese, in which they live, and not in any of the Kings
Courts at all. In defense and justification of both which paradoxes, Tho.
Flemwing, titulary Archb. of Dub in, stiffly persisting, (for that indeed
within the Diocese of Duklin, he had practiced both those points)
notwithstanding that his error was with much mildues and learning, both out of
the Canon, and Common-Lawes opened unto him by one of his Majesty's Privy
Council, yet can he not to this day be reclaymed, but remains most wilful
and obstinat in his former practiced error. His Friars persuading him to offer
himself a sacrifice in defense thereof, laying an imputation upon all such as
complain of this his tyranny, that they seek his blood. Not doubting but one
way or other to prevayle in this his usurpation, notwithstanding what
opposition soever of the higher powers against him.

And like unto this our Archbishop Flemming is another Franciscan, the present
Bishop of Down, of the house of Maggennes, a man in his behavior more like an
Italian Bannito, or some debosht Ruffian, then a sacred Bishop, as may well be
seen by his fantastique acoustrements coupled to his Vltique manners, having
his locks hanging over his rich face, and down his shoulders, even to the
center of his back, strouting himself at every third word upon his tip-toes,
as if he were angry at his parents for not making him a foot longer. And if any
think my pen has wronged him in this rough draught, let them make a pilgrimage
unto him, he lives not above two days journey from Dublin, and if they find
him not as I have presented him, let them come unto me, and tell me of it, and
I will congratulat with them his reformation. This Hugh Magennes transformed
first into a Friar, and after into a Bishop, retaining still the first savor
and seasoning of the pot, meeting lately witha Clergy man of these parts, asked
him: Now, what does Cadde^ and Harris? do they live still in Dublin? Yes. Were
I their Bishop, concutiens illustre capus, (as if every hair of his head was
able to transport them beyond the Aequinoctiall,) I would send them further
off. O ne savi magne sacerdos. by your favonr my Lord, Caddell and Harris are
civil men, and as they be Catholic Priests, so are they the Kings liege
subjects, and may live in Dublin, or where else they think good, within his
Majesty's Dominions, so long as it pleases the State to permit them, being far
from yielding to the new usurped tyranny, which your Friar Bishops have of late
brought into this Kingdom, contrary both to the Common and Canon Law, as has
bin demonstrated unto them, not only in my late Treatise against The. Flemming
his Excommunucation, but since that again most learnedly viva voce in the
Castle of Dublin, by such as had the examination of the cause. Neither is it to
be thought that his Majesty will endure such a diminution of his honor by any
one Friar, or the whole pack of them together. In the mean time God help the
poor Priests who live under the Friar Bishops, to whom if they do not yield in
these and the like practices, they shall presently hear. Veteres migrate
coloni: you shall no longer live in my Diocese, which thunderclap was first
heard in Dublin, but afterward roared into other Diocesses, yea such vexation
they find (especially Priests of the best parts and deseres) under the Friar
Bishops, as to redeem their vexation, and to purchase their peace, they are
contented to forsake their Parishes, and poor entertainments, and to betake
themselves unto other Dioc^sses, where the Clergy-Bishops govern, leaving all
to the Friar, who defires to do all, and have all. And for this cause is it,
(together with ambition, and an unbridled lust of domineering) that so many
Friars at this day do hunt after Bishoprics, as wear credibly informed both
from Paris and Rome, no fewer then eight of them, to the admiration of
strangers, and deteslation of all modest men, importuning the Pope to be made
titulary Bishops of this Kingdom, there being searce so many places vacant,
which if they do obtain, the utter ruin of the Clergy in those Diocesses can
not be prevented, whom they will not fail to supplant, and to furnish their
places with Friars, each one of his own order, as we hear daily to be
practiced in the next Diocese of Kildare, whose Bishop being a Dominican
Friar, creates his Friars, Parish Priests, contrary to the Law of holy Church,
and continued practice thereof till these times. But see the policy of this
tyrant Bishop, or rather Tyrones Bishop of Kildare, for at Tyrones intercession
was he nominated, (as himself canno: deny) having first written unto the Pope,
as is credibly reported, and believed by us, that no Bish. should be named by
his holiness in this Kingdom, but such as by Tyrone from Flanders should be
commended unto him. I say, this Ross Magogean, titulary Bishop of Kildare, in
excuse of making his Friars Pastors, and Parish Priests, contrary unto the
Laws of the Chruch, tells such as expostulate the matter with him, that of
necessity he is enforced so to do, for that out of the body of the Clergy he
wants Priests of sufficiency for those places. O blessed God! having first
discontented, banished, wrangled, and clampered all Priests of worth out of his
Diocese, and having first procured that desolation, makes afterward his own
fact an excuse of his own wickedness. Shall Machiavell ever be dead so long as
this Friar is alive?

To such miserable terms is the Clergy of this country brought, That if the
Pope perseveres as he has begun, to send us either Bishops made of Friars, or
of the Friars creatures, there is an end of the Secular Priesthood, which is of
Christ's institution, and has continued in the Church since the Apostles times,
till this unhappy tyranny of the Friars has corrupted both the doctrine and
government of the Church, and has turned all things topsy-turvy among us. If
any desire to know the names and number of our present Friar Bishops of this
Kingdom, they be as follow: Them. Flemming alias Barnwell, alias White
Archbishop of Dublin Franciscan. Boethius Igan Bishop of Elfin, Franciscan.
Hugh Magenues Bishop of Down, Franciscan. Ross Magoghagan Bishop of Kildare,
Dominican. Patrick Cumberford Bishop of Waterford, Augustine, which last is the
only indifferent Friar Bishop unto the Clergy, of all that ever yet were sent
into this Kingdom. Some others we have, who albeit they were elected out of
the body of the Clergy, yet because standing upon their own feet, they were not
able to reach the apple of Episcopal promotion, they mounted upon the Friars
shoulders, and by their alone means have obtained the same, and for that cause
are little more loving unto the Clergy, or less beloved of the Friars then the
former, holding it a point of gratitude, and the least kind of remuneration for
so great a benefit, to be at the beck and command of that Friar, whether it be
Wadding the Cordelier, or any other, by whose solicitation they received their
nomination unto a Bishop rick, bound ever after to tread in their steps, and to
run their courses. But fure for my part I should think the same Church-pollicy,
which is practiced in Rome, in debarring Friars these 50. years and upward
from the Apostolical Chair, might be observed thorough the whole Church, as
best beseeming the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and the government thereof: I
mean the Clergy to be governed by the Clergy, the Friars by the Friars, without
making such a mixture of governments, as we see at this day: one Diocese ruled
by a Clergy Bishop, another by a Franciscan, the third by a Dominican etc.
which is rather to lay a corner stone of discention, then any foundation of
unity, to plant a seminary of discord and contention, then a nursery of peace
and concord, and the same not only for the present, but even descending unto
posterity.

For example in this Diocese of Dublin we have for the present Thowas Flemming
Archbish. a Friar by all means suppressing and persequuting h^s poor Clergy,
wearing out all the most ancient, and su^ficient I'riests of his Diocese; and
to the end he might with more facility at chieve his ends, he has Iately
procured a Bull from Rome, the ground of this Bust is, for that all benefices
of this Kingdom, for want of due collation, are held to be in the lapse, and
devolved thereby unto the gift of the Pope, by which is conferred unto him the
right of patronage and presentation, of all the Benefices, Rectoryes, Vicaryes,
Capellania's, yea not them only, but the collation of all Digaityes, places of
Channons, Prebends, or what else belongs unto the Cathedral, or Collegiat
Churches, within his Diocese, all at his disposition, will, and command,
either to confer, or to be vacant, as he does the Dignityes of S. Patricks
and Trinity Church, for fear of creating a Chapter, which one time or other
might look into his game. Some Parishes he conferres (especially upon his white
disciples in titulum, others, and the most with amovibility ad nutum, to the
end they may be more serviceable unto him. All to give a free scope and an
uncontrouleable license unto his galloping Friars to command all, among whom
there is not a Lay brother, who was but yesterday an hors^-boy, but will
threaten the gravest Priest of his Diocese with a removeall from his place, if
he distaste him.

And verily the present government of the Clergy in this, and such Diocesses,
as the Friar Bishops do rule, makes me call to mind that tyranny of the Danes,
as well here in Ireland as in England, to whose violence, not only the
Republique in general, but every private family was obnoxious, having their
espialls and intelligencers in every place and corner of the country, in so
much as unto the basest groom among them, for fear of his displeasure, the
honest subject was in such thraldom, as he would be glad to give him the best
place at his table, and to feed him even ex adipe frumenti; with the best
morsells he had, and to call him at every word, My Lord Dane, whence it comes
to pass, that in these days, we call by contraction every idle vagabond, a
Lordan, borrowed I say, from that lubber of a Dane who was appointed to
domineer in every man's house. Yea (if my memory fail me not, which is the
first faculty of the mind that decays in old age) it is written in some of our
Chronicles, that if an English man had been upon the midst of a bridge, and had
seen a Dane make toward the same, though a musket shot before him, the Saxon
would have returned back again, and have left the bridge unto the Dane to have
passed over. And even such Lordanes for all the world be our Irish Friars,
helping to devour the fruits of the earth, for which most of them never swert
in any lawful vocation, absolutely commanding the whole households in which
they live, and all too little to do them service, respect, and honor. Those
that be housekeepers do more feelingly then my self understand the
discommodities of the saucy and malapert carriage of these sturdy beggars among
them.

It was on a time, when a Friar of S. Francis Order coming to a Gentle-mans
house, seated within the smoke and prospect of Dublin and finding the gate
shuts for why? the Goodman of the house with all his family were set to dinner,
neither was there written over the gate.

Porta patens esto nulli, clauderis honefto. The Friar seeing-himselfe thus
prevented, and his stomach persuading him that he was in extremeinecessity of
his dinner, he betook himself unto the hammer of the gave, and so belabored
the broad payle, as I know not whether Brontes the great Smithy man, with his
biggest hammer fetched from his right care, could lay weightier strokes upon
his anvill. But so it was, as the Friar found the proverb true. Venture non
babet aures, the belly has no cares; and no admission or answer could he get,
notwithstanding that propter improbitatem, by reason of his importunity he
persuaded himself, had they bin all in bed, and fast in sleep, they would have
risen and ministered unto him. And no question but as his hands did labor at the
hammer, so did many a cogitation hammer in his brains, sometimes bewayling the
declining of hospitality thorough the Kingdom, the hardness of rich men's
hearts: sometimes again bethinking him of the virtue of perseverance, comforting
himself with these and the like promises: Petite and accipietis, pulsate and
aperietur vobis: Ask and you shall receive, knock and it shall be opened unto
you. But nothing did more trouble the Friars mind, then when he fell into
consideration of that Legacy of S. Francis, written under his Image commonly at
their altars. That in what place so ever his Friars should be, they never
should want necessary food, or raiment, the truth of which Legacy he found his
stomach now to call in question. O how often did he examine the gates, whether
the weather, or worms, or time more consuming then either worms, or weather,
had made any little windows, by which he might espy some blessed body to pass
over the base court within, but all in vain, for as soon might he have looked
thorough the ribs of the Trojan horse. What will you have of it? Lasa patientia
sit furor, wronged patience turns into fury: the Friar gathers up a number of
stones, as David did when he went to let fly at Golias his head, though far
bigger, for this Friar is alufly bouncing Cordilier, and not such a shrimpe as
David was, these he throws against the gates of Droncondran with many a
vengeance upon all those who keep their gates so close shut against Friars: but
alas, as Priams darts rebounded back when they arrived at Pirrhus his armor of
proof, accusing the weak and feeble arm of the thrower: So did the stones
which Friar John Preston sent against the aforesaid gate, leaving some few
dints of his doughty choler, but nothing which might relieve his hunger. At
last the Friar all malecontent, betakes himself unto his palfrey, and with a
froward kind of patience, pursued the rest of his journey. But time passing on
with swift, though silent pases, not long after he meets with old John Bath,
(whose soul God pardon,) he relates what a challenge he made him, what
documents he gave him, among which I remember, this was one: What wist you, but
that the best and dearest friend you have might have bin at your gates at that
hour? It is against the laws of hospitality, and the custom of Ireland to
shut their doors at meal time etc, but betwixt us both, he either forgot to
tell me, or I to demand, what satisfaction was made for that error. And now I
wot well, what the Friar will say, or others for him: Alas Mr Harris, is this
all you have to say against that ancient Guardian, and now a definitor of his
Order. It seems if you had worse, it should out. O no, I keep the rest for my
Book De illustribus viris and fuminis S. Francisci per Hibernian, which I hope
ere long shall see the light, If they amend not. And now betaking my self unto
a more serious discourse, I will conclude this Chapter.

CAP. V. Whether it be true Martyrdom to dye in defenes of the two former
Tenants, held both in Theory and Practice by our Archbishop Tho. Flemming, and
his Friars.
MVch does our Archb. Flemming glory, that in and for the defense of the
libertyes of the Church, he is persequuted both of the State, and some of his
own profession: But for his part, as they seek his blood, so is he most ready
and willing with S. Thomas of Canterbury, for the immunityes and privileges of
the Church, to lay down his life, that so he may aspire unto the glorious Crown
of Martyrdom, And sure if the Pope and Cardinals in Rome were as forward as he
and his Friars be here, I perswede my self he would be canonized before his
death, and so be a second S. Thomas. But then how a Martyr? There indeed would
be the difficulty. And therefore the State may do well in the mean time to make
him a Confessor; That is, to acknowledge his fault, and presumption, in
violating such laws, as both Church and Commonwealth in all ages from our
very cradle of Christianity in these Kingdoms have maintained, conformable to
the Law of God, and fittest for government, as I have abundantly declared in my
Book against the Archbishop Flemming his Excomunication. And this I speak in
excuse of his first error, the mother whereof had it bin iguorance, might by an
humble submission bin made pardonable. For indeed Thomas Flemming was taken
from his Friary of Lovayn at the age of 30. years, and so was suddenly adva^ced
unto the second Primacy of Ireland, humane negotiation of interposed mediators,
Erigens e stercore pauperem, ut sedeat cum principibus, cum principibus populi
sui: raising him from the dunghill, even to sit with Princes, with the Princes
of his people; to whom if that power which could in a moment elevat and set him
aloft, had also furnished him with parts befitting government, there had bin no
cause of complaint. But the man was taken as he was, and in a new mould could
not now be cast. A Friar he was, and to have a Friar Archbishop of Dublin was
the ambition of all the Friars in Ireland, whom they presumed, and therein were
not deceived, that he would ever smell of the first humor with which he was
seasoned. Notwithstanding David taken from the flocks, and from behind the
bagged ewes, as himself confesses, Psalm. 77. Sustulit cum de gregibus, and de
post foetanies accepit cum: and advanced unto the scepter of Israel, did not
after look back, either to the Rams, or to the Ewes, or their young ones, he
left behind him, but as Solomon says of a Wise man, he had always his eyes in
his head, he looked before him, forgetting what was past, endeavoring to
perform with that present estate to which he was called, having (I con fesse)
this advantage, that he who raised him, had both the power and will to bestow
upon him the spirit of wisdom, and all other gists and graces necessary for so
high a calling. By which we may take knowledge by the way of that distinction:
Inter voluntatems: boneplaniti and permissionis handled by the Schoolmen, and
in particular by S. Tho. 1a. 2 ae qi 19. q.

Now then Tho. Flemming by Gods permission raised unto the second See of
Ireland at the age of 30. and as it was determined by his brethren and
Camerado's in the Friary of Lovaine, to extirpate the Clergy of the Diocese of
Dublin, and in their place to bring in the Friars, a plot though not very
ancient, yet before him invented by an VIster Friar called Hugh Cavall,
residing in Rome, and designed by this present Pope Vrbanus 8. about ten
years ago, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primat of Ireland, and to which purpose
the aforesald Hugh Cavall obtained a Bull by most sinister information, to make
his Friars Parish Priests thorough the Diocese of Armagh, but being prevented
by death before he could pay his way, and bid his friends farewell in Rome
(albeit not two hours before his death he writ a letter unto the Pope,
beseeching him to nominat in his place Friar Rob. Chamberlain, for so they
call him, albeit a most Irish and a tyronicall Friar of Lovaine) a successor
was designed in his place, a Priest of the Clergy called Hugh O Reyly the
present Metropolitan of Armagh, and Primat of all Ireland, who being a man not
so wedded to Friarly plots against the Clergy (albeit in many respects
obnoxious unto them) that policy of making Friars Pastors, either ended in the
first Hugh, or at least has taken a time of breathing in the second Hugh.

But our young Friar Flemming an Archbishop of 30. years, (though now near
40.) nothing doubted to under-go that burden, which Milo himself was scarce
able to bear, and in a preposterous zeal he would, yea that he would, without
either Bull or Breve, banish the Secular Priests out of his Diocese, which to
perform, (little seen in the Canons of the Church, and less in the common
Laws of England) not distinguishing the Keys from the Sword, nor Regal
power, from Episcopal jurisdiction, like a Prester John King of the
Aethiopians, he presently banisheth 3. Priests, in his opinion the most
fussicient of all his Diocese, and these living in Dublin, the mother City of
all Ireland, not doubting but they once sent away, all the rest would be glad
to kiss his hands, and to depart with his benediction. Upon such lofty terms
stood our Archbishop, leaning his head upon the elbow of his Regulare brachium,
his Friarly arm, an Arm, or rather an army always ready and pressed to second
such attempts, as Episcopal jurisdiction could not support, yea to such an
overweening presumption did he and his Friars at last arrive, relying upon
their own conrage and strength, as they doubted not to complain unto the
temporal Magisttate, and bring their matter unto the Castle of Dublin,
confident that the State would join with them, to the ratification of the
banishment of the Priests, for which cause, after that a Layman had first
broken they ce, and made the way for them, there appeared plaintiffs William
Malone, alias Morgan, alias Brown, Jesuit; John Preston Franciscan: Patrick
Brangan, and Edmund Doyle a pair of Priests adhering unto the Friars faction,
all these (I say) presented themselves before a grave Counselor of State (for
as then the Lord Deputy was not arrived) before him they accuse Mr Doctor
Caddell, and my self Paul Harris, (for the third whose name is Doctor Cabil,
had made his peace before with the Archbishop) they lay to our charge facta and
infecta, but all in the clouds of generality, as those usually do, who mean
to calumniat, and to deceive, alleging that we were disobedient, turbulent,
seditious, facticus, of unquiet spirits, enemies to peace. In conclusion, such
as did trouble all Israel, and therefore not to be tolerated, or longer
endured. But it was their chance (good hap for us) to come before such a Judge
as held it necessary to keep one ear for the Defendants, and first to hear
our answers before he condemned us, having understood that of the Moral
Philosopher, elegantly expressed by the Tragedian: Qui statuit aliquid, part
inandita altera; aquumlicet statuerit, hand aquus fuit: who determines any
thing, either party unheard, though what he determines be just, yet himself is
not just. Seneca in Medea. Wherefore it pleased that honorable Gentleman,
after he had given audience unto our Adversaryes, first to send for me Paul
Harris, to understand what I could answer in my defense, not having in nine
years before been within the Castle-gates of Dublin, and next after he sent
for Peter Caddell, who (as I take it) before that time had never seen the in
fide of the Castle, and having heard our Apology, the Bells for the present
were stayed, and that great heat of hasty exile began to coole-Soon after this,
was the happy arrival of the present Lord Deputy, before whom (upon petition)
both the Archbishop Flemming, and we the Priests were commanded to appear, and
our grievances propounded, were grationsly heard. And for that time dismissed
with grave advice, how to frame our obedience unto the Laws of God and the
Kingdom, and the Archbishop Flemming in particular was most seriously required
to reform his errors, but he standing upon his justification, and wanting at
that rhyme, (as it seemed unto us) the gift of utterance; and expression of
himself, whether not acquainted with such an audience, or that he was not
provided of his Answers, he desired again to be heard, and soon after by the
Lord Deputy his command, we were remitted unto the hearing of the now Lord
Bishop of Derry, and Sir George Radotiffe Knight, before whom all our causes
were examened at full, according unto the Canons of the Church, and the ancient
and immemorable Laws of these Kingdoms. And the Archbishop Flemming
convicted, partly by his own confession, and partly by witness, that he had
offended in these two points.

First in taking upon him to banish the Kings subjects by Episcopa^ authority
out of his Diocese.

Secondly, in erecting a new Tribunal, and drawing all causes of
Ecelesiasticall men, though merely civil and temporal unto his Consistory,
there only under pain of Excommunication to be heard and determined.

Neither can the aforesaid Thomas Flemming parallel his cause with S. Thomas of
Canterbury, I appeal to all such as have written the Legend of his life and
death, whether it be Capgravius, the Breviary, or our English Chronicles,
neither out of any other History shall our Friars ever be able to prove, that
in both, or either of those two points, there was any controversy at all
betwixt King Henry the second, and Thomas Becket. Thomas Flemming the Friar,
being the first and only Bishop, since the conversion of these Nations to
Christianity, that ever was bold to teach, maintain, or practice the same, for
which ause if he should suffer death (notwithstanding all the ruissian-like
boasts of him, and his Friars) he should dye a malefactor, and not a martyr.
But the little fear of any such punishment to befall him, causes him and his
Fryats so to triumph over those who to their power have, and always will
endeavor to maintain that harmony and concord, which time out of mind has
been twixt the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Canons of holy Church. And
verily our hope is in God, and next in those to whose hands the Sword of
Justice is committed, that they will not see the Church in her ancient Laws,
the King in his honor, or the subject in his right any longer prejudised by
such our Circumcelliones and wandering limitours, as are able by their busy
insinuations, persuasions, negotiations, if they be no sooner suppressed etc.
toward whom to use lenity would be but cruelty, and the severity of Justice
the greatest benefit of Mercy.

CAP. VI. An Apology of the Author for the sharpness of his style.
SOme say, there is too much gall in my Ink, especially writing against those
that be domestici fidei, of the household of faith, who albeit they had wronged
me, my friends, or the Clergy, yet ought not I to exceed moderamen incul patae
tutela, the moderation of a faultlesse defense, that is, so defending my self,
as not unnecessarily offending others, etc.

Alas, and will not these men yet understand, that I write not at al against
any of the Churches children or family, but only such as S. Peter inveigheth
against in his 2. Epist. 2. allwing, unstable souls, having their hearts
^xe^cised with avarice, the children of male diction leaving the right way,
have erred, following the way of Bal^am of Bosor, which loved the reward of
iniquity, etc. Such wandering stars of which S. Jude speaks, who retain
nothing but their erraticall motion, having lost both light, heat and
influence. Such as S. John in his first Epist. chap. 2, discovers, saying:
They went out from us, but they were not of us. Search the Scriptures, and tell
me, were not the Prophets of the Old Testament sharp, even to scoffing and
bitter taunting against the false Prophets? Did not our bleffed Savior in the
Gospel, reproying both the doctrine, and lives of the Seribes and Pharisees
eight times in one chapter, cryout: Vae vobis Scriba and Pharisei hypocritae!
Woe be to you, Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites: calling them serpents, and
generation of vipers. Read the Epistles of S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles
unto the Churches, consider what style they used, against the enemies of the
Faith which they planted, how edgy, how galling, how biting I Come down to the
Fathers, peruse S. Aug. against the Mantschees, Calestius or Iovinian, S.
Hierom against Vigilantins, Helvidius, and Ruffinus and tell me: Whether they
bang them not, with a style more stinging then a whip of Scorpions? Alas gentle
reader. What I have brought in this, or any other of my books, is but ale, and
cakes, to what the Fathers, and other champions of the Church, even to these
times have written against the enemies of our holy faith.

But some will say, That all the Friars are not such as I have reported them to
be, for which cause I ought to have made a distinction twixt the good and bad,
the corn, and chaff, the sheep, and wolves etc. And not send them all to the
devil together in one bagg, as I have done. For God forbid say these men, (and
then they think they speak very wifely) but there be some good, holy, and
virtuous men among them, both orthodox in belief, and irreprehenfible of life.
No, by the rood (say I) not one, there is not a right believer among them, and
consequently not a good liver: for if virtue and fall worship can walk
together, then both Turk and Jew may be good and holy. I confess there are
indeed a number of smooth fellows to be tound among the Regulars, who have
nothing but Euge Obelle in their months, such as can dexterously act G^^to the
Parasits part on every stage, praising what you praise, and disliking what you
mislike, who in the presence, or in the procuring of a benefactor, si dixerit
astuo, sudant. If he, by whom they expect a benefit, shall say, he is very
warm, the Friar will swear^ by his hood, that for his own part he sweates
downright, knowing that a benefactor is a most delicate piece, and must be
tenderly handled. I confess also some of them to be very moral, and in the
outward man not to be reproved, and yet being infected with herefie, are far
from true piety. Neither herein do they go beyond Ari^s and thousands of his
sect. What vice or corruption of manners can be laid to the charge of Novatus,
or his disciples? Pelagius, Vigilantius, and many more, whose lives we find
little or nothing taxed by such as in their writings have condemned them, yet
were they most vile and wretched heretics notwithstanding what morality or
seeming holiness so ever appeared in their outward conversations according to
that of S. Aug. in Psalm. 4. Vbi sana fides non est non potest esse vera
justitia: where there is not a sound faith, there can be no true justice. And
it has bin the custom of heretics from time to time (observed by the
Fathers) under the veil of formal sanctity to shadow their wicked doctrines.
Now our Friars be of two sorts, both naught, and both misbelievers. Either the
Inventors and publishers of those damnable doctrines above refuted, or such as
being their disciples do adhere unto them partakers of the same misbeliefe. For
if I could find but one Friar among them, that would disclay me those errors,
that would either write, or preach, or any way publish in his perambulations,
the errors of his fellows: Oh how I would stroke his head, and embrace him!
how I would exempt him from the leaven, and corruption of his fellows, and
would glory in his conversion! But O fearful is that saying of the Apostle S.
John in his second Epistle speaking of the doctrine of the Church. Si quis
venit ad vos, and hanc doctrinam non affert etc. If any man come unto you, and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into thy house, nor say, God save you,
unto him. For he that says unto him, God save you, (Note the consenting unto
others in sin) communicates with his wicked works. Now experience teaches
us, that not only the learned Friar, but the unlearned, and the lay-brother:
yea the more unlearned, the more zealous, itchy, and busy are they in
divulging among the ignorant people these salvations of habits, and scapulars,
hawks bells, and hobby-horses. How then can the one be more excused then the
other? Or why should they not all be put in one faggot, and sent to the fire
together?

So much then for the Friar. But yet my scrupulous reader desires to be further
satisfied, and that is in a second point, demanding as thus. How can you Paul
Harris be excused for being so harsh in your writings, and so disrespective
unto your Ordinary, as may appear by sundry passages both of this, and other
of your Books, especially being a Priest of his Diocese, and living within
the compass of his jurisdiction. Ought not a good Priest with all reverence
and respect, both in his words and writings, to show duty and obedience unto
his Bishop? according to that of S. Paul, Ohedite praepositis vestris: Obey
your superiors and such as be set over you. And S. Hierom ad Neopotianum. Esto
subjectus Pontifici tuo, and quasi parentem animae tuae ama. Be obedient unto
thy Bishop, and love him as the parent of thy soul.

To which I answer. That indeed such is the privilege of Bishops by the Laws
of holy Church, that none may either censure them, or publish and declare them
to be heretics (speaking of such declaration as is intended by the Canon but
only the Pope, neither before such declaration, according to the common opinion
does a Bishop loose his jurisdiction or the power of a Pastor over his flock,
or in any of his three Censures; Excommunication, Suspension, or Interdiction.
Yet notwithstanding all this, if a Bishop should obstinatly maintain, and
publish any doctrine condemned by the Church in a General Council, the least
Priest in his Diocese might be so bold to call him an heretic, and both
preach and write against him, for example of Arianisme, Donatisme,
Pelagianisme, and the like, and yet remain subject to his jurisdiction
notwithstanding. For the voice of the Church, which is the voice of God, is to
be first heard and obeyed, and to be preferred before any other. And it is the
rule of S. Aug. Ser. 6. de verbis Domini. Vbi duo superiores mandant opposita,
inferiori non est obede^ndum. Where two superiors, for example, a General
Council, and a Bishop, command opposite things, the Inferior is not to be
obeyed. And conformable to this, is that conclusion of S. Thom. 2.2. q. 104.5.
Subditiiu^^s tantummodo superioribus suis obedire tenentur, in quibus ipsisuis
superioribus subjiciuntur, and in quibus ipsi superiores sublinior is
potestatis praecepeo non adversantur. Inferiors in such things alone, are
bound to obey their superiors, in which they are subject unto their
superiors, and wherein those their superiors, go not against the precept and
command of a power higher then is theirs. So S. Thom. And in the corpse of the
aforesaid conclusion, he illustrateth the same doctrine out of S. Aug. ser. 6.
de verbis Domini. by example of the Captain, the Proconsull, the General, and
God. Where neither the Captain against the command of the Proconsull, nor the
Proconsull against the precept of the General, nor the General against the
command of God is to be obeyed by the subject.

But now ex abundanti. What will you say? If The. Flemming Archbishop of Dublin
did first exempt himself from all power and pastorship over his Priest Paul
Harris? Is Paul Harris then any longer his subject? Sure by the rule of
Relatives: If he be not my Pastor, I am no sheep of his pasture, I have either
forgotten my Logic, Orby the same rule and reason, that he discharges himself
of all cure, care and command over me, he exempts me also from all obedience
and subjection unto him. Read then what follows, witnessed by the firmes,
and subscription of these two Reverend and grave Priests, both living at this
day within the Diocese of Dublin.

We whose names are here under subscribed, do testify: That in our presence,
Tho. Flemming Archbishop of Dublin did renounce all correspondency either by
word or writing with Paul Harris Priest, celling us plainly, that thence for
ward be never would receive either letter or petition from him, or would meddle
in any matter of his, for him, or against him: but wholly disclaimed all
jurisdiction and power over him, wishing us to signify so much unto therefore
said Paul Harris, which accordingly we did.

May 24. anno 1631. PETER CADDELL Priest. WILLIAM SHER GOLD Priest.


After this again, two of his Friars having threatened violence unto my person:
I sent a petition unto Tho. Flemming Archbishop by the hands of two worshipful
Aldermen my friends, beseeching him that he would by his authority, and the
Laws of holy Church, provide for my security. His answer unto them was, That
he would have nothing to do with me in any cause whatsoever, which Aldermen
will not refuse at this day to justify the same. Lastly, having certain books
detained from me by a Parish Priest, and a Friar Carmelite, I sent my complaint
again unto him, by the hands of a Friar of his own order, (for unto his own
presence he would not admit me) whose name is John Parry, but after he
understood than the petition came from me, he neither would read or touch it,
but did grow into choler with the Friar for presenting it unto him. Behold the
equity, the mildness, the longanimity of a Friar Bishop, his charitable and
prudent government, his care of administering justice unto a Priest of his
charge. But I was a stranger, and must be strangely used, and in place of
protection made a prey, not only to the wild beasts of the forest, but even
unto the petulant and sturdy rams of the flock; by all which it appears that I
may truly say and complain, as Almighty God did of the Ifra elites unto
Samuel, 1. Reg. 8. No^^te abjecerant, sed me. They have not cast off thee; but
me, that I should not trule over them. I have not cast off my Bishop, or
with-drawne my obedience from him, but he has cast off me: of which sort of
desertion I persuade my self he will not be able to allege a president in the
whole Church of God. Well, the Vine being thus forsaken of his stay, the sheep
deprived of the care of his shepherd, as if with Daniel I had bin thrown into
the Lions den. Lord, whose tongues were not untyed? whose teeth not sharpened
against me? Imo and in me psallebant qui bibebant vinum. Well, I then found by
experience what formerly I had heard: That a man may live without father or
mother, but not without Justice. So then it happened. As concerning my books
unjustly detayned from me, no other remedy appearing, I repaired for justice
unto the present Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, to him I addressed my
petition. And by means of his honorable command, I recovered them out of the
hands of the injust detayners. But what follows upon this. Verily as the Poets
faigne, that in some storms all the winds have blown at one time, according
to that, Vna curusque, Notusque ruunt, etc. So now all the whole Regularisme of
this Kingdom from the four corners thereof; Monk, Dominican, Franciscan,
Augustine, Carmelite, Capuchin; Jesuit, with all their followers, God knows
what an hideous tempest they raise against one poor Priest, how they rage, how
they storm? And now the Friar Thom, Flemming who before had disclaymed me for
a sheep of his flock, and would intermeddle in no cause of mine with me, or
against me, begins to assume a-fresh his Episcopal jurisdiction over me, and
divulgeth me both in public and private assemblys, to be excommunicate, and
why forsooth? for bringing the Priest Brangan by a warrant (in the cause of my
books) before a secular Tribunal: Upon this, no man hence forward must eat or
drink with Paul Harris, no man may converse with him, no man must salute him,
or bid God save him. For why? Incidit in canonem. He is fallen within the
penalty of the Canon. Nay rather, Incidit in latrones, He fell into the hands
of a company of the eves, who wounding him, and leaving him half dead, he had
utterly perished, had not the good Samaritan taken compassion of him. Now
albeit I have handled this matter in my late answer unto Thom. Flemming his
Excommunication, yet for that this discourse draws me so aptly into the same
controversy (a point of such debate at this day twixt the Clergy and the
Regulars) it shall not be from the purpose to enlarge my self with some few
additions, to what in my former books has been delivered upon this Argument,
as in the Chap. following.

CAP. VII. The state of the Question is this: Whether in these Kingdoms under
the government of the King of Great Brittainy. A man conventing an
Ecclesiastical person in a cause merely civil before the tempotall
Magistrate, has ipso facto incurred Excom, De Iurc.
THe Bishop, (I will not say) with all his Clerks, but with all his Friars
maintaynes, the Artirmative. In confirmation whereof they all^dge those known
texts of the Canon and Councels, cap. sivero lo. primo (...) de sont, excom. e,
si Index leisus co tit. Lib. 6. in extr. Martim ad reprimendum, 11. q. 1. where
it is said that no Clarke may be convented before a secular judge either for
cause civil, or criminal. So Council. Chalcedonsan. 9. ^dgathense can, 32.
Carthag. 3. can. 9. etc. Bulla cene.

For answer herennto I say that those and diverse other texts out of the Canon
may be alleged to that purpose. For I acknowledge (as in my book unto the
Excommunication) that regularly speaking no ecclefiasticall person may be
convented, or empleaded before a temporal Judge in any cause ecclesiastical,
civil, or oriminall. Yet since humane laws are not obligatory till such time
as they be received, according to that. Leges institnuntur cum promulgantur,
confirmantur, dum approbantur Distinct in istis prox. Laws are then ordained
when they are published, but confirmed, when they are approved, yea and being
received, and approved, may not only by the Lawmakers be repealed, or by
privilege dispensed withal, but also by a contrary custom abrogated,
according to that Dilect. 4. de Arbitris, cap. 2. Extra. de Consuetudinibus.
Locorum consuetudines ubirationabiles sunt juri scripto derogare possunt. The
customs of places being reasonable may derogate from the law written, and such
is the doctrine of S. Aug. in his epistle ad Casulanum cited by S. Tho. 1.2. q.
97. ar. 3. Mos populi Dei, and instituta majorum prolege sunt tenenda, and
sicut prevaricatores legum divinarum, it a and contemptores consuetudinum
ecclesiasticarum coercendi sunt. The custom of Gods people, and the ordinances
of our ancestors are to be held for a law, and as the transgressors of divine
laws, so the contemners of ecclesiastical customs are to be punished. They
who desire more reason and authority for the confirmation of this point, let
them read the Angelical Doctor, 1. 2. q. 97.3. Also 2.2. q. 79.2. and q. 100.
2. and it has the consent of all Divines.

First then since it appears by the Registers of spiritual courts, that
ecclesiastical persons from time to time have been convented in cases
ecclesiastical before ecclesiastical Judges, as in matter of doctrine,
sacraments, benefices, tents. etc.

And secondly since it appears by the Registers of the same courts, to such
as will look into them, that ecclesiastical persons have usually been
convented in causes criminal before the said Tribunals, as felonies, rapes,
murders; etc. and either found innocent cleared, or guilty punished, and in
crimes capital degraded, and so delivered unto the secular arm.

And thirdly since it does not appear by any Register or other testimony to be
produced for these thousand years and upward, that any civil cause, as matter
of lands. In heritances, debts, leases, sales, rents, purchases, etc. have
been sued, or sentenced in any court of Bishops, Archdeacons, or their
officialls, by virtue of any ecclesiastical power, or jurisdiction whatsoever.
But of the contrary is manifest, and will well appear by the records of the
Kings Courts, by books of the common law, and their reports in every Kings
reign, that in the cases above mentioned, both Bishops, Priests, Abbots,
Priors, Superiors of Convents, in behalf of their subjects, and all sorts of
ecclesiastical persons, both male, and female, have had their trialls in the
aforesaid cases before the secular Tribunalls: (witness both the Canonist, and
the Common Lawyer) I say, these grounds considered, It is evident to any man of
common sense, and understanding, that either that Canon which in these civil
actions draws the plea unto the ecclesiastical court of Bishops, or any other
spiritual Judges, was either in these kingdoms never received: or if it were
at any time in observance, by custom beyond all memory was abrogated. Neither
need we to marvel thereat, for so much: as there wants not examples as well
as doctrines leading us thereunto.

For first, not to speak of the Canons of the late counsel of Trent. We see
the Bull of Pius quintus de Censibus in few places besides Italy, and Spain,
in viridi observantia, in due observance. And why? because it is not received.

What Canon or Law of the Church more general, then that diparitas cultus
derimit matrimonium. Difference of religion, that is where one party is a true
believer, the other an Infidel or heretic dissolveth matrimony. And yet Lib.
1. e 9. A^or. lib. 8. Mor. s. 11.^.5.
Becann^ the Jesuit tells us, that the Catholics of Germany marrying with the
Lutherans incur no such impediment, neither before nor after matrimony, And
why? Because (says he) that law of the Church was either among them never
received, or if so, by contrary custom abolished.

Again Panor with Felinus in e, vniver sitabis. As also Decius in e. dilectis
number. 3. de Appell. tells us, that such lay men as by command of the
Ecclesiastical ludge shall torture those whose persons are privileged from
violence by that Canon, Si quir suadome diabola, etc. or for correction and
punishment of their offenses, shall beat such Monks, or Friars with rods,
staves, or clubs, as well the ecclesiastical Judge so commanding, as the lay
persons executing his sentence, do both of them incur the Canon, and are
excommunicated ipso facto de Iure, And yet Graphius a grave writter, and a
monk of S. Benets order in his decisionibus aureislib. 2. cap. 49. excuses as
well the one, as the other, the Judge as the executioners, by reason of a
contrary custom practiced in France and now of late brought into Italy, and
maintains this custom contrary to the law, yea to be more reasonable then the
law it self, namely that men of the laity, rather then of the Glergy, should
be used as executioners in the aforesaid cases. Those who desire to set more
examples of this nature, let them read Sotus de Iure and Iustitia, Suarez, or
Lessius of the same Argument.

Now then to come home unto our case in hand, I mean, of civil causes
commenced, pleaded, and determined in the Kings Courts, the defendants being as
well ecclesiastical, as lay persons in these Kingdoms of Britanny. May we not
persuade our selves that a custom so universally received, and without
interruption continued since the Conversion of the Saxons under Pope Gregory
the great, and King Ethelbert of England, for the space of a thousand years
and upward, may not take place of the Canon that says, Priests in all causes
must be presented before ecclesiastical Judges. Cap. Qualiter de Iudicijs?
especially it being no less a law, and a Canon of the Church (as has been
before observed) That the customs of places being reasonable, may derogate
from the law written, Ext. de consuetudinibus, declared above by some examples.
Now then must I needs be foreed to beleev^^ that all our Kings, Bishops,
Nobles, Judges, and Magistrates, by whose authority Ecclesiastical persons
were convented in civil causes before secular Tribunals for a thousand years
and upward, did all live and dye excommunicated, thrown out of the Church, as
perished members, without hope of salvation, when as among our English Kings
themselves, six of them were canonized Saints, of which honor no other
kingdom of the earth can glory, namely, King Oswald, Etheldred, Edmund,
Richa^d, Edgar and Edward the Confessor, many Bishops, as S. Augustine, S.
Anselme, Dunsta^, Thomas all Archbishops of Canterbury, Richard of York,
Cutbe^t of Duresme, Thomas of Hereford, etc. Alas while these and the rest of
our country men were bound in the setters of Excommunication, where were our
gray and black Friars? and the other zealous Regulars, whose parts it was at
the least after their arrivellto have anmonished both prince, and people of
their errors, to have preached and published books, condemning that practice,
so co^ary to the laws (as these maintain) of holy Church, was the Pope and
Roman court also asleep, for so many ages? and would not inform their
spiritual children of so great a violation of the Canon had they misliked
thereof? Nay rather is it not the universal consent of all divines, together
with the Canon it self. That the permission of the Pope in any Church law,
seeing the same either from the beginning not to be observed, or by contrary
custom antiquated, and notwithstanding is silent, and makes no opposition
thereunto excuses the subject from sin, as presumed to approve and allow of
the said practice. See for this glan cap. in is it is. leges did. 4. and in c.
de treu. and pace, and in cap. cum multi 15. q. ult.

For so much then, as it is certain, that as well ecclesiastical as secular
superiors may oblige their subjects (albeit never so unwilling) to obey their
just laws, so often then as they see the same laws not to be observed, and
pass it over in silence, they sieme thereby contented therewithal, and such
silence, and taciturnity of the Lawgiver may by the subject according to the
former rules be expounded a full consent and approbation of his practice. Add
hereunto the observation of a late English Franciscan, whose true name I
understand is Dampart, and his usurped Franciscus a sincta Clara, in his late
book Deus, Natura, Gratia, in which as my country man Edmund Bunny labored in
his treatise tending to Pacification, to reconcile the Roman Catholics to the
Protestant profession. So this Friar of the contrary, by his glosses and
paraphrasticall expositions, labors to draw the Articles of the english
confession, to the Catholic and Roman doctrines. But let the Friar wring, and
wrest till he be weary, he shows himself but a time server, a slatterer, and
a mere Alchimist, adulterating both the doctrine of them, and us, and seeking
to please both, (a inst reward for such a work) contenteth neither, of whom it
may be said, as of the dead serpent stretched all along upon the grass. Amo
sic vixisse oportuit, yea so thou should have lived. The serpent all his
life long lives crooked, only after death is straight, so are many at this day
both in their lives and doctrines very crooked, only death teaches them how
they ought to have lived themselves, and how to have taught others, to the
example of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2. Non enim sumus sicut plurimi adulterantes
verbum Dei, sed ex sinceritate, etc. For we are not as very many adulterating
the word of God, but of sincerity, and as of God, before God in Christ we
speak.

Well I must not forget for all my digressio wherefore I brought the Friar upon
the stage namely for a testimony against his fellow Triars of this kingdom to
show how unlike to untuned Virginalis their wires do jangle: these maintaining
that civil actions against a Priest must be heard, and determined in the
Bishops consitory, the English Friar in the Kings courts, for which he
produces his authors. His words are as follow in his paraphrase upon the 27.
article, Confess. Anglicana. Regibus autem nostris fursse sic eoncessum jus
nominand^, and providendi, de beneficys testatur post alios Harp^feldius seculo
14 fursse etiam aliam consuct^^dinem ex privilegio ort am immemorialem causas
Clericorum cognoscendi, patet ex decisione Rotae, 804. ut communiter citatur.
To our Kings was granted the right of nomination, and provision of benefices,
as after others witnesses Harpsfeild in the 14. age. As also another custom
time out of mind sprung from a privilege of taking knowledge of the causes of
Clergy men, as appears by the decision of the Rota, as it is commonly cited.
So the English Friar. This Do. Harpsfeild, as I take it, was Archdeacon of
Canterbury in Queen Mary her days, and continued the ecclesiastical history
of England from Venerable Bode his time to his own. Decisiones Rota are the
very life, and quintessence of the Canon law, so called from a known office in
Rome called the Rota. But neither of these books are with me, for which I use
the Friars quotation.

And now the infirmity of my body not permitting me to proceed further, which
for the space of these 2. months has much afflicted me, and daily increasing
upon me, I am forced thus abruptly to break off rather then to make an end.
Beseeching almighty God of his infinite mercy to grant me, and all my
Adversaryes, and all those who profess the name of Jesus Christ to live and
dye in true faith, hope, and charity. And so hoping to see the good things of
our Lord in the land of the living, I take my leave of the world.

Mundus non mundar, sed mundus polluit. Ergo
Qui manet in mundo, Quomodo mundus erit!
But how truly may I say with old Tobias, Great art thou, O Lord, who do
wound and heal, who brings unto the gates of death, and back again, Tob. 13.
And so while yet we have time, operemnt bonum ad omnes, let us do good to all,
especially to the domestiques of faith, as the Apostle adviceth us. It being
the office of a good pastor, as well to seek the stray sheep, as to feed the
ninety and nine.

CAP. VIII. An Objection answered.
THere remains then a difficulty to be removed, for some will well allow of
my precedent discourse, were it not for one block which lies in their way,
confessing indeed, that in all causes merely civil Clerks were anciently
empleaded in the Kings temporal courts. Neither (say they) was this to be
misliked, so long as these kingdoms did stand constan^ in the profession of
the Catholic and Roman religion, but fince they have declined therefrom; and
that the Magistrates are now of an other opinion, and profession in the service
of God, then in those times they were. That of the Apostle seems to take place
writing to the Corinthians who having received the law of our Savior, did
notwithstanding in their wordly controversies draw one another unto the heathen
tribunals, Sic nonest inter vos sapiens quisquam? etc. So is there not among
you any wiseman that can judge between his brother? but brother with brother
contendeth in judgment, and that before unbeleivers. 1. Cor. 7. Now therefore
(say these men.) It is not lawful in these countries ( rebus sic stantibus) to
draw clergy men to the secular tribunals of Protestant judges.

To which I answer. That the Argument which concludes more then it ought, is
always vicious, and that reason which may be retorted upon the arguer, is
ever inconsiderately propounded. For if that passage of the Apostle were a
precept, and so binding under sin to obedience, then not only the
Ecclesiastique but the lay Catholic might not be compelled to answer before
such Magistrates, for so much as S. Paul speaks generally of all the faithful
without any distinction. And therefore our Rhemists according to the universal
consent of the fathers do understand the words of the Apostle in the nature of
a Council, and not of a command. And happy (I confess) it were, if that
Apostolical council and advice were followed, namely that controversies and
suits 'twixt parties, which are many times commenced for light causes, and more
out of stomach, malice, and revenge, then of good conscience, might be
composed at home by friends, and neighbors, sine strepitu forens^, without
this lawyerly pleading at the Bar, the benefit whereof is commonly small and
uncertain, but the discommodityes both great, and apparent, as loss of time,
expense of money, with much disquietnesse and vexation of mind. But this is a
happiness rather to be wished, then ever to be expected among such variety of
wills, hnmours, and dispositions, as the world more then ever abounds withal.
But to hold it absolutely unlawful for Christians to wage law before public
tribunalls as it is at this day the heresy of the Anabaptists. So to deny that
the Roman Catholics may convent or be convented in the courts of such
magistrates under whom they live, notwithstanding what difference soever in
matter of religion, smells very strong of the heresy of Wicliffe condemned in
the Council of Constance. For So Much as it is the consent of all divines, that
no variety of opinion, no error in faith, no infidelity destroys or takes away
the power of the civil magistrate, either supreme, or subordinate. Such
obedience then as heretofore was due unto Catholic princes by their subjects,
the same is no less due unto their successors of what opinion in matters of
faith soever they be. Religion being but accidental and not at all essential
unto civil principality ordained by God for the politic and peaceable
government of mankind, according to that: Per me Reges regnant, and legam
conditores justadesernunt. Prove. 8. By me Kings reign, and those who make
laws determine just things. If then clergy men were lawfully convented in
civil actions before Catholic princes, and Magistrates, in times past (as
has been proved) so no less also may they be before Protestants at this
day, and the contrary doctrine of our Friars and their followers, is but a
corner doctrine, and of no good subjects. And if not of their own choice and
free election, it were both good for the Church and common wealth and also for
themselves, that they might be forced both to live and teach conformable to
their holy institutes, and so happily there would be an end of all
Controversies 'twixt the Clergy and them.

An Epistle of the Author unto Thomas Flemming alias Barnwell Archbishop of
Dublin.
AS I began with an Epistle unto Pope Vrbanus 8. now sitting at the helm of S.
Peter's Barque. So it will not be impertinent by reason of some late occurents
to conclude with an Epistle unto Tho. Flemming Archbishop of Dublin in the
behalf of the poor distressed Clergy of his Diocese. If any marvel
wherefore I do address my letters unto him rather in print, then in private,
the cause is, (as I have declared in the 6. chap.) That upon what humor, or by
whose persuasion I know not, he refuses to receive any letter from me, sent
unto him by any private messenger. Yet what I publish in print, I find that he
most diligently peruseth. Now for that my desire is, he should read what I
write, whether I be his friend, (as I persuade my self I am.) Or his Adversary
(as he supposes,) yet even from an Adversary some benefit may be reaped. Else
had Plutarch never writ his book, Deutilitate ab inimico capienda. Of the
commodity to be made of an enemy. Nor ever had S. Monica the mother of that
great S. Aug. been taught to drink water, had not her shrewd may de in her
anger called her a wine bibber, as S. Aug. himself tells us in the 9. book of
his Confess. chap. 8. You see then how I endeav our to comply with the
Archbishops humor, and that to the example of diverse holy, and learned men,
who have divulged unto the world those very same Epistles which they have
directed unto particular persons without any private mission, or signature
sometimes commending their good actions, sometimes reproving their bad. So S.
Hicrom, so S. Bernard admonishing not only Bishops, and Abbates, but even
Popes, and princes of their excesses. But it will be said that they were
Saints, and I a poor sinner: yet (say I) they were not known by that style,
when they wrote those Epistles, but with much more humility then doubtless is
in me, they confessed themselves to be sinners, and so of sinners became
Saints. But to our purpose.

S. Paul writing unto Titus whom he had made Bishop tells him, that therefore
he left him in Crete to place Priests by cittyes as he appointed him. Tit. 1.
5. and in the same chap. he shows of what quality and condition those Priests
should be. Me thinks in S. Paul I hear the Apostolical father Pope Vrbanus 8.
commanding Tho. Flemming whom he made Archbishop, and sent into Ireland, that
he should make and constitute priests in his dio esse. And so indeed, it
cannot be denied but he has done, for besides what has passed in the country,
we observe that in this city of Dublin in place of F. Tho. Coil Pastor of S.
Michaells, and in place of F. Luke Rochfort, sometimes pastor of S. Andeons he
has constituted F. Patricke Brangan and F. Edmund Doyle (I say) upon the
decease of the 2. former, who in their life time conversed with such
commendations in the house of God, which is his Church, as they have left
behind them a sweet odor, as well of their pastoral, as personal virtues
among us, insomuch as their names and memoryes remain grateful to posterity.
Now if those their successors before mentioned do in all vigilance, charity,
chaslity, sobriety, and longanimity, aemulate their predecessors, then neither
will the Archbishop I know, who designed them unto those eminent places the 2.
eyes of his episcopal See, nor the present Incumbents themselves be offended
with me, for inserting their names into this my Epistle, neither need they to
blush, or be ashamed thereof, for so much as the Apostle says that such
Priests as govern well their flocks are worthy of double honor especially
they who labor in the word and doctrine, and to whom, no doubt it shall be
said in that day, Euge serve bone and fidelis quia in pauca fuisti fidelis,
etc. Well done good and faithful servant, for that thou have been faithful in
small matters, I will set thee over great, enter into the joys of thy Master.
And so much for those 2. Rectories or pastorships, conferred as we have seen
by the Ordinary, and upon what persons.

Now so it happened again as within these few weeks a third parish also became
vacant by the decease of the late Incumbent Fa. William Donagh in S. Thomas
street the suburbs of Dublin. And it is worthy our consideration to observe
how our Archbishop ever like himself proceeded in the collation thereof. We
find that Popes sometimes by way of provision, as the Canonists term it, to
places of great dignities, as Archbishopricks, and the like have in the life
time of the Incumbents nominated their successors, who upon the vacansie, were
to take possession of them. So (I take it) that Anselmus, and after him
Lanfrancus was preferred to the Sea of Canterbury. To which imitation happily
Tho. Flemming. Diocesian of Dublin (either to show the superaboundance of his
pastoral care, or else to let the world understand how little he regards what
opinion his clergy conceives of him) made a designation of 4. several Priests
to that one Pastorship, the profit whereof will hardly pay for a man's chamber
and diet by the year, and this he did during the life of the Incumbent, who
deceasing, one of the 4. enjoyes it, the other 3. are frustrated, and what
conceive they of this their Archbishops dealing, but that they were merely
deluded, and gulled by him, pretending great care of their preferment, and
minding no thing less. Sure if a farmer of Fing all shall pass his promise in
any matter of moment unto 4. of his neighbors, which can be made good but unto
one, I wot well he shall be called but a couzening churl. If a Gentleman or a
noble man shall do the like, men's censures happily may be more civil in
terms, but their opinions not a whit the better. For as their equals will
disrespect them, so their inferiors will be sure to set their black marks
upon them. But for a man not only of a noble family, but a Priest, and an
Archbishop whose persons are held sacred, to be found either with guile in
their lips, or gifts in their hands, What can we say? but listing up our voice
with our Savior in admiration. Filius hominis veniens putas inveniet fidem in
terra? Luke 18. The Son of man coming do you think he will find Faith upon
earh.


It is not I. It is not I. who reveiles pudenda mei patris. No, no I would be
sorry so to do, but even Sem and Iaphet, no less then Cham have done it.
Decantant^r per vrbem in trivys and compitis, in all conversations, his
letters, his firmes, his seals, his subscriptions are read, are perused, are
seen, are censured, For so it follows.

To his loving friend, M. James Archbald these be delivered.
Dear father, Send for Fa. De lamar, and deliver him this enclosed, and let
him by his friends labor to get the good Will of the best of the parish, in
case Fa. William dies, as you write he is like to do, but let none see the
enclosed until he dies, and let not Fa. William know of it, fearing to trouble
the good man, whom God comfort, as wishes your assured. Tho. Barnwell. This
present Sunday.


The Letter enclosed in the former, is, as follows.

To his very loving friend, M. Martin Delamar. these at Cromlin be delivered.
LOving Fa. To my great grief, I understand, Fa. William Donough to be
dangerously sick, I pray you look to him, and his parish, and if God do call
him to himself, I do hereby give your R. in that parish the same power to
minister pastoral sacraments, and use pastoral function, as he formerly had,
but I hope God will lend him a little longer unto us. His holy will be done.
Recommend the next pare of your parish to Cromlin to Fa. Ri. Glackney the rest
near Palmerston to Fa. Quin, until I think further of the matter. So
desiring God to assist good Fa. William, I rest your assured. Tho. Barnwell.
April 20. 1634.


Notwithstanding the Priest Dela Mar, forall these fair promises made unto him
in his letter, was disappointed of the Parish, and another placed therein. And
it seems albeit the Archbishop subscribed the letter he writ him. Your
assured Thomas Barnwell yet it was but a complementall and a ceremonious
assurance. For the good priest found it nothing real at all, as the event
proved. Some are of opinion that when the Archbishop intends otherwise then he
writes, he then subscribes Tho. Barnwell, but when he writes as he intends,
then he subscribes his letters, Tho. Flemming, Is ne animis calestibus astus?
May we think such heathenisme to rule in heavenly minds? O no! charity would
make a more pious construction of such a prelates actions. Wherefore I am
rather persuaded that the Archbishop never fails to make good his word or
promise unto any (of which from time to time I confess, he is more challenged
then all the Bishops in Ireland) (I say) that he never violateth or breaks
the same, either as he is Tho. Flemming, or Tho. Barnwell, or as he is of a
noble house, or as he is a Priest, or as he is an Archbishop, but only as he
is a Friar, to which sort of people, either lying is essential, or sure in
many men's opinions proper, quarto mode, and even in the Judgment of that most
pious and learned Monk Tho. Walsingham speaking of the Friars in these words
(not now first by me alleged) In tantum etenim illam veritatis professionem
suam perverse vivendo macularunt, ut in dicbus is it is in one cujustibet bouwn
set argumentum, teneus tam de forma, quam materia. His est frater; Ergo mendax.
sicut and illud. Hoe est album: Ergo coloratum. They have in such sort stained
that their profession of truth by their unhappy living, that in these days in
every ones mouth it is a good Argument, holding as well in form as matter.
This fellow is a friar, Ergo a liar. Even as to say. This thing is white, and
therefore has a color. So Tho. Walsingham in the reign of Richard 2. fol.
266.

But some will say Cuibonam? To what end should the Archbishop use such
doubling, or to whose benefit in conferring of benefices are the waters
always so troubled among us? I answer, therein lies a mystery not yet
reveiled unto babes. You know S. Paul wishes that in the Churchall things be
done Ad adificationem, I. Cor. 14. and so it is with us, but how? Ad
adificationem Regularium, to the building up of the Friars Monarchy, and
destruction of the Clergy, for this is the common Antiphona sung in the Irise
Church in these days, Up with the Friars: and, Down with the Priests. Now for
our Archbishop albeit unto strangers, and such of the laity as take no notice
of his proceedings, these things are hidden and obscure, yet the Priests of the
Hierarchy who have summered and wintered him now these ten years, do
feelingly understand the drice of his designs. Neither in any thing does he
more service unto the Regular orders then to make these embroylements in the
conferring of pastorships.

For first by these anticipate promises of one parish unto many (none
suspicious of any promise made unto other then himself) our prelate observes,
which of them is most serviceable and dutiful unto his Friars, which of them
is the best benefactor with their friends to him, and his order, which of them
is likest to prove a Johannes ad oppositum to the rest of his own body, and to
prove the most factious against the Clergy, in siding with the Friars on whom
henceforward he is to have his whole dependence.

Secondly, by this precollation of benefices unto many, sede nondum vacant the
Ordinary finds which of them is like to prove the most gracious unto the
parishioners and which of them is the most like to draw the good liking, love
and affection, of the laity unto him. For that priest shall be assured
(notwithstanding all his golden promises) to go without the parish. For it is
against the Friars greatness that any should be more pleasing unto the people
then their selves.

Thirdly, by this conferring of Cures aforehand unto diverse parties ignorant
one of another. It may be expected that every one of them armed with a promise
from the Bishop and he happily a far off in some friary in the country when
they fall void, that these competitors may enter into some scandalous
contestation one with another, every one thinking himself wronged by the other,
an occasion which the Friars will not omit to take hold of, to traduce them
both in private and public assemblyes, and for their sakes the rest of the
Clergy as men seditious, factious, contentious, covetuous, especially to and
before the laity, and all to alienate their minds from them, like unto greedy
millers every one striving to draw the grise unto their own mills,
notwithstanding that the same Friars have been the plotters and incentors of
all those differences.

Lastly, let it be always remembered as a golden rule and the most principal
maxim of their policy, that the most insufficient pretender of any cure be
the man that shall be ever preferred: experience by induction of examples has
furnished us with that knowledge, for a Priest whom God has blessed with
talents of learning and good parts is an Aristides, not fit to live in Athens,
but rather to be banished per ostracismum, For it is concluded by our Regular
Bishops that the Friars must shine amidst such blind curates, Tanquam lunainter
minora sidera, like the moon among the lesser stars.

You see my Lo. I am no flatterer, neither is the discontent of missing a
benefice under you that makes me so plain with you, for notwithstanding that I
have lived in this kingdom now very near these twenty years, you know
neither myself, nor any other for me, did ever motion such a business unto you.
And albeit (I hear) some have wished you to thrust a steeple into my mouth,
and thereby to silence me, yet (I ingenuously confess) sooner should old
Eleazarus eat swines flesh, then that I would swallow the same; Not but that to
be a pastor of souls is an honorable vocation in Gods Church, but that I am
now too old, to be a Friars horseboy. No, no let us have no new fashions in
church government, the old is the best, and such as was ordained by our
Savior. Let us keep our old priests, and send back these swarms of friars
over unto their monasteries where they may live according unto their holy
Institutes, and not here to vagabu^dare per tabernas and popinas, selling their
merits, their prayers, their penances and mortifications, yea not only of their
own persons, but of their whole orders, and that under large sealed patents,
unto Cooks for diet, to merchauts for broad cloth suits, to gentlemen for
horses, etc. besides oppressing a poor country with such shameless begging, as
little differs from mere rapine and extortion. The church may subsist, yea,
flourish without friars, but not without priests, as for many ages it has
done. For be they white, black, or gray, they are of a latter institute then
the priests, these being the successors of the Apostles, and the 42. disciples,
they of S. Francis, Dominick and Ignatius. and of a distinct hierarchy. If I be
a John Baptist and preach in the wilderness without profit: That is not my
fault, but the fault of them that will not amend their faults. It were more
pleasing and contentfull to me to come in spiritu lenitatis, in the spirit of
mildness, then in the rod of correction. If the subject were so disposed. Let
those for whose good I take all these pains both in health and sickness,
reform their manners, and I will soon alter both my voice and style, and I
wish with all my heart that I had cause to say with The Apostle, If I have made
you sad, either by my books, or by my Epistle, it repents me not, for that
you were so made sad unto repentance. Well to conclude all in oneword. Paul may
plant and Apollo may water, but God is he, who gives the increase, to whose
blessings I humbly commend these my poor endeavors, my self, my friends, my
persecutors.

From the Cell of my solitary recollection, who wishes your-Hon:
all-happinesse PAUL HARRIS. Pr.


I Hear, that some of our divines (if worthy that name) take great exceptions
unto me, for calling the Catholic Bishops of Ireland, Titulary Bishops, by
which term they understand no true Bishops at all. But sure if I had been
able to have put wit into their heads as well as a book into their hands, they
had been freed from that error. Let them then consult with the Canon, or if
they have it not, let them look into Bellar. de Clericis lib. 1. cap. 17. And
they will find this to be a good argument, teneus tam de (...) qua^ de
materia. Hic est episcopus titularis. Ergo verus: even as that. Hic est
parochus. Ergo presbiter. But I am no better then my predecessors, as many as
have exposed themselves to public consures by their writings. For all of us
may say with Terentianus Manrus.

Pro captu lectoris habene sua fata libelli.

PAge 28. lin. 2. read a thousand owo hundred. page 29. lin. 20. for cis, read
ea. page 49 for Patricke, read Patriarch. page 88. lin. 21. for unlike, read
like.


