CONFORMITY with PIETY, requisite in GODS Service. Delivered in a Visitation
Sermon at Kingston upon Thames September 8. 1638.

By William Hardwick Priest and Curate of Reigate, in Surry.

Sint unum, Doceant unum, fateantur et unum;
Vnum qui a Christi nomine nomen habent.
LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks for Richard Cartwright and are to be sold at his
shop in Duck lane next Smithfield. 1638.

To the most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England and Metropolitan, Chancellor of the University of
Oxford, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
Most Reverend father in God,
I Know your Grace cannot but wonder, that so mean a person every way as my
self, and one altogether unknown to your Grace, should presume to offer so
poor a Sermon to your sacred hands: neither am I ignorant how much this my
ambition will expose me to further Censure: But God Almighty knows, it is not
your greatness, but exemplary Piety and goodness, which has imboldned me to
shroud these Papers under your Graces Wings. And' it is no small encouragement to
me, to hear how ready your Grace is, not only to countenance the Labors of
the Learned of the times, but also the meanest endeavors of the poorest
Priests, who aim at the peace of Holy Church, whose Dignity, next under our
Blessed Savior, and our pious Sovereign, your Grace, to the admiration of all
men, continually seeks to Advance. This your Graces Charity toward Others,
has made me to adventure to cast this Sermon at your Graces feet: which as it
aims at, what your Grace delights in, Piety and Conformity, so in all humility
it begs your Paternall Benediction; which if it have the happiness to Obtain,
I doubt not but the Reader shall find no small benefit by it: And I the meanest
of those who wait on Gods sacred Altar, shall daily solicit the throne of
Mercy for your prosperous success in the affairs of the Church Militant, that
so, when you shall have finished your Course, your Grace may be crowned with
glory in the Church Triumphant: and this shall ever be the prayer of

your Graces in all humility, William Hardwick.

Conformity with Piety, Requisite in Gods Service.
Psalm. 119. 125. I am thy Servant, give me understanding, that I may know thy
testimonies.
WHosoever he be, Be he of what state or condition soever, so long as he lives
here, he is but a servant; and if it be his happiness to be admitted a Saint
in Heaven, He is ushered in with that Title, Euge bone et fidelis serve, Matt.
25.
well done thou good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy. But
here, I must confess, we are not a little puzzled about the choice of our
service; for though in our Baptism we did most solemnly renounce the service
of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, yet by our practice All of us do
declare that we have still a liking to each of them: the Flesh has some; the
World others: I will not say the Devil has most; yet thus much I dare say,
that they who have wholly given up themselves to the service of the Flesh and
the World, shall at length by woeful Experience find that Capiet omnia
Demon, The Devil will have All. Well, though it be thus with most, yet the
Saints of God have made another choice: for look but upon this our David, who
having had some knowledge of the world, and not a little trial of the flesh,
and oftentimes having been foiled by Satan, yet by the mercy of God, on the
one side, and his own hearty repentance on the other, he frees himself from
their (service I will not call it, but) slavery. And now finding Almighty God,
really to be his God, he binds himself (as it were) Apprentice to him; and as
in other places, so here he acknowledges himself his, and none but his
servant: Servus ego tuus, I am thy Servant, etc.

Not to trouble you with a large Discourse of the book of Psalms in general,
or of this so large and pithy a Psalm in particular; which, in the judgment
of St. Ambrose, excels the rest as fane, is the light of the Sun exceedes
the light of the Moon: I come rather to the Text it self, uttered by one, who
was no less a King than a Prophet: And as he was a Prophet, and a good
Prophet, not unworthy the imitation of us, the sons of the Prophets, and of
all those likewise who bear any affection or good will, either to Prophets, or
Prophets Children.

In the Words two things offer themselves to our Consideration. First, our
Prophets profession, I am thy Servant. Secondly, his petition, Give me
understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

In his Profession we are to consider two things: First, his Condition; Servus,
he was a Servant: Secondly, cujus, whose servant he professed himself to be,
Tuus, thy Servant.

Then in his petition, we are to consider the thing prayed for: Understanding.
Secondly, the means of attaining it, and that is by way of gift: Da
intellectum, give me understanding. Lastly, we have the end why he prays for
this gift of understanding, and that is, that he may know the testimonies of
his God. These are the particulars, which by Gods assistance, I am come to
treat of at this time: Wherefore relying both on your patience and charity,
with as much brevity as may be of each of them. First, therefore of the first,
our Prophets Profession, and in that too first of his Condition, servus, I am a
Servant.

If you please to peruse the Scriptures, those sacred Oracles of our God, ye
shall find, that it has ever been the humble acknowledgement of the Saints,
that they are Servants: who, though they have been advanced in Church and
Commonwealth, and so distinguished from inferior people, by gracious and
honorable Titles, yet with none of them were they more delighted, than with
this of Servant: for the present, our Prophet makes this good: For it is not Rex
ego, or Propheta ego, I am a King, or I am a Prophet: but servus ego, I am a
servant. As much likewise appears by the Apostles; who, for the most part,
assume this title of Servant, and in a manner prefer it before that of
Apostle: for this they usually mention first: as Romans 1. Paul, a servant of
Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle. So likewise 2. Pet. 1. Simon Peter, a
servant, and an Apostle. Doubtless, they had no small honor in being
Apostles, but yet their Happiness they accounted Greater in being the servants
of Jesus Christ. Damnatus Apostolorum unus, servorum nullus: One of the
Apostles was cast off, never any of Gods servants so: Thus likewise Prophets
have bin excluded, Heaven has been shut against some of them: what though
they have thought to justify themselves with their Lord, Lord, we have
prophesied in thy name? Yet this has not served their turn, for they have
been dismissed with a Non novi vos, discedite, I know you not, depart from me
ye workers of iniquity. But never were servants used thus: and therefore in
this Title the Saints have taken more comfort, and have had more confidence
then in any other: Servus, says our Prophet here, I am a servant.

Here then taken notice we may of our Condition: what though many of us are
preferred to places of Eminency, and to put a luster on our Glory, are Graced
with Titles answerable to our place? yet for all this, 'twill not be amiss,
amidst them all, to take this along with us, that we are none other then
servants likewise: ye cannot imagine how this will let out the Apostumated
matter of Pride, which otherwise may swell and burst us. Humane frailty is
such, that men are apt to be enamoured of their Advancement, and if they have
bin so happy, as to gain a popular applause, this their supposed Happiness,
if they have not somewhat to keep them under, may prove their ruin and
destruction: From which fearful downfall that we may be secure, 'twill not (I
say) be amiss, while we are in the height of our Happiness to reflect now and
then upon this our Condition to which we are subjected: Servi sumus, we are
servants.

But why this here, may some say: are there any so ignorant as not to know
this? who so stupid, as not to acknowledge it? This is the voice of men of all
ranks: all men acknowledge themselves servants: And, your Servant, and at your
service are the ordinary Parenthesis of our Discourse: Nay, the whole World is
come to that pass, that many will not only conclude of themselves that they
are Servants, but also in a contemptible manner reflect upon others, and in a
sordid and base way use many, and those (I may say) their betters, none
otherwise then as Servants, and it is well, if not worse: should I instance in
our selves, in men of our own Tribe, 'twill (I fear) be to too apparent. Many
of which, though they are such, whose Deserts might challenge an awful respect
unto their persons, yet in the opinion of many none more contemptible, none
more despised then they. We, beloved, with such are serve(...), the only
Servants, yea, Hirelings, nay what not? poor Micajah the parson of the parish,
if he be fed with the bread of Affliction, and with the Water of Affliction;
it is enough for him: A stool, a Table, and a Candlestick are a Competency: As
for Reverence and Respect to his person, they are Works of Supererogation, and
have been along since banished hence with Popery. And indeed, thus it has
been in all Ages. The Apostle Saint Paul observed as much in his time: 1 Cor.
4.13.
We are (says he) made the filthiness of the World, and the of-scouring of
al things. Thus, should we descend to this present day, and trace the times as
Historians have recorded them, we should find even the choycest of Gods
Prophets, by many accounted no better. I am sure for the present, none more
censured, none more neglected, none more vilified, none more slighted in many
places, than we of the Clergy be. And as for that Title wherewith Almighty Ged
has been pleased to grace us: that same Title of ours (I say) is not
mentioned but in derision: every ignorant and profane wretch has the name of
Priest in his mouth, which with a kind of scumme he casts into the faces of
those, who profess this sacred function: nay farther, such is the impudency of
the Age, that he now a days is accounted a Wit of the times, who Libells, or
envies most against the Fathers of the Church: the best of whom, are in the
account of these men, none other than mean servants; not as David here
acknowledged himself, but in their own phrase and meaning, an unworthy, an
undeserving generation, which the world could better spare than any other
profession whatsoever. But to stop the mouths of such prophaners of God, his
servants, and his Ordinances, let them but take along with them the Cujus, the
next thing to be considered, and then, though servants we be, yet not Servants
of so small account, as they would willingly have us, being we are servants
only of our God: servus tuns, I am thy servant, that is the next.

A servant (ye see) this our Prophet was, but not every ones: it is servus
tuns. Indeed, in some respects we may be rearmed your Servants, as the Angels
themselves are: But this service of theirs and ours to you, is but a branch of
that service which we owe unto our God. 2 Cor. 4.5.
We preach (says the Apostle) not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and
our selves your servants, for Jesus sake: so that all the service we do to
you, is with reference to our Lord and Master, Christ Jesus; none otherwise we
owe, none otherwise we perform: Almighty God is our Master, and his servants
the Saints have only professed themselves to be. David here would adhere to none
other, none other Master would he acknowledge: Tuns, I am thine. Psalm. 89.
I have found David my Servant, (says God) with much holy Oil have I
anointed him. There God had chosen David, wherefore David, as in other places,
so here, to show what liking he had to his Master, professes himself to be
his Servant; servus tuns, I am thy Servant.

Now this was his reference to God, to be his Servant; and indeed not a man
living, but in a sort may be said to be Gods servant. But yet there are some
who are servants in a nearer kind: as namely, those whom he has set on work
to some choice and notable designement, either in the Church, thus St. Paul
says of himself, Romans 1. That he was a servant of Christ, set apart to the
preaching of the Gospel, or in the Commonwealth: Thus is this our Prophet
marked out, (as I showed you but now) I have found David my servant: Now these
are not only Gods Subjects, over whom he rules (...), by general command, as
a King: but they are also men of his Household, whom he governes (...), by
special power, as a Master: so that in this respect, David, and other, the
Saints of God, whom he publicly imployes in his services, in a special
manner are termed his Servants.

Hence then we may see both our Dignity, and our Duty: our Dignity first, in
that we are admitted to be Gods Servants in such a manner. Should any of us be
entertained as Servants to our Sovereign, how would we think our selves
graced? how honored? Why behold, beloved, He whom we serve is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, and one, at whose feet all the Princes, and mighty ones of
the earth must cast their Scepters. Why therefore should any of us be
dejected, having such a Master? certainly, if our Consciences can assure us,
that our God called us to serve at his Altar, we cannot but be happy, we
cannot but be honorable. What though some Currish Doegs malign the Priests,
and endeavor to bring them into contempt? yet God and good men will ever
honor them, and hat for their works sake. And truly our gracious God, for
the better entertainment of his message brought by us, has ever graced us with
Noble Titles: though we in Humility are to acknowledge our selves, with this
our Prophet, Servants: yet our God will have us reputed as his Ambassadors,
and as shining Stars; yea, as Angels. Thus has he (whatsoever the world
thinks to the contrary) provided for us, who are employed in this so sacred a
business, as the Ministry is; nay, not the meanest of his servants shall be
neglected; our Savior says as much: Ioh. 1^.26.
If any man serve me, him will my Father honor.

The consideration of which in the next place should put us in mind of our
Duty. Servus est nomen officij: the very name of servant implies some duty to
be performed. Wherefore if ye please to call to mind what ye expect of your
servants, ye may in a manner perceive, what God requires of you.

Now two things there are, which we principally commend in our servants;
Obedience and Reverence: idle and saucy servants we account unworthy the
meanest wages. Why, beloved, the same our God requires of us, both Priest and
People; all of us must be obedient, all of us must be Reverent. We that are his
Priests, must ever be in a readiness to do our Masters service; so that when
he shall be pleased to acquaint us with his will, and shall command us to
feed his flock, and to tell Judah her sins, and Israel her transgressions:
we must not then linger like Lot in Sodom, nor loiter by the way, now framing
one excuse, then another: But to our business we must go, our task we must
take in hand, be it never so hard, never so difficult: knowing that there is a
Vae, Icre. 48.10.
a woe unto those who do the work of the Lord negligently, or with Saint Paul,
Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero, 1 Cor. 9.16.
Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel.

And no less a curse hangs over the head of the Laity, if they be negligent:
for as we of the Clergy must show our obedience to our Master by declaring his
will to you, so must you show your obedience by submitting your selves to the
will of God, not only hearing, but doing of his word: It rests in you to obey
the form of Doctrine which ye are taught, when with the Bereans ye have
sought and found it to be true, and no way repugnant to Holy Writ. Oh, beloved,
when your consciences tell you, that ye are guilty of such sins, which ye
hear at any time taxed in the Pulpit, whether they be sins of blood, or
sins of uncleanness, or sins of discontent, sins of muttering and
murmuring against the God of Heaven, and his Vicegerent here on earth: In a
word, whatsoever sins they be, your obedience cannot better be showed, than
by your Repentance for that which is past, and your pious reformation and
amendment for the time to come; all which are the true signs of obedience, and
by which alone the servants of God are discovered really to be his.

Neitheir is here all; besides our Obedience, Reveverence also is expected.
Thus much we expect from our servants, and thus much God expects from us; as
Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father, where is mine Honor? If I be a Master, where is my
fear? says the Lord of Hosts. Who is he amongst us, that has the spirit of a
man within him, that will suffer his servant to be Haile-fellow with him, to
sit cheek by jole by him, or to sit covered in his presence? now, cannot we
brook this dis-respect in our servants, be they never so faithful? and think
ye that our God, when we are performing any part of his service, especially
when we are here in his house, his presence Chamber; think ye (I say) that our
God will take this our malepart behavior well at our hands? What do ye talk
of Gods requiring only our hearts? ye are mistaken, God requires as well our
Hats, our Knees, and our whole bodies: surely if God requires our hearts,
which are our chiefest parts wherewith we do him service, he does then
comprehend all the rest, which are inferior and less noble.

But alas, these he shall hardly get of any of us, in these so nice and wanton
times: The practices of too too many confirm this, whose irreverence in the
Holy Assembly is so apparent, as if they had none other conceit of their God,
than that he is an Idol of the Heathens, which has ears, and hears not;
eyes, but see not: Here, here in the Church (with grief of soul I speak it)
we, may to too often discover some laughing, others prating; some Courting,
others barganing, so that St. Chrysostomes complaint may well be taken up in
these days: Hom. 24. in Act.
Alios video stare, and nugari, dum preces fiunt; neque solum dum preces fiunt,
sed and dum sacer dos benedicit: nescis quod cum Angelis stas? cum illis
cantas? cum illis hymnos dicis? and stas Ridens? non mirum esset, si fulmen
emitteretur non solum in eos, sed etiam in nos, digna enim fulmine sunt hae.
Some (says he) I behold trifling or toying, when others at prayers; and not
only thus in prayer time, but also when the Priest is pronouncing the
blessing: what, know thou not that thou stand with Angels? and that thou
singest Hymns and Psalms with them? and stand thou laughing? It were no
wonder, if thunder should be cast, not only on those, but also on us, for
these things, such irreverence as this deserves such a judgment. And again
the same Father: Stat sacerdos Dei orationem offerens cunctorum; tu autem
rides, nihil timens non contremiscis? non collegis teipsum: in anlam Regiam
intraturus, and habitu and oculis and incessu componis te and exornas: Huc
antemintraturus, ubi est Aula Regis coelestis, rides, garris, ambulas,
negotiaris. Gods Priest stands offering up the prayers of the people, and what
do thou laugh, fearing nothing? What do thou not tremble? do thou not
recollect thy self? Were thou to enter into the Kings Court, thou would have
a care both of thy Habit, and thy whole carriage, but when thou come
hither, where the Court of the King of Heaven is kept, thou laughest, thou
talkest, thou walk, and art otherwise uncivilly busied. But what (think ye)
is the cause of this irreverence of ours? if you please, I will tell you what I
conceive:

There is a Conclusion highly cried up amongst us, and which has oftentimes
been objected to me, and it is this: That Churches are none other than ordinary
and common places, but only in time of Divine Service. For my part, I confess
ingenuously, I cannot but blush to hear such an unsavory assertion to
proceed from any mouth, which makes a profession of Christ and Christian
Religion: Oh Beloved, shall we who are Christians, belch out that against the
House of our God, which never any Pagan did against the Temple of his feigned
Deity? Blessed Brethren! are not these Houses always separated to a holy use?
set apart to a holy employment? do not sins of Theft, or of uncleanenesse,
etc. committed in them, appear with a far more ghastly and horrid
countenance, than if they had been committed in other places? In a word, when
we set our feet on these sacred pavements, do not these stones we tread on,
put us in mind of our duty, as that we have holy thoughts, holy gestures?
'Twere a happiness, not to be expressed, could we at all times, and in all
places have holy thoughts of our God: which, because our weakness is such that
we cannot, Almighty God has appointed set times, and set places for the
performing these holy Duties. Now the place appointed for Gods public worship,
is the Church; now, what a Church is, Hom. 36. in 1. Cor.
Saint Chrysostom tells us: Non est Ecclesia tonstrina, aut vnguentaria
taberna, aut Officina forensis; sed locus Angelorum, Regia Coeli, Coelum ipsum.
The Church is no Barbers or Apothecaries shop, it is no Westminster or
Guild Hall, but the place of Angels, the Court of Heaven, yea, Heaven it self:
into the which when the Saints heretofore entered, what prostrations, what
incurvations did they use? Oh how they did bedew the pavements with their
Tears! Thus reverent were the Saints, the Servants of God, in the House of
their gracious Master. And indeed, why should they not? for Nature it self
teaches no less; Never Pagan entered into the Temple of his Idol, but with
Reverence, and what now? Shall Idols have this, and not the Living God? shall
Heathens be reverent, and not Christians? Let no man torture himself with a
causeless fear of Superstition in being thus Reverent, in the holy
Assemblies. Indeed, were our Reverence tendered to the walls, or to some
Image, or Crucifixe, or the like, there were too apparent cause of fear; but
whereas our Reverence is tendered only to God himself, I see no reason at all
in the world, why we should not use all Reverence that possible may be in this
House of God. Wherefore, ye that are fearful of Superstition, let me desire
you to be as fearful of profaneness; fall not into the one, by flying from
the other. Now for Christians to tread in Gods Courts, without putting of their
Hats, bending their bodies, bowing their knees, and other the like gestures of
Reverence, if this be not outward profaneness, I seriously profess, I know not
what profaneness is.

Yea, but may some say, This outward Reverence may shelter much hypocrisy, and
therefore why should it be so much urged, as now a days it is?

I answer, suppose it does; suppose, many may draw near to God with their
lips, when their hearts are far from him; as also sit here with their heads
uncovered, when their Hearts are at home shut up in their chests, or otherwise
gone after their covetousness; what of all this? shall (say I) the Hypocrisy
of some make others irreverent? God forbid: For my part, when I come into a
Church, and there behold a poor sinner kneeling upon his knees, weeping with
his eyes, and with an humble and lowly Reverence both petitioning and hearing
his God, my charity bids me think the best, as how that these shows are not
without substance, because I know no other; it being a peculiar privilege and
prerogative of Almighty God to be (...), a knower, a searcher of the Heart: But
again, let me see a man here sitting in his Masters House, in his Masters
presence, as if he were rather God Almighties fellow, than his Servant, seldom
uncovering his head, seldomer bending his knee, or sawcily lolling on his
Elbowes: let such a man make never so many protestations that his heart is
upright to Godward, I shall hardly be brought to believe him: for if there
were any zeal, any Reverence in the inward man, it would appear, and show it
self in the outward man. Well, I say no more but this, know that ye are
Servants, and then ye cannot but be obedient, ye cannot but be reverent.

One thing more I have to commend unto you from this Title of Servant, before I
leave it, and it is this:

Servants (ye see) we are all of us; now servants can never perform their
business well, or commendably, unless they agree together: where there is
contention amongst servants, that Household is always our of order, and the
Master of such a Family suffers very much thereby himself. Why just thus it
is in this great Family, the Commonwealth; thus it is like wife in the Church:
where there is not Unity, Unanimity, and Conformity amongst us the Servants of
God, amongst us the Stewards of God, and dispencers of his Word, all things go
to wrack. I would to God therefore, that there were that unity amongst us, as
ought to be amongst those, who serve one God, and profess one Faith, one
Baptism: Happy would it be for you of the Laity, and no less happiness would
redound to us of the Clergy. Doubtless such unsavory Comparisons would not
then be so often heard at your Table, I am for Paul, and another, I am for
Apollos; I am for this Preacher, and I am for that. The cause of all which, is
as well the want of Conformity amongst The Teachers, as want of stayednesse
amongst the Hearers: O, when it comes once to this pass, that --.

Scinditur incerius studia in contraria Clerus. When we of the Clergy shall be
full of oppositions, ever and anon banding one against another, and thinking
scorn to be Ruled or Directed by those, who are the Fathers of the Church, I
mean the most reverend Archbishops, and the right reverend Bishops: when we
shall disagree amongst our selves: yea, when some of us shall not agree with
our selves, but be this day of another mind, than we were yeasterday, and in
this place than in that; and all this oftentimes not for Conscience sake, but
policy: conforming in the University, and subscribing before the Bishop, but
sounding out an Alarm of desiance to all such regularity and orders when they
are sent amongst the people; accounting the Ceremonies of the Church
indifferent amongst the Learned, as being not able to answer them; but crying
out amongst the vulgar that the zeal of the Brotherhood must by no means
tolerate. Now say I, what other thing proceeds from this nonconformity, and
Multiplicity of Contradictions, but Contentions and Heart-burnings in every
place? This double-dealing has bred in many simple men and women, yea, some of
them are such, who (I am persuaded) have an earnest desire to fear GOD, and
are such who tremble at his sacred word: yet such Religious souls as these
have a doubtful wavering when they enter into the Church, whether they may
kneel, when others kneel; or pray, when the Minister reads Prayer; or hear
the Sermon, when a conformable Priest poth preach; or whether they may bow at
the sacred name of Jesus, or suffer their Children to be baptized with the
sign of the Cross, with a hundred such like: In a word, whether they may come
to Church on Wednesdaies and Fridayes, and such like times, when there is no
Sermon. Thus, W. Westerman. B.D. Solomon's Porch.
halting guides (says a learned Divine of ours) have begot limping Scholars.
The Church is disturbed, our prayers hindered; one swelieth against another,
one speaks evil against another, one judges another; and all this, because
there is not that conformity and unity as should be amongst those, who, with
David here, profess themselves the servants of Almighty God.

But now, do ye desire to have all redrest? as indeed, which of us should
not? Why then do ye, (I beseech you) as this our Prophet did, who, as he
professed himself the servant of God, so he now sues unto him for that, which
may make his service acceptable, and what other is that, than understanding?
which leads me to my second branch; his Petition: and in that, first to the
blessing prayed for: Understanding.

We have here (ye see) much fruit to gather, and but a little more time
allotted: that therefore which remains I will husband as well as I can, that
so ye may have some taste of all.

That which the eye is to the Body, the same is understanding to the soul. A
Body without eyes can see nothing, and a soul without understanding can judge
of nothing, This is that therefore that David prays for: Da intellectum, Give
me understanding. And indeed if Understanding be needful for any, then
surely for a Prophet, a chief part of whose Office, is to be a guide to the
blind, and to instruct those that are ignorant and void of Understanding: All
which, how can he possibly do, who wants this gift of Understanding himself.

But blessed David; what need had thou to pray thus for Understanding? Had
thou lived in these days, the less knowledge, the less understanding thou
had had, the better had thou been accepted amongst many, or else how comes
it to pass that poor ignorant Mechanics are so highly set up, and so often
cried up, as the only zealous Preachers, and Rebukers of sin: with such
Admirers of ignorance, all others, for the most part, are but Time-servers, or
Court Flatterers. But now, if such Enthusiasts as these, can make their tongues
now as nimble, as their Shuttle was heretofore, then we cry out straight way
Digitus Dei; Surely, these men were sent from Heaven; though what they deliver
be nothing: for the most part but railing; and the maine part of their
Tautologicall and tedious Discourse, tend to the upholding such a Conclusion as
this, that they are the best Christians, who are the worst Subjects. Such
(Teachers I will not say but) Bablers, if they have enough of Impudence, care
not how little of Understanding. But our Prophet (ye see) here was of another
mind; understanding he wanted, understanding he sues for, Da intellectum,
give me Understanding.

But what? had he no understanding at all? yes, habebat intellectum (says St.
Ambrose) sed ut redundare sibi crederet, uberiorem inquirit. In Loc.
He had understanding, but he desires a larger measure ofit, thereby
intimating thus much unto us, that, while we are clothed with the rags of
our Mortality, there is no hope of an absolute perfection in this so Noble a
faculty of the soul: And therefore they who fancy that they understand all
things, may justly be suspected to understand nothing as they should. This our
Prophet, v. 100. professed that he had more understanding than his Teachers:
and yet behold he had not so much, but that he wants more, and more here he
prays for: And it is St. Austines Advice, on this my Text, Nunquam
intermittenda est ista petitio (says he) non enim sufficit accepisse
intellectum, and Dei Testimonia didicisse, nisi semper accipiatur, and
quodammodo semper bibatur de font lucis aeternae. This Petition ought always
to be had in remembrance, for it is not sufficient to have received
understanding, and to have learned the Testimonies of God, unless we always
receive, and after a sort continually drink of the Fountain of eternal
Light. And to say the truth, the benefit that will redound to us hereby, should
make us ever mindful of the Petition: for as all mischief attends on
Ignorance, so all happiness waits on Knowledge and understanding. If this be
not so, I appeal to this Learned Audience. Blessed Fathers and Brethren, what
is the cause now adays, I pray you, of all the discontents and jarres in our
Church, but want of understanding? Men void of understanding are apt to embrace
Fury for Zeal, and Superstition for Devotion: Oh how prone are we to accuse
the actions of our Brethren, which we understand not? Thus Papists deal with
us on the one side, and Presbyterians and Separatists on the other. First, they
of the Church of Rome cry out, that we are utter enemies to Mortification,
being we have banished (as they say) all means tending thereunto, as Fasting,
Confession, and other the like works of Humiliation: But ye that are
judicious know all this to be false, and that all this is a mere slander; for
they understand us not. Indeed, we teach you that ye are not to put any merit
in Fasting; but otherwise we affirm and account it to be an excellent help
unto Devotion, and so according to the Articles given at these Visitations, we
acquaint you with those times of Fasting, which are appointed by the Church. So
likewise for Confession, our Church is so far from being an enemy to it, that
(though we do not make it a picke-locke of the State) we use it as a Cordial
for afflicted Consciences; and so are we directed in our Rubricke for the
Visitation of the sick; where likewise is set down a form of Absolution to
be pronounced by the Priest upon hearing the Confession of his Poenitentiary.
Thus in diverse others other particulars could I instance, would the time
permit, wherein they shamefully traduce us, and that, because they understand
us not. And again no less foully do our Amsterdamians fall upon us with bitter
Invectives, accusing us for our harmless, revered, and significant
Ceremonies; which did they but truly understand, I am very confident they
would be far better affected toward us. So that ye see the necessity of
understanding, and that for men of all Ranks, both Priests and people; little
charity can be showed the one to the other without it: which now if ye have a
desire to attain, be ye but pleased to follow me with this our Prophet, and
he will show you the modus how to procure it: Do ye pray, God will give it;
it is his gift; that is the second; Da intellectum, Give me understanding.

Intellect us spirituale munus est, In Loc
(Ambr.) and ideo quod Dei est, a Domino postulatur: Understanding is a
spiritual gift, and therefore what is Gods peculiar, is sought for at Gods
hands. So St. Hierome, Ate discam, and non ab Haereticis and Judaeis: In Loc.
I will neither learn of Heretics or Jews, neither of Philosophers nor
Humanists; Thou only O Lord, shall be my Teacher: And this is none other than
what is recorded in Holy Writ. Doubtless, says Elihu in the Book of Job,
there is a spirit in Man, Chap. 32.8.
but the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. Were it from Nature,
all would have it; or were it incident to Old age, ancient men could not want
it; or if Labor could procure it, the diligent might abound with it. Surely
says Job, Chap. 28.1, 2
there is a vein for the Silver, and a place for Gold where they fine it: Iron
is taken out of the Earth, and Brass is molten out of the stone, etc. But
verse 12. where is Wisdom to be found? where is the place of Understanding?
He answers, verse 23. GOD only knows the way thereof. If therefore any of
you lack Wisdom, says Saint James, let him ask of God, and it shall be
given him. A man may read much, he may hear much, he may converse much; but
if God do not open the eyes of the Intellect, if he do not clear the
Understanding, he shall groape even at Noonday: And as Mr. Calvin on my Text,
Parum prodesset Legem in auribus nostris sonare, vel scriptam oculis nostris
proponi, and hominis voce enarrari, nisi correcto nostro stupore, intus nos
Deus arcano Spiritus sui instinctu dociles redderet. It skills little either to
hear or read the Law, unless Almighty God by the secret instinct or
Inspiration of his Holy Spirit make us docile, and capable of his Heavenly
Counsel. If therefore thy Understanding be over-clouded with the vapors of
Error of Ignorance, down then on thy knees to thy God, and touch not a Book
or a Paper, till thou have made thy way by some pious Ejaculation or other: And
then, if thou find the success answerable to thy desire, bless God for it,
and be not thou proud of what thou have attained; for what thou have, is Gods
gift; whether it be the gift of Tongues, or the gift of Prophecy, or what
other gift soever; each of them, all of them descended from the Father of
Lights: He was the giver of it, and none else.

And withal, I would have you take notice, that as God gives understanding, so
he gives it ordinarily by means: To us of the Clergy by Prayer and study; and
to you of the Laity, usually by our Ministry: so that, if ye do not frequent
the public Assemblies, and seek for understanding and knowledge from the lips
of the Priests, ye may thank your selves, if ye continue ignorant still: Our
Prophet seems to intimate as much here; for the word which he uses for
Testimonies, in the Original signifies as well the place, where they were to
be learned, the Congregation, as the Testimonies themselves: so that David, as
he would learn them, so he would learn them in the right Vbi; not in
private Conventicles, where he might have heard Anarchy cried up as the ready
way to peace and Piety; but in the public Assemblies, in the Congregation, in
the holy Sanctuary of his God.

And oh that once we could learn to see our Happiness! the Happiness we
enjoy in these Times! Oh how ought we to bless our God, who has given us
freedom to come into his Courts, no Spanish Inquisition, no Laws or Edicts to
the contrary: All the Laws we have are to compel us, and to punish us for not
coming hither; and for our further encouragement to frequent the Courts of our
God, such has been the Piety of our Gracious Sovereign, and the care of the
vigilant Fathers of our Church, that for the bettering of our Understanding,
they have put life again into that means, which a long time has lain (as it
were) in a dead sleep amongst us. And if ye would know what that is, it is
Catechizing; without which all our other Labors are in vain: it is that which
must clear the eyes of the Vulgar and Common people; without it, understand
certainly they cannot: Where this Catechizing is not used, preach we may,
yea, and Ad Clepsydram too, but here is the mischief of it; all our Preaching
will have no better success than this, we shall but preach you into
ignorance. But Manum de Tabula; enough of this for the present: A word or two
of the last Branch, the end why he prays thus for Understanding, and I have
done.

The end (ye see here) is That he may know the Testimonies of his God; and no
marvel that he desires to have an insight in them; for the knowledge of these
infinitely excels all other Learning whatsoever. In humane Learning a Devil
in Hell does wonderfully surpass the best Proficients amongst men; but this
Knowledge of the Testimonies of God, and of his mercy to us in Christ testified
unto us in them, surpasses the comprehension of any Angel of darkness
whatsoever: for it is the Spirit of God only which knows the things of God;
and therefore here let us fix: and that understanding we have in all other
Arts and Sciences, let us use as a Handmaid unto this.

But yet here is not all; there is a knowledge of Practice, as well as of
Judgment required of us; Conscientia as well as Scientia is expected: De Inter.
Dom. c. 12.
It Is a Complaint of Saint Bernards, Multi quaerunt Scientiam, panci
Conscientiam; Many are inquisitive after Science, few after Conscience. Sivero
tanto studi^ and solicitudine quaereretur Conscientia, quanto quaeritur
secularis and vana Scientia, and citius apprehenderetur, and utilius
retineretur: But if Conscience were with as great study and care sought after
as vain and worldly Science is, it would be both sooner obtained, and with
far more profit retained. Let every man therefore look to his Conscience, to
his Life, to his Conversation: If we that preach, and ye that profess
Religion, be careless of these, woe worth the time that ever we were borne;
for that same knowledge that we have of the Laws and Testimonies of our God,
shall be so far from excusing, that it shall accuse us rather. He that knows
his Masters will, and does it not, (says our Savior) shall be beaten with
many stripes: And no marvel, for the glory of our Master seems to be very
much ecclypsed by such disorderly servants.

I remember devout Salvian brings in the Pagans insulting over the Christians,
whose lives were not agreeable to their knowledge. De Guber. Dei. l. 4.
In nobis (says that Father) Christus patitur opprobrium, in nobis Lex
Christiana patitur maledictum: Both Christ and his Law are scandalized by us:
De nobis enim dicunt Pagani, Ecce quales sunt Christiani, qui Christum colunt?
Behold, this is the common report of Pagans concerning us: Vbi est Lex
Catholica quam credunt? vbi sunt Pietatis and Castitatis praecepta quae
discunt? Where is this Catholic Law which they believe? where are these
precepts of Piety and Chastity, which they learn? Evangelia legunt, and
impudici sunt; Apostolos audiunt, and inebriantur; Christum sequuntur, and
rapiunt; vitam improbam agunt, and probam Legem habere se dicunt. They read the
Gospells, and yet are unclean; they hear the Apostles, they frequent Sermons,
and yet are Drunkards; they follow Christ, and yet are Thieves; they lead a
wicked life, and yet they boast that they have a righteous Law. But now, if ye
please, ye shall hear what these Heathen people infer and conclude upon all
this; Falsum plane est quod aiunnt se bona discere, quod jactant se sanctae
Legis praecepta retinere; si enim bona discerent, boni essent. It Is altogether
false (say they) that they learn good things, and as they boast, that they
retain the Rules of a holy Law; for if those things which they learn were
good, they then would be good themselves. Thus do we, who would be accounted
Christians, bring our God, our Religion, our Profession into contempt, if our
lives be not answerable to our knowledge.

Which, I would to God, every one of us would take into our consideration, that
so at length we may be careful to adorn our Profession by our more than
ordinary Piety. And as for those who will still be refractory, ye that have the
Rod of Correction in your hands, let them smart for it: Bear it not (I beseech
you) in vain, but smite, and smite home; we must preach, but it is you that
must punish. And as for you who are Churchwardens, and sworn Officers to do
God Almighty service in his Church, look ye likewise to your Oaths: It Is Gods
cause, not your own, which ye are sworn to defend. And therefore let
Whore-masters, and Drunkards, and prophaners of the Lords Day, and blasphemous
Swearers, and such like lewd livers be brought to feel the Discipline of our
Mother Holy Church, whose Doctrine they have so much disparaged by their unholy
lives. Certainly, if ever the Latin or Roman Tongue deserve to be termed the
Language of the Beast, it is when Churchwardens come in with their Omnia been,
whereas nothing but swearing and whooring, and such like disorders keep their
Rendevous in their Parish; this one word more, and I have done: Be ye careful,
I beseech you, of your Duty, as we will endeavor to be of ours, and then our
Gracious God thereby will be glorified, our Brethren edified, and our own
souls eternally saved, at the Day of the Appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FINIS.
Concionem hanc super illud 119. 125. typis mandari permitto.

Sa. Baker.
Land. November. 6. 1638.

