A Caveat FOR COMMEN CVRSETORS VVLGARELY CALLED Vagabones, set forth by Thomas
Harman. Esquier, for the vtilite and proffyt of his natural Country. Newly
agmented and Imprinted Anno Domini. M.D.LXVII.

Vewed, examined and allowed, according unto the Queens Maiestyes Injunctions



depiction of two beggars or vagrants with a horse and cart and a small dog,
accompanied by two uniformed men or soldiers with whips

IMPRINTED at London in Fletestret at the sign of the Faulcon by Wylliam
Gryffith and are to be sold at his shop in Saint Dunstones Church yard. in
the West.

depiction of a besom or bunch of twigs, a stick or staff, and some rope or
string, all separate

Three things to be noted
all in their kind,
A staff, a beesom, and
with, that will wind.
A beesome of byrche, for babes very fyt,
A long lasting iybbet for loubbers as meet,
A with to wind up, that these will not keep,
Bind all up in one, and use it to sweep.
depiction of a broom, composed of a besom or bunch of twigs, a stick or staff,
and some rope or string, bound together

To the right honorable and my singular good Lady. Elizabeth Countes of
Shrewsbury. Thomas Harman wishes all joy and perfect felicity here and in
the world to come.
AS of Ancient and long time, there has been and is now at this present many
good godly profitable laws and acts made and set forth in this most noble
and floryshynge realm, for the relief, succor, comfort and sustentacion of
the poor nedye impotente and miserable creatures, being and in habiting in
all parts of the same. So is there (right honorable and mine especyall good
Lady) most holsom estatutes, ordinances and necessary laws, made setforth and
published for the extreme punishment of all vagarantes and sturdy vacabons, as
passes through and by all parts of this famous isle most ydelly and wyckedly,
And I well by good experience understanding and consideringe your most tender,
pytyfull, gentle and noble nature, not only having a vygelant and merciful
eye to your poor indygente and feable parishnores, yea not only in the
parish where your honor most happily does dwell, but also in others,
inuyroninge or nighe adioyninge to the same. As also abundantly powrynge out
daily your ardent and bountiful charytie upon all such as comes for relief
unto your luckely gates.

I thought it good, necessary, and my bounden duty to acquaynte your goodness
with the abominable, wicked and detestable behauor of all these rowsey, ragged
rabblement of rakehelles, that under the presence of great misery, dyseases and
other innumerable calamites which they feign through great hipocrisye do wyn
and gain great aims in all places where they wyly wander, to the utter
deludinge of the good geuers, deceauinge and impouerishing of all such poor
householders both sick and sore, as nether can or may walk abroad for relief
and comfort (where in deed most mercy is to be showed.) And for that I (most
honorable Lady) being placed as a poor gentleman have kept a house these
twenty years, where unto poverty daily has and does repair, not without
some releife as my poor calling and habylytie may and does extend: I have
of late years gathered a great suspicion that all should not be well, and as
the proverb says (some thing lurk and lay hyd that did not plainly
apeare) for I having more occation through sickness to tarry and remain at
home, then I have been accustomed do by my there abiding, talk and confere
daily with many of these wyly-wanderars of both sorts as well men and women, as
boys and gyrles: by whom I have gathered and understand, their deep
dissimulation and detestable dealing, being marvelous subtle and craftye in
there kind, for not one amongst twentye will discover either declare there
scelorus secrets: yet with fair flatteringe words, money, and good chere, I
have attained to the typ by such as the meanest of them has wandered these xiii
years and most xvi, and some twenty and upward, and not without faithful
promise made unto them never to discover their names or any thing they showed
me: for they would all say if the upright men should understand thereof they
should not be only greuouslye beaten, but put in danger of their lives by the
said upright men. There was a few years since a small brief set forth of
some zealous man to his country of whom I know not, that made a little show of
there names and usage, and gave a glymsinge light not sufficient to perswad of
their peuyshe peltinge and pickinge practyses, but well worthy of praise. But
(good madame) with no less travel then good will, I have repaired and rygged
the Ship of knowledge, and have hoyssed up the sails of good fortune, that she
may safelye pass about and through all parts of this noble realm, and
there make port sale of her wyshed wares, to the confusion of their drowseye
demener, and unlawful languag, pylfring pycking, wily wanderinge, and lykinge
lecherye, of all these rablement of rascales, that raunges about all the costs
of the same. So that their indecent doleful dealing and excerable exersices,
may apere to all as it were in a glass, that thereby the Iusticers and
Shreeues may in their cercutes, be more vygelant to punish these malefactors,
and the Cou^stables Bayliffes, and bosholders settinge aside all fear,
slouthe, and pytie, may be more circomspecte in executing ye charge given the^
by the aforesaid Iusticers. Then will no more this rascal rabbleme^t raunge
about the country, then greater releife may be showed to the pouertye of
each paryshe, then shall we keep our Horses in our pastures vnstolen, then
our lynnen clothes shall and may lie safely one our hedges untouched, then
shall we not have our clothes and lynnen hoked out at our wyndowes as well
by day as by night. Then shall we not have our howses broken up in ye night,
as of late one of my nyghtbors had and two great buckes of clothes stolen out,
and most of the same fine Lynnen. Then shall we safely keep our pigs and
poultrey from pylfringe. Then shall we surely pass by the high ways leading
to marketes and fayres unharmed. Then shall our Shoppes and bothes be vnpycked
and spoiled. Then shall these uncomely companies be dispersed and set to labor
for their lyuinge, or hastily hang for their demerites. Then shall it incourag
a great number of gentlemen and others saying this security, to set up houses
and keep hospitalyty in the country, too ye comfort of their nighboures,
releife of the poor, and to the amendemet of the common-welth. Then shall not
sin and wyckednes so much abound among us. Then will gods wrath be much thee
more pacified toward us. Then shall we not taste of so many and soundry
plages, as now daily raygneth over us. And then shall this Famous Empire, be
in more wealth and better floryshe, to the inestymable joy and comfort of the
Queen's most excellent majesty whom god of his infynyce goodness to his great
glory long and many years make most prosperously to raygne over us to the
great Felycity of all the Peers and Nobles, and to the unspeakable joy releife
and quietness of mind of all her faithful Commons and Subjects. Now me
thinks I fellow these peuyshe perverse and pestilence people begyne to
freate, fume, swear and stare at this my book, their life being laid open and
aparantly painted out that their confusion and end draws one a pace Where as
in deed if it be well wayed it is set forth for their synguler profyt and
commodity, for the sure safegarde of their lives here in this world, that they
shorter not the same before their time, and that by their true labor and good
life, in the world to com they may save their Souls, that Christ the second
person in Trinitye has so derely bought with his most precious blood: so that
hereby I shall do them more good the^ they could have devised for them selves.
For behold their life being so manifest wicked and so aparantlye known, the
honorable will abhore them. The worshipful will reiecte them, the yemen will
sharply tawnte them, The Husband men utterly defye them, The Laboring men
bluntly chyde them, The women with a loud reclamation wonder at them. And all
Children with clapping hands cry out at them, I many times musinge with my
self at these myscheuous misliuers merueled when they took their oryginall and
beginning, how long they have exercised their execrable wandering a bout. I
thought it meet to confere with a very old man that I was well acquaynted
with, whose wit and memory is marvelous for his years, being about the age of
fourscore, what he knew when he was young of these lousey leuterars. And he
showed me that when he was young, he waited upon a man of much worship in Kent,
who died immediately after the last Duke of Buckingham was beheaded, at his
buryall there was such a number of beggars besides poor householders dwellinge
there aboutes that uneath they myghtly or stand about the House: then was there
prepared for them a great and a large barn, and a great far ore sod out in
Furmentye for them, with bread and drink abundantly to furnesh out the
premises, and every person had two pence for such was the dole. When Night
approached ye poor householders repaired home to their houses, the other
wayfaring bold beggars remained all night in the barn, and the same barn
being serched with light in the night by this old man and then young, with
others, they told seven score persons of men, every of them having his
woman, except it were two women that lay alone to gether for some especyall
cause. Thus having their makes to make merry with all, the buryall was turnede
to bousynge and belly chere, morning to myrthe, fasting to feastinge, prayer
to pastyme, and pressinge of papes, and lamenting to Lechery. So that it may
apere this uncomely company has had a long continuance, but then nothing
given so much to pylferinge, pyckinge and spoylinge, and as far as I can learn
or understand by the examination of a number of them, their languag, which they
term peddelars French or cantig began but wtin these.xxx. years little above,
and yt the first inuenter thereof was hanged, all save the head, for that is
the fynall end of them all, or else to dye of some filthy and horible diseases:
but much harm is don in the means space by their continuance, as some x. xii.
and xvi years before they be consented, and the number of them does daily
renew. I hope their sin is now at ye highest, and that as short and as spedy
a redres will be for these, as has been of late years for the wretched, wily
wanderinge vagabondes, calling and naming themselves Egiptians, depely
dissemblings and long hydinge and coueringe their de^pe deceitful practices,
fedinge the rude common people wholly addicted and given to nouelites, joys,
and new iuuentions, delytinge them with the strangenes of the attire of their
heads, and practisinge paumistrie to such as would know their fortunes. And
to be short all thieves and hores, as I may well wryt, as some have had true
experience, a number can well wytnes, and a great sort has woll felt it. And
now (thanks be to god) through wholesome laws and the due execution thereof,
all be dispersed, vanished, and the memory of then clean extynguyshed, that
when they be once named hereafter, our Children will much marvel what kind
of people they were: and so I trust shall shortly happen of these. For what
thing does chiefly cause these rowseye rake helles thus to continue and daily
increase? surely a number of wicked parsons that keep typlyng Houses in all
there is, where they have succor and relief, and what so ever they bring they
are sure to receive money for the same, for they sell good penyworthes. The
buyers have ye greatest gain, yea if they have nether money nor ware they wylbe
trusted, their credit is much. I have taken a note of a good many of them and
wylsend their names and dwelling places to such Instecers as dwells nere or
next unto them, that they by their good wisdoms may displace the same, and
auctoryse such, as have honesty. I will not blot my book with their names,
because they be resident. But as for this fletinge Fellowshyp I have truly
setforth the most part of them that be doers at this present with their names
that they be knowene by. Also I have placed in the end thereof their lewd
langage calling the same pedlers French or canting. And how shall I end my
prologe, making true declaration (right honorable Lady) as they shall fall in
order of their vntymelye tryfelinge time, lewd life, and pernicious practices,
trustinge that the same shall neither trouble or abash your most tender,
tymerous and pytifull Nature, to think ye small meede should grow unto you
for such Alms so given. For god our marcifull and most louinge father well
knows your hearts and good intent, the geuer never wants his reward,
according to the saying of Saint Augustyn: as there is (neither shall be) any
sin unpunished, even so shall there not be any good deed unrewarded. But how
comfortably speaks Christ our Savior unto as in his gospel (give ye and it
shall be given you again) behold farther, good Madam that for a cup of cold
water, Christ has promised a good reward. Now saint Austen properly declares
why Christ speaks of cold water, because the poorest man that is, shall not
excuse him self from that cherytable warke least he would paraduenture say
that he has nether wood, poot nor pan to warm any water with. Se farther what
god speaks in the mouth of his prophet Esaye, break thy bread to him that
is a hongred, he says not give him a hole lose: for paraduenture the poor man
has it not to give, then let him give a piece. This much is said because the
poor that has it should not be excused, now how much more then, the rich?
Thus you see good madam. for your treasure here dispersed where need and lack
is, it shall be heaped by aboundantlye for you in heaven, where neither rust or
moth shall corupt or destroy the same. Unto which tryumphant place after many
good happy, and fortunat years prosperouslye here dispended, you may for ever
and ever there most joyfully remayn. Amen.

Finis. depiction of a female figure with a book on a lectern
The Epistle to the Reader.
ALthough good Reader I wright in plain terms and not so plainly as truly,
concerning the matter meaning honestly to all men, and wyshe them as much good
as to mine own heart, yet as there has been so there is now, and hereafter
wylbe, curyous heds to find fauttes, wherefore I thought it necessary now at
this second Impression to acquaynt yt with a great fault as some takethe it,
but none as I mean it, calling these Vagabonds Cursetors in the intytelynge
of my book as runneres or rangers about the country, derived of this Laten
word (CVRRO) neither do I wryght it Cooresetores with a duble do or Cowresetors
with a w which has another singnification, is there no deuersite between a
gardein and a garden, maynteynaunce, and maintenance, Streytes and streets,
those that have understanding know there is a great dyfference, who is so
ingnorant by these days as knows not the meaning of a vagabone, and if an
ydell leuterat should so be called of any man, would not he think it both
odyous and reprochefull, will he not shonne the name? ye and where as he may
and dare, with bent brows will reueng that name of Ingnomy, yet this plain name
vagabone is deryued as others be of Laten words, and now use makes it commen
to al men, but let us look back four. C. years since, and let us se whether
this plain word vagabon was used or no, I believe not and why, because I read of
no such name in the old estatutes of this realm, unless it be in the margente
of the book, or in the Table, which in the collection and pryntinge was set
in, but these were then the common names of these lewd leuterares Faytores,
Robardesmen, Drawlatches, and valyant beggares, if I should have used such
words or the same drder of writing as this realm used in king Henry the
third or Edward ye fyrstes time, Oh what a gross barberous fellow have we here
his writing is both homely and dark that we had need to have an interpretar,
yet then it was very well and in short season a great change we see well this
delycat age shall have his time on the other side, eloquence have I none, I
never was acquaynted with the muses, I never tasted of Helycon. But according
to my plain order, I have setforth this work symplye and truly, with such
usual words and terms as is among us well known and frequented. So that as ye
proverb says (all though truth be blamed it shall never be shamed) well good
reader I mean not to be tedyous unto the, but have added five or six more
tales because some of them wear donn while my book was first in the press,
and as I trust I have deserved no rebuke for my good will, even so I desire no
praise for my pain cost and travel. But faythfullye for the proffyt and
benyfyt of my country, I have don it, that the whole body of the Realm may se
and understand their lewd life and pernicious practisses that all may spedelye
help to amend that is amysse, Amen say all with me.

Finis. knotwork ornament or design
A Ruffler
THE Rufflar because he is first in degree of this odious order. And is so
called in a statute made for the punishment of Vacabonds. In the xxvii year of
King Henry the eight late of most famous memory. He shall be, first placed as
the worthiest of this unruly rableme^t. And he is so called when he goes first
abroad either he has served in the wars, or else he has been a serving man
and weary of well doing, shakinge of all pain, does choose him this idle life,
and wretchely wanderes about the most shyres of this realm. And with stout
Adascite, demands where he thinks he may be bold, and circomspecte
enough as he sethe cause to ask charity, rufully and lamentably, that it
would make a flyntey heart to relent. and pitye his miserable estate, how he
has been maimed and broused in the wars, and parauenture some will show you
some outward wound, which he got at some dronken fraye, either halting of
some preuye wound festred with a fylthy fiery flankard. For be well assured
that the hardist soldiers be either slain or maimed, either and they escape
all hassardes, and return home again, if they be without relief of their
friends, they will surely desperately rob, and steal, and either shortly be
hanged or miserablye dye in prison, for they be so much ashamed and disdain to
beg or ask charity, that rather they will as desperately fight for to live and
mayntayn them selves as manfully, and valyantly, they ventered them selves in
ye Princes quarrel. Now these Rufflars the out castes of seruinge men when
begginge or crauinge fayles, then they pycke and pylfer from other inferior
beggars, that they meet by the way as Roages, Pallards, Mortes, and Doors. Yea
if they meet with a woman alone ridinge to the market, either old man or
boy, that he well knowethe will not resist, such they filche and spoil.
These rufflares after a year or two at the farthest become vpryght men, unless
they be prevented by twinde hemp. I had of late years an old man to my
tennant, who costomably a great time went twice in the week to London, either
with fruit or with pescods, when time served therefore. And as he was coming
homeward on black heath, at the end thereof next to shotars hill he over took
two rufflars the one manerly waiting on the other as one had been the master,
and the other the man, or servant caryinge his masteres cloak, this old man
was very glad that be might have their company over the hyl, because that day
he had made a good market, for he had seven shyllinges in his purse, and a
nolde angel, which this poor man had thought had not been in his purse, for
he wylled his wife over night to take out the same angel, and lay it up
until his coming home again. And he verily thought that his wife had so
don, which in deed for got to do it. Thus after salutations, had this
master rufflar entered into communication with this simple old man, who
rydinge softlye beside them, commoned of many matters. Thus fedinge this old
man with pleasant talk, until they were one the top of the hill, where
these rufflares might well behold the coaste about them clear. Quiclye
stepes unto this poor man, and takes hold of his horse brydell, and leads
him in to the wode, and demands of him what and how much monye he had in his
purse. Now by my troth quoth this old man you are a merye gentle man, I know
you mean not to take away any thing from me, but rather to give me some if
I should ask it of you. By and by this servant thyefe casts the cloak that
he carried on his arm about this poor manes face, that he should not mark or
view them, with sharp words to deliver quicly that he had and to confess truly
what was in his purse. This poor man then all abashed yielded, and confessed he
had but just seven shylinges in his purse and the troth is he knew of no more.
This old angel was falen out of a little purse into the botome of a great
purse. Now this seven shyllings in white money they quickly found, thinkinge in
deed that there had been no more, yet farther groping and searchinge, found
this old angel. And with great admiration this gentleman thief begane to
bless him saying, good lord what a whorlde is this, how may (quoth he) a
man believe or trust in the same, se you not (quoth he) this old knave told me
that he had but seven shyllings, and here is more, by an angel, what an old
knave and a false knave? have we here quoth this rufflar, our lord have mercy
on us, will this world never be better, and there with went their way. And
left the old man in the wood doing him no more harm. But sorowfully
sighinge this old man returning home declared his misaduenture, with all the
words and circomstaunces above showed. Whereat for the time was great laughing,
and this poor man for his losses among his loving neighbors well considered
in the end.

A Upright man.
A Upright man the second in sect of this vnsemly sort must be next placed,
of these rainging rablement of rasscales some be serving men, artificers, and
laboryng men, traded up in husbandry. These not minding to get their living
with ye swet of their face, but casting of all pain will wander after their
wicked manner, through the most shyres of this realm, as Sommerset shyre,
Wylshyre, Barkeshyre, Oxfordeshyre, Harfordeshyre, Middilsex, Essex, Suffolk,
Northfolke Suffex, Surrye, and Kente, as the chief and best shyres of relief.
Yea not with out punishment by stocks, whippings, and imprisonment, in most of
these places, above said. Yet not withstanding they have so good lyking in
their lewnd, lecherous loytering, that full quicly all their punishments is
forgotten. And repentance is never thought upon, until they clyme three tres
with a ladder. These vnrewly rascales in their roilyng, disperce the^ selves,
into several companyes, as occation seruethe, sometime more and sometime less.
As if they repair to a poor husbandmans house, he will go alone or one with
him, and stoutly demand his charity, either showing how he has served in the
wars, and their maimed, either that he seeks service, and says he would be
glad to take pain, for his living, although he means nothing less. If he be
offered any meat or drink, he utterly refuses scornefully, and will naught
but money, and if he espy young pyggs or pultry, he well notes the place and
the the next night or shortly after he will be sure to have some of them;
which they bring to their stawlinge kens, which is their typpling houses, as
well known to them according to the old proverb (as the beggar knows his
dishe.) For you must understand every Typpling ale house will neither receive
them or their wares but some certain houses in every shyre, especially for
that purpose, where they shall be better welcome to them, then honister men. For
by such have they most gain, and shall be conuayde either into some loft out of
the way, or other secret corner not commen to any other, and thither repair,
at accustomed times, their harlots which they term Mortes, and Doxes, not with
emty hands, for they be as skillful in picking, riffling and filching, as the
vpryght men, and nothing inferior, to them in all kind of wyckednes, as in
other places hereafter they shall be touched. At these foresaid pelting penish
places and unmannerly, metings O how the pottes walk about, their talki^g
tounges talk at large. They howl and bowse one to another, and for the time
housing belly there. And after there ruysting recreation if there be not rome
enough in the house they have clean straw in some barn or backehouse nere
adjoining where they couch comely together, and it were dog, and byche, and he
that is hardyste may have his choice, unless for a little good manner some will
take there own that they have made promise unto, until they be out of sight,
and then according to the old adage (out of mind.) Yet these upright men stand
so much upon their reputation, as they will in no case have their women walk
with them, but seperat them selves for a time, a month or more. And mete at
fayres, or great markers where they mete to pylfer and steal, from staules,
shoppes, or bothes. At these fayres the vpryght men, use commonly to lie, and
lingar in hye ways by lanes. some pretty way or distaunce from ye place, by
which ways they be assured that compeny passes still, two and fro. And there
the will demand with cap in hand and comely curtesy, the devotion and charity
of ye people. They have been much lately whipped at fayrs. If they ask at a
stout yemans, or farmars house his charity, they will go strong as three or
four in a company. Where for fear more then good will, they often have
relief, they syldome or never pass by a Justices house, but have by ways,
unless he dwell alone and but weakelye manned thither will they also go
strong after a slye subtle forte, as with their arms bound up with ketcher
or list, having wrapte about the same filthy clothes, either their legs in
such manner bewrapped halting down right, Not unprovided of good codgels which
they carry to sustain them, and as they feign to keep dogs from them, when
they come to such good gentlemen's houses If any search be made or they
suspected for pyltring clothes, of hedgges, or breaking of houses, which they
commonly do, when the owners be either at the market, church, or other ways
occupied about their business, either rob some sely man or woman by the hye
way, as many times they do. Then they high them into wodes, great thickets,
and other ruff corneres, where they lie lurkinge three or four days to
gether, and have meat and drink brought them by their Mortes, and Doors, and
while they thus lie hydden in covert in the night they be not idle, nether as
ye common saying is (well occupied) for then as the wyly fox crepinge out of
his den seeks his pray for pultery so do these for lynnen and any thing else
worth money, that lies about or nere a house. As sometime a whole bucke of
clothes carried away at a time. When they have a greatter bootye then they may
carry away quickly to their stawling kendes as is above said. They will hyde
the same for a three days in some thick covert, and in the night time carye
the same like good water Spanlles to their foresaid houses, to whom they will
discover. Where or in what places they had the same, where the marks shall be
picked out clean, and conuayde craftelye face of to sell. If the man or woman
of the house want money the^ selves. If these upright men have nether money nor
wares, at these houses they shall be trusted for their vitales, and it amount, to
twentye or thirty shyllinges. Yea if it fortune any of these upright men to be
taken either suspected or charged with felonye, or petye brybrye, don at such a
time or such a place, he will say he was in his hosts house. And if the man
or wife of that house be examined by an officer, they boldelye vouche that they
lodged him such a time whereby the truth cannot appear. And if the chance to
be retained into service through their lamentable words, with any welthy man.
They will tarry but a small time, either robbing his master, or some of his
fellows. And some of them uses this polocye, that although they travail into
al these shyres, above said, yet will they have good credit espiciallye in one
shyre where at diverse good farmars houses they be well known where they work
a month in a place or more and will for that time behave them selves very
honestlye and paynfully. And may at any time for their good usage have work
of them and to these at a ded lift or last refuge they may safely repair
unto and be welcome. When in other places for a knacke of knavery that they
have played they dare not tarry. These upright men will sildom or never want, for
what is gotten by any Mort, or Doxe, if it please him he does comaunde the
same. And if he mete any beggar whether he be sturdye or impotent he will
demand of him whether ever he was stalled to the roge or no. If he say he
was, he will know of whom and his name yt stalled him. And if he be not
learnedly able to show him the whole circumstaunce thereof he will spoil him of
his money, either of his best garment if it be worth any money, and have him to
the bowsing ken. Which is to some typpling house next adioyninge and lays
their to gage the best thing that he has for twenty pence or two shyllinges,
this man obeys for fear of beating. Then does this vpriight man call for a
gage of bowse which is a quarte pot of drink and powers the same upon his
pelde pay adding these words. I. G. P. do stalle thee W. T. to the Roge, and
that from hence forth it shall be lawefull for the to cante, that is to ask or
beg, for thy living in all places. Here you se yt the upright man is of great
auctoriti For all sorts of beggars, are obedient to his hests, and sermounteth
all others in pyltring, and stealinge. I latly had standing in my well house
which stands on the backeside of my house, a great cawdren of copper being
then full of water, having in the same half a doson of pewter dyshes, well
marked, and stamped with the connizance of my arms, which being well noted
when they were taken out were set a side the water powered out, and my caudren
taken away, being of such bygnes that one man unless he were of great
strength was not able far to carye the same. Not withstanding the same was
one night within this two years conuayed more then half a mile from my house,
into a common or heth. And there bestowed in a great firbushe. I then immediately
the next day sent one of my men to London, and there gave warning in Sothwarke,
kent street, and Barmesey street to all the Tynckars there dwelling. That if
any such caudorn came, thither to be sold, the bringar thereof should be stayed,
and promised twenty shyllinges for a reward. I gave also intelligence to the
water men that kept the ferres that no such vessel should be either conuayd
to London, or into essex promising the like reward, to have understanding
thereof. This my doing was well understand in many places, about, and that the
fear of espyinge so troubled ye conscience of the stealer, that my
caudorendaye untouched in the thick firbushe more then half a year after
which by a great chance was found by hunteres for conneys, for one chanced to
run into the same bushe where my caudren was and being perceived one thrust
his staff into the same bushe and hit my caudren a great blow the sound
whereof did cause the man to think and hope that there was some great treasure
hidden, whereby he thought to be the better while he lived. And in farther
searching he found my caudren, so had I the same again unlooked for.

A Hoker or Anggicar.
THese hokers or Angglears be peryllous and most wicked knaves, and be deryued
or proceed forth from the upright men they commenly go in frese ierkynes and
gally slopes poynted been the thekne, these when they practice there pylfringe
it is all by night for as they walk a day times from house to house to demand
charity they vigelantly mark where or in what place they may attain to there
pray, casting there eyes up to every wyndow well noting what they se their,
whether apparel, or linen, hanginge nere unto the said windows and that will
they be sure to have ye next night following, for they customably carry with
them a staff of.v. or.vi. foot long, in which within one ynch of ye tope
there of is a little hole bored through in which hole they put an iron hoke
and with the same they will pluck unto them quicly any thing yt they may reche
there with, which hoke in the day time they covertly carry about them, and is
never seen or taken out till they come to the place where they work there
fete, such have I seen at my house and have often talked with them and have
handled there staves not then understanding to what use or intent they served,
although I had and perceived by there talk and behavior great lykelyhode of
evil suspicion in them, they will either lean upon there staff to hyde the
hole thereof when they talk with you, or hold their hand upon the hole and
what stuff either woollen or lynnen they thus hoke out they never carye the
same forthwith to their staulyng kens, but hides the same a.iii. days in some
secret corner, and after conueyes the same to their houses abouesaid, where
their host or hostys gives them money for the same, but half the value that
it is worth, or else their doxes shall a far of sell the same at the like
houses. I was credebly informed that a hoker came to a farmers house in the ded
of the night and putting back a draw window of a low chamber, the bed
standing hard by the said wyndowe, in which lay.iii. parsones a man and two
bygge boys, this hoker with his staff plucked of their garments which lay
upon them to keep them warm with the couerlet and shete and left them lying a
sleep naked saving there shertes, and had away all clean, and never could
understand where it became. I verily suppose that when they were well waked with
cold they surely thought that Robin goodfelow (according to the old saying)
had been with them that night.

A Roge.
A Roge is neither so stout or hardy as the vprightman. Many of them will go
fayntly, and look piteously, when they see, either meet any person, having a
kercher as white as my shoes tied about their head, with a short staff in
their hand, halting, although they need not, requiri^g alms of such as they
meet, or to what house they shall come. But you may easily perceive by their
color, yt they carry both health and hypocrisy about them, whereby they get
gain, when others want that cannot feign and dissemble. Others there be that
walk sturdely about ye country, and faineth to seek a brother or kinsma^ of
his, dwelli^g wtin some part of ye shire, either yt he has a letter to to
deliver to some honest householder, dwelling out of an other Shyre, and will
show you the same fair sealed, with the superscription to the party he
speaks of, because you shall not think him to run ydelly about the
country, either have they this shyfte, they will carry a cirtificate or pasport
about them from some Iusticer of the peace, with his hand and seal unto the
same, how he has byne whipped and punished for a vacabonde according to the
laws of this realm, and that he must return to. T. where he was borne or
last dwelt, by a certain day lymited in the same, which shall be a good long
day. And all this feigned, because without fear they would wyckedly wander,
and will renew the same, where or when it pleases them: for they have of their
affinity that can well write and read. These also will pick and steal as the
upright men, and has their women and metinges at places appointed, and nothing
to them inferior in all kind of knavery. There be of these Roges Curtales
wearing short clokes, that will change their apparel, as occasion serves.
And their end is either hanging, which they call trinninge in their language,
or die meserably of the pockes. There was not long since two Roges that
always did associate them selves together and would never separate themselves
unless it were for some especial causes, for they were sworn brothers, and were
both of one age and much like of favor, these two traueling into east kent
resorted unto an alehouse there being weried with traueling, salutinge with
short curtsey when they came into the house such as they saw sitting there, in
which company was the parson of the parish and calling for a pot of the best
ale, sat down at the tables end, the likor liked them so well that they had
pot upon pot, and sometime for a litel good manner would drink and offer the
cup to such as they best fancied, and to be short they sat out all the company,
for each man departed home about their business. When they had well refreshed
themselves, then these rowsy roges requested the good man of the house with his
wife to sit down and drink with them of who^ they inquired what priest the
same was and where he dwelt, then they feyninge that they had an uncle a
priest, and that he should dwell in these parts, which by all presumptions it
should be he, and that they came of purpose to speak with him, but because
they had not seen him since they were six years old, they durst not be bold
to take acquaintance of him until they were farther instructed of the turth, and
began to enquire of his name, and how long he had dwelt there, and how far
his house was of from yt place they were in, the good wife of the house
thinkinge them honest men without disceit because they so far enquired of
their kinseman was but of a good zealous natural intent, showed them cherefully
that he was an honest man and well-beloved in the parish and of good wealth, and
had been there resident.xv years at the least, but says she are you both
brothers, yea surely said they, we have been both in one belly and were
twins, mercy god quod this folish woman it may well be for ye be not much
unlike and went unto her hall window calling these young men unto her and
loking out thereat pointed with her fingar and showed them the house standing
alone no house nere the same by almost a quarter of a mile, that says she is
your uncles house, nay says one of them he is not only my uncle but also my
godfather, it may well be quod she, nature will bind him to be the better unto
you, well quod they we be weary and mean not to trouble our uncle to night, but
to morrow god willinge we will see him and do our duty, but I pray you does
our uncle occupy husbandry what company has he in his house alas says she but
one old woman and a boy, he has no occupying at al, tushe quod this good wife
you be mad men go to him this night for he has better lodging for you the^ I
have, and yet I speak folishly against my own profit, for by your tarying here
I should gayn ye more by you now by my troth quod one of them we thank you
good hosts for your holso^e counsel, and we mean to do as you will us, we will
pause a while and by that time it will be almost night, and I pray you give us a
rekening, so manerly paying for that they took bad their host and hosts
farewell with taking leave of the cup, marched merely out of ye doors toward
this parsons house vewed the same well round about and passed by two bowshots of
into a young wodde where they lay consulting what they should do until midnight,
quod one of the^ of sharper wit and subtiller then the other to his fellow
thou see that this house is stone walled about, and that we cannot well break
in in any part thereof, thou see also that the windows be thick of mullions
that there is no krepinge in between, wherefore we must of necessity use some
policy when strength will not serve, I have a horse lock here about me says he
and this I hope shall serve our turn, so when it was about.xii. of the clock
they came to the house and lurked nere unto his chamber window, the dog of the
house barked a good, that with the noise this priest waketh out of his sleep
and began to cough and hem, then one of these roges steps forth nerer the
window and makes a ruful and pitiful noise, requiring for Christ sakes some
relief that was both hongry and thirsty and was like to lie without the doors
all night and starve for cold unless he were releued by him with some small
piece of money, where dwell thou quoth this parson, alas sir says this roge I
have small dwelling and have come out of my way, and I should now says he go
to any town now at this time of night, they would set me in the stocks and
punish me, well quoth this pitiful parson, away from my house either lie in
some of my our houses until the morning and hold here is a couple of pence
for thee, a god reward you quoth this roge and in heaven may you find it. The
person opens his wyndowe and thrusts out his arm to give his alms to this
Roge that came whining to receive it, and quickly takes hold of his hand and
calls his fellow to him which was redye at hand with the horse lock and
clappeth the same about the wrest of his arm that the mullions standing so
close together for strength, that for his life he could not pluck in his arm
again, and made him believe unless he would at the least give them.iii. li. they
would some of his arm from the body. So that this poor parson in far to
lose his hand called up his old woman that lay in the loft over him, and
willed her to take out all the money he had, which was.iiii. marks which he
said was all the money in his house for he had lent vi. li. to one of his
neighbors not iiji. days before well or they, master person if you have no
more, upon this condition we will take of the lock that you will drink.xii. d.
for our sakes to morrow at the alehouse where we found you and thank the good
wife for the good chere she made us, he promised faithfully that he would so
do, so they took of the lock and went their way so far ere it was day, that
the parson could never heue any understanding more of them, now this parson
sorowfully slombering that night between fear and hope, though it was but
folly to make two sorrows of one, he used contentacion for his remedy, not
forgettyng in the morning to perform his promise but went betims to his
neighbor that kept tiplinge and asked angerly where the same two men were that
drank with her yester day, which two men quod this good wife? the strangers
that came in when I was at your house with my neighbors yesterday, what your
neuewes quod she, my neuewes quod this parson I trow thou art mad, nay by god
quod this good wife as sober as you, for they told me faithfully that you were
their uncle, but in faith are you not so in deed, for by my troth they are
strangers to me, I never saw them before. O out upon them quod the parson they
be false thieves and this nigut they compelled me to give them all the money in
my house. Benedicite quod this good wife and have they so in deed as I shall
answer before god one of them told me besides that you were godfather to him
and that he trusted to have your blessinge before he departed, what did he
quoth this parso^, a halter bless him for me, me thinks by the mass by your
countenance you looked so wildly when you came in quoth this good wife that some
thing was amiss, I use not to geste quoth this parson when I speak so
earnestly, why all your sorrows go with it quoth this good wife, and sit
down here and I will fill a fresh pot of ale shall make you merry again, ye
says this parson fill in and give me some meat for they made me swear and
promise them faithfully that I should drink.xii.d. with you this day, what
did they quoth she now by the mary mass they be merry knaves, I warraunte you
they mean to bye no land with your money, but how could they come into you
in the night your doors being shut fast, your house is very strong, then
this parson showed her all the hole circumstaunce how he gave them his alms
out at the wyndows, the made such lamentable cry that it pytyed him at the
heart, for he saw but one when he put out his hand at the window, be ruled
by me quoth this good wife, wherein quoth this parson, by my truth never
speak more of it, when they shall understand of it in the paryshe they will
but laugh you to skorne.

A Wild Roge
A Wild Roge is he that is borne a Roge, he is more subtle and more given by
nature to all kind of knavery, then the other, as beastely begotten in barn
or bushes, and from his infancy traded up in treachery, yea and before ripenes
of years does permit, wallowinge in lewd lechery, but that is counted
amongst them no sin. For this is their custom that when they mete in barn at
night every one gets a make to lie wythall, and there chance to be twentye
in a company, as there is sometime more, and sometime less: for to one man
that goes abroad, there are at the least two women, which never make it
strange when they be called, although she never knew him before. Then when
the day does appear, he rouses him up and shakes his ears, and away
wandering, where he may get ought to the hurt of others. Yet before he
skyppeth out of his couche and departs from his darling, if he like her well
he will appoint her where to mete shortly after, with a warninge to work
warely for some chetes, that their meting might be the merier. Not long since
a wild roge chanced to meet a pore neighbor of mine who for honesty and good
nature surmounted many. This poor man tiding homeward from London, where he had
made his market, this roge demanded a penny for gods sake to keep him a true
man. This simple man beholding him well, and saw he was of taule personage with a
good quarter staff in his hand, it much pitied him as he said to se him want,
for he was well able to serve his prince in ye wars. Thus being moved with pity,
and lokt in his purs to find out a penny and in loking for ye same, he plucked
out.viii.s. in white money, and raked therein to find a single penny and at ye
last finding one does offer ye same to this wild roge, but he seeing so much
money in this simple man's hand, being stricken to ye heart with a covetous desire,
bid him forthwith deliver al yt he had, or else he would with his staff beat
out his brains. For it was not a penny would now quench his thirst thus
swalowing his spitle gredely down, spoiled this pore man of al ye money yt he
had, and lept over ye hedge into a thick wood, and went his way as merely, as
this good simple man came home sorowfully. I once rebuking a wild roge because
he went idly about: he showed me that he was a beggar by enherita^ce, his
Graundfather was a beggar, his father was one, and he must needs be one by good
reason.

A Prygger of Prauncers.
A Prigger of Prauncers be horse stealers, for to prigge signifies in their
language to steal, and a Prauncer is a horse, so being put together the
matter is plain. These go commonly in Ierkins of leather or of white frese,
and carry little wandes in their hands, and will walk through grounds and
pasturs, to search and se horses mete for their purpose. And if they chance to
be met and asked by the owners of the ground what they make there, they feign
straighte that they have lost their way, and desire to be enstructed the
best way to such a place. These will also repair to gentlemen's houses and
ask their charity, and will offer their service, And if you ask them what
they can do, they will say that they can keep two or three Geldinges, and wait
upon a Gentleman. These have also their women, that walkinge from them in
other places, mark where and what they see abroad, and shows these Priggars
thereof, when they meet, which is within a week or two. And look where they
steal any thing, they convey the same at the least three score miles of or
more. There was a Gentleman a very friend of mine, riding from London
homewarde into Kente, having within three miles of his house business,
alyghted of his horse, and his man also, in a pretye village, where diverse
houses were, and looked about him where he might have a conuenyent person to
walk his horse, because he would speak with a Farmer, that dwelte on the back
side of the said village, little above a quarter of a mile from the place
where he lighted, and had his man to weight upon him, as it was mete for his
calling: espieng a Priggar there standing, thinkinge the same to dwell there,
charging this prity prigginge person to walk his horse well, and that they
might not stand still for taking of cold, and at his return (which he said
should not be long) he would give him a penny to drink, and so went about
his business. This peltinge Priggar proud of his pray, walks his horses up
and down, till he saw the Gentleman out of sight, and leapes him into the
saddell, and away he goes a main. This Gentleman returning, and findyng not
his horses, sent his man to the one end of the village, and he went himself
unto the other end, and enquired as he went for his horses that were walked
and began somewhat to suspecte, because neither he nor his man could neither
see nor find him. Then this Gentleman diligently enquired of three or four
town dwellers there whether any such person, declaring his stature, age,
apparel, with so many linamentes of his body as he could call to
remembrance. And vna voce all said that no such man dwelte in their streate,
neither in the parish that they knew of, but some did well remember that such
a one they saw there lyrkinge and huggeringe two hours before the Gentleman
came thither and a stranger to them. I had thought quoth this Gentleman he had
here dwelled, and marched home manerly in his botes, far from the place he
dwelt not I suppose at his coming home he sent such ways as he suspected or
thought mete to search for this Prigger, but hitherto he never hard any
tidinges again of his palfreys. I had the best gelding stolen out of my
pasture that I had amongst others while this book was first a printing.

A pallyarde
THese Palliards be called also Clapperdogens, these go with patched clokes,
and have their Morts with them, which they call wives and if he go to one house
to ask his alms, his wife shall go to another, for what they get, as bread,
chief, malte, and well, they sell the same for ready money, for so they get
more, and if they went together, although they be this divided in the day, yet
they mete iompe at night. If they chance to come to some gentylmans house
standinge alone, and be demanded whether they be man and wife, and if he
perceive that any doubts thereof he shows them a Testimonial with the
ministers name and others of the same parish, naminge a parish in some shere,
fare distant from the place where he shows the same. This writing he carries
to salve that sore. There be many Irishe men that go about with cou^terfeate
licenses, and if they perceive you will straytly examen them, they will
immediately say they can speak no English.

Farther, understand for troth that the worst and wickedst of all this beastly
generation are scarce comparable to these prating Pallyardes, All for ye most
part of these will either lay to their legs an herb called Sperewort, either
Arsnicke, which is called Ratesbane. The nature of this Spereworte will raise a
great blister in a night upon the soundest part of his body, and if the same
be taken away it will dry up again and no harm. But this Arsnicke will so
poison the same leg or sore, that it will ever after be incurable this do
they for gayn and to be pitied. The most of these that walk about be walchmen.

A Frater.
SOme of these Fraters will carry black boxes at their gyrdel, wherein they have
a brief of the Queens majesty's letters patentes given to such a poor
spitlehouse for the relief of ye poor there. which brief is a coppie of the
letters patentes, and utterly fained, if it be in paper or parchement without
the great seal. Also if the same brief be in print, it is also of authority.
For the Printers will see, and well understand before it come in press, that the
same is lawful. Also I am credibly in formed, that the chief Proctors of many
of these houses, that seldom travel abroad themselves, but have their factors
to gather for the^, which look very slenderly to the impotent and miserable
creatures committed to their charge; and die for want of cherishing, whereas
they and their wives are well cra^med and clothed, and will have of the best.
And the founders of every such house, or the chief of the parish where they
be, would better see unto these Proctors, that they might do their duty, they
should be well spoken of here, and in the world to come abou^dantly therefore
rewarded. I had of late an honest man, and of good wealth, repaired to my house
to common with me about certain affairs. I invited the same to dinner, and
dinner being done, I demanded of him some news of those parties were boe
did. Thanks be to God sir (says be) al is well and good now. Now (quoth I)
this same now declares yt some things of late has not been well. Yes sir (quoth.
he) matter is not great, I had thought I should have been well beaten within
this seventh night. How so (quoth I) Mary sir said he, I am Constable for fault
of a better, and was commanded by the Iusticer to watch. The watch being set,
I took an honest man one of my neighbors with me, and went up to the end of the
town as far as the spittle house, at which house I heard a great noise, and
drawing nere stood close under the wall, and this was at one of the clock
after mydnight. Where he hard swearing, prating, and wagers laying, and the pot
a pase walki^g, and.xl. d. gaged upon a match of wrestling, pitching of the
bar, and casting of the sledge. And not they go in a fustia^ fume into the
back side, where was a great Axiltrye, and they fell to pitching of the bar,
being iii to iii. The Moon did shine bright, the Constable with his neighbor
might see and behold all that was done. And how the wife of the house was
rosting of a Pyg, while her gestes were in their match. At the last they could
not agree upon a cast, and fell at words, and from words to blows. The
Constable with his fellow runs unto them to part them, and in the parting
lyrkes a dry blow or two. Then the noise increased, the Constable would have
had them to to the stocks. The wife of ye house ru^nes out with her good man to
entreat the Constable for her gestes, and leaves the Pyg at the fire alone. In
comes tow or three of the next neighbors, being waked with this noise, and
into the house they come, and find none therein, but the Pygge well roasted, and
carries the same away with them spyt and all, with such bread and drink also
as stood upon the table. When the good man and the good wife of the house had
entreated and pacified the Constable, showing unto him that they were Proctors
and Factors all of Spyttlehouses, and that they tarried there but to break
their fast, and would ride away immediately after, for they had far to go,
and therefore meant to ride so earlye. And coming into their house again,
fynding the Pygge with bread and drink all gonne, made a great exclamation,
for they knew not who had the same.

The Constable returning and hearing the lamentable words of the good wife,
how she had lost both meat, and drink, and saw it was so in deed, he laughed
in his sleue, and commanded her to dress no more at unlawful hours for any
gestes. For he thought better bestowed upon those smell feasts his poor
neighbors, then upon such sturdye Lubbars. The next morning betimes the
spitte and pottes were set at the Spittle house door for the owner? Thus
were these Factours begyled of their breakefaste, and one of them had well
beaten an other, and by my troth (quoth this Cunstable) I was glad when I
was well ryd of them. Why quoth I, could they cast the bar and sledge well? I
will tell you sir (quoth he) you know there has been many games this Summer,
I think verily that if some of these Lubbars had been there, and practysed
amongst others, I believe they would have carried away the best games. For
they were so strong and sturdye, that I was not able to stand in their
hands. Well (quoth I) at these games you speak of, both legs and arms be
tried. Yea (quoth this offycer they be wicked men. I have seen some of them
since with cloutes bound about their legs, and haltyng with their staff
in their hands. Wherefore some of them (by GOD be naught all.

A Abraham man.
THese Abraham men be those that feign them selves to have been mad, and have
been kept either in Bedleant, or in some other prison a good time, and not one
amongst twenty that ever came in prison for any such cause: yet will they
say how pitiously and most extremely they have been beaten and dealte withal.
Some of these be merry and very pleasante, they will dance and sing, some
others be as cold and reasonable to talk with all. These beg money, either
when they come at Farmours howses they will demand Baken, either cheese, or
wool, or any thing that is worth money. And if they espy small company within
they will with fierce countenance demand somewhat. Where for fear the
maids will give them largely to be rid of them.

If they may conuenyently come by any cheat, they will pycke and steal, as
the vprighte man or Roge, poultrey or lynnen. And al women that wander, be at
their commandments. Of all that ever I saw of this kind, one naming him
self Stradling, is the craftiest and most dissemblingest Knave. He is able
with his tongue and usage to deceive and abuse the wisest manne that is. And
surely for the proporcion of his body, with every member there unto
appertaininge, it cannot be amended. But as the proverb is (God has done his
part.) This Stradlyng says he was the Lord Sturtons man, and when he was
executed, for very pensiuenes of mind he fell out of his wit, and so
continued a year after and more, and that with the very grief and fear he
was taken with a marvelous palsy, that both head and hands will shake, when
he talks with any, and that apase or fast, whereby he is much pitied, and
gets greatly. And if I had not demanded of others both men and women, that
commonly walks as he does, and known by them his deep dissimylation, I
never had understand the same. And thus I end with these kind of vacabondes.

A Fresh Water Mariner or Whipiacke.
THese Fresh water Mariners their shipes were drowned in the plain of
Salisbury. These kind of Caterpillars counterfeit great losses on the sea,
those be some Western men, and most be Irysh men. These will run about the
country with a counterfeit license, fayning either shipwreck, or spoiled by
Pirates near the coast of Cornwall or Deuenshire and set a land at some haven
town there, having a large and formal writing, as is above said with the names
and seals of such men of worship at ye least iiii. or five as dwells near
or next to the place where thee feign their landing. And nere to those shieres
will they not beg, until they come into Wilshire, Hamshire, Barkshire,
Oxfordshire, Harfordshire, Middelsexe, and so to London, and down by the river
to seek for their ship and goods that they never had, then pass they
through Surrey, Sossex, by the sea costs, and sort i^to Kent, demanding
alms to bring them home to their country.

Some time they counterfeit the seal of the Admiraltie. I have diverse times
taken away from them their licenses of both sorts, with such money as they
have gathered, and have confiscated the same to the poverty nigh adjoining to
me. And they will not beelong without another. For at any good town they will
renew the same. Once with much threatening and fair promises I required to
know of one company who made their license. And they swear yt they bought the
same at Portsmouth of a Mariner there and it cost him two shilinges, with such
warrants to be so good and effectual, that if any of the best men of law or
learned about London should peruse the same, they wear able to find no fault
therewith but would assuredly allow the same.

A counterfeit Cranke.
THese that do cou^terfet the Cra^ke be young knaves and young harlots, that
depely dissemble the falling sickness. For the Cranke in their langage is the
falling evil, I have seen ome of these with fair writings testimonial,
with the names and seals of some men of worship in Shropshiere, and in other
Shieres far of, that I have well known, and have taken the same from them.
Many of these do go without writings, and will go half naked, and look most
pitiously. And if any clothes be given them, they immediately sell the same,
for wear it they will not, because they would be the more pitied, and wear
filthy clothes on their heads, and never go without a piece of white soap
about them, which if they see cause or present gain, they will privily co^uey
the same into their mouth, and so work the same there, that they will foam as
it were a Boore, and marueilously for a time torment them selves, and thus
deceive they the common people, and gain much. These have commonly their
harlots as the other.

Upon Alhollenday in the morning last. Anno domini. 1566. or my my book was
half printed I mean the first impressio^ there came early in the morninge a
Counterfeit Cranke under my lodgyng at the white Fryares within the cloister in
a little yard or coorte where abowtes lay two or three great Ladies beeng
without the liberties of London whereby he hoped for the greater gain, this
Cranke there lamentably lamenting and pytefully crying to be releued declared
to diverse there his paynfull and miserable disease I b^ynge risen and not half
ready hard his doleful words and rufull mornings hering him name the falling
sycknes thought assuredly to my self that he was a deep desembelar, so
coming out at a sodayn and beholding his ugly and yrksome attire his loath
some and horrible countenance it made me in a marvelous parplexite what to
think of him whether it were feigned or troth, for after this manner went he,
he was naked from ye wast upward saving he had a old gyrken of lether patched
and that was loose about him that all his body lay ^^ote bare a fylthy foul
cloth he ware on his head being cut for the purpose having a narrow place to put
out his face with a bauer made to trusse up his beard and a string that tied
the same down close abowte his neke with an old felt hat which he still
carried in his hand to receive the cheryte and devotion of the people for that
would he hold owte from him having his face from ye eyes downward all smerde
with fresh blood as though he had new falen and been tormented with his paynful
panges his gyrken being all be rayde with dirt and mire and his hatte and hosen
also as though he had wallowed in the myer, sewrely the sight was monstreous
and terreble, I called him unto me and demanded of him what he ayled. A good
master quoth he I have the grievous and painful dyseas called the falling
sycknes why quoth I how comes thy gyrken hose and hat so be rayd with dirt
and mire and thy skyn also. A good master I fell down on the backesyde here in
the foul lane hard by the watersyde and there I lay all most all night and
have bled all most all the blood owte in my body, it raynd that morning very
fast and while I was thus talking with him a honest poor woman that dwelt
thereby brought him a fair lynnen cloth and bed him wype his face therewith and
there being a tobbe standinge full of rain water offered to give him some in a
dishe that he might make him self clean he refused the same why do thou so
quoth I, a sir says he if I should wash my self I should fall to bleeding a
fresh again and then I should not stop my self, these words made me the more
to suspect him.

Then I asked of him where he was borne what is name was how long he had this
disease and what time he had been here about London and in what place, sir says
he I was borne at Leycestar my name is Nicholas Gennins and I have had this
falling sycknes.viii. years and I can get no remedy for the same for I have it
by kind my father had it and my friends before me, and I have byne these two
years here about London, and a year and a half in bethele^, why wast thou
out of thy wits quoth I? ye sir that I was.

what is the Kepars name of the house, his name is quoth he John Smith, then
quoth I he must understand of thy disease if thou hadest the same for the
time thou wast there, he knows it well, ye not only he but all the house
beesyde quoth this Cranke for I came thens but within this fortnight, I had
stand so long reasoning the matter with him that I was a could and went in to
my chamber and made me ready, and commanded my servant to repair to bethelem
and bring me true word from the keeper there whether any such man has bin with
him as a prisoner having the disease aforesaid and give him a not of his name
and the kepars also, my servant retornyng to my lodgyng did assure me that
nether was there ever any such man there nether yet any keeper of any such name,
but he that was there keeper he sent me his name in writing affermynge that he
lets no man depart from him unless he be set away by his friends and that
none that came from him beggeth abowte the City then I sent for the Printar of
this book, and showed him of this dyssembling Cranke and how I had sent to
Bethelem to understand the trough and what answer I received again requiring
him that I might have some servant of his to watch him faithfully that day that
I might understand trustely to what place he would repair at night unto, and
thither I promised to go my self to see their order and that I would have him
to associate me thither, he gladly granted to my request and sent two boys
that both diligently and vigelantly accomplished the charge given them and found
the same Crank abowte ye Temple where about the most part of the day he begged
unless it were about xii. of the clock he went on the backsyde of Clementes. In
without Temple bar there is a lane that goes into the Feldes there he
renewed his face again with fresh blud which he carried about him in a
bladder and dawbed on fresh dyrt upon his gerken hat and hosen.

And so came back again unto the Temple and sometime to the Watersyde and
begged of all that passed hye, the boys beeheld how some gave grotes, some
six pens, some gave more for he looked so ouglei^ and yrksomlie that every
one pytied his miserable case that beehelde him, to be short there he passed
all the day till night approached, and when it began to be somewhat dark he
went to the watersyde and took a Skoller and was fette over the Water into
Saint Gorges feldes, contrary to my expectation, for I had thought he
would have gonne in to Holborne or to Saint Gylles in the field but these
boys with (Argues and Lynces) eyes set sewre watch upon him and the one took
a Boat and followed him and the other went back to tell his master.

The Boy that so followed him by Water, had no Monney to pay for his Bote
hyre, but laid his Penner and his Ynkhorne to gage for a penny, and by that
time the boy was set over, his Master with all celeryte had taken a Boat and
followed him a pase, now had they still a sight of the Cranke which crossed
over the feldes toward Newyngton and thither he went and by that time they
came thither it was very dark, the pryntar had there no acquayntance nether
any kind of weapon about him nether knew he how far the Cranke would go,
becawse he then suspected that they dogged him of purpose, he there stayed him
and called for the Constable which camforth diligently to inquire what the
matter was this zealous Printar charged this officer with him as a malefacter
and a dessembelyng vagabonde, the Constable would have laid him all night in
the Cage that stood in the streat, nay says this pytifull printer I pray you
have him into your house for this is like to be a cold night and he is naked
you keep a vytellynge house let him be well cheryshed this night for he is
well hable to pay for the same, I know well his gaynes has been great to day,
and your house is a sufficient prison for the time and we will there search him,
the Constable agreed there unto, they had him in, and caused him to wash him
self that done they demanded what money he had about him, says this
Cranke so God help me I have but xii. pens. and plucked owte the same of a
little pursse, why have you no more quoth they, no says this Cranke as God
shall save my soul at the day of judgment, we must see more quoth they and
beegane to strype him, then he plucked out a another pursse wherein was xl. d.
Toushe says this Prynter I must see more, Says this Cranke I pray God I be
dampened both body and soul if I have any more, no says this Prynter thou
false knave here is my boy that did watch thee all this day and saw when
such men gave the peeses of six pens grotes and other money and yet thou have
showed us none but small money, when this Cranke hard this and the boy
vowynge it to his face he relented, and plucked out a another pursse wherein was
eight shyllynges and odd money so hade they in the hole that he had begged
that day xiii. s. iii d. ob. then they strypt him starcke naked and as many as
saw him said they never saw hansommer man with a yellow flexen head and
fair sknned without any spotte or greffe then the good wife of the house fet
her man's old clock and cawsed the same to be cast abowte him beecawse the
sight should not abashe her shamefast maidens nether loathe her squamyshe sight.

Thus he set him down at the Chemnes end and called for a pot of Beer
and drank of a quart at a drafte, and called for another and so the third,
that one had been sufficient for any reasonable man, the Drink was so strong
I my self the next morning tasted thereof but let the reader judge what and
how much he would have drunk and he had byne owte of fear then when
they had thus wrong water out of a flint, in spoiling him of his evil gotten
goods his passing pence and fleting trashe. The printer with this officer were
in gealy gelowsy, and devised to search a barn for some roges and vprighte
men, a quarter of a mile from the house yt stood alone in the fields, and went
out about their business leaving this cranke alone with his wife and maidens,
this crafty Cranke espyeng all gone, requested the good wife that he might go
out on the backside to make water and to exonerate his paunch, she had him
draw the lach of the door and go out, neither thinking or mistrusting he would
have gone away naked, but to conclude, when he was out he cast away the cloak
and as naked as ever he was borne he ran away that he would never be hard of
again til now the next morning betimes I went unto Newington to understand
what was done, because I had word or it was day that there my printer was, and
at my coming thither I hard the hole circumstance as I above have written,
and I seeing the matter so fall out, took order with the chief of the parish
that this.xiii. s. and.iii. d. ob. might the next day be equally distributed
by their good discrecio^s to the poverty of the same parish, and so it was done.

A Dommerar.
THese Dommerars are lewd and most subtle people, the most part of these are
Walch men, and will never speak, unless they have extreme punishmente, but
will gape, and with a marvelous force will hold down their toungs doubled,
groninge for your charity, and holding up their hands full pitiously, so that
with their deep dissimulation they get very much. There are of these many, and
but one that I understand of has lost his tongue in deed. Having on a time
occasion to ride to Dartford to speak with a priest there, who makes al kind
of conserues very well, and uses stillinge of waters. And repayringe to his
house I found a Dommerar at his door, and the priest himself perusinge of his
license, under the seals and hands of certain worshipful men, which priest
had thought the same to be good and effectual. I taking the same writing, and
reading it over and noting the seals found one of the seals like unto a seal
that I had about me, which seal I bought besides Charing cross, that I was
out of doubt it was none of those Gentlemen's seals that had subcribed. And
having understanding before of their peuish practices, made me to conceive that
al was forged and naught. I made the more have home, For well I wist that he
would and must of force pass through the parysh where I dwelt, for there was
no other way for him. And coming homewarde, I found them in the town
according to my expectation, where they were staid: for there was a Pallyarde
asociat with the Dommerar and partaker of his gaynes, which Pallyarde I saw
not at Dartforde. The stayers of them was a gentleman call- Chain, and asaruant
of my Lord Keepers, called Wostestowe, which was the chief causer of the stayng
of them, being a Surgien, and cunninge in his science, had seen the like
practices, and as he said had caused one to speak before that was dumme. It
was my chance to com at the beginning of the matter. Sir (quoth this Surgen) I
am bold here to utter some part of my cunning, I trust (quoth he) you shall see
a miracle wrought anon. For I once (quoth he) made a dumme man to speak. Quoth
I you ar well met, and somewhat you have prevented me, for I had thought to have
done no less or they had passed this town. For I well know their writing is
feigned, and they deep dissemblers. The Surgien made him gape, and we could see
but half a tongue. I required the Surgien to put his finger in his mouth, and
to pull out his tongue, and so he did, notwithstanding he held strongly a pretty
while, at the length he plucked out the same, to the great admiration of many
that stood by. Yet when we saw his tongue, he would neither speak, nor yet
could hear Quoth I to the Surgien, knit two of his syngers together, and
thrust a stycke between them, and rub the same up and down a little while,
and for my life he speaks by and by. Sir quoth this Surgien I pray you let me
practice an other way. I was well contented to see the same. He had him into a
house, and tied a halter about the wrestes of his hands and hoysed him up
over a beam, and there did let him hang a good while. at ye length for very
pain, he required for Gods sake to let him down. So he that was both deaf and
du^me could in short time both hear and speak. Then I took that money I
could find in his purse, and distributed the same to the poor people dwelling
there, which was xv. pence half penny, being all that we could find. That
done, and this merry miracle madly made, I sent them with my servant to the
next Iusticer, where they preached on the Pyllery for want of a Pulpet, and
were well whypped, and none did bewail them.

A dronken Tinckar.
THese dronken Tynckers called also Prygges, be beastly people, and these young
knaves be the wurst. These never go without their Doors, and if their women have
any thing about them, as apparel or lynnen that is worth the selling, they
lay the same to gage, or sell it out right (for been bowse at their bowsing
ken.) And full sone will they be wearye of them, and have a new. When they
happen one work at any good house, their Doors linger a lofe, and tarrye for
them in some corner, and if he taryeth long from her, then she knows he
has work, and walks near, and sytteth down by him. For besides money he
looks for meat and drink for doing his dame pleasure. For if she have three
or four holes in a pan, he will make as many more for spedy gayn. And if he
se any old ketel, chafer, or pewterdish a broad in the yard where he woorketh,
he quicklye snappeth the same up, and into the booget it goethe round. Thus
they live with decrite. I was crediblye informed by such as could well tell, that
one of these tippling Tinckers with his dog robbed by the high way.iiii.
Pallyardes, and.ij. Roges.vj. persons together, and took from the^ above.iiij.
pound in ready money, and hide him after in a thick wood a day or two, and
so escaped untaken. Thus with picking and stealing, mingled with a little work
for a coullor, they pass their time.

A Swadder or Peddler
THese Swadders and pedlers, be not all evil, but of an indifferent behavior.
These stand in great awe of the vpryght men, for they have often both wares
and money of them. But for as much as they seek gain unlawfully aganst the
laws and statutes of this noble realm, they are well worthy to be registered
among yt number of vacabonds, and undoubtedly I have had some of them brought
before me when I was in commission of the peace as malefactors for brybering and
stealing. And now of late it is a great practes of ye upright man, when he
has gotten a botye to bestow the same upon a pack full of wares, and so
goethe a time for his pleasure because he would live with out suspicion.

A Iarkeman, And a Patrico.
For As much as these two names a Iarkeman and a Patrico be in the old brief
of vacabonds, and setforthe as two kinds of evil doers, you shall understand
that a Iarkmane has his name of a Iarke, which is a seal in their Languag,
as one should make writings and set seals for lycences and pasportes.

And for troth there is none that goes about the country of them yt can
either write so good and fair a hand, either indite so learnedlye as I have
seen and handeled a number of them: but have the same made in good towns where
they come, as what can not be had for money, as the proverb says (Omnia
venalia Rome) and many has confessed the same to me. Now also there is a
Patrico and not a Patriarch, which in their language is a priest yt should make
marriages till death did depart, but they have none such I am well assured,
for I put you out of doubt that not one amongst a hundredth of them are
married, for they take lechery for no sin, but natural fellowshyp and good
lyiknge love, so that I will not blot my book with these two that be not.

A Demaunder for glymmar.
THese Demaunderes for glymmar be for the most part women, for glymmar in
their language is fire: these go with faynen lycences and counterfayted
wrytings, having the hands and seals of such gentlemen as dwells nere to
the place where they feign them selves to have been burnt and their goods
consumed with fire. They will most lamentably demand your charity, and will
quickly shed salt tears, they be so tender hearted. They will never beg in
that Shiere where their losses (as they say) was. Some of these go with
slates at their backs, which is a sheet to lie in a nights. The upright men
be very familiar with these kind of women, and one of them helps an other. A
Demaunder for glymmar came unto a good town in Kent to ask the cheritie of
the people, having a feigned lycens about her that declared her misfortune by
fire, done in Somerset shyre, walking with a wallet on her shoulders wherein
she put the devotion of such as had no money to give, here that is to say,
Malte, woll, baken, bread, and cheese, and always as ye same was full, so was
it ready money to her when she emptyed the same, where so ever she traueled this
harlot was as they term it snowte fair and had an Upright man or two always
attending on her watch (which is on her parson) and yet so circomspecte that
they would never be seen in her company in any good town unless it were in
small vyllages where typling houses wear, either traueling to gether by the
high ways, but ye troth is by report she would wekely be worth vi. or seven
shyllinges, with her begging and bycherye. This glimmeri^g Morte repayring to
an Ine in ye said town, where dwelt a wydow of fyfty winter old of good
welthe but she had an vnthryftye son, whom she used as a chamberlain to
attend gestes when they repard to her house, this amerous man beholding with
ardant eyes, beholdinge this glymmeringe glauncer was presently peteously
persed to the heart, and lewdly longed to be clothed under her lyuerye and
bestowing a few fond words, with her, understood strayte, that she would be
easlye persuaded to lykinge lechery, and as a man mased mused how to attain
to his purpose, but he had no money. Yet consideringe with him self that
wares would be welcome where money wanted, he went with a wannion to his
mothers chamber and there sekinge about for od ends, at length found a little
whystell of silver that his mother did use customably to wear on, and had
forgote the same for haste that morning, and offeres the same closely to this
manerly marian that if she would mete him on the backesyde of the town and
courteously kys him without constraynt she should be mystres thereof and it
wear much better, well says she you are a wanton, and beholding the wystell
was farthar in love therewyth, then rauysht with his person and agred to mete
him presently and to accomplish his fond fancy, to be short and not tedyous a
quorter of a mile from the town he merely took measure of her under a bawdy
bushe (so she gave him that she had not) and he received that he could not) and
taking leave of each other with a courteous kiss, she plesantly passed forth one
her iornaye and this untoward lycorous chamberlayne repaired home ward. But or
these two tortylles took there leave the good wife had myssed her whystell, and
sent one of her maidens in to her chamber for the same, and being long sawght
for none could be found, her mystres hering that dylygent search was made for
the fame, and that it was taken away, began to suspecte her unblessed babe,
and demanded of her maidens whether none of the^ saw her son in her chamber
that morning, and one of them answered that she saw him not there but coming
from thence, then had she enough for well she wyste that he had the same, and
sent for him but he could not be found. Then she caused her hosteler in whom
she had better affyaunce in for his troth and yet not one amongst twenty of
them but have well left there honesty (As I here a great sort say) to com
unto here which attended to know her pleafure, go seek out says she my
untoward son and bid him come speak with me, I saw him go out says he
half an our sithe^s on ye backsid I had thought you had sent him of your
arrante, I sent him not quod she go look him out. This hollow hosteler took
his staff in his neck and trodged out apace that way he saw him before go
and had some understanding by one of the maidens that his mystres had her
wystell stolen and suspected her son, and he had not gone far but that he
espied him coming homeward alone, and meting him axed where he had been. Where
have I been quod he and began to smyle, now by the mas thou have been at some
baudy banquet, thou have even told troth quod this chamberlayne sewrely quod
this hostler thou haedest the same woman that begged at our house to day for
ye harms she had by fire, where is she quod he she is almost a mile by this
time quod this chamberlayne, where is my mystres whystell quoth this hosteler
for I am well assured that thou had it and I fear me thou have given it to
that harlot. Why is it myssed quoth this chamberlayne, yea quod this hosteler
and showed him all the hole circomstaunce what was both said and thought on
him for the thing. Well I will tell the quod this Chamberlayne I wylbe plain
with the I had it in deed and have given the same to this woman, and I pray
the make the best of it and help now to excuse the matter, and yet surely
and thou would take so much pain for me as to over take her for she goes
but softly and is not yet fare of and take the same from her and I am ever
thine assured freende. Why then go with me quoth this hostler, nay in faith
quoth this Chamberlayne what is frear then gift, and I had pretty pastime for
the same, hadest thou so quoth this hosteler now by the mass and I will have
some to or I will lie in the duste or I come again. Passing with have to
overtake this paramoure within a mile from ye place where he departed he
ouertoke her having an upright man in her company a strong and a sturdye
vacabond some what amassed was this hosteler to se one familiarly in her company
for he had well hopped to have had some delycate dalyance as his fellow had
but saying the matter so fall out and being of good corrage and thinking to him
self that one true man was better then two false knaves and being on the high
way thought upon help if need had been by such as had passed to and fro.
Demanded fersely the whistell that she had even now of his fellow, why
husband quoth she can you suffer this wretch to slander your wife, a vaunt
verlet quod this upright man and letes drive with all his force at this
hosteler and after half a dosen blows he strycks his staff out of his hand,
and as this hosteler stepte back to have taken up his staff again, this
glymmeringe Morte flinges a great stone at him and struck him on the head that
down he falls with the blood about his ears and while he lay this amassed the
upright man snatches away his purse, wherein he had money of his mystresses as
well as of his own, and there let him lie and went away with speed that they
were never hard of more. When this dry beaten hosteler was com to him self he
fayntly wandereth home, and crepethe into his couche and restes his idle head,
his mystrys hard that he was come in, and laid him down on his bead,
repaired straight unto him and ask him what he ayled and what the cause was of
his so sodden lying one his bed, what is the cause quoth this hosteler your
whystell your whystell speaking the same pytiously iii. or iiii. times, why
fool quoth his mystres take no care for that, for I do not greatly way it, it
was worth but iii. s. iiii. d. I would it had been burnt for iiii. years agon,
I pray the why so quoth his mystres I think thou art mad, nay not yet quoth.
this hosteler but I have been madly handlyd, why what is the matter quoth his
mystres and was more desirous to know the cause, and you will for give my
fellow and me I will show you, or else I will never do it, she made him
presently faithful promise that she would, then says he send for your son
home again which is ashamed to look you in the face I agree there to says she,
well then quoth. this hosteler your son has given the same Mort that begged
here for the burning of her house a whystell and you have given her v. s. in
money, and I have given her x, s, of my own, why how so quoth she, then he
sadlye showed her of his myshap with all ye circomstaunce that you have hard
before, and how his purse was taken away and xv shyllings in the same, whereof
v. s. was her money and x. s. his own money is this true quoth his mystres, I
by my troth quoth. this hosteler, and nothing greues me so much, neither my
beatyng neither the loss of my money as does my euel and wretched luck, why
what is the matter quoth. his mystres, your son says this hosteler had some
chere and pastyme for that whystell for he lay with her, and I have been well
beaten, and have had my pursse taken from me and you know your son is merry
and pleasant and can keep no great council and then shall I be mocked and
laughed to skorne in all places when they shall here how I have been served,
Now out upon you knaves both quoth his mystres, and laughes out the matter,
for she well saw it would not otherwise prevail.

A bawdy basket.
THese bawdy baskets be also women, and go with baskets and Capcases on their
arms, wherein they have laces, pynnes, nedles, white ynkell, and round sylke
gyrdls of al colors. These will bye conueyskins, and stele lynnen clothes of
on hedges. And for their tryfles they will procure of mayde^ servants, when
their mystres or dame is out of the way, either some good piece of beef, baken,
or cheese, that shall be worth xii. d. for ii. d. of their toys. And as they
walk by the way, they often gain some money with their instrument, by such
as they sodaynely mete withal. The upright men have good acquayntaunce with
these, and will help and relieve them when they want. Thus they trade their
lives in lewd loathsome lechery. Amongst them all is but one honest woman, and
she is of good years, her name is Ione Messenger, I have had good proof of
her. as I have learned by the true report of diverse, Three came to my gate the
last summer. Anno Domni. 1566. a very miserable man and much deformed as burnt
in the face blere eyde and lame of one of his legs that he went with a
crouche, I axed him where he was borne and where he dwelt last and showed him
that thither he must repair and be releued and not to range about the
country, and seeing some cause of cheryte I caused him to have meat and drink
and when he had drunk I demanded of him whether he was never spoiled of the
vpryght man or Roge, yes that I have quoth be and not this vii. years for so long
I have gone abroad, I had not so much taken from me and so evil handelyd as I
was within these iiii. days, why how so quod I in good faith sir quod he I
chanced to mete with on of thief bawdy baskets which had an upright man in her
company, and as I would have passed quietly by her, man says she unto her
make, do you not se this ylfauored windshaken knave, yes quoth. the upright man
what say you to him, this knave faith she owes me ii. s, for wares that he had
of me half a year a go I think it well says this upright man syrra says he
pay your detes, says this poor man I owe her none nether did I ever bargane
with her for any thing and as this aduysed I never saw her before in all my
life, mercy god quoth she what a lying knave is this, and he will not pay you
housband beat him surely, and the vpryght man gave me iii. or iiii. blows on
my back and shoulders and would have beat me worsse and I had not given him
all the money in my purse and in good faith for very fear I was feign to give
him xiiii. pence which was all ye money that I had, why says this bawdy basket
haste thou no more, then thou owe me x. d. still, and be well assured that I
wylbe paid the next time I meet with the. And so they let me pass by them. I
pray god save and bless me and all other in my case from such wicked persons
quoth this poor man, why whether went they then quoth I in to east Kent for I
meet with them on thyssid of Rochester. I have diverse times been attempted but I
never lost much before, I thank god there came still company by before this
unhappy time. Well quoth I thank God of all, and repair home into thy natyue
country.

A Antem morte.
THese Antem Mortes be married women, as there be but a few. For Antem in their
Language is a Church, so she is a wife married at ye Church, and they be as
chaste as a Cow. I have ye goes to Bull every moon, with what Bull she
cares not. These walk most times from their housbands company a month and
more to gether, being asociate with another as honest as her self. These will
pylfar clothes of hedges, some of them go with children of.x. or xii. years of
age, if time and place serve for their purpose they will send them into some
house at the window to steal and rob, which they call in their language,
Milling of the ken, and will go with wallets on their shoulders, and slates at
their backs: there is one of these Antem Mortes she is now a widow, of fyfty
years old, her name is Alice Milson, she goes about with a couple of great
boys, the youngest of them is fast upon xx. years of age and these two do lie
with her every night, and she lies in the mids, she says that they be her
children, that beteled be the babes borne of such abhonable bellye.

A walking Morte.
THese walkinge Mortes be not married, these for their unhappy years does go
as a Antem Morte, and will say their husbands died either at Newhauen
Ireland, or in some service of the Prince. These make laces upon staves and
purses that they carry in their hands, and white vallance for beds. Many of
these has had, and have children: when these get ought, either with begging
bychery or brybery, as money or apparel, they are quickly shaken out of all by
the upright men, that they are in a marvelous fear to carry any thing about
them that is of some valor. Wherefore this policy they use, they leave their
money now with on and then with another trustye householders either with the
good man or good wife, some time in won shiere, and then in another as they
travel, this have I known ye iiij. or v. shillings yea.x. shillinges left in
a place and the same will they come for again within won quarter of a year or
some time not inhalfe a year, and all this is to little purpose, for all their
peuyshe pollicye, for when they bye them lynnen or garments, it is taken away
from them and worsse given them, or none at all. The last Summer Anno Domni.
1566. being in familiare talk with a walking Morte, that came to my gate I
learned by her what I could and I thought I had gathered as much for my purpose
as I desired. I began to rebuke her for her lewd life and beastly behauor,
declaring to here what punishment was prepared and heaped up for her in the
world to com, for her fylthy living and wretched conversation. God help quod
she how should I live, none will take me into seruis, but I labor in harvest
time honestly. I think but a while with honesty quoth I Shall I tell you quod
she, the best of us al may be amended, but yet I thank God, I ded on good
deed within this twelve mo^ths wherein quod I, says she I would not have it
spoken of again. If it be meet and necessary quod I it shall lie under my
fete, what mean you by that quoth she, I mean quod I to hide the same and
never to discover it to any. Well quoth she and began to lawgh as much as she
could, and swear by the mass that if I disclosed the same to any she would
never more tell me any thing. The last summer quod she I was great with child
and I traueled into east kent by the sea cost, for I lusted meruelously after
oysters and mussels and gathered many, and in ye place where I found them, I
opened them and eat them still, at the last in seking more I reached after one
and stepped into a hole and felin into the wast and their did stycke, and I had
been drowned if the tide had come, and espyinge a man a good way of, I cried
as much as I could for help, I was alone he hard me and repaired as fast to me
as he might and finding me their fast stycking, I required for gods sake his
help, and whether it was with stryuing and forcing my self out or for Joy I
had of his coming to me. I had a great couller in my face and looked red and
well tollered. And to be plain with you he lyked me so well (as he said) that
I should there lie still, and I would not grant him, that he myghtly with me.
And by my troth I wist not what to answer I was in such a perplexite, for I
knew ye man well, he had a very honest woman to his wife and was of some wealth
and on the other side if I wear not help out I should there have peryshed,
and I granted him that I would obey to his will, then he plucked me out. And
because there was no convenient place nere hand, I required him that I might
go wash my self and make me some what clenly, and I would come to his house
and lodge al night in his barn, whether he might repair to me and
accomplish his desire, but let it not be quoth she before nine of the clock
at night for then there wylbe small s^yrring. And I may repair to the town
quod she to warm and dry my self, for this was about two of the clock in
the after noune do so quoth he for I must be busye to look out my cattle
here by before I can come home. So I went away from him and glad was I, and
why so quoth I, because quoth she his wife my good dame is my very friend, and
I am much beholdinge to her. And she has done are so much good or this that I
we are loath now to harm her any way^, to by quoth I what and it had been
any ^ther man and not your good dames husband. The matter had been the less
quoth she. Tell me I pray the quoth I who was the father of thye child she
stodyed a while, and said that it had a father but what was he quoth I.
Now by my truth I know not quoth she, you bring me ou^ of my matter so
you do, well say on quoth I then I departed straight to ye town and came to
my dames house. And showed here of my mysfortune, also of here husebandes usage
in all points and that I showed here the same for good will and bide her take
better head to her housebande, and to her self, so she gave me grate thanks
and made me good cheer, and bid me in any case that I shouldde be redye at the
barn at that time and our we had appointed, for I know well quoth this good
wife, my husband will not break with the. And one thing I warrant the that
thou give me a watch word a loud when he goes about to have his pleasure
of the and that should be fie for shame fie, and I will be hard by you with
help. But I charge the keep this secret until all be fynesed, and hold
says this good wife here is one of my peticotes I give the. I thank you good
dame qu^^h I, and I warraunte you I will be ^^ue and trustye unto you. So my
dau^e lef^e me setting by a good fire with meat and drink, and with the
oysters I brought with me, I had great the ere she went straight and
repaired unto her gossypes dwelling there by, and as I did after understand she
made her moan to thee^. what a naughti lend lecherous husband she had, and how
yt she could not have his company for harlots, and that she was in fear to
take some fylthy disease of him, he was so commen a man having little respect
whom he had to do with all, and quoth she now here is one at my house a
poor woman that goes about the country that he would have had to do
withal wherefore good neighbors and louinge gossypes as you love me and as
you would have help at my hand another time, deuyse some remedy to make my
husband a good man, yt I may live in sum suerty with out disease, and that he
may save his soull that God so derelye bought. After she had told her tale
they cast their persinge eyes all upon her, but won stout dame amongst the
rest had these words as your pacient bearinge of troubles, your honest behauor
among us, your neighbors your tender and pytiful heart to the poor of the
parysh, does move us to lament your case, so the insatiable carnalite of your
faythelesse husband does instigate and styre us to deuyse and invent some
speedy redress for your ease and the amendment of his life. Wherefore this is
my council and you will be aduertysed by me, for I say to you all, unless it
be this good wife, who is cheefely touched in this matter I have the next
cause, for he was in hand with me not long a go, and company had not been
present which was by a marvelous chance, he had I think forced me. For
often he has been temperinge with me, and yet have I sharply said him
nay, therefore let us assemble secretly into the place where he has
appointed to meet this gyllot that is at your house and lyrke preuely in seem
corner till he begin to go about his business. And then me thought I hard
you say even now that you had a watch word, at which word we will all
step forth being five of us besides you for you shall be none because it is
your husband, but get you to bed at your accustomed our. And we will carry
each of us a good byrchen rodd in our lappes, and we will all be muffeled for
knowinge and se that you go home and acquaynt that walking Morte with the
matter for we must have her help to hold, for always four must hold and two
lay one. Alas says this good wife, he is to strong for you al, I would be
loath for my sake you should receive harm at his hand fear you not quod these
stout women let her not give yt watch word until his hosen be about his
legs. And I trow we all wylbe with him to bring before he shall have leisure to
pluck them up again they al wc on voice agred to ye matter yt the way she had
devised was ye best, so this good wife repaired home but before she departed
from her gossyps she showed the^ at what our they should preuely come in on ye
backsyd and where to tarry their good our, so by yt time she came in it was all
most night,

and found the walking Morte still setting by the fire, and declared to her all
this new deuyse above said, which promised faithfully to fullfyll to her small
power as much as they had devised, with in a quarter of an owre after in
comes the good man, who said that he was about his cattle, why what have we
here wife setting by the fire, and if she have eat and drunk send her into
the barn to her lodging for this night, for she troubeleth the house, even as
you will housbande says his wife you know she comes once in two years into
these quarters. Away says this good wife to your lodginge, yes good dame
says she as fast as I can, thus by loking won on the other each knew others
mind and so departed, to her comely couche, the good man of the house shrodge
him for Joy thinking to him self I will make some pastyme with you anon. And
calling to his wife for his sopper set him down and was very pleasant and
drank to his wife and fell to his mamerings and mouched a pace nothing
understanding of the banckquet that was a preparing for him after sopper, and
according to the proverb. (Swear meat will have sour sauce) thus when he was
well refreshed, his sprietes being reuyued entered into familiare talk with his
wife, of many matters hawe well he had spent that day to both there
proffytes, saying some of his cattle that were like to have been drowned in
the deches dryuing others of his neyghbors cattle out that were in his
pastures, and mending his fences that were broken down. Thus profitably he had
consumed the day, nothing talking of his helping out of the walking Morte out
of the mire, nether of his request nor yet of her promise. Thus feding her wc
friendly santycyes consumed two ours and more. Then fayninge how he would se
in what case his horse were in and how they were dressed. Repaired couetly in
to the barn, where as his freendely foes lyrked preuely unless it were this
mannerly Morte, that comely couched on a bottell of straw, what are you come
quod she by the mass I would not for a hundredth pound that my dame should
know that you were here either any else of your house. No I warrant the says
this good man they be all safe and fast enough at their work, and I wylbe at
mine anon. And lay down by her, and straight would have had to do with her,
nay lie says she I like not this order if ye lie with me you shall surely
vntrus you and put down your hosen for that way is most easiest and best,
say thou so quoth he now by my troth agred. And when he had untrussed him
self and put down he began to assalt the vnsa^able fort, why quoth she that
was with out shame sauinge for here promise. And are you not ashamed, never a
whyt says he lie down quickly, now fie for shame, fie says she a loud
which was the watch word. At the which word, these fine furious sturdy
muffeled gossypes flynges out, and takes sure hold of this betrayed parson,
sone plucking his hosen down lower, and bynding the same fast about his feet,
then bynding his hands, and knittinge a hand charcher about his eyes, that he
should not see, and when they had made him sure and fast. Then they laid him
one until they wear windles, be good says this Morte unto my master for the
pascion of god and laid on as fast as the rest, and still seized not to cry
upon them to be merciful unto him, and yet laid on a pace, and when they had
well beaten him that the blood braste plentifullye out in most places they
let him lie still bound. With this exortation, that he should from that time
forth know his wife from other men's and that this punishment was but a
flebyting in respect of ye which should follow, if he amended not his
manners. Thus leuyng him blustering blowing and fominge for pain and
malyncolye that he nether might or could be revenged of them, they vanyshed
away and had this Morte with them, and safely conuayde her out of the town,
sone after comes into the barn one of the good man's boys to set some hay
for his horse. And fyndinge his master lyinge fast bound and greuouslye
beaten with rades, was suddenly abashed and would have run out ag^yne to have
called for help, but his master bed him come unto him and vnbynd him. and
make no words quoth he of this. I wylbe revenged well enough, yet not
wythstandinge after better advise, the mattor being dishonest; he thought it
meter to let the same pas, and not as the proverb says (to awake the sleping
dog.) And by my troth quoth this walkinge Morte, I come now from that place
and was never there sythence this part was playde, which is some what more
then a year. And I here a very good report of him, now that he loves his
wife well and uses him self very honestlye and was not this a good act,
now how say you. It was pretelye handeled quoth I and is here all yea quoth
she here is the end.

A Doxe.
THese Doxes be broken and spoiled of their maydenhead, by the upright men, and
then they have their name of Doxes, and not before And afterward she is commen
and indifferent for any that will use her as homo is a commen name to all men.
Such as be fair and some what handsome, keep company with the walkinge Mortes,
and are redye always for the upright men, and are chiefly mayntayned by them,
for others shall be spoiled for their sakes, the other in ferior sort will
resort to noble men's places, and gentlemen's houses standing at the gate,
either lurkinge on the backesyde about backehouses either in hedge rows or
some other thycket, expectinge their pray, which is for the uncomely company
of some courteous ge^t of whom they be refreshed with meat and some monye,
where eschaunge is made ware for ware: this bread and meat they use to carry
in their great hosen, so that these beastlye bryberinge breeches serve many
times for bawdye purposes. I chanced not long since familiarly to commen
with a Doxe that came to my gate, and surely a pleasant harlot, and not so
pleasant as wytty, and not so wytty as void of all grace and goodness. I found
by here talk that she had passed her time lewdlye eyghttene years in
walkinge about. I thought this a necessary instrument to attain some
knoweledge by, and before I would grope her mind I made her both to eat and
drink well, that done I made her faythefull promise to give her some money if
she would open and dyscouer to me such questions as I would demand of her,
and never to be wraye her nether to disclose her name. And you should says
she I were undone: fear not that quoth I, but I pray the quoth I, say nothing
but troth. I will not says she, then first tell me quoth I, how many
upright men and Roges do thou know or have thou known and been conversant
with and what their names be: she paused a while and said: why do you ask me,
or wherefore? For nothing else as I said; but that I would know them when
they came to my gate. Now by my troth (quoth she (then are yea never the
near, for all mine acquayntance for the most part are dead. Dead quoth I,
how dyed they, for want of cherishinge, or of paynefull diseases. Then she
sighed; and said they were hanged. What all quoth I, and so many walk
abroad, as I daily see? By my troth quoth she, I know not paste six or
seven by their names, and named the same to me. When were they hanged quoth I?
Some seven years agone, some three years, and some with in this fortnight, and
declared the place where they wear executed, which I knew well to be true,
by the report of others. Why (quoth I) did not this sorrowful and fearful
sight much grieve thee, and for thy time long and evil spent. I was sorry
quoth she, by the Mass, for some of them were good loving men. For I lackt
not when they had it, and they wanted not when I had it, and diverse of them I
never did for sake, until the Gallows departed us. O merciful God (quoth I
and began to bless me. Why bless ye quoth she? Alas good gentleman every one
must have a lyuinge. Other matters I talked of, but this now may suffice to
show the Reader as it wear in a glass, the bold beastly life of these
Doors. For such as has gone any time abroad, will never forsake their
trade, to dye therefore, I have had good proof thereof. There is one a
notorious harlot of this affinitye called Besse Bottomelye, she has but one
hand, and she has murdered two children at the least.

A Dell.
A Dell is a young wencheable for generation, and not yet known or broken by
the upright man. These go abroad young, either by the death of their parents,
and no body to look unto them, or else by some sharp mystres that they serve
do run away out of service, either she is naturallye borne one, and then
she is a wild Dell, these are broken very young, when they have been lain
wtall by the upright man, then they be Doxes, and no Dels. These wyld Dels
being traded up with their monstrous motheres, must of ne^essyty be as evil or
wursse then their parents, for neither we gather grapes from grene briars,
neither fygs from Thistels. But such buds, such blosoms, such evil sede sown,
well worsse being grown.

A Kynchin Morte.
A Kynchyn Morte is a little Gyrle, the Mortes their mothers carries them at
their backs in their states, which is their shetes, and bryngs them up
safely, till they grow to be ripe, and soon ripe, soon rotten.

A Kynchen Co.
A Kynchen Co is a young boy, traden up to such peuishe purposes, as you have
hard of other young ympes before, that when he grows two years, he is better
to hang then to draw forth.

Their usage in the night.
NOw I think it not unnecessary to make ye Reader vndrsta^n how and in what
manner they lodge a nights in barnes or backe-houses, and of their usage there,
for as much as I have acquai^ted them with their order and practices a day times.
The arche and chief walkers yt has walked a long time, whose experience is
great because of their co^tinui^g practice, I mean all Morts and Doors for
their handsomnes and diligence for making of their couches. The men never
trouble them selves with the thing, but takes the same to be the duty of the
wife. And she shuffels up a quantity of straw or hay in to some pretty corner
of the barn where she may conveniently lie, and well shakes the same, making
the head some what hie, and drives ye same upon the sides and feet like a bed,
then she lays her wallet, or some other little pack of rags or scrip under
her head in the straw to bear up the same, and lays her petycote or cloak
upon and over the straw so made like a bed, and that serves for the
blancket. The^ she lays her state which is her shete upon that, and she have
no shete, as few of them go without, then she spreddeth some large clouts or
rags over the same, and makes her ready, and lays her drouselye down. Many
will pluck of their smockes, and lay the same upon them instead of their
upper sheet, and all her other pelte and trashe upon her also, and many lies
in their smockes. And if the rest of her clothes in cold weather be not
sufficient to keep her warm, then she takethe straw or hay to perform the
matter. The other sort that have not slates, but toumble down and couche a
hogshead in their clothes, and these be still lousy and shall never be with out
vermin, unless, they put of their clothes, and lie as is above said. If the
upright man come in where they lie, he has his choice, and crepeth in close by
his Door, the Roge has his leauings. If the Mortes or Doxes lie or be lodged
in some Farmers barn, and the door be etherlocked or made fast to them, then
will not the upright man press to com in. Unless it be in barnes and out
houses, standinge alone, or some distance from houses which be commonly known
to them. As saint Quintens, three Cranes of the Vyntre, Saint Tybbes, and
Knapsbery, These four be with in on mile compass near unto London. Then have
you iiii. more in Middlesex, draw the pudding out of the fire, in Harrow on
the hill parish. ye Crose keys in Cranford parish, Saint Iulyans in
Thistellworth parish, the house of pity, in North hall parish. These are their
chief houses near about London, where commonly they resort unto for Lodging,
and may repair thither freelye at all times. Sometime shall come in some
Roge, some pyeking knave, anymble Prygge, he walks in softly a nights, when
they be at their rest and plucketh of as many garments as be ought worth that
he may come by, and worth money, and may easily carry the same, and runs
away with the same with great felicitye, and makes port sale at some
convenient place of theirs, that some soon ready in the morning, for want of
their Casters and Togema^s Where in steed of blessing is curssing, in place of
prainge pestilente prayting with odious oaths and terrible threatninges. The
upright me^ have given all these nycke names to the places above said. Yt have
we two notable places in Kent, not fare from London, the one is between
Detforde and Rothered, called the Kings barn, standing alone, that they haunt
commonly ye other is Ketbrok, standing by black heath half a mile from any
house. There will they boldlye draw the latch of the door, and go in when the
good man with his famyly be at supper and sit down without leave and eat and
drink with them, and etherly in ye hal by the fire al night, or in the barn
if there be no rome in the house for them. If the door be either bolted or
locked, if it be not opened unto them when they will, they will break the same
opene to his farther cost. And in this barn sometime do lie.xl. upright men
with their Doxes together at one time. And this must the poor Farmer suffer,
or else they threaten him to burn him, and all that he has.

The names of the Upright men Roges, and Palliardes.
HEre follows the unruly rablement of rascals, and the most notorious and
wyckedst walkers that are lyuinge now at this present with then true names as
they he called and known by. And although I set and place her but iii. orders,
yet good Reader understand that all the others above named are derived and come
out from the upright men and Roges. Concerning ye number of Morets and Dotes,
it is superfluous to write of them, I could well have don it but the number of
them is great, and would ask a good volume.

Upright men.
Richard Brymmysh John Myllar. Well arayd Richard. John Walchman. Thomas
Bulloke. John Jones. Ihon Teddar. Richard Justice. Lennard Just. Robart
Grauenar. Wyllia^ Chamborne Bryan Medcalfe. Robart Gerse. Gryffen. Core the
Cuckolde. Robart King. Nycholas Wylson. Burfet. James Barnard. Stephen Neuet.
Richard Barton. John Braye. Thomas Cutter. Dowzabell skylfull in fence. Robart
Egerton. Thomas Garret. Dauyd Coke. Harrye Hills alias harry go depar. John
Cutter Folentyne Hills his brother. Wylliam Pannell. Wylliam Morgan. John
Bell. Robart Bell his brother. Phillip Greek. John Steuens. Robart Maple.
Wylliam Belson. John Gray^. Roba^^ Lang^^^. Ge^^^e ^^r^mar. Wyliam ^^^^s. John
Why^^. Thomas ^ewton. Wylliam Garret. Long Green. Fardinand^ Angel Wylliam
Robynso^. Wyllia^ Vmb^ruile. John Rewe. Thomas W^b. Wylliam David's. John
M^rres. John a Farnando. Antony Heymer. Laurence Ladd. Dycke Glouer. Antony
Iackson. Richard Constans. Will pen Little John Gray. Robyn Bell. Thomas Grayhis
toes begone. Robbyn Topp John Newman. Wylliam Jones. Great John Gray. Dycke a
Brystow. Tom Bodele. Richard Thomas. Will Powell. Christopher Cook. Edmund Dun
a singing man. Laurence Marshall. Richars Cadman. Edward Skinner, (...) N^^
Shiner (...) (...) Wylliam Clark^ Water Wyrrall. Ned Barington. John Appconnes.
John Thomas. John Arter. John Palmer alias Todd. John Goffren. Thomas Wast.
Thomas Dawso alias. Thomas ^acklin. John G^d^ord. John Herwod amaker of wels,
he (...) half his bargain in hand, and when he has wrought ii. or iii. days
he runs away with his earnest. John Peter. John Porter. Richard Stategood.
John Appowes. Harry Agglyntyne. John Goddard. Edward Brown. Rychard Appryce.
Harry Smith, he driueleth when he speaks. Thomas Baset. John Bates. Thomas
Merchant. Thomas Web. John Comes. John Chyls, alias great Chylas. John (...) he
makes (...) and fausets. John Loudale a master of fence. Robart Brownswerde,
he weatenhe his hear songs. Wylliam Brown. John Love dale. Harry Ionson.
Water Martyn. Antony Iacson. Robart Curses. Thomas Awefeld. John Mekes. John
Appowell. Thomas Gybbins. Richard Walker. Wylliam Grace. John Chapel. John
Gryffen. Robbyn Edmundes. Thomas Lacon Richard Copar. John Mason. Ned
Wetherdon. Ned Holmes. David Edwards. Wyllia^ Pychering. Thomas Bate. John
S^^^ling with the shaking head. John Frank. Thomas Allen. John ^^ker. David
Holland. John Basta^^d. George Hu^cheson. David Jones Fraunces Dawghion.
Roges.
Harry Walls with the little mouth. John Waren. Richard Brewton. Thomas Haske.
Richard Horwo^, well pexe lxxx. years old, he will byre a vi. penny nail a
sonder with his teeth, and a dawdy dronkard. Wylliam Carew. John Done with one
leg. John Elson. Thomas Bear. Nicholas Adams a great s^amerar. Arche Douglas
a Scot. Simon King. John Raynoldes. Thomas Shawnean Iresh man. Black Dycke
George Belbar^y. Humfrey Ward. Little Robyn. Little Dycke. John Harrys. James
Monkaster a counterfeit Cranck, Nicholas Crispyn. Edward Eellys. Wylliam
wastfield. Dycke Duram. Richard Crane ^^rieth a Kinchen co at his Back.
Nycholas Blut, alias. Nycholas Gennyns a counterfeit Crank Wylson. Godman. John
Dew. John Crew with one arm. Nycholas Lynche. Raffe Kyteley. Richard Jones.
Lambart Rose. Harry Mason. Thomas Smithe with the skal skyn. David Dew neuet a
counterfeit Cranke. John Brown a great stamerer. Edward Anseley. Robart
Harryson. Gerard Gybbyn a counterfeit Crank Wylliam Gynkes with a whyr beard a
lusty and strong man, he runs about the country to seek work, with a byg
boy his son carrying his tools as a dawber and plasterer, but little work
serves him.
Pallyards.
Nycholas Newson carries a layned lyrence. Bashforde. Robart Lackley. Wylliam
Thomas Edward Heyward, has his Morte following him Which fayneth ye crank
Preston. Robart Canloke. Wylliam C^oper with the Harelyp. Thomas Edwards.
Laurence with the great leg. John Perse a counterfeit Cranke. Richard Hylton
carries ii. kinchen Mortes about him. Dycke S^han. Irish. John David's his
fellow. Will Penyt ^e^reath a kinchen-morte at his back. Richard Thomas. John
Harrison. Edward Jews a dummerer. John Carew. Wyllia^ Bowmet James Lane with
one eye Irish. Hugh Jones. David Powell. Sothegarde. John Fysher. Nycholas
Decase. Thomas David's Swanders. John Dew. David Jones a counterfyt Cranke.
John Gylford Irish with a counterfeit lysence.
Their is above an hundredth of Irishe men and women that wander about to beg
for their living, that has come over within these two years. They lay they
have been burned and spoiled by the Earele of Desmond, and report well of the
Earl of Vrmond.

All these above written for the most part walk about Essex, Myddleser, Sussex
Surrey, and Rent. Then let the reader judge, what number walks in other
Shieres, ^eare me to great a number, if they be well understand.

HEre I set before thee good Reader, the lewd lousey language of these
lewtering Luskes, and lasy Lorrels, where with they bye and fell the common
people as they pass through the country. Which language they term Peddelars
French, a^ unknown tongue only, but to these bold beastly bawdye Beggars, and
vain Vacabondes, being half myngled with English, when it is familiarly
talked, and first plaring things by their proper names, as an Introduction to
this peuysh speech.

Nab. a head. Nabchet. a hat or cap. Glasyers. eyes. a smeli^g chete a nose.
began. a mouth. a pratlynge chete. a tongue. Crashinge chetes. teeth. Hearing
chetes. ears. fambles. hands. a famblinge chete. a ring on thy hand.
quaromes. a body prat a buttocke. stampes legs. a caster a cloak. a togeman a
cota. a commission a shierte drawers hosen. stampers shoes. a moflinge chete.
a napkyn. a belly chete an apern. dudes clothes. a lag of duds a bucke of
clothes a slate or slats a sheet or shetes lybbege a bed. bunge a pursse.
lowre money. mynt gold. a board a shyllinge. half a board six pence. flagg a
great, a wyn a penny. a make a halfepenny, bowse drink. been good benshyp
very good. quiet nouhgt. a gage a quart pot, a skew a cup. pannam bread.
cassan cheese. yarum milk. lap butter, milk, or whey. pek meat. poppelars
porrage. ruff pek haken. a grunting chet or apatrices kichen, a pyg. a
cakli^gchet a cock or capo^, a margerye prayer. a Hen. a Roger or tyb of the
buttery a Goose a quakinge chet or a red shanke a drake or ducke grannam.
corn. a lowhi^g chet a Cow. a bleting chet a calfe or sheep a prauncer a
horse. antem a church. Solomon a alter or mass. patrico a priest. nosegent a
Nun. a gybe a writing. a Tarke a seal. a ken a house. a stauli^g ken a
house yt will receive stole^ ware a bousing ke^ a ale house. a Lypken. a house
to lie in a Lybbege. a bed, glymmar, fire. Rome bouse wine lage. lage. water
a skyppar. a barn. strommell. straw. a gentry cofes kenne. A noble or gentle
man's house. a gygger, a door. bufe. a dog the lightmans the day. the
darkma^s, the night. Rome vile London. dewse a vile the country. rome morte
the Qeune, a gentrye cofe a noble or gentle man. a ge^try mort A noble or
gentle woman, ye quyer custyn yt Iusticer of peace the harma^ beck the
Counstable, the harmanes the stocks, Quyerken a prison house, Quier
cramprings. boltes or fetters trinynge hanginge chattes the gallows the high
pad. the high way the ruffmanes. ye wods or bushes a smelling chet a garden or
orchard crassinge chets apels pears or any other fruit. to fyltche to beat to
strike to rob. to nyp a bong. to cut a purse To skowere ye cramprings. to
wear boltes or fetters. to heue abough. to rob or ryfle a boewethe. to cly
the gerke to be whypped to cut beuie. to speak gentlye To cut been whyddes
to speak or gave good words To cut quyre whyddes. to give euel words or
evil language. to cut. to say. to tower. to see to bowese. to drink. to
maunde. to ask or requier to stall. to make or ordain to cante to speak. to
will a ken to rob a house. to pryggs. to ride. to dup ye giger to open the
door to couch a hogsheade. to ly down sleep to nyggle to have to do with a
woman carnally. stow you, a hold your peace. bynge a waste go you hence, to
the ruffian. to the devil the ruffian clythe. the deuell take thee
The upright Cafe canteth to the Roger
The vprighte man spaketh to the Roge
Man. Been Lyghtmans to thy quarromes in what lipke^ have thou lipped in this
dark manes; whether in a lybbege or in the strummell.

God morrow to thy body, in what house have thou live in all night whether in
a bed, or in the straw.
Roge. I couched a hogeshed in a Skypper this darkemans.

I lay me down to sleep in a barn this night.
Man. I tower ye strummell tryne upon thy nabcher and Tagman I see the straw
hang upon thy cap and coat


Roge. I say by the Solomon I will lage it of with a gage of been house then
out to my nose watch.

I swear by the Mast I will wash it of with a quart of drink, then say to me
what thou wylt,
Man. Why have thou any lowre in thy bonge to house.

Why have thou any money in thy purfe to drink.
Roge. But a fiagge, a wyn and a make But a grot, a penny and a half penny.


Man. Why where is the kene that has the been house.

where is the house that has the good drink.
Roge. A been mort hereby at the sign of the prauncer A good wife here by at
the sign of the horse,


Man. I cut it is quyer boufe I bousd a flagge the last darkemans.

I say it is small and naughtye drink, I drank a groate there the last
night.
Roge. But bouse there a board and thou shall have beneship But drink there a
shyllinge, and thou shall have very good.

Tower ye yander is the kene dup the gygger and maund that is beneshype.

Se you, yonder is she house open the door, and ask for the best.
Man. This house is as benshyp as rome bouse.

This drink is as good as wine. Now I to were that been bouse makes nase nabes,
Now I so that good drink makes a dronken head.

Man tide of this al dry what been pecke is in harken.

Ask of this wife what good meat she has in her house,
Roge. She has a Cacling chete, a grunting chete, ruff pecke, cassan, and
popplarr of yarum.

She has a hen a pyg, baken, chese, and milk porrage.
Man. That is beneshyp to our watch.

That is very good for us. Now we have well bousd, let us strike some chete
Now we have well drunk let us steal some thing. yonder dwells a quyere
custen it were beneshype to myll him.

Yonder dwells a hoggeshe and choprlyshe man it wear very well done to
rob him.
Roge. Now bynge we a waste to the high pad the ruffmanes is by, Nays let us
go hence to the high way the wodes is at hand.


Man. So may we happen on the Harmanes and cly the Iarke or to the quyecken and
skower quyart tramprings and so to tryning on the chates.

So we may chance to set in the stocks either be whypped either had to
prison house and there be shackeled with bolttes and fetters and then to hang
on the gallows. Gerry began the ruffian clye thee.

A torde in thy mouth the devil take thee.
Man. What stowe you been cofe and cut benar whydds and byng we to rome vile to
nyp a bong so shall we have lowre for the bousing ken and when we byng back to
the deuseauyel we will fylche some duddes of the Ruffemans or myll the ken for
a lagge of dudes.

What hold your peace good fellow and speak better words, and go we to
London to cut a purse, then shall we have money for the ale house, and when we
come back again into the country, we will steal some lynnen clothes of one
hedges, or rob some house for a bucke of clothes. By this little ye may holy
and fully understand their untoward talk and pelting speech myngled and
without measure, and as they have begone of late to deuyse some new terms for
certien things: so will they (...) an alter this and deuyse as evil or
worsse. This language now being known and spread a broad, yet one thing
more I will ad unto, not meaning to Englysh the same, because I learned the
same of a shameless Doxe, but for the phrase of speech I set it forth only.

There was a proud patrico and a nosegent, he took his Iockam in his famble,
and a wappinge he went, he dokte the Dell, he pryge to praunce, he byngd a
waste into the dark man's, he fylcht the Cofe with out any fylth man.
While this second Impression was in printinge it fortuned that Nycholas
Blunte, who called him self Nycholas Gennyns a counterefet Cranke, that is
spoken of in this book, was found begging in the white friars an New-yeres
day last past Anno domini. 1567 and committed unto a offescer who carried him
unto the depetye of the ward which comytted him unto the counter and as the
counstable and a another would have carried him thither. This counterfeit Cranke
ran away, but one lyghter of foot then the other over took him, and so leading
him to the counter, where he remained three days, and from thence to Bryde
well, where before the masters he had his dysgysed aparell put upon him, which
was monstrous to be hold. And after stood in Chepesyde with ye same apparil on a
scafold

A Stocks to stay sure, and safely detayne,
Lasy lewd Leutterers, that laws do offend,
Impudent persons, thus punished with pain,
Hardlye for all this, do mean to amend.
depiction of two men each with a leg in stocks

Fetters or shackels serve to make fast,
Male malefactors, that on myschiefe do muse,
Until the learned laws do quite or do cast,
Such subtle searchers, as all evil do use.
depiction of a pair of fetters or handcuffs and a pair of shackles

A whyp is a whyskar, that will wrast out blood,
Of back and of body, beaten right well.
Of all the other it does the most good.
Experience techeth, and they can well tell.
depiction of two whips or flails and two birch-brooms

O doleful day, now death draws nere,
His bitter styng does pearce me to the heart,
I take my leave of all that be here,
Now piteously playing this tragical part,
Neither stripes nor teachinges in time could convert,
wherefore an ensample let me to you be,
And all that be present, now pray you for me,
depiction of a man bound at the wrists being led to a gallows past a group of
people

THis is the figure of the counterfeit Clarke, that is spoken of in this book of
Roges, called Nycholas Blunt other wise Nycholas Gennyngs. His tale is in the
xvii. lefe of this book, which does show unto all that reads it, woundrous
suttell and crafty deseit down of and by him.

depiction of a man or Nicholas Blunt or Jennings with his head imprisoned in
the Counter or Compter stocks, guarded by two men armed with sticks and a third
armed man nearby

Thus I conclude my bold Beggars book,
That all estates most plainly may see,
As in a glass well pollyshed to look,
Their double demeaner in each degree.
Their lives their language, their names as they be,
That with this warning their minds may be warmed,
To amend their mysdeedes, and so live unharmed.
depiction of the Madonna and Child or Mary and Jesus in a circular frame with
roses and other flowers

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Faulcon by Wylliam
gryffith. Anno Domni. 1567. the eight of January.


