A PARADOX. Prooving, That the Inhabitants of the Isle called MADAGASCAR. OR
St. LAVRENCE, (In Temporal things) are the happiest People in the World.

Whereunto is prefixed, a brief and true Description of that Island: The
Nature of the Climate, and condition of the Inhabitants, and their special
affection to the English above other Nations.

With most probable Arguments of a hopeful and fit Plantation of a Colony
there, in respect of the fruitfulness of the Soil, the benignity of the Air,
and the relieving of our English Ships, both to and from the East Indies.

By WA: HAMOND.

LONDON, Printed for NATHANIELL BUTTER. 1640.

The Preface.
TO the end that the Reader may have the better understanding of this following
discourse, I will here as a preparative set down briefly, plainly, and truly,
the description of this Island so far as my weak capacity shall enable me;
having been there diverse times in the Honorable East India Companies
Service: And once resident there Four Months together. In which time I
observed all such principal passages as fell within the Circle of my
Condition, according to my ability.

A DESCRIPTION OF MADAGASCAR.
MAdagascar, otherwise called St. Laurence: Is situate on the South side of
the Equator; and extends it self from 12. degrees to 26. degrees of South
Latitude: 60 English miles make a degree, and by this account the Island is
840. miles in Length, and 240. in Breadth; yet the Breadth must be taken on
the South-west side, because by North and East it contracts it self into a
lesser compass, containing in Length 14. degrees. or 280. Leagues, in Breadth
about 80. Leagues; and is esteemed the greatest known, Island in the World. It
is thus bounded; on the West side lie the Kingdoms of Sofala, Mosambique, and
all the maine Land of Africa: On the East the Land of Mascaravos, or, as it is
now styled Mauritius, On the North, is the Island of Comero, and on the South,
the maine Ocean.

The whole Island it self, seems on the East side to be a Plain and
Champion Country. On the West it is more mountainous; full of Navigable
River's, and excellent harbors for shipping; the principal whereof, best
known to the English, is the Bay of Augustine, in 23 degrees of Latitude,
under the Tropic of Capricorn, where most commonly all the ships, bound for
India touch; making it their first Port to winter and refresh and cure their
sick men, the air being so good that in the space of 7. or 8. days (which is
the time of their longest stay) they are perfectly recovered.

If any where, the Proverb, Terra bona, gens mala, may be here applied: The
Inhabitants are a sluggish and slothful people, they will neither plant, nor
sow, yet live plentifully by the fat of the Soil, which though untilled and
unmanur'd, yields all necessaries for life, even to superfluity.

Nature will not be exceeded, or out done by Art; what our Northern Geoponicks
labor for, by cultivating the earth, by planting and transplanting, by
ingraffing and inoculating, grows here naturally. The Woods abound with
excellent Timber, trees of diverse kinds, all unknown to us, except the
Tamarind; whereof we sawed some into Planks, which carried between 3, and 4,
foot diamiter; and one other sort, which, for the resemblance, and use, we
called Box. And which is most to be admired, there is none that bears not
fruit serving for food for the Creatures, according to their several kinds.
Oranges and Limons they have in abundance, and a kind of Palmito, called by
the Portugals, Corodima^, which is said to be admirable virtuous, and not
unproperly, the Inhabitants feeding on it in stead of Bread* the lower grounds
especially toward the Sea side, being full of them. Of Trees yielding most
excellent sweet Gummes, there are many; whereof one for color and consistence,
resembles Sang: Draconis: and being cast on the Coals, smells like Benjamin.

It might easily have transcended my belief, had I not seen it: and now
reporting it I might be thought to use a Travelers authority, were not many
surviving in this Kingdom, to confirm it. There is a Tree, which we named
the Flesh-tree; because being cut whilst it grows, it bleedeth a certain
Sapp, or Liquor, like unto blood: the inward part thereof is soft and tender,
even like musculous flesh.

The Plains afford excellent Pasturage; as may appear by the largeness of
their Cattle. Their Rivers are plentifully stored with Fish, and Foul of all
kinds. Cattle they have in such abundance, that the Inhabitants seem all of
them to be Grasiers: they being their chiefest livelihood. Their Oxen are
large, as ours in England: having betwixt their shoulders a great Bunch of
flesh, weighing 20 or 30. Pound; and these they willingly sell for small
prizes: but their Kine (except they be old, or barren) they do not easily
part withal, keeping them for breeding: and their milk is their chiefest food.
Sheep they have great store, and those very large; having long hanging-eares
like a Blood-hound; their tails are long and fat: and though their flesh for
sweetness, and taste, may stand in some comparison with our English Mutton, yet
for the perfect condition of this Creature, they cannot stand with ours in
competition; ours yielding us yearly a golden fleece, the staple commodity,
Wool; theirs being hairy, like Dear, yielding no fit materials for clothing.
Of Goats likewise they have in abundance; all wild kinds of Cattle being at
home, and suckled as by hand, loose their wild nature, and become exceeding
tame: wild Hogs they have in the woods, whereof we killed some; but for
beasts of prey, as Lions, Tigers, Woolves, and the like, we saw none, neither
do I believe there are any, because their Cattle graze freely up and down the
plains continually without any annoyance. The chiefest enemy they have, is the
Crocodile, whereof there are many in the rivers, which sometimes meet with
them, yet might easily be destroyed, had the Inhabitants either will, or skill
to do it.

For look upon the people, and you might justly wonder to see Barbarism
civilized: we beyond expectation, found them very affable, courteous, and just
in their dealings, and lived among them about four months, with that
familiarity and friendship, as if we had been all of one Nation, and their
Country had been our own. At our first coming a shore, when they saw us set
up our Tents, and placed a couple of Falcons, for the security of our men, they
conceived that we came thither to inhabit; and presently their King or,
Governor, by name, Andicapela, came to our Captain, with a retinue Captain
^eddall.
of 100. of his people, or there abouts, to offer him their Country and
service; humbly beseeching him, that he would take them, their wives and
children, and cattle under his protection, and they would serve and obey him
as their King: especially petitioning that he would defend them from their
enemies the Massagoces, with whom they have mortal wars.

Their dress is but little diffring from Adams in his innocence, for both men
and women go naked, as a token and conscientious check of deformity by sin;
they wear a small piece of Cotton-cloth, of their own making, to cover their
privities, so that the sexes are hardly known one from another, especially the
young men from the women, but only by the plaiting of their hair.

They know not any political government, (yet as man by nature is a sociable
creature) they live in Tribes or families together, for we never saw above 2 or
300 that lived together in one place, having all things common, except their
wives; of whom they are very jealous. They choose one among them whom they obey
as their Pater familias, or master of their household, who has the disposing of
all their substance (which is their Cattle) no one daring to sell any of them
without his leave, who likewise (as I have often observed) when any beast is
killed, divides it amongst them by a Geometrical proportion according to the
number of their family. By his order also they remove their stations from place
to place, as he shall direct them, in a willing obedience, not disputing about
the convenience but conform their wills to his prescriptions. These several
Tribes have wars one with another, which commonly is for pasturage and
watering places for their cattle; the captives they take they sell for small
prices (cheaper then their beasts) to the Portugals which come thither once a
year for that purpose. They tell us of a great King that lives up in the
Mountains, but they can relate but little of him in particular, because they
dare not travel so far for fear of their enemies. Their weapons are Darts, and
Lances; in the managing whereof they are very expert. Bows and Arrows they
know not: and as for Gunnes, the report of a Musket, will make an hundred of
them flee. Their fight is thus ordered; (we saw them skirmish before us to make
us sport) they divided themselves one from another a good distance, and so
betwixt running and leaping, they traverse their ground with a terrible noise:
they throw their Darts one at another, at their best advantage; and so swiftly
retiring backwards, they catch their enemies Darts and Lances, and return them
again. Whether it was their coveting of our supposed jewels, or their
confidence in our friendship which led them to it, I know not: At our first
coming, we bought up most of their Lances and Darts, for a few Beads; and so
utterly disarmed them: for although the Men do nothing else but make Darts;
yet for want of Tools they cannot make one in 10. days: so that for a months
space we could not see 20 Darts amongst them.

Their riches and bravery, consists in Beads, or in such bawbles, which they
can hang about them; accounting all other things impediments to them. Gold and
silver they contemn, as being too burdensome unto them; and not so useful as
Iron: yet I have seen some of them wear little hoopes of Gold and Copper
together about their arms: which shows that they have gold in their Country;
and it is certain that they have Pepper, Cloves, and Nutmegs growing there,
because when we showed them, they knew them; and made signs to us that they
grew in the Island, though far up, whither they durst not go. One of our men
having a dried Limon, by chance showed it them, and the next day they brought
us abundance of very large and fair ones.

In the time of our being there, we coasted toward the North about 10 leagues,
where we entered into a spacious river, as broad as the Thames at Gravesend,
where the people, by their gesture and behavior, expressed much joy to see us,
and invited us a shore: we were no sooner landed but at least 100 of them came
to bid us welcome, calling us friends and brethren; and carried us to see their
Town, the way was through a great wood, which consisted most of Tamarind and
Palmito trees, which having past, we discovered a most excellent Champion
country, equal to any which I have seen in the world, for pasture and
herbage. At the corner of the wood was their Town, their houses being nothing
but a few Booths made of Boughs under the Trees, to shadow them from the Sun;
where with songs and dances they entertained us; giving us milk, and their
women bringing their children to us to stroke and dandle them in our arms:
Here we stayed till it grew late, and then went to our Boat, many of them
bearing us company. By this passage we perceived the cunning of Audrapela, that
he would not suffer any to sell us Cattle, but himself: for if any strangers
came down to trade with us (as diverse times they did, bringing great droves of
Cattle with them) then would he cunningly seek to persuade us from trading
with them; making signs that they were his, and our enemies, Man-eaters, and
the like: but when he saw our resolution to go over the River unto them: (for
they durst not come without his permission,) then would he make the price
himself, and give them what he listed: and yet we bought their fattest Oxen
for 5. or 6. Aggat-beads; which in India cost not much above 12 d. and every
day they brought us down such store, that we might have bought 100. in a day.

The light of reason has taught them some religion, and in part we might
perceive some points of Mahometisme among them, being thought to have crept in
by reason of their near neighborhood with the Moors, with whom they agree
in circumcision, and abstinence from Swines flesh, though in other things they
are most miserable Idolaters. For we perceived in every one of their Towns, or
Stations, where they lived, certain Images, rudely carved, sprinkled over with
blood and fat, which we judged to be offered to the Idol, when they killed a
beast. Their Priests, at our first coming, came unto us; one of them having a
book in his hand of sheepskins, somewhat like our Parchment; read unto us a
great while, what we understood not, and then delivered the book into our
hands; every letter, or Character, expressing the form of some creature, best
known unto them; As of a Cow, a Sheep, a Bird, a Fish, and the like, like
Egyptian Hyerogliphicks, and we in requital showed them one of ours; which
when they had well viewed, and turned it over and over, they gave it us again
to read, whereat they gave a great deal of attention, although they understood
not what was said.

Concerning the commodities and riches of this Island, (which every man is
willing to hearken after) I may truly asfirme, that for wealth and riches, no
Island in the world can be preferred before it. As for Gold, Silver, Pearl,
and precious Jems, questionless the Island is plentifully stored with them.
And of Iron there is abundance, which necessity has taught them to melt out of
the hard rocks, to arm themselves against their enemies; and for their
superfluous things, which are less necessary, No doubt but all the commodities
of India, do either grow there naturally already, or may be soon planted
there. What abundance of treasure is yearly transported out of Europe into
India only for leaves and blossoms of trees; I mean for Indico and cloth of
Cotton-Wooll, whereof the first (for ought I know) may grow there already; or
if not, it may easily be brought thither; and Cotton it grows there
naturally. But for those that prefer a present profit before the future; I do
affirm upon my trial and experience, that great quantities of Aloes, the best
in the World may be made there in a short time; If there were good vent for it:
for proof whereof, some of our men, by my direction preserved the juice of
that herb, drying it only in the Sun, without any other Art; which within 3 or
4 days they had gathered and made above 50 pound: the which was sold in London
at greater Rates, then that which came from Soccotore; and by the Druggists
preferred before it.

These premises considered, with what facility might a Plantation be here
settled: and how honorable it would be for our Nation? and how commodious for
all Christendom? There are but two discouragements which may dissuade the
transporting of a Colony hither: the condition of the Natives; and the Passage:
but they are a People with whom for the space of 30 or 40. years, we have had
Commerce: and are therefore acquainted with our civil customs, and peaceable
demeanours: and being now no strangers unto us, are willing to put themselves
under our protection: And the Passage, wherein lies the greatest difficulty,
is ordinarily performed in 4* months: and that in a most peaceable and quiet
Sea, if a fit season be chosen. Such is the experience of our Seamen, by
reason of their Annual trading into those parts. And then for the honor of
our Nation by settling a Collony in those parts: how soon might the Trade of
India be diverted thither* especially the Trade of Indico? which if it grow not
there naturally, the Seed may be brought and manured there; and workmen brought
from India to instruct our people in the Art of making it.

If we did but consider, upon what ticklish terms our Commerce with the
Magullans stands at this present, with the lives and goods of our Merchants and
people that live there amongst them, how their lives and goods lie: being at
their devotion, how often they have imprisoned and chained our Merchants?
seized upon their goods? ransacked their houses? threatened and terrified them
with their Chabuck or Whipps, upon every slight occasion? (whereof I have had
some experience) we would make more account of this Island.

And then it would be a general Commodity and benefit for all ships that shall
hereafter pass into India: as first for the revictualling of them with Flesh*
Tallow, Butter, Cheese and the like; their Beef being salted and ordered as it
ought, may be preserved six months sweet and good, as those that have made
trial thereof can testify. Where likewise provision may be made of Clapboards
for Caske, Sheathing boards, Plancks, and the like. And lastly, no Christian
Prince can pretend any title or claim thereunto. The King of Portugal had long
since planted upon it (as the Portugals themselves report) but for fear of
weakening his Forts and Forces upon the Maine of India. And the King of Spain
has too many Irons in the fire already, to oppose our people there, where they
may enjoy the first fruits of a most plentiful Harvest, which is better than
the gleanings of America.

A PARADOXE. PROVING That the Inhabitants of the Island called MADAGASCAR, or
St. LAURENCE, (in Temporal things) are the happiest People in the world.

(*)

By Walter Hamond.



A PARADOXE: PROVING The Inhabitants of the Island called Madagascar, or St.
Lawrence (in things temporal) to be the happiest People in the World.
I Confess (worthy Sir) that I have undertaken an Argument, which at the first
sight, will seem to most Men, Idle and Impertinent, although I might answer
for my excuse; that I was therefore idle, because I would not be idle; for it
may be objected unto me: Will you take upon you to prefer this poor, naked,
and simple Ignorant people before the rich Gallant, understanding men of
Europe. These are naked, we are clothed. These are poor and miserable, we
are rich and wealthy. These are simple Innocents, we have hearing and
Experience of many things, wherein they are altogether ignorant.

All this I confess to be true, yet let us examine their defects which are
supposed to consist in their Nakedness, Poverty, and Simplicity: As for their
Nakedness, Their Nakedness defended.
J hold them therefore happy, as approaching nearest to the greatest perfection
of Mankind. For Adam in the state of Innocence was Naked, Sin and Apparel
entered both together, those Fig Leaves being sowed together for a veil, or
covering to hide his filthiness, and deformities, as his vaine-heart conceived
from the Eye of Heaven: For as a Painter, or statuary having limmed a curious
Piece, or carved a goodly Image, does take a great delight in the sight of it,
as of his Masterpiece; For if it should by some accident become spotted, or
blemished, he will delight no more in the beholding of it, but is ashamed of
his work every time he looks upon it, and will therefore-eyther cast it
aside, or hide and cover it out of his sight.

So, when this admirable piece of work, this perfection of Nature, this
Masterpiece, this Epitome of the World, this Image of the Deiry, Man: was
spotted and blemished by sin, it grieved the Almighty, to see his Image so
defaced in him, who therefore did cloth him, as it were to hide and cover him
out of his sight.

Apparel is but like unto so many Plasters, and Roulers, to cover our soars
and deformities, or like Masking suits wherein we act, not what we are, but
what we seem to be, it is the outside that deceives us, and by a juggling
trick makes us take that for a brave man which is a piece of shreds, a mere
thing of the Tailors fashioning.

For Example, put the Spruce Gallant into a Contemptible habit, and what is
he then? A poor miserable wretch in the worlds opinion, which judges by the
outward appearance, and so esteems him. But the same man he was? No, he is a
ragged Rogue, a tattered Knave? Again, put such a Rogue, or Knave into the
Acoutrements of a Gallant, let him be Scarlified and Beveriz'd, let his Jupoon
be Carbonadoed to discover his Damask Purpoint, or his embroidered Camise:
arm his side with steel, his heels with Iron, and his head with Feather; and
then like Nebuchadnezar his Image, every man is ready to adore him. As will it
please your worship, to command me any service: I will wait upon your worship,
it is right as your worship says. And all this while we reverence nothing but a
suite of Clothes, which these happy People happy in this want, judiciously
contemn. Apparel to them is a Burden, an impediment, a very Disease, they
care not for it, they count it as an unnecessary bundle and know that it would
make them Dull, Heavy, and Effeminate. They prefer the good Constructure of
the Limbs, and lineaments of the Body which they have by Nature, before all our
artificial Bumbasted patches. We wonder at them how they can go Naked; but
they wonder more at us, how we can endure to go packt up in a fardle of Clouts
sewed together. We are bound up in Prison, whilst they are free, and at
liberty, we are stifled up in our sweat, and stink, whilst the Exhalations of
their vapors, offends them not. Nor does the coldness of the Air hurt their
naked Bodies, more then it does our naked faces; it was our evil Custom that
clothed us, and their Innocence and freedom of Nature that keeps them naked.

For an instance of the premises I will only call to your remembrance, the
behavior of the Rassee, or Governor Andrapela; at that time when he, with his
followers, were invited by Captain Weddell aboard the Aboard the Charles then
riding in Augustine Bay.
Ship, the Captain seeing him naked, did judge it to be rather by a forced
necessity, then a free Election, and caused a Suite of his own Apparel to be
given him, which he knew not what to do with when he had it, being told, that
they would defend him, and keep him warm, he said that he had no need of
them, and that they would be but a trouble to him. For said he, I can pierce
them through with my Lance. At last with much ado they were put on; but their
putting on, put him into such a fear and agony as if they had been so many
Fetters and Manicles laid upon him. He looked as if he had been ashamed of
himself, earnestly entreating the Captain that he might be set ashore,
expressing in his countenance a great deal of grief and discontent, to be as
he thought so discourteously dealt withal. The Barge being mand, I went ashore
with him, to observe his behavior; and can testify that he no sooner set
foot on land, but suddenly he threw away his Suite, flinging his Doublet into
one place, his Hose into another, and at last he tore his shirt from his back,
as if it had been poisoned with the blood of Nessus the Centaure, and then
fetching two or three friskes, he expressed a great deal of joy, that he was
freed from that bondage and Imprisonment.

As for our selves, we are compelled (so miserable and poor we are,) to be
beholding to the unreasonable creatures for our raiment, robbing one of his
Skin, another of his Wool, another of his Hair; nay not so much as the poor
Worm, do escape us, whose very Excremens we take to cover us withal, while
they in the mean time are nothing beholding unto us? Was nature a Mother to
them, and a Stepdame to us? No, but as a kind, and loving mother, she has
sufficiently provided for us. It is our own Luxuxious Effeminacy, that has
stripped us out of our natural simplicity, and clothed us with the rags of
Dissimulation, Let us consider the natural beauties of all the Plants, fruits,
and flowers, they have no Artificial couerings, yet they so far exceed Man
in Beauty, and Magnificience (the Lillye in particular, Truth, it self has
spoken it,) that Solomon, in all his Royalty was not clothed like one of them.

The greatest and sole Monarch of the world Adam, was clothed but with the
Skins of dead Beasts, which Divines hold was to put him in mind of his
mortality, but now the height of Apparel is grown to that excess, that not
the Skins of the Cattle, or the other commodities accrewing, but the soil
of a whole Lordship, is scarce sufficient to cloth us. Now the Tailor is
become the best surveyour, Euclide might have spared his pains in Geometry, he
can measure all our Lands by his Yard-wand. And what are the effects of this
monstrous pride in Apparel, but the Ruin of many noble Families, the decay
of Hospitality, the ushering in of Oppression, Bribery, and Extortion, Theft,
Murder, Cousening and deceit, and in the end Beggary, or which is worse, a
death with Ignominy.

Now for Pride, such is the Happiness of these people, that they know not what
it means, here is no man that respects another the better for his Outside,
but for his inward virtue, and natural Endowmens. If he have but a Clout to
cover his privities, he thinks himself sufficiently Apparelled.

Concerning their Poverty. J do confess indeed, Their Poverty defended.
that to be poor, is to be miserable, contemptible, and wretched, a very
abject of men, a reproach to his kindred, and a shame to his friends, but if
you admit this definition of poverty which I dare aver to be a true one.
(Poverty is a want of all necessaries useful for this present life,) and if I
can prove that they want no necessary thing for the use of this present life, I
hope there is no man that will judge them poor, but will pronounce us poor,
who are always complaining of want, and them rich, which in their imagined
poverty express no token of discontent.

True it is, that they have not so many superfluous things as we have, and
therein are they happy. When Diogenes came by chance into a Fair, and saw so
many toys and bables to be sold, he brake out into these words.

Oh, how happy am I, that have no want of any of these things; and upon a time
to show how despicable unnecessary things are, he shrew away his Dish, because
he saw another lap water out of the hollow of his hand.

These People know, that Nature is contented with a little, and that it is not
th^se outward things, which make the Possessour, any thing the better. They
know that the inordinate desire of riches is the Root of all mischief, a
Raging famisht Beast, that will not be satisfied, a bottomless Gulf that
cannot be filled, a very Dropsy, wherein by desire of drink a man may sooner
break his Bowels then quench his Thirst.

They know that they are gotten with Labor, Anxiety, and Care, kept with
continual fear, Suspicion, and Watchfulness, and lost with extreme Grief,
and Despair.

As for Gold, the Soul of the World (as I may call it, for it gives Life,
Motion, and Action to all.) These people know it not, or do they know it, they
regard it not, at least I am sure they value it not. Happy people unto whom the
desire of Gold has not yet arrived; But it may be objected here* that
although they respect not Gold, yet they are covetous of Red Beads. It Is true,
they affect them as Ornaments, not as incombrances; for whilst we lie as it
were chained and manicled in golden Fetters, they adorn themselves with them
as with Jewels, only here is the difference, they covet red Stones, and we
desire a refined Earth almost of the same color? We think them fools,
because they give us an Ox for a few Beads; but they account us greater fools
to part with such Jewels, for so small a value, for opinion of men not their
virtue, that makes them to be dear or of small price.

Those red Beads, which peradventure we value but at sixe-pence, they may rate
at six pounds. But suppose that they should see us give the price of twenty
Oxen bought at the dearest Market in Europe, for one white Stone of the same
bigness; would not they laugh at our extreme folly; and yet when it is bought
A Gourd* This I have tried by offering them a Diamond and a red Bead, and they
have taken the Bead and refused the Diamond.
they will not give you a Calabas of milk for it, though there is no more
virtue in the one then there is in the other; yet the offensive condition of
the Diamond is notoriously exceeding the Cornelian, for the powder of the
Diamond taken inwardly is almost mortal poison, and corrodes the stomach, as
learned Physicians have observed, who never could accuse the undervalewed
Cornelian of such a venomous quality.

The Golden Age, so much celebrated by ancient Writers, was not so called, from
the Estimation, or predomination that Gold had in the Hearts of men, for in
that sense as one said wittily.

Aurea Saturni redierunt saecula nam nunc.
Auro venit honos conciliatur Amor.
This may be truly called the Age of Gold,
For it both honor, love, and Friends are sold.
But from the Contemps thereof; then Love and Concord flourished, then Rapine,
Theft, Extortion and Oppression were not known, which happy Age these people
do at this present enjoy. But when men began to dive into the Bowels of the
Earth to make descents as it were down into Hell to fetch this glittering
Oar, from the habitations of Devils, and (...)trial Goblins, with it came up
Contention, Deceit Lying, Swearing, Theft, Murder, and all the seven Capital
sins; as Pride, Covetousness; Wrath, Gluttony, and the rest, so that we must
needs confess that it had been happy for us, if Gold had never been known.

For the attaining whereof, what labors, what sorrow, and what dangers do we
endure? We are contented daily to expose our selves, to a thousand perils, to
suffer a thousand injuries, in hope to enjoy it; and yet scarce one in a
thousand, attaineth to the end of his labor.

For this do we suffer a voluntary Exile from our Miseries of Sea faring men
native Country, for this are we contented to be imprisoned in a nasty Ship,
to expose our lives to the tempestuous fury of the merciless Elemenes, and to
expose our bodies to the rage of the Enemies thundering Ordinance, where through
Heat, Cold, Hunger, Thirst, Watching, ill Lodging, bad Diet, infected Air,
and a thousand other inconveniences, we not only endanger our Lives every
minute, but sometimes loose them.

But grant that we do escape all these perils, and obtain in some measure
what we have so dearly purchased, it will be so confessed, there is more care
and danger in the keeping of them, then in the attaining of them.

For this do Thieves lie in wait to rob us, friends to entrap us, and our
enemies to betray us; Nay, suppose we do escape all these outward casualties,
our inward vices, our disordered affections, and our evil Concupiscences, do
all threaten to ruin us.

The consideration hereof, caused the Lady Catherine, Dowager to K. Henry 8.
(who out of her own experience, had tried both fortunes) that if it were put
to her choice, to suffer the extremity of fortune in Prosperity or Adversity:
She would choose adversity; because the former was never without Danger, nor
the latter without Comfort.

From their Poverty, I come in the last place to speak Their Simplicity
defended.
of their Simplicity, (which as the simple uncompounded and unmixed Elements
are purest) is an argument if not of their freedom from Corruption, yet that
it does not tyrannize over them, and that they enjoy the happiest-condition
which Mankind can live in; out of doubt had our first Parents been contented
with that Simplicity of estate, they were at the first created in, and not have
been so curious in the knowledge of forbidden Mysteries, they had not purchased
the wrath of God upon themselves and their posterity.

But let us see wherein their ignorance and Simplicity does consist, It may be
objected, that they are Ignorant of the use of the creatures which was have
attained to, and of many Arts that we profess, and that they are simple in
all their actions.

For first, their Houses are but simple Sheddes made with a few boughs heaped
together (in comparison of which) and are stately Palaces.

Their Diet is gross and ill cooked that they eat, their meat half raw and
badly dressed; whereas our Tables are furnished plentifully with sundry
delicacies, curiously dressed by the Art of Cookery, and that with great variety.

That their Drink is water simply which is common to them and their Beasts
alike, whilst we are served with all kind of pleasant Wines, and other
artificial aromaticke* Drinks.

That their Simplicity appears in their ignorance of many Sciences, wherein
the well being of a Commonwealth does consist; as the Art of Navigation, by
means whereof, we are able to visit the remotest parts of the World, to
transport our own Commodities to them, and to import theirs to the enriching
of ourselves; as also, that they know not Military Art, nor the use of Powder
and Shot: all which are evidences of their stupid Ignorance, both in these and
all other Sciences.

What an heat do these small Coals cast? What Answer to the former
Alegations.
a terrible show do th^se poor Antiques make, they are just like the Pageants
or the Gally-foists upon the Lord Mayors day; deface their Paintings, rip of
the Canvasse, thou will find nothing in them, but a few rotten sticks in the
one, and a trimmed Dungboate of the other.

Let us compare them together by the square of Reason, and we shall find their
defects in these things, to be a maine testimony of their Happiness, and on
the contrary, our excess herein the cause of our misery, and wretchedness.

And first for their Buildings, they are such as best Their Buildings.
suite with their free Estate and condition, using them but as Tabernacles for
the present, and changing them according to the quality of the Season, and
goodness of the Soil. We may commend the wisdom of the Storke, and Swallow
for this cause.

These men fear not the opression of a covetous Landlord, nor the danger of a
cracked title, his quarters rackt rent, rends not his sleep, nor takes he care
for the renewing of his old Lease, the breaking in of Thieves he fears not;
for he has nothing to loose, and the surprise of Enemies he regards not; for
if they be not strong enough for encounter, they can suddenly remove
themselves to a place of more security.

I have seen a Town, consisting of above one hundred Families, and all of
them busied about their several employments. Some about their Cattle, some
making of Lances, and Darts, and some weawing of Cotton, to make their Aprons,
when upon a sudden, suspecting us as Enemies, in the space of half an hour,
they have planted and removed their dwellings.

The women carrying their implements for dressing their food, and their young
Infants; Their Children The cause of their remouall was the coming ashore, of
one with a Fowling piece, to kill Foul for the Captain.
driving away the Cattle, and the rest of their People as a guard unto them,
with their Darts, and Lances, some in Front, some in Flanck, and the rest in
the Rear; when again we having understood the cause of their departure, with
a little persuasion, they returned and suddenly replanted themselves, and
every man quietly settled himself to his business as before, without any
noise, tumult, or uproare, all which was done in the space of an hour.

Whereas we like so many wild Beasts can hardly be forced out of our Dens,
except Famine, Sword, or Fire do compel us. And then, Oh what lamentation,
what Exclamation, and grievous Complaints do we make.

Yet what are our Houses, but so many strong Prisons, wherein the Owner lies
bound in several actions of Debt, which I forbear to particularize, and
although he walk abroad sometimes, he does but traile his fetters after him,
and is bound to keep within the Rule.

He must endure discomodity of evil Neighbors, the unhealthfulnesse of the
Situation, which these happy People can avoid at their pleasure without much
pudder or turmoile.

And lastly, suppose that one of our Houses should take fire, by accident or
otherwise, then what passion? What Rage? What ungoverned fury do we fall into?
Oh I am undone for ever, Oh I have lost that Chest, that Box of writings, that
Casket of Jewels, out alas! I am undone; what shall* I do? Nay, we are so
far out of our selves, and transported with fury, that as if the black
Chambers of death was not to be found otherwise, we sometimes lay violent
hands upon our selves, and increase the danger of an eternal Death to prevent
a temporal Dereliction.

Whereas, on the contrary, if any of their Houses happen to be on fire, he is
not moved at all with it, but can patiently stand by and warm himself at the
flame, and say, here is a good fire, I find much comfort by it. This is the
last benefit my House can do me, and in this point they are happier then we
are.

Their DIET.
AS for their food, it may be objected, that it is but course and simple: for
defense whereof, I might answer, that it is therefore the more healthful, and
agreeable to Nature, who is best pleased with meats of simple qualities. But it
is further objected, that it is sluttishly dressed, transeous and loathsome. How
know we that? Because we love it not, is it therefore unwholesome? One man
loves no Fish, an other no Cheese, another no Flesh; which are not only
hurtful, but poison to their constitutions. Should we therefore infer, that
Fish, Cheese or Flesh, are poison? such judges are we of their food, which best
agrees with their constitutions, and preserves them in health, strength and
vigor; for they eat not, but for Necessity, knowing no other sauce than the
Lacedemonian sauce, Hunger; eating rather for preservation of life, than
delight or luxury: whilst we in our Diet are so voluptuous, that we even dig
our graves with our teeth, (as the French proverb has it) the whole world
being scarce sufficient to make a Bacchanalian sacrifice for that Deity, the
Belly: France, Spain, Italy, the Indies, yea and the Molluqes must be ransackt,
to make sauce for our meat; whilst we impoverish the land, air and water, to in
rich a private Table. Thus we live, as if we were born to no other end, but by
Gluttony and surfeiting to oppose Nature, dull the spirits, subvert the animal
faculties, and heap upon our selves an innumerable company of diseases, it
being a maxim amongst our Europaean Physicians, that Gluttony has killed more
than the sword. Whereas to the contrary, such is the Temperance of these
people, that I can scarce see one sick or diseased among them.

Now for Wine, the cherisher of the heart, the expeller of cares and sorrows,
the reviver of the spirits, and the infuser of valor and courage, these
Discommodities of Wine.
people know it not: and herein I esteem them (what ever our Epicures think)
most happy. For when I consider the dangerous effects thereof, as namely, how
it confounds our Reason, disturbeth our Senses, dulleth our Understanding,
consumes our Memory, depraveth our Judgment, and finally transformeth us from
men to beasts. I know not whether I should bewail our own miserable condition,
or applaud theit happy estate.

Heretofore in our country of England, all foreign Wines were sold in
Apothecaries shops, for the relief of the sick, weak and aged; then Physicians
walked on foot, for the service of Gods people: but when it once came to be
sold publicly in Taverns, then they rode on horsback like Princes; the excess
of Wine being a main upholder of theirs: thence proceed Fevers, Convulsions,
Epilepsies, Vertigo's, Lethargies, Gowts, and all Exotique diseases, unknown to
our Ancestors.

Besides, what horrible and execrable actions has it not perpetrated? what
sacrileges? what rapes? what murders have not been committed by the excess of
Wine? The examples of this kind are As the Turkish Emperor, and all the
Eastern Princes.
infinite, and the consideration thereof moved some Kings and Princes to
prohibit, and lay great mulcts and penalties upon them which used it, though
with moderation; knowing that it transporteth men into all unjust actions, and
transformeth them into beasts.

Where to the contrary, water produces no evil effects; for it asswageth
thirst, refreshes the spirits, abateth choler, quickneth the senses, and
temperatly does humect and moisten the inward parts of the body. And had not
the distemperature of our parents, our evil education, and our natural
corruptions prevailed against us, we might have enjoyed the like happiness
which these people possess.

And may not their ignorance in the Art of Navigation, be deservedly accounted
an happiness. Certainly by this means they are not contaminated with the vices
and evil customs of strangers: when we have derived to our selves, with our
commerce with foreign Nations, with their wares and commodities, their vices
and evil conditions; as our drunkenness and rudeness from the Germans; our
fashions and factions from the French; our insolence from the Spaniards; our
Machivillianisme from the Italians; our levity and inconstancy from the
Greeks; our usury and extortion from the Jews; our Atheism and impiety from
the Turks and As the Pocks, brought into England by the first discovery of
America.
Moors; and our voluptuous luxury from the Persians and Indians; which perhaps
might have passed without censure by natural men, had not we been infected by
this means with some diseases of the body, as well as corruption of the soul.
Besides, to balance the account, what are our ships fraught As the Chinese,
who will suffer no stranger to come into their country.
withal, but with toys and vanities, which we might well be without, and serve
but as fomenta luxuriosa, stirrers up of Pride, luxury and wantonness; for
which cause only, some Nations are forbidden to have any commerce or traffic
with strangers, left they should be infected with their vices and evil
customs.

Besides, those happy people have no need of any foreign commodity, Nature
having sufficiently supplied their necessities, wherewith they remain
contented. But it is we that are in want, and are compelled like famisht
Wolves, to range the world about for our living, to the hazard both of our
souls and bodies; the one by the corruption of the Air, the other by the
corruption of Religion.

Their ARMS.
AS for their ignorance in the Millitary profession, though they be not trained
up in the practice of those Arms our Moderns have lately invented, they retain
the use of those Weapons which have been in use from all Antiquity, I mean the
Lance and Dart, wherein they have attained to such perfection, that therein I
believe no Nation in the World does equal, I am sure cannot exceed them. But
you will say, they want desensive Armor, and places of strength, and
retirement. It is true, they have no other Armor than their own valor; nor
Forts, but fortitude and courage; who, like the Parthians, fight flying, making
their retreat as dangerous to the Enemy, as their first encounter.

And lastly, for the use of powder and shot, and the managing of great
Ordnance, whereof they are altogether ignorant. Herein they are happy also
above all other Nations; it being one of the most damnable inventions that ever
was forged in the Devils Conclave: against the fury whereof, neither the
courage of the valiant, nor the strength of the mighty can prevail; so that
Hercules himself, whom the Poets falsely, or Sampson, whom the Scriptures truly
deliver for the strongest of men, were living in these times, a child might
kill them with a Pistol. Let us examine the invention, state, and progress of
this pernicious and cruel Engine.

All Writers do agree, that a German Monk was Pareus, lib. 1. in Praef.
the first inventer of the materials thereof; and, as it is thought, not
without the Devil, to show his hatred to Mankind: the first invention was but
rude and simple, but Time and the wickedness of men, have added to the first
project, even to the mounting them upon wheels, that they might be the eafier
transported, and run (as it were) to the Ruin of Mankind. From hence has
proceeded these Monsters, of Canons, and double Canons, and Culverings, these
furious Basilisks, and murderers, those fiery Falcons and Sakers: wherein it
seems the inventers knew well what they did, when they imposed on them the
names of Snakes, Serpents, and ravenous Birds; the very names of them being
terrible, and apt to beget in us a horror and detestation of them. I forbear
to speak of lesser Engines, but of greater danger; as the Dag and Pistol,
which may be concealed in a man's pocket, wherewith many have been treacherously
slain without any prevention. Out of this miserable and cruel Magazine have
issued these Mines, counter-Mines, Firepots, Firepikes, Oranges, Granado's,
Hedghogs, Petards, and the like; a most cursed invention, wherein the malice of
man to man is grown to that height, whom we ought to love as our Brother; that
such as can invent the most wicked, cruel and execrable project to destroy men
withal, is held the most worthy to receive the greatest honor, respect and
reward: and now, if ever, it may truly be said, Homo homini Demon; one man is a
Devil to another.

All inventions, as they are but the imitations of Nature, do ever fall short
of the pattern; but in this they have exceeded Nature. Take it thus briefly: the
Thunder and Lightning which these Salmonians would imitate, does transcend the
other in fury and violence; for the Thunderbolt, as natural and accidental,
falls sometimes on a a tree, mountain, a tower, seldom on a man: but this
infernal Engine, guided by the malice of man, aims only at man, to whose
destruction it is wholly directed. There are some countries, that by reason of
the coldness of the climate, as Russia, Tartaria, Greenland, at certain
seasons of the year, as in the depth of Winter, and the midst of Summer, are
exempt from Thunder. But no country or season can privilege the Inhabitants
from the fury of this pernicious Engine. The Thunderbolt, by the means of the
lightning, and noise in the air, gives some warning to men, to avoid the
ensuing danger; but this thundereth in striking, and strikes in thunder,
sending the mortal Bullet, as soon into our bowels, as the sound into our
ears. Therefore we have good reason to detest the Author of this so pernicious
and damnable an invention.

And here I cease not, presuming to advise Kings and Princes (this being but a
Paradox) in the use of the instrument: (for I know it to be as well defensive
as offensive) but magnifying the mercies of GOD toward this people, whose
simplicity has herein made them more happy than our too deer bought knowledge
has advantaged us.

FINIS.

