THE HVNTING OF THE FOX OR, FLATTERY DISPLAYED. The Flatterers devise; A
Water-man looking one way, and rowing another, with this Motto Mel in ore, fell
in cord.

By H. H. Grayens.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith, at
the sign of the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard, 1632.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir CHRISTOPHER HARFLETE, Knight of the I Will of Thanet.
SIR:
THe Hunting of harmefull beasts is commended for recreation, and the
Metaphorical hunting of wickedness is commanded for reformation. It was part
of my recreation (being sometimes wearied with the study of the Law) to
vnkennell, to put up and hunt the Fox, for so S. Bernard calls the Flatterer;
which may be called, My sparehoure-meditations: I know your Worship to be
free from this vice, which made me bold to fly to your Worship to shelter it
under the wings of your Protection, hoping for no exception but your
acceptance; wishing you with your virtuous Lady, all health and happiness in
this world, and all blessedness in the world to come: Thus prays

Your Worships affectionate friend and Kinsman, HEN. HARFLETE.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have written nothing but the truth, but I know Truth brings
forth a bad daughter, Hatred, Veritas odium, but I wish that she might be an
abortive; I hope none through hatred will give too hard a censure of me for
writing the truth: I have writ the truth in love and charity: I have covered
naked truth with her sister Charity. I hope (gentle Reader) that Hatred, the
daughter of Truth, will pass by her Mother, and not know her in that attire;
the^ judge favorably of me, and quo animo legis, obserua, quo observas,
serua: Read it that the may remember it, and remembering, practice not
flattery, but true amity; hoping for no less, and praying to God for this, I
leave thee to God.

Thy friend, no flatterer, HEN. HARFLETE.

The Contents.
Of Flattery consider,

1. THe Definition. page 4. Which consists of the 1. Genus: 2. Differences. The
Genus Vice. Flattery is a vice. 5 It is the worst of vices: Because it
counterfeits all virtues. 6 Because it is hated of God. 7 Because it is hated
of Man. 8 Because it is the nourisher and preserver of vices. 11 It is an
infectious vice. 12 It is an hurtful vice. 14 It is a scoffing vice. 15 It is
a fawning vice. 16 The Differences, in which observe four things. First
Flatteries near affinity with friendship, It Is hardly discerned from
friendship; from which, note that flattery is like friendship. 18 That a man
can hardly know it from friendship. 21 That a flatterer is a secret enemy. 23
Secondly, the means whereby a flatterer does deceive (viz.) by soft and smooth
speeches. 24 Thirdly his ends, which are taken from his 1. Policy. 2. Inten^.
1. Of his Policy, see the 1. Object. 2. Extent. The Object is favor. To get
favor* page 26 The Extent, For some worldly respect. 27 2. Intent, To deceive.
29 Fourthly, his hypocrisy, pretending what he intends not. 31 II.
Distributio^ which demonstrats the Causes, Object, Signs of Flattery. The
Causes are four: 1. Efficient. The Devil. 32 2. Material, fair, and glozing
words. page 34 Which are in regard of the (...) ^lightfull. page ^6 In regard
of the Auditors (...) or trial, bitter; because they are Birdlime. 31 Because
they are sweet poison. 37 Because they are wine but deadly. 38 Because they are
swords. 38 Because they are netts. 38 In regard of the flatterers aim
deceitful. 39 3. Formal Dissimulation or hypocrisy. 42 (...). Final.
Deceit. 44 The Object is to be considered, 1. Generally, 2. Specially.
Generally that flatter for some outward good, such are found in Church, Court,
City, Country. In the Church. 48 The Minister flatters in his Instruction,
when he preaches for Favor, Profit, Credit. 50. 51 And that in regard of the
Matter. 55 Intention 58. Manner of speaking. 58 In the Court you shall find
the flatterer Ambitious. 60 Selfe-conceited and politic. 63 Affecting
popularity. 63 In the City there flattery is between the Citizen and his
Wife. 64 Between the Citizen and Countryman. 65 Between the Cheater and
Stranger. page 69 In the Country. 70 Specially who aim at a man's Life. 73
Goods, 75. Good name. 76 The signs are to praise a man (though absent) beyond
his deserts. 77 To praise a man to his face. 78 Upon small distasts to slack
acquaintance. 78 He is a talebearer. 78. 79
THE HVNTING OF THE FOX: OR, THE FLATTERER DISPLAYED.
SAint Gregory compares the world to a rotten nut, which being opened with the
knife of verity, you shall find nothing within but rottenness, and vanity;
vanity indeed; so says the wisest of Kings; vanitas vanitatum, and omnia
vanitas: Eccl. 1. 1.
Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity: There is nothing found in the
Macrocosme or great world, but vanity; you shall find the same in the
Microcosme or little world, Man. Homo vanitas, man himself is vanity, so says
the Psalmist: but man is most vain Psalm. 39. 6.
respect^ vitiorum; in respect of his vices, as Solomon in his book of
Ecclesiastes witnesses; wherein he has hunted out the vanities, and sins
which men most haunt: The wicked like Esau, are cunning hunters of goodness, and
good men; they hunt both 1 vi and 2 fraud.
By force, and fraud; by hand and head: Wicked hunt: 1. Vi, by force.


Micah 2. 2. They covet fields, and take them by violence. Here they hunt with
hands, by force. Anaxagoras thought man the vvisest of all creatures, quia
manuatus, because he has hands, whereby to express all signs, but he might
better have concluded him the worst of all creatures; because he has hands,
whereby to oppress his neighbor.

Mal. 7. 2. They hunt with a nett: Here they hunt with their crafty head, 2.
Fraud, by craft.
by fraud: As they are hunters, so they are cunning hunters. By their crafty
head they have devised politic gins to catch good men: They seek not the
Golden Fleece by Iasons merit or honesty, but by Medeas subtilty; But as S.
Augustine says, Their tricks August. (...) vita and moribus Christi.
may be approved of, in iure fori, but they shall be reproved for them in jure
poli; Earth may connive at them, but heaven will never receive them.

I vvish that all wicked hunters might be hunted by good men that are in
authority. The hunting of harmfull beasts is commended for recreation. The
metaphorical hunting of wickedness, Metaphorical hunting.
is commanded for reformation. There are many beasts that may be hunted; for
wicked men in the Scripture are compared to diverse sorts of beasts; some to
wild Boares, some to Horses, some to Mules, some to Dogs, some to the Fox;
and to others, and that respectu vitiorum; because they are so deformed by
their sins, and through them transformed into savage natures; I insist not
upon many particulars, but only upon one, and that is the Fox, whom (...)
hunt, not with sword, but pen; Cant. 2. 15. Take us the little Foxes; upon this
place, S. Bern. says. Duo sunt vulpium genera. There are two kinds of Foxes,
the Flatterer, and the Slanderer; of which my intent is to vnbourough only now
the Fox-Flatterer.

Flattery is the subject of this ensuing discourse; which does object two
things to your eye, and consideration; The 1 Definition 2 Distribution
of Flattery.

1 The Definition.

Flattery is a vice hardly discerned from friendship, whereby a man with soft
(...). ^d. ^at flat^ is.
and smooth speeches seeks to get favor with a man for some worldly respect,
thereby the more easily to deceive him, pretending what he intends not.

Give me leave (gentle Reader) to open the definition of Flattery, that I may
in part open and rip* up the belly of the Fox-Flatterer.

The definition does consist of two parts.

The 1 Genus. 2 Differences.


1. The Genus in this word. Vitium, ^ry is (...).
it is a vice.

1. It is a vice.

1 The worst of vices. And secondly, 2 infectious 3 hurtful 4 fawning 5
scoffing
Vice.


First. A Vice: or peccatum, a sin, so Aquinas calls it; For (according to
the judgment of Devines) it is a sin against the ninth Commandment; A
flatterer bears false witness against his neighbor: Now a man may bear
false witness two ways: either first privately, by himself, or secondly
publicly, before the Magistrate: Flattery, and slandering, are two members of
private bearing false witness, a slanderer bears false witness to a man
against others; a flatterer bears witness to a man against himself. ^his ^a
granted proposition, it needs no greater amplification: so that it is as
Tacitus says, Vetus in republica malum, It is an old evil in the
Commonwealth, and no vices like to old vices; and as it is vetus, so it is
vitiosum, a vicious evil, for it is first vitiorum pessima.

1. The worst of vices.

And that in 3. respects, propter 1 Simulationem virtutu^. 1. It is the worst
of vices. Worst of vices.
2 Odium a deo. ab homine.
3 Conservatione^ vitioru^.


First, it is the worst of vices, because it counterfeits all virtues: Vice 1.
Because i^ count ^its all vices.
is made virtues Ape in a flatterers practice; It is his intent Virtutem non
colere, sed vitia colorare; as S. Bernard says, Not to embrace virtue with a
Bern. super Cant ser. ^6.
good intention, but to paint over vice with a fair complexion: For every
vice takes his colors, or his instigations from him, and his greatest exploits
are, either to further vice, or to smother it. He is like unto the Camelion,
apt to all objects, capable of all colors, who clokes hate with holiness,
ambition with good government, and flattery with eloquence; yet whatsoever he
pretends is dishonesty; for as a Camelion has all colors save white, so has
he all points save honesty.

2. It is the worst of vices because it is hated both of 1 God. and 2. Because
it is hated.
2 Man.


Man cannot abide him, because he does a little profess amity to man, God
cannot endure him, because he does no more but profess it.

Because he wears Gods livery of true amity, the world daignes not to be his
mother, and because his heart is fallacious and sinne-wedded, God means not to
be his Father. A touch of these. And first he is

Hated of God. 1. Of God.


The Scripture tells us the Lord hates evil, and the Psalmographer assures us,
that the flatterer harbors an evil heart. Psalm. 41. 7. God then cannot choose
but hate him, for if flattery were not evil, it could not be the object of
hatred, for nothing can be hated but evil, or that which is esteemed so at
the least, according to the Moralist, Odium est, quo voluntas resilit ab
objecto disconuenienti, vel vi disconuenienti; Hatred is the turning of the
concupis^ible appetite from that which is evil, or esteemed evil. Now God
does not hate flattery as an esteemed evil, but as an absolute evil in it
self. (...)

The Schoolmen tell us of a twofold hatred in God.

There is a hatred 1 Negative. 2 Positive.


1. The negative hatred of God is twofold: 1 Negatio amoris. 2 Displicentia
rei.


The first is, when God does deny his love, he is said to hate; so he hated
Esau before he had done either good or evil.

The second is; when sin does displease him, causing him to turn away his
wonted favor, he is said to hate.

2. The Positive hatred is d^retum puniendi; a decree in God to punish; for
when God does punish man any way for sin, he is said to hate the sinner; now
if God does hate the flatterer, what can he expect but Gods displeasure and
judgments upon him for his false heart; and whom God hates man cannot love,
and therefore

2. He is hated of man. And why? 2. Of man.


Because a flatterer pretends amity, intends enmity. He salutes his friend in
his mouth with Ave, or, God keep you; when in his heart he means, Cave, or,
The devil take you, thus he is amicus nomine and ore, inimicus re and cord;
A friend in show, an enemy in deed. Psalm. 41. 5. and therefore worthy to be
hated of man, who thus turns enemy to man: I may speak of the life of a
flatterer, what Tully Tully.
speaks of the life of a Tyrant; Haec est vita Tyrannorum (says he)
adulatorum (say I) in qua nulla fides, nulla charitas, nulla stabilis
benevolentiae potest esse fiducia, omnia semper suspecta, nullus locus est
amicitiae; In the life of a flatterer there can be no faith, no charity, no
sure benevolence; all things are always suspected; there is no place of
friendship. And therefore he is worthy of hatred. But me thinks I hear the
flattering enemy, inducing us to subjection to the God of the word, producing
an objection out of the word of God. Backing it both with precepts affirmation,
and examples confirmation. And first by precept. Math. 5. 44. We must do good
to those that hate us; and love our enemies. And 1 Ioh. 3. 15. and 1 Ioh. 2.
ver. 9. and 11. He that hates his brother is a manslayer. And Leu. 19. 17. We
ought not to hate our brother in our heart. Secondly, by example. David loved
those that hated him, 2 Samuel 19. 6. And therefore we ought not to hate the
flatterer who is our brother.

To these I answer.

First, there is a twofold love. Amor rei. personae. Sol. 1.



The love of the 1 thing or action. 2 person.


We must love the person of our enemy that has wronged us; but we must hate
his ^nfull actions, we must pray against their sins, not persons. 2 Samuel 15.
31. Acts 4. 29.

Or secondly, There is a twofold Sol. 2.
hatred, say the Schoolmen.

Odium 1 abominationis. 2 inimicitiae.


The hatred of 1 abomination. 2 enmity.


With the hatred of abomination, a man may hate or distaste the evil or sin
done against God, which is hateful to God, and hurtful to his members, as
flattery is.

Secondly, with the hatred of Enmity, a man may hate the person; but how?
only as he does will or permit the punishment of the person, because of the
evil he has committed; so a Magistrate may will a man to be punished, Vt
improbus sed non vt homo; as a wicked man, but not as a man; so I may hate a
flatterer Non vt homo, sed vt adulator: Not as a man, but as a Flatterer.

Thirdly, It is the worst of vices.

Quia vitiorum altrix and conservatrix.

Because it is a nourisher and preserver 3. Be^ it preser^ vi ces.
of vices.

Flatterers are Authors et fautores mali, They are Authors and favorers of
evil; I need apply no more to this, but what is applied to the Jesuit, may
be implied in the flatterer. Consulo, praecipt^, consentio, prov^, laudo;
Non retego culpam, non puni^ non reprehend^;
Participo, de^e^do, men^ in caput ista redundant.


Evil counsel lies lurking in his head, he forbids good things to be done
with his tongue; he can consent to evil in his heart; he can do mischief
with his hand: so that his tongue, head, heart, and hand, are nourishers,
preservers, and practisers of vice: So that I may infer, that slattery is but
another sins Pander. Demosthenes does likewise aver, that it is Vitiorum
altrix et vei itatis corruptrix; The nourisher of vanity, and corrupter of
verity. Thus it is the worst of vices. Secondly, it is an

Infectious vice. 2 Infectious vice.


Adulatio insi^it illum, qui came asficit, et interficit, quem inficit: It does
infect that man, who does affect it, and it kills him, whom it does infect:
This sin carries death at his tail: and therefore says a Heathen, It kills
two at a blow; the flatterer, and the flattered. The flatterer carries death in
his tongue, the flattered in his ear: The flatterer like the serpent in
Paradise, wrongs himself persuadendo, by enticing to sin; the flattered
kills himself consentiendo, by consenting to sin: as Eve by believing the
flattering devil.

The hurt that befalls the preserver of this vice, is manifest. And the damage
that betides the flattered, is mams^ld; but yet this infection spreads no ^r
the^ then to the flattered; there being a reciprocal relation between them
both (happy would the nature of man be, if all infectious diseases were of
that nature) Quamvis adula^ sit perniciosa, noc^re tamen nemini potest, nisi
ei, qui eam recipit, aut qui ca delectatur; Although it be pernicious or
infectious, yet it hurts none but those, which do receive it, or delight in
that vice, says Isocrates.

I would wish all men to beware of touching this pitch, lest they be d^siled
therewith; It leaves something behind it where it comes, and therefore it may
not vnsitly be compared unto Swallows, which in the Summer time creep under
every house, but in the Winter time leave nothing behind them but dirt, or
perhaps some infectious matter; for, Blanditiae sunt pessimum very affectus
venemon, Flattery is the worst poison of true affection, says Ta^us. It is
vitium linguae, a vice of the tongue; I have read of many unreasonable
creatures that carry poison in their tails, but I never read of a reasonable
creature, that carries poison in his tongue, till I read of the flatterer,
Under whose lips is the poison of Aspes, says the Psalmist.

3. It is a hurtful vice. 3. A hurtful vice.


Bias being asked of all beasts which was the worst, and most hurtful,
answered; Inter feras tyrannus, inter cieures adulator; Among wild beasts the
Tyrant, among tame the flatterer; yet surely if I might compare him to a ^ame
foul, I would liken him to the tame Peacock for hurt; and therefore what some
have mockingly said of the Jesuit, I may truly say of the slatterer, Pav^ est;
he is a Peacock; for he has the color of an Angel, the pace of a thief,
and voice of a devil; what more hurtful, and deceitful, then a fine but
false color; then a comely, but theevish pace; then a pleasing, but a
devilish voice. And therefore it is the best course of every man to course
from him this hurtful beast; and if it were my lot to fall among beasts, I
would accept of Antisthenes opinion, (...), I had rather fall among Ravens then
among flatterers; for they would but peck me being dead; but these will pick
me being living.

4. It is a scoffing vice. 4. A scoffing vice.


And therefore we call him a fl^ering fellow, a fawning Sycophant, and a
scoffing Parasite, Adulatores suorum dominorum tam arrisores quam arrosores
sunt; Flatterers are as well scoffers as biters, says Seneea: They do as
well flowt at their prey, as deceive their prey; for the flattered is but the
flatterers prey, and as long as the hope of obtaining some benefit sticks in
his stomach, he is his servant to wayt upon him; but as soon as his benefit is
obtained, no longer a servant, scarce a friend: and perhaps he has left his
acquaintance with many a scoff; for it is most certain he has showed him
some cheating trick, for his courtesies; his a^rision is a sign of delusion;
he has de^ved him, and therefore he aerides him; but a wise man, will never
(like Solomon) believe the flatterer, nor yet with Diogenes care for his (...);
who when the people mocked him, was wont to say: Arrident me, attain^n non
derideor; They deride me, Diogen.
yet I am not decided.

5. ^t is a fawning vice. 5. A fawning vice.


It is a fawning vice too; dog-like, who fawnes upon his Master for crusts and
bones. Loving smiles, and Apish gestures are his best impostures: He uses his
mouth as the dog waggs his tail, the one to obtain a boon from his friend,
the other to gain a bone from his Master. I wish now that missing their boon,
they might be censured to Adonibezeckes doom, that their hands and toes might
be cut off; their hards, Vt neminem assequantur; that they may lay hold of
none; their toes, Vt neminem insequantur; that they may not follow any man to
flatter him: and they should gather crumbs under men's tables; they fawn like
dogs, let them feed like dogs, says one.

Thus for the Genus in the definition, Flattery is a vice; now follow the

Differences.

In the words following.

In which observe four things. 1. Flattery's near affinity with friendship.
It Is hardly discerned from friendship. 2. The means whereby the flatterer does
deceive: and that is by soft, and smooth speeches. 3. The flatterers end, and
that is twofold.taken from the flatterers 1. Policy; to get favor for some
worldly respect, where note the 1. Object of this policy, and that is favor to
get favor. 2. Extent of the Object; for some worldly respect.
2. Intent, to deceive.
4. The flatterers hypocrisy; pretending what he intends not:


First, flatterie's near affinity with friendship.

It is hardly discerned from friendship,]

From which Note may be noted these three notes.

That 1. Flattery is like friendship. 2. A man can hardly know it from
friendship. 3. Flattery is a secret enemy.


First, of the first.

1. That Flattery is like friendship.

Flattery is like friendship in show, but not in fruit, says Isocrates, Non
est eadem, sed sient, o^ fere; it is like or almost friendship, Almost in
Agrippa mari'd a good Christian, and the flatterers Almost covers a friend, and
discovers a so: They are mutually mingled together affectu; they differ
effectu; or as the Moralist says, In omni motis, and affectu animi, sed non in
actionibus; They are joined together in every motion and affect of the mind,
but they are disioyned in their several effects and actions; therefore we
grant the old rule true, Nullum simile est idem, If flattery be similis, it
cannot be eadem, That which is like to a thing cannot be the same; flattery is
but like friendship, and therefore nemo amicus idem et adulator, A flatterer
cannot be both a flatterer and a friend.

Aquinas will have friendship to be a virtue, and flattery a vice: now vice may
be in some respects like virtue; and vice sometimes may been virtues Ape; but
yet no vice can be a virtue, for they are mere contraries; would you know
what this friendship is which opposes flattery; Then thus. Amicitia est
specialis uirtus, secundum Aquin. 22. Friendship, what it is. (...)
quaminter se homines been disponuntur, simul conviventes; Or thus arcording to
some, which runs both to one sense. It is a community of a perpetual will, the
end where of is fellowship of life; and it is framed by a perfect habit of a
long continued love. Now brass being gilded over with silver, may to the
outward appearance seem to be good silver; but time or the touchstone, (time
by long wearing, or the touchstone by present rubbing) discernes it to be but
brass; Flattery being covered over with amity, may appear to be true
friendship to the eye of the world; but either time (for true friendship is
perpetual flattery temporary) or the touchstone of adversity or present
necessity, will discover true f^iendship from flattery, and therefore well said
Plato, It is the property of true friends to live and love together; but fained
friends fly from a man in time of trial* for where flattery dwells,
friendship can have no chamber to lodge in: they cannot be lodged in the same
subject, no more then God and Dagon under one roof. Nemo potest (...) pariter
servire, deoque
S^c and adulator null^ (...) erit


If God and Satan may be bedfellowes, no doubt but flattery and friendship
may be chamber-fellowes; If one man can truly serve God and the Devil, I would
yield that one man might be both a true friend, and a flatterer; Though
friendship be like, yet it is contrary to flattery, dislodging verity, without
which the name of amity cannot subsist; and as flattery is Like, so i^ is so
like to friendship that (in the second note.)

2. A man can hardly know it from friendship.

Flattery is an arrant thief, he has robbed friendship of his coat, and wea^es
it himself. I hey both wear Gods livery, and of m^n they are both taken for
Gods servants; one that is a wrongful detainer of a great man's livery, is
taken for to be one of his true retai^ers, and of a stranger taken for his true
man; but the Master knows he is none of his servants, wherefore he punishes
him for his presumption; so ^lattery is hardly discerned from friendship;
Difficile est eodem and adu^atore et amico vti: It is a hard thing ^o p^t any
confidence in that man that ^eemes to be a friend, but indeed is a ^iend;
Solomon says Caveat amicus, let ^he flattered take heed; but I say ca^eat
adulator, Let the flatterer take ^eed; though man knows not his ^eart, yet God
knows it; and will one day pay him home for his dissimulation: The fl^tterer
is clothed like the Ass in the Lions ski^ in the fable; who, when he had
gotten on the Lions skin, was taken of all beasts for the true Lion: but his
Master finding him, knew him by his long ears, which he could not hide,
disrobed him, and beat him well for his knavery. The fable is but a fable, the
moral^ may be good; This Ass is the flatterer; who has got on the Lyo^
skin, friendship^ coat, and of all simple, silly and mistrustlesse people
taken for the true Lion, true friendship; but the Master, that is God* who is
Lord and Master over all knows him well enough by his long ears, that is his
heart, that is no^ clothed with friendship, and therefore God will disrobe
t^is dissembling Ass the flatterer, and make him appear as he is indeed, a
righ^ Gnatho, a Parasite; I wish that m^ might know flattery theoretically, bu^
not practica^y; that he might kno^ it to avoid it, not to practice it; f^ by
practicing he becomes man's enemy, for thirdly,

3. A flatterer is his friends secret enemy.

No enemy like to a secret enemy, and therefore Antigonus in his prayers was
wont to desire the g^ds to defend him from his Friends; for he said, he could
easily beware of them, which were his open enemies: David the beloved of God,
found some secret and inward hatre^ in those, of whom outwardly he seemed to
be beloved, for so David himself confesses, ^sal. 41. 7. The flatterer did
secretly hate him, Pro. 26 24.
and seek his hurt; These flatterers are Lamiae, Witches, which kill those
which suck their milk, Lamiae, is translated Dragons: and Lam. 4. 3. These are
the Dragons which draw out their breasts: I h^se cannot choose but be secret
enemies, who under a pretense to give the body nutriment, should be a cause of
mischi^fes increment, and healthes decrement, I c^nnot choose but count him my
enem^, that pretends health, but intends death, Prou. 26. that Pro. 26. 28.
for to cure my grievous malady, would not care to prescribe a venomous remedy:
that under a healthful potion would give me deaths portion. Haec adulatoris
amicitia, blanditoris inimicitia, The flatterers amity, in the end proves
enmity: For whose sake was devised this device; A Waterman rowing one way, and
looking another; His motto, this; M^l in ore, fell in cord; Honey is in his
mouth, but gall in his heart.

2. The means whereby the flatterer does deceive, and that is, By soft and
smooth speeches.]

Flattery according to the Hebrew tongue, (as those can best tell as have skill
in that language) signifies blandus, or mollis, smooth, or soft, because the
flatterer uses smooth and soft speeches; but he is like unto a Sodom Apple,
fair and sound in the outward appearance, but rotten within; so is he
faire-tongued, but rotten-hearted; and therefore say some of the Hebrews, the
word (to flatter) signifies Dividere, to divide, because in the flatterer his
tongue is divided from his heart: but those smooth speeches sooth up man ad
interitum to his own destruction; and therefore, well says Diogenes, A
flattering tongue is like Laer^. in vit^ D^gen.
^o a ^lken halter; which is soft because silken, but strangling, because a
halter.

Smooth words, but all vanity, little verity in them; for a man had better give
the words of an enemy some credit, then the words of a flatterer; for Illi
verum saepe dicunt, hi Tul. in Lalio.
^nquam, says Laeliu^; they sometimes speak truth, these never.

Receive then Solomon's advise, le^t he deceive you by his fairetongued
devises. Though he speak (fairly or) favorably believe him not; so I leave
his fine, and fained tongue, and come to his vain

Ends.

Which are twofold, his Policy, where is the Object of his policy; and that is,
favor to get favor. Extent of the object, for some worldly respect.
Intent to deceive.


First, the object of his policy, and that is

To get favor,]

The flatterers policy is but a crafty, and worldly policy: It is most sure
that he is the worlds friend, and Gods foe. For crafty, knavish, and worldly
policy, and true, and religious piety never shake hands together. Policy is
derived from the Greek word (...), which in our English tongue is termed
civility; but I am sure the flatterers policy is but knavish civility: the
confines of his policy reaches to a man's favor; and deceit sets a full period
to his policy. To be in a man's favor is but to be well esteemed of him, or to
have the favorable aspect of his countenance, and respect of his heart; I
think it is strange, that the tur^ing of a favorable countenance upon a man,
should make a man turn devil. To be a devil in heart, a Saint in tongue: To
insinuate is the devils practice, and the flatterer is but the devils Ape;
These kind of vvretches are a kind of mercenary wretches, they prostrate
themselves thereby to suck out private advantage, such a one was Iehonadab, 2 Samuel 13. who being destitute of all grace did prostitute his service to Ammon,
to be a graceless approver, and shameless procurer of Ammons shameful lust,
that so being a favourer of Ammons incestuous mind, he might the better
insinuate himself into Ammons favor. Thus for the object, now follows the

2. Extent. For some worldly respect.]

We read of a threefold love. Amor: 1. Purus. 2. Lascivus. 3. Quaerens vtile.


The first, is a pure love, the second lascivious, the third worldly. The first
is a stranger to the flatterer; with the second he may, with the third he
always does entertain his friend, which shows him to be a temporiz^r. He
loves his friend, as long as he can live by his friend: he is a fair
company-keeper, as long as he is a fair tongue-keeper; hoping by fair words
to obtain his worldly desire; if you can find in your heart to give him
presently, he will find in his heart to love you everlastingly; but yet

Aes in praesenti imperfectum format amorem.

His love is lame of one foot, which makes him go halting; he is like unto a
Hawke, who getting into the vvide world with a full belly, gives his Master a
kind farewell; but if once he find need and want, he will again stoop to
the lure. The Greek word for the world is (...), which signifies saire, which
may show us thus much that a faire-tongued flatterer is a mere worldling: it is
the property of a vvorldling to feign himself a friend, as long as he can
gain by his friend; I would have every good man to beware of this
pocket-friend. Thus have I done with his policy his first end, I come to his
second end, by which he intends

Deceit. To deceive.]

He does invont many good words, thereby the more easily to circumvent his
friend: he is like the horse-stealer that strokes the horse with a sweet Glove,
whose end is to cheat him of his good cheer, for he gets upon his back, and
rides him out of his Pasture. We read in the Prou. 29. 5. That a man that
flat^ereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his feet. The flatterer plays the
fowler, the poor silly mistrustlesse friend is his bird; and his fair,
cunning, and close words, the nett he spreads to deceive him.

Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit auceps, says the Poet.

Pindarus calls the deceitful man a flatterer, Impossible est (says he) vt
cives dolosus, qui est adulator, forte aliquod and sincerum verbum proferat. It
is impossible that a deceitful Citizen, who is a flatterer, should speak a
true word from his heart: and flattery is not only deceitful, but it is
cruelties partner, Fallax and crudelis res est adulatio, says Saint Austin:
and therefore Felicem accipimus, qui fallacem non recepit; We account him
happy that shunnes the flatterers acquaintance; For he that warily receives
the deceiving flatterer, may easily perceive a cheating knave; but follow him
not, lest he lead you to hell, for roaring and drinking is the horseway to
hell, and whoring and cheating is the foote-way to that infernal pit: and
there I leave his deceit, and come to his

4. Hypocrisy. Pretending what he intends not.]

He seems what he is not, and that is player-like, Extremum injustitiae genus
est, iustum haberi qui iustus non est, says Plato; It Is the highest kind of
injustice for a man to be accounted just, true, and honest, who indeed is not
so. A man had better trust to an enemy that seems as he is, then to a friend
that seems as he is not: For multo melius de quibusdam acerbi inimici
merentur, quam illi amici qui dulces videntur and acerbi vere sunt: The
greatest enemy deserves better at a man's hand, then that friend which seems
to be his loving friend, but indeed is his greatest foe; and from such a friend

Libera me Domine.

Thus have I done with the Definition of flattery, I come now to the

Distribution.

which demonstrates the causes object signs
of flattery.

First for the Causes, which are four.

The cause Efficient. Material. Formal. Final.


First for the efficient cause of flattery, and that is, the

Devil.

He makes a man a flatterer; for these two are great friends; and there is a
kind of a conjunction copulative that knits these two together; they are
commonly in league soothing up one another as mutual flatterers, they never
meet without shaking of hands, such mutual fellowship is there betwixt them,
as between prosperity and pride, which are seldom persuaded to part company;
but here is the difference, the devil is the Master, and the flatterer is his
Schaller; who being no good and skillful Grammarian, teaches him to speak
false Latin; his School is the flatterers heart, and quando adulatio lingua
resideat, diabolus cord insidet; When as flattery is resident in the tongue as
porter, the devil keeps Court (and sits president) in the heart, as King and
the chief Ruler; and wheresoever you see a flatterer, you may say, Ibi
diabolus.

He is the devils child too, and as like the father as he can possibly look,
he is the father of lies, Ioh. 8. 44. and there is no liar like the deceitful
flatterer, wherefore lying and flattery are joined together. Psalm. 78. 36. The
devil began to flatter our first parents in Paradise, and there he first put
out his flattering horns, and I think his children have them by succession;
therefore it is good for the honest plainedealing man to take heed, lest he
be gored with the horns of the flatterer; for let him look how he can, yet
fronti nulla fides; I will not trust his countenance.

It was Seneca's pride, and he boasted much Vbicunque ago, Demetrium
circumfero, But the best thing the flatterer can boast of, is this Vbicunque
ago Diabolum circumfero; wheresoever he goes he carries the devil about him,
to whom I leave him, and proceed to the

2. Material cause; of flattery.

It is composed of fair and glozing words.

A fair tongue is the flatterers Hawks hood, whereby he carries his
mistrustlesse friend quietly into perdition, without ever bayting at the Inn
of repentance.

His smooth tongue is but a lying tongue, they be words of seeming amity, but
sildome words of any verity; for which he is accounted the father of a
monster, for he is the common father of untruths, and untruths are
unnatural monsters, for oration is oris ratio; the soul is the mother, and the
tongue should be the midwife of truth: now for the soul to conceive a truth,
and the tongue to bring forth a lie is wonderfully unnatural; such a
monstrous tongue ownes our flatterer: It seems by his fair, sweet, and
pleasing words, that he is a sweet friend; but Non acerba, sea blanda verba
timendasunt, says Seneca, for all his sweetness lies in ore non cord; in his
lips not heart. The Bees go forth and return home (in Virgils phrase) crura
thymo plena; their thighs full of honey; but this sweet friend goes out and
returns home, Ora thymo plena, hony-tongued.

By this it seems their mouths drop honey combs. l it is true; but their end
is as bitter as vvormewood; for sweet meat relishes best with sower sauce,
says our proverb. Would you now know what his fair words are; Consider
what they are

in regard of the 1 sound. 2 sense or trial. 3 his aim.


They are in 1 the sound, deligtfull. 2 the sense, bitter. 3 his aim,
deceitful.


1. In regard of the sound; we may speak of them as it is spoken of the
Nightingales voice; Voces sunt praeterea nihil; They seem for the present
sweet and delightful in the ears of the Auditour: or else I may say of them
as S. Ambrose lib. 2. (...). 7. said of Calanus answer to Alexander; Praeclara
verba, sed verba; eloquent words but no more.

2. Would you know what they are in the Auditors sense or trial;

T^y are, 1. Viseus merus, birdlime. 2. Venenum mellitum, poison. 3. Mulsum
lethale, deadly wine. 4. Melle litus gladius, a killing sword. 5. Laqueus, a
net.


1. They are birdlime but entangling; according to Plautus, Viscus says he:
Now it is the nature of birdlime, after the poor bird has touched it, so to
entangle her, and clog her, that it hinders her slight again into the air;
such are the words of the flatterer, which being always dedited by the
Auditour, will so clogge him, that at last he shall not be able to raise up
his flight to heaven.

2. They are poison, but as sweet as honey, says Pliny: who would be so mad
for a little sweetness to kill himself, such is the nature of the flatterers
words; they are to the Auditour sweet in the conception, but deadly in the
operation; for

Impia sub dulci melle venena latent, says Ovid; and says Minus, Habet suum
venenum blanda oration. a sweet tongue but deadly.

3. They are wine, but death is in the cup; Mors in olla; he that believes the
words of the flatterer, is like him that is drunk with wine, bereft of his
senses.

4. They are a sword, but it is melle litus; besmeared with honey; thus are the
flatterers words like this honyed-sword sweet in the apprehension, deadly in
the application; yea, it is more hurtful then the sword. Plus nocet lingua
adulatoris, quam gladius persecu / da / toris; The tongue of a flatterer hurts
more then the sword of a persecuter, says a Father.

5. They are laqueus, a nett but entrapping. They entrap a man, says Diogenes;
Malus homo blande loquens cuique laqueus agnoscendus est; The tongue of a
flatterer is a net to the hearer.

3. Would you know what the flatterers words are in his own aim or end,
they are deceitful; they are like unto a fair rotten staff, whosoever
trusts to them shall be sure to have a fall.

His smooth words are but oscula inimici, the kisses of an enemy, Prou. 27. 6.
Better are the wounds of a friend, then kisses of an enemy.

We read in the Scripture of five kisses. Osculum 1 amicitiae. 2 lasciviae. 3
amoris. 4 proditionis. 5 adulationis.


The first is of friendship, so Jonathan kissed David.

The second of lust. So the harlot kissed the young man. Brou. 7. 13.

The third is of true love, betwixt Christ and his members.

The fourth of treachery, so Judas kissed Christ.

The fifth of flattery, so Absalom kissed the people in the gates. Two of these
are good; the other three naught, and bad, and are much used by the flatterer;
they are the kisses of a false friend, whose kisses are odious; Amici vulnera,
quam inimici oscula sunt vtiliora, says Saint Ambrose.

His words are kisses, and they be not verba, but verbera, not words, but
wounds; and if a man do but observe his words, he shall find that the
composition of them is an opposition to his heart; and therefore you shall
find them spoken with

a humble complementall
tongue.

He has a tongue of humility, and a tongue full of complements:

First, an humble tongue; a formal hypocritical humility; you shall have him
show himself affable, courteous, and officious even to admiration, lay his
hands even under your feet, when his heart picks but matter of some worldly
and bygood out of this his abasement. Vt vipera curvando, sic iste humiliando
ingreditur; As the viper enters his cranny by bowing, so he enters your heart
by crowching.

And secondly, he has likewise a complementall tongue; he will tell you,
that he will be your servants servant to command, and be at your service to
wait upon you; but what his tongue vtters, his heart means not: for demand of
him the least kindness, and he will be ready to forbear your company, but
command his best service, and he will utterly forswear your acquaintance. You
know now the flatterers language, he can, imitate Pertinax, of whom it is
storied, that he could speak exceeding well, but do exceeding ill; you see
his tongue is full of fair words; but his heart is full of hypocrisy; that is,

3. The formal cause; or formality of flattery.

Hypocrisy, or dissimulation.

The Greeks say that (...), the Lingua.
tongue is so called quasi (...), of (...), to know; signifying thereby, that
the tongue should speak nothing but what the heart means; now what greater
dissimulation then to express that by the tongue which is not impressed in the
heart and soul; for the soul (says one) is the fountain of knowledge, and
the tongue a channel from that fountain; Now a flatterer is a right
dissembler, and hypocrite, for he is like unto Aristotle's videtur quod non
est; he seems to have a good, true, and sound heart, when as he is rotten at
the heart; he is like a Sepulcher, Sepulchrum quasi semi-pulchrum, Extra
nitidum, in^ foetidum, says one; he is (as our Country proverb is) like to
D^me silver-pinne, fair without, and soul within. And a stately building
where a flatterer inhabiteth, is but a gaudy coat to a Sodomeapple; I pray GOD
keep every good man from keeping their visitation in his house (or Chapel:)
for there you shall find a Gentleman bearing in his arms a cloven or divided
tongue, and a double heart; Of all letters in the Crosserow a W is the worst,
for it is a dissembling and flattering knaves Epitheton; Can any man think the
dissembling hypocritical flatterer to be a true friend, no? nor yet a half
friend, witness the Poet.

Qui lingua duplicem mentem sic gestat in vna;

Hostis, sed nunquam fidus amicus erit.

Cato further confirms it.

Qui simulat verbis, ^ec cord est fidus amicus.

Flattery and hypocrisy keep their revells in that heart, where the sign of
a double tongue hangs at the door of the mouth: The emblem of deceit, as well
as hypocrisy is a double heart; and so I come to the fourth final cause of
flattery, and that is

Deceit.

Whatsoever the flatterer does propose to be the end of his more then wonted
friendship, yet surely his purpose is to end his friendship with Deceit; No
longer pipe, no longer dance, says the proverb; if once his friend can show
him no more booty, he will show his friend a light pair of heels. Craft
always vshers deceit; if Craft be in the premises, deceit will be in the
co^sion: for what the flatterers Craft has in invention, his fraud and Deceit
does put in execution. We read of the crafty Fox, that he will feign
himself dead, that thereby he may the more easily get his prey; so the
flatterer faines himself honest, that thereby he may the more easily deceive
his friend: he plays verth his friend as the Fox in the fable played with the
Raven, who seeing a piece of Cheese in the mouth of the Raven sitting in a
tree, devised this way to cosen her of her fare; he praised her for the most
fairest bird living, and that she surpassed all other birds in her most
pleasant voice, which he most desired to hear; which praise the Raven
hearing, opened her mouth to sing, by which means the Cheese fell to the
ground, the Fox caught it, and ran away: The Fox is the Emblem of a
Flatterer, he gets into a man's favor, intending nothing but Deceit.

His words are like Hypomanes balls to deceive Atalanta.

Flattery cannot choose but be the eldest borne of the devil, begotten upon the
body of deceit, delivered forth by the Midwife Craft.

There are two things that are naught to be practiced by any man; the one is to
flatter a friend, the other is to neglect a friend; The first of these is, to
play false in the game of friendship; the second is, to throw the Cards in the
fire: The first by flattery, blindes the eyes of his friend, the more easily to
get some goods from his friend: The last by Pride, binds his own hands from
doing good to his friend; these two are both to be condemned, for this is
Lyon-like, to forget his benefactours courtesy; the other is Fox-like, to
circumvent his Neighbors simplicity.

What is spoken of the Youths of our times, I may speak of flatterers, They
bear in their thoughts not (...) but (...), not Virgins but Curtezans; so the
flatterer bears in his mind not the Virgin Truth, but the Courtezan, Deceit:
He uses Covin in all his actions, now Covin in the law, is, when a man making
show of one thing, does the clean contrary; and if ever Covin is used by any
man in personal actions, it is used by the Flatterer: and I vvish that we
English could deal with these Foxes, as the Welch-men did with their Wolves,
pluck off their skins, until they were extinct, and not one of them left in a
whole Nation.

I have done with the causes, the object of flattery follows.

The Object is to be considered 1. generally. 2. specially.


1. Generally Is for some outward good; or for some vvorldly respects; and for
the flatterers own private ends: This has been handled before, I will but
run it over now, or if you please but little for explication, somewhat for
application of this point.

Such as flatter for their own ends, (if you desire where to find them) you
shall find them

both in Church. Court. City. Country.


1. In the Church.

I am sorry flattery should creep so high to God; but it is carried thither by
flattery's Porter, Covetousness; I know some will be ready to say to me in
Terence, phrase, Bona verba quaeso; good words, I pray; My intent is not to
give any ill words; but desire from my heart, that no ill flattering words
should proceed out of the mouth of a Minister. Mistake me not; I am no man to
teach Paul; or to instruct that tribe what to say, but do honor it with my
heart; but a word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold with pictures
of silver. Preachers are Pro. 36. 11.
called Fishers, but some there are that fish with a shining shell in their ^t;
and these are flattering fishers; These are they that may say at the sunne-set
of their life, we have fished all day and caught nothing; or if they have
caught some fish, (for the word of God is powerful, proceeding out of the
weakest and wickedest) yet themselves have perished in the waters; These are
they I aim at: who aim not aright.

I would presume that there would be no flatterers found among the sons of
Levi; If I might truly speak of them what Nazianzen has in his Epitaph on
great S. Basil; (...). That their words are thunder; their life lightning; But
would you know, who is the flatterer? you shall know him by this if he
flatters

either in his 1. Instruction, 2. Conversation,


Either in his words, or life; precepts, or example; If his words be not
thunder, and his life lightning, he is a slatterer.

1. In Instruction.

He flatters in his preaching, when his chief aim in teaching, is to please;
if he be (...), one that makes Merchandise of the word; and this he does,
when in teaching he seems to aim at those three golden apples that
men-pleasers usually run after; that is, when he

Preaches either for 1. Favor. 2. Profit. 3. Credit.


Devine Paul sought for neither of these in his Doctrine; For first he did not
carry the word of God in his mouth, thereby to curry favor with men, for 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. He used not flattering words.

Secondly, he seeked not profit; His pains was not only for gains, he was
none of those silver fishers, that angle for the tributary fish, with
twenty-pence in her mouth; he sought to get more souls to God, not more money
to his purse; for Ver. 5. He used not a cloak of Covetousness; It is a badge
of a false Prophet to seek his own profit, Ier. 6. 13.

Thirdly, he aimed not at Credit; he did not distribute the word to man,
thereby to purchase credit of man; he did not speak to man, that man might
speak to him as the people spoke to Herod; Vo^Deinon hominis, The voice of God
not of man he desired not at last to come off with a great Hem, and a
Plaudite; for verse. 6. He ought not glory of men, but a flatterer pleases both
for favor, gain, and credit. The Minister must not preach pleasing Ob.
doctrine, lest he turn flatterer; Then, pray what was Paul's (...), He
became all things to all men, that by all means he might gain some? I
answer. The flattering Ans.
teacher, and faithful Preacher, may both please but in different respects;
For first, the flatterer in his doctrine pleases in the matter, seeking
placentia, but a faithful teacher does please for the manner, speaking truth,
placenter faithfully, yet wisely to become with men: Secondly, the one does
please in dispendiumveritatis, the other in compendium charitatis: Thirdly, one
pleases propterse, and that is a carnal pleasing; the other propter deum, and
that is a Christian pleasing: Fourthly, the one pleases men in their sins;
the other seeks to please men by converting men from their sins: Lastly, the
one does please men for Gods sake, and that is not to please men but God; the
other pleases men for the fleshes sake, and that is not to please God but men.
Thus does the flatterer sooth up, humor, and please men in their sins; and
therefore they sin to please men. Would you have the Emblem of a flatterer?
I have read of Trochylus the little Wren of Egypt, who does pick the
Crocodiles teeth, whereby he does feed himself, this tickling and pleasing of
the bird does cause him to gape wide, which Ichneumon the Rat of Pharaoh
perceiving, and taking her advantage by this means, shoots suddenly into
the bowels of the Crocodile, and eats out his belly: Thus does that
Preacher, which does flatter men in their sins by pleasing and tickling
Sermons, he humors men sleeping securely in their sins, by which means he
makes open way for the devil, to enter into the hearts of men; he is like to
the Serpent in Paradise, who tickled Eve to death with pleasing words; Eris
sicut Deus: and like to the Camelion, he lives on the air of men's favors.
Ministers should preach in Love, when aiming neither at favor, nor reward,
reprehend sin in his best friend; but the flatterer does otherwise; he
seems to have small charity in his heart, when flattery sits in his mouth; for
flattery is contrary to Charity; but how can that be, seeing all the while
he Ob.
pretends charity; and it is so taken? I answer: that flattery in a private
Ans.
man or public Minister, may be considered

three ways, ratione 1. materiae. 2. intentionis. 3. modi loquendi.


1. In regard of the matter; when a Minister or other man seems to praise
another sin; this is flattery; but you will say; Ob.


Est procul a nobis populi laudatio ^ulpa.

It is so? then what means those Ans.
hyperboles at the last funerals of a lost friend; when we shall hear the
dead raised and praised even ad astra, as though there were none left living to
parallel them: when as their Actions in their life time gives him the lie;
when they have been known to have led as lewd a life as the lewdest upon
earth; of whom a man may speak (I am sure) without flattery, and (I suppose)
without the gift of too hard a censure; as once it was spoken of a quondam
Pope; Vt Leo vivebat, vt canis moriebatur; so these, they lived like Lions, and
died like dogs; then what is this but to praise not them, but their sins; but
you will say; Charity requires a better judgment; and it is required that men
judge favorably; I grant this, Love indeed covers a multitude of sins, but
it is no Love to praise another sins, (or to praise a man above his deserts,
that is right flattery) for this contraries first the love of God, against whose
justice a man speaks; and secondly, the love of a neighbor, whom he
cherishes in sin, and calls evil good, to whom a woe is pronounced, Esaias
5. For suppose a man have been known by his neighbors to have been a most
wicked ill liver, yet at his suneralls he shall have a large commendation
beyond his deserts, what is this but to open a flood-gate to sin, and to give
the ignorant further liberty to sin. I will illustrate this by one instance;
Suppose a man has been a notorious Drunkard, but yet a plainedealing honest
man; yet at his Funerals, and death, he shall be praised for a very good
liver; an excellent Christian; an example for imitation; and that for
conclusion, No doubt but he now rests in peace, etc. As Charity wills a man to
judge, I confess it. Now what will the ignorant be apt both to think, and
say? this is their usual saying, He was a good man, but yet he was given to
Drunkenness, that was the worst fault in him; but yet the Preacher says, he
is a happy man: then surely think they, Drunkenness is not so great a sin
as we take it for, but for all that a man shall get to heaven well enough. I
hope you cannot but grant (these things being considered) that overmuch
praising of the dead, is but a flattering of the living: and in this case I
hold it better for a man to spare every word, then to speak too many words:
and upon such an occasion (by which may a fault be committed) it is better to
conceal, then to reveal all the truth.

2. Flattery is to be considered

Ratione intentionis:

In regard of the intention of the flatterer, when a man flatters a man to this
end, that he may fraudulently hurt him either corporally or, spiritually; I
hope this is far from the Ministers intent; these are they that with the
Priests in the sixth of Ier. 13. 14. cry out, Peace, peace, when there is no
peace. This contraries charity too.

3. In regard of the manner of speaking; when the praise of the speaker does
cause the hearer to sin, prater adulatoris intentionem, beyond the intent of
the speaker; this may not contrary charity, though a man may please to call it
Flattery, and therefore take this note out of Aristotle; Si aliquis Lib. 4.
Et^. cap. 6.
velit ad delectationem alteri loqui and execdit modum delectandi; and si hoc
faciat sola intention delectandi vocatur placidus, sed si faciat ho^
intention alicujus commodi externi consequendi, vocatur blanditor si^e
adulator; If a man by speaking does delight the hearer, and does exceed in
delighting, if he do this with an intent only to delight, he is called a
man-pleaser: but if he do it, intending and hoping thereby to get some
outward and by-good thereby, he is called a Flatterer.

Secondly, as he may flatter in Doctrine, so he may flatter in Conversation,
and life, when he does nor lead his life according unto his Doctrine; for if
the Minister be given to any vice, the people will imitate it as a ve^tue; the
Minister does lead the people by the eyes, as Hercules did by the ears: let
them then do as they say, lest by their ill life they lead men to hell, Plus
movent exempla quam praecepta, was Seneca's observation; but both precept and
example joined together, is most commendable in a Minister. You see how they
flatter, and that for some by-respect. Thus for Churchflattery; now follows

Court-flattery.

The arrows that these flatterers shoot, fly to two marks only, either
pleasure, or profit; Pride vshers pleasure, and avarice is Gentleman Usher to
profit: for what makes the flatterer fly to the Court for ease and pleasure,
but pride; and what makes him flatter for gain and profit, but Covetousness.
Flattery is the Earewigge of the mighty, and the very bane of Courts; Magnates
sunt magnetes, Great men are those loadstones, that draw flatterers to them,
Divitum sunt asseclae, said Diogenes to Aristippus, they are attendants upon
rich men; for these horse-leaches are soonest found in great or rich men's
waters; for the rich shall never want them.

Te bona dum splendet fortuna sequuntur amici.

V^ te dum lucet sol solet vmbra sequi:

Quam primum liquidus nebulis offenditur aer,

Ecce repent tuum deserit vmbra latus, says Owen in his Epigrams.

They will follow great men, as long as they obtain great gains by great men,
but if once adversity should arrest that great man, they would fly as fast from
him as Croto's Mouse did, when his house was on fire: for there is no Parasite
will lurk but where he can find gains, Patitur dum potitur, He will
endure the hardest labor to obtain the 'least favor, for praemium est
solatium labor is, says he, labor is his consort till a reward be his
comfort, Adulor says one, quasi adaulor, quod in aulis maxim fieri soleat, It
is most used in Courts.

King Zerxes marching toward the Greeks with a great Army, called some of
these Parasites unto him, and asked them what they thought of this war; the
one told him, that when the Greeks heard of his Army, they would quickly
yield. Another told him, that the air had not room enough for the arrows
they should shoot off; some spoke one thing, some another: The King being
puffed up with pride called 'Damascerus the Philosopher to him, and asked him,
what he most doubted of in that war, he told him, that the thing he most
feared, was, that these flatterers would deceive him, and destroy him.
Adulationis vnctio, domorum est emunctio, The flatterers instruction is but the
Creditours destruction: So that the flatterer is but like the trencherflye,
which waytes more for luere then for love. In the Court you shall find the
ambitious flatterer like Absalom, who may speak in Fortunes phrase with
Nebuchadonezer,

Regno, regnavi, regnabo, sum sine regno: but the have of his head was his
death.

Secondly, the self-concei^ed and politicle Flatterer like Achitophell: but
mark his end, he went out and hung himself.

Thirdly, the flatterer affecting popularity with Herod, but he was even up
with worms.

Fourthly, the vainglorious flatterer like Nebuchadonozer; but he was turned
into a beast. Take heed (ye Courtiers and great men) of these flatterers, and
say with an Epigrammatist,

Tam gravis ille mihi, nigri quam flumina ditis,

Ore aliud qui fert aliud sub pectore celat, I hate the flatterer like the
devil. Thus for Court-flatterie: you shall find the flatterer likewise in the

City.

That is full of flatterers: there you find a great deal of flattery,

between 1. the Citizen and his wife. 2. the Citizen and the Countryman. 3.
the Cheater and the Stranger.


1. Between the Citizen and his wife; you may call it femaleflattery, mutual
friendship, alias flattery. It is a strange thing, that a woman should be
turned like Io into a beast, to be her husbands Spamell; and she carries two
egregious flatterers about her; her back, and her belly, or rather flatters
for the outward good of them both; for sometimes you shall find all a Citizens
wealth upon his Wives back, and her table; here pride is flatteries Iackey;
she like 'Dalilah flatters him to get away Sampsons strength, Sampsons lay in
his lock, the Citizens under his lock and key, or in his purse: To get fine
clothes and Jewels on her back, and dainties for her belly, is the end of her
flattery. Thus she turns a Dalilah to her Husband: Dalilah signifies poverty,
and how many of them have brought their Husbands to poverty by back and
belly-flattery; for by their instigations, pride, and flattery, they do (as
we usually say) maintain their Wives above their degree; their Children
according to their degree, and themselves (very seldom now in these days
seen) below their degree.

Secondly, flattery between the Citizen and Countryman; or the Citizen,
flattering the Countryman; here is flattery crept into the Shop, for their
sale commonly is not without flattery, to the end (...) deceive the buyer;
Caveat emptor, let the buyer beware of this flatterer: The poor and simple
Country man takes a great journey to London, to buy things for his use at the
easier rate, where he finds a great many of our, What lack you Sirs,
standing at every Shop; at last finding a Shop that may supply his wants; he
makes it his resolution, there to give his purse a discharge of his burden he
is entertained with Hat in hand, a bended knee, a supple tongue, with speeches
sleep't in Oil; with candied flattery, and ho^ed words, carrying in their
mouths the figure Hyperbole, praising their own Wares, even ad astra, with a
Nonesuch, or the best in London, especially of that price, when as the
skillful Merchant knows, it is the worst (almost) in London: thus at last many
a fair forsoothes draws the Chap-mans hand to his Pocket, to draw his Purse:
thus to close up the bargain with a fair word; at the heel of Farewell
commonly follows their common sayings, either, Pray tell no man what you paid,
or else, in good faith (if it were as strong in their heart, as it is common in
their mouth, they would not say) I gain nothing by this bargain, but
amrather a looser by it, but I do it that I may take your money another time,
and such like words, when it is scarce vvorth half the money; and as soon as
the Chapmans back is turned, they can (with derision and joy) bless
themselves, and say, God send us more such Chapmen as he is.

Thus he was entertained with reverence, respect, and flattery in his face,
he goes away with an ill bargain, bad vvare, excessive price, an empty purse,
and scoff at his back; I know who they be that can say, Expertis creed.

Oh the wickedness of such flattering Shop-men, experienced by the silly
Chap-men. The sale of these flatterers is put in the scole of Injustice, whose
weight is deceit, unjust vendition is their pride, and part of their ambition;
they take Mimus words for their rule, as Saint Austin has it (lib. 13. de
Trin. cap. 3.) Optimum est vili emere, and care vendere. They can by cousonage
and flattery put off bad Ware at a dear rate.

Let the buyer take heed of these flatterers, and shun them (if he ca^) as
he does that house where L^d have mercy upon us, is set upon the do^e. So I
leave him, and come to another flatterer, and that is the

Cheater; Who watches for the Stranger, as the Cat for the Mouse: his gettings
come in when a Stranger comes to town; he has a great deal of
Pocket-friendship in him: he laughes a man in his face, when as one hand is in
his Pocket: these are such flatterers, as lie in every street, a man can
scarce get to his journeyes end, without meeting, such acquaintance,
especially to unload his full purse at home, if he have not Argus his eyes,
and especially one eye in his Pocket: This flatterer is so well known, I need
describe him no further; for he is sibi natus, multis notus, omnibus nocuus,
mundi nothus, and diaboli filius: He is known to many, hurtful to all, the
worlds bastard, and the trueborne child of the devil, to whom I leave him, and
come to seek out siattery in the

Country.

I am sure that is not free from the devils watermen; that look one way, go
another way; that do one thing, and mean another; whether shall I travail
to find them out, I need not travail far to seek them, for I am sure if I
miss them all day, I shall find them at night at my lodging. Iunes and
Taphouses are not free from them; there you shall find the Taphousehaunter, a
common guest, he will presume to keep you company, and profess great
friendship, if you will bestow but a Pot upon him; this is but pot-friendship,
and drinking friendship is but drunken kindness: and likewise there find you
another flatterer the Gamester; that will be ready for you at any pastime to
pass the time away; who will be sure to cheat you of your money, and then
perhaps fly your company; you shall seldom find true friendship among
gamesters, where one word perhaps breaks off the game of friendship, and gives
friendship Farewell, with a broken head: this you shall find at games: Beware
of these flatterers bearing in your mind that old verse,

Ludens taxillis been quid sit in illis:

Take heed lest the game for conclusion trip up thy heels.

Or if these flatterers appear not thy Host himself will come and act the
part of a flatterer, who to rob thee of thy money, will entertain thee kindly
but if he draw the drink out of his barrel, he will be sure to draw thy wit
out of thy head, and thy money out of thy purse, and then turn thee out of
doors: beware of this flatterer, for he is a monster, if our common saying be
true, that such a one must have, (for if his Wife be a wanton she will never
want one;) a head like an Ox, a back like an Ass, to bear all taunts, a
belly like a Hog to drink with all companies, and a tail like a dog to
fawn upon every commer. You shall find many flatterers besides; if thou
know them, shun them; if not, be wary what company thou keep. Thus
have I done with Countryflattery, and with the object of flattery in general;
next follows

The special object of Flattery,

which is threefo^d, thy life. goods. good name.


He that aims at thy 1. life 2. goods 3. good name
is a 1. treacherous 2. covetous 3. tale-bearing
Flatterer.

The first aims at thy life; here Envy is hid under seeming friendship, and
cloaked under Flattery; these are they the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 28. 3.
That speak f^rieadly to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their
hearts:

Tuta frequensque via est per amici fall^re nomen,
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.
To deceive by emity is but plain knavery: It is an easy way to deceive by
friendship, yet it is the devils policy, to deceive by friendship; thus was
Caesar deceived by his friends Brutus and Cassius, who murdered him in the
Senate House! So Alexander was deceived by his kinsman, and dear friend (as
he thought) Antipater, who poisoned him in the midst of his triumphs at
Babylon: Adulator Scorpio est, qui palpando incedit, sed cauda ferit, Super
Ezekiel lib. 1. cap. 9.
says Saint Gregory; and if a man do believe this Scorpion, the flatterer, he
shall find his tail, that is, his end, intent, and purpose, to be death and
confusion:

-- Nam front politi, Astutam vapido servant sub pectore vulpem.

This flatterer deals with a man as the Fox does with the birds, faines
himself dead, that he may the more easily catch them to devour them; and the
flatterer faines himself harmless, honest, and religious, that he may the
more easily deceive the hearts of the simple. Thus Ioab dealt with Abner, 2.
Sam. 3. And thus does this flattering Butcher claw a man like an Ox, that he
may the more easily knock him on the head: I can but use this prayer either for
them or against them; Aut convertantur, ne pereant, aut confundantur, ne
noceant; Lord, convert them lest they perish, or of thy justice confound them,
for making others to perish.

The second aim at a man's goods, and they are covetous flatterers.

Envy moves the first, covetousness this. The goods of man is that good which
he aims at; he will most love that man, whose purse he has at command; and
what is it that a man will not do for gain; Committitur cades lucri gratia,
spoliantur templa, violatur amicitia, fides negligitur, patria proditur, omnia
mala patrantur; Money (we say) makes the man, but money makes the flatterer
mar the man: for to get a little gain, murders are committed; friendship
violated, and all evil by it committed This has been fully handled in the
book, I leave it and come to the last, who aims at a man's good-name, and he
is a

Talebearer:

And is a detractour likewise; who carries two tongues in his head, one to
lick, another to bite; one to flatter a man to his face, another to slander
him behind his back; he is one that to please some, will backbite and
detract from others. The flatterer that gives his neighbor an ill name, is
halse a hangman; who with the sharp razour of his tongue does cut his throat,
Cum actum est de nomine, actum est de homine: He that has an ill name, is
halfe-haaged; the tongue is a dangerous thing if ill used, though it cannot
prevail always ad interitum hominis, yet it will ad interitum nominis; if it
cannot murder, yet it will murmr; the head of John was cut off with the
foot of a woman; and a man's good name diverse times is cut off by the tongue
of a man: these flatterers are such as do famam ex infamia comparare; climb to
merit praise by the stayres of others disgrace. These are the firebrarnds of
the devil; if thou hearkens to them they will burn thee in thine ear; or if
thou hearkenest to them, thou have a devil in thine care as they in their
tongues. I have done with the object of Flattery, I come at last to the

Signs of a Flatterer.

The first sign is, to praise a man (though absent) beyond his deserts; so
says Aquinas, Adulator supra debitum virtutis modum verbis hominem delectare
studet. A flatterer does seek to delight a man by praising others beyond their
merits.

The second sign is, to praise a man to his face; for this is but to puff a
man up with pride and self-conceit: for (says one) it is an easy thing to
make men believe they be better then they be; but you may flatter some women
beyond the knowledge of themselves. We ought not to be proud of the flatterers
praise, for another dispraise can soon blemish it; but another opinion of
thee concerns thee not so much as thine of thy self, in which thou should
not be partial.

The third sign is, if, upon small distasts slacks his acquaintance, then he
was not a friend, but a flatterer; for a good Bow is not easily broken, unless
it be extremely overdrawne, nor a well grounded affection fullied with the
smallest distasts.

The fourth and last sign, he is a talebearer, if he does backbite another,
and tell thee long tales to the disgrace of another, he is a flatterer, for be
sure he spares not to do the like of thee to another: this is confirmed, Pro.
18. 8. and 26. 22. Psalm. 41. 6. He has a divided tongue, of two humors like
Ptolomies man, or as of two colors, white and black, white with a
complementall courtesy to thy face, and black with a defaming injury behind
thy back; he uses his tongue as Ioab did his hand, he salutes and stabs the
same man with the same tongue: believe him not, for he will deceive thee.

Thus have I ripped open the flattering- Fox, I hope you may now partly know him,
and knowing him avoid him, for there is no truth but deceit in him.

And now (thou flatterer) I speak to thee, repent of thy sins, which by
flatteries means do accompany thee; lying, covetousness, deceit, malice,
ambition, hypocrsie, and what not; Panaces the herb was good for all
diseases: so this herb Repentance applied to thy heart, is good for these and
all other thy foul and soule-diseases: repent that God may forgive thee;
repent of all or else of none; for God will forgive thee all, or none.

Larga Dei pietas veniam non dimidiabit,
Aut nihil, aut totum te lachrymante dabit.
FINIS.

