A notable and learned Sermon or Homily, made upon saint Andrews day last
past 1556. in the Cathedral church of S. Paul in London, by Master Ihon
Harpesfeild doctor of duinitie and Canon residenciary of the said church, Set
forth by the bishop of London.

Vltimo Decembris, 1556.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



Constituite diem solennem in condensis, vsoque ad cornu altaris.
HOnorable, worshipful, and devout christian audience, the holy prophet David,
in his hundredth and xvii psalm (whence the words of my theme are taken out)
does in treat of four points most mete to be duty considered, and
effectually of us all practiced at this present. First he declares that
himself had been in extreme peril and danger of life, and in great
affliction and tribulation of mind. Secondely, he acknowledges that God of
his infinite mercy and goodness did delmer him. Thirdelye that he does esteem
those dangers and vexacions as a scourge for sin. Fourthlye and last he
gives thanks unto GOD his deliverer, and exhorts al other to do the like.

Concerning the peril he was in, he says: Circundantes circun dederunt me
sicutapes. My enemies compassed me round about as thick as it had been a swarm
of Bees. And again within a while after. Impulsus euersus sum ut caderem, I
was thruste at so sore, that I was like to be ouer-throwne: and after that he
calls him self, lapide^ quem reprobauerunt difica^tes. A ston which the
builders did refuse and cast away: meaning in those.iii. places, the
persecution which he sustained at the hands of wicked Saul, who (as it is
written in the first book of the kings) sometime threw a darte at David:
sometime sent men suddenly David's house, to take him in his beed and bring him
unto him, that he might be slain: sometime persecuted him with an open army.
Concerning the second point, which is how David in the forsaied Psalm does
confess and acknowledge that god of his mere goodness miraculous lie protected
and delivered him, it is there written. Dominus suscepit me, God was my help.
Fortitudo and laus mea dominus, and factus est mihi in salutem, God is my
strength and my rejoicing, and is become my salvation. Dextera domini fecit
uirtutem, dextera domini exaltauit me, dextera domine fecit virtutem. The right
hand of God has done myghtelye, the right hand of God has exalted me, the
right hand of God has done myghtely. Concerning the third point, which is
that the prophet David cou^teth his trou bles and persecutions as a
chastisement for sin, he says. Castigans castigauit me dominus. God has
chastened and corrected me. The last and fourth point is thanks giving and
provoking all other to the like. This point is to be found in many places of
the Psalm, but most notably in the words of my theme when he says:
Constituite diem solennem in condensis vsoque ad cornu altaris. Appoint you to
keep a solemn feast, in great frequencies or multitudes, and co^course of
people even reachinge to the corners of the alter. It was commanded in the old
law that at solemn feasts the people should bring Oxen, Calves, lambs, or
Goats, to be offered up upon the altar in sacrifice, and that the priest
should sprynkell of the blood upon the corners of the altar: and he now
exhorts them so to do, in geuynge thanks to God, for that he had delivered
him out of the hands of Saul: and he month them to keep a new solemnetie for
this purpose, besides the accustomed feasts cominau^ded in the law.
According to this example given us by king David, it is our part to use our
selfs this present day. First to remember what miserable and parilous case we
were in of late years. Next to consider how God by his mighty hand, and
thoroughe his infinite mercy has delivered us. Thirdlye to persuade our
selves, that we worthily suffered those miseries for our sins. Fourthlye to
be thankful, and induce other to thanks giving for our delivery. Which that
ye may the rather do, I intend by Gods grace and your patience, to stand
upon the two first points, and to set forth the exceeding great benefit of
our reconciliation to the unity of the catholic church, and the horrible
miseries which we were in, in the time of schism and division, and then no
more, but touch the other two parts, and so commit you to God. And that the
things to be uttered at this present by me, may be to Gods honor, to your
edification and comfort, I desire you first to help me with your prayers.

The prayers.

I Find in holy scripture that there were two commonweals, instituted,
ordained, and appointed by God him self. The one emonge the children of
Israel, the other among the christians. The common weal of the Israelites or
Jews, was in time before the comminaltie of christendom. But this in worcester
thines is far before it. For the things belonging to that estate, were
figures, types, and shadows of things belonginge too christianity. The
children of Israel were under cruel Pharao, in great captivity and thraldom,
until such time as god of his goodness called them outs of Egypt, and drowned
their enemies in the red Sea: likewise is all mankind thrall to the
spiritual Pharao, that is the devil, before they comme to pass thoroughe
baptism, which because it takes his force and strength of the blood of our
savior, and is ministered in water, may well be lykened to the read Sea, and
in it all power of the devil is quite over whelmed and destroyed. The children
of Israel having passed the read Sea, were not forth with directly conveyed to
the land of promise: but were feign to traueill in the baren and unpleasant
wyldernes, a long space, there abiding much trouble and vexation. Even so
christen people after their Baptism are left in this vale of misery, here to
endure many sharp and perilous storms, and are not immediately from the Font,
had up to the land of the living, which is the land promised to the just. In
many other points the laws of Moses was a shadow of christianity, but most
especially in the kind and manner of government, is lively represented the
government used in Christ's church: which is the matter I specially purpose
to set forth unto you, and therefore desire you to give good ear unto it. The
common weal of the Jews, in that their passage from Egypt to the land of
promise, had two milers, by Gods own appointment set over them, Moses and
Aaron both preistes: but the one, that is Moses, which was the higher, made
priest immediately by God, the other, that is Aaron, made priest at Gods
commandment by Moses. Of those two rulers, the higher and worthier received
at Gods hand all that God would have said to the people, and he delivered it
to Aaron, and then Aaron delivered if to the people, or at the least instructed
the people therein. Contrariwise when the people would have any question
demanded of God, Aaron did move that question to Moses, and Moses to God: So
that Moses was Aaro^s mouth, in things to be moved from the people to God:
and Aaron was Moses mouth in things to be reveled from God to the people: as
it is written in the.iiii. of Exodus, where god speaks thus to Moses. Ipse
loquetur pro te ad populum and erit os tuum. Tu autem eris ei in his quae ad
deum pertinent, that is. Thy brother Aaron shall be thy spokesman to the people,
he shall be thy mouth. And thou shalt be his spokesman, and his mouth in
things that come from GOD. Again Moses went up to the top of mount Sinay,
and there talked face to face with GOD: but Aaron in the mean season tarried
beneth at the foot of the hill emonge the people to instruct and guide them.
These iii. points in Moses and Aaron, as they were things fulfilled in deed
in their persons, so were they significations of things to come, in the state
of christianity. For as S. Paul says in the first to the Corinthyans the
tenth chapitre. Haec omnia in figura contingebant illis, All these things
chanced to the Jews in a type or figure. And in the tenthe to the Hebreues
heal so says, Vmbram habens lex futuroru^ non ipsa^ imaginem reru^. The law
of Moses had but a shadow of things to come, and not the true shape of
those things in deed. To come therefore to the public weal of Christendom,
and the government thereof: There are in the church of Christ always two head
rulers, both preistes, that is, Christ our high priest made by God the
father immediatlye, according as we reed in the hundredth and ninth psalm, Tu
es sacer dos ineternum secundu^ ordinem Melchisedech. The other priest inferior
to Christ, and yet governor of the whole church, first was saint Peter, and
now is his successor. Now Peter was made priest by Christ, as Aaron was by
Moses; and his successors are made preistes by men as Aarons successors
were. Christ is Peter's spokesman to God, and Peter was Christ's mouth to the
church as appears in the.xxii. of Luke, in these words, Simon, Simon, ecce
Sathanas experiuit uos, ur cribraret, sicut triticum, Ego autem rogaui pro te
ur non deficiat fides tua. Tu autem aliquando conuersus, confirma fratres tuos.
Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired you to sifte you as it were wheat:
but I have prayed for the, that thy faieth fail not: and when thou shall be
converted, confirm thy brethren. In that Christ prays for Peter to God the
father, that Peter's faieth should not fail, he is Peter's mouth to god ward,
as Moses was Aaro^s. Again in that Peter confirms his brethren, in the
truth of christ's religion, he is christ's mouth to the people. Christ is
ascended in to the high mount of heaven, Vt appareat nunc vultui dei pro
nobis. That he might appear before the face of God for us. But the other ruler
that is christ's vicar, remains here on earth, to govern the church
militaunt, as did Aaron among the Israelites, as shall anon appear most
evidently by inevitable authorities of the new testament. Now when God had
placed those two priests in the government of the Jews, he would such
obedience to be given unto, them of the whole people, that none might once
repine against the authority of either of them, as is evident in the.xvi. of
Numbres, where Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, for making rebellion against Moises,
and Aaron, were swalowed up in to the earth alive, and most terribly perished,
that the rest might by their example, fear at any time to attempt the like.
And in the.xvii. of Numbres, GOD to declare, that he had appointed Aaron as
well as Moises, to be rular over the Israelites, caused every captain of the
twelve tribes to bring in a rod to Moses, and all the twelve rods to be
laid in the tabernacle all night, and whose rod should burgin on the
morrow, that he was the chief governor under Moses. Which being done, on the
morrow, Aarons rod was found with buddes on it. The same authority that was
in Aaron at that time, and thus confirmed miraculously, remained in the high
priest, Aarons successor from time to time so long as the estate of that
common weith endured. Even so is it ut Christendom. Peter first was placed in
the chief government under Christ, and after Peter his successors continue in
the same, and have the rule of the whole church. But you will peradventure
require farther proof hereof, and would gladly here whether this may be
established by the ghospel, and the ancient fathers: wherein for your
conte^tacio^ I will so^what say. And first touching Peter and his authority
we read in the.xvii. of Matthew, how the gatherers of the tribute money came
to ask the tribute of Christ, and how Christ bade Peter cast his angle into
the sea, and look what fish he took first, he told him that in his mouth he
should find so much money as two me^ were bound to pay and said, da eis pro me
et te. Pay that money to the^ for me and thy self. Upon this fact of Christ
S. Augustine says Didrachma capitum solutio intelligitur. Saluator cum pro se
et Petro dari iubet, pro omnibus exoluisse videtur: quod sicut in saluatore
erant omnes causa magisterii, ita et post saluatore^ in Petro omnes
continentur: ipsum enim constituit caput eoru^: that is to say, The tribute
money was head money or payment which every head or ruler was bound to pay.
Wherefore when our savior commanded the tribute to be paid for himself and
for Peter, he seems to have paid for them all. For as they were all in our
savior by reason he was their master, so after our savior they were all
contained in Peter. For he had made Peter their head or ruler. The same S.
Austine writing upon that place of S. Luke in his.xxii. chapter where Christ
says that he prayed for Peter, has these words, Non orauit pro Iacobo et
Ioanne et reliquis, sed pro Petro in quo reliqui continentur, Christ did not
pray for James and John and for the rest of his Apostles, but for Peter, in
whom the rest are contained. In the.xxi. of Matthew we find how our savior
said unto Peter in most special and earnest manner, pasce agnos, pasce agnos,
pasce oues, feed my lambs feed my lambs, feed my sheep: And though certain of
the other apostles, and they also the most nota blessed, were then present, Yet
he gave the charge only to Peter. Whereupon Cipria^, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Austine, gather that Peter was made rular above and over them all. Now as
concerning Peter's successors, where they are to be found and of their
authority writes the ancient father Ireneus, in his third book against ye;
heresies of Valentinus, and other heretics, and in the third chapter of the
same book in this manner. Quoniam valde longum est omnium ecclesiarum enumerare
successiones, maximae et antiquissemae et o^nibus cognitae a gloriosissimis
duobus Apostolis Petro et paulo Romae fundatae et constitutae ecclesiae, eam
qua^ habet ab apostolis traditione^ et annu^ciata^ hominibus fidem per
successiones episcoporu^ peruenie^tem vsque ad nos, indicantes confundimus eos
omnes qui quoquo modo vel per sui complacentiam malam, velvanam gloriam, vel
per caecitatem et mala^ sententia^, preterquam oportet colligunt. Ad ha^c enim
ecclesia^ propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse est omnem co^uenire
ecclesiam, hoc est eos qui su^t vndique fideles, that is to say. Forasmuch as
it were a long process to recite the succession of all christen seas, we show
the succession of Bishops in the greatest, the most aunciente, and the most
known sea, founded and stablished at Rome by the most gloria apostles Petre
and Paul: and we declare what is the tradicion, which that sea has received
from the apostles and what faith has been preached to men there, and is comen
by succession of bishops even unto us, and so doing we confound and put to
silence al those, which by any means either by standing to much in their own
co^ceite, or for vain glory, or through blind ignorance, or through wrong
opinion, do gather otherwise in matters of religion then is behouable. For
unto this sea, by reason of the higher government, every sea, that is, all
faithful, whersoeuer they dwell, must needs have recourse. The like is also in
Saint Austine in his, cxlv. epistle, where he improuing the sect of the
Donatistes writes in this manner, Si ordo episco poru^ sibi succe dentium
co^siderandus est, qua^to citius et vere salubri ter ab ipso Petro numeramus,
cui totius ecclesiae figuram gerenti dominus ait. Tu es Petrus, et super hanc
Petra^ aedificabo ecclesia^ mea^, If the order of Bishops succeding one a
another is to be considered, how much more sooner and in deed more wholsomly do
we reckon from Peter himself, unto whom bearing the figure of the whole church,
our lord says: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church:
And within a little after he says In hoc ordine successionis nullus Donatista
inuenitur. In this order of succession no Donatist is found. Thus concerning
the primacye of S. Peter and his successors, we have matter sufficient both in
scripture and in the fathers to content us. But it may not here be omitted,
that though in the number of many successors of Saint Peter it might sometime
chance some one or mo to be evil: yet that nothig can preiudicate to the
authorite nor me^ ought therefore to withdraw their obedience. And that in this
point also ye may se good matter to content you: I shall recite a notable saying
of Saint Austin in his forsaied epistle to this effect, where he writes in
this manner. In illu^ autem ordine^ episcoporu^ qui ducitur ab ipso Petro vsoque
ad Anastasiu^, qui nu^c ea^de^ sedet cathedram, etia^ si quisquam traditor per
illa tempora surrep sisset, nihil praeiudicaret ecclesiae, et innoce^tibus
christianis, quibus du^s prouidens ait de praepositis malis: Quae dicu^t
facite, quae aute^ faciunt nolite facere. Dicunt enim and non faciunt, vt certa
sit spes fidelis quae no^ in homine, sed in deo collocata nunquam tempestate
sacrilegi scif matis dissipetur, that is to say. Though some traitor had by
these days crept into that order, or number of Bishops, which is reckened
from Peter unto Anastasius, which now sits in that sea, yet were it not
prejudicial to the church, and to the innocent christen folk, for who^ our
lord providing says. Do the things which they say, but that they do, do ye
not: for they say and do not, that the hope of a christen man might be sure,
and being set not on man, but on god, should never be shaken with any tempest
or storm of wicked scisme. Now that ye have heard how necessary it is for all
christendom to be under ye government of the Apostolic sea, and thereby must
needs perceive that the benefit of our reconciliation and reduction to that
sea, is a most excellent and exceadyng great benefit: I think good to note unto
you the circumstances incident with the same, whereby the benefit is made the
more notable. This most joyful reconciliation came unto this realm on the
first feastiual day in the whole year, by the order of the ecclesiastical
service, that is, on saint Andrews day. It came in the feast of S. Andrew
brother to S. Peter, to whose sea we are reconciled, in the day of such a saint
as was crucified, as both Peter was, the first that enjoyed this authority,
and as Christ was, who gave the authority unto Peter. It chanced in the time
of a parliament, and by the full consent and glad approbatio^ of the whole
realm, in that parliament represented: It came unto us by our own country
man the most honorable lord Legates grace, who never swarued from that sea: In
the reign of our soueraines king Phylip and queen Mary, who always continued
in their obedyence to that supremicye. It came by see unto us, a mete passage
for the authority of him, which was called to that authority from the sea,
and in his feast, who was made an apostle from the sea, that is of a fyssher. I
shall not need much to speak of the great evils that this realm is ryd from
by this benefit. Every man feleth in him self the great relife, that he has by
his reconciliation: I mean not only for the temporal cruelte, myserye,
tumult, fear, and tyranny, which cease by this benefyte, but most of all
for the inward ghostly relyfe, of which saint Paul speaking in the second
chapter of his first epistle to the Corinthians, says: Quisscit hominu^ quae
su^t hominis, nisi spiritus hominis qui ipso est? Ita et quae dei sunt nemo
nouit nisi spiritus dei, what man knows the things which are in man, but
the spirit of man which is within him? Even so those things which long
to god, none knows but only the spirit of god. In which words saint
Paul gives us to wete, that who so has not ye spirit of god in him, knows
not gods truth. Now the spirit of god can not be but in them that are of the
body, which is governed with gods spirit, and this body is the Church:
whereof they are not, which deuyde them selves from the government appointed
by god to be in the church, which government is as you have heard, the
obedience to the sea of Rome, from which we have divided our selves of late
years: and where unto we were by this days benefit united and reconciled
again. We were I say rid from that mysery, which saint Paul speaks of in
the second chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians, saying: Eratis illo in
tempore sine christo, alienatia conuersatione Israel, et hospites
testamentorum, promissionis spem non habentes, et sine deo in hoc mundo. Ye
were at that time without Christ: Ye were straiinge from the conversation of
Israel, ye were strangers from the testamentes having no hope of the promysse,
and men without god in this world. If we now perceive these two points
which I have declared, the one of gods singular benefyte as this day
conferred and bestowed upon us, the other touching the dreadful dangers we
were in before, we have then a third part to play with king Dauyd, that is,
to acknoweledge these miseries to have comen upon us for our offenses in
saying every one of us. Castigans castigauit me dominus, et morti non tradidit
me. God has chastened me, but he has not delivered me into death. The fourth
point also is to be joined to the other three, that is to give thanks as David
did, and to exhort all other to do the same, whithe for my part I shall do
with the words of my theme, saying unto you. Constituite diem solennem in
condensis vsque ad cornu altaris. Of late men pulled down aultars, contempned
the service and sacrifice of the altar, but now we must come in great
multitudes to the altar, to the service of the altar, and the sacrifice of
the altar, I mean to the Mass. And in consideration of the high work of
god done on the altar, we must make great solempnity, specially on this day
And behold besides the benefyt of our reconciliacion chauncyng on this day,
we have yet by S. Andrewe a confirmacion of our belief in the sacrament and
sacrifice of the altar by that he said and did this day. For among other
aunsweres which the blessed apostle S. Andrewe made to the cruel Aegeas, he
said: Omnipote^ti deo qui vnus and verus est, ego omni die sacrifico. Non
thurisfumu^ nec taurorum mugientium carnes, nec hircorum sanguine^, sed
immaculatum agnum quotidle in altari sacrifico cuius carnes posteaquam omnis
populus ma^ducauerit, and sanguine^ eius biberit, tamen integer parmanet and
immaculatus, that is. I do offer sacrifice every day to God almighty, not the
smoke of franckencens, nor the flesh of roaring bulls or the blood of goats,
but I sacrifice every day on the altar the immaculate lamb, whose flesh
after that all the people has eaten and has drunk his blood, yet he abides
whole and immaculate. What can be plainer spoken either of the presence of
Christ's body and blood in the sacrament of the altar, or of the sacrifice of
the Mass, then here is spoken? And as plainly the same blessed apostle
utters in that that follows, a another point worthy to be considered. For
when Aegeas maruailinge at his talk said unto him: Quomodo potest hoc fieri:
how can this be done? S. Andrewe answered. Sivis scire quomodo potest fieri,
assume forma^ discipuli vt possis discernere quod quaeris, It thou will know
how it may be done, take upon thee the shape or form of a disciple or lerner,
that thou may discern ye thing that thou ask. Which because Aegeas would
not do, he could not understand the mystery, as in our days, so many as would
pre supteously teach themselfes, and not learn of Christ's church, erred in
the truth of Christ's sacraumentes. Wherefore I ethorte you with the words of
my theme: keep this day a solemn day: keep solemn procession, make great
sole^nitie, so as your devotion may stretch even to the altar: or rather the
prophet David foreseyng in spirit the benefit of christian unity, does
exhort you thereto, and with the prophet David, S. Peter the prince of the
Apostles (to whose authority we are recovered) exhorts you, and with David
and S. Peter, Peter's brother saint Andrewe, whose feast we keep, exhorts you:
and with the, and above them, Christ our savior exhorts you, to rejoice and
be thankeful for the great benefit of god comen this day unto you, that we
keeping our selves with in his fold on earth, may be found in the number of
those la^bes, which sra^ding on his right hand at the day of Dome shall hear
our lord say unto them. Come ye blessed children of my father possess the
kingdom which was prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Which
send unto us al, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, to whom be al
honor and glory world without end.

Amen,
Imprynted at London, by Robert Caly, within the precinct of the late dessolued
house of the graye Freers, now converted to an Hospital, called Christ's
Hospital.


