A MOST EXCELENT AND FRUITFUL TREATISE, CALLED PATERICKS PLACES, concerning the
doctrine of Faith, and the doctrine of the Law: which being known, you have
the pith of all Divinity.

With a brief collection or exposition of a sum of S. Paul's doctrine
touching justification by Faith, in Jesus Christ: which is the only mark to
shoot at, and the only means to obtain salvation.

Selected and reduced into this volume by I. D. 1598.

These things are written, that ye might believe that Ies(...) is the Christ,
the son of God: And that in believing(...) ye might have life through his
name. John. 20. Read diligently, Judge soberly, and pray earnestly to God, for
the true understanding hereof.

AT LONDON Printed by William White dwelling in Cow-lane near Holborne
Condite, and are there to be sold. 1598.

TO THE GENTLE AND FRIENDLY READER.
LIKE as in a Garden, there grow diverse Herbs and Flowers of sundry sorts,
which do so amaze the beholders, as that they are in doubt which to make their
choice off: So the holy Scriptures are a plentiful Garden, being full
replenished with all manner of heavenly comforts, and spiritual consolation for
the soul of man, does offer unto us many sweet flowers, and pleasant fruits;
the chief whereof is (Faith in Christ Jesus.) Our savior Christ, speaking of
the nature and virtue of this Herb, says, If ye had Faith as much as is a
grain Luke 17. Math. 17.
of Mustard-seede, and should say to this Mulberie-tree, Pluck thy self up by
the roots, and plant thy self in the Sea, it should obey you. Luke 17. and
Math. 17 And in an other place. Whatsoever ye shall ask in Math. 21.
prayer (if ye believe) ye shall receive it. Math. 21. And again I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it
shall be done unto Mark. 11.
you. Mark. 11. And S. Paul says, The Scripture has concluded all under
sin, that the Promise, by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them
that believe. And again: Before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, and
shut up unto the Promise, which should afterward be revealed: wherefore the Law
was our Scholemaister: for we are all the sons of God, by faith in Christ
Jesus. For allyee that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Galla. 3.
And S. Paul in the. 10. to the Romans, speaking of the Israelites faith,
says: They being ignorant of the righteousness Romans 10.
of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted them selves to the righteousness of God. For, says he: Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that believes. And says
further: If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart, that God raised him up from the death, thou shall be
saved. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
man confesses unto salvation. Therefore was it, that one being desirous to
obtain salvation, asked of the Apostles, What must I do, that I may be saved?
Who answered: Believe Act. 16.
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thine household. Act.
16. This is that Herb, the virtue whereof our savior Christ shows, saying:
Whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have John. 3.
eternal life. John. 3. Holy Job in his affliction, feeling the strength and
virtue of this Herb, did fly unto Jesus, saying: I have heard of thee by the
hearing Job. 42.
of the ear: But now mine eye sees thee. Job. 42. The woman of Samaria,
through the sweet savor of this Herb, desired him, to give her of that
water, that she might not thirst, neither come to the John. 4.
Well to draw. John. 4. The operation and strength of this herb, enforced the
woman that was a sinner, to stand at the feet of Jesus, behind him weepeing,
and began to wash his feet with her tears, and did wipe Luke 7.
them with the hears of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them
with ointment. Luke 7. So also an other woman lifted up her voice, and said
unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the Luke 11.
pappes which thou have sucked. Luke 11. And certain men that were in the
Ship came to him, and worshypped him, saying: Of a truth thou art the Math.
14.
Son of God. Math. 14. This caused Simon Peter to say, Thou art the Christ,
the son of the living God. Math. 16.
Mat. 16. The Centurion by the scent of this herb, was provoked to send unto
Jesus, beseeching him that he would come, and heal his servant being sick.
And Jesus coming, being not fair from the house, the Centuryon sent his
friends to him, saying: Lord trouble not thy self, for I am not Luke 7 Math.
8.
worthy that thou should come under my roufe: But say the word, and my
servant shall be whole. Luke 7. and Math. 8. This also caused a woman, having a
box Mark. 14.
of ointment of Spicknard very costly, to break the box, and to power it upon
his head. Mark. 14. And an other woman, who was troubled with a bloody Issue
twelve years, to say in her self: If I may touch but Math. 9.
his garment only, I shall be whole. Math. 9. The Theife through this Faith, said
unto Jesus, Lord remember Luke 23.
me when thou co^mest into thy kingdom. Luke 23. Therefore as the Passion of
Christ serves to none, but such as do believe: so neither does Faith (as it is
only a bare quality or action in man's mind) it self iustefie, unless it be
directed to the body of Christ crucified, as to her object, of whom she
receaueth all her virtue. And therefore these two must always jointly concur
and hold together, Faith, and Christ Jesus, crucified. This Treatise
following (gentle Reader) teaches the use, nature, and virtue of Faith, in
such abundant and excellent manner, as it were all one for me to cast a drop of
water into the Sea, as to take upon me to enlarge any matter thereupon: And if
I should, or could; I can but reiterate or repeat that which already has been
set down. For the Book does so set forth it self (as in my poor
understanding) needs little help: saving that some few words that were wrong
placed, I have amended, and some others I have added, for the better
explanation of the Author: And I have else followed the former Coppie, with a
brief collection or exposition of a sum of S. Paul's doctrine delivered upon
the same, set forth before (but lying hid as it were) in a great volume: which
I have also thought meet and very necessary, were put into a smaller volume,
to the intent to be carried about with us (as a flower or herb in our bosom)
for our oftener remembrance and instruction. This Herb being once known, it
is said by the Author, you have the pith of al Divinity: written and set
forth by that learned, godly, and zealous Martire, M. Patericke Hamelton, being
a Scottishman borne, and of the kings blood: who (as is set forth in the book
of Martyrs) taught, and earnestly preached the truth to the people, and
refelled their abuses, constantly and stoutly susteining the quarrel of Gods
Gospel, in the time of ignorance and blindness: Through which occasion (as is
also there set forth) he was cited to appear before the Archbyshyp of Saint
Andrew, named James Beton, and his College of Priests, the first day of March
Ann. 1527. And the same day at after dinner in all haste, was had away to the
fire, and burned; the king then being but a child, which made the Archbyshoppe
more bold. The which Treatise (gentle Reader) as I cannot commend unto you in
that measure, as it deserves or requires: So do I confess in my self such
want of ability, knowledge, and skill, as most unworthy of al others, to set
forth so excellent a matter, of so high a nature or mystery. But it pleases
Almighty God by troubles and affliction, to bring his children to the exercise
of many of those virtues, that do belong to a Christian man; And in
tribulation, Faith is chiefly exercised, in considering the cause of Gods
exercising of us: and in believing most assuredly the promises he has made for
our delyuerance. In which consideration, I having passed sometime in my grievous
and sorrowful troubles of adversaries, I spent that time chiefly, in
understanding and collecting this Treatise following; which is able so to
instruct, teach, and give such heavenly light and comfort unto us (if we be
desirous and willing to seek thereaster) as may undoubtedly redounde to our
everlasting life and salvation; as our savior Christ him self teaches us:
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only true God, and whom
John. 17.
thou have sent, Jesus Christ. John. 17. Unto whom let us still be praying
incessantly, that it will please him to lighten the darkness of our hearts and
understanding, and to increase our Faith and knowledge in his Son Jesus
Christ, our onley Savior and Redeemer: which is the only key and means for
us to attain to the true knowledge and feelyng of this Faith, whereby we may
be found worthy to be numbered amongst those whom our Savior Christ prays
for. Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me even where I
am, that John. 17.
they may behold my glory, which thou have given me. John. 17. Of the which
his glory, as he has power to make us partakers: so, if we lay all our Faith,
hope, and trust, upon him, he will then say unto us, as he said unto the blind
man, Receive thy sight, thy Faith has saved thee. Luke 18. Farewell in him,
Luke 18.
whom we are all to follow and believe. Amen.

Your welwiller in the Lord, and most unworthy: I. D.

This is a true or faithful saying, and by all means worthy to be received,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: of whom I am chief. 1.
Tim. 1. 15.
A TREATISE OF CERTAIN COMMON PLACES, CALLED PATERICKS PLACES.
The doctrine of the Law.
What the Law is.
THE Law is a doctrine that bids good, and forbids evil: as the
Commandments do specify, here following.

The Ten Commandments of God.
1 Thou shall worship but one God. 2 Thou shall make thee no Image to worship
it. A division of the Co^mandementes. Exodus 20.
3 Thou shall not swear by his name in vain. 4 Thou shall hold the Sabbath
day holy. 5 Thou shall honor thy Father and thy Mother. 6 Thou shall not
kill. 7 Thou shall not commit adultery. 8 Thou shall not steal. 9 Thou shall
not bear false witness. 10 Thou shall not desire ought that belongs to thy
neighbor.
All these Commaundemets are briefly comprised in these two here-vnder ensuing.
The love of God, the love of our neighbor.

Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind. That is the first and great Commandment: The second is like
unto this, that is: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
Commandments hangs all the Law and the Prophets. Math. 22.


Certain godly and general Propositions, proved by the Scripture.
The first Proposition.
He that loves God, loves his neighbor also.

This Proposition is proved 1. John. 4. If a man say, I love God, and yet
hates his brother, he is a liar. He that loves not his brother whom he has
seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? 1. John. 4.


The second Proposition.
He that loves his neighbor as him self, keeps all the Commandments of
God.

This Proposition is proved Math. 7. Romans 13. Whatsoever Math. 7. Romans 13. ye
would that men should do to you, even so do you to them: for this is the Law
and the Prophets.

He that loves his neighbor, fulfilleth the Law.

Thou shall not commit adultrie. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not steal.
Thou shall not bear false witness. Thou shall not lust. etc. And if there be
any other Commandment, it is comprehended in this saying: Love thy neighbor
as thy self. Romans 13. Romans 13.


All the Law is fulfilled in one word, that is, Love thy neighbor as thy
self. Gal. 5. Galla. 5.


Argument.
Bar- He that loves his neighbor, keeps all the Commandments of God. Romans
13. ba- He that loves God, loves his neighbor. 1. Ioh. 4. ra. Ergo, He that
loves God, keeps all the Commandments of God.
The third Proposition.
He that has Faith, loves God.

John. 16. John. 16.


Argument.
Bar- He that keeps the Commandments of God, has the love of God. ba- He
that has Faith, keeps the Commandments of God. ra. Ergo, He that has
Faith, loves God.
The fourth Proposition.
He that keeps one Commandment of God, keeps them all.

This Proposition is confirmed Heb. 11. It is impossible for a man without
faith to please God, Heb. 11.
that is, to keep any one of Gods Commandementes, as he should do. Then
whosoever keeps any one Commandment, has faith.

Argument.
Bar- He that has Faith, keeps all the Commandments of God. ba- He that
keeps any one Commandment of God, has faith. ra. Ergo, He that keeps one
Commandment keeps them all.
The fifth Proposition.
He that keeps not all the Commandments of God, keeps not one of them.

Argument.
He that keeps one Commandment of God, keeps all. The Law requires
perfect obedience. Enthymema.
Ergo, He that keeps not all the Commandments of God, keeps not one of
them.
The sixth Proposition.
It is not in our power, to keep any one of the Commandments of God.

Argument.
Ba- It is impossible to keep any of the Commandments, without Grace. to- It
is not in our power to attain Grace. co. Ergo, It is not in our power, to
keep any of the Commandments of God.
Faith is the only gift of God.
And even so may you reason concerning the holy Ghost and Faith: for so much, as
neither without them we are able to keep any of the Commandments of God,
neither yet be they in our power to attain them: Non est volentis, neque
currentis. etc. Romans 9. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs;
But in God that shows mercy. Romans 9.


The seventh Proposition.
The Law was given us, to show our sin.

By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 3. The office of the Law. Romans
3.
I knew not what sin meant, but through the Law: for I had not known what
lust had meant, except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust. Without the Law
sin was dead, that is, it moved me not, neither wist I that it was sin:
which notwithstanding was sin, and forbidden by the Law. Romans 7.
Romans 7.

The eight Proposition.
The Law bids us do that thing which is vnpissible for us.

Argument.
Da- The keeping of the Commandments, is to us impossible. ri- The Law
commands us the keeping of the Commandments. i. Ergo, the Law commands
us that which is impossible.
Objection.
But thou will say, Wherefore does God did us do that which is impossible for
us?

Answer.
I answer, to make thee know that thou art but evil, and that there is no
remedy to save thee in thine own hand, and that thou may seek remedy at
some other: for the Law does nothing else, but command thee. The Law ordained
to bring us to Christ.


The doctrine of the Gospel.
THE Gospel is as much to say in our tongue, as Good tidings, like as these be
here under following, Luke. 2.
and such other, concerning the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, for the
remission of our sins.

Christ is the savior of the World. John. 4.


Christ is the Savior. Luke. 2.


Christ dyed for us. Romans 5.


Christ dyed for our Sins. Romans 4.


Christ bought us with his Blood. 1. Pet. 2.


Christ washed us with his Blood. Apoc 1.


Christ offered him self for us. Galla. 1.


Christ bore our sins on his back. Esaias 53.


Christ came into the world to save sinners. 1. Tim. 1.


Christ came into this world, to take away our sins. 1 John. 3.


Christ was the price that was given for us, and our sins. 1. Tim. 2.


Christ was made debtor for us. Romans 8.


Christ has paid our debt, for he dyed for us. Collo. 2.


Christ made satisfaction for us, and our sins. 1. Cor. 7.


Christ is our Righteousness. 1. Cor. 1.


Christ is our Sanctification. 1. Cor. 1.


Christ is our Redemption. Ephesians. 2.


Christ is our Peace.

Christ has pacified our Heavenly father for us. Romans 5.


Christ is one, and all his. 1. Cor. 3.


Christ has delivered us from the Law, from the Devil, and from Hell. Collo.
2.


The father of Heaven has forgeuen us our sins for 1. John. 1.
Christ's sake: or any such other like to the same, which declare unto us the
mercy of God.

The nature and office of the Law and of the Gospel.
The Law shows us our sin. Romans 3.


The Gospel shows us the remedy for it. John. 1.


The Law shows us our Condenmation. Rom 7.


The Gospel shows us our Redemption. Collo. 1.


The Law is the word of Irs. Romans 4.


The Gospel is the word of Grace. Act. 14. 20.


The Law is the word of threatening by cursing. Deuteronomy. 27.


The Gospel is the word of Comfort. Luke 2.


The Law is the word of unrest. Rom 7.


The Gospel is the word of Peace. Ephesians. 6.


A disputation between the Law and the Gospel: wherein is showed the
difference or contrariety between them both. The contrary operation of the
Law and of the Gospel.

The Law says, Pay thy dept.

The Gospel says, Christ has paid it.

The Law says, thou art a sinner, despair, for thou art damned.

The Gospel says, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, be of good comfort, for thou
shall be saved.

The Law says, Make amends for thy sins.

The Gospel says. Christ has made it for thee.

The Law says, the Father of heaven is angry with thee.

The Gospel says, Christ has pacified him with his blood.

The Law says, Where is thy righteousness, goodness, and satisfaction.

The Gospel says, Christ is thy righteousness, thy goodness, and satisfaction.

The Law says, thou art bound and obliged to me, to the Devil, and to Hell.

The Gospel says, Christ has delivered thee from them all.

The doctrine of Faith.
The doctrine of Faith.
FAITH, is to believe One, Like as Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness.

To believe God, is to believe his word, and to recount it true that he says.

He that believes not Gods word, believes not God himself.

He that believes not Gods word, he counts him false and a Iyer, and
believes not that he may and will fulfill his word: and so he denies both
the might of God, and God him self.

The ninth Proposition.
The. 9. Proposition.
Faith is the gift of God.

Argument.
Da- Every good thing is the gift of God. ri- Faith is a good thing. i. Ergo,
Faith is the gift of God.
The tenth Proposition.


Argument.
Da- The gift of God is not in our power. ri- Faith is the gift of God. i.
Ergo, Faith is not in our power.
The eleventh Proposition.
He that lacks Faith, can not please God.

Without Faith, it is impossible to please God. Romans 14. Romans 14.


All that comes not of Faith, is sin: for without Faith, can no man please
God. Heb. 11. Heb. 11.


An Argument, or Induction.
Induction.
He that lacks Faith, trusts not God: He that trusts not God, trusts
not his word: He that trusts not his word, holds him false, and a liar:
He that holds him false, and a liar, believes not that he may do that he
promises; and so denies he that he is God. a primo ad vltimum, He that
lacks Faith, denies God.
If it were possible for any man to do all the good deeds that ever were done,
either of men or Angels, yet being in this case, it is impossible for him to
please God.

The twelfth Proposition.


Right is the word of God, and all his works in faith. Psalm. 33.
Psalm. 33.

Lord thine eyes look to faith: that is as much to say, Jer. 5.
as, Lord thou delightest in Faith. Ier. 5.

The thirtenth Proposition.
He that has Faith, brings forth good fruit.

Argument.
Da- A good Tree brings forth good fruit. ri- He that has Eayth, is a good
Tree. i. Ergo, He that has Faith, brings forth good fruit.
The fourtenth Proposition.
He that has Faith, and believes God, can not displease God.

Induction.
Induction.
He that has Faith, believes God: He that believes God, believes his word:
He that believes his word, wotteth well that he is true and faithful, and
may not lie; knowing, that he both may and will fulfill his word. a primo ad
vltimum, He that has Faith, can not displease God: neither can any man do a
greater honor to God, then to count him true.
Objection.
Thou will then say, that theft, murder, adultrie, and all vices please God.

Answer.
Nay verily, for they can not be done in Faith: for, a good Tree bears good
fruit. Math. 7. 12.
Math 7. 12.

The fiftenth Proposition.
Faith is a certayntie, or assurednes.

Faith is a sure confidence of things which are hoped for, and a certayntie of
things which are not seen. Heb. 11. A definition of faith, Heb. 11.


The same spirit certifieth our spirit, that we are the children of God. Romans
8. Romans 8.


Moreover, he that has Faith, wotteth well that God will fulfill his word:
whereby it appears that Faith is a certayntie or assurednes.

A Man is iustefied by Faith only.

Abraham believed in God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. Romans 4.
Justification by faith only Romans 4 Romans 3. Galla. 2.


We suppose therefore, that a man is iustefied by Faith, without the deeds of
the Law. Romans 3. Galla. 2.

He that works not, but believes on him that iustefieth the wicked, his
Faith is counted to him for Romans 4.
righteousness. Romans 4.

The just man lives by his Faith. Aba. 2. Romans 1. Aba. 2. Romans 1.


We wot that a man is not iustefied by the deeds of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ: and we believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be iustefied by
the Faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the Law. Gall. 2. Galla. 2.


What is the Faith of Christ?

Faith in Christ, what it is.
The Faith of Christ, is to believe in him: that is, to believe his word: and
believe that he will help thee in all thy need, and delyuet thee from sin,
and all evil.

Thou will ask me, What word:

I answer thee, The Gospel: which is,

He that believes in Christ, shall be saved. Mark. 16. Mark. 16. John. 3.


He that believes the Son, has everlasting life. John. 3.

Verily I say unto you, He that believes in me, has John. 6.
everlasting life. John. 6.

This I write unto you, that you believe on the Son 1. John. 5.
of God, that ye may know, how that ye have eternal life. 1. John. 5.

Thomas, because thou have seen me, therefore have thou believed: happy are
they which have not seen, and yet have believed in me. John. 20.
John. 20.

All the Prophets to him bear witness, that who soever Act. 10.
believes in him, shall have remission of their sins. Act. 10.

What must I do, that I may be saved? The Apostles answered, Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. Act. 16.
Act. 16.

If thou knowledge with thy mouth, that Jesus is the Lord: Romans 10.
and beleeuest with thine heart, that God raised him from death, thou shall be
^a^e. Romans 10.

He that believes not in Christ, shall be condemned. Mark. 16.
Mark. 16.

He that believes not the Son, shall never see life, but the ire of God by
death upon him. John. 3.
John. 3.

The holy Ghost shall reprove the world of sin, because they believe not in
me. John. 16.
John. 16.

They that believe Jesus Christ, are the sons of God.

Ye are all the Sons of God, because ye believe in Jesus Christ. 1. John. 3.
1. John. 3.

He that believes that Christ is the Son of God, is safe. John. 1.
John. 1.

Peter said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Jesus answered, and
said unto him: Happy art thou Simon, the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood
have not opened to thee that, but my Father that is in heaven. Math. 16.
Math. 16.

We have believed and know, that thou art Christ the Son of the living God.

I believe that thou art Christ the Son of God, which should come into the
world. John. 11.
John. 11.

These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ, the
Son of God: and that in believing ye might have life. John. 20.
John. 20.

I believe that Jesus is the Son of God. Act. 8. Act. 8.


The sixtenth Proposition.
He that believes the Gospel, believes God.

Argument.
Da- He that believes Gods word, believes God. ri- The Gospel is Gods word.
i. Ergo, he that believes the Gospel, believes God.
To believe the Gospel, is this, That Christ is the Savior John. 4.
of the world. John. 4.

Christ is our Savior. Luke 2. Luke 2. Heb. 13. Apoc 1. Heb. 9. 1. Pet. 2.


Christ bought us with his blood. Heb. 13. 1. Pet. 1. Apo. 5

Christ washed us with his blood. Apoc. 1.

Christ offered him self for us. Heb. 9.

Christ bore our sins on his back, 1. Pet. 2.

The seuententh Proposition.
He that believes not the Gospel, believes not God.

Argument.
Fe- He that believes not Gods word, believes not God him self. ri- The
Gospel is Gods word. o. Ergo, He that believes not the Gospel, believes not
God him self: and consequenly, he that believes not those things above
written, and such like, believes not God.
The eighttenth Proposition.


Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature. He that
believes, and is baptized, Mark. 16.
shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be condemned. Mark. 16.

A comparison between Faith and Incredulity.
Faith is the root of all good. A comparison between Faith and Incredulity


Incredulity is the root of all evil.

Faith makes God and man friends.

Incredulity makes them foes.

Faith brings God and man together.

Incredulity sundereth them.

All that Faith does, pleases God.

All that Incredulity does, displeases God.

Faith only makes a man good and righteous.

Incredulity only makes him unjust and evil.

Faith makes a man a member of Christ.

Incredulity makes him a member of the Devil.

Faith makes a man the inheritour of heaven.

Incredulity makes him inheritour of hell.

Faith makes a man the servant of God.

Incredulity makes him the servant of the Devil.

Faith shows us God to be a sweet Father.

Incredulity shows him a tirrible Judge.

Faith holds styffe by the word of God.

Incredulity wauereth here and there.

Faith counts and holds God to be true.

Incredulity holds him false and a liar.

Faith knows God.

Incredulity knows him not

Faith loves both God, and his neighbor.

Incredulity loves neither of them.

Faith only saves us.

Incredulity only condemns us.

Faith extolleth God and his deeds.

[Incredulitie extolleth her self and her own deeds.

Of Hope.
HOpe is a trusty looking after the thing that is promised to come: As we hope
after the everlasting What hope is
joy which Christ has promised unto all that believe in him.

We should put our hope and trust in God alonely, and in no other thing.

It is good to trust in God, and not in man. Psalm. 118. Psalm. 118. Pro. 28.
Psalm. 118. Psalm. 115.


He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. Pro. 28.

It is good to trust in God, and not in Princes. Psalm. 118.

They shall be like unto the Images which they make, and all that trust in them.
Psalm. 115.

He that trusts in his own thoughts, does ungodly. Pro. 12.
Pro. 12.

Cursed be he that trusts in man. Ier. 17. Ier. 17. 1. Tim. 6.


Bid the rich men of this world, that they trust not in their unstable riches,
but that they trust in the living God. 1. Tim. 6.

It is hard for them that trust in money, to enter into Luke. 18.
the kingdom of heaven. Luke 18.

Moreover, we should trust in him only, that may help us: God only may help
us, therefore we should trust in him only.

Well are they that trust in God: and woe to them Psalm. 2. Ier. 17. Psalm. 14.
Eccles. 34. Sap. 3.
that trust not in him. Psalm. 2. Ier. 17.

Well is that man that trusts in God: for God shall be his trust. Psalm. 14.
Eccle. 34.

He that trusts in him, shall understand the verity. Sap. 3.

They shall all rejoice that trust in thee. They shall Psalm. 5.
ever be glad, and thou will defend them. Psalm. 5.

Of Charity.
Charity is the love of thy neighbor. The rule of The rule of charity.
Charity is this; Do, as thou would be done to: For, Christ holds all
alike, the rich, the poor, the friend and the foe, the thankful and
unthankful, the kinsman and stranger.

A comparison between Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Faith comes of the word of God, Hope comes A comparison between Faith,
Hobe, and Charity.
of Faith, and Charity springs of them both.

Faith believes the word, Hope trusts after it that is promised by the
word, Charity does good unto her neighbor, through the love that it has to
God, and gladness that is within her self.

Faith looks to God and his word, Hope looks unto his gift and reward,
Charity looks on her neighbors profit.

Faith receaueth God, Hope receaueth his reward, Charity loves her neighbor
with a glad heart, and that without any respect of reward.

Faith pertayneth to God only, Hope to his reward, and Charity to her
neighbor.

The doctrine of Works.
We believe that a man shall be iustefied without What good works do. Romans 3.
works. Rom 3.

No man is iustefied by the deeds of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus
Christ: And we believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be iustefied by the Faith
of Christ, and not by the deeds of the Law: For, if righteousness come by the
Law, then dyed Christ in vain. Galla. 2. Galla. 2.


That no man is iustefied by the Law, is manifest: For, a righteous man lyneth
by his Faith: but the Law Galla. 3.
is not of Faith. Galla. 3.

Moreover, since it behooved Christ the maker of heaven and earth, and all that
is therein, to die for us, we are compelled to grant, that we were so far
drowned and sunken in sin, that neither our deeds, nor all the treasures
that ever God made, could have helped us out of them. Therefore no deeds nor
works, may make us righteous. Works do not make us righteous.


No works make us unrighteous.
An argument on the contrary sense.
If any evil works make us unrighteous, then the contrary works should make
us righteous: But it is proved, that no works can make us righteous: Therefore
no works makes us unrighteous.

Works makes us neither good nor evil.
It is proved, that works neither make us righteous Works make us neither good
nor evil before God.
nor unrighteous: Therefore no works make us either good or evil. For
righteous and good are one thing, and unrighteous and evil likewise one.

Good works make not a good man, nor evil works an evil man: But a good man
brings forth good works, and an evil man evil works.

Good fruit makes not the Tree good, nor evil fruit the Tree evil: But a
good Tree bears good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit.

A good man can not do evil works, nor an evil man good works: for a good
tree can not bear evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit.

A man is good ere he do good works, and evil ere he do evil works: for the
tree is good ere it bear good fruit, and evil ere it bear evil fruit.

Every man, and his works, are either good or evil.
Good fruit is sign of a good tree, but not the cause thereof. Math. 12.
Every Tree and the fruit thereof, are either good or evil: Either make ye the
tree good, and the fruit good also: or else make the tree evil, and the fruit
of it likewise evil. Math. 12.

A good man is known by his works: for, a good man does good works, and an
evil man does evil works: Ye shall know them by their fruit. For a good
tree bears good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit. A man is likoned to
the tree, and his works to the fruit of the tree. A man likoned to the tree,
and his works to the fruit. Math. 7.


Beware of the false Prophets, which come to you in Sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are rauenyng Woolues: ye shall know them by their fruits. Math.
7.

None of our works either save us or condemn us.




The man is the Tree, his works are the fruit.
Faith makes a good man.
Faith makes the good Tree, and Incredulity the evil Tree: such a tree, such
fruit: such a man, such works. For all things that are done in Faith, please
God, and are good works: and all that are done without Faith, displease God,
and are evil works.

Whosoever believes, or thinks to be saved by his works, denies that
Christ is his savior, that Christ dyed for him, and all things that pertayne
to Christ: for how is he thy savior, if thou might save thy self by thy
works: or whereto should he dye for thee, if any works might have saved
thee: To say that our works do save us, is to deny that Christ is our savior.


What is this to say, Christ dyed for thee? Uerely, Christ to deliver us from
death, dyed for us.
that thou should have dyed perpetually: And Christ to deliver thee from
death, dyed for thee, and changed thy perpetual death into his own death: for
thou made the fault, and he suffered the pain, and that for the love he had
to thee before thou wast borne, when thou had done neither good nor evil.

Christ has paid our debt.
Now seeing he has paid thy debt, thou need not; neither can thou pay it,
but should be damned, if his blood were not: But since he was punished for
thee, thou shall not be punished.

Finally, he has delivered thee from thy condemnation, and all evil, and
desires naught of thee, but that thou will acknowledge what he has done for
thee, and bear it in mind: Christ desires no recompense, but thankfulness.
and that thou would help other for his sake both in word and deed, even
as he has helped thee, for novght, and without reward. O how ready would we
be to help others, if we knew his goodness and gentleness toward us. He is a
good and great Lord: for he does all for naught. Let us, I beseech you
therefore, follow his footesteppes, whom all the world ought to praise and
worship.

Amen.
He that thinks to be saved by his works, calls him self Christ.
No savior but Christ only.
For he calls him self the Savior, which pertayneth to Christ only.

What is a Savior, but he that saves: And he says, I saved my self: which
is as much to say, as I am Christ; for Christ only is the savior of the world.

We should do no good works for the intent to get the inheritance of heaven,
or remission of sins.
For whosoever believes to get the inheritance of No remission but in Christ
heaven, or remission of sin through works, he believes not to get the same
for Christ's sake And they that believe not that their sins are forgeuen
them, and that they shall be saved for Christ's sake, they believe not the
Gospel: for the Gospel says, You shall be saved for Christ's sake: your sins
are forgeuen for Christ's sake.

He that believes not the Gospel, believes not God. So it follows, that they
which believe to be saved by their works, or to get remission of their sins
by their own deeds, believe not God, but recount him as a liar, and so
utterly deny him to be God.

Objection.
Thou will say, Shall we then do no good deeds:

Answer.
I say not so: But I say, we should do no good works for the intent to get the
inheritance of heaven, or remission of sin. Good works not excluded to be
left undone, but not to just fie us when they are done.
For if we believe to get the inheritance of heaven through good works, then
we believe not to get it through the promise of God. Or if we think to get
remission of our sins by our deeds, then we believe not that they are
forgeuen us, and so we count God a liar: For God says, Thou shall have the
inheritance of heaven for my Sons sake: And you say, it is not so, but I will
win it through my works. Thus you see I condemn not good deeds, but I
condemn the false trust in any works: for all the works wherein a man
puts any confidence, are therewith poisoned, and become evil. Not the doing
of good works, but the trusting in good works condemned.


Wherefore thou must do good works: But beware thou do them not to deserve any
good through them, (for if thou do) thou receauest the good, not as the gifts
of God, but as debt to thee, and make thy self fellow with God: because thou will take nothing of him, for naught: We must do good works, but not to mente
thereby.
And what needs he any thing of thine, which gives all things, and is not
the poorer.

Therefore do nothing to him, but take of him, for he is a gentle Lord: and
with a gladder will gives us all that we need, then we can take it of him. If
then we want ought, let us wite our selves.

Prease not therefore to the inheritance of heaven We must not think to win
heaven by good works.
through presumption of thy good works: for if thou do, thou countest thy
self holy, and equal to God, because thou will take nothing of him for
naught: And so shall thou fall, as Lucifer fell, for his pride.

Certain brief Notes or declarations upon the foresaid places.
THis little Treatise of M. Patericks Places, albeit in quantity it be but
short, yet in effect it comprehends matter able to fill large volumes,
declaring to us the true doctrine of the Law, of the Gospel, of Faith, and of
Works, with the nature and properties; and also the difference of the same:
which difference is thus to be understood. That in the cause The Law and the
Gospel how they are to be joined, and how to be separated.
of Salvation, and in the office of Iustefiyng, these are to be removed and
separated a sunder, the Law from the Gospel, and Faith from Works; otherwise
in the person that is iustefied, and also in order of doctrine, they ought
commonly to go necessarily together.

Therefore, whersoeuer any question or doubt ryseth of Salvation, or our
iustefying before God, there the Law, and all good works, must be utterly
excluded and stand a part, that Grace may appear free, Grace free, Promise
simple, Faith alone.
the Promise simple, and that Faith may stand alone: which Faith alone (without
Law or works) works to every man particularly his salvation, through mere
promise, and the free grace of God. This word (particularly) I add, for the
particular certefiyng of every Particularly.
man's heart privately and peculiarly, that believes in Christ. For as the body
of Christ is the cause efficient of the redemption of the whole world in
general, so is Faith the isntrumental cause, by which every man applies the
said body of Christ crucified, particularly to his own salvation: So that in
the action and office of iustefication, both Law and works here be utterly
secluded and exempted, as things haning nothing to do in this behalf. The
reason is this; for, seeing that all our Redemption universally, springs
only from the body of the Son of God crucified, there is nothing that can
stand us in stead, but that only, wherewith this body of Christ is
apprehended. Now forasmuch as neither the Law, nor Works, but Faith only, is
the thing which apprehends the body and death of Christ; therefore Faith only
is that matter which iustefieth every soul Faith is the only isntrumental
cause of every man's particular saluetio^ The body of Christ the object of our
faith.
before God, through the strength of that object which it does apprehende: For
the object only of our Faith, is the body of Christ; like as the brason Serpent
was the object of the Israelites looking, and not of their hands working: by
the strength of which object, through the promise of God, immediately proceeded
health to the beholders: So the body of Christ being the object of our Faith,
yields or strikes righteousness to our souls; not through working, but in
believing only.

Thus you see how Faith, being the only eye of our soul, stands alone with
her object, in case of Faith is only the eye of the soul which looks to
Christ.
iustefying: But yet nevertheless in the body she stands not alone; for
besides the eye, there be also hands to work, feet to walk, ears to hear,
and other members more, every one convenient for the service of the body; and
yet there is none of them all that can see, but the eye: So in a Christian man's
life, and in order of doctrine, there is the Law, there is Repentance, there is
Hope, Charity, and deeds of Charity; all which in life and in doctrine are
joined, and necessarily do concur together: And yet in the action of
iustefying, there is nothing else in man, that has any part or place, but only
Faith, apprehending the object, which is, the body of Christ Jesus for us
crucified: In whom consists all the worthiness and fulne, of our salvation, by
Faith; that is, by our apprehending and receiving of him, according as it is
written John. 1. Whosoever received him, he gave them John. 1.
power to be made the sons of God, even all such as believed in his name.
etc. Esaias. 53. And this just servant of mine Esaias. 53.
in the knowledge of him, shall iustefie many. etc.

Argument.
Da- Apprehending and receiving of Christ only, As many as received him, to
them he gave power. etc, John. 1. And he by the knowledge of him, shall
justify many. etc. Esa. 53.
makes us iustefied before God. John. 1. ri- Christ only is apprehended and
receaned by Faith. si. Ergo, Faith only makes us iustefied before God.
Argument.
Ba- Justification comes only by apprehending Esa. 53.
and receiving of Christ. Esa 53. to- The Law and Works do nothing pertain
to the apprehending of Christ. co. Ergo, the Law and Works pertain nothing to
Justification.
Argument.
Ce- Nothing which is unjust of it self, can justify All our righteousness is
as fylthy clo^^s
us before God, or help any thing to our justifying. fa- Every work we do,
is unjust before God. Esa. 64. Esa. 64.
re. Ergo, no work that we do, can justify us before God, nor help any
thing to our iustifiyng.
Argument.
Ca- If works could any thing further our justification, When ye have done
all that is commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants. Luke 17.
then should our works some thing profit us before God. me- No works (do the
best we can) do profit us before God. Luke 17. stres. Ergo, no works that we
do, can any thing further our justification.
Argument.
Ba- All that we can do with God, is only by Christ. Without me can ye do
nothing. Ioh. 15.
John. 15. to- Our works and merits be not Christ's, neither any part of him.
co. Ergo, our works and merits can do nothing with God.
Argument.
Da- That which is the cause of condemnation, can The Law works anger. Romans 4.
not be the cause of justification. ri. The Law is the cause of condemnation.
Romans 4. Ergo, it is not the cause of justification.
A Consequent.
We are quit and delivered from the Law. Romans 7. Now are we quit and delivered
from the Law, being dead to that wherein we were once holden. Rom 7.
Ergo, we are not quit and delivered by the Law.

Forasmuch therefore as the truth of the Scripture in express words, has
thus concluded our salvation in Faith only, we are enforced necessarily to
exclude all other causes and means in our justification, and to make this
difference between the Law and the Gospel, between Faith and Works:
affyrming with the Scripture and word of God, that Law condemns us, our
Works do not avail us, and that Faith in Christ only justifies us: And this
difference and distinction ought diligently to be learned and re^ayned of all
christians, especially in conflict of conscience, between the Law and the
Gospel, Faith and Works, Grace and Merits, Promise and Condition, Gods free
election and man's free will: So that the light of the free grace of God in our
salvation, may appear to all consciences, to the immortal glory of Gods holy
name.

Amen.
The order and differences of places.
The Gospel, Faith, Grace, Promise, Gods free election. Antitheta The Law,
Works, Merits, Condition Man's free will.

The difference and repugnance of these foresaid places being well noted and
extended, it shall give no small light to every faithful Christian, both to
understand the Scripture, to judge in cases of conscience, and to reconcile
such places in the old and new Testament, as else may seem to repunge,
according to the rule of Augustine, saying, Distingue tempora and conciliabis
The Law to be discerned from the Gospel.
scripturas. etc. Make distinction of times, and thou shall reconcile the
Scriptures. etc. Contrariwyse, where men be not perfectly in these places
instructed, to discern between the Law and the Gospel, between Faith and
Works. etc. they can never rightly estable their minds in the free promyses
of Gods grace, but walk confusedly without order, in all matters of religion:
examles whereof we have too much in the Romish Church, who confounding these
places ^he ignorance and blindness of the Popes Church.
together without distinction, following no method, have perverted the true
order of Christian doctrine, and have obscured the sweet comfort and benefit
of the Gospel of Christ, not knowing what the true use of the Law, nor of the
Gospel means.

In the doctrine of the Law, three things to be noted.
In the Law therefore, three things are to be considered. First, what is the
true vigor and strength of the The first point.
Law: which is, to require full and perfect obedience of the whole man, not
only to restrain his outward actions, but also his inward motions and
inclinations of will and affection, from the appetite of sin: And therefore
says S. Paul, The Law is spiritual, but I Romans 7.
am carnal. etc. Romans 7. Whereupon rises this proposition (that is) That it
is not in our nature or power to The strength of the Law.
fulfill the Law. Item, the Law commands that which is to us impossible, etc.

The second thing to be noted in the doctrine of the Law, is to consider the
time and place of the Law, what The second point.
they be, and how far they extend. For as the surging Seas have their banks
and bars to keep them in: so the Law has his times and limits, which it
ought not to pass. If Christ had not come and suffered, the time and dominion
of the Law had been everlasting: Romans 10. The death of Christ is the death of
the Law: that is, of the condemnation of the Law.
but now, seeing Christ has come, and has dyed in his righteous flesh, the
power of the Law against our sinful flesh does cease: for, the end of the Law
is Christ. Romans 10. (that is) The death of Christ's body is the death of the
Law, to all that believe in him. So that whosoever repents their sins, and
fly to the death and passion of Christ, the condemnation and time of the Law
to them is expired. Wherefore this is to be understood as a perpetual rule in
the Scripture, that the Law, with all his sentences and judgments wheresoever
they are written, either in the old Testament or in the new, do ever include a
privy exception of repentance, and belief in Christ, to the which always it
The time of the Law, how long it lasts. Galla. 3.
gives place, having there his end, and can proceed no further, according as
S. Paul does say, The Law is our Scholemaister until Christ, that we might be
justified by Faith. Galla. 3.

Moreover, as the Law has his time how long to reign: so also it has his
proper place where to reign. By the reign of the Law, here is meant the
condemnation of the Law. For as the time of the Law ceasseth, The time of the
Law ceasseth, when faith begins.
when the faith of Christ in a true repenting heart begins: so has the Law
no place in such as be good and faithful (that is) in sinners repenting and
amending, but only in them which be evil and wicked. Evil men here I call
all such, which walking in sinful flesh, are not yet driven by earnest
repentance to fly to Christ for succoure. And therefore says S. Paul, To the
1. Tim. 1.
just man there is no Law set, but to the unjust and disobedient. etc. 1. Tim.
1. By the just man here is meant, not he which never had disease, but he who
knowing his disease, seeks out the physician: and being cured, keeps him
self in health, as much as he may from any more surfettes: Notwithstanding he
shall never so keep him self, but that his health (that is, his new
obedience) shall always remain frail and imperfect, and shall continually
need the Physician. Where, 1. The disease 2. The knowing of the disease. 3.
The Physician.
by the way, these three things are to be noted: First, the sickness it self.
Second, the knowing of the sickness. Third, the Physician. The sickness, is
sin. The knowing of the sickness, is repentance, which the Law works. The
Physician is Christ. And therefore, although in remission of our sins,
Repentance is joined with Faith, yet it is not the dignity or worthiness
Repentance is joined with faith, yet it is no cause of salvation.
of repentance that causes remission of sins, but only the worthiness of
Christ, whom Faith only apprehends, no more then the feeling of the disease
is the cause of health, but only the Physician: for else, when a man is cast
and condemned by the Law, it is not repentance that can save or deserve life:
but if his pardon come, then is it the grace of the Prince, and not his
repentance that saves him.

The third point to be considered in the doctrine of the Law, is this, That we
mark well the end and The third point.
purpose why the Law is given: which is, not to bring us to salvation, not to
work Gods favor, nor to make us good, but rather to declare and convince our
wickedness, and to make us feel the danger thereof: to this end and purpose,
that we seeing our condemnation, and being in our selves confounded, may be
driven thereby to have our refuge in Christ the son of God, and to submit our
selves to him, in whom only is to be found our remedy, and in none other. And
this end of the Law discreetely ought to be pondered of all Christians:
otherwise they that consider not this end and purpose of the Law, fall into
manifold errors and inconveniences. 1 First, they pervert all order of
doctrine. Inconveniences that rise in not knowing the true end of the Law.
2 They seek that in the Law, which the Law can not give. 3 They can not
comfort them selves nor others. 4 They keep men's souls in an uncertain doubt
and dubitation of their salvation. 5 They obscure the light of Gods grace. 6
They are unkind to Gods benefits. 7 They are injurious to Christ's passion,
and enemies to his Cross. 8 They stop christian liberty. 9 They bereave the
Church (the Spouse of Christ) of her due comfort: as taking away the Son out
of the world. 10 In all their doings they shoot to a wrong mark: For where
Christ only is set up to be apprehended by our Faith, and so freely to
justify us, they leaving this justification by Faith, set up other marks,
partly of the Law, partly of their own devising, for men to shoot at. And
here comes in the manifest and manyfolde absurdities of the B. of Romes
doctrine: which, as in a catalogue here follows.


Errors and absurdities of the Papists, touching the doctrine of the Law, and
of the Gospel.
1 THey erroniously conceive opinion of salvation They conceive salvation in
the law.
in the Law: which only is to be sought in the faith of Christ, and in no
other.

2 They erroniously do seek Gods favor by works They seek Gods favor by
works of the Law.
of the Law, not knowing that the Law, in this our corrupt nature, works
only the anger of God. Romans 3.

3 They err also in this, That where the office of the Law is diverse, and
contrary to the Gospel, they The Law is given by Moses: Grace and verity by
Jesus Christ John. 1.
without any difference, confound the one with the other, making the Gospel to
be a Law, and Christ to be a Moses.

4 They err in dividing the Law unskillfully into three parts: into the law
Natural, the law Morrall, Law natural. Law morral. Law euangelical.
and the law Evangelical.

5 They err again, in dividing the Law evangelical Precepts and counsels.
into precepts and Counsels, making the precepts to serve for all men: the
Counsels only to serve for them that be perfect.

6 The chief substance of all their teaching and Their teaching is of works
of the Law.
preaching, rests upon the works of the law, as may appear by their
Religion, which wholly consists in men's merits, traditions, laws, Canons
decrees, and ceremonies.

7 In the doctrine of salvation, of remission, and justification, The Law
equal with the Gospel, or seclude the Gospel.
either they admixt the Law equal with the Gospel, or else clean secluding the
Gospel, they teach and preach the Law: so that little mention is made of the
faith of Christ, or none at all.

8 They err in thinking, that the Law of God requires nothing in us under
pain of damnation, but Obedience in externe actions.
only our obedience in externe actions: as for the in ward affections and
concupisence, they esteem but light matters.

9 They not knowing the true nature and strength of the Law, do erroniously
imagine, that it is in man's In man's power to fulfi^l^ the Law.
power to fulfill it.

10 They err in thinking not only to be in man's power to keep the Law of
God, but also to perform Works of perfection.
more perfect works, then be in Gods Law commanded: And these they call the
works of perfection: and hereof rise the works of Supererogation, of
Satisfaction, of Congruitie and Condignitie, to store up the treasure horse of
the Popes Church by Indulgences, to be sold ^at to the people for money.

11 They err in saying, that the state monastical is The state monastical.
more perfect, for keeping the counselles of the Gospel, then other states be,
in keeping the Law of the Gospel.

12 The counsels of the Gospel they call the vows Vows of their religious men.
of their religious men, as profounde Humility, perfect Chastity, and wilful
Poverty.

13 They err abhominably in equalling their laws Equalling Gods law with man's
law.
and constitutions with Gods law: and in saying, that man's law binds under
pain of damnation, no less then Gods law.

14 They err simply, in punishing the transgressors of their laws more
sharply, then the transgressors Their punishing of transgressors.
of the law of God: as appears by their Inquisitions, and their Cannon law
etc.

15 Finally, they err most horribly in this, That They exclud faith, and
ascribe salvation to works and merits.
where the free promise of God ascribes our salvation only to our Faith in
Christ, excluding works: They contrarily ascribe salvation only, or
principally, to works and merits, excluding Faith: Whereupon rises the
application of the sacrifice of the Mass, Ex opere operato, for the quick and
the dead: application of the merits of Christ's passion in Bulls, application
of the merits of all religious orders, and such other more, specified more at
large. etc.

Here follows three Cautions to be observed and avoided, in the true
understanding of the Law.
FIrst, that we through the misunderstanding of the The syrst Caution.
Scriptures, do not take the Law for the Gospel, nor the Gospel for the Law:
but skilfully discern and distinct the voice of the one from the other. Many
there be which reading the book of the new Testament, do take and
understand, whatsoever they see contained in the said book, to be only and
merely the voice of the Gospel. And contrariwise, whatsoever is contained in
the compass of the old Testament (that is) within the Law, Stories, Psalms,
and Prophets, to be only and merely the word and voice of the Law; wherein
many are deceived: For the preaching of the Law and of the Gospel are mixed
together in both the Testamentes, as well the old as the new: Neither is the
order of these two doctrines to be distincted by Books and leaves, but by the
diversity of Gods spirit, speaking unto us. For sometimes in the old
Testament God does comfort: as he comforted Adam, with the voice of the Gospel.
Sometimes also in the new Testament, he does threaten and terrify: as when
Christ threatened the Pharisees. In some places again, Moses and the Prophets
play the Evangelists: in so much that Jerome doubts whether he should call
Esaias a Prophet or an Evangelist. In some places likewise, Christ and the
Apostles supply the part of Moses. And as Christ him self until his death,
was under the Law (which Law he came not to break, but to fulfill:) So his
Sermons made to the Jews, for the most part, run all upon the perfect
doctrine and works of the Law: Showing and teaching what we ought to do by the
right law of Justice, and what danger insueth in not performing the same: All
which places, though they be contained in the book of the new Testament, yet
are they to be referred to the doctrine of the Law, ever having in them
included a privy exception of repentance and faith in Christ Jesus: as in
example, where Christ thus preached.

Blessed be they that be pure of heart, for they shall Math. 5.
see God. etc. Math. 5.

Except ye be made like these children, ye shall Math. 18.
not enter. etc. Math. 18.

But he that does the will of my Father, shall enter Math. 7.
into the kingdom of heaven. etc. Math. 7.

The parable of the unkind Servant, justly cast into Math. 18.
prison for not forgiving his fellow. etc. Math. 18.

The casting of the rich glutton into hell etc. Luke 16. Luke 16. Luke 12.


He that denies me here before men, I will deny him before my father. etc.
Luke. 12. with such other places of like condition: All these I say pertaining
to the doctrine of the law, do ever include in them a secret exception of
earnest repentance, and faith in Christ's precious blood: For else Peter denied,
and yet repented. Many Publicans and sinners were unkind, unmerciful, and hard
hearted to their fellow servants: and yet many of them repented, and by faith
were saved. etc. The grace of Christ Jesus work in us earnest repentance, and
faith in him unfeigned. Amen.

Briefly, to know when the Law speaks, and when When the Law speaks and
when the Gospel speaks.
the Gospel speaks, and to discern the voice of the one from the voice of
the other, this may serve for a note: that when there is any mortal work
commanded to be done, either for eschewing of punishment, or upon promise of
any reward temporal or eternal: either else when any promise is made with
condition of any work commanded in the Law, there is to be understood the
voice of the Law. Contrarily where the The promise of the Gospel is without
condition.
promise of life and salvation is offered unto us freely without all our
merits, and simply without any condition annexed of any Law either natural,
ceremonial, or moral: all these places, whether they be read in the old
Testament, or in the new, are to be referred to the voice and doctrine of the
Gospel. And this promise of God freely made to us by the merits of Jesus
Christ, so long before prophesied to us in the old Testament, and afterward
exhibited in the new Testament, and now requiring nothing but our faith in the
son of God, is called properly the voice of the Gospel, and disscreth from
the voice of the Law in this, that it has no condition adjoined of our
meriting, but only respects the merits of Christ the son of God: By whose
faith only, we are promised of God to be saved, and justified, according as we
read Romans 3. The righteousness of God comes by Faith of Jesus Christ, in all,
and Romans 3.
upon all that do believe. etc.

The second Caution or danger to be avoided is, The second Caution.
that we now knowing how to discern rightly between the Law and the Gospel,
and having intelligence, not to mistake the one from the other, we must take
heed again, that we break not the order between these two, taking and
applying the Law, where the Gospel is to be applied, either to our selves, or
toward others: For albeit the Law and the Gospel many times are to be joined
together in order of doctrine, yet case may fall some times, that the Law must
be utterly sequestered from the Gospel: as when any person or persons do feel
them The Gospel to whom it belongs.
selves with the majesty of the Law, and judgment of God, so terrified and
oppressed, and with the burden of their sins ouerwayed and thrown down into
utter discomfort, and almost even to the pit of hell; as it happens many
times to soft and timorous consciences, even to Gods good servants: when such
mortified harres do hear either in preaching or in reading, any such example,
or place of the Scripture, which pertayneth to the law, let them think the
same nothing to belong to them, no more then a mourning weed belongs to a
marriage A mourning weed in a marriage feast
feast: And therefore removing utterly out of their minds all cogitation of the
Law, of fear, of iudgemeut, and condemnation, let them only set before their
eyes the Gospel, the sweet comfort of Gods promises, free forgiveness of sins
in Christ, grace, redemption, liberty, rejoicing, Psalms, thanks, singing,
and a paradise of spiritual iocunditie, and nothing else: thinking thus with
them selves, that the law has done his office in them already, and now must
needs give rome to Christ the son Christ the fulfiller and the finisher of
the Law. Romans 10
of God, who is the Lord and master, the fulfiller and also the finisher of
the law: for, the end of the law is Christ. Ro^. 10.

The third danger to be avoided is, that we do not use or apply on the contrary
side, the Gospel in stead of the The third Caution.
Law: For as the other before was even as much as to put on a mourning gown in
the feast of a marriage: so is this but even to cast Pearls before Swine,
wherein is a great abuse among many. For commonly it is seen, that these
worldly Epicures, and secure Momanistes, to whom the doctrine of the Law does
properly appertain, do receive and apply to them selves most principally the
sweet promises of the Gospel: and contrariwise, the other contrite and bruised
hearts, to whom belongs only the joyful tydinges of the Gospel, and not the
Law, for the most part receive and retain to them selves the terrible voice
and sentences of the law: whereby it comes to pass, that many do rejoice
where they should mourn: And on the other side, many do fear and mourn,
where they need not. Wherefore to conclude, in private use of life, let every
person discreetly discern between the Law and the Gospel, and apply aptly to
him self, that which he sees convenient.

And again, in public order of doctrine, let every discreet Preacher put a
difference between the broken How to join both the Law and the Gospel.
hearts of the mourning sinners, and the unrepentant worldlinges: and so
conioyne both the Law with the Gospel, and the Gospel with the Law, that in
throwing down the wicked, ever he spare the weak hearted: and again, so spare
the weak, that he do not encorage the ungodly. And thus much concerning the
conjunction and difference between the Law and the Gospel, upon the occasion
of M. Patericks Places.

The end of M. Patericks Places.
A BRIEF COLLECTION OR EXPOSITION OF a sum of Saint Paul's doctrine
delivered upon the same: Of all Christians to be observed and learned.
AS all men be transgressors by disobedience of All men condemned by one.
one Adam (though they never touched the Apple) coming of his seed by nature:
So all men be justified by the obedience of one, which is Christ, though they
did no righteousness, being likewise borne of him by spiritual regeneration and
faith.

And therefore, as all men coming of Adam, be condemned All men saved by one.
originally, before they grow up to commit any sin against the Law: so all
men be saved originally, being regenerated by Faith in Christ, before they
begin to do any good work of charity, or any other good deed.

A true Christian knows nothing else, but Christ A true christian defined.
only crucified: which is only the object whereunto our faith looks.

Also, Saint Paul cutting off, and excluding all Salvation by mercy only,
and not by merits.
glory of man's deseruinges, stays only upon Gods promise, and upon grace;
not men's merits: upon mercy, not men's laboring or running: upon election and
calling. etc.

He also admits no sacrifice for sin, but the sacrifice of Christ alone,
and that done once for all with One sacrifice for sin, and no more. Heb 9.
blood: For without blood, there is no remission of sin; which only is
applied to us by Faith, and by nothing else. Heb. 9.

He death also declare unto us the virtue of the Cross and Passion of Christ.

By whose blood we have redemption, and remission Ephe. 1.
of our sins. Ephe. 1.

By whose strypes we are made whole. Esa. 53. Esa. 53. 1. Pet. 2. Collo. 1.
1. Pet. 2.

By whose Cross all things are pacified, both in heaven and earth. Collo. 1.

By whose death we are reconciled Romans 5. Romans 5. 1. Timo. 1.


Who has destroyed death, and brought life to light. 1. Tim. 1.

Who by death, has destroyed him, which had the Heb. 2.
power of death, that is, the Devil, And has delivered them, which lived
under fear of death all their life in bondage. Heb. 2.

By whose obedience we are made just: By whose Romans 5.
righteousness we are justified to life. Romans 5.

By whose curse we are made blessed, and delivered Galla. 3.
from the maladiction of the Law. Galla. 3. with many other such like. etc.

Wherefore, whosoever studieth to be accepted with God, and to be found
righteous in his sight, let him learn diligently by the doctrine of Saint
Paul, to make a difference and a separation, as far as from heaven to the
earth, between these two (that is) between the righteousness of works, and
righteousness of Faith: And in any case beware he bring no other means for his
justification, or remission of his sins, but only Faith, apprehending the
body or person of Christ Jesus crucified. For as there is no way into the
house, but by the door: so is there no coming to God, but by Christ alone;
which is by Faith. And as the mortell body, without bodily sustenance of bread
and drink, can not but perish: so the spiritual soul of man, has no other
refreshing, but only by Faith in the body and blood of Salvation comes only
by Faith.
Christ, whereby to be saved.

With this Faith the idolatrous Gentiles apprehended Jesus Christ, and received
thereby righteousness.

Cornelius (the first baptized Roman) so soon as he heard Peter preach Christ,
received straight way the holy Ghost.

Peter him self confessed: and for his confession had Math. 16.
the keys of heaven. Math. 16.

Zacheus received the person of Christ into his Luke 19.
house: and withal, received salvation, both to him and his whole householde.
Luke 19.

What a sinner was Marie, which had no less in her Luke 7.
then seven Devils: and yet because she set her heart and affection upon that
person, many sins were forgeuen her? Luke 7.

The righthand Thief, how far was he from all Luke 23.
works of the Law? And yet by Faith, entered he iustefied into Paradise the
same day with Christ. Luke 23.

In like manner, although the poor Publican came Luke 18.
to the Church with less holiness after the Law, yet went he home to his
house more justified, then the Pharise with all his works: and all by reason
of Faith. Luke 18.

The parable of the Prodigal Son, which was That which is lost by the Law,
is recovered (...) Faith, (...) Luke 18. Math. 9.
lost, yet revived again. Also of the lost Groate, and of the lost Sheep
which went astray, and was found again: What do these declare? but that which
is lost by the Law, to be recovered by Faith and Grace.

And how often do we read in the Gospel? Thy Faith has saved thec. etc

Jesus seeing their belief. etc. John. 14. John. 14.


He that believes in me, I will raise him up in the last day. etc. Believe
also in me. etc.

He that believes in me, has everlasting life. etc. Ioh. 15.


Without me ye can do nothing. etc. He that is in Ioh. 15.
me. etc. He that loves me. etc. He that hears me. etc. He that abides in
me. etc. He that receaueth me. etc. Unless ye eat my flesh, and drink my
blood. etc. That they may receive remission of Act. 26.
their sins by their faith in me. etc. Act. 26.

To him all the Prophets give witness, that whosoever Act. 10.
believes in him, should have remission of sins in his name. etc. Act. 10.

He that believes, and is baptized. Math. vlt. Math. vlt. John. 14.


He that believes in me, shall do the works that I do, and greater then
these. etc.

And likewise in the writings of S. Paul, how often The writings of S. Paul
full of the name of Christ Jesus.
do we hear the name of Christ, almost in every third or fourth line, where he
still repeateth: In Christo Jesus, per Christum Iesum, per Iesum Christum
dominu^ nostrum. etc. Qui credunt in ipso. etc. Omnes qui credunt in eo. etc.
Credentes illo in eum credentes illi, in nomen eius. In nomine Domini nostri
Jesus Christi. etc. Believe (says S. Paul to Act. 16.
the Iaylor) in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy whole house
etc. Act. 16.

Thus then thou see, as the Passion of Christ is only The personal cause of
salvation.
the efficient or personal cause immediate, of our salvation: so is Faith
only the isntrumental or mean cause, that makes the merits of Christ to us
auayleable. The instrumental cause.
For as the Passion of Christ serves to none, but such as do believe: so
neither does Faith (as it is only a bare quality or action in man's mind) it
self justify, How Faith justifies.
unless it be directed to the body of Christ crucified, as to his object, of
whom it receaueth all his virtue. And therefore these two must always jointly
concur together, Faith, and Christ Jesus crucified.

As for example, When the Children of Israel were Example of the brazen Serpent.
bid of Moses, to look up to the Brazen Serpent: neither could the Serpent
have helped them, except they had looked up: nor yet their looking upward have
profited Number. 21.
them, unless they had directed their eyes upon the said Serpent, as the only
object set up to the same purpose for them to behold. So our Faith in like
case, directed to the body of Jesus our Savior, is only the means whereby
Christ's merits are applied unto us, and we now justified before God:
according to the doctrine of S. Paul, who in express words defining to us
what this Faith is, and how it justifies, What Faith is by S. Paul Romans 10.
says: If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with
thy heart, that God raised him from death thou shall be saved. etc. Romans 10.
Besides this, what action or quality soever is in man, either Hope, Charity,
or any other kind of Faith and believing, be it never so true, except it
apprehende this object (which is) the body of Christ the Son of God, it
serves not to justification: And that is the cause why we add this particle
(only) to Faith, and say, That Faith only in Christ iustifyeth us, to exclude
all other actions, qualities, gifts, or works of man, from Faith only.
the cause of justifying: for so much as there is no other knowledge nor gift
given of God to man, be it never so excellent, that can stand before the
judgment of God to iustifycation, or whereunto any promise of salvation is
annexed, but only this Faith, looking up to the brazen Serpent (that is) to
the body of Christ Jesus for us crucified.

As for example: When the Turk says, That he believes in one living God,
that made heaven and earth: The Turks Faith.
his belief therein is true, yet it justifies him not, because it lacks the
right object: which is Christ. So when the Jew says, That he believes in one
The Jews Faith.
God, maker of heaven and earth: and believes also, the same God to be
omnipotent, merciful, just, and true of promise, and that he has elected the
seed of Abraham: True it is, that he believes, and yet all this serves him
not, because Christ the son of God is not joined withal. And though the said
Jew should be never so devout in his prayers, or charitable in alms, or
precise in keeping the Law, and believed never so steadfastly that he is elect
to be saved: yet he is never the nearer to salvation for all this, so long as
his Faith is not grounded upon the head corner stone, which is the person and
body of Christ Jesus, the true Savior. After like sort it may be said of the
Papict, The Papists Faith.
when he says, That he is baptized, and believes in the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, three persons and one God. And also confesses, Jesus Christ to
be the Son of God, which dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
righteousness. etc. His belief therein is true, and in deed would save him,
if he did stay his salvation in his Faith, and upon Christ his Savior only,
according to the promise and grace of God, and go no further: But that he does
not. For neither does he admit Christ only to be his perfect Savior, without
the help of other Patrons, Heads, Advocates, and Mediators: nor yet
permits his Faith in Christ only, to be the means of his iustifycation,
but sets up other by means, as Hope, Charity, sacrifice of the Mass,
Coufession, Penance, Satisfaction, Merits and Pardons, supposing thereby to
work his justification before God, contrary to the word of promise, to the
Gospel of grace, and to the doctrine of S. Paul.

Also Saint Paul in the. 9. to the Romans writing of this righteousness
which comes of Faith, Romans 9.
calls it the righteousness of God, in these words, Whom God, says he,
has set up for a propitiation by Faith in his blood, whereby to make manifest
Romans 3.
the righteousness which is of him self, in tollerating our sins. etc. Romans
3. By the which righteousness, it is evident that Saint Paul means the
righteousness of Faith, which almighty God now reuealeth and makes manifest by
preaching of the Gospel. Wilt The righteousness of Faith, why it is called Gods
righteousness.
thou see yet more plainly this righteousness of God, how it is taken in S.
Paul, for the righteousness of Faith: and therefore is called the righteousness
of God, because it is imputed of God only to Faith, and not deserved of man.
In the same Epistle to the Romans, and in the. 3. chapt. aforesaid, his words
be manifest, The righteousns of God (says he) is by faith of Jesus Romans 3.
Christ in all, and upon all that do believe, etc.

And thus much of the true causes of our iustificatino, The causes of our
salvation distincted.
after the doctrine of Saint Paul: concerning which causes this distinction
furthermore by the way is to be added, that as touching the original causes of
our salvation, which be diverse and sundry: some are external and without us,
some are internal and within us. Of the external causes which are without us,
the first and principal is the Mercy and grace of God: Grace and mercy.
Of this follows Predestination and Election, then comes Uocation. The last
and next cause to us, is Election. Vocation. Christ's passion.
the Death and Bloodshed of Christ, whereby we are redeemed: and all these be
external causes, because they are without us. Of internal causes that be in
man through the gift of God, there is but one, and no more in Scripture
appointed (That is) our Faith Faith in Christ.
in Christ: which is the gift of God in us. Besides this, there is no gift of
God given to man, no virtue, work, merit, nor any thing else, that is any part
or cause of our salvation, but only this gift of Faith, to believe in Christ
Jesus. And this is the cause why The meaning and cause why faith only
justifies*
we hold, that Faith only iustifyeth: meaning, that amongst all the works,
deeds, actions, labors, and opperations whatsoever man does, or can do,
there is nothing in man that works salvation, but only his Faith, given to
him of God, to believe in Christ his son: following therein the trade of
Saint Paul's teaching, who in precise words so ascribes justification to
Faith, that he excludes all other actions of man, and works of the Law: And
therefore in the fame Epistle to the Romans, Saint Paul reasonyng of the
glory of Justifying, asks this question, How Al works of man excluded from
the glory of justifying.
this glory is excluded, whether by the Law, or works: and concludes no:
ascribing only the glory thereof to the law of Faith. And consequently upon the
same he infers, We hold that a man is justified by Faith, without the
deeds of the Law.

And how then can that be accounted for any part of our iustifycation, which
Saint Paul utterly debarreth and excludes in that behalf. Of which like
exclusiues and negatiues, the whole course of Saint Paul's doctrine is full,
where he still concludes, Sine operibus, absque operibus legis, non ex
operibus dei donum est, non ex operibus, sed secundum miserecordiam ne quis
glorietur. Ephe. 2.
Ephe. 2. Non ex operibus Iusticiae que ferimus nos, sed secundum propositum
suum et gratiam. etc. Tit. 3. Non secundum Tit. 3. Time. 2.
opera nostra. etc. Tim. 2. That is to say, It is the gift of God, not of
works, that no man should glory. etc. Not of the works of righteousness which
we have done, but of his own mercy. etc. Not after our works, but after his
own promise and grace, which is given to us. etc. Again, Galla. 2. Non
iustificatur Galla. 2.
homo ex operibus. etc. That is, A man is not justified by works. etc. Item,
ei qui non operatur credenti autem in eum qui iustificat impium fides imputatur
ad iustitiam. Romans 4.
etc. Romans 4. To him that works not, but believes in him which justifies
the wicked, his faith The exclusiues and negatiues of S. Paul to be marked,
is imputed to righteousness. etc. By these exclusiues and negatiues in Saint
Paul's doctrine, what does he else mean, but utterly to seclude all kind of
man's merits and works of the Law, from the office and dignity of justifying.
And although he expresses not the word (only) yet upon his exclusiues and
negatiues, this exceptiue must needs be inferred. For in all logique, the
consequent is necessary and formal: as, one man is suffered to come into the
house, and no person else is suffered to enter but one: Ergo, one man only, is
suffered to enter into the house. And thus much concerning Faith in Christ,
proved to be the only mean, or isntrumental, or conditional cause of our
Salvation, and no other besides the same alone, by the doctrine of S. Paul,
taught to the ancient Romans.

Saint Paul after he has thus established us in certainty of our Salvation,
through Faith in Christ, exhorts us vehemently and with all instance, to good
works, showing the true use and end of good works: (which is) First to show
our obedience and duetifull The true use and end of good works.
service (as we may) unto God, who has done so great things for us. Secondly,
to relieve our neighbors with our charity and kindness, as God has been kind
to us his enemies. Thirdly, to stir up others by our example, to praise God,
to embrace the same Religion, and to do the like: For requisite it is, that as
God has been so merciful unto us, and gracious in eternal gifts, we should
be merciful likewise to other in temporal commodities. And seeing it has
pleased him of his fatherly goodness (of our parts so little deserved) to call
us to so high a vocation, to give the blood of his Son for us, to forgive us
al our sins, to deliver us from this present wicked world, to make us
citizens of heaven; yea, his children, more then servants: ^ytle then can we
do, and well may he think those benefices ill bestowed, if we forgive not our
neighbors, and show some thing again worthy that holy calling, wherewith he
has called us, in mortifying our fleshly lusts here, and studying after
heavenly things. And finally, if we being provoked with such love and kindness,
render not again some love for love, some kindness for kindness, seeking how to
walk in serving him (so much as we may) in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our life. And though our obedience shall always be imperfect, do
the best we can: yet reason would, that some obedience we should show, as
loving children, to such a loving father.

And this is the cause why Saint Paul is so vehement Good works justify
not, but follow the justified.
and urgent, to call upon good works, not that works should justify: but
that we being justified so mercifully and tenderly through his grace, should
not abuse his grace in vain, but endeavor our selves to our utmost, to render
our service again to him in such conversation of life, as may most make to his
glory, and profit of our neighbor. And though the words of our Savior
seem in some places, to attribute to our obedience and charity here in earth,
great rewards in heaven: That is, of his own free grace and goodness, so to
impute small matters, for great desartes: And not for us to claim any meede
thereby, or thank at his hand, as by any worthynes of our doings, no more
then the Servant when he comes from the Plough, and serving the Cattle in the
stelde, serves first his Master at home, and wayteth upon his table: the
Master is not bound (says Christ) to thank his Servant therefore, and did
him sit down: So you (says he) Luke 17.
when you have done that is commanded you, say ye are unprofitable Servants,
ye have done but what your bounden duty was to do. Luke 17.

Again, here also is to be understood, that where such rewards be ascribed
unto men's deeds, it is not for the worthynes of the deed it self, but for
the Faith of the doer; which Faith, makes the work to be good in Gods sight:
For else, if an Infidel should do the same work that the Christian does, it
were nothing but mere sin before God. In that therefore the Christian man's
work is accepted, be it never so small (as to give a cup of cold water) the
same is only for his Faythes sake that does it, and not for the work which is
done. Whereby again we may learn, how Faith only does justify a man, and
that three manner of ways. First, it justifies the person in making him
accepted, Faith justifies three manner of ways.
and the child of God by regeneration, before he begin to do any good work.

Secondly, it justifies a man from sin, in procuring remission and
forgiveness for the same.

Thirdly, it justifies the good deeds and works of man, not only in
brynging forth good fruits, but also in making the same works to be good and
acceptable in the sight of God (...) which otherwise were impure, and execrable
in his sight.

The office therefore of Faith and Works, is diverse, and must not be
confounded. Faith first goes The office of Faith, and the office of the Law
compared together
before, and regenerateth a man to God, and iustifyeth him in the sight of God,
both in covering his sin, and in making his good deeds acceptable to God,
clyming up to heaven, and there wrestling and pleading Christ's merits with
God, and his judgment, for righteousness, for salvation, and for everlasting
life. Works and Charity follow Faith, and are exercised here upon earth, and
gloriech only before man, but not before God, in showing fo^rth obedience both
to God and man: Further then this, our good works do not reach, nor have any
thing to do in the judgment of Romans 7.
God touching salvation. I speak of our good works (as S. Paul speaks Romans
7. as they be ours, and imperfect: for else, if our works could be perfect,
according to the perfection of the Law, as Christ wrought The works of man be
imperfect: and therefore have nothing to do with justification.
them in the perfection of his flesh, then should we obtain salvation by them:
according as it is said, Qui feceret ea, viuet in eis. But now seeing the
imbec^^itie of our flesh can not attain thereto, it follows thereof, that all
glory of justifying is taken from our works, and transferred only to Faith.

Certain Principles, or general Verities, and infallible Rules of the
Scripture, grounded upon the truth of Gods word, in the argument of
justification.
The first Principle. AS sin and death came originally by the disobedience of
one, to all men of his generation by Romans 5.
nature: So righteousness and life, came originally by the obedience of one to
all men, regenerated of him by Faith and Baptism. Romans 5. The second
Principle. The Promise of God was freely given to our first Genesis 3.
Parents without their deserving, That the Seed of the woman should break
the Serpents head. Genesis 3. The third Principle. Promise was given freely to
Abraham, before he Genesis 12.
deserved any thing: That in his Seed all nations should be blessed. Genesis 12.
The fourth Principle. To the word of God, neither must we add nor take from
it. Deuteronomy. 4. Deuteronomy. 4.
The fyft Principle. He that does the works of the Law, shall live Teuit. 18.
Galla. 3.
therein. Leuit. 18. Galla. 3. The sixth Principle. Accursed is he which abides
not in every thing that Deuteronomy. 27. Galla. 3.
is written in the book of the Law. Deuteronomy. 27. Galla. 3. The seventh Principle.
God only is to be worshypped. Deuteronomy. 6. Luke 4. Deuteronomy. 6. Luke 4.
The eight Principle. All our righteousness is like a defiled cloth of a Esa. 64.
woman. Esa. 64. The ninth Principle. In all my holy Hill, they shall not kill
nor slay, Esa. 11. 65.
says the Lord. Esa. 11. 65. The tenth Principle. God loves mercy and
obedience, more then sacrifice. Ose. 6. 1. King. 15.
Ose. 6. 1. King. 15. The eleventh Principle. The Law works anger,
Condempneth, and Romans 3.
opens sin. Romans 3. The twelfth Principle. The end of the Law is Christ,
to righteousness, Romans 10.
to every one that believes. Romans 10. The thirteenth Principle. Whosoever
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Math. vlt.
Math. vlt. The foureteenth Principle. A man is justified by Faith, without
works: freely Galla. 2. Ephe. 2.
by grace, not of our selves. Galla. 2. Ephe. 2. The fyfteenth Principle. There
is no remission of sins without blood Heb. 9.
Heb. 9. The sixteenth Principle. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. Romans
14. Romans 14. Heb. 11.
Without Faith, it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11. The seventeenth
Principle. One mediatoure between God and man, Christ 1. Timo. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
Jesus. 1. Tim. 2. And he is the propiciation for our sins. 1. John. 2. The
eighteenth Principle. Whosoever seeks in the Law to be justified, is Galla. 5.
fallen from grace. Galla. 5. The nineteenth Principle. In Christ be all the
Promyses of God Est and 2. Cor. 1.
Amen. 2. Cor. 1. The twentieth Principle. Let every soul be subject to the
superior powers, Romans 13.
giving to Caesar that which is Cesars, and to God that which is Gods. Romans 13.
O Lord increase our Faith.
FINIS.
A brief repetition of the times of the several deaths of Christ our
Savior, and of his holy Apostles, and the manner thereof, so near as may be
gathered.
IN the reign of Tiberius, the Lord Jesus the Son of God our only Savior,
in the. xxxiiii. year of his age, which was the xviii. year of this Emperors
reign: by the malice of the Jews he su(...)ered his blessed death and
passion, for the conquering of sin, death, and Satan, the prince of this
world, and rose again the third day: After whose blessed passion,
resurrection, and ascension, Tiberius having received letters from Pont^^s
P(...)e of the doings of Christ, of his miracles, resurrection, and ascension
into heaven: and how he was received of many as God, was him self also moved
with belief of the same, and did confer thereof with the whole Seuate of Rome
to have Christ adored as God: But they not agreeing thereunto, refused him,
because (said they) that contrary to the law of the Rom(...)n^ he was
consecrated for God, before the Senate of Rome had so decreed and appointed him.

Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist.
Matthew, otherwise named Leui, was first a Publicane, or Custom gatherer, and
was made or chosen Jews in the Hebrew tongue: who we read was stayne with a
Spear.

Mark the Evangelist, and Peter's disciple.
Mark the Evangelist, and first Bishop of Allexandria, preached the Gospel
in Egypt, and there drawn with ropes unto the fire, was burned, and after
buried in a place called Bucolus, under the reign of Traianns the Emperor:
But some record that he dyed at Allexandria in the. viii. year of the reign
of Nero.

Luke the Evangelist, and Paul's disciple.
LVke the Evangelist, was sometime a Physician of Antiochia, and was Paul's
disciple and fellow in all his travels. He lived four score and four years,
and then dyed, and was buried at Constantinople.

John the Apostle and Evangelist.
John the Apostle and Evangelist, whom the Lord Zebedeus, and brother of James,
was exiled by Domitianus into Pathmos: of whom diverse and sundry memorable
acts be reported in sundry Chronicles. As first, how he was put into a vessel
of boiling Oil: and that he turned certain pieces of Wood into Gold, and
Stones by the Sea side into Margarets, to satisfy the desire of two, whom he
had before persuaded to renounce their riches: and after they repenting, that
for worldly treasure they had lost heaven, for their sakes again, he changed
the same into their former substance. Also, how he raised up a Wydow, and a
young man from death to life. How he drank poison, and it hurt him not:
Raising also two to life that were dead, by drinking the same before. These and
such other miracles are written of him. He dyed threescore years after Christ,
and was buried near to the city of Ephesus.

Peter the Apostle.
PEter the Apostle, the brother of Andrew, about the Rome to withstand Simon
Magus, and there continued the space of. 25. years, until the last year of
Nero, which was the. 14. year of his reign: of whom he was crucified, his
head being down, and his feet upward, him self so requiring, because (said
he) he was unworthy to be crucified after the same form and manner as the Lord
was. And it is further recorded of him, That Simon Magus being then a great man
with Nero, and his president and keeper of his life, was required upon a time
to be present at the raising up of a certain Noble young man in Rome of Neros
kindred lately departed, whereas Peter also was desired to come to the reviving
of the said Personage: but when Magus in the presence of Peter could not do
it, then Peter calling upon the name of the Lord Jesus, did raise him up, and
restored him to his mother: whereby the estimation of Simon Magus began greatly
to decay, and to be detested in Rome. Not long after, the said Magus threatened
the Romans that he would leave the City, and in their sight fly away from
them into heaven: So the day being appointed, Magus taking his Wings in the
mount Cap^tol^nus, began to fly into the air: but Peter by the power of the
Lord Jesus, brought him down with his wings headlong to the ground: by the
which fall his legs and joints were broken, and he thereupon dyed: Then Nero
sorrowing for the death of him, sought matter against Peter to put him to
death: which when the people perceived, they entreated Peter that he would
fly the City: Peter through their importunity, at length persuaded, prepared
him self to avoid: But coming to the gate, he saw the Lord Christ come to
meet him, to whom worshipping, said: Lord, Whyther do thou go? To whom he
answered, and said, I come again to be crucified: By this, Peter perceiving
his suffering to be understood, returned back into the City again, and so
was he crucified in manner as is before declared. Moreover, it is recorded of
Peter's wife, That Peter seeing his wife going to her martyrdom, as he was yet
hanging upon the Cross, was greatly joyous and glad thereof, who crying to her
with a loud voice, and calling her by her name, bade her remember the Lord
Jesus.

Paul the Apostle.
Paul the Apostle, which before was called Saul, Nero, and was beheaded. Of
whom it is written, that sentence of death being pronounced against him, Nero
sent two of his Esquters, ^erega and Parthenius to being him word of his
death: This done, the Soldiers came and led him out of the City to the place
of execution: where he after his prayers made, gave his neck to the sword.

James the Apostle.
James the Apostle of Christ, and brother of John, Herod was beheaded. Of this
Apostle it is written in story of him, that when he was brought to the
tribunal seat: he that brought him, and was the cause of all his trouble,
seeing him to be condemned, and that he should suffer death, as he went to the
execution, he being moved therewith in heart and conscience, confessed him self
also of his own accord to be a Christian: and so were they both led forth
together, where in the way he desired of James to forgive him, that he had
done. After that James had a little pawsed with him upon the matter, turning to
him, Peace (says he) be to thee brother, and kissed him: and both were
beheaded together.

Andrew the Apostle.
ANdrew the Apostle of our Lord and savior Christ, Peter, being ^onuersant in
a City of Achaia, called Patris, through his diligent preaching, had brought
many to the Faith of Christ. Egeas the Governor knowing this, resorted
thither, to the intent he might constrayne as many as did believe Christ to be
God, by the whole consent of the Senate, to do sacrifice unto the Idols, and so
give divine honor to them. Andrew thinking good at the beginning to resist
the wicked counsel and doings of Egeas, went unto him, saying in this
effect: That it behooved him that was Judge of men, first to know his Judge,
which dwells in Heaven, and then to worship him being known: and so in
worshypping the true God, to revoke his mind from false Gods, and blind
Idols. But the Preconsull esteeming these things to be as vain, especially
seeing the Jews (as he said) had crucified Christ before: therefore charged
and commanded Andrew, not to teach and preach such things any more (or if he
did) that he should be fastoned to the Cross with all speed. Andrew abiding
in his former mind very constant, answered concerning the punishment which he
threatened: He would not have preached the honor and glory of the Cross, if he
had feared the death of the Cross. Whereupon, sentence of condempnation was
pronounced, that Andrew teaching and enterprising a new sect, and taking away
the religion of their gods, ought to be crucified. Andrew coming to the
place, and seeing a farer off the Cross prepared, did change neither ^ullor
nor countenance, but out of the abundance of his heart did speak, and said: O
Cross most welcome and long looked for, with a willing mind joyfully and
desirously I come to thee, being. Scholar of him which did hang on thee,
because I have been always thy lover, and have coueted to embrace thee. So
being crucified, he yielded up the Ghost.

Thomas the Apostle.
THomas the Apostle of our savior Jesus Christ, Parthians, Meds, and Persians:
Also to the Germans, Hiraconis, Bactris, and Magis. He suffered in Calamina a
city of Indea, being slain with a Dart.

Bartholomew the Apostle.
BArtholomew the Apostle of our Lord and Savior Indians, and converted the
Gospel (written by S. Matthew) into their tongue: where he continued a great
space, doing many miracles: At last in Albania, a City of greater Armenia,
after diverse persecutions, he was beaten down with staves, then crucified: and
after being ex^oriate, he was also beheaded.

Matthias the Apostle.
MAtthias the Apostle of our Savior Christ, after Jews, at length he was
stoned and beheaded. Some do record, that he dyed in Ethiopia.

Philip the Apostle.
PHilip the Apostle of our Savior Christ, after he Hirapolis, a city of
Phrigia, being there stoned to death and crucified: where also he was buried,
and his daughters also with him.

Judas, called Thaddeus, the Apostle.
IVdas, called Thaddeus, the Apostle of our Lord and James, preached to the
Edessens, and to all Messopotamia: He was afterward slain under Angarus,
king of the Edessens in Berito.

Simon, called Zealous, the Apostle.
Simon, called zealous, the Apostle of our Savior Maritan^a, and in the
country of Affricke, and in Britania. He was likewise crucified.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by William White. 1598.


