EXILE EXILED. Occasioned by a Mandat from Rome, procured by Tho. Flemming
alias Barnwell, Archb. of Dublin, and Friar of the Order of S. Francis, from
the Congregation of Cardinals De propaganda fide, for the banishment of Paul
Harris out of the Diocese of Dublin.

By PAUL HARRIS Priest.

In umbra alarm tuarum sperabo, donec transeat iniquitas. Psalm 56. Printed
Anno Dom. 1635.

To the Reader.
S. Paul tells us of some kind of men, that they profit, but still to the
worse, 2. Tim. 3. It is not long since that there was a Book set forth,
admonishing the Friars to be sober, but they have burnt so many of those
Books, and read so few of them, as from folly they have profited to extreme
madness. It was little sobriety to excommunicate one man, for the fault, or no
fault of another. But howsoever clave errante, vel non errante, the Censures
are Episcopal. But for a Prelat to throw away his Keys, and to take the
Sword, and to hang it at a Friars belt, and with it to play the Fencer, yea the
Offender.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?

The Italian says, That before a man falls into any great calamity, God first
gives him a rappe upon the pate, that is, he deprives him of his judgment,
well expressed by the Poet, De Ponto lib. 4.

Creed mihi, miseros prudentia prima relinquit,
Et sensus cunre, consiliumque fugit
A wretched man, right, reason first forsakes,

He reckes not of advice, nor counsel takes.

The Friars began with Excom. they arrived at Exile. What Is the next? Assizes
and Quarter Sessions. The Prophet says, De radice colubri egredietur Regulus,
Esaias 14. from the root of an Adder shall issue out a Cockatrice. By which is
signified (as Lyra expounds it) That from a small beginning, and contemptible,
great and intolerable mischiefs do arise. But the Adder of Exile being
prudently oppressed, the hatch of the Cockatrice was prevented.

Is it not to be lamented, that the Ecclesiastical and Politic estate cannot
consist together, but that the advancement of the one, must be the abatement
of the other? In so much that some doubt not to say, that a Catholic can be
no good Subject: Vtinam abscindantur qui conturbant nos: I would to God they
were cut off who were the occasions of that scandal. For my part, I profess
my name in the number of those who are both good Catholics and good Subjects:
And I trust in the mercies of God, so to be found living and dying. And
whosoever reads this little Work, I wish him of the same mind, and to be as I
am, excepting those afflictions, persecutions, and continual vexations, which
I endure a falsis fratribus, and their abused followers, whom God amend, as
also thy friend (good Reader)

PAVL HARRIS Priest.

A Letter from Card Antonio Barbarini, Prefect of the sacred Congregation of
Cardinals De propaganda fide, unto Tho. Flemming Archb. of Dublin, and by him
published not only thorough this whole Diocese of Dublin, but generally
thoroughout all Ireland, in the months of August and September, of this
present year 1635.
To which Letter, for the better understanding thereof, is added a gloss by
Paul Harris, very necessary to be read of all such, to whom that Letter is
communicated.
The Letter of Card Antonio, unto the Archb. of Dublin, Tho. Flemming.
MOst illustrious and reverent Lord, as brother. Here it is written unto the
Bishop of Mead, That he command that same Paul Harris to depart forthwith
from your Diocese, otherwise to give order byauthority of the same holy
Congregation, to the faithful people, that none shall receive from him the
holy Sacraments, nor hear his Mass. And that some scandal arise not by
means of this order, Your Lordship may give unto the said Bishop (when he
receives this enclosed) such advertisements and informations as you shall
think fitting for prevention thereof. To conclude, I commend my self unto
your Lordship.

Rome 13. December. Your Honors most affectionat as brother Card. Antonio
Barbarini. Francis Ingoli Secretary.
The Gloss.
MOst illustrious and Rev. Lo: as brother vid. Thomas Flemming alias Barnwell,
to whom this Epistle was directed, as himself publishes. Here it is written
to the Bishop of Mead subandi enclosed within this Letter. The name of the B.
of Mead is, Tho. Dese Do. of Sorbon in Paris.

That he command that same Paul Harris viz. mentioned in the enclosed Letter
unto the B. of Mead, not yet published.

To depart forthwith your Diocese

To wit, the Diocese of Dublin.



CAP. I.
NOW this same Paul Harris is doubtless the English Priest, who lives in
Dublin, who wrote a Book in answer to Tho. Flemming his Excom. as also a
second called Arctomastix, against a libelling Friar, who shadoweth himself
under the name of Vrsulanus; and since that, a third Book against the false
doctrine of Habits and Scapulars, and Donna Luissa her Saturdayes Fast. So then
it seems this same Paul Harris the English Priest, is to be commanded by the
Bishop of Mead Do. Dese, authorized by the Congregation of Cardinals De
propaganda fide, to depart the Diocese of Dublin. Certs if the Bishop of Mead
his Warrant come in the Name of King CHARLES, it will doubtless be obeyed;
but if it come in any other man's name, Paul Harris (as far as I understand
his mind) is resolved not to depart. Nay, if all the Friars, Priests, Bishops,
Cardinals, Popes, and a general Council, shall command him to depart, he
will not remove a foot out of the Diocese of Dublin. The reasons of this his
resolution he has abundantly yielded, and published unto the world, in an
Answer unto the Archbishops Excom. cap. 3. Yea, but it is said in the text of
this Letter, That the Bishop of Mead is to command him Forthwith to depart.
Alas good Friars, give him leave to pay his way, and bid his friends farewell.
Forthwith is very sudden. Let him at least depart with bag and baggage, as
Soldiers do from the Fort they can no longer defend. Happily Paul Harris
cannot say as old Bias did, Omniamea mecumporto. The Friars say, he is rich:
Will they not allow him time to transport his wealth to the place of his future
residence, to make sale of his houses, and lands, and to recover the arreeres
of his rents, to call in his debts, to make an end of his suites in law, etc.
All which require time, and cannot be dispatched Forthwith. Patrick Cahil being
banished the same Diocese by the present Archb. was allowed 15. days of abode
before he removed. O but he was a native, and Harris is an English churl, and
must not be so kindly dealt withal. Forthwith: This is like the Summons of
Gads hill, or Salesbury plain, Stand and deliver. Well, perambulet mare and
aridam, quaerens quid devoret. Let the Friar compass sea and land, seeking
what he may devour, yet old Paul is resolved to live among his old neighbors
of Dublin, notwithstanding the Friars should determine the contrary in a
general Chapter.

By this then gentle Reader, you see (at least if this Letter came from Rome,
as our Archb. pretends, and would have it to be believed) That the sword of
exile is taken out of his fist, and put into the Lord Bish. of Mead his hands;
who for all the persuasions that our Bish. Flemming can use (see the luck of
it) absolutely denies to draw out the same; In plain terms that he never
intends to pronounce any sentence of exile against Harris, and so has declared
himself to the face of our Archb, and his Friars, and to as many as deal with
him about it. But how will the Bish. of Mead answer this neglect, or rather
contempt of the Roman command? O! let it alone: He knows how to give
satisfaction unto the holy Congregation of Cardinals De propaganda fide, or to
any other misinformed, and abused superior. And now it pittyes me to see,
(and yet I cannot but laugh) how our Archb. Plemming, and his Friars, torment
themselves in this business. For now that they cannot induce the B. of Mead
by no persuasion to this horride fact, viz. to sentence a Priest to exile, yet
never called to his answer, and much less convicted of any fault, and
consequently innocent, (for so the Law presumes Reg. 8) They now cry out; O
frustra nostri suscepti labores! O male impensi sumptus! O all our labor in
vain undertaken! O costs cast away! Albeit in truth, all their labors, costs
and charges, were no more then the addressing of one Letter unto Friar Wadding,
a man according unto their own heart, resident continually in the City, and
pressed to negotiate all their causes, a man of that zeal and earnestness in
procuration, as he would well ween to obtain a sentence before a citation, a
condemnation before a conviction.

Cordiger esuriens in coelum jusseris ibit. I tell you perdy: A hungry Friar,
hungry of maintenance, hungry of honor, hungry of vanity and vainglory, and to
conserve his declining reputation among his fellows, what will he not do? Ad
stygias si jusseris ibit.

So then our Archb. and his Friars, seeing all their proceedings against Paul
Harris, come to no better a pass in the Roman Court. The Archb. disarmed as a
party, and therefore partial. The Bishop of Mead only authorized to
pronounce sentence, and refusing that service. I say, all designments and
machinations so untowardly succeeding on our Archb. side. At last, as desperate
of all better success, he betakes himself to this silly refuge, forsooth to
publish a private Letter received from a Card. the Popes Nephew, which Letter is
nothing else in the world, but the case or cover of the Letter sent unto the B.
of Mead: As if one bereft of his sword, should lay about him with the
scabberd. For it plainly appears, that the B. of Mead has the sword, and
our B. nothing left him but the scabberd, with which he makes this goodly
flourish, sending abroad the coppyes thereof like so many butter-flyes among
his followers and devoto's, presuming (as he well may) of the many-headed
multitude, in all communityes as most injudicious, so with all most factious,
being as ready as the blind Senator in Iuvenal, Sat. 4. to applaud what they
hear others to condemn: adding of his own invention, as likewise his Friars
in their perambulations, that the sentence of Harris his exile, awarded by the
Ordinary, is now ratified and confirmed by the Popes sentence, which is as
far from truth, as Rome is from Dublin Nothing sent from his Hol. in these
parts insinuating the same. And that now Harris (says the Archb.) may turn
the edge of his style from me, upon the Cardinals, who have confirmed my
sentence: And this he may do with small labor: for it is no more but to change
the Title of his Book from me to them. So Tho. Flemming. Al which (with due
respect unto your place my Lord) are manifest untruths, and so convicted to be
by the tenure of this very Epistle of the Card. published by your command into
so many hands. For if that sentence be put into the power of the B. of Mead to
be pronounced de futuro, without relation to your sentence at all. How then is
your sentence confirmed of which no mention is made? A sentence of which it
seemed your self being ashamed, before a grave audience, did in express
terms before many witnesses, disclay me and deny ever to have given.

For you may remember my Lo. Archb. that being called before the Lo. Bishop of
Derry, and Sir George Radcliffe Knight, there being then present Do. Peter
Caddell, Do. Patrick Cahil, William Brown, Patrick Brangan, Edmund Doyle
Priests, that you acknowledging and avowing your command of Peter Caddell out
of your Diocese, you constantly denied the exile of Paul Harris, but only
that you willed and advised him to depart, by reason of which your denial, he
was forced to produce his witness William Brown Priest, who before those two
honorable persons, being charged by them upon his conscience, as an honest man
to speak the truth, whether you only desired or commanded him to quitt your
Diocese; the said William Brown did testify, that you absolutely commanded
Paul Harris to depart, and to leave your Diocese, and that himself was the
man who was also commanded to deliver that message unto him in your name. All
those before named can witness that business so to have passed. And therefore
I say, had your exile of Paul Harris been most legal, (which I will never
grant) by your voluntary denial thereof it was revoked, and utterly quashed,
no less then a sentence of Excommunication, Suspension, etc. by the like deny
all remains cancelled and revoked. How then now confirmed? It follows.

Otherwise to give order by authority of the same holy congregation, to the
faithful people, that none shall receive from him the holy Sacraments, nor
hear his Mass. The order which Tho. Flemming gave four years ago, was;
That none under pain of Excom. should be present at his Mass. The nullity of
which Excom. being declared by an Answer thereunto, it was the less observed,
especially of such as were of Judgment. What order the B. of Mead was to lay
down, appears not, for that the Serpent was crushed in the Egg.

This sacred Congregation of Card. De propaganda fide, was instituted about the
year 1612. by Paulus 5. of which Congregation at this time, Card. Antonio
Barbarini, the youngest of the three nephews of this present Pope Vrbanus 8.
is head, or Prefect, a man about 30. wise, but not much learned. And it is
strange that being wise, and an Italian (a Nation so respective) writing to
foreign countries, he would not command his Secretary, to style his Epistles
in Latin, unless (peradventure) Latin is become a stranger among the Latin
Secretaryes. We Tramontani (as the Italians call us) directing our Letters
unto the Court of Rome, neither write them in English, or Irish, albeit we are
not ignorant, that there wants not of these Countries in the City, who are
able to translate them into Italian. This Congregation of Cardinals (I
confess) have a glorious style conferred upon them by his Hol. as to be
Propagators, advancers and promoters of the Faith, but surely their endeavors
will never answer unto those honorable titles, so long as (giving ear to a
company of turbulent and malecontent Friars) they shall seek to disturb the
peace and tranquillity of those Kingdoms, over or in which they have no
principality. I say, by exercising a secular power over those who are none of
their subjects. For as his Majesty of Great Britain, never attempted to exile
any of the Popes subjects out of Rome, or any other his Territoryes; so neither
ought they to banish any of his Majesty's liege people, either out of this, or
that City, Province, or Diocese, but to know their own bounds, and not to
transgress the same. And truly were I either wise or learned, I would
endeavor to persuade those most eminent L. Cardinals (in acknowledgment of
their error) either to send an Embafsadour unto his Majesty, or at least to
direct a deprecatory Epistle unto him, by which he might be induced to pass
over that injurious entrenchment upon his Crown and Dignity. And alas what
less can they do? This truly would be a commendable act, beseeming their
greatness, and answerable unto their high titles; by this means, the Faith
might either be propagated, or certs less scandalized. And it may be hoped,
that in so generous a breast of our renowned Sovereign, it would find both a
gentle admittance and remittance.

And as for the faithful people here mentioned: Surely as many as be of
understa^ding and capacity (who I confess, are not the greatest part of your
flock) do well see and discern, that all these machinations of the Friars
against Harris, proceed merely from malice, who for his desire and zeal of
their reformation, as well in their corrupt manners in life, as abominable
errors in doctrine, do labor by all means to ruinate and undo him. But P.H.
is confident, that Qui habitat in adjutorio altissimi, in protectione Dei coeli
commor abitur: He that dwells in the help of the highest, shall remain in
the protection of the God of Heaven. Neither is he better then his
predecessors, so many worthy Prelates and Priests, who for seeking to reform
abuses among Monks and Friars, have suffered at their hands extreme
persecution, not always ad exiliu^, but sometimes ad sanguine^. Examples
whereof both ancient and modern, our Ecclesiastical Historyes do recount.
And it is no small comfort unto P.H. and an affront to his adversaryes, that his
books being by the Friars presented unto the Roman Censors, and by them read
and perused, tried, sifted and bolted, yet came off as Gold from the fire,
without the least note, obeliske, or asteris ke of reproof, which is also no
small honor unto our holy Faith, because hereby those who are otherwise
persuaded in matters of doctrine, may plainly see that the Catholic Church
maintains none of those fooleryes, which the Friars profructu ventris do
daily vent, and were largely confuted in his aforesaid Book. It follows in
the Epistle.

And that some scandal arise not by means of this order, your Lordship may
give unto the said Bishop, when he receives this enclosed, such advertisements
and informations, as you shall think fitting for prevention thereof.]

But no advertisements, or informations, that Dublinensis could give, seemed
sufficient to Medensis to the prevention of scandal, maturely considering,
that it was a thing impossible, without notorious scandal, indicta causa to
banish a Priest out of the Diocese wherein he has his habitation, his
friends, acquaintance, and benefactors, and that in a continued residence of
more then 20. years, and to be sent into Pontus, I mean, to uncouth and
unknown places, where being separated from his friends and wel-willers, he may
with less difficulty have his throat cut by a malicious Friar, or some
suborned Wood-kerne. O! but Harris might pass into his native Country of
England. True indeed, and so he may (but not for sic volo, sic jubeo of a
Prelate) though as yet he is not so minded: these 20. years of a continued
absence, having made him well-neere as much a stranger in his own Country, as
in the County of Tirconnell, where as yet he never set foot. Such are the
fruits of time, whose nature is as the Poet Menander says, (...), to procure
oblivion. No no, with the good leave of the State, P. H. now of the age of 63.
has set up his rest, and is resolved to say of Ireland, and in particular of
this Diocese of Dublin, Hic habitabo, quoniam elegi eam: Here will I dwell,
for that I have made choice thereof, till such time as his better part be
translated into a better habitation.

Again, the Lo. Bishop of Mead no doubt does well consider, that a banishment
inflicted without an examination of the cause, without the bill of the
Plaintiff, and answer of the Defendant, can not but be most injurious, and
illegal, and so by the same nonsense of a nolo, that a party is removed from
this Diocese of Dublin, he may also be excluded from any other Diocese, and
so consequently out of all Christendom, for that there is no place in any
Country of the Christian world, but is contained in some Diocese, and so
perforce must be compelled to live either upon the Seas, or among Turks and
Infidells.

Lastly, the Lo. B of Mead had good cause to refuse to be employed in such a
piece of service, viz. to pronounce sentence of exile against any of the Kings
Subjects, for he being a Do. of that famous University of Sorbon, and as by
profession a Divine, so also seen in the Canons and Laws of holy Church, does
well understand, that Exile is a punishment beyond the sphere of Episcopal
jurisdiction, proper to the Crown, and not to the Miter, and accordingly to be
managed by the Secular, and not by the Spiritual arm. So S. Bernard in his 5.
book De consideratione, unto Pope Eugenius, tells us; That as the Keys belong
unto the Prelates, so the Sword unto the Civil Magistrate. Forsitan tuo nutu,
non tua manu evaginandus: Peradventure by your will (says he) not by your hand
to be unsheathed. Which doctrine is laid down, and canonized in the Decretals
of Gregory lib. 5. de Cler. excom. tit. 27. cap. 2. Si quis presbyter, aut
alius clericus fuerit degradatus, aut ab officio pro certis criminibus
suspensus, and ipse per contemptum and superbiam aliquid de ministerio sibi
interdicto agere praesumpserit, and postea ab Episcopo suo correptus in incepta
praesumptione perduraverit modis omnibus excommunicetur, and quicunque-cum co
communicaverit, similiter se sciat esse excommunicatum. Similiter de Clericis,
Laicis, vel foeminis excommunicatis observandumest. Quod si aliquis omnia ista
contempserit, and Episcopus minime emendare potuerit regis judicio ad
requisitionem Ecclesiae exilio damnetur: If a Priest or a Clergyman shall be
degraded, or for certain crimes suspended from his office, and thorough
contempt and pride, shall presume to do any thing in his ministry forbidden
unto him, and after being by his Bishop reproved, shall notwithstanding
persevere in his former presumption, by all means let him be excommunicated,
and he who shall communicate with him, let him know that he is excommunicated.
And this to be observed with Clerks, Laics, and and women excommunicated. But
if any shall contemn all these things, and that the Bishop can put no remedy
unto it, then by the judgment of the King, at the request of the Church, let
him be banished.

In which Canon is plainly distinguished the office of the Bishop, and of the
King. The spiritual censures of Excom. Suspension etc. to be inflicted by the
Bishop, and not by the King. The temporal punishment of exile etc. to be
commanded by the King, and not by the Bishop. Again, in this Canon may be
observed the order and method of a legal process; as first, conviction of
crimes, or contumacy, including in his nature and essence, a citation of the
party accused; next, infliction of spiritual censures by sentence of the
Bishop, as Excom. Suspension etc, which being contemned, and the delinquent
incorrigible. What then is to be done? Mary the Bishops power being exhausted,
in the last place comes in the sword, to wit, corporal punishment of Exile, to
be adjudged by the King, at the instance of the Church. By which it is
manifest, that Exile is a punishment transcending all spiritual power and
Episcopal jurisdiction. For else should the Law have said: Then by the
judgment of the Bishop, let him be banished; but here it is said in terminis,
in express terms, by the judgment of the King let him be banished.

Like unto this is that other Canon de judiciis, lib. 2. it is. 1. cap. 10. In
these words. Si Clericus in quocunque ordine constitutus, in furto, vel
homicidio, vel perjurio, seu alio crimine fuerit deprehensus legitime, atque
convictus, ab Ecclesiastice judice deponendus est. Qui si depositus
incorrigibilis fucrit, excommunicari debet, deinde cotumacia crescente
anathematis mucrone feriri, post modum vero, si in profundum malorum veniens
contempserit, cum Ecclesia non habet ultra quod faciat, ^e possit esse ultra
perditio plurimorum, per secularem comprimendus est potestatem. Ita quod ei
deputetur exilium, vel alia legitima poena inferatur. That is, If a Clergy man
in what order soever, shall be found in theft, or manslaughter, or perjury, or
other crime, and being lawfully convicted by the Ecclesiastical Judge, he is
to be deposed; who, if after deposition he shall be incorrigible, he ought to be
excommunicated, afterward his contumacy increasing, to be stricken with the
sword of Anathema: but if arriving at the depth of all evils, he shall remain
in contumacy, whenas the Church has not further what to do (that there be not
besides the destruction of very many) he is to be repressed by the Secular
power. So as Exile may be deputed unto him, or some other lawful punishment
inflicted. So the Canon.

In which we see, as in the former, that the power of the Church and of the
Prelat, proceeds no further, even with the greatest delinquents, but to
excommunication and to Anathema, at which once arriving, they make a period,
confessing (as we see in this Canon) that the Church can pass no further, but
leaves Exile, and all other corporal punishments, to the Secular power to be
awarded and inflicted. What then may we think of that Prelat, who not content
with his spiritual sword of Ecclesiastical censures, will with his own hand
unsheath the temporal sword of the Civil Magistrate? which S. Bernard
conformable unto the doctrine of the Church, lay de down in these two Canons
above cited, flatly denies not only to Bishops, but to the Pope himself, Non
tua manuevaginundus: Not by thy hand (O Pope Eugenius) to be unsheathed. Yet
has our Archb. contrary unto the Laws of holy Church, and the practice of all
times, unsheathed the sword of his Sovereign and Liege Lord, once by his own
confession, and twice more by conviction of witnesses, before honorable
Personages, by exiling out of his Diocese, three Priests, albeit (I confess)
with very bad success, their disobedience to unlawful commands, being so
justifiable as we have seen.

I do not marvel then, though the B. of Mead like a good subject, did
refuse to meddle in a business of that nature, not having the consent and
approbation of the State. All temporal jurisdiction in inflicting corporal
punishments, from the least to the greatest, being essential unto his
Majesty's Crown and Dignity. And I can not but wonder, that the Archb.
Flemming and his Friars, should persuade themselves, that albeit a Prince be of
another opinion in some points of doctrine, from the Roman, which we call the
Catholic and Apostolical Church, that therefore he is a less absolute and
Sovereign Commander within his Realms and Dominions, over which Almighty GOD
has placed him, then any other the most Catholic Prince in the World: which
is a doctrine so undoubted, as it is defined by the Church, as a matter of
divine faith, which whose denies, Coneil. Constant.
is to be ranked among heretics. How then say I, comes it to pass? that,
what no Prelate under any Prince in Christendom at this day would do or with
the integrity of his faith to GOD, or allegiance to his Prince could do. What
no Prelates for these thousand years and upward, under any King of England
(since our first conversion from Paganism, unto Christianity, under Pope
Gregory the great) did, or durst do. That this present ^rchb. Tho. Flemming,
now in these days, dare so boldly attempt, namely; to exile and eject the
Kings Subjects, without invocating the Secular arm.

CAP. II. An objection against some points of the former discourse answered.
IT will happily be alleged in defenee of the Bishop by his Friars: That the
times are such, as they do not permit that correspondencie twixt the Prelates,
and the Civil Magistrate in these Kingdoms, as in days of yore, and that
therefore they can not expect that the Secular arm will condescend to execute
any such their designs or desires. To which I answer. And is it then good
Logic, that the Bishops may usurp their power, and entrench upon the right
of the Secular arm? That because the King will not strike, that therefore the
Bishop may take the sword out of his hand, and lay about him? Let me illustrate
this by a familiar similitude: There is a Friar in Paris, and he wishes with
all his heart, that the Archb. of that place would excommunicate one Titius an
Adversary of his, who lives in his Diocese, and is one of his flock, but he
dares not impart his mind unto him, for that he is persuaded he will never
condescend thereunto, and in moving him in that affayre, he shall but loose his
labor, and peradventure be repulsed with blame. Well, what then? what does the
Friar? Mary he says, Courage m^^n Frers, and without any further delay, he
excommunicates the party himself. I demand in this case, Quid juris? It^
answered, that the Friar is mercifully dealt withal, (...) he be but set upon
the Pillary, or upon an Ass, and whipped naked from the waste upward thorough
the streets of Paris. And why? because he presumes to execute that power which
he never had.

True it is, That conformable unto the Canons above alleged, as also the
immemorable customs and constitutions of these Kingdoms, in case of enormous
crimes, as Theft, Murder, Perjury, Simony, Heresy, etc. as also disobedience,
proceeding to incorrigibility etc. and that not only in Clearkes, but in
Laics, unto their Ecclesiastical superiors, as Bishops, and other Prelates,
after spiritual remedies used, as admonitions, censures, depositions,
degradations etc. at the instance of the Church upon a siguificavis, there
commonly issued out a Writ from the Kings high Court of Chancery, Decapiendo
excommunicate. De comburen do baretico etc. according to the quality of the
delict. If then our Archbish. has proceeded in this legal manner with his
subject, and is arrived at the uttermost extent of Episcopal jurisdiction. He
may then require the assistance of the Secular arm, by intimating his Process
into the Kings Court of Justice, which if they answer his desires, so it is;
if not, he must rest contented, and not think to erect a new Tribunal, and a
new course of proceeding, contrary to what before, by authority of Church and
Commonwealth is established, and by custom of so many ages, confirmed. To
make him self both Prince, and Prelate; both Bishop, and Civil Magistrate, to
pluck the Roses from the Kings Crown, and to place them in his own Miter.
For by so doing, he may draw the sword of the Secular arm upon his own neck,
and in prosecuting others, make himself an offender in the highest degree.

How often do we find in former ages? when both Prince and Prelate were of
one lip and heart in divine worship, and acknowledged obedience unto the Pope
in matters spiritual. Yet even in those times, did not those Catholic
Princes always answer the instance and requisition of their Bishops, in
lending them the assistance of their sword and secular arm, but sometimes were
slow and remiss in that kind of correspondency, yea sometimes did absolutely
deny the same. As who so will peruse the Ecclesiastical History of the Church,
collected by that learned Card. Caesar Baronius in his Annalls; Or our
Countryman Nicholas Harpsfeild in his Ecclesiastical History of England,
shall easily find. And so often as this happened, what did those Prelates?
forsooth contained themselves within the bounds of their spiritual and
Episcopal juvisdiction, never attempting to hang, burn, or banish, as our
hor-spurre Frians have persuaded our Archb. to the great scandal of Gods
Church, and his own utter ruin, if the King be not the more merciful unto
him. Which matters well pondered by the B. of Mead, it is no wonder that he
told our Arch that they were none of his friends that procured him that
Commission from Rome, to pronounce sentence of exile against any of the Kings
Liege people; by which act, himself might come to be in the same predicament
with Tho. Flemming Archb. not only a bad member of Gods Church, but a
disloyal subject unto his Majesty, verifying that of the Prophet, Psalm. 49.
Cum videbas furem, currebas cum to etc.

CAP. III. The informations, by which the Archb. and his Friars procured from
the Congregation of Cardinals De propaganda fide, the Commission of Paul
Harris his exile from the Diocese of Dublin.
POpes, and Princes, Cardinals, and Bishops are men, and no Angels, and
according as they are informed, so they speak, so they write, so they
determine causes; so they absolve, and so they do condemn.

I remember I have read in Philip Commines his history of the wars twixt the
French King Lewis II. and Charles Duke of Burgundy, that in some services
wherein the French had the worse, and routed (more upon a Pannick fear, then
any just cause of terror) some Commanders being after by the King called to an
account for their cowardice: The Author observes, and so reports it: That
certain Captains, and great Monsieurs, that ran from the field but six
leagues off, were severely punished for their offenses; and others who fled
from the field, and ran ten leagues beyond them, were highly rewarded for their
valor and good service. Noting (as I said before) that Princes by reason of an
impossibility of proper knowledge in themselves as touching the estate of
absent affairs, are forced (resting upon informations) to judge accordingly,
walking sometimes upon the right hand, and other whiles upon the left.

And so it happened in the cafe of P. H. who by Friar Wadding, the Archb. his
Agent in the City, and others of his fraternity, as well shodd, as barefooted
Friars, his mortal and sworn enemies, is accused to be a most turbulent; and
a seditious person, disobedient to all lawful authority, and as one confirmed
in contumacy, remains incorrigible, and so incurable, without hope of
amendment etc. And thus have the Friars chanted their Mattins at Rome.

P. Harris the defendant of his innocence, in the mean time lies at anchor in
the Port of Dublin, little knowing how the winds blow abroad, till upon these
suggestions, there comes from the City, not a Commission to any particular
Bishops, or other Prelates, to examine his cause, or to hear what the Archb.
can allege against him, or he make answer thereunto, but the perclose of all
judicial proceedings, namely Sentence, and that is thought fit to be of Exile
out of the Diocese wherein he lives, and that sentence commanded unto the B.
of Mead to pronounce.

But now hear (good Reader) what Paul Harris says unto this information.
Albeit nothing more, or other can he say, then what he has delivered in his
former Books. Even the same which all the Clergy of Dublin do know at this
day to be true. That which so many of the Laity as take notice of our troubles,
do know to be true. That which the Friars themselves, the only causers and
procurers of all these intestine broils twixt the Clergy and the Regulars,
best of all know to be true: Namely, that this information made by the Archb.
and his Friars, unto the Cardinals at Rome, is most false, most unconscionable
and wicked, that it is a mere Chimera, and an En^rationis, without any
existent foundation. And to the end that the world may again and again
understand in all places, that which in these parts is most palpable. I could
wish, not the shell of a Triton, but the trumpet of an Arch-angell to sound it
thorough sea and land, that all the inhabitants of the Earth, and not only of
Rome, may hear it, and take knowledge of the injustice and falsehood of those,
who by their places and office in Gods Church, should be lights and lanthornes
unto others, to direct their paces into the ways of justice, peace, and truth.
For it is so far from any shadow of verity; That Paul Harris has been
disobedient unto his Superior the Archb. or that ever he denied upon any
summons, citation or message, to appear before him, or to answer any
accusation, or matter, little or great, laid unto his charge, that in all his
life he never received any message or citation at all from his Ordinary which
he has not obeyed. And this to be true, the Archb. in his own conscience
knows, and none better then himself understands the innocence of P. H. in
that behalf. But in case it be otherwise, since it is a matter of fact, why
has not the Archb. (in all this time since Harris wrote his two Books,) for
his own credit and reputation, and to the greater affront of P. H. declared
here at home unto some sufficient and understanding men either of the Clergy,
or Laity, the falsity of this his so bold assertion, naming the parties by whom
he sent his citations, or his messages, to what place he called him unto his
answer? The time when, the day, the month, or the year, that so P. H. being
challenged of so notorious an untruth in his writings, might be disrespected
accordingly? Doubtless such an advantage would not have been let pass, had P.
H. been guilty of any such disobedience unto his Ordinary: Since it is well
understood, that the Archb. is not so tender of that man's credit and
reputation. And such have been the accusations and informations of the
Ordinary and his Friars, against P. H. at Rome, himself never being called to
his answer either here or there.

CAP. IV. Paul Harris not admitted to any hearing of his Diocesan, was forced
to seek for Justice at the hands of the Civil Magistrate.
IT is the office of a Prelat, not only to feed, but to govern his flock. As
the shepherd does not only lead his sheep to wholesome pastures, but protects
them from the jaws of all ravenous beasts, and such of their fellows as would
be hurtful unto them. This our Savior teaches, setting down the parts of a
good Shepherd, Ioh. 10. from whose office, among all other professions in the
world, it pleased him to transfer that name unto the Governors of his
Church, tearming both himself, and them, Sheepheards, or Pastors, saying; Ego
sum pastor bonus etc.

Now Tho. Flemming a Pastor, having P. H. a member of his flock, whose cure
and charge belonged unto him, and being wronged by some of them, who were also
under his charge, and complaining of his aggrievances unto his Pastor, could
not be admitted unto his presence, sending them by the hands of others, he
spedd no better. And this P. H. does aver to be true, not by his own
testimony, (which in his own cause is worth nothing) but by the attestation of
most grave and Rev.persons yet living, who have firmed the same with their own
hands, and are ready to justify it before any Tribunal. Read then as
follows.

We whose names are here subscribed, do witness; That in our presence Tho.
Flemming Archb. of Dublin, did renounce all correspondency, either by word, or
writing, with Paul Harris Priest, telling us plainly, that thence forward he
never would receive either Letter or Petition from him, or would meddle in any
matter of his, for him, or against him; but wholly disclaimed all jurisdiction,
or power over him, wishing us to signify so much unto the aforesaid Paul
Harris, which accordingly we did,

May 24. 1631. Peter Caddell Pr. William Shergold Pr.


Thus P. H. being excluded from all audience and correspondencie with his
Pastor, he addressed himself unto the Temporal Magistrate, yet neither in
Ecclesiastical or Criminal cause, but merely Civil, such as was the
detayning of some Books from him by a Priest, and a Friar, and the same most
injustly, as it appeared upon the hearing before the now Lo. Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, for by his order they were restored him. After this again, P.
H. understanding of some slanderous informations, made by Friars, and others
against him, unto the Ordinary and weening that after so long a space he had
been come unto a better mind, he solicited him again for an audience, but
being repulsed as before, he sent him this message; as follows.

THis 15. day of May 1633,
We whose names are here subscribed, do witness; That being requested to
deliver a message unto the R. R. Tho. Flemming Archb. of Dublin, we
accordingly the year and day above written, delivered the same: The which was
this. That whereas diverse slanders and accusations are intimated unto your Ho.
against the aforesaid Paul Harris Pr. and presented unto you his Pastor, as
also published abroad by diverse Friars, and others, to the prejudice of the
good name and fame of the aforesaid Marris: his request unto you the Lo. Archb.
by us, is; that you would be pleased according unto the Laws and Canons of
holy Church to judge him, first admitting him unto audience, and to his just
defense.

The Lo. Archb. answer unto us, was: That in case Paul Harris would admit and
receive an absolution for the Excom. that he had notoriously incurred, he
would; otherwise not.

James Talbot Pr. William Shergold Pr.


Thus Reader thou see, That two years after the former denial P. H. is
again debarred of audience by the Archb. or else to be admitted upon such
terms, as to acknowledge an Excom. Of which Excom. for that himself has
written very largely in two former Books, he will be here more brief. The
Excom. pretended against him, is; That he commenced a suit) as has been
formerly said) before a Temporal Magistrate against a Priest and a Friar, for
detaining of certain Books from him. For our Archb. and his Friars are of
opinion, that no Ecclesiastical persons, ought to be brought before a
Temporal Magistrate, for what cause soever; and that the party so conventing
them, incurres Excom. De Iure.

To which P. H. answers; That no such Canon was ever received, or practiced in
these Kingdoms, as he has largely declared in his former Books, and that he
preferres the judgment of all antiquity under his Majesty, and his
Predecessors, before the opinion of Tho. Flemming and all his followers. Since
those who are learned in the Laws, as well Canon, and Civil, as Common, do
with one voice agree, and have assured him: That in all causes and actions,
merely Civil, of which nature this was, against the Priest and the Carmelite
Friar, that as well Bishops, as Priests, Abbots, and Priors, did sue, and were
sued in the Kings Courts, and none other. If then all Bishops and Priests,
Abbots and Friars, who have consented and allowed of this practice, for these
thousand years and upward, did maintain an error, I think P. H. had better
venture upon that error, then upon the skill of a Prelat who never yet studied
out of his own Friary, or took degree in any University. But this Physician
who is so liberal of his plasters, offering his absolutions, before the
Penitents ask them: Since he can not cure himself, let him seek a remedy in
time for his own sores, not being ignorant that himself is notoriously
excommunicated ab homine, and by authority of this present Pope Vrbanus 8. in
the controversy twixt Patrick Cahil, and Patrick Brangan, from which (to the
great scandal of Gods Church) we never heard that yet he received an
absolution. And I pray God, that not guilty of schism, and heresy, he stands
not also excommunicate De Iure.

But now ex abundanti: Let it be supposed, (for granted it will never be) that
to draw Ecclesiastical persons before Secular Tribunalls, in all causes as
well Civil as Ecclesiastical and Criminal, is unlawful, and that the Canons
inhibite the same under Excom. Suppose also, that this Law be received, and in
all times has been in viridi observantia, practiced in these Kingdoms. I say
all this being granted as most true and undoubted, P. H. is as clear from all
spot of Excom. as the sunbeams, or the water in the fountain. As how?
Forsooth upon this ground; That before he convented those Ecclesiastical men,
to wit, the Priest and the Friar above mentioned, he was denied all audience
and correspondencie with his Prelate the Archb. either by word or writing, as
before has been declared and testified. In which case it is lawful, not
only for a Priest, but for a Layman to seek for Justice at the hands of the
Temporal Magistrate, against a Cleargy-man, and to convent him before a
Secular Tribunal: I say, in case his Prelate refuse to hear him, or to admit
his complaint, or to do him justice, Read for this De Iudiciis tit. 1. cap.
7. Qualiter and Quando, together with the Gloss, and you will find these words:
Quod in defectum justitiae, Clerici ad judicium seculare trahi possunt: So
Aaor. c. 14. q. 2. Farinas. q 8. De Inquisit-Ambrosinus cap 18 n. 39. Molina de
Just. tract. 2, disput. 31. conclus 4. Salas de leg. disp. 14. sect. 9. n. 111.
with many others.
That for want of Justice, Clergymen may be drawn to Secular Tribunalls.
Casus; Titius a Priest is indebted one hundred Crowns to Sempronius Priest, or
Layman, the debt cannot be denied, the day of payment is expired: but Titius
will not perform. Sempronius is of our Friars opinion, that it ought to be
tried and recovered before the Ordinary; but the Ordinary will not hear him,
or receive his libell. Where shall Sempronius sue his Bond against Titius? At
Rome? But that has not been seen or heard of, since the Capitol was built.
Ergo, he must either loose his debt, or take the benefit of the Canon. In
defectum justitiae, Clerici ad seculare judicium trahi possunt, as before. And
S. Athanasius: doubted not long before the Canon was thought of, to convert the
Arian Heretics his false accusers of foul crimes before Constantius the
Emperor. Athan. in Apolog. ad Constant. And before him S. Paul, Act. 25.
appealed in the Controversies he had with his own Nation the Jews, unto
Caesar. Appello Casarem. But if you answer, that in the aforesaid cases, there
was no spiritual superior Prelat or Bishop to hear, or to determine their
causes. I then reply: And what distinction make you twixt a Prelat that will
not hear a Priests cause, and no Prelat at all Verily none. And this was, and
still is the case of P. H. who before his Ordinary never yet could be admitted
either plaintiff or defendant. Wherefore I conclude, that in conventing his
Adversaryes, though Priests, before the Temporal Magistrate in Civil causes,
he did not incur any censure of Excom. being warranted by the Canon above
alleged; In defectum justitiae, Clerici ad seculare tribunal trahi possunt:
For want of Justice, Cleargy-men may be convented before the Secular Judgment.
Unless we will maintain the Archb. Tho. Flemming to be above the Canon,
which is not only absurd, but heretical.

And let my Reader (whether Friend or Adversary) observe, that neither Brangan,
or Doyle, can be excused from Excom. De Iure, in the conventing of P. H. before
the Temporal Magistrate, he never having to this day declined the
jurisdiction, or forum of the Ordinary. So as the Canon De Iudiciis, Qualiter
and Quando, which has excused P. H. for drawing them before Secular Judgments,
namely In defectum justitiae, can no sort militat in their behalf, who have
suffered no defect of Justice from their Ordinary. In fine then, they remain
absolutely excommunicated, together with their Master, and may say; Iam sumus
ergo pares.

CAP. V. Of the want of judgment and discretion in the Bishop and Friars, the
persecutors of Paul Harris.
IS it possible, that man a reasonable creature, and made unto the Image of
GOD, should have his reason so overruled with passion, and his judgment so
overmastered with malice, as they should be powerful, not only to obscure,
but in a sort to extinguish the light thereof? For not to speak of conscience,
and common honesty, which as in every Christian ought chiefly to prevail, so,
especially in Churchmen, who are to be guides, and leaders of others unto
their salvation. How is it possible, that wit, capacity, or common sense,
should not avert these men from such violent and out-ragious courses against P.
Harris?

Is it because that glorious Greatness who sits at the Helm of Government is
pleased most graciously to grant unto us some more favorable respect then in
times past using us (not with standing what difference soever with others in
points of doctrine) with all indiffe^recie in the Politic government: As if
he should say, Tros Tyriusque mini nullo diserimine habetur.
Papists and Protestants are one to me,
Who in subjects ducties so well agree.
Such is the influence of that blessed aspect in our dread and no less beloved
Sovereign, with that gracious and propitious Star, to their perpetual
glory, and our unspeakable comfort. O then! what pity is it? That golden
Peace, and gowned Rest, should be the parents of so foul an offspring, as is
discord and dissension.

Is it? That we have already surfetted of Ease, and in so short a time become
weary of so long-expected a welfare, that now (the rod and rigor of State
being removed) we should embolden our selves upon domestical broils.

Is it? For that a way is given, nor only to the freedom of our Consciences,
but even to the moderate and discreet exercise of our spiritual Functions, as
well Episcopal, as Priestly, that we should contend also for Secular power and
preheminencie, to the encroaching upon our Caesar's jurisdiction?

Is this the gratitude, and thankfulness we owe and show, for these our,
Halcyon days in which no storm is either for the present felt or for the
furure feared: If our own ungraciousinesse, and intemperate ambition do not
abbreviat and shorten the same.

Verily, if our Friars had but read their Esops fables, they might have better
understood themselves. The sluggard is sent, to school unto the pismire with a
vade ad formicam tiger, pro. 4. Go to the pismire O sluggard, and may not the
Friar be sent unto his fables of Esop, with a vade ad Esopum stulte? Get thee
to thy Esops fables, O fool; and from the example of the Frog and the Mouse,
learn wisdom: For there thou may observe, how the Frog assaulting the
Mouse, and the Mouse defending himself: In the heat of that fierce combat,
when neither of them had leisure to look about them, down comes the Hawke
suddenly from the stand, and at one stoop, seasing upon them both, ended their
quarrel.

Alas! have these men so soon forgotten S. Stevens day? when for the
non-observance of some points of a Proclamation, all our Houses and Oratoryes
were in one hour seized unto the Kings use. May not our Franciscans remember,
that the first blast and brunt of that tempest, discharged it self upon their
own Cells and Oratoryes? For as we read, that some Cities have been rased,
and sowed with salt; others, their walls dismantled: So was that their Convent
in Cooke-street defaced, having their roof and timber-work pulled down and
levelled with the ground. A sad spectacle and exemplar; for whose offense, and
the rude uproare of that day, others (no doubt) were the less spared.

Alas! has malice against one man so blinded their judgments, and so perverted
their wills? that sooner then they will cease to wage an unplacable war with
one Priest, they will not only hazard their own peace and quiet, but even of
the Church in these parts. Know they not how soon, and how suddenly the Royal
Falcon, (if he will daigne to so low a stoop) can end the battle betwixt the
Frog and the Mouse, to the ruin of both? Do they not yet understand, that two
scratches of a goose's quill, can banish both Bishop, Priest, and Friar, and
that not only from their several Dioceses, Parishes, and Convents, but even
out of his Majesty's Dominions? At what time as well friend as foe, beholding
(for our demerits) such calamities to befall us, shall point us out with the
singer of Gens absque consilio, and absque prudentia etc. Lo, a people without
wit and understanding. Had P. H. apostated from his faith, or had he turned a
Jew, or a Turk, then had his persecution from these men wholly calmed. Nay,
many doubt not to say, that our Regulars would have much rejoiced, and gloryed
therein. But now that (through Gods mercy) he preserves himself, and
endeavors to keep those also in the Catholic faith, who begin to swarve
therefrom; therefore is he made (if not the only butt, yet) the principal
mark against whom they shoot their poisoned darts. But P. H. may comfort
himself in this: That Regium est been facere, and male audire; It is one of to
do well, and to be evil spoken of. And it is one of the eight Beatitudes
pronounced by our Saviors own mouth, Math. 5. Beati estis cum maledixerint
vobis, and persecuti vos fuerint etc.

CAP. VI. P. H. is in hope, that the Archb. and his Friars, looking back into
themselves, will in time be reclaymed, and become his friends.
WE have in our English Proverb; that, They go very far who never return.
And Seneca out of the Poet Menander tells us; That friendships should indeed be
eternal; but enmityes mortal and determinable.

Immortales inimicitias ne retine, mortalis existens. but nothing ought to be
more effectual with Christians to this purpose, then the doctrine of our
Savior, which teaches, that the mark by which his Disciples are known and
distinguished from others, is Charity among themselves, John 13. By this shall
all men know that you are my Discipl^^, if you love one another. And the
beloved Disciple, speaking of the contrary vice, 1. John. 3. Omnis qui odit
fratrem suum, homicida est, etc. Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer.
And why should I not hope, that these men may not only come unto their wits
again, but also to their wills, rectified and reformed, and as newborn
Babes, abandoning all malice, deceit, simulation, envy, and detraction, grow up
unto salvation? I say, why should I not hope these things of them? For I
understand, that some of them already do day lie pray for me. And I doubt not
but their prayers are, That God will give me patience to endure all injuryes
wrongs, and persecutions at their hands; and above all, to deliver me from
their bad tongues: And I thank God, in this Christian duty, I am not behind,
for I also pray for them, Inter schismaticos and hareticos, till such time as
God shall be pleased to give them grace to recall their doctrines of Habits and
Scapulars, and cease to commend unto us the Luissian Fast. But howsoever they
should (as God forbid) persevere still mine enemies and persecutors, yet am I
also bound by the precept of Christ, both to love mine enemies, and to pray for
my persecutors. Notwithstanding I may in the mean time endeavor to defend my
self, and to seek justice against them, since the Prophet David has taught
me; that Charity and Justice are compatible, and that Peace and Justice way
kiss each other.

And as touching this union of Charity and Justice: It is not from the purpose
to recount an accident which happened in Sivill of Spain, in the time that my
self lived there. A certain Judge of a Court, called in their language an
Oydor, riding somewhat late in the evening, was by his enemy who sought his
life, assaulted in the street, and by whom he was mortally wounded, yet so as
he lived in perfect sense and memory some few days after. The Murderer in the
mean time was apprehended, and being brought unto the party, he humbly upon
his knees confessing his most wicked attempt, besought him with many tears to
forgive him. To whom says the wounded Judge, being at hand to yield up the
Ghost: Yes brother, from the Tyles of the House upward, I freely forgive thee;
but from the Tyles downward, I desire Justice may be done upon thee. And in
the same mind that he was dying, am I now living; From the Thatch of the
House upward, I freely forgive all my adversaryes, persecutors, and enemies:
That is, I desire all heavenly graces and good gifts from the Father of Lights
to descend down upon them, and after this life, the salvation of their souls
in Heaven: Moreover I desire that the good Angels of GOD may keep them in all
their ways, and protect them from all harm in body, goods, and good name.
Notwithstanding from the Thatch downward, I will not desist to call and cry
for Justice, and satisfaction against them, so long as I amable either to
write, or speak; which satisfaction and reparation of wrongs, as in part I
have already by the Judgment of the Civil Magistrate, received against some,
(for which I shall ever remain most thankful,) So am I in hope, the like
Justice remains for the rest; which with patience I will expect. For the
former, read as follows.

Rev. Father Paul Harris,
Whereas Fa. Thomas Dowd, and Fa. Richard Fortrell Priests, chosen orderers
between us two, made an order against me, for the repayring of your good name,
and that I always refused, and neglected to perform the said order, until
such time as the R. Ho. the Lord Deputy General commanded me thereunto. Now
then I being no less willing to show mine humble obedience to his Honor, then
also sorry to have detracted of your fame: I do by these presents most
willingly and submissively, ask forgiveness of your Rev. Fa. Paul Harris,
this being a point of the Order, for all such abuses, obloquyes, detractions,
as I have done against you, either by words, or writings, or otherwise. And I
do hereby (acknowledging my fault) earnestly pray you in Christian charity, to
accept of this mine humble submission, tending to the restitution of your good
name. And withal, I do hereby sincerely promise, never hereafter to speak in
any sort which may directly, or indirectly, tend to the obscuring of your good
name.

Witness my hand this 23. of Feb. 1633. Edmund Doyle. Being present John
Fitton. Stephen Iellous. Robert Nugent. William Hechins.


How truly is it said? Quae nocent, docent, Those things that do hurt us, do
instruct us. And the Prophet Esaias 28. Vexatio dabit intellectum, Tribulation
will give understanding. And day lie experience shows, that to those duties
whom prosperity can not draw, affliction drives, even as froward children are
forced to kiss the rod and hand that whipped them. It is observed, that some
sort of Birds do sing more sweetly imprisoned in a Cage, then either in the
fields, or woods abroad. Howsoever it fares with Birds, I am assured, these
notes and palinodious dittyes had never been sung, but in a Cage; but now the
author of this submission being at liberty, for all his Castle-promises, redijt
ad ingenium or rather ad vomitum, has returned to his old disposition, or
rather to his vomit. Otherwise had he persisted in the accomplishment of what
he solemnly promised, his submission at this time had neither been pressed on
published.

CAP. VII. Of the conveyance of these Letters from Rome, into Ireland, and by
what means they came unto the hands of the Archb. Flemming.
BEing lately in the Country, it was my chance in some communication with one
of my acquaintance, to ask of him, if he knew, or could guess, how the
Cardinals Letters were passed into Ireland, and came to the hands of
Dublinensis, whether by the post of Paris, or Antwerp, etc. He answered very
pleasantly, he could soon resolve me in that point, and that they neither
came by the way of Paris or Antwerp, but by the way of Loretto. Your reason
quoth I. Why? quoth he, wot you not that there passed from Ireland certain
Pilgrims for Loretto the last year, and so from Loretto, to Rome, and returned
back this last Spring? Now, before they returned home from their pilgrimage,
there was not a word spoken of these Letters; but since their arrival, all the
Country has sounded of them. This discourse of my friend, made me remember a
passage which I read some 50. years ago, in a Sermon of Hugh Latimer, which
as then, so I now relate, to parallel his conceit.

It happened in the days of Henry 8. that many ships being cast away upon the
coast of Kent, especially in that place which to this day is called Goodwins
sands. The Council thought good to grant a Commission to examine such as were of
the most ancient inhabitants of those parts, if there could be any cause found
thereof, who being called to Dover, were required to say their opinions in that
case, what they thought might be the occasion of those dangerous seas and
sands, now infamous for shipwracks, which informer times had no such note of
danger. Among the examined, one old man stood up and told the Commissioners,
that for his part, he wist well what was the cause of those troublesome sands,
which swallowed up so many ships, and by my hood (says he) it is no other then
Tenderton steeple. I say (quoth he) and will abide by it, that Tenderton
steeple is the cause of Goodwin sands. For I can well remember the building of
Tenderton steeple, and before it was built, there was no Goodwin sands, but
soon after the building of that steeple I could hear the seafaring men in the
Churchyard after Even-song, and in the Alehouse, complain much of those
sands, and they would tell, how such a ship, such a Barque or Pinnace was there
sunk etc. Well, well, quoth my friend (interrupting me) it is enough, you have
very strongly confirmed my opinion of the Letters; but what matter is it
whether the Pilgrims are the cause of Goodwins sands, or Tenderton steeple
brought the Letters from Rome, let those who^ the matter concerns more then
you and me, look to it. For since they have the thread by the end, they know
how to wind it up. But since by this occasion we are fallen into mention of
the Pilgrimage of Loretto, I pray you resolve what opinion you hold of that
strange House of our Ladies, of which there runs so great a fame, as it
draws us out of Ireland from our Houses, Wives and Children, to the great
danger of our persons, and expense of our purses, unless for such as make a
bon voyage of it, and receive fifteen for five at their return home. And as
for the miracles, we hear very much with our cares, but we see little with
our eyes; neither the blind or deaf to return welsensed: as for the halt and
the lame, I less marvel, for few of them can reach so far. Nay bir lady, I
have known some to carry hence a pair of good legs with them, and scarce have
brought them so sound back again. Besides they tell us, that House did use to
fly in the air, by sea and land, above a thousand leagues: now it is strange
to us, that a House that has no legs to go upon, should have wings to fly
withal. Of these and other matters no less wonderful, I pray you show us the
truth, and how far they may be believed; for I confess, God's above all
etc. And I think by this time there was as many gathered about to listen to
our talk, as were assembled in Queen Dido's Hall, to hear Aeneas discourse
of the Trojan war.

Well then (quoth I) if so great a longing you have to hear the history of the
Lauretan House, and the stupendous wonders of that holy place. Albeit the
lights upon yonder cup-bord are now spent far below their wastes, and so
invite us rather to retire our selves unto our lodgings, then to begin any new
discourse: yet to satisfy your no less earnest, then harmless curiosity, I
will begin.

Know then, that I have not only read and heard of this House but I have seen
the same, and (which I more esteem) my self within it. And for the reasons
which shall after be alleged) I am persuaded this is the very same House in
which the blessed Virgin the Mother of GOD was borne, in which she received the
Angelical salutation, and in which the Savior of the World in his infancy
was nursed and bred. And albeit (I confess) that of some it is scarce
beleevod, how this House (now used as a Chapel) came to be transported from
Nazareth, so many, hundred leagues by scarce and land, Et per varios casus,
after so many remouealls, to be placed where now it stands in the Picene
Territory, near unto Ancona in Italy. The house of Loretto came into Italy,
1294. Blondus, 1389. lib. 1. de Italia illustrata reg. 5. wri^eth of it, and
Pet. Georgius, 1461. So also Hieron Anglitanus in the same age, Baptista
Mantuan. Erasm. in his Liturg. and in his Sermon thereof In our days Pet.
Canisius, Muretus. Turselinus.


First then for the Posse, those who believe the omnipotency of GOD, cannot
doubt of the possibility of the transportation of this House, no more then they
can of that history of the Prophet Habaccuck, who by the hair of the head was
carried by the Angel, from Indea into Babylon, to Daniel, to give him his
dinner in the Lions den, and from thence back again, Dan. 14. or of the
assumption of Elias in a fiery chariot into heaven. 2. Kings 2. Or of Philip,
who (from the Eunuch whom heliad baptized) was by the spirit placed in Azotus,
Act. 8. The difficulty then is, Defacto esse, whether indeed this
transportation of the Lauretan House is by the same faith to be believed, as
the former examples out of the Old and New Testament. I answer, No. Those by
divine faith excluding all uncertainty for the authority of the revealer, the
Holy Ghost this leaning upon humane testimony, has accordingly humane
credibility, not void of all uncertainty, yet not dangerous unto salvation, and
may be embraced without disparagement to any man's wisdom, were he equal
therein to Solon, or Salva^^on. For as we believe the City of Rome to have
been founded by Romalus, because some profane. Writers do so report: Why may
not so much credit given unto the Relatours and Legendars of that history
called Domus Lauretana, being Christians, and more pious Historians then the
former? It seems to me not much different from a miraculous preservation, that
M. Manlius, one man, in the night defended the Capitol from the Gauls, after
they had ascended the height thereof, expulsing and throwing them down
headlong, being destitute both of Weapon and Armor. Memorable is that also
and in my opinion not much short of a miracle: That Horatius Cocles, a valiant
Roman, and blind of one eye, by his alone prowess with-stood Porsenna King of
the Tuscans, and his whole Army, invading the City, and standing upon the
bridge, defended the passage, and made it good, one man against a multitude,
till such time as his Citizens (being at dinner, and not understanding of that
danger) coming to their doors and windows, and seeing in what estate matters
were, issued forth to his aid, and breaking down the bridge behind him, he
with no less admiration, threw himself into the river Tibris, and in his
Armor, swamme unto the City shore without any harm. What think you of the
two twins Romulus and Remus, immediately after their birth, thrown into the
river Tibris, at the command of Amulius, and being cast upon the shore, were
no less wonderously preserved by the kind fostership of a she Wolf, who
left her owue whelps to give them suck? What shall we say of Tarquinius
Priscus the fifth King of the Romans, who cut a whetstone in two parts with a
rasor? Servius Tull us seen many times with a flame of fire about his head,
licking his hair and temples. Can we believe all this, and many other things
no less strange, for the authority of one Livy, renowned in the Roman history?
And must whatsoever is related by so many pious Authors, and consented unto, by
the Suffrages (in a manner) of all Christians, as touching that sacred House of
Loretto, be thrown out of doors? To come to Ecclesiastical history, we read
that Gregory, B. of Neocesarea, called (for his great and many miracles)
Thaumaturgus, removed a Rock out of his place; and this is related by no meaner
an Author then the great S. Basil, a Primative Father, and an ancient Doctor of
Gods Church, who doubts not to compare the aforesaid Gregory, to Moses, the
Prophets and the Apostles. This S. Gregory lived in the year 233. after our
Savior, and S. Basil 370. both of them in the Primitive times of the Church.
We know who said unto his Disciples, if they had faith, as a grain of mustard
seed, they should say unto this mountain, remove hence, and it should obey,
Math. 17. And the like of the Mulberry tree. Luke 17.

Neither do I applaud that opinion, that maintains all miracles to have
ceased with the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior. For (methinkes) that
doctrine is not consonant to these Scriptures, Mar. 16. Signa autem cos qui
crediderint hac sequentur, etc. The signs that shall follow such as believe,
are these; In my Name shall they cast out devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, they shall take away serpents, and if they drink any thing that is
deadly, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands upon the sick, and they
shall be healed, etc. Of which miracles, albeit some of them were wrought by
the Apostles, and recorded in their Acts, yet why this Scripture may not extend
to the faithful in all ages, according to that order and distribution of
gifts, laid down by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12. I would willingly understand?
And some verily GOD has set in the Church: first Apostles, secondly Prophets,
thirdly Doctors, next miracles, then the graces of doing cures, helps,
governments, kinds of tongues. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all
Doctors? Are all Miracles? Have all the grace of doing cures? Do all speak
with tongues? Do all interpret? This text then that proves unto us, that in
the Church are placed Doctors, helps, and governments, tells us also, that in
the same, GOD has set miracles, and graces of healing; neither was the Church
which our blessed Savior purchased with his own Blood, and the Holy Ghost,
enriched with those divine graces, to endure only for the time of the Apostles,
and the 42. Disciples, but even unto his second coming, and yielding up his
government into the hands of his Father. By the same reason then that they
exclude miracles, they must also exile Doctors, helps, and governments out of
the Church, all concluded by the Apostle in one catalogue, and these later
confirmed to be perpetual in the Church. Ephesians. the 4. and consequently the
former. Again, our Savior says, John 14.12. Amen, amen I say unto you, he
that believes in me, the works that I do, he also shall do, and greater
works then these shall be do. But we find not this Scripture fulfilled in
any of the Apostles, or of his Disciples, or in all of them put together, whose
miracles (so far forth as we read of them in holy Writ) did neither in
number or excellency, equal our Saviors miracles, and much less exceed
them. Who then be they that shall do greater works then our Savior did? but
the faithful who were to succeed in the future ages of the Church? of which
times now to descend to speak, me thinks it would argue either too much
simplicity, or singularity, to discredit all those miracles, ascribed as well
to the Saints departed this life, and their Relics, as to the living; by
those Fathers and Doctors of Gods Church, who for their antiquity, sanctity,
and learning, all ages have, and ever shall admire.

S. John Chrysostom, in a whole Book against the Pagans, proves that Christ
was God, because he wrought miracles, not only by S. Peter's shadow, and S.
Paul his hand-kerchiefe, but also by the relics and monuments of Saints, and
namely by the ashes of S. Babilas. As Almighty GOD by the bones of the Prophet
Elizeus gave life unto a dead corpse, so soon as it touched them, 4. Reg. 13.
See for this S. Chrysostom. lib. de Babilamar. tom. 5.

Eusebius. B. of Caesarca, who flourished in the year 326. reports in his
Ecclesiastical History, That the woman who was cured by our Savior of a Flux
of Blood, Mat. 9. having the Image of our Savior made of brass, and placed
before her door, there did grow up a certain strange herb at the foot of
the Image, which so soon as in growth it came to touch the hemme of our
Saviors garment in that Statua, it became medicinable to the curing of all
infirmityes, but being taken before it sprung up to that height, it had no
virtue at all. And the same Author tells us, that this same brazen Image of our
Savior continued till his time, and that he saw it with his own eyes. Eusebius.
eccles. histor. lib. 7. cap. 14.

What shall we say unto the miracles wrought by S. Paul. the first Hermit, and
by Hilarion, recorded by S. Hierom? The miracles of many Saints, wrought at
their tombs and monuments, testified by S. Augustine in his Books De civitate
Dei? The miracles of S. Martin, written by Severus Sulpitius. The innumerable
miracles of the holy Ermites, living in the deserts of Lybia, recounted by
Theoderet in his religious history? The miracles approved by S Gregory the
Great in his Dialogues? The miracles reported by S. Bid in his Ecclesiastical
History and lives of Saints? with infinite others, recorded by Ecclesiastical
Writers of later times: must all these be ranked with the Legends of Amadis de
Gaul, of Huyon of Bordeaux, of Primaleon of Greece, or the Knight of the Sun?
O no: neither judgment, nor piety can allow of it.

But to draw to a conclusion, That it may appear unto our senses, that
miracles are not ceased, but continued among us even till these times: And that
Almighty GOD has not so restrained his power to the Ordinary course of
secondary causes, as that sometimes, and so often as he is pleased, he
transcendeth not all the works of Nature, showing such wonders among us, as
that the most refractary cannot but say with the unbeleeving Jews, Act. 4.16.
Ecce manifestum signum factum est, and non possumus negare: Behold, a manifest
miracle is wrought among us, and we cannot deny it. I will then only insist in
that kind of miracle which is called: Gratia sanitatu^, the gift of healing
diseases, inserted in the List of miracles, both by our Savior, Mar. 16. and
by the Apostle 1. Cor. 12. which gift ab effectis, is apparent to have been
conferred from above, unto two Christian Princes, as it were by an hereditary
descent from immemorable times, namely, the King of England, and the French
King, who only by the touch of their hands. (calling upon Almighty GOD) doc
cure that diseafe which in Greek is called (...), in Latin struma, and in our
English tongue scarce known by any other name then the Kings evil, soyclepped
from the Crowned Curers. Neither is this infirmity helped by any other Prince,
or Potentate upon Earth, but by those two sacred and anointed Kings, neither
have they the gift of helping any other disease or infirmity in man's body, this
only excepted. By what then has been said, as touching the authentication of
miracles, as well in modern, as ancient times, I see not but according to the
weight and worth of the reporters, they may receive admittance: It being no
less a fault of indiscretion to believe nothing, as to believe every thing in
that kind published.

And now in the last place, it remains to answer unto my friends objection,
made in the beginning of this Chap. That (forsooth) many infirm and diseased
persons return from Rome and Loretto, and other holy places, with as little
health as they passed hence; which difficulty shall be the better resolved, if
we consider the variety of Pilgrims, and digest them into their several
ranks: Since among those that pass into foreign Countries, you have in a
manner as many ends and purposes, as persons.

For first we have the Curious Pilgrim, whom commonly we call the Traveller,
either some young Gallant in his minority, or lately wived, or who either upon
some discontent leaving their home, and friends, make the scope and end of
their peregrination (according to the best interpretation) to furnish
themselves with knowledge and experience, observing the various manners of Men
and Cittyes, and not always in motion, but sometimes at anchor in some famous
University, to hear a Pythagoras, a Plato, or an Aristotle. Who (to observe
that short precept of Tully) it shall never repent the^ at their coming home.
Peregrini, and incolae officium est, nihil praeter negotium suum agere.
Officer. It becomes a Pilgrim, and an Inmaco, to meddle with nothing but his
own affairs. Neither would I wish this our curious Pilgrim to be too long
absent from home, lest he taste of such discommodities as Ulysses did, at his
return to Ithaca.

Our second Pilgrim is the Covetous Pilgrim, a venturer, though no merchant,
who designs his voyage to some one set place, admitting a probability of
danger, either in respect of the Country so remote, or of the indisposition of
his body, for age, or infirmity, in regard whereof, he covenants before he
departs from his own smoke, to multiply the greater, by the lesser number,
according to the exposing of his Dollors, Dublons, Rings, Chains, Jewels,
Horses, Coaches, and what not: That at his return (if ever) he may say. -- I
am mihi quarto: I am decies redit in rugam. Pers. Sat. 6. his Creditors at home
(in the mean time) cursing those legs that shall ever bring him back.

Our third Pilgrim, is the Counterfeit Pilgrim, who under pretense of devotion,
visiting the most memorable Pilgrimages of Christendom, he walks by
Cathedral Churches, Abbayes, and Hospitalls, not disdayning also (Si spes
refulserit nummi) to visit places of inferior note. To which purpose, as the
prologue to his intended and pretended Pilgrimage, he puts himself into a
Pilgrims Habit, which is a gray Frise coat, side to the mid-legg, well girt
unto him, a stiff felt of a course hat of the same color, a strong ashen
staff in his hand about his own pitch, with two bigg knots toward the upper
end. His knapsack, and his Calavas, accommodated under his left arm, with the
provision in them of an Noah's Arc. And to the end it may appear, that he
beggs not of any necessity, but only like a young Jesuit for mortification,
his holland-shirt hangs half a foot out of his sleeve at the hand, and below
his Frise Habit, you shall discover a fair silk stocking upon his leg, for
by that slight he shall be held by strangers, a man of note and fashion in his
Country, and that thorough extremity of piety, he travells so disguised, to
give satisfaction unto his supposed most sincere devotion, either voluntarily
undertaken, or enjoined for penance. And whereas the needy beggar, vested as
well inside, as outside, with pure unfayned poverty, shall with much
importunity get a penny, this Counterfeit will purchase a pound, and after a
few months, returns home, like a Spanish Gallion from the West Indyes.

Our fourth Pilgrim, who from his motion may be termed the Rolling Pilgrim,
being very penurious, makes a virtue of necessity, no less mindful of his
wallet then of his devotion, eating the sins of the people by whom he
passes, whose travells commonly do end either with his health, or with his
life, imitating the motion of the heavenly bodies; for as they roll about the
circumference, so he about the center. Neither does it much import where he
begins, since he is not determined where to conclude and make an end.
Meeting him then upon the borders of France, coming from the never-wasting
taper of Arras, he tends for Amiens in Picardy, there to visit the head of S.
John Baptist. Thence he passes to S. Denis, where besides many other rare
Relics in rich enclosures, he does reverence the thorn of our Saviors
Crown. And so to Paris, prostrated at the shrine of S. Genovefa, neither
forgets he in his walk the rest of the nostre Dames of France: descending to
Marsells in Provence, he religiously adores the Relics of S. Lazarus, whom
our Savior John 11. raised to life: next he arrives at Baubne, where he
tenders his devotion at the body of the blessed Magdalen, who anointed our
Saviors head, and washed his feet with her tears: Then entering into Savoy,
and passing the Alpine rocks and mountains of snow, he descends into Piemont,
where he visits the Relics of S. Eusebius B. of Vercells. At Millan in
Lombardy, he visits the monument of S. Ambrose; as also of S. Carolus
Borromeus, both Bish. of that place: thence to Padua, to honor the Relics of
S. Antony. From thence he speeds himself to the holy Chamber of Loretto, made
glorious by the presence of our Savior in his Childhood, his Mother, and S.
Joseph.

Quam virgo coluisse domum magis omnibus unam
Posthabita fertur Galilea. Hic illius Icon
Hic stabilis cultus. Locus hic quem tempus in omne
Esse suum voluit, quem nunc habitatque, fovetque.
Where after the tribute of his devotion paid, (if his poverty, and no better
and outside, be not an impediment) he shall be admitted into the Sacristia, to
behold not only the sumptuous ornaments of the Church, but the rich offerings
of Emperors, Kings and Princes, of Queens, Nobles, and Ladies, of greater
value then all the land and fertile soil he can behold from the hill of Tarro,
where I advise him to look to his conscience in the matter of the tenth
Commandment. And now taking his leave of Loretto, I wot well he hastens to
Rome, the Queen of Cities, sometimes Empress of the Earth, where he presents
himself Ad limina Apostolorum, before the Altar of the two Apostles S. Peter
and S. Paul, he visits the seven Churches, he makes the holy stairs, (being
charitably entertained for three days diet, and lodging, in the Hospital of
the holy Trinity) It may be also his good hap to be admitted ad Mensam Papalem,
to dine in his Hol. presence, being the daily ordinary of twelve poor
Pilgrims, but let him not expect to be admitted to that Table the second time.
And now enriched with Beads, Graynes, and Meddalls, and happily with some
Relics of the eleven thousand Virgins, or of the martyred Legions in the
days of Dioclesian preserved at the trefontani, a mile from Rome (of which
there be great store, and so the less esteemed) he bids Rome farewell, with a
Non habemus hic civitatem permanentem, and setting his Palmers staff upon one
end, he is indifferent which way it falls, but resolved that way to wend; If
toward the South, he holds his course for Naples, not staying at all for the
Convoy, knowing that the empty purse, fears not the thief, inviting in his
way the Hospitalls to supper and lodging; arriving at that noble City
(mindful of his vocation) first, with devout pases, he sets forward to the
monument of S. Ianuarius, where with much admiration he beholdes the martyrs
blood in a Vial, so often bubbling, and boiling, as his head is brought in
presence of it: Having complied with his devotions at the rest of the Churches
and Chapels, and collected the charitable alms of the City, he cuts over
some two days sail, to Ligorne in Tus^^ane, and so betakes himself to Luca,
to the miraculous Crucifixe: thence by sea or land to Pavia in Lombardy, where
he humbly loutes at the tomb of the great S. Augustine, in a Church, common
both to the Ermites and Canon Regulars of his Order. And so our Palmer bids
sweet Italy adieu, the garden of the World, and a terrestrial Paradise:
Importuning his charitable passage from Genoa in a Galley bound for Barcelona,
whore coming a shore, after one days journey, he tastes the entertainment of
our blessed Lady of Monteserrate, who has a Diamond in her Crown, valued at
fourteen thousand Ducats, the most frequented Pilgrimage, not only of
Catalaunia, but of all Spain, admirable for the situation, a Monastery placed
in the top of a mountain, among the clouds, the passage thereunto cut out
with sawes, from whence it has the name of Monte-serrate: after this he
passes to Sarragosa, where he bids his Beads before Nuestra Sinnora de la
Pillar, our Lady of the Pillar (her Statua being advanced on the top of a high
small Pillar in the chief Church,) which done, he bends his course to our Lady
of Guadalupa; from thence to Sivill to Nuestra Sinnora de Antigua, with so many
silver lamps in silver chains depending, and ever burning. And so leaving
Andaluzia, he coasts over Siera Morena, to Burgos, to worship the sweating
Crucifix: and never rests till he arrive at the body of S. James at Compostella
in Gallicia a rich Monastery of the Benediotines; where refreshing himself
some few days, he betakes himself to his accustomed employments, and bidding
Spain a dios, he bends his course for France, passing the mount of S. Adrian,
among the Pyren hills, trusting to God, and to his good legs, to find
himself at Towers, against the Anniversary solemnity of S. Martin, sometimes
B. of that place, whose Feast falls upon the 11 of November.

And I pray God (quoth my friend interrupting me again) that your head grow
not addle, with so many windings, and turn abouts of your wandering Pilgrim;
but now having brought him to France where first you found him, I pray you bid
him farewell, and give him leave to roll where he list, for it seems, that it
is one of his vows, never to rest, so long as he can either go, or creep;
and (I trow) I have heard you sometimes to say, such Pilgrims were seldom
holy men, Qui multum peregrinantur, raro sanctifican^u^. Gerson de I^^^ as, Chr.
To whom (quoth I) If my discourse have proved long: It is your invitation at
the first, and heedfull attention, which have been the causes thereof. Nothing
more encouraging a man to draw out the thread of his speech to the full length,
then attentive Auditors, which I have found you hitherto to be. Having then
passed through so many Pilgrims: The Curious, the Covetous, the Counterfeit,
and the Wanderer, Give me leave to add to that number the fifth, which is the
Distressed Pilgrim, in speaking of whom, had you my friend not interrupted my
discourse happily by this time I had given you an account of what you desired
at my hands in the beginning, which (if I do not mistake) is this.

How comes it to pass (say you) That in those which you call holy places, and
have in so high an estimation, and glory so much of their miracles? That we
behold so great a number of Halt, Blind, Deaf, Dumb, lamed of their limbs,
diseased of their bodies, of Dropsies, Palsies, Consumptions, Convulsions,
Gouts, Sciaticks, Phrensies, Ielousies, Epilepsies, etc? so few to be cured, or
to return home sound of wind, and lim, and in perfect health? To which I
answer. It seems no more strange then that so many sitting at home, (where
they have almighty GOD still present with them) do not recover of the same
infirmities, For albeit we hear it said, Petite and dabitur vobis, quarite and
invenietis, pulsate and aperietur vobis. Luc. 11. Ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Yet S.
James says. Petitis and non accipitis, eo quod male petatis, Iac. 4. You ask
and you receive not, and the reason is added, because you ask amiss. Whether
then at home, or abroad, you ask amiss; that is, either things unlawful, or
in complacency of sin, or with an inordinat desire, as of health, or any other
temporal benefit, which happily denied, is better then obtained. This
inordinate desire, not conformable to the will of GOD, and repugnant unto our
souls health, may be a sufficient impediment of not receiving what is asked.
Our distressed Pilgrim repaires unto Loretto; he speeds not; he went blind,
he returns blind; he went crooked, he returns with the same Nemesis upon his
shoulders; he went hence with two good legs, he comes limping home; he
went with a Dropsy, he comes home with a Timpany; he went to be cured of his
frenzy, or his jealousy, and he returns madd. Was there then any
insufficiency of almighty GOD, to have supplied these defects, or to have
remedied these diseases at the memory of his Saints? O no. The Poet could say,
Pers. Sat. 2.

Poscis opem nervis, corpusque fidele senectae:
Esto, age: sed grandes patinae, tucetaque crassa
Annuere his superos vetuere, Iovemque morantur.
Thou asks sound lims and strength against old age,
But up-heapt plates, the long and fat sausage
Forbids the Gods; and Jove to grant suffrage.
It is said of our Savior, Mar. 6. That in his own Country of Nazareth, by
reason of their incredulity, Non poterat virtutem ullam facere, he could not
work any miracle, but only heal a few sick persons. Not that our Savior
being GOD, could not work miracles, but that on their part there wanted apt
dispositio^s and capacity unto them. Of which dispositio^s, Faith is the
principal? and note, that Non possum is often in the Scriptures put for Nolo,
I will not. So our Savior says in the Gospel: The children of the Kingdom
cannot fast while he be with them, non possunt jejunare, as much as to say,
nolunt jejunare, they will not fast. So when a man takes himself to be
wronged, he will commonly say, I can not put up this wrong at his hands: I can
not digest it: as much to say, I will not.

Again, we must not infer, that where dispositions requisite in the person
of the Patient are found, as a true faith, purity of heart, resignation to the
will of GOD, that there is always the benefit of cure in their corporal
infirmityes, because it is ever a ruled case: That our heavenly Father knows
what we have need of, and what is best for us: many more being driven by
adversity to seek out their salvation, then by prosperity: those who have but
one eye, one foot, one hand, entering into Heaven, when others who have two
eyes, feet, hands, are cast into hell fire. Mark. 9. And we know the Parable of
the Sun and the Wind. Albeit then we see twenty for one returning from such
places (where almighty GOD is pleased sometimes to work miracles, in honor of
those who on earth were his faithful and true servants, and now triumphant in
Heaven) laboring still of those maladies, for which they sought relief at the
memories of Saints, It would be great presumption and temerity in us, to
suspect, much more to judge, that they were not prepared for so great a
benefit. We know what Apology our Savior made in the case of the man blind
from his nativity. When as the Jews demanded of him, Quis peccavit, hic, aut
parents ejus, ut coecus naseeretur? John 9. Who was it that sinned, he, or his
parents, that he should be borne blind: The answer was, Neque hic peccavit,
neque parents ejus, etc. Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, but
that the works of GOD might be manifested in him. And by analogy the same may
be applied to our case.

Besides, it is not to be doubted of, but many infirm and diseased people
repair to such places, more for devotion and spiritual comfort, then for any
desire, or expectation of their bodily health. Non ut been sit pedi, aut
lateri, sed ut been sit anima: not so tender of the welfare of their
corruptible bodies, as of that immortal part, which is, and ought to be most
dear unto them. And so much (my friend) to answer your difficulty, why so
many return from pilgrimages without reparation of their health.

The last knot to be untyed in this Argument, (and rather insinuated by you,
then clearly propounded) is this. How is it to be believed say some? That so
many signs and works surpassing all power of Nature, which we call miracles,
should be wrought at the memory and monuments of Saints, rather then in other
places. The omnipotency of GOD (the Author both of Nature, Grace, and all
miraculous works) being one and the same in all places and times.

To as many as urge this reason, and think it worthy to be insisted upon. I
might say as our Savior said unto the Sadducees, Math. 23. Erratis nescientes
scripturas, and virtutem Dei: You err, not knowing the Scriptures, or the
power of GOD. Our blessed Savior tells us, Luke 4. Quod multa erans vidua,
etc. That there were many Widows in the days of Elias in Israel, when as the
Heavens were shut for 3. years and six months, in which time there was a
great famine thorough the whole earth, and unto none of those was Elias sent,
but in Sarepta of Sidonia, unto one Woman a Widow. And there were many Lepers
in Israel, in the days of Elizeus the Prophet, and none of them was cleansed,
but Naaman the Syrian. Now what was the cause why no other Widow was exempted
from that famine, but only the Widow of Sarepta? Because (notwithstanding the
presence of GOD in all places) there wanted also the presence of the Prophet
Elias. And why were not the rest of the Lopers clennsed, but only Naaman the
Syrian? wanted there the power of GOD, or due preparation in the Subject: Who
can say so? No, but the presence of the Prophet Elizeus. By which we see the
circumstance of personal presence, though not necessary unto the power, yet
many times required unto the will of the worker of signs and wonders. And
albeit our Savior in the Gospel, sometimes did cure the absent, to givers to
understand, that his power was not restrained to presence, yet commonly, and so
the most part, he cured none but the present: and so the people did
understand, both by laying his hands upon them in the Cure: As when by reason
of the press of people, they uncovered the roof of the house, Mar. 2. to let
down the Paralinique in his bed before him. So the Prophet Elias raised not
the Widows son to life, before him self came unto him. And our Savior went
unto the grave of Lazarus before he revived him. He took the Governors Daughter
by the hand, Math. 9. as also in Naum he touched the Coffin of the dead, before
he raised them to life.

And no less also do we behold a presence required even in those livelesse
instruments, which it pleases the divine Wisdom to use in this kind. So the
bones of the Prophet Elizeus, quickened the dead Corpse thrown into his grave,
by a Physical touch or contact. The waters of Jordan in like manner, the
leprosy. The Hemorissa (being so many years diseased) found no cure, till she
touched the hemme of our Saviors garment. The waters of the pond in
Jerusalem, John 5. did not heal before they were touched. S. Peter's shadow,
healed none but such as it passed over. And the Napkins and Handkerchiefes
which were sent from the Body of S. Paul, being applied, did not only cure
diseases, but cast out devils Acts 19. By which, and many other examples (which
for brevity I omit) it may appear, that either Presence, Application, or
Physical contact in most miracles, have been required as a condition to the
effecting of them. That we may the less marvel, if present at the Relics
and monuments of Saints, we receive those helps both spiritual and temporal,
which being absent, we might miss of.

And so I conclude this Chap. of Pilgrimages, my self unfit for those
ttavells, to which some against my will, most willingly would compel me. And
now our artificial stars being ready to set, and to descend below their
Horizons. It is time to end that discourse, to which your attention has thus
far drawn me. And so wishing all welfare and happiness to the whole
Company, I bid you all goodnight: resolving my self to sleep, till some
other occasion shall awake me.

FINIS.

