THE DESTRVCTION OF SODOM: A SERMON PREACHED at a public Fast, before the
honorable Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament, At St. MARGARETS Church
in Westminster. By JOHN HARRIS, Preacher there. Feb. 18. 1628.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. and R. Y. for G. Lathum, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bishops head.

THE DESTRVCTION Of SODOM.
GENESIS 19. 24. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire,
from the Lord out of Heaven.
ABout five hundred years after Christ, when the Romans vast Dominion began to
decline, there was great affliction and trouble thoroughout the world; plagues,
and famines, and wars, and earthquakes, and other evils, conspired together
to vex all places: so that the people of God, every where, both in the Greek
and Latin Churches, fearing their turn might be next to come under the
scourge, had forms of holy Prayers, composed by their Prelates, which the
Greek Church termed Basil. ep. 63. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 3.
Litanies, the Latin Rogations, to be spoken often into the ears of the Lord
of heaven and earth, to prevent imminent judgments; so godlily wise were the
Christians of old time, that those calamities, which they knew, being present,
all people would bewail with tears, being absent, they labored by their
prayers to keep away.

And if I take not my mark amiss, that is the intention of this meeting: Job
19. 12.
Gods troops of afflictions, as holy Job calls them, are abroad in the
Christian world, making havoc of men and countries; and we, conscious to our
selves, that our sins deserve to have them come, and to encampe about our
tabernacles, are met here together, to make prayers to our God, to keep them
away from us: and to set a greater edge upon our devotion, and the more to
testify our humiliation to the World, and to Angels; a Fast is proclaimed,
which is to be observed by us in a strict manner: all the time is to be spent
in confession of sins, in bitter lamentations, in deiection and humiliation
for transgressions, in abstinence from meats and drinks, and all other
corporal delights, that may cheer the heart, and so hinder it from being
truly sorrowful and afflicted, in alms deeds and visiting the sick, in
mourning and weeping for angring God, and in crying mightily unto the Lord,
Jonah 3. 8.
to divert judgments approaching.

And to help to these exercises of repentance, the Word of God must be
preached, the sins of a Nation must be ripped up, Gods judgments against
sin must be denounced, for nothing does further more to humiliation and
compunction, than a serious consideration, how infinitely iniquity does anger
God, and how severely he has, and does, and will punish it. It was the course,
which God himself directed the Prophet Jeremiah to run, when Israel and
Judah were upon the point of destruction: Ier. 36. 1, 2, 3.
This word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Take thee a roll of a
book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against
Israel, and against Judah, and against all the Nations, from the day I spoke
unto thee, from the days of king Josiah, even unto this day: it may be, that
the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them,
that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may forgive their
iniquity and their sin. And in that roll of the book, the Rabbis say, was
written the book of Lamentations: Six. Sen. lib. 2. Bibl.
in which book, Jeremiah the Prophet, does in a most mournful Elegy, lament
the miserable condition, which Jerusalem, because of sin, was to come unto. I
have resolved to follow that tract, to speak unto you of a people, whose
damnable impiety brought upon them such a misery, the relation whereof, may
make all, that work unrighteousness with greediness, to tremble to hear it,
and so to abhor and avoid crying sins, lest they should prove likewise
their ruin and confusion.

Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah, brimstone and fire, from the
Lord out of Heaven. You may please to observe in the Text, these particulars:

1. An act: It rained.

2. The agent: The Lord rained from the Lord; Dominus Filius pluit a Domino
Patre, Carranz. sum. Council.
The Lord the Son rained from the Lord the Father: that interpretation is
given of the words, at a Council held at Jerusalem in the time of Constantius
the Emperor.

3. The matter it rained: Brimstone and fire. The Lord rained from the Lord
brimstone and fire.

4. The place from whence it rained: Out of Heaven. The Lord rained from the
Lord brimstone and fire out of Heaven: Saluian. lib. 1. degub. Dei.
Super impium populum Gehennam misit e Coelo; The Lord from the Lord sent upon
a wicked people Hell out of Heaven.

5. The patients upon whom it rained; upon Sodom and Gomorrah in the Text:
Upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, in Deuteronomy. 29. 23. Upon Sodom,
Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboim and Segor, in lib. 1. St. Aug. de mirab. Script. Upon
all the plain, upon all the inhabitants of the Cities, upon that which grew
upon the ground, in Genesis 19. 25.

6. The time when it rained; Then: Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and
Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from the Lord out of Heaven.

The time administreth occasion to discourse of the Agents longanimity, and of
the Patients iniquity.

The act and the materials, give way to treat of Gods severity, and of Sodom
and Gomorrah's misery.

Thus then we will proceed, Gods grace assisting.

First, speak of Gods clemency, and of Sodom and Gomorrah's impiety.

Secondly, declare Gods fury, and Sodom and Gomorrah's calamity.

Thirdly, conclude with an application of such uses, as may be made by the
story.

First of Gods clemency, and of Sodom and

There is not a greater antipathy betwixt any two natures in the world, than
there is betwixt the nature of God and sin: You may sooner reconcile fire and
water, heat and cold, light and darkness, than God and Mammon, Christ and
Belial, the holy Ghost and Dagon. God hates sin wheresoever he finds it, be
it in Heaven or Earth, in Men or Angels, in Elect or Reprobates. Indeed his
Mercy, his sweet blessed Mercy, to which mankind has been ever much bound,
never cease soliciting him to treat Adams children with all the favor he
may, and like to an importunate suitor, never gives over craving of him,
until he make her a promise, that he will not execute the fierceness of his
anger, Hosea 11. 9.
otherwise the world should hear oftener from him than it does. Howsoever
though mercy does much with God, yet mercy does not all, justice may be heard:
if the suspension of judgment work no remorse in sinners hearts, to take
pity upon their own souls, and to please God, justice will procure that God
shall render indignation and wrath, Romans 2. 8, 9.
tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile. Misericordia Deo attribuitur secundum effectum,
Aquin. p. 1. q. 21 3. 0.
non secundum passionis affectum; Mercy is attributed unto God according to the
effect, not according to the affect of the passion: it does never transport him
beyond himself, neither causes it him utterly to stop his ears to his
justice, when it pleads for indignation. It Is evident in holy Writ, that Mercy
is potent with God, has a great hand with him; he will hear her mediating
for the most notorious malefactors in the world, if he can discern in them
any hope of amendment.

How long did he protract Sodom's ruin, and what courses did he take to
reclaim them? sent Lot to preach to them, stirred up four Kings to make war
upon them, gave them victory over them, and when they had taken the people, and
were carrying of them into captivity, pressed Abraham out to rescue them, Genesis
14. 15, 16.
who divided himself against them, he and his servants by night, and smote
them, and pursued them unto Hoba, which is on the left hand of Damascus, and he
brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his
goods, and the women also, and the people. Yea, when their sins cried out for
brimstone, flames and wrath was gone out from God, and he had dispatched his
ministering spirits to go down, Genesis 18. 21.
and see whether they had done altogether according to the cry of it which came
up unto him. He protected unto Abraham, if he could find ten righteous men
there, he would not destroy them for tens sake. Genesis 18. 32.
Gods goodness toward them, does surpass all oratorie to express, all
cogitation to think; he would have spared them upon any tolerable terms, they
might have made their peace upon any indifferent conditions: God, I say, took
no delight in their desolation. At last, when he saw that no preaching, no
war, no captivity, no redemption from captivity, could beget any piety among
them, Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from
the Lord out of Heaven.

Their sins were insufferable; not ordinary, but great, very great
transgressions: they did provoke the justice of God from the greatest of them,
to the littlest of them, they did even against nature and common reason agree
to be wicked, they were not only sinners, drawn to iniquity by the strong
incitations of nature, but they were wicked, industriously wicked, willingly
wicked; like to the house of Jacob, Micah 2. 2.
they devised iniquity upon their beds, and when the morning was light, they
practiced it: They were scelerum principes, and inuentores, prime offenders,
and inuentors of new villainies: they took delight in damned transgressions,
their greatest glory was in the greatest iniquity, and they were then most
merry, when the God of Abraham was most angry. I read of a people in Picenum,
that were called Nequi nates; Wicked ones, a soli iniquitate, says the
Geographer, Bertij tab. Geogra.
from the naughtiness of their soil: the men of Sodom are called wicked ones
from the iniquity of their manners. Genesis 13. 13.
The men of Sodom were (...), wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly.
Pride, a sin, that made of Angels Devils, as Prosper says; Prosp. lib. 3 de
vit. cont. cap. 3.
a sin that is forerunner to destruction: as Solomon shows, Humility goes
before honor, and a haughty spirit before a fall. A sin, of which they that
are guilty, have God always at their backs to take vengeance of them for it,
as Seneca has it, Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo Deus, was in high esteem
among them: excessive they were above measure; a mortal iniquity, Dives epulo,
est Parochianus Diabolo: A rich Epicure, is a Parishioner to the Devil. The
higher men feed, the more outrageous the blood boiles, and the harder task it
is to resist concupiscence. Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Iesurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou
art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the rock of his salvation. Idleness likewise, a sin capital by
the laws of Draco; Ecclus. 33. 27.
A sin that teaches much evil: A sin that choaketh virtue, nourishes
pride, frames a life fit only for hell fire, a sin, the whole university of
things cries down, abounded among them: whereas all other creatures were
perpetually in action; trees growing, waters flowing, birds flying, oxen
plowing, spheres moving, the men of Sodom, like to standing ponds, like to
Sodomes Salt Pits, stunke for lack of motion. The poor they did contemn; a
crying sin: Negatur gutta, qui negauit micam, Aug.
A drop of water is denied to Dives to cool his tongue, being in hell in
torments, who denied a crumme from off his table to Lazarus, to allay his
hunger, Luke 16.
living on earth in pleasures; These were sins which the earth it self could
no longer endure: hearken, and I will show you greater abominations than these.

Masculine beastiality; A sin, none but a Devil, come out of Hell in the
likeness of a man, dares to commit: a sin, enough to defile the tongue that
talks of it; a sin, of which, if a man were sure neither God nor man did
know of it, yet the turpitude of it should be motive enough to make a
reasonable creature disdain it, was as allowable among them by custom, as any
other act, in other Commonwealths, is by law: Nay, Peccabant, and publicabant;
They did sin, and not for shame hide it, Aug. lib. 16. c. 30. de ciuit. Dei.
but with ostentation they did publish it, it is manifest. Gods rehearsing Iudahs
sins, says, They declare their sins as Sodom did: to do evil, and to
rejoice at it, it is a desperate iniquity; deplorata nequitia: a lamentable
wickedness; Calvin.
for men to sin, and to take pastime in it, to anger the powers of Heaven,
and to joy in it, to set their souls burning in the flames of sin, as Nero
set Rome on fire, and to behold them with affectation, like raging waves of the
sea, for men to some out their own shame, good Lord, that ever the children of
women should be so transcendently wicked: it was impossible for any but
incarnate Devils to excel them in wickedness. Furthermore, there was public
liberty of sinning; each man gave his consent for the allowance of villainy, no
man accusing, or condemning, or correcting, or deploring the iniquities that
were among them: Only Lot persuades, I pray you, Brethren, do not so
wickedly, Genesis 19. 7.
and they frump him for it. Genesis 19. 9.
This one fellow came in to soiourne, and he will needs be a Judge. There
was such a habit of filthiness, that unrighteousness was reputed for
righteousness, and the gainsayer of uncleanness, was blamed more than the
actour. Their Magistrates, that had regal power, never interposed their
authority, to bridle them in their beastly desires: And (my beloved) that is a
daring sin, when the Magistrates, that should be to the people like gods to
imitate, shall be every jot as wicked as the multitudes: Inferiores sunt
superiorum simiae, Herodot.
Inferiors they are the apes of superiors; whereby it comes to pass, that
those which are called to high places in the world, either carry many to
destruction with themselves, or bring many into the way of salvation with
themselves, as Fulgentius says to Theodorus a Senator of Rome: Fulgent. ep.
6. ad Theod. Sen. Ecclus. 10. 2.
As the Judge of a people is himself, so are his officers, and what manner of
man the Ruler of a City is, such are they that dwell therein. Now that the
Rulers of Sodom should be such, as did not only conniue, wink at wickedness,
but even tolerate, nay approve, yea partake with the people in their
abominations; it was ominous, it did portend some dreadful judgment coming
upon the whole Nation. when the vices of inferiors are dissembled and winked
at by governors, they are reserved for the judgment of God. I had as live see
a blazing star burning in the Heavens, as a wicked man in a place of power:
an earthquake is not so prodigious as a wicked Ruler. Before God broke down
the walls of Babylon, and burnt the high gates with fire, Ier. 51. 57.
he threatened to make drunk her Princes, and her Wisemen, and her Captains,
and her Rulers, and her mighty men: An inundation of ungodliness must needs
ouerflow a Land, when those that have the oversight, do superintend, and
should bound wickedness, are themselves boundlesly wicked. Religion must of
necessity go down the wind, as it did in Sodom, when those that should uphold
it, do most profane it; one of the first in authority, and one of the last in
Christianity. Ethelbertus King of Kent in the Heptarchy was wont to say, it was a
sign of a very evil man, singulus quisque homo, etc. Every particular man is
a part of the City and Kingdom wherein he was borne, Aug. de ciuit Dei. lib.
4. cap*
be it never so ample; as a letter is part of a word, says Augustine. Some be
like to capital or text letters, as great men: some to smaller characters, as
men of low degree: some be like to vowels, as men in authority: some to mutes
and liquids, as the vulgar sort: all men go to the making of a City or
Kingdom, as all letters go to the making up of words. And as in a word, if one
letter be amiss, though but a mute, it may danger to mar the word, though
not so much as if a vowell be defaced; so in a City or Kingdom, if one man be
blotted with sin, say but a mean man, it may bring a destruction to that
City or Kingdom, yet not so soon as if a man of higher place be blurd with
impiety.

Here were sins enough to set patience in a rage, and to transform the God of
mercy into wrath, and yet God respited their subversion so long, until their
sins came bellowing up into Heaven, and were ready to lay an imputation of
partiality upon his justice. Three hundred and forty years, Chronology says,
passed betwixt the drowning of the world with water, and the burning of Sodom
with brimstone and fire, all, or a great part of which time, God was grieved
with that generation; and if ever they would have bethought themselves to alter
their conditions, had there been but a sprinkling, a gleaning of good people
in her, one honest soul for a thousand reprobates, God would have repented him
of his purpose: at last, when the Lord looked, nay sent down from Heaven, saw
there was no hope, they were altogether corrupt, and become abominable in their
doings, there were none that did good, no not Ten, Then the Lord rained upon
Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from the Lord, ut of Heaven.

It Is recorded of Julius Caesar, that he never entertained hatred against any
man so deeply, but he was willing to lay down the same upon occasion offered;
Sueton. vita Iul. Caes.
and the author does instance in this, when C. Memnius put-in for the
Consulship, he befriended him before others of the Competition,
notwithstanding that C. Memnius had made bitter inuectiues against him. Our
God, to whom all the Caesar's and Kings of the earth are tributaries and
homagers, does never hate (I take hatred as it is an intention of God in
punishing) so irreconcileably, but true humiliation will work a
reconciliation; that makes him say, Patientia Dei pios turbat; Gods patience
does even distract good men, makes them to wonder at him, how he can endure
such palpable dishonor, and suspend vengeance: When David saw the prosperity
of the wicked, he says, his feet were almost gone, his steps had well nigh
stipt. And when God, because the Ninevites had turned from their evil ways,
repented of the evil which he said he would do unto them, and did it not, it
displeased Jonah exceedingly, Jonah 4. 1.
and he was very angry. He has suffered likewise among wicked men for his
clemency, the damned Atheist draws an argument from thence against his
omnipotency; says he cannot, because he does not banish all evil out of the
world. Auerroes the Philosopher, draws an argument from thence against his
providence; thinks he meddleth with nothing below the sphere of the Moon,
because of his slownesse to anger. Ceacilius in Munitius Faelix, inferres a
conclusion from thence against his justice: says that he is either inualidus,
Munit.
impotent, and not able to redress evils, or else iniquus, unjust, and not
willing to rectify them. Psalm. 21, 3^*
He does prevent a man with the blessing of goodness. Lam. 3. 23.
He renueth his kindness every morning. He must be called upon once, twice,
thrice, to render vengeance: Lord, how long shall the wicked; Psalm. 94. 3, 4.
how long shall the wicked triumph; how long shall they utter and speak hard
things? I dare say by a (...), Dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox; It Is a grief
to our God, so often as men constrain him, to be cruel. Judge 10. 16.
His soul is grieved for the misery of Israel; His Ierem. 31. 20
bowels are troubled for Ephraims sake. The rainbow is an emblem of Gods
mercy; it is planted in the clouds, if you mark it, as if man were shooting at
God, and not as if God were shooting at man. The situation of the Propitiatory,
or Mercy-seat, was an argument of his mercy: Exodus 25. 21.
God commanded it should be planted over the Arc, in which was the testimony,
the book of cursings, that so mercy might be near at hand to pronounce
sentence of absolution, when justice is in hand to denounce sentence of
condemnation. Ambr. Epist. lib. 1. ep. 3.
Of such infinite compassion was our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, that he
would have pardoned Judas, it Judas had had grace to have asked forgiveness.
Augustine Aug. lib. 13. cap. 7. de ciuit. Dei.
says, that some of them were forgiven, that murdered Christ. In the 34. of
Exodus, where himself proclaims his nature by adjectives, he begins with
merciful, Exodus 34. 6.
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, etc. as if mercy had a priority in him. In
the 116. Psalm, Verse 5. he doubles the epithet merciful, Merciful is the
Lord, and righteous; yea, and our God is merciful: as if he had two quantities
of mercy in him for one of justice; as if no act of justice could pass from
him, but through the gate of mercy. Longanimity is as Gods natural child; the
holy Deity is in travel with it: even as any thing great with young does
desire to be rid of the burden, so does God desire to pour forth his mercy:
never Nurse, when her breasts were full of milk, was in greater pain for
children to suck them, than God is in pain to have children to draw his mercy
from him. Justice comes from God, as a sting from a Be, constrainedly; Mercy
flows from him, as honey from a Be, most willingly: Mercy is as essential
to him, as light is to the sun, or as heat is to the fire; he delights in
mercy, as any sense or faculty of our souls do in their actions, the eye in
seeing, or the ear in hearing, or the memory in remembering: Patience, and
clemency, and mercy, and compassion, and peace, are the fruits of his bowels,
the offspring which the divine nature does produce; fury, and rage, and anger,
and affliction, and war, and flaming fire, are forced into him by the
provoking exorbitances of the world.

God does all along the Scripture even court sinners to turn from their
vicious courses; the omnipotent Creator does even turn beggar, to beseech his
creatures to walk in his ways; not that it is any advantage to him, if all the
world should worship him with a holy worship: Can a man be profitable to God,
as he that is wise is profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to the
Almighty, that thou art righteous, or is it gain to him, Job 22. 2. 3.
that thou make thy ways perfect? says Eliphaz the Temanite to holy Job.
Our goodness extends not to him; Non eget ipsa iustitia hominis: He has no
need, Aug. lib. 10. cap. 5. de ciuit. Dei.
no not of man's righteousness. Neque fonti se quisquam dixerit profuisse si
biberit, neque luci si viderit; A man cannot say he does the fountain good by
drinking of it, or the light by seeing by it, nor that he does God good by
serving of him; all the worship man performs to God, is for man's profit, not
Gods: wherefore a man duly pondering of that (...), that long suffering which
is in God, that bears with many millions of misdemeanors mortal men commit,
whereby he is infinitely dishonored, and of that free love that does provoke
him to desire man's love, whereby he is in no respect benefited; if he be not
reprobate silver, if he have any relics of Religion left in him, how can it
choose but inflame his soul to love the Almighty? Many a great dishonor did
God put up before he drowned the old world; 1500. years and odd he patiently
waited they should amend their manners, before he began to affright them with
any mention of a flood, yea and after he had threatened a deluge, he gave them
120. years respit to change their courses, afforded them all that time Noah to
preach righteousness unto them: After all this, when the 1500. years were
ended, and the 120. were exspired, when the Arc was builded, and Noah and his
family were aboard in her, yet he prolonged the time seven days before he
broke open the fountains of the great deep, Genesis 7. 4.
and opened the floud-gates of Heaven. And so for the Sodomites, Ipsi
extorserunt vt perirent; They themselves wrested from God their own
destruction: Saluian.
their iniquities, like rebels, make a head, as if they would bid Heaven a
battle, and dare God and his Angels to do their worst; and God for many
years carried himself patiently: at last when no forbearance could beget
repentance, no procrastination of their affliction in him, could procure an
alteration of manners in them, Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah
brimstone and fire, from the Lord out of Heaven.

Or you may, if you please, let this ( Then) in my Text, answer to the ( When)
in the Verse next before it, When Lot was entered into Zoar, Then the Lord
rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from the Lord out of
Heaven. And from thence you may make an observation, how dear in the sight of
the Lord a righteous man is: Sodom could not be burnt before Lot was
departed; Haste thee, escape to Zoar: for I cannot do any thing till thou be
come thither, Genesis 19. 22.
says the Angel to Lot; the Angel had given him in commission to be as
provident in Lots preservation, as to be diligent in the Sodomites
destruction: Haste thee, escape thither: for I cannot do any thing till thou
come thither. A speech, the more I meditate upon it, the more I am amazed at
it. St. Augustine says, a certain Platonist, as Simplitianus told him, said
those words of St. John's Gospel: In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, John 1. 1.
and the word was God, the same was in the beginning with God, were fit to be
written in letters of gold, Aug. lib. 10. (...) ciuit. Dei. c.
and to be set up to be read in the highest places of all Churches; and the
reason of this his high commendation of that saying, is, because it is such a
strong text to confirm Christ's divinity: For, as Ambrose well notes, Ambr. de
fide cont. Arrian.
erat, erat, erat, erat: ecce quater erat; and vbi inuenit Arrianus quod non
erat? the word was, it was, it was, it was: behold, St. John says four times
it was in the beginning, and where does Arrius find that it was not in the
beginning? Verily, this Scripture, Haste thee, escape thither: for I can do
nothing til thou be come thither, deserves to be inscribed upon every man's
heart, that God should so tender the welfare of his servant, as to profess
plainly, he could not vindicate himself upon his foes, until he had taken
order for his safety: I am rapt to read it, and pray you all to take special
notice of it; When Lot was entered into Zoar, Then, and not before then, the
Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire, from the Lord
out of Heaven. And to say continually as the Psalmist does, Blessed is the
Lord, Psalm. 35. 27.
which has always pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.

Wicked men may likewise make to themselves advantage by this observation, and
learn to respect the righteous, because they fare the better for it. Varro.
Mundus est magna homilli domus; The world is the great house of little man,
and faithful men are the buttresses and pillars, to uphold it from ruin and
confusion: they stand in the gappe betwixt the world and Gods wrath, as Moses
his chosen did in the breach betwixt the Israelites and Gods anger, when they
had vexed him at the waters of strife, to turn away his indignation from them,
Psalm. 106. 23.
lest he should destroy them. The Nurse fares the better oftentimes for the
Child's sake, and so do the wicked for the children of Gods sake: Abraham could
have compounded with God for ten righteous men for Sodomes sins, and so
have saved the place and the inhabitants from destruction. Yea Jerusalem, iam
iamque peritura, Hieron.
even now upon the push of being destroyed, is offered to Jeremiah to be
spared, if there could but a man be found in it that executed righteousness.
Ierem. 5. 1.
At such a high rate does God value one righteous man, that his holiness shall
balance many a thousands wickedness. Good men are sanguis mundi, the blood of
the world: when they dye, a man may fear the very world lies adying. When
Eliah the Prophet was taken from the head of his servant Elisha, and carried up
into Heaven, Elisha cried out, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, 2.
Reg. 2. 12
and the horsemen thereof: As if he should have said, Eliah that good man, that
was the only chariot and horsemen to defend Israel, he had such power with
God, because of his holy life to hinder him from plaguing of it, is taken from
it. If God go out against a place to overthrow it, one just man is a better
fort to defend it, than a rock of marble, or a rampire of flint: A good man
has a great deal of interest in God; God will come to a parley with him, and
yield to him in any tolerable request: that speech which God used to Moses on
the Mount, is proof sufficient to inform wicked men, how gracious a good man
is with the great God. Israel had trespassed greatly, turned the glory of the
invisible God, into the similitude of an Ox that eats grass, and by that
Idolatry angered Jehovah so far, that he has a thought to confound them; and
yet before he will proceed to execution, knowing Moses love to them was such,
he would be making intercession, and knowing his own nature to be such, that
if Moses mediated, he could not choose but remit, the omnipotent God does
petition frail man not to interpose; Now therefore let me alone, Exodus 32. 10.
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them. And
when Moses would not be persuaded from making supplication, but falls upon God
for Abraham's sake to take compassion, God offers Moses composition to let him
alone: Let me alone, Exodus 32. 10.
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them, and I
will make of thee a great people: When nothing would beat Moses off from being
instant and earnest with God for their pardon, the Text says, Exodus 32.
The Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto the people: An
example that may move a heart composed of hatred against Gods chosen, and turn
it into love. Nay, an after generation fares the better oftentimes for a good
man of a former generation; it was above too. years by computation, betwixt
the reign of King David and King Ioram, and yet though the impieties of Ioram
deserved to have his Kingdom rent away from him, The Lord would not destroy
Judah for David his servants sake. 2. Reg. 8. 19.
Two hundred seventy and six men had their lives* Acts 27.
saved for St. Paul's sake from shipwreck: God gave him all that sailed with
him, Verse 24.
as the Angel said. Small reason therefore have dissolute wretches to contemn
good people, if they consider it: It was a base unworthy speech of Haman, when
he told King Ahashuerosh, Hest. 3. 8.
It was not for his profit to suffer the Jews; Himself and his kingdom fared
the better for such inhabitants. Make much of honest men, my Beloved; make much
of honest men: they are medulla mundi, to the world as marrow is to the bones,
the strength and stay of it. Thetares would quickly be weeded up, were it not
for plucking up the good corn also. So long as there are good men, possibly
the world may endure: when once there is a general dearth of good men, adue
this present world for evermore. No marvel Laban was so loath to part with
Jacob, and would come to a new composition with him, rather than he should quit
his service; he had learnt by experience, Genesis 30. 27.
that the Lord had blessed him for Jacobs sake. David cries out in the 12.
Psalm, Help Lord: Psalm. 12. 1.
And why? what is the matter with David? O the godly man cease, the faithful
fail from among the children of men: And is that such a matter to be
transported at? Yes, it is a fatal sign, Esaias 1. 9.
when there is a decrease of good men; Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto
us a seed, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto
Gomorrah.

The Dragon that is wroth with the woman, Apoc. 12. 17
makes war with the remnant of her seed; that is, the Devil who is wroth
with the Church, in all ages has plotted the ruins of those which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, and infused a
strong conceit in the hearts of all his subjects, that they were the causes of
all calamities. If Tiber ouerflowed her banks, if Nilus did not water the
fields, if the heavens were brass, or the earth quaked, if there were a plague
or famine in the Commonwealth of Rome, Tert. Apol.
the people cried, To the Lion with a Christian; as if their being had been
the cause of all miseries. St. Augustine says it grew to a Proverb in Rome,
Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Pluuia defecit, Christiani nominis gratia, Rain has failed, because the name
Christian is tolerated. Alas, blind Heathen, were it not for Christianity,
there would soon be an end of Infidelity: God blesses the Egyptians house
for Joseph's sake, not Joseph for the Egyptians sake. God blessed Sodom for Lots
sake, not Lot for Sodomes sake, it is evident here in this Text: for while Lot
remained within her walls, it went well with her; when Lot was gone out of her,
Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from the Lord
out of Heaven. The same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all: he that rained it bears record
of it, Luke 17. 29. And we know that his record is true.



God is no way so long suffering in bearing, that he is not as just in
punishing; If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword. God spun out the
thread of his love to an immeasurable length, to try whether the men of Sodom
would lay hold of it; he did angle for them, sat in heaven, let down the
line of his love, and baited it with his mercy, to prove whether the men of
Sodom would swallow it, that he might catch their souls. It Was long before he
was provoked, he did smother indignation many years, before it kindled and
came to be devouring flame; and when all would not prevail, Then the Lord
rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from the Lord out of Heaven.

Here, my Beloved, I will give you another observation: As God is infinite in
suffering, urged, thoroughly urged, before he will break out into fury, so he
is violent and fierce in the execution of his judgment, when he is resolved
upon it: The longer the archer draws before he looses, the sorer shot he
makes; the longer God is before he pours forth his vengeance, the more twill
scorch. I need not search other Chronicles for examples to verify this
collection, Sodom and Gomorrah ratify the truth of it. Strabo says, nature
wrought this act, Strabo. Geog. lib. 16.
and that the fire issued out of the earth which consumed these cities; but
Strabo understood not the Scriptures, nor the power of God; he is but a
profane author, and we are not to credit his report: We have Moses and the
Prophets, and we must hear them; and they say The Lord rained upon Sodom and
Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from the Lord out of Heaven. Fearful rain. Tert.
de Pallio.
Tertullian says, that the City called Vid. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 52.
Vulsinium in Italy, was destroyed with fire from heaven. Histories say, that
in the year of our Lord 717. when the Arabians and Saracens lay at the siege
of Constantinople, Basil. Menol. Bedae.
fiery hail fell from heaven and burnt their Navy. In Exodus 9. 24. It rained
hail, Exodus 9. 24.
and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it
in all the land of Egypt, since it became a Nation. Here it rained brimstone,
and fire mingled with the brimstone, very grievous, such as there was none in
all the world, since it was a world. From whence came it? from the Lord out of
heaven. Indeed the Philosophers say there is an element of fire above; Arist.
lib. 4. de coel. c. 5.
and though the elementary fire be of its own nature incapable to move
downward, unless it be forced, as also incapable of voracity, unless a
consuming faculty be supernaturally added to it, yet we know God can, and it
may be at this time did indue that simple fire with those qualities, to make
the miracle the greater. Jobs cattle and his servants were burnt with fire
from Heaven, Job 1. 16.
the fire of God. So likewise fire came down from heaven at Eliah's call, and
burnt the two Captains and their fifties. 2. Reg. 1.
But there are no veins of brimstone aloft; what though? it may be, God
borrowed brimstone of the earth; it may be he did command the Sun to exhale
up some to intermingle with his potion, which he administered to diseased
Sodom; it may be he turned air into brimstone, John 2.
as he did water into wine. Whatsoever fire it was, simple or compound, and
wheresoever he had the brimstone, it matters not much to dispute, sure I am it
was the Lords doing, rain it he did, and though it be marvelous in our eyes,
because supernatural, the Heavens not using to pour down brimstone drops,
yet to him it was no more difficult to say to the brimstone, Burn thou Sodom,
Job 37. 6.
than to say to the snow, Be thou upon the earth.

Alas, what became of the inhabitants? What became of them? naught became of
them; they were all every mothers child fried in brimstone flames: a terrible
judgment; take it into your consideration, and wonder at it. The same morning
the sun did arise in his wonted manner, decked all the plain of Jordan with
his glorious rays, and before it was climbed up to the meridian, tota rogus,
regio est; Sodom is all in a flame, Tert. Sodom^.
her citizens be all in a fire, her soil is poisoned with sulphur, her vines
and olive trees be blasted with filthy fume, the earth yawn'd and denounced
the ruins of the buildings, that were not of combustible matter, together with
the ashes of the inhabitants: those that whilere did boil in lust, do now
boil with fire, God meets their strange lust with strange fire, quenches
the heat of their concupiscence with the heat of brimstone, fills their
swallows, that were accustomed to be filled with sauorie meats, with
stifling smoke, consumes all, their bodies, their goods, their cattle, yea
their whole territory with a shoure of fire from heaven. Infamem vitam famosa
poena consumit, Aug. lib. 1. de mirab. Script.
A famous punishment finisheth an infamous life. Some were smitten with
blindness, and rather run into, than from the scorching flames: Others no
sooner cry Fire, fire, but their tongues burn with fire to stop their clamor:
A third scuds out of the City, and a sheet of fire, like to a swift Herald,
makes after him, arrests him, and executes the will of God upon him: Some
leap into the water, hoping thereby to be rescued from the fire, because of
the natural contrariety that is betwixt those two elements; and, as in the
Egyptian plagues, I shall now tell you a wonder, fire and water were made
friends together for that day: the fire had power in the water, Wisd. 19. 20.
forgetting his own virtue, and the water forgot her own quenching nature. In
one street the hot tiles spring from off the flaming roofes, braining those
that passed under; in another lane the scalding lead drops down out of the
gutters, and lights upon the hairy scalph of such as had gone on in their
wickedness: Here is a hideous noise heard with the downefals of houses, there
is a piteous cry to be heard, made by people sorely tormented in that flame.
The heavens thunder fearfully, the lightning flasheth dismally, the brimstone
burns inquenchably, the people shreek universally, the cattle bellow
miserably, God is angry terribly, because they had sinned abominably. The
flakes of fire, Judges 15.
like Sampsons foxes with firebrarnds at their tails in the fields of
Philistia, scour thorough the fields of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the adjacent
Cities, and burn up the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives. For all
this Gods anger is not turned away, Esaias 5. 25.
but his hand is stretched out still.

As Christ cursed the fig tree, and said, Matthew. 21. 19.
Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever, so God cursed the land of
Sodom, and said, Let never inhabitant dwell in thee more henceforward for
ever; the children were burnt with their parents, that not a remnant of the
blood of Sodomites might remain. Josephus writes, that all that huge Army
which Pharaoh led forth against the Israelites, consisting of 50000. horsemen,
and 200000. footmen, was so utterly defeated, that there was not one left alive
to carry home news of the overthrow: and the Psalmist justifies it, The
waters covered their enemies, there was not one of them left. A fearful
destruction, Psalm. 106. 11.
that not one should be able to come off, of such a multitude, yet it was not
like this of Sodomes; though they lost many of their people, yet there were
more Egyptians left behind, Proletarij, to increase and multiply; here was an
utter extirpation, an everlasting extinction of the whole race of Sodomites:
The nurse burnt with the child at her breast, the mother melted with her babe
in her belly, the father fried with his posterity in his loins, young men were
dissolved to ashes, young maidens were consumed to cinders; and not one only of
a sort, but all of every sort, all that gave suck, all that were great with
child, all that had been, that were, or might be fit for procreation, of both
sexes, male and female, of all ages, young and old, Amb. lib. 2 de vocat. gen^.
c. 4.
dyed in that dreadful fire; Quos vna impietas prophanauit, vna sententia
deleuit. So says St. Ambrose of those that perished by the flood, and so say I
of those that perished by this fire: For all this Gods anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still.

God has cursed the very climate, made it inhabitable, has so altered the
condition of the ground, that forreiners if they would adventure to plant
colonies there, cannot by any industry manure it so that it shall bear fruit.
It has Babylons curse; It shall be no more inhabited for ever, Ier. 50. 39. 40.
neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation; no man shall
abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein: Once it was the
choicest seat under the sun, the very Paradise of the world, holding
resemblance with the garden of the Lord; corn, Genesis 13. 10.
and wine, and oil, did increase there so abundantly; it was so fertile a
soil, that people believed it to be Gods peculiar habitation. Martin Luther
says, that cruel rain has made it so barren, that the ground has lost her
foyson, it cannot be tilled, the plowers cannot tear it up into furrows, to
harrow-in any kind of grain. God cursed the earth because Adam transgressed,
Genesis 3. 18.
yet not so, but that it should bring forth thorns and thistles: I cannot
read that either thorn or thistle will grow on Sodomes soil; it is only a
breeding place of nettles and salt pits. God said, Zeph. 2* 9.
he would lay Babylon in that desolate taking; that none but doleful creatures
should possess it; as Owls, Dragons, Satyrs: I cannot hear that either Owl,
or Dragon, or Satyr will dwell where Sodom was; though the wilderness of
Arabia border upon it, and could spare plenty of such creatures to people it,
if they did not disdain to make their nests in it. Jerusalem for crucifying
the Lord of glory, was razed in that fashion by Titus the Emperor, that those
which came afterward to see, could hardly be persuaded to believe that there
ever had been such a City as Jerusalem, Yet Sion is become a plowed field.
Troy, Ier. 26. 18.
for the perjury of Laomedon, and for the adultery of Paris, was burnt to dust
and ashes; one Fimbria the day after, to be sure Troy should not want
desolation, went over all the ruins, prying and searching where any thing was
standing, to raze that down also, yet iam* seges est vbi Troiae fuit, Ovid.
epist.
now grass does grow* where the City of Troy was. The Land of Sodom is like
salt that has lost his savor, good for nothing; neither will a foul fly in
her air, nor a fruit ripen in her valleys, nor a fish spawne in her river: A
poole of water there is, rightly called mare mortuum, the dead sea; because
Nequit proferre aliquam de gurgite gentem squamigeram. Tert. Sodoma.
It cannot bring forth out of the deep gulf any of the scaly people. Diverse
Authors give this sea diverse names; some call it mare maledictum, the cursed
sea: some mare solitudinis, the desert sea: some mare Diaboli, the Devils sea.
Philo the Jew says it smokes still; and therefore some say it is caminus
gehennae, the very chimney of hell. Yet here is not all: For all this Gods
anger is not turned away form them, but his hand is stretched out still. All
this is but the beginning of their sorrows, there is a worser doom behind
for these sensual men: What Is that? fire and brimstone again. What brimstone?
that stream of brimstone the Prophet speaks of, Esaias 30. 33.
that everlasting fire, Matthew. 25. 41.
such as is prepared for the devil and his angels. What, fire and brimstone
here, and fire and brimstone hereafter, fire and brimstone in infinitum, does
it stand with divine Justice? I confess, calamities poured down upon good
people, are the earnest of an everlasting inheritance; good people, Psalm. 126.
5.
if they sow in tears, shall reap in joy; but the judgments which the wrath
of God raines down in this life upon the wicked, such as the Sodomites were,
are but the preambles to future woes; but entrances into, not exemptions from
ensuing miseries: Great plagues remain for the ungodly. It Is said, Psalm. 32. 10.
that the heavy night which was spread over the Egyptians, was but an image of
that darkness which should afterward receive them: And I may say, Wisd. 17. 21.
the fire and brimstone which fell upon the Sodomites in this life, was but a
figure of that fire and brimstone which shall feed upon them in the life to
come. God, by the holy Prophet Nahum, Nahum 1. 9.
threatens his enemies to bring upon them so much tribulation, that affliction
should not rise up the second time: There should be no need of a new plague, he
would pay them home at once. From whence Pelagius concludes, God will not
punish sinners twice. Ah Pelagius, if they be such sinners as the Apostle St.
Paul speaks of, that do not like to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 1.
28.
as the Sodomites were, it is not the utter ruinating of their dwelling places,
and the rooting out of them and their posterity from the earth, will acquit
them and satisfy Gods justice; a worser doom is behind, infinite extremity,
devouring fire, everlasting burnings; the Sodomites suffer the vengeance of
eternal fire: and the reason is, Epist. Iud. ver. 7
wicked men, if it were in their power, would live without end, that they might
sin without end; and therefore it is agreeable to Gods justice, that their
souls should never want woe in the next world, that by their good will would
never want wickedness in this. Let no man flatter himself in his own heart,
because it is said, Psalm. 103. 9.
God will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever. Let no
man reason, Man sinned but a time, and God will punish him but for a time;
rather let him know, he that sins against an infinite Majesty, must expect to
endure infinite misery, if it be not prevented by infinite mercy: He that
neglects ineffable goodness, must look to be exposed to ineffable fadnesse.
Man by sin destroyed that good, which if he had kept, would have made him
eternally blessed; and loved that evil, which not repented of, will make him
eternally cursed, if it be imputed to him, and not satisfied for by the blood
of Christ. God does not measure sin temporis longitudine, by the quantity of
time in which it is committed, nor proportion the punishment after that rate;
then a beastly Sodomite should have but a few minutes torment: he does judge of
sin as Augustine says, Aug. lib. 21. c. 11 de ciuit. Dei.
iniquitatis magnitudine, by the greatness of the iniquity, and correspondent
to that allots the plague.

Then are the Sodomites utterly unhappy; first, to be turned to destruction;
and then to be turned into hell: Who can help it? the Holy One of Israel is
not to be slighted, is not to be neglected. My heart danceth for joy to muse
upon the depth of his mercy, yet had we best to be advised that we abuse it
not by presumption; he is not a God of wood, nor of stone, insensible of
dishonor, or careless of par^ipension; if he be long provoked, he will at
last awake like a giant out of sleep, and tear those in his wrath, that fear
not the Lord and his strength: A wretched people they were, the Sodomites were,
to live so as to deserve to have their country and their kindred ruined so
irreparably; yet more wretched, to live so as to deserve to have their bodies
and souls damned eternally. It Is lamentable to think of their judgment past,
it is more lamentable to think of their judgment to come: though their bodies
are consumed unto dust, as small as that which the whirlewinde scatters, yet
God will collect together all parts of every one of them (for it is as easy to
him to raise a dead man out of his grave, as it is for one of us to raise a
living man out of his bed) and when he has so done, he will touch their
flesh with such a touch of immortality, that they shall fry in flames, be
sensible of the pain, and yet not be consumed with the fire, as they were
when they were Citizens of Sodom, before that their mortal had put on
immortality; and as the moth is to the garment, and the worm is to the wood,
so sorrow shall eat their hearts: poena sensus, and poena d^mni, the
consideration of that which they shall suffer, intermixed with the consideration
of what they are bereft of, will crucify their souls with unspeakable woe.

But, says one to me, omit the eternal judgment, and press the temporal:
for carnal men will quake more to hear of the loss of their bodies and
estates, than of their souls. I can make no farther illustration of it than
this: There were sundry goodly Cities, of which Sodom was the Metropolis,
fairly situated in a champian in the plain of Jordan, plentifully peopled
with men, women, and children, delicately provided for, of corn, and wine, and
oil, and all other necessaries that might any way conduce to earthly content,
as it might be this morning, and on the same day before noone, the soil was
cursed with barrenness, the beasts suffered for their masters transgressions,
the people perished every one, that there might be an end of the race of
Sodomites; The Lord from the Lord, God the Son from God the Father being the
agent of this astonishing act, fire and brimstone being his instruments, crying
sins the incitements, and the reason Saint Peter gives, God turned the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, 2. Pet. 2. 6.
condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those which
after should live ungodly: and that Scripture brings me to my Application.

I need not search into the manners of other Nations, nor lay my seen abroad
to make application of my discourse, it holds at home in many things, and in
some things better than I would it did; we can vie blessings with Sodom,
heavenly and earthly blessings with Gomorrah, the blessing of peace, the
blessing of plenty, the blessing of Gods Word that inestimable blessing, and
we may tell sins with them too, and I fear ouertell them: If I had a
Catalogue of the number of Sodomes sins, and a relation of their will and
greediness to commit them, and were tasked to compare ours with theirs, I
believe for quantity and manner, we are near even with them: Indeed, Peccatum
nefandum, that sin not fit to be named, the high hand of God has kept out of
our Country, and ever may it remain a stranger, otherwise I cannot set my
thoughts to work, to muse of any sin that I do not find acted in
abominable manner: Adultery is in the height, hardly more ordinary in any land;
do not men lay wait at their neighbors doors? Job 31. 9.
and do not women sit blowzing in their windows, looking for their paramours,
Judge 5. 28.
as the mother of Sisera did for her son? Pride never rode in that state in
the streets of Sodom when it went abroad, nor was bedeckt in that gorgeous
fashion when it staid at home. Idleness like to a pernicious tetter has
ouerrun the land; there are among us and abundance of such people as those
Thessalonians were which the Apostle increpates, that walk inordinately,
working not at all: Of men many, 2. These. 3. 11.
of women not a few, besides those sunburned vagabonds that lie basking under
hedges, and yawling in high ways, trusting charity with their lives, rather
than labor; which oftentimes failing them, of beggars they become felons, and
so end their days oftentimes cursedly upon a tree; the just judgment of God
upon them for their inordinate walking. How many men borne of gentle blood, and
bred up at the feet of Gamaliel in the schools of the Prophets and Seminaries
of learning, of pregnant capacities, and able bodies, live out of all honest
vocations, sacrifice all their time either to Morpheus the minister of sleep,
or to Bacchus the god of wine, or to Venus the goddess of beauty, as if
neither the true God, nor the Commonwealth deserved any time to be spent in
their service, all were due to the bed, the tavern, and the brothel-house?

Edebant and bibebant, Luke 17. 28.
The men of Sodom did eat and drink, says our Savior; Ecce peccatum
voluptatis, Behold the sin of voluptuousness: Take notice of the garbs of
men of present times, and trust me not if you do not see Sodom equalled, if
not outstript in gluttony: Could the Manes of any man appear, that ever dwelt
within the consines of that Country, at one of our feasts, the ghost would say
our feasts do far exceed. If ever Nation was to be condemned for
superfluity in fare, I do bewail this Land, in which I was borne, and this
City in which now I breathe; good Lord, that thou should give us plenty, and
we should spend it so profusely.

Emebant and vendebant, Luke 17. 28.
The men of Sodom did buy and sell, Ecce peccatum cupiditatis, Behold the sin
of covetousness: And had covetousness a habitation in Sodom? and was filthy
avarice a cause of her desolation? then Lord be merciful unto our Land, that
has many a member in it, who out of a covetous desire, have made a marriage
with silver, and given a bill of divorce to Jesus Christ! The Clergy in the
Church, as in Prospers generation, Prosp. lib. 1. c. 21 de vita con.
Non vt meliores, sed vt ditiores, neo vt sanctiores, sed vt honor atiores sint
caeteris festinant, Make haste not to be better, but to be richer, not to be
more holy, but to be more honorable than other men; forgetting that of St.
Paul to Timothy, 2. Tim. 2. 4.
No man that warreth ent angleth himself with the affairs of this life, that
he may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier. The Gentry in the
country, as in Augustines days, Aug. de ciu. Dei lib. 3. cap. 1.
magis stama^hantur si villam malam habeant, quam si vitam, are far more
offended at the badnesse of their Lordships, than at the badnesse of their
lives; never remembering that of Solomon, Riches profit not in the day of wrath,
Prou. 11. 4.
but righteousness delivers from death. The Gallants in the Court, as in
Iugurtha King of Numidia's days, are so prodigal, that they will not keep
goods themselves, and so covetous, that they will not suffer others to keep
theirs; making no use of the Apostles precept, Romans 13. 8.
Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. The Advocates and Pleaders at
the bar, as in Pope Eugenius his days, greedy of filthy lucre, Bern. lib. 1.
de consid.
look their Honorarium should be of such a value, that a man had better take
our Savior Christ's counsel literally understood, Matthew. 5. 40.
If any sue him at the law and take away his coat, let him have his cloak
also, than contend for his coat again; never remembering that speech of our
Savior to the Publicans, Luke 3. 13.
Exact no more than that which is appointed you.

Aedificabant, and plantabant, They planted, Luke 17. 28.
they builded; Ecce peccatum securitatis, Behold the sin of security: And did
security make her nest within that for ever cursed country? Examine all that
ever breathed out of English air, and let them speak the truth from their
hearts, and verily they must certify, none that ever were sprinkled with the
water of Baptism, nuzzle themselves more in security than we. Stratonicus
told the Rodes, they builded as if they would live ever, and eat as if they
would dye presently: For Gluttons; those Epicures that desired of the gods
necks so long as Cranes, that the delicious relish of meats and drinks might
remain long, were not more to be blamed than some among us: And for builders,
Genesis 10. 10.
Nimrod that was a prime agent in Babels building, was not more ambitious of
eternizing his name than we; non Absolon, 2. Sam. 18. 18.
that built a tower in the valley of Sauch to keep his name in remembrance,
calling it Absolons plane.

Nay, we are not clear of that sin of Sodom, which cried to Heaven for
brimstone, with that which cried lowdest, of rejoicing in doing evil. A sin
not greater than can be forgiven; for what sin can be so deadly, that the
death of Christ will not salve? but I dare say it is a sin that must have an
infinite measure of mercy, and an abundant measure of tears to wash it away;
and yet it is among us an usual sin, and very usual sin: Mark it when you
please, when two humors meet that love sin alike, you shall hear the one
vaunting to the other of his wickedness, and then laugh himself at his own
beastliness, cheer up his heart at the repetition of his own ungodliness. O
Lord, look down from heaven, behold and visit the world, and restrain the
sons of men from this most grievous iniquity.

Ephraim and Manasses are in our land, fullness of bread and forgetfulness of
God. Gog and Magog are in our mother City, pride and plenty. Blood makes a
clamor at the gates of heaven for vengeance, oppression presses him to pour
down the vials of his wrath, blasphemy and swearing challenge him for his long
suffering; Usury, a sin that makes a man worse than a thief, worse than
death, worse than hell, worse than Judas: worse than a thief, because the
thief robs only in the night, the Usurer robs both day and night: worse
than death, because death kills only the body, the Usurer kills both body and
soul: worse than hell, because in hell only the bad shall be punished, the
Usurer punishes both good and bad: lastly, worse than Judas; for Judas
restored the money again which he had unjustly taken, but the Usurer seldom
makes restitution, is had in more execration among Turks than Christians: for
Viri boni Deum timete, and foenerari praetermittite; qui enim Vsurarij vivunt,
Daemoniaci resurgunt: Ye that be good men, fear God, and put no money to
usury; for they that live Usurers, do rise Devils, are the words in their
Alcoran. The times are grown monstrous; there is discord in societies, fraud
in merchants, corruption in officers, conniuency in magistrates, symonie in
ministers; every night brings forth a thief, every day a deceiuer, every
minute a drunkard, and every week a murderer: we are fallen into such times
the Prophet speaks of, Our hands are defiled with blood, Esaias 59. 3.
and our fingers with iniquity, our lips do speak lies, and our tongues
matter perverseness. There was never that vice reigned, but now it is rife, yea I
think I may say it, and not belie the world; there be many new vices reign
now, which Sodom and Gomorrah never heard of: there be new devices to cousin
with, new fashions to be proud with, new oaths to blaspheme with, new merits to
justify by, new Articles of Faith to believe, new Sacraments to receive, new
gods found out to worship, and new Mediators to intercede: Fall to your
prayers, and beg fervently of God to send that new heaven and new earth, of
which St. Peter speaks, wherein dwells righteousness: 2. Pet. 3. 13.
for this whole world lies in wickedness, 1. John. 5. 19.
as St. John says: And for my part, I despair of it, doubt twill never be
better before it be purged with fire.

Nulla aetas erat culpae immunis, Ambr. de Abra. patr. cap. 6.
No age was free from wickedness in Sodom: the infants, whom nature yet
denied strength to perpetrate actual iniquity, had desire; and the old men
that were decayed in strength, had eyes full of adultery, Omnes omni malo
replerentur, They were all filled with every evil. Genesis 19. ^.
The men of Sodom compassed Lots house round, both old and young, all the
people from every quarter, not ten righteous persons could be found among many
thousand souls. I cannot say so of this Nation: for I do resolve my self, I
may confidently speak as the Lord did to Saint Paul in a vision by night
concerning Corinth: Acts 18. 10.
God has much people in this City, more in this Land, and daily may he add to
the number of them: And as he did to Ezechiel the Prophet in a vision
concerning Jerusalem, There are some that sigh and cry for all the abominations
that be done in the midst of us, and daily may he add to the number of those
likewise: But withal, when I make an estimate of the multitude of people that
are contained within our borders, and observe so many marching furiously after
their own lusts, for so few following of Jesus Christ, I am afraid of some
vengeance approaching, because I do not know what the will of the Lord is,
whether he will spare the place for their sakes. I do lay as much upon Gods
mercy as I may without wronging his justice, he will not be moved to pour
forth his vengeance, unless sinners superabound in vices, nevertheless when
and where you find all iniquity planted, all rebellion against God reigning,
all the crying sins rousting, you may take liberty to proclaim what you
fear, salvation stepped aside, and destruction winged ready to seize upon that
people for a prey.

Eduardus the Confessor, one of the last of the Saxon Kings, said upon his
death bed, that the wickedness of the English was complete and grown to the
height, Hollinsh. Chro.
and the revenge and punishment thereof would shortly follow. Loath I am to
presage unluckily of any grievous calamity likely to betide my native
Country, I had rather promise the lengthning of tranquillity, were it not that
your selves and your sins would cry out upon me for flattery, if I should. I
wish with all my soul, that peace Psalm. 122. 7.
may be within your walls, and plenteousnesse within your palaces. Long may you
Job 29. 6.
wash your steps with butter, and may the rocks pour you outriuers of oil.
Long may your Psalm. 126. 2.
mouths be filled with laughter, and your tongues with joy. God bless your
Psalm. 132. 15.
victuals with increase, and satisfy your poor with bread. Send that Psalm.
144. 12, 13, 14.
your sons may grow up as the young plants, and that your daughters may be as
the polished corners of the temple: That your garners may be full, and
abounding in all manner of store, and that your sheep may bring forth
thousands and ten thousands in your streets; that your oxen may be strong to
labor, that there may be no invasion, no leading into captivity, no
complaining in your streets: That you may dwell without fear, Reg. 4. 25.
every man under his vine, and every man under his fig tree, having peace round
about you, as Judah and Israel had. God Psalm. 132. 17, 18.
make the horn of our David to bud, clothe his enemies with shame, but on him
let his Crown flourish; make his seed to endure for ever, and his throne as
the days of Heaven: All the good that ever was conferd of all Nations, I wish
heaped upon you. They were wont to say of Pericles, that (...) Suadela, the
goddess of eloquence sat upon his lips, he did by his Rhetorique so win the
hearts of the Athenians to him. From the bottom of my heart I wish our words
were made so powerful, as to woo all that hear us to convert from their
sins, and to turn unto the Lord, that so we might never need to foretell of
anger and wrath ready to descend from heaven: but the intolerable head sin
has got, kindles in me a strong jealousy, that either the end of all things
is at hand, to make a clean riddance of the wicked and their wickedness, or
else that some bitter judgment is near; it is near, and hastes greatly to
scourge us for our iniquities.

I have no skill in divination, yet let not my words seem to you, as the
report the women made of Christ's resurrection seemed to the Apostles, (...), as
an idle tale, Luke 24. 11.
do not slight them altogether, as Lots sons in-law did Lots counsel: when
he told them God would destroy that City, he seemed to his sons in-law as
though he had mocked. Genesis 19. 14.
I do not speak them out of any sudden flash of undigested zeal, I have
made collection upon collection, and observation upon observation, and been at
war within my self in my meditations, how to deliver my mind discreetly and
christianly, to avoid the imputation of an Enthusiasticke, and I find the
times so out of measure sinful, vices of all sorts, bloody, beastly vices, so
fowly committed, and so little punished, virtue so sincerely preached and so
little practiced, that I do look either for a sudden amendment of all hands,
(which I will be plain with you I misdoubt: For can the Morian change his
skin, Ier. 13. 23.
or the Leopard his spots? no more can they do well, that are accustomed to
do evil.) or else for some punishment suddenly; and if it come not, it is Gods
extraordinary mercy, because his compassions fail not.

We may say in our prosperity we shall never be removed, God of his goodness
has made our hill so strong; our poor shall be satisfied with bread, and our
children within us, our mowers shall continue filling of their hands, and they
that gather up the sheaues their bosoms: Yet hear me, Ecclus. 33. 18.
hear me, ye great men of the people, and hearken with your ear, ye that be
rulers of the congregation: Husband your provisions never so frugally,
replenish your storehouses never so aboundanly, barter with foreign Nations
for wine to store your cellars, send into your own valleys for wheat to fill
your granaries, and be not careful of the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, to
prune off her rotten branches, if you do not labor that the Lord of heaven
and earth may have a plentiful harvest, if you do not set justice as a
weeding hook to the roots of vices, to crop them maturely, so sure as Ier*
46. 18.
Tabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel is by the sea, Thistles shall Job
31. 40.
grow in stead of wheat, and cockles in stead of barley: Your Psalm. 107. 34.
fruitful land shall be made barren, because of the wickedness of those that
dwell therein.

Again, Hear me, hear me, ye great men of the people, and hearken with your
ears ye that be rulers of the congregation: Give order to cleanse your open
streets from all annoyances that may breed an infection, and to purge your
private houses from all scum and filth that may prove contagious; yet if you
do not exercise your authority, to sweep away sin out of your countries,
and cities, and villages, and private families, take heed a pestilence, morbus
incognitus medicis, a disease the physicians know not what to make of, such a
one as killed in Israel 70000. people in three days, 2. Sam. 24. 15.
do not creep into your particular houses, to kill your wives out of your
bosoms, and your children in your cradles, and make your merchant men to drop
down dead in your streets, as they are trotting to the Exchanges: dung in
your streets will not breed a plague so soon, as drunkenness in your houses,
nor will the il-fauoured serpent poison a place so soon, as the wel-fauoured
harlot.

Finally, Hear me, hear me, ye great men of the people, and hearken with
your ears ye that be rulers of the congregation: Give in charge to your
Captains of hundreds, and Captains of fifties, to muster your fighting men
year after year, and to exercise them in the feats of arms; provide such
horses as Job speaks of, that will mock at fear, Job 39. 23.
not turn back at the rattling of spears, or glittering of swords: Rigge up
your shipping, and set out a Navy to sea, advise one with another to make
fortifications and impregnable bulwarks impossible to be scaled, for the
safeguard of your Country, use all the art, and cost, and counsel your Nation
can yield to entrench your selves from foreign foes, and do not take a course
to quell the power of sin, and take heed God do not bring upon you an Army
of men bitter and hasty, as those Caldeans the Prophet Habacuc talks of,
Habac. 1. 6.
fell, as those Arabians whom Esdras calls the Nation of Dragons, fierce, as
those Carnanians the same man says rage in wrath like the wild Boar of the
wood, 2. Esdr. 15. 2^. 30.
having garments rolld in blood, that shall waste your Cities with misery,
Ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne them, ravish your wives, Ezech. 21. 27.
defloure your daughters, take no pity of the fruit of your loins, but even
blood their swords in the bellies of women great with child, that shall burn
down your Churches, and when the Ministers of the Gospel beg for their
lives, shall answer them as Titus the Emperor did the Priests of the Jews,
when they petitioned him for their lives, Decet Sacerdotes cum templis
int^rire, It is meet the Priests perish together with the Temples; that shall
drive you of the Laity in whole droues away captive, forbidding you upon pain
of death to look back upon the places where you dwelt, as the Romans forbade
the conquered Jews to look back upon Jerusalem; Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 4.
cap. 6.
and if they spare any at home, make them to pay an annual tribute for their
heads, as the Italians do the Jews at this day; and employ their children to
murder them that begat them, and to the rooting out of that faith wherein they
were borne and baptized, as the Turk does his Ianizaries, the children of the
Grecians. An unrighteous man will not consider this, neither will a fool
understand it; Psalm. 92. 6.
like as the Lord upon whose hand the King of Israel leaned, answered the man
of God when he foretold him of plenty: Behold, if the Lord would make windows
in heaven, 2. Reg. 7. 2.
might this thing be? so some one incredulous spirit or other may object, If
the Lord should cast us altogether out of his protection, might this thing be?
Are we not walled about with seas? Have we not ammunition and weapons of war?
Have we not men of magnanimous resolutions? and may we fear foreign
invasion? My beloved, Lament. 4. 2.
the Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have
believed, that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of
Jerusalem: and yet Jerusalem is a heap of stones. Micah 3. 12.
Let me say unto thee, O thou Merchant City, that art a mart for Nations, as
the voice did to Phocas the Emperor, Though thou build the walls of thy palaces
as high as heaven, yet if sin dwell in them, they may easily be entered by an
enemy. And give me leave to say unto thee, O thou careless Nation, as Nahum
the Prophet does to Nineveh, to that great City Nineveh, Nahum 3. 8, 9, 10.
Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the rivers, that had
the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her walls were from
the sea? Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite: Put and
Lubin were her helpers, yet was she carried away, she went into captivity,
her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets,
and they cast lots for their honorable men, and all her great men were bound
in chains.

Tremble therefore, thou secure Nation, and amend thy manners, lest God to raze
thee, and to lay thine honor in the dust, do call for Lucifer the son of
the morning, do hiss for the Be of Ashur, do call for a ravenous bird out of
the East, do plant the Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; give them
that charge he gave those whom he pressed to destroy Babylon, Put your selves
in array against (Britany) round about, all ye that bend the bow shoot at
her, Ier. 50. 14, 15.
spare no arrows; for she has sinned against the Lord: Take vengeance upon
her, as she has done, do unto her: And upon that set all your inhabitants in
such a hurry and an vp-roare, as the Citizens of Rome were in, when Martius
Coriolanus approached near it with an Army; Liuius.
make the murmuring multitude to flock about the streets, and you that are
Magistrates, to be at your wits end, to send post after post, and messenger
after messenger, to show the King that his country is taken at one end, Ier.
51. 31.
as the Babylonians did to their King, when the King of the Medes had entered
the City: and when men shall say, O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be
ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabberd, rest and be still; as
it is Ier. 47. 9. when the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, shall weep
between the porch and the altar, and say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give
not thy heritage to reproach, that strangers should rule over them, as it is Joel
2 1 7. he sit in heaven, laugh Priest and People all to scorn, cover himself
with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass thorough, as it is Lament. 3. 44.

To conclude all, the way to keep us from these fearful punishments, are
fasting, prayer, godly sorrow for sins past, and the amendment of our sinful
lives in the time to come: Not a day for a man to afflict his soul, Esaias 58. 5.
to bow down his head as a bulrush, to spread sackcloth and ashes under him,
it is not such a fast that the Lord has chosen: August.
Opus est perpetua poenitentia, quia perpetuo peccamus; We sin perpetually,
wherefore we had need to repent perpetually: though we do draine our hearts
dry of water to day, we shall have need again to morrow to water our couches
with our tears. Our grief for our sins must be equivalent, it must hold
proportion with the delight we have taken in our sins: our sins have been
wondrous great, and our mourning must be marvelous deep: we have bin out of
measure sinful, and we must be out of measure sorrowful; we have sinned with
greediness, and we must repent with bitterness; we have bin transported with
delight in the commission of our sins, and we must be swallowed up with
heaviness in our submission for our sins: Qui culpam exaggerauit, Amb. lib. 1.
de poenit,
exaggeret etiam poenitentiam; maiora enim crimina maioribus abluuntur fletibm;
He that has augmented his sin, must augment his repentance; greater crimes are
to be washed away with greater lamentations. Some run abominable races, act such
iniquities the Angels of God wonder at; and when they have done, will say each
man for his own particular, Miserere mei Deus, Lord have mercy on me, and
that too ex more magis quam ex animo, rather out of custom than heartily, as
Saul said to David, when he was going to combat with Goliath, 1. Sam. 17. 37.
Go, and the Lord be with thee; and think then they have repented
completely. O Lord God, that a man should dare to sin so damnably, and dream
to quit himself of the guilt of it so eastly! it is not bare Lord have mercy
upon us will do it, there belongs more to repentance than so; the faculties of
our souls must be griped with grief, and wearied with groaning, and tired
with supplications: we must double our words as Daniel does, and say, O Lord
hear, Dan. 9. 19.
O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken, and defer not for thine own sake, O our
God. We must renew our complaints with David, Psalm. 55. 17.
evening, and morning, and at noone day, we must pray, and make a noise, and
God will hear our voice. We must weep and wipe our eyes, and weep again and
wipe our eyes again, if we have loved many sins, before many sins can be
forgiven us. We must draw a conclusion in our own bosoms, that no Nation has
bin more bound to God than we, no Nation has sinned against God with a higher
hand than we; and therefore no Nation has greater cause to fast and weep,
mourn and lament for their sins, than we. We must give way to the thoughts of
our hearts, to reflect upon the distressed condition of the Church of Christ
abroad, and note how that the bed does not privilege the sick man, nor the
cradle the suckling babe, nor the great belly the woman, nor the altar the
Priest, nor the seat of justice the Magistrate, from the fury of the
merciless soldier: They fight and are killed, they yield and are murdered,
they fly and are pursued, they remain and are beleaguered, they hide
themselves and are hunger-starued, their corn fields are devoured by troops
of horses, their streams of water are colored red with the blood of men and
beasts, and in some places their earth is void, as if it were returning into
the Chaos again; as it is, Zech. 8. 10. Zech. 8. 10.
there is no hyre for man nor beast, neither is there any peace to him that
goes out, nor to him that comes in, because of affliction; for all men are
set, every man against his neighbor.

And yet we, a sinful Nation, a people laden with as much iniquity as any
Nation in the Christian world, are at rest; no trumpet is heard in our
streets, no solitude ante ostia, no desolation is before our gates, our
plow-shares are not beaten into swords, nor our mattockes into spears: the
seat of justice is not interrupted, the Word of God has a free passage, we
lay us down to sleep, and take our rest, God making us to dwell in safety; and
upon the comparison of these things, we must bethink our selves, what
ungrateful wretches we have bin to dishonor our God with our sins, that
has and does follow us with so much loving kindness above other people that
are more righteous than we; we must earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry for
our misdoings past, and we must swear unto the Lord, and vow a vow unto the
Almighty God of Jacob, to renounce our evil ways, and to serve him in spirit
and truth, in sincerity and with good conscience in the time to come; and then
our God will not forsake us, nor give us up for a reproach, that strangers
should rule over us, but bless us all our lines long in bodies and souls, and
entaile the blessings more firmly, than by any law you can devise, to descend
upon our posterity successively, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure:
And to that purpose, let us pray unto him, and say, O most gracious God, let
not our manifold sins make a separation betwixt thee and us, let them not
provoke thee to remove thy spiritual and corporal blessings from us; Give us,
O Lord give us, broken hearts, contrite spirits, and bleeding souls, to offer
up in sacrifice unto thee, that thou may be reconciled, and at an atonement
with us: Our sins are great, Lord, we confess it, but thy mercy is greater,
Lord, we believe it; mercy therefore, dear Father, have mercy upon our King,
upon our Queen, upon our Nobility, upon our Clergy, upon our Magistracy, upon
our Commonaltie, upon our whole Land, for thy Sions sake, for thy Gospels sake,
for thy beloved son Jesus Christ's sake. Give, O Lord, give thy Angels charge
over us, let them pitch their tents about us, that no pestilence come among us
to devour us, no famine befall us to starve us, no sword of an enemy invade us
to destroy us, and then, O Lord our God, if thou will give us grace, we will
bless thee, we will praise thee, we will magnify thee, we will sing songs of
thanksgiving unto thee, we will ascribe all honor and glory unto thee, and to
thy Son, our blessed Savior and Mediator Jesus Christ, and to thy holy
Spirit, to which blessed and glorious Trinity of persons, and but one God, be
given all might, majesty, dominion, and praise, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

