A BRIEF ANSWER of Thomas Harding Doctor of Divinity, touching certain
untruths, with which Master John Iuell charged him in his late Sermon at
Paul's Cross the viii. of July. Anno. 1565.

ANTVERPIAE typis Aegid. Die. 26. Iulij.

TO THE READER.
FOR so much (Gentill Reader) as Master Iuell hitherto has refused my
reasonable request, touching his sermon at Paul's Cross of the.27. of May
last, to be imparted unto me, so as he will stand unto it, and has since that
time eftsoon doubled his evil demeanor toward me, and his injury toward
the truth, by his other late sermon of the.8. of July last: I trust I shall
seem to do neither besides the duty of an honest man, if I clear my self of
slander objected, neither besides that apperteineth to my calling, if I defend
the truth impugned. I confess in very deed, it should better become my person
to bestow a just treatise upon these points, the^ such short pamflets, which
I would willingly do after the measure of my simple lerning, if I had the said
sermons either printed, or by M. Iuell himself subscribed. But the case
standing as it does, and the same being yet denied: I think it better thus to
write briefly, then by silence to seem to acknowledge a gylt, to suffer thee to
remain deceived, and the truth injured.

If the points whereto now I make answer, were mo or fewer, or under an other
form of words uttered, then here thou find them reported: therein I am
blameles, who follow such informations, as fresh from Paul's Cross I have
received. That such things were there spoken, I am not without cause
persuaded: seeing that the informations by sundry persons aparte made, without
diversity agree in one. And because thou art desirous with many other to be
resolved therein, to be short, thus it is.

COncerning his sermon of the.27. of May, there was no great thing said worthy
to be answered, besides his disproufe of certain ancient fathers in the first
article of my book alleged. Of whose good authority I purpose to treat
hereafter at large, for so the matter requires. Which to do at this present,
the time and occasion serves not.

Touching his other sermon of the eight of July, as the matter he treated of
was of more weight, so was his dealing therein of more falsehed and shamelesnes.

First, whereas he bare his hearers in hand, that in my second article for
proof of receiving under one kind, I had belyed S. Paul, as though I had
said, that in the tenth chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, he had
made no mention of the cup, for which he triumphed at me not a little:

How truly this was said, let my book be trial, where upon occasion of S.
Paul's receiving of one only kind after S. Chrysostomes mind, thou shall
find Reader, these words, in the first print, fol, 41. a. in the later print,
fol. 61. a.

It is not to be marueiled at, albeit S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians the
institution of our Lords supper under both kinds, that yet upon occasion
given, and when condition of time so required, he ministered the communion under
one kind, since that without doubt he took that holy mystery under one kind
for the whole Sacrament, as we perceive by his words, 1. Cor. 10
where he says: Vnus panis, and vnu^ corpus multi sumus, omnes, qui de vno
pane participamus. One bread and one body we being many are, all, that do
participate of one bread. where he speaks nothing of the cup. Thus there.

Now judge who list, whether in respect of those words of S. Paul, I might not
say as I did, where he speaks nothing of the cup. for in those words in
deed he speaks not of the cup. And that my word (where) has relation to
that sentence of S. Paul only, not to the whole chapter. For neither could I
be so blind, as not to see mention of the cup made in the next sentence
before, and how absurd had it ben by denying so known a troth, to have given
such advantage to the adversary? Now that S. Paul in that sentence speaks
nothing of the cup, I will be tried by the most ancient and truest copies
both Greek and Latin, and by judgment of them of M. Iuelles own sect them
selves, yea by thenglish Bibles and new testamentes of best authority.

Item where I say in my book, In the first print, fol. 14. in the 2. fol. 29.
that the blessed sacrament is not called communion, because many, or as M.
Iuell teaches, the whole congregation communicates together in one place, but
because of the effect of the sacrament, for that by the same, we are joined to
God, and many that be diverse be united together, and made one mystical body
of Christ, which is the church, of which body by virtue and effect of this holy
sacrament all the faithfuls be members one of another, and Christ is the head:
for proof where of there I allege Dionys. Areopagita:

Against this he pretended to have the authority of Pachymeres, of Haimo, of
Hugo Cardinalis, and Gerardus Lorichius. For his proof he alleged certain
words as out of Pachymeres.

To this I answer. First, that Georgius Pachymeres in his Greek Paraphrasis
upon Saint Dionysius, where only he had cause thereof to treat, wrote no such
words, as according to thinformations Master Iuell alleged. Neither without
doubt has Haimo, Hugo, or Lorichius any thing to the contrary of the doctrine,
which in that behalf my book reports. Now whereas M. Iuell byndeth us to the
authority of the first six hundred years after Christ, and admits none for
us that wrote since: what reason is it he should be heard, bringing against us
such as be far out of the compass of those years, and otherwise in his
opinion obscure men, and of no fame?

Lorichius lives in our time, Hugo Cardinalis lived Anno Domini. 1230. whom M.
Iuell doubtless little estemeth, as he who in his replies to M. D. Cole
disgraceth men of greater lerning then this Hugo was of, with the contemtible
name of the black Guard. Yet now he thinks good to make his most advantage of
them, and of who so ever come to hand, albeit their words that make for his
purpose against the doctrine of Saint Dionysius touching this point, are not
yet brought forth.

Georgius Pachymeres a Grecian, wrote not full three hundred years past, Haimo
long before, about the time of Charlemaigne. These, as the two other,
notwithstanding their age, I esteem as I ought. But their bare names without
any sentence alleged, prove no more the contrary of that I affirm, the^
potecaries empty painted boxes yield wholesome medicines for the sick.

Item where in my book among there places of holy scripture for proof of
communion under one kind, In the first prmt, fol. 41. in the second print fol.
61.
I say, that the place of the.17. chapter of the Acts might be alleged, and
add for better authority of that point, the judgment of S. Chrysostom, with
these words: Where Chrysostom and other fathers understand the bread that S.
Paull in peril of shipwreck took, gave thanks over, brake, and eat, to be
the holy Sacrament.

Hereof M. Iuell took occasion to say his pleasure of me, that I mysreported
S. Chrysostom, and belyed him, and therefore was not to be trusted. etc.

Understand Reader for my discharge, how good cause I had so to write, and how
little cause M. Iuell had so to say. For S. Chrysostom writing upon the
seventh chapter of S. Matthew, hom. 17. operis imperfecti, which work has been
alleged hitherto both of catholics and ghospellers of all sorts under the
name of Chrysostom, though it has been in some places corrupted by Origenistes
and other heretics for maintenance of their heresies, shows himselffe in
plain words to be of that opinion. Neither ought the errors of the Greeks by
false means conveyed in to that work, diminish the creditie of the whole,
specially of that which to this day no man ever found fault with all. Because
the place is notable, and makes clearly for proof of the real presence in
the sacrament, and for communion under one kind: I may do well to recite the
whole, thought it be somewhat long. Sed quia de Sanctis coepimus dicere etc.

Because we have begone to speak of holy things, it is not to be left
unspoken, that sanctification is one thing, and that which is sanctified, an
other. For sanctifiication is that, which sanctifies an other: but that which
is sanctified, can not sanctify an other, though it self be holy. As for
example, thou make the sign of the cross over thy bread which thou eatest,
right so as S. Paul says, for it is made holy by the word of God and prayer,
thou have sanctified it, thou have not made it sanctification. But that which
the Priest gives with his hand, is not only thing sanctified, but also
sanctification, for as much as not only that is given which is seen, but also
which is understood. And so it is laufull to cast of the sanctified bread to
beasts, and to give it to infidels, because it does not sanctify the rceiuer.
But if that which is taken of the hand of the Priest were such a thing, as that
is which is eaten from of the boorde, all would eat from of the boorde, and no
man would receive of the Priests hand. Luc. 24.
Wherefore our Lord also did not only bless the bread in the way, (he means
at Emaus) but gave it also with his hand unto Cleophas and his fellow. Act. 27.
And Paul as he was under sail, did not only bless the bread, but also with
his hand gave it to Luke, and to his other disciples. Now that which is given
with the hand, is not to be given to beasts, nor to infidels, for that is not
only sanctified, but also sanctification, and sanctifies the receiver. Thus
Chrysostom.

In which words he does both expou^de the place of the.24. of S. Luke for the
Sacrament, and also says expressly touching the place of the.27. of the
Acts, that S. Paul in the ship gave the bread with his hand to Luke, and to
the rest of his disciples, and that the same was not only a holy thing, but
also sanctification, which sanctifies and makes holy the receiver, which is
this blessed Sacrament that we speak of, which M. Iuell and the rest of his
fellows make to be but a sign, and figure of a holy thing.

Now Reader, for so much as Chrysostom says, that this sanctification, this
thing that makes other things holy, is given by the Priests hand: I would
thou should demand of M. Iuell, when thou meetest him next, what that is.
Require him to answer thee directly. And tell him, that it can not be
understood of Christ spiritually received, for that is not the thing which is
given by the priests hand. Ask him further, where this sanctification
rests, whether it be in the bread, or in the priest. for seeing that after the
mind of S. Chrysostom, it is given by the hand of the priest, it must be
either in the priest that gives it, or in the thing that is given. I trow, M.
Iuell will not say, that the great power to sanctify other is in the priest,
for it is the proper act of God, as him self witnesses, Ego Dominus, cod. 31.
qui sanctifico vos, it is I your Lord, which do sanctify you. Then the priest
sanctifies not, but only delivers the sanctification. Now if this Sacrament
were nothing in it selffe but bread, as M. Iuell, and all that new Geneuian
clergy teaches; how could this sanctification by their doctrine be in it? For
the bread being but a domme creature, is not apt to receive sanctification, as
they say, much less can it sanctify an other. Then since there is a thing
given by the hand of the priest, in which this sanctification rests, and the
same can neither be the priest, nor the bread: what remains, but that of
force M. Iuell must confess, that it is none other, but the most precious body
of our Savior Christ in that holy Sacrament, who as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.
is our righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, which body never being
separated from the godhed, is even that which sanctifies us?

Item where I say in the third article of my book, that I never read, neither
I think M. Iuell, or any the best learned of his side is able to prove, that
the church Service was within the first six hundred years in any barbarous or
vulgar tongue:

Against that M. Iuell would seem to allege me against my self, making me
forgetful of that I had said before, and contrary to my self. And therefore
he alleged out of my book certain words, where I make as it were an
antithesis between the Nouices in faith of S. Paul's time, in the first print
fol. 70. a. in the second fol. 95. a
and the church of our time, uttering these words: Their prayer (I mean the
first lerners of the faith) was not vaileable for lack of faith, and therefore
was it to be made in the vulgar tongue, for increace of faith. Our faith will
stand us in better stead, if we give our selves to devout prayer.

To this I answer. I speak of the church Service, and M. Iuell alleged
against me my words mencioning the prayer of the first lerners of the faith,
which commonly was pronounced in an unknown tongue through the working of the
holy Ghost miraculously to little profit of the hearers. Now between such manner
of prayer in the beginning, and the public Service which afterward in
continuance of time the church had in due and settled order, is great
difference. I speak of the one, M. Iuell obiecteth the other to no purpose,
but only to show of a will to discredit me. Verily by this he proves no
contrariety to be found in me, where with (as I am informed) in his Sermon
full bitterly he charged me. If he had either charity, or honesty, or
judgment, having read the third article of my book, he might well have
understood, that I mean by church Service a far other thing, then the
uncertain and as yet undisposed prayer of the very first infantes and entrers
in to the faith in S. Paul's time.

For proof that certain Nations had the church Service in vulgar and
barbarous tongues, he alleged S. Thomas of Aquine and Eckius, whom otherwheres
he scoffeth at as men of small authority, to such streightes for this point is
he dryue^. And yet that which they say is far from proving his assertion.
For as concerning that which he brought out of Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, S.
Chrysostom, Hierome, and Augustine, much less pertains it to this purpose.
He that being asked the way to York, answered a pot full of plummes, said as
aptly to the question, as M. Iuell answered to this direct point out of the
forsaid fathers.

Neither more makes the decree of Iustinia^ for proof that the service was in
any other the^ the Greek and Latin tongue in the East and West church, De
Ecclesiast. diuersis capitulis, co^stit. 123.
which to that end he alleged: but only that Bishops and Priests should
pronounce their words at the Mass and other Service with an audible and
distinct voice. Neither is he able to prove, that that decree was to be
extended to the Latins, and to all the people of Christendom, to whom in his
Sermon he said it to perteine. If he would stand to Justinians decrees, he
would sone be brought to recant in the chief points that be in question
betwixt us and the Ghospellers, as the learned in the Civil laws do well know.

In the.j. print, fol. 80. in the second, fol. 107.
Item where in the fourth Article of my book, I allege a testimony out of
Saint Augustine lib. 1. contra. 2. epistolas Pelagianorum ad Bonifacium, cap.
1. in which that holy and learned Bishop acknowlegeth the Bishop of Rome his
superiority, Englishing his words so smoothly as the roughnes of the Latin
phrase, which in sundry books I found uniform permitted, and there do note in
the margent this part of the sentence in Latin, so as I found it in books of
sundry impressions, Quamuis in eo praemineas celsiore fastigio speculae
pastoralis:

Hereat M. Iuell took occasion to carpe me, and to say his pleasure of me,
that I had mangled S. Augustines place, left out the verb est, placed a
nominative case without a verb, put communis without a substantive, written
speculae for specula, had made S. Augustine to speak false Latin, and had done
I can not tell what.

To all this I answer. I alleged the place faithfully as I found it. And if
M. Iuell will try my truth herein, let him vewe the books of sundry Paris
printes in folio, and of Lions print in octauo, and he shall find speculae,
not specula. And in tourning the place into English, not being so hardy as to
alter any word of the book, wherein I should give the aduersarye occasion to
charge me with the crime of a falsarie: for that I thought not to be upright
dealing: I englished it so, as the words seemed best to bear. Wherein the
fault which M. Iuell charged me with, is not to be imputed to my falsehed,
putting the words as I found them, but to the printers oversight, if any
were. Neither do I make S. Augustine to speak false latin, but so as the
books which I consulted, report him to speak. But what fault so ever he found
with my grammar, certain it is as touching divinity, that Saint Augustine for
all that in the forsaid place to Bonifacius, acknowlegeth the Bishop of Rome
his superiority over and above all other Bishops.

By this I perceive, whereas M. Iuell to impair my credit in the opinion of
the unlearned people, charged me with incongrue speech in the Latin tongue, he
would if he could, also charge me with inco^grue behauioure in Christian life.
For that is the mark he shoots at, to discredit my person, whereas he sees,
he is not able to disprove the doctrine that I defend.

If these be the greatest faults he could find in my book, there is no great
cause why his huge book made against it, that now is in printing, should be so
much desired, or sustain so great an expectation. Which expectation the
greater it is, the more it shall cause men to contemn it, and laugh at it, if
they shall see so great a hill after so long travail, brought a bed but of a
foolish mouse. If greater faults had been found, Paul's Cross had rong of
them. For these foreronning sermons have set forth the specialst points, to
disprove the doctrine of the Catholic church, to discredit me, and to get
credit to his own book.

And whereas he vaunted him selffe to have noted against my book.97. errors
within the compass of the first.80. leaves of his said book: In case they be
of the same coin that these be of, which he has pyked out for his best show
in the pulpite, as by such coyners they be easily coined: so may they be sone
rejected, when they come to sight, as being light of weight, and counterfeites.
If all were erroneous and faulty, that M. Iuell is not ashamed for such to note
and reprove, then were the whole sum of the Catholic faith and Christian
religion erroneous and faulty. With the teachinges and promptinges of the holy
ghost, John. 14.
wherewith the church has hitherto ben preserved from error in faith: it is
small shame my simple doings by M. Iuelles light report to be named erroneous
and faulty.

I understand by mine informations, that he spoke of certain other points,
wherein he sought how to impugn the truth, and to discredit me, as of the
secret pronouncing of the Canon in the West church, of thaulters standing in
churches of old time toward the East, and such the like matters of small weight
not worthy thanswering. But now I intend not by making any answer thereto,
either to trouble thee, or to pain my self being otherwise fully occupied.
This much I thi^^e to be enough for this time, to satis^^ thy request, to
defend the truth, and to clear me of the untruths, with which I was of M.
Iuell unjustly charged.

Now to end Reader, if thou be settled in the catholic faith, there stay
thee, what so ever thou hear and read to the contrary, and thank God of it.
If thou be wavering, nor yet thoroughly settled, but indifferent as it were to
the one side or the other: be well assured, that the faith of the catholic
church of these nine hundred years past be sufficiently disproued and confuted,
which in deed can not be Christ's promise standing, Mat. 28.
and his prayer made to his father for the church performed: John. 14
before thou adue^ter theverlasting state of thy soul by thy private choice of
a new found faith in these later perilous times toward the coming of
Antichrist first preached.

Antuerpiae. 1565. 24. Iulij. Tho. Harding.


