DAVID'S COMFORT AT ZIKLAG A PLAIN SERMON made in time of dearth and scarcity
of Corn and WORK.

By Robert Harris.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET, at the gilt Cup in Cheape-side 1628.

DAVID'S COMFORT AT ZIKLAG.
1. SAM. 30.6. And David was greatly distressed, for the people spoke of
stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his
sons, and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the Lord his
God.


THese words briefly report David's distress at Ziklag: which distress is
first in gross said to be great; and then more particularly, enlarged from the
causes and effects thereof. The cause (over and above his prinate loss) is the
mutiny of his own people, who are 1. imbittered upon the loss of their
children, taken by the Amalekites (against whom their zeal should have been
greater;) and thereupon in the next place would have stoned David, as the
author of so much mischief. David then was in danger of his head: he was
like enough to dye by the hand of his friends, as a malefactor without trial;
and this distresses him. Now for the effects: David first comforts and stays
himself on God; who was able to help all, being the Lord; and ready, being
his God. Secondly, having comforted him self in God, he consults with God:
where 1. the means on his part is mentioned, Gods own means: 2. the answer on
Gods part, a direct answer; both for the means to be used, and success to be
expected: he should follow and he should certainly speed. We will not
forestall another by any exact enquiry into the words, but acquaint you with
some general meditations, that have been to one, and may be to you, somewhat
useful.

First, Doct. 1.
this is in sight: That the Lord does sometimes suffer his dearest servants to
be greatly (...)stressed: Men greatly beloved, as David was, are many times
greatly straightned, as David was. To prove this, were to waste time. First,
see When they are chiefly thus distressed; secondly, Why: and as for kinds of
distresses, we shall touch them in application, and so save time. It shall
suffice (for the present) to say, that Gods children drink of all waters, and
have experience of all afflictions, and that chiefly in these times. First,
when they have left Gods counsels, and followed their own devices. Gods
children are never worse hampered, than in nets of their own weauing: when
they will be witty either against God, or without God, then they spinne a
woeful thread, a Spiders web. For carnal reason is a very bad counsailor,
and puts a man upon evil means; and none can draw a good conclusion from ill
premises, but only God. Therefore when Christians have lost Gods wisdom and
his ways, and betaken themselves to their own wit and ways, they have
plunged themselves wonderfully. A man is secure and confident in his own
courses, like a child that leaves his fathers counsel, and follows his
own; and the fresh water soldier, that will be a Pilot before he is fit for
a Mariner, and thereupon runs his ship upon the sands. Thus Jonah was greatly
distressed when he would be wiser than God: thus Abraham greatly distressed,
Genesis 20. when he would live by his wits: thus David, he had so contrived it,
that neither Saul, nor Achitophell, nor any of them all should touch him, and
now he is in all their dangers, unless God help him out. And never do Gods
children please themselves greatly in their own contriuements, but thus they
speed: where they expect great safety, they are greatly endangered; where much
comfort, greatly distressed.

2 Secondly, when they have received great blessings and comforts from God,
then comes pride and security, and that is a forerunner of a fall. Great
mercies work great thoughts and spirits in us; and great thoughts make way for
great afflictions. We will not instance in Nebuchadnezzar. David prospered
greatly, God had set him on high, made his mountain strong, his heart grew
secure, then came trouble. Hezekiah was greatly distressed, and when was it?
after great deliverances and blessings: V(...)iah and Asa the like. Man's heart
cannot bear a great measure of comfort, no more than his head can a great
measure of wine: therefore either God mingles their wine when they take it, or
presently after; or else they be giddy, and must be distressed. Hence S. Paul
after great consolations had great temptations and afflictions; 2. Cor. 12.
and the blessed Virgin Mary in S. Luke is told of a sword when of a son,
Luc. 2.35.
that must through her heart as well as Christ through her loins.

3 Thirdly, when they be to receive some great comfort from God, when God has
some great employment, or preferment, or deliverance, or consolation in store
for his children, he makes way thereto by some great affliction of body,
mind, state, friends etc. as men lay the foundation very deep when they mean
to raise the building very high. Thus Joseph was greatly distressed, but when?
when he must be a Prince shortly after: thus David greatly impouerished, when?
when shortly after he must come to the Crown. Generally, as in dark nights it
is darkest toward day-breake: so it is with the Saints of God; the sharpest fit
is ever at the birth, when they be delivered of their sorrow. So God makes his
comforts more tastefull and less dangerfull to them; and therefore first mars
them, then makes them; undoes them, crushes them, and then rayses them up.

These be special times: the general should have been first noted, viz. When
Gods children have gotten some stock and strength; for the Lord is wise, and
will not use an Iron Instrument to thresh out Cummin; Esaias. 28.
he will not lay weight upon green Timber, but first season it, and then
employ it after. Ioh. 21.
Thus while Peter was young he walked at large, but after was distressed. Thus
for the When.

Now Why does God bring such distresses on his? you may partly guess by the
When. He respects himself, his Church, his particular children in it.

First, God gains glory many ways by this. Reason 1.
First, his power is seen in their distresses, his love, goodness, truth,
etc. Then the Saints can say with Job, Now mine eyes have seen thee.

2 Secondly, Job. 42.5.
then not only present power and mercy is seen, but former: We see what
power was used in preventing misery, what mercy in giving comfort.

And thirdly, then God shall have their custom and company. Children that
care not for Parents in prosperity, will to them in misery; they will come
early, come every whit of them. David could comfort himself in his wives, in
his children before, but now ail are met in God; no wise but God, no child nor
friend but God: now he goes all one way, and now his confessions and prayers
be such as will set out God indeed; prays more and more spiritually than
ever, etc.

Secondly, Reas.2.
God aims at the Churches good in this. 1. whilst she is a spectator, she
lays about her in the getting and exercising of grace: others deep sorrows
makes all see how needful it is to get much says, patience, Scriptures in a
readiness. 2. these stir up to prayers, mercies, etc. as when Peter is in
Prison, one beheaded, another imprisoned, they thought it was time to pray;
therefore Acts 12. they set about it earnestly: So for mercy, when they saw
the Church distressed, famine coming toward her, they save and lay up, as
Joseph for Egypt. 2. when themselves be afflicted, they help themselves by the
afflictions of others. Such went before me in this affliction, and God loved
them, why not, me: Such cried and sped well, why not I: Psalm. 34. They follow
the cloud, and do not miscarry. Heb. 12.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
God aims at the parties good in great distresses: hereby they are tried,
humbled, have experience of their frailties and graces. A Christian knows
little of himself till much distressed, neither what his weakness, not what
his strength in Christ is: he neither sees how poor himself is, nor how
great his God is. 2. hereby they are brought to receive often sentence of
misery, death, h^ll in themselves; and it is good to taste these things before
we fecle them; twill empty a man of himself, and make him trust in the living
God; twill learn him those three Lessons of Christianity, that S. Paul has
clapped up in one verse, Phil. 3.3. i. to worship God spiritually, to make Christ
his iov, to lay down all confidence in the flesh: and 3ly. hereby they are made
helpefull to others. There is little to be expected from man till deeply
plunged. 1. He cannot pity others till experience has taught him. 2. he will
not be serviceable till afflictions have humbled and broken him. 3. he knows
not how to comfort others till himself has been wounded and healed. But when
he has learned by experience, he can make his own plaster serve another man,
and comfort him in the same affliction with the same consolation. And those be
the sweetest and surest comforts, when a man can say, my case was just the
same, and here is the scripture, the medicine that wrought the cure in me. 2
Cor. 1.

First for the wicked: Use.
leave them but these Scriptures to think upon. If this be done to the green
Tree, what shall be done to the dry? If God begin with the people that call
upon his Name, what shall the end of the enemies be? Are there not strong
plagues for the workers of Iniquity, Job 31? shall not they be distressed?

2 The chief Use is to Saints: Let not them question their sonneship because of
afflictions. In this nonage the Heir differs little from a servant: You can
make no certain Conclusion from outward things: do not offer it, unless you
will wrong God, Christ, the Generation of the Just, your own souls, all at
once.

Ob. But what shall be said to extraordinary afflictions?

Ans. 1. If such, God has determined the case in Job, against those
disputants: They are no good proofs of a bad person or condition.

Ans. 2. But ours be not extraordinary, nothing has befallen us, but what is
humane.

Ob. No? when did you hear of such a dearth as is now upon us? Ans. When? why
when an Asses head was worth four pound, 2 King. 6. Therefore infer nothing
against the truth of our Church from thence.

Ob. Oh but would the lining God so affict me if his Child?

An. So: how?

Ob. O I am crossed in a child as no man was so ungrateful, so unnatural.

Ans. Yes, except David, Ely, and yet those beloved.

Ob. Oh but I have such a beast to my husband as no woman ever had.

Ans. Yes, Abigaell.

Ob. Oh but my estate is broken all to pieces, I am nothing worth.

Ans. So was David at Ziklag: so Naomie: and yet beloved.

Ob. Oh but I have sold all, and now want bread.

Ans. So the Widow of Sarepta, 2 King. 4. Neh. 5. Lam. 4. and yet beloved.

Ob. Oh but my body is smitten too.

Ans. So David's and Jobs, and yet beloved of God.

Ob. Oh but my spirit is wounded, I am scorcht with the flames of hell, and
feel it in my conscience.

Ans. So Job and David.

Ob. But I am disabled from all service, I can neither pray, nor read, nor
hear, nor live, not dye.

Ans. So the Saints, Psalm. 102. the Church in Esaias; and yet beloved.

Ob. Oh but I am torn to pieces with hellish blasphemous Temptations.

Ans. Christ had such offered outwardly, yet beloved.

Ob. But I am haled with lusts, now impure lusts, now covetous lusts,
reuengefull lusts, and they make me weary of my life. So Paul, Romans 7. Gal. 5.
yet beloved. What then is to be resolved upon? Surely, that neither things
present, nor things to come, shall ever separate us from the love of God; for no
afflictions forfeit our Title.

Ob. Oh but mine be fins, passions, temptations.

Ans. Let them be what they will be; if they be afflictions to us; if they
tire us, wound us, make us cry to God, as Ichosaphat did, when they pursue us,
they weaken not our Title. Oh but that the smart of them may do without the
hatred of sin: they may weary men because painful, not because sinful. They
may; but mark, 1. these two be not well opposed: often the painefulness comes
from the sinfulness; were they not sinful, we could brook them well enough
for their pleasure and profit. 2. if opposed, pain in hypocrites only follows
sins committed. Thou art distressed before hand, and in great fear lest thou
should commit it; as Paul, Who shall deliver me from the body of death? 2.
great sins are painful only, if nothing but pain be heeded. Thou art
troubled with the first motions, a whole body of sin. 3. sin is only
painful to the unsanctified. Thou art troubled as much for want of faith,
love, humility, thankfulness, as for the ouerflowing of sin. 4. pain
makes one howl, but not to God, at least in the first place. But sin drives
a David first to God, then to men; ends in prayer, and not in chasing despair.
And is it thus with thee? either condemn David, or say, a man may be crossed
in wife, child, house, goods, friends, kinsmen, all at once; nay hazzarded in
his life, tempted in his soul, troubled in his conscience plunged into a sea
of miseries, and yet be dear to God; a blessed man, a glorious Christian.
witness David.

In the next place, Doct.
they think and speak of stoning David. See our nature; In crosses we are
apt to fly upon men, rather than to fall down and humble our selves before
God. Thus, were the Israelites crossed? they murmr at Moses, and they will
stone him. Want they water? stone Moses: Want they meat? stone Moses. And thus
the King of Israel at Samaria, Abab for Eliah, etc. Nay we see this disease
too strong in Saints: Sarah, in the 16. of Genesis, Asa etc.

Reas. 1. The reason is clear: first, we stoop not to God, because we are
naturally empty of Faith: we cannot see him, wanting an eye that's spiritual:
we will not, because we expect no help from him; and it is Faith that makes
us stoop, Lam. 3.

2 We chafe at man, because proud; and therefore fretfull and complaining: 2.
guilefull, and therefore rather translate than confess our faults; like
children, that will rather quarrel with servants for complaining, than
themselves for offending.

Use 1. Fear this distemper in nature, and watch which way our hearts are
working in the day of affliction. Unless the cross be very immediate, our
hearts break out toward men rather than God; and we sooner fret, chafe,
threaten, curse, than confess, pray, submit: and this is a fearful sin,
beware of it. And now lets not speak in the language of the wicked; It Is long
of David, therefore stone him: it is long of Corne-masters who hold-in corn,
that there is such scarcity, therefore down with them: it is long of Inclosers,
therefore down with them: it is long of hard Landlords, and therefore down with
them, long of Merchants that transport: it is long of some men's pride, others
wastfulnesse, others wantonness; and so grow bitter against others: But say,
it is long of me and my fathers house; my sins have increased wrath upon
Israel; I have been proud, wanton, wastefull, abused plenty, murmured etc. I
have sinned the sins of others, in that I have spoken of them with more
delight than grief, in that I have not wept for them, stood in the gap;
otherwise God would never beat another sins on my back. Thus lets do,
fret at our own sins, befoole our selves; and not only so, but in stead of
chafing at men, cast down our selves before God, see the rod, and God
appointing it: that done, go to God as David does, go by faith, go in the
works of repentance, go for counsel; lie at his foot, saying, Lord we
yield, we yield: if thou will have us poor, we will be poor; if thou will
have our goods, houses, habitations, here we are, and we resign that which we
have forfeited a thousand times: This the only remedy there is left us. We must
not spend our time in inueighing against others, but in accusing our selves:
we must not imbitter our hearts, by dwelling upon the instruments, but humble
them by looking up to God, and hush them by a free submission or our selves.
Fretting does but increase our misery, subjection and yeeldance only eases
us; and therefore say as they, Lamen. 3. 22. -- 40.

2 Comfort, if storms do not breed thistles and nettles in our ground:
Comfort, if crosses do not draw passions, oaths, curses, repinings, raylings,
but prayers, confessions etc. from us. O it is well when being let blood, our
veins send out that which is pure, not now that which is black, poy soned:
This argues a good constitution, yea the finger of God; for crosses of
themselves are not so much as purgative, much less alteratiue: It Is grace that
changes our complexion, and it is as good a sign when crosses take well, as when
the Word does. If then we find that our crosses send us homeward, set us
against our sins, make us cry out, because we can forgive no more, bear no
more, because we be so full of wrath, passion etc. lets bless God for this
cure: for nature chafes, morality bites it in; only sanctity makes sin
odious, stirs up desires of grace, pulls down flesh, sets up God in Christ;
in short, improues the cross.

Follows, Doct.
Their souls are bitter for their children: so the childs misery is the
parents bitterness: It Is gall and wormwood to a parent to see his sons and
daughters delivered to misery.

Reas. If there be grace in the parent, then the parent sees his own sin in
the childs smart: It grieves a good man to see a beast, a stranger bleed for
him, much more his child.

2 If but nature, yet nature is strong in working, that has so mingled fathers
and children, that in one both are sinitten; both bleed and smart, both live
and dye together.

Use 1. For ungrateful children: Think of this; your sorrows are your parents
forrowes, your shame theirs, your pain theirs, your loss theirs; and if you
love not your selves, love your parents: kill not them by your wickedness,
fill not their souls with gall who have fed you with milk.

Use 2. Against those that rob and spoil, oppress, defraud and beggar
yongue and old, the mother and the child upon her: Oh it is a fearful sin to
ruin houses and towns, to lay whole families on heaps, to set father,
mother, son, daughter all on weeping; the cry of so many will surely to
heaven, the smart of so many will deeply imbitter; when children shall cry to
parents for bread and they have it not, when they shall call for portions and
they have none, for coats and they have none, food and money and they have
none, when they shall look one way on the miseries of their children, another
way on the injustice, unmercifulness, oppression of Landlords, of Creditors,
and see themselves and theirs for ever betrayed to misery through the default
of others; Oh this fills the heart with many a bitter thought, the mouth with
many a bitter curse; the father curses, the mother curses, the son curses,
the daughter curses; they lie at God, and give him no rest till he revenge
them upon such hurtful persons: and that God that would not have a bird killed
from her yongue, will hear these curses, and make the earth, and stones, and
walls of men's houses, and lands to feel them: Oh then do not rob, kill,
crush men's sons and daughters, this will work bitterness in others, to us,
to ours.

Use 3. For instruction to us all: Is it so bitter to see our children in
misery, captivity? then meet the Lord before sentence goes forth, lest our
souls be made bitter for our sons and daughters: should the Lord send the
sword amongst us to our Ziklags, and we should see our daughters ravished, our
sons butchered before our eyes, would not this be bitter? Should we see
ones leg off, a seconds arm, a thirds head, a fourth crying to us, hanging
on us, would not this be bitter? should we see the Amalekites in our land,
our children carried away for slaves, would not this be bitter? should our
children fall in the streets for bread, dye for thirst, they ready to eat up
us, we ready to chop them to the pot, would not this be bitter? Oh how could
our eyes behold these things, how could our souls digest so great bitterness?
Oh lets now prevent this, that we may never see or feel it: Tell me not,
there is no danger: the Word of God is agaiust us; most of those sins which
have brought Captivity, Sword, Famine upon others, are amongst us: we see the
Lord has begun already, and our brethren have begun to us in this bitter
cup. O the bitter lamentations in Germany; fathers, mothers weeping for their
sons that be not: Oh England, look to it that we drink not up the
dregs; Oh that thou would fast and mourn in public; Oh that you would
each in private. Here each man wept bitterly for his sons and daughters, but
it was too late, they were gone: Nay, it was not too late; though gone, tears
will waft them home again: those tears that will recover children, will
continue children; therefore each man for himself, for his sons, weep
apart, pray, fast, mourn, wives apart, husbands apart, children apart; stand
before the Lord as Iehoshaphat did with your little ones, and say, Oh Lord
spare our Ziklags, our houses, our sons, our daughters, spare them from the
sword, from famine, from pestilence, from misery and who knows but that the
Lord may yet have mercy?

He comforted himself (or, strengthened, all is one) for the joy of the Lord
is strong.

Doct. The world is never so empty of comforts but that comfort may be found in
God: though there be somewhat a dearth of comfort in the earth, yet Gods house
is ever filled; in heaven comfort is to be had when none in earth, in God when
none in creatures. Daniel, David, Paul; thousands would witness this if
needful.

The instance is plain: when David could not comfort himself in his wives,
nor his children, nor his goods, nor in any thing under the Sun, he could in
something above the Sun, etc. And the Reason is at hand.

Reason. 1. God is the God of all consolation, the Spring of comfort; if any
water it is in the Sea, if any light it is in the Sun, if any comfort it is in God,
there it rests, there it is when no where else.

2. God is All-sufficient; there the heart finds every want supplied, every good
thing lodged: if the discouragement grow from wants, want of power, want of
wisdom, of comfort, of help, there the heart receives answer; in God there
is enough; there it is to be had, and that freely. As God is All-sufficient to
furnish us with all necessaries, so infinite in power, wisdom, goodness, to
help us against all evils, feared or felt. It our discouragement grow from
evils feared, look up to him and he can prevent all, as you see in David and
Esters story, and Paul: David was near to killing when Saul was now ready to
chop upon him; the Church in Ester was at a low ebb, when the lot was cast;
Paul, when forty had vowed his death; Peter, when the next day he must dye, and
but one night, hour, step between death and him, yet rescued.

2. If afflictions have overtaken us and discouraged us, look up again, and
see how easily the Lord can take them off: this week David has neither wife,
nor child, nor corn, nor cattle, and by the next he has his own, and a
great deal more: this year you see he is worse than naught for wealth, the
next a King; yea Peter can tell you, that imprisonment may be for a night,
deliverance ere morning; David's heaviness may be your guest this night, joy to
morrow, Psalm. 30.

3. If afflictions be long and strong, and thence discouragement, look up
again and you shall find, (...).
that after two days God will revive you, and you shall live in his sight. He
can heal old wounds in a short space; as in the captivity, Ioh. 5.5.
in the man in the Gospel; and deep wounds with a little tent. When David is
broken all to pieces, his estate to pieces, his household, his army, his heart
(they had wept till weary of weeping) Lo in two or three days he can make up
all again.

4 If afflictions be most bi^ter, and stinging, and lasting to our end, and
therefore discouragement; look up, and see, and God can ouer-top all these
sorrows with comfort, and sweeten the bitterest cup: why he has more
consolations than there be afflictions: as one abounds so the other. He has
stronger consolations than afflictions, he can make a David for the present
say Psalm. 94.19. and for the time past, It Is good I have been afflicted; and
for the future, Isah. 119. and 73.
Thou will be my guide to the death, and so receive me to glory: yea he can
make a Peter sleep in irons, a Paul sing in dungeons, Act. 12 and 16.
a Marty rejoice in sufferings, Heb 10. Why then if in God may ever be found
that which will answer our wants, supply all our griefs, there is comfort still
to be had.

Use. Now then (Brethren) is not this God worth the having? You cannot always
have comfort in wealth, comfort in health, comfort in neighbors, in children,
in wives, these be not always: these, while they be, do sometime minister
matter of grief; yea, sometime their life and presence does discourage: Esaias 20
but in IEHOVA is constant peace, constant comfort, and joy to be found; He is
constantly good, great, true, etc. Oh get him; how ever you do, get him, and
you have all; come what will come, he changes not, his comforts are sure; never
cease seeking, begging, hearing, conferring, till his Image be set upon you,
and your hearts assured of his love. You have seen the comforts of the world,
you see how all cisternes fail you, go to the fountain, in the word of God,
in the house of God, in the favor of God, you shall have comfort, in his light
you shall see light, when others nothing but darkness round about. Oh then,
thou that sit in darkness, in the darkness of temptation, in the
darkness of sin, in the darkness of affliction, darkness of poverty,
debt; thou that see no light, none within thee, none without thee, none in
thy soul, none in thy mind, none in thine estate, friends, etc. arise, put on
beauty, come into the light, stand up from the dead, (dead comforts, dead
companions, dead works) and the LORD shall give thee life.

2. For Saints: why do not they chide themselves, as David did, and call upon
themselves for comfort? Surely, Joy is comely; and it is their part to rejoice
in God.

Ob. Oh but how can we in sad times, in the midst of sorrow?

Ans. How did the Apostles? they rejoiced in the stocks.

Ob. True in case of persecution: but how should we in affliction?

Ans. How does David? he had lost wife, child, all, yet he comforts himself;
in what? when all was gone? in God, in him was all; and so long as God stood to
him, all staide with him.

Ob. But what if sin have haled afflictions on us?

Ans. David was not clear, yet in God is comfort then; comfort, because he is
gracious and ready to pardon.

Ob. Yea, but what if the misery be common, not particular and personal?

Ans. Such was David's, yet he comforts himself. Why God can heal a Town as
soon as a man; a Shire as soon as a Town; a Kingdom as soon as a Shire.

Ob. Yea, but what if ones ease be despemte?

Ans. So was David's to men's judgments: houses burnt, goods gone, the enemy
was gotten into possession; and yet David comforts him self in God. And in
truth, there is no mane case, estate, soul, desperate to God: if we were
nothing, he could make us something, if worse than nothing, he could repair
us.

Ob. Yea, but what if nothing left?

Ans. Yet if God loft, all is well, all is in him; all power, all wisdom all
wealth, comfort, etc.

Ob. But the times (...) exceeding hard.

Ans. But God is as kind, as rich as ever; heaven as full, grace and comfort
as cheap.

Ob. But when poverty pinches, need presses: what comfort then?

Ans. Yes, the consolations of God are strong: those crosses that seem to
swallow you, shall be very sufferable, if you fly to him. Oh then fly to him
by faith, Hab. 3.
say as Hab. vlt. Though the Figgetree, etc. yet will I rejoice in the Lord.
Fly by Prayer; and one faithful Prayer will shake off these yokes as easily
as Sampson did his bonds. Fly to the Word, and some Tychieus will comfort your
hearts as S. Paul says. Some one promise or other will settle you beyond
expectation.

Ob. Oh but what if God himself be a terror, not a comfort?

Ans. The word speaks blood not peace; yet reconcile thy self to God, cast
out sin, cast thy self upon his mercue: say, If any mercy or comfort in the
world, it is in God; therefore to him I Will go, there I Will lie at his gate, though
he kill me, I Will trust in him.

Ob. But what if I have done so, and yet find no comfort?

Ans. Wait, Psalm. 85.8.
hearken, for the Lord will speak peace to his, etc. He that trusted in him
never was ashamed. Hear then thou that look into thy barn, and there is no
comfort, corn is gone; into thy purse, there is no com(...), money is gone; into
thy cupboard, there is no comfort, bread is gone; unto thy children, there is no
comfort, thy own flesh and bone is gone; into thy heart, and there is no
comfort, hope and joy is gone; unto thy friends and land, and behold darkness
and sorrow, Esaias 5, the last verse. yet look upward to heaven, there comfort
grows; to Christ, there is comfort treasured; to God, and there the fountain is
as full as ever; conclude, God is mine, and therefore comfort is mine; he is
comfort without bread, without friends, without life.

Next, David consults with God in time of distress.

Doct. We must not spend time in whyning, fretting, musing; but we must
consult, and cast what is best to be done: The people do the one, David the
other. So Jacob, Genesis 42.1. Exodus 10.7.1. Sam. 6.2.
So the Egyptians to Pharaoth: the Philistims in Samuel: And Ephraims folly is
herein taxed, that he would stand still at the birth, Hes 13.13. But I press
not this; only for Use thus much.

Use. We are in David's straight (in a sense:) the people weep till they can
weep no more, their souls be bitter for sons and daughters, yea too many
speak almost of stoning every David, whom they conceive to be an occasion of
their misery: What must we do? surely David is a good pattern; 1. he
comforts himself in God, so must we, else our who be not our own, nor
graces, we can neither speak to God nor man; discouragement robbes a man of
all: 2. David goes to Gods ordinances, Gods word, Gods mouth, asks Gods
advice; so must we, hear what God says, what he calls for; and he calls for
more fasting, submission; calls us from our feasts, fashions, laces, etc. 3.
David forthwith executes what God speaks, so must we; you have been told
that this expense in feasting, in building, in houshould-stuffe, bravery for
your selves and children, abuse of plenty would beggar you; believe it now,
confess, amend it: and we tell you now, you must stoop that are poor, you
must help that are rich, do it, etc. But if we should now, it were too late.
No, God can fetch Ziklag again when it is gone, if sought unto: But what may be
done: You have heard (Beloved) it is not in vain to seck to God 12. seek to God
with tears, fastings, out with your sins, down with your hearts, yield,
yield, and acknowledge abuse of plenty: 3. use policy, and provide as David
did, work, the maine defect is from want of work: it is in vain to speak of
bringing down ma(...) unless there be employment. Were barley (...)
shillings, if men have not work it is all one: therefore you poor be willing
to work for bread, you rich study to sinde work; it is impossible to employ
all: thus do, you that have money (...) (out of fears) hoard it, produce,
employ it, and bring not certain mischiefs upon uncertain (...): a. you that
have wool, hemp, etc. now set it (...) etc. 3. you that have land, love
tillage; men may discourse, but without tillage such a land as this cannot
stand: love housekeeping; it is better keep men as servants, rather than as
rogues, as masters: 4. you that have means without land, help to sow the
land that this year will lie untilled and unsown, without help, and make some
bargain with poor men, etc. Why but there is not employment for half. Yet
again: Why but there is no money, there is little. Yet there might be more, if
pride in lace, plate, etc. might down, if unbelief did not bear the keys of
their coffers that have many houses. Suppose there were less money, pay men in
corn, bread, cloth, etc. But there is no work: No, look to your fields, were
ditches scoured, marshes drained, lands ploughed in many fields, it would
quite cost: look to your high ways, all the poor in the Country be scarce
crow to gather and lay stones in them for some weeks, etc. But we have not to
pay them. I answer once for all, better keep them working than begging and
wandering: kept they must be, and if they catch a haunt of idling and roguing,
they will be past all shame, all work, all thrift, all grace, and we shall all
rue it: Therefore if you know better means, use them, and set your wits on work
that something may be done, etc.

FINIS.

