The Apology of Johan Bale against a rank Papyst, aunswering both him and his
doctors, that neither their vows nor yet their priesthode are of the Gospel,
but of Antichrist. Anno Do. M. CCCCC. L.

A brefe exposycyon also upon the.xxx Chaptre of Numeri, which was the first
occasion of this present varyaunce.

Save thy self, O Syon, thou that dwell with the daughter of Babylon,

Zach.ii. Ye shall depart from Babylon, and escape the Caldeanes with a merye
voice, for the Lord has preserved his servant Jacob.

Esa.xlviii. Flee away from Babylon, every man save his soul. Let no man
hold his tongue over her wickedness, for the time of the lords vengeance is
come.

Hier.li. Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the most virtuous, mighty, and excellent Prince, Edward the.vi. by the
grace of God King of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, and
in earth under Christ, of the Churches of the said England and Irelande ye
supreme head, his most humble subject John Bale wysheth all honor, health,
and felycyte.
LONG was it (most worthy and excellent Prince) ere ye divine majesty would
fully condesce^de, yt Israel should have a King A king.
to raygne over the^, as had the foreyn nations, consydering that he had been
of so long time their high governor, leader, and defender.i. Regu^.viii. But
when it was ones determinatly granted them, what was more earnestly required
of God in that magnifycent mynystracyon, then were the necessary affairs of
relygion? David.
How diligent was king David in nombrynge the Leuytes, in assygnyng their
offices, and in appoynting the sacryfysers, syngers, seruitours, porters, and
other mynisters, in their places, lottes, and courses. i. Para.xxiii. How
studiouse was king Solomon Solomon.
in buildinge the house of the Lord. iii. Reg.vi. and in disposyng the
priests, leuytes, queresters, and door kepers, according to the order that
his father David had set. Abia.
ii. Para^.viii. King Abia strongelye warred upon Israel which had than
rebelled against the Lord, because they had rejected the priesthode of Aaron,
for a wicked priesthode of the ydolatrouse nations, to do them service in a
counterfett and false relygyon, which were no gods but ydolles. Asa.
ii. Paralip.xiii. King Asa followed the pleasure of God. He overthrew the
ydolatrouse aulters, destroyed false worshippinges, cut down the yrgroues,
brake in sondre their images, deposed his own mother for ydolatry, abolyshed
the stues of male children, and commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, and to do in all things according to his law and
commandments.iii. Reg.xv.

King Iosaphat having an heart couragiouse Iosaphat.
in the ways of the Lord, bannisshed the hill aulters and grove chapels out
of Judah, he sought out the word of God, he sent fourth faithful preachers in
the third year of his raygne, which took with them the book of the law, and
taught the people in all the cities of the land.ii. Paralip.xvii. King Iehu
executed the reuengemente of Iehu.
God, for the innocent blood of his holy prophets and seruan^ts, that was
cruelly shed. He slew the great tyraunts, Ioram, Ochosias, and queen
Iesabell, with their children and kyndredes, he destroyed all the false
prophet^s* and priests, consuming the ydolatours with their ydolatries, and
made common takes of their churches.iiii. Re.ix. and.x. King Ezechias did
clean to the Lord, put away Ezechias.
the hyl aulters, consumed y^ images, struck down the groves, and all to brake
the brazen serpent y^ Moses had made.iii. Reg.xviii. He prepared the temple,
purified the sanctuary, pourged y^ Levites, reformed y^ priests, restored
again the true religion of Judah, pro uided for the ministers, and offered up the
lacri fyces to the Lord.ii. Par.xxix. King Josias Josias.
in like case restored again y^ decayed religion, brought y^ laws of the Lord
to light, commanded the people diligently to observe the^, put down the false
religions which had done sacrifices to the host of heaven, brent their images,
defaced their aulters, and stampte the^ to powder, brake down y^ bugger^ places
in y^ Masmongers.
house of y^ lord, slew al y^ ydolatrouse priests ^ brent their bones in places
of their wicked sacryfyces, and he put out of the way all sothsaiers,
sorcerers, inchaunters, witches, and removed all other abhominacio^s of the
ungodly, reducynge the people to the true service of God.iiii. Reg.xxiii.

Suffycient are these most worthy examples of y^ scripture, to declare what y^
dewty of a king is, concerning the affairs of our Christen religion. Two
things have ii. evils,
chiefly been the cause of the utter decay and full destruction thereof,
continually from time to time, both in the old law and in the new, which are
dysputed and improued in this treatise here following. The one of them is a
prodigyouse priesthode, in no point agreeable to the prescrypcyous, ordinances,
or determynate rules of God. The other is Uowes.
a strange kind of vowyng, neither taught of Christ nor yet persuaded of his
Apostles, but expreslye condemned of them both, for an horrible hypocrysye and
manyfeste doctrine of deuyls. In the Testament of Moy ses, is only the
priesthode of Aaron, and in the Testament of Christ, the only priesthode of
Melchisedech. The first as a figure was fynyshed in Christ, in the other he
perpetually reygneth at the right hand of God the father. Let your learned
Mayestie then Priesthed
co^sydre, what priesthod it is, that these wily, wilful, wicked, arrogaunt,
and obstinate papists of your Realm, extol so mallopertly and boast so
stoutlye, these two priesthodes taken clerelye from this earth? way also what
the vows are, yt sets it in force to work all ungodliness, and still to
uphold the wretched world in the most execrable vices of ydolatrye and
buggery, to remain the wicked members of that great city which Members.
the holy Ghost calls Sodom and Egypt. Apocal.ii.

None authoryte have these vows and this priesthod of the holy scrypturs,
though they a thousand times allege for them: vouere and reddite. Psa.lxxv.
for vouere in that place pertayneth no more to their vnwining state, tha^ does
reddere there to the office of their massynge priesthode. Uowes in that Uowes.
kind, are not of faith, but of supersticion, not of Christ's doctrine, but of
the Paganes fables. Mark the folyshnesse of them, when they are of things
impossible. Who can pro myse to do miracles and perform it at his pleasure?
who can vow that his hear shall not grow, nor his nails increase, and
fulfill it in effect? No More can they do to live chaste, unless the Lord
give it, which he never does in causes unnecessary. An office was this
practiced priesthode, not of God, Of boeth.
but of ydols, and that kind of vowynge, an inuencion of the old Paganes for
their vestals and monials. So that an offycein ydolatrye is the priesthode, and
the vow yt they call of their chastyte, a service of prodigiouse buggery, much
detested of saint Prestes.
Paul. Roma. i. In Christ we have a priesthode, so many as believe in him and
are regenerate. i. Petri. ii. and Apocal. v. why should that false priesthod of
Antichrist, depryue us thereof, for their oylynges and sha^ynges, and convert
us into a layte, to give place to that deuilrye?

Is darkness above light, unrighteousness above righteousness, or Belial
above Christ? Oh break down these gates of Gaza and buyldinges of hell, like
a mighty strong Samson, and from hens fourth suffer Samson.
no such filthy orders to be given in your realm. In some places of the old
testament is this usurped presthode called the presthod of Baal. iii. Reg.
xviiii. and Hier. xxiii and in some places the presthode of Bell, Daniel xiiii.
Esai. xlvi. In the new testamente, the massynge presthode, whych^is the
synnefull synke and confuse Chaos of all ydolatrye* Chaos.
was reared up by the Deuyls general vycar, the bawdy bishop of Rome, and
put in full strength, Satan ones set at large after his thousand years
inprisonment. Apocalip. xx. Mark the procedynges of pope helhounde or
Hildebrande, otherwise called Gregory the. vii. which first deposed priests
that had wives, and enacted in the general synod at Rome, that none should be
admitted to that massing order, unless he professed the life sodomyticall
under a contrary title of chastity, in Profession.
the year of our Lord a. M. lxxiiii. Never were they able before that day, of
their little cakes to make the^ pratye gods by their transubstanciacions* nor
yet to bring the blind people in a madness to worshypp them.

As it was with the presthode of the old ydolatours, so was it in continuan^ce
with this massynge presthode of Antichriste. For the Egypcyanes which were the
first authors Egypci^^
of the false religion, would never admyt any man to their presthode, that had
not been nousled up from his youth in the rules of that most fylthie ydoll
Priapus. Which baudy custom is not only received of the Romysh church, but
also with al dylygente loking on, both maynteyned and religiously observed.
None may be admytted to their whorysh orders, that has not those instruments,
whereby men are known to be men, no, not the great Priapus of Rome Priapus.
his own person. Though they professed hipocritically a perpetual abstine^ce
from lawful generation, yet were they not all without their unlawful
remedies, when the vnque^cheable heates came upon them. The bishops had their
dedicated ladies and madames, the monks their veyled mo^yals, the chano^s
their professed nonnes, y^ frpres Provision
their religiouse systers, the great cathedral churches, mynsters, and
colleges, had stues at their very gates, besides all their other more then
beastly occupyinges, not with a comely honest to be named.

These. ii. horrible mo^sters, the Romish Popes priesthode, and the vow of
his boryshe buggerye, which has filled all the whole world with so many
ydolatries, sorceryes, aduoutries, lecheries, ^odometries, Fruits.
tyrannies, trayteries, sedicio^s, co^spiracies, and innumerable treasons, has
not been so noyouse and hurtefull to the christen common wealth, but it has
still to this day very earnest vpholders and mayntainers, not only of the
clergy, but also of the laytie, not of the meaner sort of men, but of them
that will be cheche mate with the best at home in their shyres or contrayes,
as appears by Proved.
this treatise following. I therefore exhort your excellent majesty in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, as ye undoubtedly inte^d the glory of God and wealth of
your christian Realm, not only to remove this vow and this priesthode, hence,
but also clearly to abolysh their names with the name of their first founder
the bishop of Rome. Suffer not the title Nopriests
of a priest to remain within your christen domynion, nor yet the note of that
buggery vow, but away with them both, as with the most pestilente poisons
that ever inhabyted here.

If holy S. Paul wylled fornycacion not ones to be spoken of among the
Ephesians, Ephesians. v. let not these two, much greater ii. evils.
evils, which has bredde and brought forth so exceadyng many myschyefes,
dwell still among your people to their deadly corruptynge. Send them again to
Rome, from whence they came first of al, to their po^pose patryarke, and
permytte them no longer to maintain his cursed cattle here. Let the one
bear away the other, the blind priesthode Catell.
the lame vow, and let them trudge hence apace, till they come to their
master of myschief. And let their names be as ody ble to your majesty's liege
people, as their fruits has been execrable and wicked, else are ye never like
to have quietness within your own land. Account not him for Enemy.
your majesty's faithful subject, that here a after shall support them or
defend them by any kind of false doctrine, for in the end ye shall not find
him a faithful subject.

The testament of Christ has names sufficient Names.
for the mynysters of his congregation, as preaching bishops,
superintendentes, watch men, pastors, eua^gelistes, instructours, elders,
deacons, stewards of his mysteries, and such other like, though we horowe not
these blasphemouse tytles of Antichriste.

Rote out these temple chaplaynes and altar prestes, from the multitude of
your people in the English and Irishe churches, for those prestes were never
like the prestes Borrowed
of the Lord, though they borrowed of them both dysgyfinges and obseruacions in
outward apearaunce, but like the false prestes of the pdolatrouse nacyons. The
Lord has promised to dispatche the shaven Madya^ytes, Hiere. ix. and those
priests whom he utterly forbad to shave their crounes, Leui. ^hauen.
xix. and. xxi. Deuter. xiiii. and Ezech. xliiii. be you a faithful and earnest
minister in executing that Godly office. Destroy the male stues (as is said
before) within your own land, as did noble king Asa. iii. Reg. xv. Break
down the buggery places in the house of ye ^orde, as did good king Josias.
iiii. Reg. Josias.
xxiii. And drive out of the temple, the unlawful buyers and sellers, with
Jesus the son of God, Luc. x. Deliver your people, like a valeaunte Moses,
from the manifold bondage of that Babylon and Egypt, that they may stead
fastly stand and persevere in the fredom, whereunto Christ has most gracyously
called the^. I bes^che the almighty God to preserve your excellent majesty,
and Prayer.
to gyde you always in his true fear and love, to prospere you in long life
to his pleasure, and to send you evermore over his cruel enemies and yours,
triumphaunt victory, to the glory of his holy name and confort of yont
faithful subjects.

So be it.

Johan Bale to the Reader.
IN the very^ time (most ge^tyll Reader) that Christ apeared in the flesh for
the restauracio^ of man, diverse alteracio^s ha Alteracions.
pened in the world, and many strange wo^ ders were seen, prenunciate before
by the Prophets, and afterward in the chronycles declared to be paste. The
high priesthode and sacrifyces of the Jews, with all the temple ceremonies
the^ ceased. The symulachres or ydols of the gen tyles, fell down to y^ ground
and were broken both at Rome and in Egypt, yea, great Romulus and all. In token
that he was Romulus
come into this earth, which should both end that priesthode, and by his
lyuelye doctrine abolishe all supersticions and false relygyon. The order
appointed to him alone of his heavenly father, Christ in that flesh took upon
him, which was the high priesthode of Melchisedech. In that priesthode he
uttered the eternal testament, performed the general sacrifice Christ.
ones for all, paid the price of a full redemption for sin, and pacyfied for
man his fathers wrath for ever. In that priesthode he arose from death and
ascen ded to heaven, he sytteth now on the right hand of his father almighty,
co^tinuallye he makes interpellacion for us sinners, and shall come at the
latter day to judge the quick and the dead. This priesthode Priesthod
requires neither oil nor shaue^ crown, neither chalyce nor altar, neither
myter nor cope, neither vestiment nor cross, with such like toys of
Antichrist.

Of this priesthode are we priests, so many as believe in him, to offer up our
selves as a sacryfice to God, to become his fre children by adopcio^, and to
receive y^ Priests.
inheritance of immortalite. The priesthode which has of long time been used
in the christen church, is a false and deceytful priesthed, practiced of ye
Romish popettes and brought into an use by their couetouse co^ueyaunces, the
obseruacio^s thereof borrowed of the Jews shadows Apes.
and paganes supersticions. To nothing might ye priests of ye priesthod, be
more ap tely compared, tha^ to dau^sing apes, whose natural property is, to
cou^terfet al things that they se done before them, and yet are they never that
they seem to resemble. For those mocking masmongers have counterfeted Aaron in
their apa(...)aylinges, aulters, and ceremonies, yet (...)er they never as was
Aaron, Eleazar, Mockers
or Phinees. They have cou^terfeted Chri stes sufferinges, in crossinge one
hand over an other, and in spredinge their atmes abroad, Judas in kyssinge,
Cayphas in prelatyng, and Pilate in washinge their hands, with an hundred
toys more, yet were they never right Christ's, but such disgysed monsters with
crowns shaue^ round, as ye never saw the like.

And what else has set foreward this prestigiouse presthode, but a prodigiouse
kind of vowyng, in lewdness not unlike Uowing^
to y^ same, which never was in full force till Satan was at liberte, Apocali.
xx. So long as they were permitted to have wives in marriage, they were
ministers of the church and no prestes. But now sens they have left marriage,
by virtue of their vows, they became prestes and no godly ministers, to serve
Antichriste and y^ Devil in all blasphemouse ydolatries. And because men shall
not be ignorant of their vows, I will declare unto the^ Uowes.
what they are and from whe^s they came, ere they shall enter into the readinge
of this book following. This was their first original, as I have gathered of
most learned and ancient writers. A manner the people among the old paganes
conceived first of all, to give gifts to their superior governors, to obtain
thereby their benevolence and favor, the For fauer
dyspersed commens to their kings, and the enclosed citiezens to their
magistrates. And as they perceived this commodiouse in serving their
expectacion, they practysed upon the same a religion to their gods, to please
them by y^ like, having it in a continual and daily exercise, whereby they
obtained in process of time, both Gaynes.
prodigiouse answers of their false gods, and also miracles of diverse
kinds, as the Devil is ever ready where true faith is wantyng, and his word
neglected, to subvert all order of godliness.

The Hebrews though they were the pe culyar and chosen people of God,
contynually exercised in his good doctrine, by Teachers
Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Io seph, and other graciouse fathers in
that succession, yet were they very flexible and prone to ydolatry, which lay
much in that practysed kind of vowynge, or promysinge sumwhat. God therefore
of mercy, not willing to lose that people of his, but favorably to bear
with their babysh weakness, gave fourth certain ru Rules.
les and precepts by his servant Moy ses, for sacrifyces, vows, and
ceremonies, not in all points unlike to theirs, to serve their tender infau^cy
till they came to more years of discressio^. Though these vows were thus
converted into a relygion by the set ordinance of God, and served to these.
ii. very profitable ends, to keep the Hebrews from the fylthynes Hebrews
of ydolatry, and to be special types or fygures of Christ in this flesh,
yet were they in themselves but ceremonial shadows. Continual were they not,
because they were but tolerate for a time for mannys infyrmytees sake, and had
not their first institucyon of God. For by his holy prophets he sumtyme
reproved them, and sumtyme forbad them, and by his son Jesus Christ he
utterly abolyshed Uowes.
them in the end as vain worshyppynges, S. Paul allowynge them for none
other but very barrayne, weak and beggarly tradycyons, Gala. iiii.

In brent offerynges to the Lord (says David) thu have no delyghte, Psalm. l.
I hate your feastfull days and fastings (says the Lord) even from my very
heart, Reproved
Esaias. i. Where as ye sense me when ye come together, I will not accept it,
Amos. v. In vain ye worshypp me (says Christ) teachinge the doctryues and
precepts of men, Mathe. xv. with a great sort of witnesses more. To proceed
further Uowes.
in this matter, when vows are at the best, they are no profitable wurkes of
the Gospel, but unprofitable wurkes of the law, which iustyfyeth no man,
Roman. iii. and Galat. ii. Yea, now clearly abolyshed and taken away by
Christ, we are compelled by his lively docume^tes to judge them much wurse.
They be now no better than mennys fleshelye Wurkes.
dreams, voluntary wurkes, monastycal wurkes, hipocritysh wurkes, and in that
kind, synnefull, wicked, blasphemouse, and deuylysh wurkes, proceadynge of a
dampnable dark ignorance of Christ's lively doctrine. Of this am I sure, that
vows may well make pharysees, hypocrytes, dyssemblers, ydolatours, and
beastly buggerers, as they have done without Uowes.
nombre. They may set forth pagane prestes, maskyng monks, turkysh nu^nes and
vestalles, masmongers and ydell prebe^des, with other disgised apes of antichrist
but they can make no godly christianes.

Let no man then fear to forsake the^, no more than he shall fear to forsake
wic ked sy^. For they are not only a miserable Uowes.
captivity and servitude of Egipte, but also a clogge, a yoke, a snare of
satan, a cheane of iniquite, and the most sinful character of the great
beast, or a mark to bye and sell by, which is to have an occupying in that
wicked generacto^, Apo. xiii. He that bears that character or mark in his
forehead and hand, that is to say, he that believes that wicked doctrine
Doctrine
of Antichrist, and follows it in his life, shall drink of the cup of Gods
heavy wrath, Apocai. xiiii. A noisome wound and sore botche falls upon all
the^ that bears the mark of that hortible mo^stre, Apo. xvi. for so have
they their consciences defiled with filthiness vnspea kable, and ar given up
into their own lusts. They which bear that character in the beasts
obedyence, are stayne by ye swerd Character
that proceeds from the mouth of him which sytteth on the horse. Apo. xix.
that is, they be co^de^pned utterly by the wurd of God written, Johan. iii. and
by that which shall be pronounced at the lattre day by Christ sytting on the
judgment seat in our humanyte. Math. xxv. Lo, this is the reward of ydell
vowers, that neglectyng Gods ways, will follow their own inuencyons. Nothing
ought of a christian Reward.
man to be attempted, that is not expreslye taught in the testament of Christ.
For that which is not in the scryptures contained, is fryuolouse, vayn, and
wicked.

Here perauenture it will be reasoned. How can I be Gods, unless I do vow my
self unto him? Thus I answer thy unlearned and folly she question. In the old
law, the first borne were the lords, Answer
Leuit. xxvii. yet they never vowed them selves unto him. In the new law are
we the first borne so many as believe in Christ, and are regenerate, Johan.
i. tha^ are we his by faith and baptysme, and not by vows. Gods creaturs we
are by creacion, Of God.
his servant by redemption, his children and heirs by adopcion, by vows are
we in no point his, but our own. Uowes being wurkes of our synneful will,
may add unto his wurkes great imperfeccion and weakness, but no per feccyon
and strength can they add. We may do as deo the sons of Aaron, ministre
Aaron.
a strange fire in the sacryfyce, and be consumed of the same, Leuitic. x. We
may put to his wurde, and be found reprouable liars. Prouerbio. xxx. We
may add to his book of prophecy, and have added unto us the plages therein
written, Apoca. xxii. Oh tempte not the lord to much, least in his high
displeasure for thy wylfull rebellion, be destroy the Rebellion
for ever with Core, Dathau, and Abiron, Nume. xvi. None of us lives his own
servant (says S. Paul) neither does any of us dye his own servant. But
whether we live or dye, we are ye Lords, Roma. xiiii.

A promise or vow, is always of this nature, it dyspossesseth the first
owner, and makes the thing promised, to be his, whose it was not before. See
than what A vow,
thou do, when thou bryngest thy self vudre a vow. Where as thu werte the
Lords before, thu becomest thine own by a new creacion, as the tree that is
^ewen down and made an image, becomes of Gods, the caruers. A miserable
mutacion is this, if thu mark it. For by thy vow, thu thus becomeste of Gods
creature, an ydol of thine own. But this thu wylt offer to God? This sacrifyce
is unsavory. Thu cannist not herein please An ydoll
him, but most wyckedly blaspheme him. When thu art his creature, it stands
well with ye to be saved by Christ's merytes. But when thu art thine own, thu
will make claim to thine own deservings, which can not further the to
salvation. Thu will paradue^ture say, that thou art still Gods,
notwythstandynge thy vow, though thou in that pel Not gods
try be nothing less. For thus is a vow dyffyned of Lyra. Uotum est, cum
aliquid de nostris offerimus deo. We calit a vow when we offer any thing of
our own to God. But standing the case, that thu werte his in deed, thu doeste
but mock him, if thu offer him his own, for thu cannyst not do it without a
theft. Remember how dysdaynouslye and lothesomly they are pleased with
gifts, that A theft.
have this homelye adage in their mouths, he geuethe me a pygge of mine own
sow, and thu shalt well perceive how much God is pleased with thy fo lyshe
and ydell vows.

O bruty she fool and beastlye ydyote, thu sekest and procurest by thine own de
uyses to make Gods commandments of none affecte for Antichrists wicked
tradycyons, Mathe. xv. Thy labor in this work is none other, but as the
enemies was, which sowed the unhappy tares among the good wheat, whyls y^
Wickedli
tyllers were a sleep, Mathe. xiii. In the ydell slothfulness of the church,
when the profitable tylthe of Christ was not regarded, the wylye old serpente
sent fourth his wicked massengers, to plant in the ignorant hearts that most
execrable superstycyon of vowynge. Thu Tares.
blyude and wytlesse ass, do take it for an high relygyon, but in the
last judgment day, it shall be reckened to the among ydell words, in
parell equal with the blasphemynge of Gods holy name. Repent it therefore, as
thu woldeste repent sin, and forsake it utterly as thu will forsake thy
dampnacyon. Con Covert.
uert thyselfe again into the fredome of Gods children, and be not a captyue
slave in the lothesome kingdom of Antichrist. Tarry not upon the unlearned and
wytlesse persuasyons, of such babbling papystes, as is he that is here
confuted, for their ways and doctrynes leads clerelye to perdicion. They
vnprofytablye cry, doctors, doctors, as the Jews The Jews.
sumtyme cried, the temple, the temple, Hier. vii. but trust not thou in their
false lyeng wurdes. We can never have a better doctor than was Christ, whom
God the father commanded us to hear, Mathe. iii. for other doctors we have no
commandment.

He y^ voweth to live without a wife, or any other kind of papystry, is no more
bound to perform y^ ungodly vow, tha^ he Not bosid
that has professed the faith of a Jew or the religion of a Turk, is bound
to ob serve it to his lives end. If an English vower in the time of peace,
should promise by oath to serve the French king of a thousand vows at a
certain day, and war betwyxt England and France were proclaimed in the
mean time, he Break it.
should better please God to break his oath, than to keep it. Like
consyderacion is to be had of the unadvised vow of prestes chastity. If a
man professing that life, should afterward feel himself not able to perform
it, but were like to fall into greater mischeues than is the breaking thereof,
he may break it without danger, as a thing begone of rashenes. Submit.
For no man ought to prefer his own act to ye ordinance of God. And
again, the change of things by his secret providence, dyschargeth the
necessitye of the oath or promise. How folyshe, unadvised, and presumptuouse is
the vow, when promise is made to live all the year of an other mannys purse
without his grant or consent? How frantycke A vow.
and parelouse, when that is behested wherein stands the danger of life, as
to give a sharp knyfe to a child? How doubtful and wicked, when that thing
is professed which is impossible, as that the hear and nails shall not grow.

Sucht are the rash vows of the ydolatrouse and mocking papystes. They
profess to be chaste, the gift remaining Mockers
in the hands of God, and not promised to that kind of vowers. They fear not
the parell of yt which is most dau^gerouse, as to give to a mad man a weapon,
that may stee therewyth. Neither doubt they the impossibilite of that which
is to nature impossible, as to live without sustenaunce of meat and of drink,
or when they have eaten, never to avoid the superfluouse matter. I would wysh
yt al rash vowers would layserly consydre Dewers
the rash vow of Peter the Apostle, to what conclusion it brought him, and
so with him to repent it at the lattre. He vowed to goo with Christ into
prison, and to stand by him to the very death. But what followed of that
rashenes? He was never able to perform his vow, because God had not promised
to assiste it. But in the end he fled from it, shamefully forsakynge him,
leaving him, and deuyenge him utterly. If repentance Peter.
had not gracyouslye followed thereupon, he had without question been dampened as
was Judas that betrayed him. Such are the fruits of all rash vowers, they
deny their Lord God in the end, for want of perfourmaunce. Let them
therefore repent, and follow his commen ordinance. Marryage is the instytucion
of God, and vyrgynyte his noble gift. Why these. ii. virtues should fall at
varyau^ce ii. virtues
or contend for the highar place, I can not by the scryptures co^ceyue. They
were in Mary Christ's mother at a peaceable agreement, and the one served at his
incarnacyon so well as the other. Neither was the one more praised for her
service there, than was the other.

But in this ydell presthode, the one could never abide the name of the other,
by reason of the vow that antichrist had placed therein. Which in process of
time The vow.
exyled the^ both, and nourished for the^. ii. un happy gestes, called whoredom
and buggery. Away with that wicked vow, that sets varyau^ce among virtues,
and that places in their rowmes most execrable vices. That vow is not all
unlike to yt Angel of myschefe, which set the first strife among Angels in
heaven, and amongst Doctors.
men here in earth. I maruele what has moved the fyckle heads of our
doctors, so earnestly to maintain a matter by their doctrine, of so much
mischefe. It is in my opinion a great madness, to at tend so much to the voices
of Hierome, Ambrose, and Gregory, dyssuading from mar Apostle.
riage, and so little to regard him which cre ated man to live honestly therein,
co^maundyng by his Apostle, that men should rather marry tha^ burn, rather to
have wy ues of their own, tha^ inordynatly to affecte the wives, daughters or
maid seruau^ts Hierome
of others. i. Cor. vii. Though Hierome were a great prater and boaster of
virginite, yet was he no virgin, but may be suspected of ill rule with yo^ge
women, for his to much familiarite with the^, as apeareth by his epistles.
Ambrose and Gregori, should seem by some of their writings, to be as chaste as
error in hypocrysy would permyt the^. Augustyne which is brought in Augustine:
in y^ inuectiue here following for a strong witness for the vow of prestes
chastity, had for his time and occupyeng three concu bynes, and by one of the^ a
bastard called Theodatus, as his written life manifests. The other
scrupulouse fathers and scolding scole doctors, which cried with wide throtes
both in chaires and in pulpetes chastity, chastity, ded after many prodi giouse
sorts, most shamefully slide from their vowed professio^s. If this kind of
doc Doctrine
trin had not been first practysed, more for y^ insaciable belly, than for y^
right honor of god, it had never obtained so strong and strought mayntenau^ce.
I omit to declare for length of the matter, what mischefe and confusion, vows
brought to this realm by the Danes and Normannes, when the lives of the
vowers in their monasteries were more beastlye than Beastly.
either among paganes or Turks. All pratlynges of folysh papystes set apart,
that ye must fulfill your promise ones made, though it were most presu^ptuouse
and wicked. Consydre this question that God ones axed of the Jews by his holy
prophet. Quis ista quesiuit de manibus vestris? vt ambularetis in atriis meis?
Esai. l. Who has required these In vapne.
things at your hands? to travail with them in my porches? Who set ye a wurk,
or who shall regard them? And it may in conscience be your dyscharge, having
repeutaunce for your rashenesse.

I exhort the (gentyl reader) to accept al things here, as I do mean them. If
thu be of God, to the glory of God, for to that end have I proponed them. If
thu The end.
be of Antichrist and will not change, I leave the at thy lyberte, to wexe
angrye, hot, furyouse, and mad at thy pleasure, for I know thy frantik head.
Turmoyle in the sprete of thy beastly father, for y^ wicked vow and the
presthode that I disalowe here, and hardely spare not. As the Angel said to
S. Johan the Apostle of such wrangelyng hypocrites. Apo. xxii. Fylthie
Qui nocet, noceat adhuc, et qui sordidus est, sordescat adhuc. He that does
evil, let him still do evil, and he that is fylthy, let him still be
fylthy. I will not seek to call the back, no more than the holy Ghost does in
that place, for y^ labor were all in vain, thu being a vessel of
reprobacion. The wurde of the Lord is able to turn thy contrary and froward
buyldynges to duste, and to blow them away with the wind. Psalm. i. In shar
pely rebukyng y^ supersticions, me think, Rebukes.
I should not offend the ryghteouse, but the spyghtfull rebellers and
obstinates only. Therefore I humbly require the inhabitauntes of this realm, as
they love God and the christen commen wealth thereof, no longar to be led by
the wicked sprete of error. But in the mekenes and true fear of his mighty
majesty, to obey their most lawful king, gracyously given them of the lord
as a godly, favorable, and learned Josias. Also to obey Josias,
his most noble counsel, as the chief under him in the public authoryte. And
in the end, to follow their godly procedynges, to the glory of God, honor of
the king, welthe of this realm, and confort of the commens.

So be it.

An Apology or answer of Johan Bale to an heap of fanatycall reasons,
pretendynge the mayntenaunce of sodometrouse vows, in the presthode of
Antichriste, with a brefe exposycion upon the* xxx. chaptre of Numeri.
AFewe months ago, by chance, as I sat at supper, this questyon was moved
unto me, by one that seruently loves Gods verite, and myghtely detesteth all
falshed in hypocrysy. Whether the vows expressed in the. xxx. chaptre of
Numeri, gives any establyshement to the Dowes.
vow of our prestes now, to live without wives of their own, or nay? for
the same party, as I perceived anon after, had been assaulted and chaced the
day before, with that most fryuolouse dysputacion. To who^ (I remember) I gave
this short answer, that Answer
they made for that kind of vowynge, nothing at all, but condemned it. For
as I than judged of that matter, so judge I now still, that those vows were of
things than present and so fourth contynuyng, till Christ's Christ.
coming in the flesh, concerning the only nacyon of the Jews. And now to
be of no force toward us, for so much as they were not expresselye
confyrmed, declared, and taught of Christ, as were the moral precepts of
the law. Math. v. Moreover I considered, that Christ being the clear light
of the world, Johan. viii. and bryghtenesse of his fathers glory, Hebru. i.
Left Moses far behind him, as a bare shaddowe or figure, constitutynge one
only religyon of us and the Jews, Religion.
whose perfeccyon stands not in the works of the law, neither in
renouncing of christen marryage, but in a pure and constaunt faith in him and
his Gospel.

In the end I was required to write by a sentence or two, what I thought in
dyscharge of so syngle and sleuelesse a matter. Whereupon the next day, I
turned me toward a wyndowe, and wrote the few sentences here following in
this book, which I have therein placed under this wurde Cen sura, to make it
several from y^ other. ii. processes. Wrytinge
For a matter of so small wayght, dyscression, and learning, I thought not only
those few words to suffyse, but also the time to be ill bestowed that should
be more spent thereupon. In conclusion the writing was delivered to him that
was the capytayne Delivered.
of this play being by birth a man of worshypp. Gentyllye was it received at
the first and so intertayned by the space of five or six wekes. Nevertheless
with in the same time, enteringe into the hands of a chaplain, it has been
so handeled and tosed among the spyders web weuers of Babylon the great
city, Esa. lix, and Apocal. Weuers
xviii. that it is become much larger both in length and bredthe than before. I
have smelled them out, by these their monkish the torykes, wherwt their
obieccio^s are greatly reple^yshed, that is to say, our vow, our chastity,
in our power, we may, we were bound, with a great sort more of the like,
which I will always touch as I come to their dwellinge places. And for so
much Sackes.
as they have shaken so lowsy bags of beg gerye with so earneste a stomach,
let them not doubt of it, but the stinking dust thereof, shall be turned to
them again, brushe it of their side gowns if they can.

My first writing, whom I little thought to find so studiouse co^mentours in yt
genera cio^, yt dylige^t reader shall always find, under this wurde, Ce^sura,
Their obieccpons, Note it.
or old sack shakinges of fryres, under this wurde, Obieccio, And finally my
simple answers, under this wurde, Responsio.

Censura.
A vow in the old law, is not a profession of any rash brain, as al mon A
vow.
ky^h vows were, but it is an earnest pro mise to fulfill that which God has
ordained and commanded. For why, David says: I have loved thy commandments
above gold and preciouse stone. I observe thy precepts, and al false ways I
abhor. Also in an other place. Blessid are they which walk in Gods ways,
and do no wickedness. Psalm. cxviii.

Obiectio.
I have at my laysur, perused and diligently considered your writing,
concerning the Uowes.
matter of vows, and the declaracion of the. xxx. chaptre of Numeri. Wherein
your opinion, being but one man, without farther reasons and proves added to
the same, can not as yet fully deduce me to beliue the contrary of that which I
have conceived by the co^municacion of lear ned men in times past, and also by
other books Ioha^ Eckius
and authorytees, as it has been my chance to have read, concerning that
matter. Wherefore I have added to every parcel of your writing, such doubts as
I thought my self not fully resolved in, desiring thereby your further
declaration of the matter, with the openyng and dyssoluynge of the same doubts.

Responsio.
Right worshypfull sir, I have received your gentle answer to my simple and
undigested wrytinge, but not without the crooked cauyllacions and unseasonable
obiec^ions of some chaplayne of yours, whereupon Bablings.
I perceive, that if I follow your desire in resolving the doubts therein
moved, I must be enforced to answer to. ii. spretes. First unto yours, which
(as apereth) is full of lenyte and gentylnesse, corresponding to your name and
office. And than to your said Falshede.
chaplaynes, whom I find foystered with the popes old deggres and leven of
hypocrisy. I desire you therefore to perpe^de, yt though Socrates be a frynd,
and Plato a frind, yet is the veryte to be preferred in fryndeshyp to them
both. The truth of it is, that a question was axed me, whether the. xxx.
chapt. of Numeri, made any thing for the vow of life syngle, or forswearyng
of marryage, Celibatus
in monks and in priests, or nape? Chastity I can not call it, for the great
godfathers thereof calls it, Celibatus clericorum. Whereupon I made the said
writing, as a light answer to so tryfeling a question, thinking it at that
time sufficient for a matter of so small value, as I do yet, to this hour, And
to fortify the same, I add this much more thereunto.

The five books of Moses, tended all Moses.
to one end, concerning the religion, the polytyque governance, and the
oeconimicall order of the Jews. The foren nations of yt Gentyles, were not
burdened at any time by Gods commandment therwyth. The book of Numeri,
according to the title thereof, no^breth out the people of Israel, in their
tribes and famelies, so dystributinge unto them the land of promission. The
obseruacions The Jews.
and sacrifices contained in the same, only respects that people,
comprehended in certain nombre and place appointed to y^ said trybes and
famelyes. Uowes in the xxx. chaptre of Numeri, pertains nothing to the
prestes which received the offerynges, but altogether and alone to the com men
people which brought the offerynges to them. The chaptre it self is plain,
to Mathe it.
him that will not be blind of a stubburne wylfulnes. What ingins now will
your chaplayne bring, to make that chaptre to serve your turn concerning
prests vows? Your whole disputacio^ is here ouerthrown, the place being so
preposterously alleged, for a presthode so preposterous. Truly all Sophistry
the vnfounde sowderynges of Alyngtons sophistry, will not be found able
workina^ly to clowte up this foul broken hole. The best were to recompense it,
with an honest reca^tacion.

Besides all this, I wondre of what believe your said chaplain is, yt he
co^sydereth not now, these dark figures and shadows, all fulfilled and
fynyshed in Christ, but will make of them a new uncommanded religyon. I would
wyshe that he put aside the All done
veil from Moses face, for a more right understanding of the scryptures, or
else that he removed from his popish heart, which has wretchedly blinded both
him and his fellows, that malice that he in his Romish masters quarrel,
bears against his brethren, for attendynge to the only voice of Uowes.
their true shepeheard. Uowes in y^. xxx. cha. of Numeri (as I said before)
perteyneth to y^ only multitude of the Jews, as well married as unmarried, and
nothing at all to the prestes. I wo^dre therefore what wyld worm in the ydell
head of your Chaplayne, has now restrained the largeness of that place, from
the commen people (to whom it was only due) to the popes sinered presthod,
willing thereby to make it also Iewysh. In all Non at all
Chriestes doctrine is no soch kind of vowinges, as your chaplayn here
maynteyneth, neither yet in the whole processes and acts of his Apostles. No,
in all the. iiii. written Gospels is not this wurde vouere, or votu^, ones
reheersed or spoken of, to help your chaplayne in this guat strayninge to
swallowe in a camel.

Arlotus and other most dilligent searchers, which first collected the great
concordaunces Uouere.
of the whole Bible, were never yet able to stretche vouere nor votum, further
than for the old testament. Conradus Pellicanus wrong votum one ynche further
by vehement strayning, adding thereunto the vow of Paul in Cenchrea, Actor.
xviii. and an other time at Jerusalem, Acto. xxi. concerning his head
sherynge, which will not serve your purpose, making only for a gentle
bearing with the weak Iewysh brethren, Paulus.
to win them to a better faith. If ye take for ground of your matter, the
cruel vow of those wicked Jews, which swore before the high pressed, that they
would neither eat nor drink till they had stain Paul, Acto. xxiii. Let it be
your own stuff hardely. The descrybers of ye primative church Egesippus and
Eusebius, makes no manner of mention of that prestysh vow of yours. The name
thereof was much more in use The name
among the pagane poets and sophisters, than among the Christen doctors, a
great while after Christ's ascension, so famous was it among Christians in
that age. Wha^ monkery was ones spronge up, by the ydelnes of them that fled
from the persecucio^s, than grew it into a name and use among that sort (as
among the sects of our time the ite racyon of baptysme) but yet not into a
dampnable bondage.

For Paulus ye first heremite, Antonius, Hilarion, Macharius, Pambo, Pachoimus,
and a great sort more which were the Heremites
first founders among christianes of ye life solitary, were never acquaynted
with this kind of vowyng. Freely ded their disciples inhabit the wilderness.
Frelye lived they after the rules of the Gospel, married or unmarried, as
apereth by Spiridion, Policrates, and other married bishops, in the
Ecclesiastical storye of Eusebius. What though their supersticiouse posteryte,
the fo lysh world to delude, brought that fre estate of lyuinge into a
necessite and bondage of Bondage.
vows, yet would they for their times, attempt nothing that had not the
scriptures authorite to bear it. The papacy ones confirmed for money, by the
trapterouse murderer Phocas, vows were thought apt instruments to work
many miracles by, in the vprearynge and further mayntenaunce of that mighty
monarchy of Antichriste, Papacye.
as it was in deed by the practyse of hypocrytyshe monks. For all this time
the prestes had their wives, and the monks were at their lyberte, to goo or
to come, except it were a certain of them which upon their own brain, wholly
addycted themselves to that rule, without either counsel or commandment of
God, to make Moukes.
Satan apere the Angel of light to the excecated world, as the sequel
here declares.

I read in the chronicle of Cyrillus the Greek heremyte, De processu sui
ordinis ad abbatem Ioachim, that Aymericus a Aymericus.
french man, being the popes legate and patriarch of Antioche, gathered
together by virtue of his commission, a certain nombre of dyspersed heremytes in
the mount of Carmelus. To whom he builded a monastery there, in the year of
our Lord a. m. c. and. xxi. compellynge them to obedience under one superior
called Bertoldus, being his nygh Cyrillus.
kynsman. Never before (says Cyrillus) ded the obseruers of this religion,
bind themselves by any vow, till this patriarch first of all enforced them to
it. Nunquam (says the text) ad obediendum alicui, se voto prius obligauera^t,
donec patriarcha Aymericus, eos ad hoc primu^ astrinxit, and ce. About.
lxxviii. years after, followed Albertus Albertus.
the patriarch of Jerusalem, which in the year of our Lord a. m. c. xcix.
gave them a rule of supererrogacion, or wurkes more than neded, to confyrme
them in the same. All this time, and more than eyghte and fourthy years after,
were they bound to none other vow, but to the only vow of obedience to
their pryor. Breuely is this whole story towched, of Polydorus ^ergilius, lib.
vii. de rerum inuentoribus. But when these were ones entered into the prouynces
Europa.
of Europe, and compelled to seek the Romysh popes confirmacion, by two Englysh
frires called Reginaldus and Petrus, they could not be thereunto admitted, till
they in the year of our Lord A. M. CC. xlviii. had added this clause to their
vow of obedience. Cum castitate and abdicatione proprietatis.

And when that was adjoined thereunto, by the straight commandment of pope
Innocent the. iiii. Hugh the pressed Cardinal An order.
of S. Sabyne, and Willyam bishop of Antirade, being his commissioners, than
were they allowed for a spyrytuall religion in that Sodomiticall church of
Autichrist, and might both preach and hear confessions, for mayntenau^ce of
the same, as testifyeth Sybertus de Beca in tractatu de con syderatis super
regula. But mark what Fruits.
fruits followed immediately after, of this newly professed vow of their
chastity. These religiouse brethren frequented the houses of relygiouse
systers, conuertyng their chaste profession into most detestable whoredom.
Whereupon Nicolaus Gallus their maistre general, and the seventh in nombre, a
man of rare conversation, detested that kind of religion, and wrote against
them a very sharp treatise, called Ignea sagitta, a fyery Nicolaus Gallus.
darte in the year of our Lord. a. m. cc. lxx. And in the. v. chaptre this
sentence he has among many other. Per plateas ciuitatum de mane vsque ad
vesperam bini et bini discurrentes, vagis gre^sibus circuitis, ipsum haben^es
pe^agogum, qui rugiendo circuit qu^rens quem deuoret. Et sic in vobis
prophecia, In circuitu im pii ambulant, ad vestre confusion^s cumulu^ ver
aciter est impleta. Est enim cau Causa.
sa discutsuum huiusmodi principalis ac precipua, vt visi^e^is, non pupillos
sed puellas, non viduas in tribulatione existentes sed fatuas iuue^culas,
beghinas, moniales, ac dominas. Ubi, alter in alterius iactantes lumina vultus.
etc.

From morrow till night (says he) by couples ye course y^ streets of cities
in ydelnesse, having him to gyde which gredyly Satan.
seeks whom he may devour. So that this prophetical saying, The wicked
strayeth abroad, is not only veryfyed, but also fulfilled in you. The chief
cause of your discourses, is not to vysite the fatherless children, but
dyssolute damsels, not wydowes in their trouble, but wanton we^ches, beghi nes,
nuns, and vowesses, or ladies of the mantell and the ring, corruptinge their
ydell lives by many uncomely ways. Thomas Cartipratensis in his second book,
de bono universally, cap. lvi. says. That about the same time, Nuns were so
vexed with cer ten night spretes, called Incubi, when they were in bed and
the candell out, that neither crossynge of their foreheades, nor holy water,
nor yet Gods body in the box, could defend them from being with child. For
thus lies it in the text. Incubi ^emones, it a religiosas virgins
opprimeban^, Incubi.
vt nulla cis valeret crucis signatio, nec aqua benedicta, nec ipsu^ Chri sti
corporis sacramentu^. Sister Christine for example, refused on a time, to be
among her other systers howseled, because a sprete of that kind had occupied
with her the night before.

Never had the sothsayers of Egypt, nor Pharaoes calcars, more subtle points
^owers.
of conueyaunce, with all their incantacio^s and nec romancies, tha^ had these
relygiouse vowers and ydell braggers of chastity, for that necessary
occupyinge. And much help obtained they to practice in that art, by the fine
wurkes of pope Syluester the second, pope Hyldebrande, fryre Albert, frire
Bako^ of Oxford, frire Perscrutator of York, frire Bongay, frire Some, frire
Lynne, frire Riplay, Conclusio
and a great sort more. All this bring I in before my answer, to declare unto
you the beginning and succession of the vow of single living or forswearinge
of marriage, in the Romish presthod and popysh relygyous, least we should take
darkness sor light and Belial for Christ, or that ydolatrouse presthode and
Popyshe.
religyon for a presthode and religion of the scripture. Now will I show
hystorycallye the form and fashyon of that popysh vowinge, that it may be
known diverse from y^ ce remonial vows in ye scriptures, and not to seem
worthy to have defense of y^ same, but ra there by them to receive due
conde^pnacyon.

None end of dyffinicio^s has this kind of vowing among the scholastical
masters, Diffynycions.
and yet not one of them to the purpose. Su^me says, that a vow is an holy
promise to god. An other sort calls it a desire, of God requested. Su^me
affirms it to be a will, mouinge reason to promise. Su^me calls it a
conceyuing of a better purpose, made sure by a delyberacio^. Su^me names it a
service, making religiouse me^ more accepted to god tha^ y^ layte. Su^me
calls it an act to Gods high honor, a co^municacion with God, a Of vows
second baptism, and a receyuinge of holy orders. Sum names it a good
wurke of sit pererrogacion, an office of special dedicacio^ to God, a
profession of a rule relygiouse, and an act to Christ's pleasure. Su^me says,
it is a testificacion of a fxe promise which is due to God, a promise annexed
to the rule of a monk, a spyrituall publyque wealth, an offering to God of the
whole tree with Diffinicious.
his fruit, and the marye of the Gospel. Sum reports it to be a law
correspondynge to the commandments of God, an ac^e having an opinion of
health and ryghteousnes, a bond^ indispensable by autorite of the church, and a
dyrepcion or sackynge of matrimony. Sum says, it is a profession making a
full christen man, a religion equal with the Gospel, baptysme, faith, Of vows
and the wurde of God, an act requyringe the remission of sin, iustificacion
and the life everlasting, and soche a worshypp to God as deserves heaven.

Sum affyrmeth it to be a satisfaccion for sin, a perfeccion Euangelical,
an obseruacion of Gods precepts and counsels, Doctors.
and the highar part of Gods true worshippinge. Sum calls it a couenaunte
to be observed in pilgrimage, offering, prayer, and fasting in pain of
dampnacion, a discharge from wife and children, father and mother, maistre and
maistres, frynde, neybour, acquayntaunce and all, though it be to their great
hinderaunce, a renouncing of father and mother, wife, child, and maistre in
the obedience of religion, and a great foul rabble besides. Yea, Thomas Aquinas
dyffyneth Thomas.
it thus. A now (says he) is a certain testymonye of a fre promise, which
God ought to have, in things pertayninge to him. Ricardus de Media villa
says, that it is a promise of a supererrogantinge purpose, made first to God
for a good end, and brought into full strength by a delyberacio^. Thus have I
given you here the labors of a meany of Ne^rothes builders in the lettynge
Builders.
up of this their great castle of confusyon. Jack dawe that threw from him al
his fedders, was never more galauntly gar nyshed with the fedders of every
foul, than this bird of uncleanness is decked with dyffynycions.

Now will I cause that ydolouse stynkynge A monstre
monstre, whom your chaplayne so myghtely defends here, for a religion
indyspensable, to show him self abroad, in his own proper persoue. It is
the profession of a monk, or obligacion from God to the devil, in the
blasphemouse kingdom of Antichrist. Let your chaplayne avail his bonet, and
receive him with reverence, for here now he comes. Ego frater. N. facio
professionem meam, et promitto obedientia^ Deo, bea^o Francisco vel Dominico,
et tibi frat^i. N. de. N. Priori eius Professio.
ordinis generali, ac eius successoribus, viuere sieve proprio et in castitate
secundum regulam predicti ordinis vsque ad mortem. I frire. N. make my
profession, and promise obedience to God, to S. Fran ces or Dominike, and to
the frire Nicolas of Naples, priour general of the said order, and to thy
successors, to live without propre and in chastity, according to the rule of
the said order, unto my lives end. This has In rule.
Bartholomeus Pisanus in co^formitatibus Francisci, Antoninus of Florence, Par.
iii. Tit. xxiiii. cap. xiiii. and Ioannes Maria de Nouolaria in suo Mari magno.
Mark the good stuff therein contained.

In this holy profession, is Frances, a man dead more than three hundred years
ago, coupled with God in obedience, so is brother. General.
N. of. N. the maistre general of y^ same order, dwelling always at Rome, and
ga pinge for the death of some Cardinal, to obtain his dignite for money,
except it be for the time of his vysitacion, or of gatheryng up his ydell
rentes in all the christen proynces. And like as it was in this order to
Frances, so was it in other orders to Basyle, Benedicte, Bernarde, Augustine,
Marye, Fathers.
and Dominycke, and to their general monsters (masters I should have said) as
they came by course. The obedience of Fran ces was to pope Innocent the third
and to his successors canonicallye admitted bysshoppes of Rome, as is written
in regula Minorum, which is not the Gospel of Jesus Dregs.
Christ, as the said rule affyrmeth, but a co^trariouse doctrine of Antichrist
his great enemy. It follows consequently, that these relygiouse vowers, must
live without their own and in chastity according to the rule of y^ said order
(not of Christ's Gospel for that has no vows) unto their lives end.

And if your chaplayne will yet farther contend for their vows in holy
orders of subdeacon, deaco^, and presthode. I say this Orders.
unto him, and can prove it by a thousand wytuesses, if need be, that the
Monckes or relygiouse votaryes, coming to these whorish or ydolatrouse orders
of Antichrist, took never those vows of the bishops suffcaganes, as the
popes massemo^gers ded whom they than called the secular prestes. For the
suffraganes were not their ordynary prelates, neither had they power to extorte
any new profession of them. But in deed Fre passage.
they suffered them always without vow to pass, knowing and consydering yt
they had vowed before in their monastycal professio^s, votu^ publicu^ and
solemn, which was unto the^ a second baptism, Thomas of Aquine says. O
knavery unspeakable. The prests vow esteemed of a much lowar kind, is called
votu^ tacitum ac priuatum, having this bawdy clause thereunto adjoined, Si non
cast ta^ Si non cast.
me^ caute, whereby they might occupy other men's wives and daughters, for not
having wives of their own: for what else caused the one sort to be called
regular o^ religiouse, and the other secular or profane, but only the
dyfference of their profession^ and vowinges?

Yet to speak it truly, I could never thoroughly know, what a prestes
profession was in those days, by all that ever I read. Saving ones (I
remember) as I was ^ Prestes.
Maldon in Essexe, about. xx. years ago, I found an old bishops ordynary,
or bok^ of their exorcismes, for church halowinges, belle blessings, and oyled
orders geuynge. Wherein I beheld this only clause, for the oblygacyon or charge
of their chastity, Accipe iugum domini. Take the yoke of the Answer.
lord. But I found therein no answer appointed, to be made of them which
received that order, neither by affirmation no^ yet negacion. And therefore the
bond should seem to stand void, unless this borrowed clause of the law do
help it. Qui tacet co^sentire videtur, he which holds his peace seems to
consent or agree to it, But than that same videtur, may in some case discharge
if again. Iugum domini, is no such he any burden, as is so commenly eased by
whoredom and sodometrye. For the Lords yoke does case and not burden, all
the^ yt are laden. Math. xi. My yoke (says Christ) is easy, and my burden
is light. This yoke is a gentle sufferaunce of heart, or an humble endeuer to
do the will of God. And is not only Orders.
for prestes at their orders taking, which of all men regards it least, But
commen it is for all kinds of people, men and women, married or unmarried,
maid, wydowe, husband, wife, and all.

Except your chaplayne can make, these before rehearced professions good by ye
scriptures, which (I know) he shall never be able Weak.
to do, Let him not contend with those men for their vows in this age, which
has in the obedience of Gods holy wurd and their kings commandment,
re^ounced those wicked kinds of relygions and presthode, and by virtue of that
word now taken them wives in marryage. For truly, and as the Lord lives, of
these most detestable kinds only, were all the vows which they professed. Ages.
I speak not here of the ages from. vii. to. xiiii. which was the year of
profession, and from. xiiii. to. xxi. which was the year of taking their
orders. Which their dyuynyte masters allows, having in their unsavory
commentaryes, this unsavory sentence of their own dottyng brain. Quanto a
castioribus Boys.
animis proficiscu^tur vota, ta^to ma gis Deo placent. Quare adolescentu^ vota,
preuale^t votis senioru^. The more chaste those hearts be (say they) from whens
the vows come, the more acceptable are those vows to God. Wherefore the vows
of young boys are better in value, than y^ vows of their eldars. Is not here
(think you) a lo^pe of fine dyuynyte? yes, and it were to serve in the deuyls
black parlour.

The fyckle promise of a wa^ton boy, not Doctrine
grounded in Gods knowledge, is here preferred to all other kinds of vowyng.
Here is no bad doctrine, if it be well co^sydered and wayed. Saint Paul
admitting wydowes to be found at ye charges of the congregation, allowed the^
not to vow the sole life (if ye will there have it a vow) before ye age of. lx.
years. i. Tim. v. Of what strength than will they make the vow of inconstan^t
laddes? I omit the mysteries and fruits of this text, least ye re Mysteries
hearsall of them, should be an infeccion to other, in hearing so fylthie
examples. Upon al these matters before rehearced, I thus conclude, that these
vnco^maunded vows are such ydele, mocking and blasphemonse promyses, as of
necessite ought to be broken. And I have I sidorus to hold with me therein. In
malis promissis (inquit) res^inde fidem, in turpi vo to muta decretu^. Quod
incante vouisti, ne Do it not.
facias. Impia est promissio, que scelere adim pletur. In promises yt be evil,
discharge thy covenant. In a filthy vow change thy former decre. Fulfill not
that thou have vowed vnbewares, for that promise is wicked, which is not
accomplished without naughtynes

When the kings grace of England by ye A discharge.
autoryte of Gods wurd, discharged ye monkish sects of his realm, from their
vowed obedience to the bishop of Rome, ded he not also discharge the^ in
conscience of yt vow of Sodometry, which altogether made them Antichrists
creaturs? If he did not so mind it, why altered he their relygions? why took
he from them their disgysed garments? why plucked he down their monasteryes?
yea, why put he the^ so at lyberte, and sent them fourth abroad? These things
ought not to A broad.
have been, if that kind of chastity had been indispensable. For the vows
made in those relygyo^s, perteyned only to the same. Wha^ those religions were
ones ba^nyshed ye realm, was it not necessary that those vows should be also
bannyshed with them, which made them relygions? Would ye have men in one point
to be the kings true subjects, and in an other the Romyshe popes sworn
creatures? The holy Ghost in the scriptures, Papists.
callethe this kind of doing, a tyranny of Sodom, and an obstinate rebellion
against God. From this generation are we called by a voice from heaven, which
thus says unto us, Apoca. xviii. Come away from her (my people) least ye be
partakers of her sins, and so receive of her plages.

I herein dyscommende not the honorable state of virgynyte, neither yet of
faithful wydowed, whom I know to have their worthy praises of the scriptures,
but this Praised.
hellyshe lake and synke of sylthynesse unspeakable. All this have I written
before, least we should take evil for good, and couple sower with sweet,
making of the^ a mingle mangle for pigges of the popes old puddel. From hens
fourth will I answer to your chaplaynes froward obieccions. Though The
reported in your writing to be but Opinion.
one man, yet shall it apere yt my oppnion co^ cernyng vows, is not mine own
private opi nio^ alone, but ye opynyo^ also of al the^ which are ruled by ye
sacred scriptures. I am fullye persuaded in conscience, yt those most wholesome
pastures of the holy Ghost are plenteouse and fait enough for any christen
mannys feadynge, and are able alone to sustayn us without all other
prouysions, into the life everlasting. Al other reasons, proves, declaracyons,
opynions, communycacio^s, Reasons.
autorytees, writings, doctryns, or doubts, what so ever they be, not grounded
upon the^, are nothing worth at all, be they never so delycately prepared. For
without the verite, they mynistre nothing to man, but iyes, corrupcion, and
poison. Now follows here the process of your writing.

Obiectio.
First ye begin with the dyffinicion of a vow, what it is in ye old law. Where
in ye tell first, what it is not, and so ^eclare, that it is not a profession
of any rash brain. And therein I agree with you. For in every vow, as I
thynk, the^ must be a delyberacyon and a sure purpose. ^otaries.
So yt mad men, ^are brains, children, fools, and such like, can make no
vow whereunto they ought to be bounden. Ye say, it is an earnest promise, to
fulfill that which God has ordained and commanded. Wherein ye seem to say
true, but not all the truth, to make a perfyght dyffynycion. For ye name of a
vow extends to many moo things, than your dyffynycyon does.

Responsio.
It is at his pleasure, that your chaplain here with mock and all, reports
me to dyffyne a vow. For I mente nothing less at that time, than to dy^fyne
it after Aristot^les Toppkes, as he require th it. I have left him good store
of such dyffynicions Dyffyne.
here before, taken out of a great rabble of his dottynge doctors or
sophistical sentency^ ners, and yet not one of them to any purpose
concerning the scripture. I never yet judged of the holy scriptures, as
Aristotle ded Aristotle
^nes judge of dysfynycyons, which in the xii. book of his Metaphisickes,
says that, De diffinitionibus potest esse scientia. A science may be of
dyffynicions. For of the scripturs can we make neither art nor science no more
than we ca^ make an art or science of Gods eternal wisdom. And though it
were thus Englished, that knowledge may come by dyffynycyons, yet holds not
the comparison, for Gods ways are not al one with mannys inuencyo^s. Esa. lv.
If I have A vow.
said, in descrybyng a vow, concerning diverse places of the old testament,
that it is not a profession of any rash brain, as all monkysh vows were, I
think I have said the truth, yea, and such a truth as your chaplain is
not able to wtstande by any just A promise
ground to the contrary. If I have also uttered, that it is there an earneste
promise of fulfilling that which God has ordained and commanded, neither
have I taught an old wives fable, for the scriptures stands strongely on my
side.

As Jacob in yt way going toward L^ Jacob.
ban his uncle, vowed a vow, that if God preserved and prospered him in that
journey, he would acknowledge him to be his Lord God, by ye tithe offerynges of
that he should send him, Gene. xxviii. was that vow any other than a faithful
promise to God? grounded upon commandment before to Abraham, to be taken for
his God. Genes. xvii. No^ other opinion had David of vows, David.
than this when he said. Psalm. lxv. Introibo in domu^ tua^ in holoca^stis,
reddam tibi vota que distinxerunt labia mea, et locutum est os meum in
tribulatione. I will enter into thy house with brent offerynges, to perform
the vows which I promised with my lyppes, and uttered with my mouth, when I
was in trouble. As frankely disposed as your chaplayn was, to tryfle and to toy
with my dyffynycion, as he scornefully calls it, with it is and it is not,
yet is he in the end compelled to agree with me therein, and to confirm it with
a reason of his own. But because I find his reason barren, A reason
braynlesse, and without any ground, except it be of the sophisters
dyffynycyons, I reiecte it utterly, and will confirm the order there of by a
sentence of him, whose wurdes were never yet out of order.

No^ facietis singuli, quod sibi rectum videtur. Sed quod precipio tibi, hoc
tantu^ facito domino, nec addas quicqua^, nec minuas, Deute. xii. Ye shall not
do (says As are vows.
God) that seems good to me^nis pryuate judgments. But do only that which
I command you, and se that ye add nothing thereunto, neither yet dyminysh
from it. Lo sir, here is both, ye shall and ye shall not, and all about one
commandment, and your voluntarye vows dyspatched clerelye, come they with
delyberacion or without delyberacyon, with sure purpose or without sure
purpose, because they have non allowaunce Delybera ^yon.
of Gods wurde, but a manifest condempnacion. An other like sentence. Non
recedat volumen legis huius ab ore tuo, sed meditaberis in eo diebus ac
noctibus, vt custodias et facias omnia quecu^que sunt in eo. Non declines ab ea
ad dexteram nec ad sinistram. Iosue. i. Let not the ^oke of this law (says
the Lord) be out of thy mouth, but study therein day and night, to
accomplish and do what so ever I have commanded the. Se thou decline The law
from that law neither the one way nor the other. Non vltra vocaberis Jacob,
sed Israel erit nomen tuum. Gene. xxxv. Thu shall be no more called Jacob, but
Israel shall be thy name.

Not only by bread lives man, but by every wurde which comes from Gods
mouth. Math. iiii. Not for our ryghteouse works, but of his own mere mercy
has Mercy.
he saved us, Tit. iii. Neither in ma^nys will, nor yet in his runnynge, is the
attaynement of salvation, but in Gods mercy aloue, To. ix. Thus have I proved
by the scryptures, that a truth may be set forewarde by, it is and it is not,
ye shall and ye shall not. And all the commandments of God, are given after
ye same order. As thus: Thu shall have non other Gods in my syghte. Thu shall
Commau^ deme^tes.
hallowe the sabbath day. Thu shall make the no graven image. Thu shall honor
father and mother. Thu shall not kylle. Thu shall not stele, and so fourth.
Here is a great matter than, that your chaplain dwells upon, but that of
nature he must play the mocker, to maynteyne a mock against all godliness,
if it would be taken at his hand, as it will not. But of one thing I Negacion
do not a little maruele, that in my dyscrypcion of a vow, a poor aduerbe of
negacio^ should so much offend him, and the usurped lord ships with all out
ragiouse pride in the clergy, offends him nothing at al, by this erneste
warninge of Christ, Uos autem non sic.

A plain token is it, that he plays the part of Jack Nitigo, as ye saying
is, he seith, Se not,
but he will not se, or else that he seyth a small moate, and leteth the great
beam pass by, as ded the hypocrytes, Math. vii. He has a straight eye to
vows, but their stinkinge fruits in all execrable occupying of y^ flesh, he
respects not. The delyberacio^ and sure purpose, which he bryageth me in
here, to seclude from his popysh vowers the rashenesse of brayn, are neither
borrowed of Christ Mydylto^.
nor of Paul, But of Richard Mydylton a gray frire, otherwise called, de
media villa, or of some of his disciples in the scol^ doctrine of braulers, as
though a monkish profession were lawful and good prevented by a delyberacion.
Here is proper stuff to uphold these wares of fylthynesse, to Antichrists
behoue. He neither wayeth this monkyshe profession here, nor yet dyscretely
examineth it, whether it be by the scriptures lawefull or unlawful. But
rashely he judges Rashely
the rash vows thereof both good and sufficient universally (for he says here
in every vow) having a delyberacion and a sure purpose. But what is the
delyberacion ye speak of? What is the sure purpose ye require? wherwyth are
they seasoned? with the obedience of Gods wurd, or with hope of belly ease?
This is not here declared, No, nor Gods wurde ones called to counsel. A thief
waytyng his pray, takes a deliberacion. An aduouterer has a sure purpose of
that he sekyth.

This rash kind of vowyng, so rashely Mad men
described, he may well bequethe to his mad men, his harebraynes, his children,
and his fools, as he has put them here by order, for fytt they are not for
men of wisdom and godliness. A sober delyberacion might here have done him
good service in a far better purpose than this is. Where as I call a vow, an
earnest promise to do those things which God has ordained and commanded, I
dyffyne not the general Author.
name of a vow, as he capcyously lays it to me. I only show my mind, what I
think a vow to be concerning a great nombre of places in the old testament,
that they might the rather apere unmeet to allow ye popes sodometry in that
contrary kind of vows. And therefore I grant, that the name extends
farther than my former dyffini^ion, and so is it like to do still, for ought
that I will do more therein. Agareues, Turks, Turks.
Jews, Idolaters, Papystes, and the Devil, makes vows in their sorts,
which I intend not to couple in one dyffinicion, with the vows of the sacred
scryptures. No, that marriage were not lawful. And of this have I written
enough before.

Obiectio.
Anna i. Regu^. i. ded vow to God y^ ^rute of her womb. which God should give
her, and yet she was not commanded of God so to do. Anna.
But it was in her power to have fulfilled that which God had ordained and
commanded, and also to have done other wise. Nazarei, which ded vow and
dedicate themselves to God, as it is expressyd, Number. vi. ded not vow that
thing which was commanded by God. For than every man should have had sinned
that had not been Nezareus, because they fulfilled not gods commandment. There
for your diffynicion Nazarei,
semyth vnperfyght. For a vow although it be sumtymes in those things that be
commanded and required of all men, as the vow which is made in baptism, yet
proprely, me think, it is in those things which be lawefull, and in our
power, and whereunto we were not boun den before, And so by our vow, do
restrain Propely
our lyberty.

Responsio.
His examples here concerning Helcanaes wife. i. Reg. i. and the Nazarees, Nu.
Examples.
vi. confirms my dyffinicion, and confounds his whole matter. For where as he
says, that Anna grounded her vow upon no commandment or ordinance of God
(as do monks and prestes) he falsely reports it, to maintain a most
deuylyshe purpose in hypocrisy. For it is written. Ero. xiii. Sanctifica mihi
omne primogenitum, quod aperit omnem vuluam in filiis Israel. Sanctyfye unto me
all the first borne, that opens all matryces among the children of Israel.
And ye same is confirmed in Christ, Lu. ii. Omne masculinu^ adaperie^s vulua^,
sanctum Domino vocabitur. Every man child that first opens the womb, shall
be Scriptures.
called holy, or dedicated to the Lord. Ama^ child was it that she desyered
of the Lord, and such a one as should be the first fruit of her womb. And like
as that was universally Gods, both by ordinance and commandment, so was the
fulfyllyng and ground of her vow. Mea enim sunt omnia primo genita filiorum
Israel, tam ex hominibus First frut.
quam ex iumentis. Ex die quo percussi omne primogenitu^ in terra Aegypti,
sanctifica^t eos michi. Numeri. viii. All the first borne among the children
of Israel (says God) are mine both man and beast. Because the same time that
I smote the first borne in the land of Egypt, I sanctyfyed them for my self.

If this be restrained of this adversary, to the only law of purificacyon, yet
shall it Cleringe
still maintain my purpose, that Gods ordinance was the ground of her vow.
For she sought thereby to be pourged of the contumelyouse reproach and
maledyccio^ of the law. Moreover she found the like of all yt she went about
here, in the barren mother of Samson, Iud. iii. as a matter to ground upon,
besides Gods wurkynge in her spretes perturbacion. The ordinance of God there,
is this, myngled with commandment. S^erilis Precept.
es and absque liberis, sed co^cipies and paries filiu^. Laue ergo ne bibas
vinu^ acsicera^, nec immundu^ quicqua^ comedas, quia co^cipies et paries
filium, cuius non ta^get caput nouacula. Erit enim Nazareus Dei ab infantia
sua, et ex matris vtero. Behold thou art barren, and bear not. But thu
shall conceive and bear a son. And now be ware thu drink no wine nor lycour
yt is strong. For lo, thu shall co^cey^e and bear a son* And there may no
raser or sheres come on his head. For ye child shall be a Nazare unto God, eue^
A Nazare
from the time of his birth. This wise prelate your chaplain, would (as
apereth) by his fond arguments, have it only a wurk of nature and of ma^nys
art, to obtain godly children, and not the gift of God, specially when they
were appointed to the ceremonial obsequyes in the house of God, Number. viii. O
beastly nody without brain.

If all this will not sattle his wyld wytlesse head, to give over to Gods
ordinance, yt he has all this time given to ma^nys fyckle inuencion, Than let
him mark the praper Idle head
that the said Anna made, and he shall se sumwhat more. Exultauit cormeum in
domino, et exaltatum est cornu meu^ in Deo meo, etc. i. Reg. ii. Mine heart
(says she) reioyseth in the Lord, and my horn is advanced in my God. Let at
a sum in salutari t^o. Non est san ctus, vt est dominus. Deus scientiarum
dominus est, et ipsi preparantur cogitationes. Dominus mortificat et viuificat.
Dominus paupere^ facit et ditat. Suscitat de puluere egenum, etc. I rejoice in
his prepared Anna*
health. Non is so holy as the Lord. The lord is a God of knowledge, and he
sets fourth yt wurkes (mark it sir Johan) for what is it, that is good,
which is not at Gods pleasur? The lord kylleth and rayseth. The lord ma keth
poor and enrycheth again. He rayseth up the poor from the dust, and lyfteth
up the beggar from the donge hyl. Pedes sanctoru^ Impii*
seruabit, et impii in tenebris co^ticescent, etc. He will fashyo^ the steps
of his holy ones, But the wicked shall keep silence in darkness, etc. as a great
nombre of blasphemouse papystes does now adays, by ye same hand of God. If all
this be not enough, I know not what will satissye a wicked fool.

And where as your said chaplayne says, that it was in her power to have
done otherwise than to have fulfilled Gods ordinance therein, it is but an
homelye handelynge Homelye*
of the story, and nothing perteynynge to the purpose. For it lies not only
in the text, fac quod bonum ^ibi videtur, et ma^e donec ablactes eum. Do what
thou thynkeste best, and tarrye till thu haste wened him. But also it follows
there, Precorque vt imple at dominus verbum Derbum
suum. i. Reg. i. I desire God to perform his word. The word of God is
never contrary to it self, neither had she at that time digested it after so
fyckle a sort. They which are with God, and gather with him, Lu. xi. as this
good woman ded in this act, goes not pra^kyng before God, but mekelye comes
after, else were they scatterers from him. We which are the laborers,
husbandrye and buyldinge of God, ought non otherwise to wurke than his word
appoynteth. i. Cor. iii. I wondre that he could Folishly
bring in this example, being so far from the purpose of his matter. For
Annaes vow was no profession of sole life, but an only promise of offering up
her child to God, for service in the temple.

In his reason concerning the Nazarees or absteyners, he takes the man for his
obseruacion, as the absteiner for his abstine^ce, and so calls him a thing
not ordained nor commanded of God, which is no wurkemanly co^uepaunce. But
this will I say unto Absteiner
him, that a law concerning the Nazarees, is largely set out in the. vi.
chaptre of Numeri (which chaptre he has also alleged) yea, for an earnest
ordinance and commandment of God, to abstain from wine. There is not much
other matter in all the Blind.
whole chaptre, than for them. I wondre there fore, he perceived it not, in
searchynge out the place. But peradventure he ded it, perfunctorie, carptim,
or cursim, in manner as ye old writers do report the dogs to drynk in Egypt,
rennynge with all spedye haste possible, or without aduysement whether ye will.
His conclusyon is as much out of square, as are his premysses. If the
Nazarees Nazarei.
observed the vows by commandment (says he) or prescripte order of God,
than every man should have sinned that had not been a Nazare. No ser, not so.
God com maunded certain specyaltees to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with diverse
other of the fathers, that he appointed not all men to do. Neither was Jacob
bound to do in effect, that was precyselye commanded to Isaac. Christ badde
not all men preach, when he Specialtees.
said to his Apostles, Go fourth and preach, And therefore your conclusyon is
nothing worth.

Now in the end what make these examples of Anna and the Nazarees to any
purpose, concerning the vow of monks and of prests, to live syngle without
marriage? Not like.
Anna had an husband. Her desire was that she might not dye barren, but to
have a man child. And her vow was to offer that child of her own body unto
God for term of life. And her vow lasted no lo^gar, than till her child was
wened. Her son was holy Samuel, which though he were consecrated to God,
had both wife and children, i. Regu^. viii. The Nazarees had wives, as
apereth by Samson and Samuel. They drank Married
no wine, they ate no grapes, they had no vinegar to sauce so long as their
vows lasted, as monks and prestes have in their daily masses and feastinges.
No rasure nor sheeres might come upon their heads, as does upon the heads of
monks and prestes. Neither might they be seane at burials of ye dead, as are
commenly prestes and monks for money. And their vows lasted no longar, than
for the time of their abstinence. Lastednot
For afterward (the text says) the abstayner might drink wine. Thus does
his own alleged stories not help, but clerelye confound his clouted up
matter for monks chastity.

To couple Baptism with the vows of the old law in one dyffynicion of
vows, he does unadvisedly and without all sincere judgment. For they only
co^prehende gifts and offerynges, with external rytes and ceremonies, Folyshely
where as in baptysme the professyon is only faith, called of the Apostle
Prima fides. i. Timoth. v. For when Christ says, Marci. xvi. Predicate
Euangelium omni creature, Go preach the Gospel to all creatures, It follows
not there, Qui votum emiserit, he that has made a vow shall be saved, But Qui
crediderit and cet* he that byleueth and is baptized, shall be saved. No vow.
By this barbarouse and strange coupling together of baptysme and vows of the
old law in one dyffynycion, he puts no difference betwyxte the maistre and
the servant, the free and the bound, the light and his shaddowe, the veryte
and his figure, the church and the synagoge, Christ and Moses, but thrusts
them in together, making of them an hoche poche, all contrary to the wholesome
doctrine of Saint Paul. Galat. An ill coke
iiii. Also on the othersyde, me thinks he does baptysme great wrong, to
join him with a monkysh vow in the same dyffynycyo^, for in so doing he
coupleth righteousness with vuryghteousnesse, and the importable yoke of
strangers with the gentle yoke of Christ. ii. Corinth. vi.

His aduerbe proprely, borrowed of Porphiryes princyples, is not able to make
that Fo^de gere
enterprise good. He may for his pleasure, take this kind of learning out of
Thomas of Aquyne, for he in deed calls monkerye the second baptysme, I can
not se that he ca^ find it any where else. A doctrine this may be for
turmoylynge Thomistes, but how it might avail any well aduysed or sober
christians, I can not perceive. By ver tu of this sophystycall aduerbe,
proprely, he Conueyaunce.
restrayneth the pryuate vows of monks and of prestes from the generalte
which he fyndeth in baptysme, and all in the same dyffynycyon. A very clearkely
co^ueyaunce. But where as he thinks it, to be in those things which be
lawful and in mannys power to be performed, meaning the chastyte of the said
monks and priests, whereunto they were not bound before, His thinking shall
stand void, till he bring fourth just proves by the scryptures of the Never.
new testament, and that will be (I think) ad cale^das Grecas. Of this am I
sure, that both hypocrytycall monkery and massynge presthode, are such
plantacions as our heavenly father never yet planted, Mathe. xv. but the
ungracious father of Rome, the pa triarke of all myschefe.

If he had said, that to vow or to promise, lies in mannys power, I had
granted it. For S. Paul says, Roma. vii. Uelle adest mihi, To will, is
present with me. But where as he says, that the things promised, do To will
lie in our power, that I utterly deny^ him. For it follows in the text, At
vt fa^iam bo number, non reperio, But to perform that which is good, I find
not. As chastity is a gift of God, so is it neither followed nor yet performed
of us without his gift. For the perfourmaunce thereof is not the vowers, but
his which has given the gift. Noui enim (says S. Paul) quod non habitet Not
ours.
in me, hoc est in carne mea, bonum. I know that in me, that is to say, in my
flesh dwells no good thing. The wise man says also, Sapie^. viii. Scio
quoniam aliter non possum esse continens, nisi Deus det, et hoc ipsum erat
summa sapientia, scire cuius esset hoc donum. I perceive, that I can not keep
my self chaste, except God give it me. And a great point of wisdom is it also,
Sapiens
to know whose gift that is, or from whence it comes. Than is it
presumptuouslye here spoken, that it should be in our power.

When Christ's dyscyples upon certain occasions, judged it not good to marry,
Mat. xix. Christ made the^ this answer. Non oe^s capaces sunt dicti huius,
sed his quibus datum est. No man (says he) can away with that saying, save
they to whom it is given. Christus
And as touching them which chastened themselves for the only kyngedome of
heaven, which is neither in monkery nor massynge, he concluded after this
sort. Qui po test capere, capiat. He that has power to set hand upon it,
let him apprehende it in Gods name. Here is no man commanded, No precept.
neither yet counseled, to make thereof by vow, a perpetual band. For so
might it be turned from a virtuous fredome into an horrible temptacion and
snare of the devil, as that vow has been to innumerable both men and women.
In the circunstaunces of this long dy^fynycyon, have I smelled out this
chaplayne of yours, the compylat of this matter, by these fine rhetoryckes of
monkery. Our vow, our lyberte, our chastyte, Found out
in our power,, we may, we were bound, with such other like, so that he can not
hyde himself. But where as he says, he was not bound to be chaste, before he
ded vow it, he must prove himself a liar.

For this God commanded Moses to speak to the universal multitude of Israel,
Uniuersally.
Leuit. xix, and xx. Sanctificamini, et estote san cti, quia ego sanctus sum.
Be holy, for I the lord your God, am holy. Christ says also, Luce. xii. Sint
lumbi vestri precincti. Let your loins be gyrt about. And S. Paul i. Timo.
v. Temetipsum purum serua. Keep thy self pure. Sara the wife of Abraham, was
chaste. So was Sara the daughter of Raguel, Anna the wife of Helcana, and Su
sanna the wife of Ioachim, yet they never Paphnutius.
vowed chastyte. Paphnutius a man of God, said openly in the general counsel
of Nicea, that Castitas was co^^ubitus cum propria coniuge, A companyenge of
men with their own wives, in the act of generacio^, and no man there
withstode him. Lib. ii. histo. tripartite, cap. xiiii. A false and an
hypocrytes opinion is it, that chastity can not dwell in man, unless it be
vowed. Zacharias the priest and Helizabeth his wife, were both chaste, the
Gospel says, if chastyte Chastyte
be a perfectyon, and a walking in the laws and ordynaunces of God without
reprove. For why, Erant ambo iusti coram Deo (the text says) vitam agentes
iuxta omnia precepta ac iura Domini, irreprehensi. Luce. i. Both were ryghteouse
before God, and so fashyoned their lives after his laws and precepts, that no
man could find fault with them.

Notwithstanding Epiphanius affyrmeth in libro de heresibus, that in the
great college of Jerusalem were serten Levites, Leuytes
which for their vows sake would touch no woman in marriage, but among them
selves they wroughte sylthynesse unspeakable. And those (says he) were the
chief in opy nyon among the people, and most commended of holiness. And for
reprehendyng those vi^es in the^, was good zacharias slain. zacharias.
Philypp Melanchton following the said Epiphanius, confirmeeh the same story,
in his commentary upon Daniel, ca. xi. Saint Paul confesses holiness and
honor in S. Paul.
marriage, and according to them requires it to be used. i. These. iiii. Sciat
(inquit) vnusquisque vestrum, vas suum possidere in sanctificatione et honor,
etc. Learn every one of you, to use his vessel in holiness and ho nour. And
what more can be looked for of all your vows? Nay, I would they brought
Holiness
not with them the contrary, as fylthynesse and dishonor.

Then makes he a conclusion of his matter, declarynge the nature of his
dyffyned vow. And so by our vow (says he) we do A beast.
restrayn our lyberte. The children are we of fredom and not of bondage, and
our mother a fre woman by the death of Christ, Galat. iiii. The law of our
profession, is also a law of lyberte, Iaco. i. And where as the sprete of the
Lord is, there is perfyght lyberte, S. Paul says, ii. Cor. iii. In the name
of God, what lyberte will this man restrain by his vow? If his vow restrain
these, his Restrain
vow is a thing most wicked. What lyberte will it than restrain? Lyberte to
mar ry. Than is his vowynge a doctrine of deuyls, for their doctrine only, in
all the scriptures, is reported to forbydde marryage, i. Timoth. iiii. Saint
Paul the elect vessel of God, says. Si se no^ co^tinent, nuba^t, Melius
Better.
est enim nubere quam vri. i. Cor. vii. If they can not abstain, tha^ let the^
marry. For it is better to marry than to burn. And this is there spoken
without restraynt or excepcion of vows.

Obiectio.
And than we vow chastity, when we may lawfully go to marriage, as S. August.
says, de bono viduitatis, cap. xvi. Quando licite A foul lie.
rei licentiam tibi, amor melioris boni aufert. Donauit enim ne liberet nubere
cum liceret, vt iam non liceret, etiam si liberet. Et ca. xi. Bonum continentie
vidualis luculentius de^et, cum pro illo vouendo et profite^do, possunt femine
quod et libet et licet. S^d post vot^ professionem perseueranter frenandum et
vincend^^ est quod libet, quia ia^ non licet. Et psalm. lxxv. Augustine.
Non sitis pigri ad vouendum. Non enim viribus vestris implebitis. Deficietis
side vobis presumitis. Si autem de illo cui vouetis, vouete, securi redditi^.
Uouete et reddite domino Deo nostro omnes co^muniter Quid debemus vouere?
Credere in ilium, sperare ab illo vitam eternam, been viuere secundum communem
mo dum. Est enim quidam modus communis omnibus, Co^munis
furtum non facere, non castimoniali pre cipitur, et nupte non precipitur,
Adulterium no^ facere omnibus precipitur. Non amare vinolentiam, qua
ingurgitatur anima, et cortumpitur in se templum Dei, omnibus equaliter
precipitur.

Non superbire, omnibus equaliter precipitur. Non hominem occidisse, non odisse
fratre^, In communi.
non aduersus aliquem tenere perniciem, omnibus in communi precipitur. Hoc
totum omnes vouere debemus. Sunt etiam vota singuloru^. Alius vouet Deo
castitatem coniugale^, vt preter vxore^ sua^ no^ nouerit alia^. Sic et femina
pre ter virum suum non nouerit alium. A^^^ etiam vouent, etsi experti tale
coniugium, vltra nihil tale pati, nihil tale concupiscere, aut sustinere. Et
ipsi vouerunt aliquid maius quam illi. Maius
A^^^ virginitate^ ipsam ab ineunte etate voue^t, vt nihil tale experia^tur,
quale ill^ experti sunt, et reliquerunt. Et isti voueru^t plurimum, Alii vouent
domum suam esse hospitalem omnidu^ sanctis aduenientibus. Magnum votum vouent.
Alius vouet relinquere omn^a sua, distribuendo pauperibus, et ire in communem
vita^, in societatem sanctorum, magnum vou^t votum. Magnum
Uouete et reddite Domino Deo vestre, et cet. Quisque quod vouere voluerit,
voueat, illudque attendat, vt quod vouerit reddat, Unusquisque Deo quod vouet,
si respi^it retrorsum, malum est, etc.

Responsio.
I supposed before that this prete^sed vow here, had been a professyon of
chastity, which is also due to marryage. But now I perceive, it is an only
renouncing and utter Sodoma.
bannyshynge of marryage. For it follow eth in his writing. Then vow we
chastyte (says he) when we may lawfullye go to marryage. It is true that ye
do so. But what godliness find ye in so doing, or what win ye in the end,
as ye seal up your hand for term of life? Surely, for your reward ye
win the sore plage, belonging to such ungodly presumpcyon, that is, to be
given over of God, unto lusts unlawful, Romano. i. as experyence has
declared A plage.
in an hundred thousand buggerers. The fruit manyfesteth what the tree is, the
examples of life, what the vow is, dyssemble you the matter neuerso long. It
is not all for naught, that Saint Johan was commanded not to measure the
quere, or approve it by Gods wurde, neither yet to allow the order thereof for
a state of rygh teousnesse, Apocalip. xi. Neither yet is the Thequere
great spyrytuall city, which is the blasphemouse church of Romyshe vowers,
without cause called, Sodoma and Aegyptus, in the self same chaptre.

And when he perceyueth, that scryptures will not aid him in approuynge of his
bablynges, he heapeth me in, an whole half leaf at a dashe, out of Saint
Augustyne, De bono viduitatis, if it be his, and in A doubt
Psalm. lxxv. As though his authoryte auayled, where scryptures are not to be
had, and as though the veryte might be choked with a multitude of wurdes. But
to open and declare this papystes conueyaunce, I will first of all Englysh here
these saynges of S. Augustyne, if they be his.

Saint Augustine Englyshed.

Saint Augustine says in the. xvi. chap. of his book concerning honest
wydowhed. When the desire of a better purpose (a tail A tail.
without an head) takes away from the, the lyberte of that thing which is
lawful. For it is Gods gift, that thu lykest not in marrye when thu myghtest
well do it, that from hensfourth it should not be lefull for the, though it
lyked the. And in the. xi. chaptre. The estate of wydu al clennesse is than
most fytt, when for the vow and profession there of, women may put aparte that
is both liking and lefull. But as the vow is ones May.
professed, constantly is that to be restrained and vanquyshed, that lyketh,
for no longar is it lefull. And upon the. lxxv. Psalm. Be not slow to vow, yet
of your own strengthes ye shall not perform it. If ye presume of your
selves, ye shall fail. But if ye be bold of him, to whom ye have promised,
vow Bold
hardely, for assuredly shall ye perform it. Uowe, and yield it unto our
Lord God, al you universally. But what must we vow? To believe in him, to hope
of him the life everlasting, and to live christenly among our neighbors. For
an order is prescribed to all men, in no wise to steal. Not to the professed
nonne, nor yet to the married woman, was it commanded, but all folk are
charged to committ non aduoutrye. Not to To all me^
follow dronkenes, whereby the soul is ouercharged, and the temple of God
defiled, is equally commanded to all men.

Not to wexe high minded, is commaun ded to all men a like. Not to kill a man,
not to hate their brother, and not to seek an undoing to any man, is
universally commau^ Uniuersally.
ded to all men. All this ought we al to vow. These are also vows to every
man particulare. One voweth to god, chastity in wed lock, as that he will
know none other tha^ his own wife, and in like case the woman, to know none
other but her own husband. An other sort promyseth, that though they have
proved the act of marriage, yet will they no more do the like, neither yet
affect it nor favor it, and these has vowed sumwhat more than they. An other
sort voweth Uotaries
vyrgynyte from their youth, that they will never assaye that other has
assaied and left, and these in like manner has vowed much. An other sort
promyseth their house to be herbourouse to the howsehold of faith, and a great
vow do they make. An other man voweth to leave all his goods, and to
associate himself with men that are godly, he has vowed a great vow also.
Uowe therefore, To learn
and render it to your Lord God. Let any man vow that is willing to vow,
taking always head that he perform what he voweth. Ill is it for any man to
look backwarde, that has vowed, etc.

S. Augustyne declared.

First it is to be marked, to whom, o^ at whose instaunce, this book was
made, who was the author, and what is the argument, The book.
or ground thereof. The book was written to one Iuliana, a professed wydowe.
The title and argument, are corresponding to the same, for they declare the
honest state of wydowhede. But the great learned man Frasmus, utterly denies
the wurke to be Saint Augustynes, and proves it by many strong reasons.
Consydre first of all, that they are brought to a narrow shyft, that seeks to
be helped by women's matters. Wydows
What has wydowed to do with presthode, more than womanhede with massing? Are
the offices of prestes and women bycomen now all one, and were wont to be so
diverse. Then let prestes become women also. Is not here (think you) a wyttie
fatche of this papyste, to prove his matter by? His first proposycyon was (and
thereupon is all this contencyon) that prestes must be Celibes, that is to
say, men without women. Celibes.
And now that matter can not be proved without women's help. I have now my
conjecture. For I thought always, though they had rejected women, yet would
they seek them out again for some naughtye purpose. They fare like monks and
frires, which never could agree, but when some myschefe was in bruynge,
against the glory of God.

And in deed the prophet Daniel confesses, that the hearts of that
generacyon, are gredely set upon women, Dani. xi. but that ^echerouse.
is all out of marriage. But I fear me, their labor here, tends to this
end, to find out among themselves by virtue of their orders, that
prodygyouse kind of occupyenge without women, which Saint Paul appoynteth
them as a plage of their error to dampnacyon, Roman. i. They are about no
small miracles, when they have such compassynges, ye may be sure. O execrable
generacyon of Antichriste. Now to the Deuyls.
contents and argument of this alleged book. The wurke is divided into two
parts, the one containing doctrine, and the other fatherly counsel, for the
honest state of wydowhede. The doctrine which is the strongar part, ends
with the fyftene chaptre, and this crooked cloyner, cloughteth me in a patche of
the lattre part, Conueyaunce.
which is the weaker. But mark his conueyaunce (I beseech you) and ye shall
see in him, the cursed nature of a wicked papyste. He brings me in here, the
lattre end of a sentence in the. xvi. chaptre, leaving out all these wurdes.
Qua in re, prius illud moneo, vt quantamcunque tibi inesse sentis Left out
pie continentie dilectionem, beneficio Dei tribuas, eique gratias agas, qui de
spiritu suo tibi tautum largitus est, vt eius in cord tuo charitate diffusa
(now comes in his patche) licite rei licentiam, tibi amor melioris boni
auferret.

But in place of all this, he has trumped me in a Quando, to help his
conueyaunce, and changed the time in Aufert. A false harlot False dice
(they say) will never betrue. And thus is the sentence to be englyshed. By
the way of exhortacion or counsel (says the author) I admonish the, that
what love so ever thu fyndest in the toward godly clennesse, im pute it to
God as his benefyghte, and give thanks to him, which out of his own sprete
has given the so much, that his charity being spread abroad in thy heart (his
Quando is out here) the love of a better Quando
thing might take away the lyberte of that was lawful. And what is all this to
the pur pose, to prove the folyshe vows of monks and of massemongers
indispensable? Truly no more tha^ is, Sta^s puer ad mensam, made by Robert
Grosted of Lyncolne. The mind of the writer was, that charity procedynge of
faith and not of vowynge (for here is no vow spoken of) should be judged to be
the gift of God, and that no boast should be made No vow
thereof, as of that thing which were in our power. For it follows. Multi
quippe habent magna Dei dona, et nesciendo a quo habeant, impia vanitate
iactantur. Many there be (says he) which has worthy gifts of God, but for
lack of knowledge of him that is the gyuer, they wickedly and vainly glory in
themselves. This spoke he against Boastyng
such iustycyaryes (as are our bragging papystes) which boasted that of
their own fre will, without the grace of God, they were able to live well.

His authoryte out of the. xi. chaptre and part concerning the doctrine, is
the conclusyon of an argument, the premysses left Conueyaunce.
clerelye out. But to make it not so to apere, serving his turn, he has
craftelye conveyed away this wurde Ergo. Mark the good wurkemanshypp of this
Babylonish builder. The author in that chaptre disputes against them, which
judged the marryages of professed systers or nuns to be aduoutryes and no
marryages, and concludes Marryages,
that such marryages ought not so to be judged neither yet dyssolued, though,
as in his opinion, the vow breaking he not allowable. In y^ chaptre before he
begins with this reason. Qui dicu^t taliu^ nupitas no^ esse nuptias sed potius
adulteria, no^ mihi videntur satis acute ac dilige^ter co^siderare quid di
ca^t. They yt report ye marryages of vowers, Unlearned.
to be no marryages but aduoutryes, seem not to be learnedly wise in their so
saynges. And if they ground (says he) upon Christ's spousage, and that he is
not yet dead but alive, and conclude it aduoutry that way. Thus I answer
the^. That in there generacyon, wherein Christ is, being now risen from the
dead, there is no such kind of marryage.

For if they might make that reason good, than might they also prove Christ
an aduouterer, Christ.
by receyuynge upon her faith, an other mannys wife. And this I add to it.
That an horrible sin they might also im pute to Christ, as to have married
his own mother, when she bycame her spouse, with other like fantasyes nothing
to the purpose. Neither may Christ (says he) be taken for the second
husband, as in that kind of marryage, his promise being prima fides. This is
no conuenyent rule therefore, No way.
of putting the man from the wife, but rather a way to make them aduouterers.
And after this sort he contynueth, till he come to the said conclusyon, Bonum
ergo continentie vidualis, etc. which all I cut of here, for time losing. The
commodyte therefore (says he) or professyon of vydual clennesse, is than most
fytt, when for the vow and promise thereof, women may put apart, that is both
liking and lefull. If this chaplayn had minded the preferremente of a veryte,
as he ded the bolsterynge out of a falshede, A fox.
he had there more aduysedlye marked this wurde possunt, which carries all
the wayght of the whole matter. That profession is fytt for them, when they
may, that is to say, when they are able to leave that is liking and lefull.

And that caused Saint Paul, not before lx. years of age to admytt any
wydowes Wydows
to live at the charges of the congregacyon without husbands. i. Timoth. v.
Make priests at that age, and ye may chance to have them chaste, but I dare
not promise you before, I have known so many to slide. Lo ser, how say ye now,
have ye not sponne here a fair threde with your. ii. allegacions of this
doctor, to prove, that than ye vow chastity when ye may lawfully go to
marryage? yes that ye have, and it were will Somer the kings fool. I told
you before, Somer
as I tell ye now again, that all this was but wome^s ware, which have many
times light heads, and therefore (I pray you) reserve it to their use, and
seek out some better stays, for the sole living or wyuelesse state of your
presthod, for these are far to weak. And as touching the writer, whom e y^
call S. Augustine, under whose authoryte ye seek to confirm a falshede, it is
yet in questyon A doubt
whether that book where his or no. Mark in the same. xvi. chaptre, a little
after your first allegacyon, Sursum corda, with dignum et iustum est, and S.
Gregory which followed. cc. years after, will rather apere the author thereof,
than S. Augustyne.

Now are we come to the third allegacion of this chaplayne, Non sitis pigri ad
vo uendum etc. which is S. Augustynes in deed upon the. lxxv. Psalm. But mark
his cruel theft here (I beseech you) that ye be not Augustine.
an other time deceived by the like. Thus begins S. Augustyne upon this
text of David, vouete et reddite, promise and do it, or vow and perform it.
Quisquis quod potest (inquit) voueat et reddat. Ne voueatis and no^ reddatis,
sed quisque quod potest voue at and reddat. Let every man vow (says he) yt
he Able.
is able to to perform, and let him perform it in deed. Do never promise,
unless ye mind to pay. But let yche man promise, yt lies in his power, and so
fulfill that he has promised. Than follows the text, that he seeks to wurke
his false feate with, Non sitis pigri ad vouendum. Be not slow to vow, and so
fourth. O blessed Augustyne, thy doctrine is godly and pure in this matter, and
not Godly.
mixed with the leaven of hypocrites. As thu put it fourth hece, it is
seasonable and good and may wholsomly feade the flock of Jesus Christ. But as
this cruel enemy ded handle it before, it was more like to have poy sened than
nouryshed. Full falselye art thu alleged here of this mocker and peruerter of
all godliness.

Thy teaching is, that no man should take upon him to vow that thing, which
he is not able to perform, according to Of power
the nature and true meaning of the text in that Psalm. And because S.
Augustyne would have this point taken for the seasonynge salt or ground of
all that should follow concerning that matter, he reherseth it here twyse. But
why left you this out, ye most spyghtfull adversary to all veryte and truth?
why let ye it pass by? yea, why took ye it not with you? Because ye would
play the dissembler, liar, mocker, poisener, thief, and soul murderer, ever
like your self, a vi. parts.
full exercysed craftesman in that occupyeng of mischefe. But tell me maistre
person, who has taught you to play so wicked parts as these are. Even the
Devil your captain, which seeks not else but to devour in darkness, you
helping him forward as much as ye may. For what purpose or to what end, do ye
wurke these false feats. Even to make of the howsholde servants of God, the
citizens of Sodom and Gomor. O devil Cytezens.
incarnate, O most vengeable Satan. But now that I have thryse taken you in
this kind of robery, I will so hold ye by the nose, both in this and in that
which shall fo low (be yesure of it) yt al they which shall look upon you and
your wurk, shall take ye for no^ other than a naughty thief and a pycke purse.

And as touching S. Augustyne, he utterly refuses, so to be taken or alleged
of any man, that his authoryte should maintain Doctrine
a doctrine besides y^ scriptur. For he says, in prologo textii libri de
trinitate. Noli meis literis quasi canonicis scriptis inseruire, etc. Give in
no case, so much credyte to my wrytynges, as to the canonycall scryptures of
the Bible. This sentence has he also in his second book, ad Uincenti^. Ideo
na^que retractationum librum feci, vt discant lectores, Recantaci ons.
neque mea per omnia mihi placere. For that only cause made I a book of
retractacions, that my readers might well know, that mine own wrytynges ded
not in all points please me. Moreover he writes thus in his wurke, de natura
et gratia, c^. lxi. Solis canonicis scripturis sine vlla recusatione consensum
debeo. Such a pryuylege belongs to the scryptures of the Bible, that to them
we must always assente without refusal. ^o, these are enough to clear him in
that matter. And to confirm that he has said before concerning vows, I
remember he has in diverse places of his learned wrytinges, quod vota stulta
no^ prosint Augusty.
sed obsint, imo quod extra scriptura^ da^nanda sint. That folyshe vows
profyteth not but much hyndereth, and also that they are dampnable when they
have no ground of the scriptures. Which for tedyousnesse in searchynge the
great heap of his wuckes to little profyght, I now pass over.

In ye end also will I say, yt they are ill frindes to S. Augustyne, which to
establysh so Authoryte
wicked a purpose, usurp his authoryte on this wise. For though his time were
su^what corrupted with superstycyo^s, yet he never took vows as they have been
prodigiously taken of hypocrytes in our age. That is to say, for a worshipp of
God, for a merit of righteousness, and for a singular perfeccyon. And though
he had so done, yet is not this couse quence thereby found true. Uowes were in
use in S. Augustynes days, Ergo ye sodomy tycall professyons of cloysterers
and masmongers, Argument
are a lawful service of God. No more than this argument is good. In S. Au
gustynes time some thought there was a pur gatorye, Ergo we ought to have
masses, the popes indulgences, and chauntery foundacyous for the dead. In
bryngyng in that long process of Saint Augustyne upon the. lxxv Psalm, this
charmynge chaplayne took much more pain than he neded. For it is nothing to
the purpose to defend monkysh Monkery
vows, but that he seems glad, to have sum what in aperaunce, though it be
most theuishly borrowed. The vows that he treats of, are no forswearynges of
marryage (as are the prestes vows) for than he should by his doctrine forbid
all men to marry, which were most deuelyshe. For thus he concludes, Omnes
communiter, universally all men.

But to put all out of questyon, this godly man dyffyneth, what kind of
vowynge he means. Quid de bemus vouere? inquit. Credere
Credere in illum, sperare ab illo vitam eternam, et been viuere secundum
communem modu^. What ought we to vow? says he, or what promise is required of
us by Gods law? To believe in him, to hope by him to obtain the life
everlasting, and to live godly, non otherwise than after the comme^ manner of
christianyte, required of all men geuerally. All the vows that there follows,
be they propre or commen, are governed by these christen rules. Thus is this
adversary Dowes.
discharged. iii. ways, for taking here any hold for his sodometrouse vows,
by quod potest, which he has theuyshly left out, by omnes communiter, and by
credere in illu^, which both he brought with him with out understanding.
Therefore this deceytfull Papyste
papyste may now go, as the common saying is, and shake the dog hay. For
nothing in all this long process of S. Augustyne, will serve him to his
mind.

Obiectio.
By this authoryte of S. August. we learn, that there be. ^i. kinds of vows.
One comme^ to all men. which differs nothing from the office and dewtie of a
christen man, whereunto every man is bound more by Gods law than by his own
promise. An other syngular, after every mannys own devotion, in such things
ii. Uowes
as he may lawefully forbear, and yet by his vow does bind himself to the
perfourmau^ce of them. The bond, whereof stands in the promise of the man,
not in no former commaun dement of God. This kind of vow, is clean left out
in your dyffynycyon, which makes it vnperfyght in my mind.

Responsio.
Here has this chaplayn ouershote his wits, by calling these three several
allegacio^s, but one authorite of S. Augustyne. But per adventure he would have
them here taken in substance, for. iii. persons and one God, Subtyle
for aboughte soche mysteryes his popyshe generacio^ is very busy and
co^nynge. I am well contented that he and his has learned in this lattre
allegacyon, which is S. Augustynes in deed, that there are vows of. ii. diverse
kinds, one commen an other propre, or one double and an other syngle, for the
other. ii. have no soche dyuysyon of vows. But I would he and they had learned
this of S. Augustyne wythall, that those vows Possible.
must be of things which are in our power, concerning faith, the common
christianyte, and a way to the life everlasting, for he mente non other. To
live without wives by your own appoyntement, and your other like voluntary
wurkes, are as agreeable to these, as mennys ways are to Gods ways, and light
to darkness. A man might here drive you and yours to a narrow shyft, that
would require of you to prove S. Augustynes dyuisyon upon this wurde votu^, by
Christ's doctrine. A shyfte.
Well, I let you alone concerning yt matter for this time, and go foreward
with the members of your dyuysyon, whom ye have dyffyned full like your self.

One commen (ye say) to all men, which dyffereth nothing etc. I would wysh yt
ye had left out some of those bablynges, and yt ye had given to this one of
yours, his own right na Prima fides.
me, calling him prima fides as S. Paul does and not votu^. For votu^ is but a
borrowed bastard name, without the scriptures of Christ's new testament. But such
are y^ buildinges of these wicked iusticiaries, to uphold in hypo crysie their
volu^tary wurkes. An other singular (ye say) after every ma^nys own deuocyo^,
in such things as he may lawfully forbeat etc. Merciful God, what co^fuse
matter and unfruitful baggage is this? Placed is it not in ye scriptures,
unless it be in ye smoke Smoke.
rising up from the botto^lesse pytt, Apocal. ix. or else in the golden cup of
y^ rose colored whore, and tha^ is it part of ye abhominacyon and fylthynesse
of her whoredom, Apo. xvii. Is the promise of co^ingall chastyte or faithful
clennesse in marryage, as the man to know non other woman than his own wife,
and the woman no^ other man than her own husband (which S. Augustyne here
no^breth among Lyberte.
syngular vows) after every ma^nys devotion, yt he may leave it of if he
lysteth and become an aduouterer? Is it also in such things as he may lawfully
forbear? Then has God spoken it all in vain, that in such case man should
leave father and mother and only cleave to his wife, and they twain thereby to
be one. Gene. ii. and Math. xix.

How can ye say, that the bond is the ma^nys in y^ state, when yt man has no
power of his own body, but y^ wife? i. Cor. vii. Stands The bo^de.
the bond of this vow in the promise of man, and in no former commandment
of god? and so leaves him at lyberte, whether he will be an whoremaistre or
no? What manner of doctrine call ye this? I am not ill apayed, Fynely.
that this kind of dyffynyng is out my diffynicion (as ye call it) neither do
I reckon it the more vnperfyght for the want thereof. I would men ded mark this
workemanshypp here, and ded se how fynely falshede as in a net, conuayeth
himself. Come out ye devil, I will yet dyscouer you further, for all your
crafty lurkinge, and clearly dispatche ye of your hold. Uowes are here deupded
into vows commen, and vows syngular. This division is altogether naught, as
you have here dyffyned the me^bres thereof, Agree.
though ye father it upon S. Augustyue. For memb^a diuisa in genere non
conueniu^t, as it is required they should do. If it be answered yt they agree,
in genere vocabuli. I must say again, that our dyfputacyou is not super
vocabulis, upon wurdes and names of things, but upon the very things
sygnyfyed by them. I will prove by their grounds, that they agree not in vno
genere.

The ground of vows common, are Gods holy commandments, the ground of vows
syngular, as you have descrybed them, are mennys ydell deuocyons, otherwise
called Deuocio^s
will wurkes, or wurkes of supererrogacio^, that is to say, more than need.
How far these. ii. are from agreement in vuo genere, y^ voice of Godsowne
mouth by the prophet has declared, Esa. lv. Non enim cogitationes Thoughts.
me sunt cogitationes vestre, necvie vestre, vie me. Sed quemadmodum celi,
terra sublimiores sunt, ita excedu^t vie me vias vestras, et cogitationes me
cogitationes vestras. My thoughts (says the lord) are not your thoughts, nor
your ways my ways. But so far as the heavens are higher than the earth, so
far do my ways excede your ways, and my thoughts your thoughts. Se now
how these divided members agree. Who ever thus coupled himself with God, but
Antichrist the son of perdicion? Lucyfer
which exalts himself above all that belongs to God, ii, These. ii. But
come down thu devil, that thus settyst thy chair in heaven, and will be check
mate with the highest, ^sa. xiiii. full vumete are thy dongysh and fylthie
tradicions, to be coupled with his laws immaculate. The days wylones come,
that thu shalt be brought down to the depeth of h^lle.

The bond of this vow (says this tha plain) stands in the promise of the
man, and not in the former commandment of God. Whereunto I say, yet ones
again, that Shame
yt more is his shame to couple it, yea, rather to make it equal with Gods
commandments. But that the myscheuouse nature of that hypocrytyshe
generacyon is, as Christ has declared, Mathe. xv. to make Gods
commandments of none effect, for their own be astlye tradycyons. If the
bond be of man, how little strength is it of? Is a Man.
sin full man of such omnypotency, that his unadvised decre must perpetually
stand, leadynge to so wicked an end? Isidorus says. Si quis preuentus fuerit,
vt diffiniat agere aliquid eorum que non placent Deo, penitentiam agat. It quod
contra mandatum Domini statutum est, in irritum reuocetur. If any man be so
prevented, that he bind himself to do auye of those things A vow.
which are not pleasynge to God, let him repent him of that prompse. And
let that which was determined without Gods commandment, be called back
again and made of none effect. Sayncte Bedas also confyrmeth the same in
Romelia. xlv.

Si aliquid forte nos incautius iurare contigerit, quod obseruatum in peiorem
vergat exitum, Libere illud salubriori consilio mutandum nouerimus, ac magis
instante nenessitate Change.
peierandum nobis, quam pro vitando periurio in aliud grauius esse diuertendum.
Denique iurauit David per Deu^, occidere Nabal virum stultum and impium, atque
omnia que ad eum pertinebant demoliri: Sed ad primam intercessionem Abigail
femine prudentis, mox remisit minas, reuocauit ensem in vaginam, neque aliquid
culpe se pro tali periurio contraxisse doluit. If it has chanced us (says
S. Bid) to be Bedas.
sworn to any such things, as the fulfyllynge thereof, might bring us to a
greatter evil, Being instructed by more wholesome counsel, we may well break
that oath, and rather for the time of need forswear the thing, than for
doubt of perjury to run into a greatter inconuenyente. For David swore by
his Lord God to slay Nabal, a folyshe and wicked man, and to destroy all that
was his. Yet at the first instaunce of the sobre wise woman Abigail, he
withdrewe Abigail
his anger, put up his swearde, and never thought any sin in that perjury
or breakyuge of his vow. The chaplayne says, that this kind of vows, is
clean left out in my dyffynycyou. As I said before, I am well contented it
is so. Saint Paul says. i. Lorinth. vi. Righteousness can have no
felyshyppe with unrighteousness. Light agrees not with Christ.
darkness, neither has Christ any concord with Belial. And this (he
says) maheth my dyffinicion vnperfyght, As though monkyshe vows, might add
perfeccyon to vows of the old law, confyrmed by y^ scriptures. Who could
ever have painted him out more lively for Antichrists man, than he paynteth
out him self?

Obiectio.
Than ye go about to prove it by the saynges David
of David, which saynges declare the good af fectyon of the just man, to the
keeping of Gods commandments, and seem to pertayne nothing to declare what
is a vow. And therefore in my mind, your dyffynycyon is nothing fur thered by
these authoritees. The just man says, I have loved thy commandments above
gold and precyouse stone. This proves not that a vow is only a promise to
keep Gods commandments. For it speaks not of a vow, but declares his
affection and obedience A vow.
to God, So I take it, except you se further in it, and can otherwise declare
it.

Responsio.
I go not about to approve this descryp cyon of a vow, after the order of
Aristotle's logyckes and Porphiries pryncyples, as I told you before. For so
might I do as your false generacyon does, prepare a deceytfull bayte to
circumuent the simple which has no foresyght, and to trappe them in a snare
False.
to the devil your masters behoue. This kind of clowtynge ye shall keep to
your self, as an art fytt for your occupyenge, to wrynge by couples into one
diffinicion of a vow, truth and hypocrysy, veryte and falsehede, God and the
devil, agree if they may. For otherwise (ye say) it can not be made Dyffynycyon
nor come to y^ shappe of a persyght diffynycyon. In allegynge David, I approve
a doc tryne and no dyffynycyon, the ground of a vow after the sacred
scriptures, and not the name of it, as it has been hurly burlyed in
Antichrists kingdom. Though the alleged textes here, makes mencyon of no
vows, yet include they that, whereupon vows must be grounded, if they be of
value, as are gods appointed ways and commandments, They also seclude y^
ought not to be vowed, that is to say, false ways and wyckednesses.
Hypocrysyes.
And this agrees well with that which is uttered in the former descrypcyon, to
declare and show a plain contrariete betwyne the sober vows of the scripture
and the frantyck rash vows of our clergy, least men un bewares should judge
them all one, and so be parelously deceived.

And no man can deny it, but David the author of those.ii. sentences, was a
vower, for he vowed a vow to the God of Jacob, Psalm. cxxxi. He confesses in
his Psalms that he was a contynuall and daily vower. A vower
In me sunt Deus, votatua, que redda^, laudationes tibi, Psalm. lv. I have
within me, O God (says he) thy vows, which I will pay the, and they are thy
praises. Reddam vota meade die in diem, Psalm. lx. I will perform my vows
from day to day, Redda^ tibi vota, que distinxerunt labia mea. Psalm. lxv. I
shall render the vows, which my lyppes has with deliberacyon promised.
Praises
Uota mea Domino reddam in conspectu timentium eum. Psalm. xxi. et. cxv, I will
perform my ^^wes to the Lord, in the sight of them that fear him: With a
great nombre of testymonyes more, who is than more fytt to be called to
witness in such a matter, than he which has sought it and proved it? Or who
knows it better than he that has had it in so much use? and commands men
so earnestlye to vow? by these wurdes, Uouete et reddite, and cet. Be godly.
Uowe and perform your vows. Psa. lxxv. These are to be loved as Gods
prescripte ways, and observed as his commandments, the other are utterly to
be abhorred, as the ways of falshede and wickedness. Thus perteine they
sumwhat (as you term y^ matter) to declar what is a vow, and there for they
have well furthered my diffinicion.

These saynges of David (ye say) declare the good affection of the just man, to
the ke pynge of Gods commandments. Here is so wayghtye a sentence, as might
well Wit
have commen from them which were wo^te to sing that Psalm at their popish
hours without deuocyo^, it comes fourth so freshly and with such a courage
of slouthe. But it is good portasse doctrine. As ye love the scriptures, so
handle ye the^, yrkeso^ly, fayntly, vnsauerly, and barre^ly. But as feeble and
as cold as ye judge them, yet are they so full of life and strength of Gods
sprete, that all the Lively
powers of hell are not able to prevail against the^. And they will serve the
scripture vows at need, though they serve not your popysh vows. They declare
in David besides your feeble affection, a faith incomparable, and an whole
geuynge up of him self to God from all worldly cares. A doctrine from above, a
demonstracyon of the ryghteouse, a prophecye full of pythe, a puryte of Gods
wurde, a consolacyo^ in Godliness, Sentences.
an hate of superstycyon, a right handelyng of ye scriptures, a full
obseruacio^ of Gods commandments, an obedyence to Gods byddynges a
symplycite of soul, a meekness of sprete, a conscience without cancre, a
strong love toward virtue, a study for righteousness, a despre of knowledge
heavenly, a fervent zele in the truth, an alacryte Declared
of sprete, an inward peace, a joy in the holy Ghost, a dylygence effectual,
a co^stauncy in perfyghtnesse, a mygthy perseuerau^ce, a gift of Gods sprete, a
sincere relygyo^, a detestacio^ of ydolatry, gods true worcester shypp, a work which
most hyghly pleases God and dyspleaseth the Devil, and an whole sum of
Christianite.

Censura.
Uowes in the.xxx. chaptre of Numeri, are gifts with praises unto God, or
offeringes with thanks geuyng. And they pertayn to a feast of the Jews,
called Clangor
Clangor, or the day of trompett blow ynge, which feast came but ones in the
year, and continued but.vii. days after. And therefore those vows were not
perpetual.

Obiectio.
In this sentence, ye seem to change the sygnyfycacyon of vows, and also to
restrain the^ to one feast called Clangor. For vows (ye say) are gifts, with
praises unto god, or offering Dowes.
with thanks geuynge. And before ye said generally, that a vow in the old
law, was a pro myse etc. How can it be both the promise of a thing, and the
thing promised? And by the chaptre it self, it may seem to be taken for the
promysyng of a thing to God, and not for a gift or offering promised. For
the last sentence says thus. Si vouerit, et iuramento se constrinrerit, vt
per ieiunium vel ceterarum rerum abstinentiam, affligat animam suam et^^. By
which words it apereth, that a vow is Promise.
not taken for a gift or an offering, but for the promise of some lawful
thing, as fasting, abstynence, or such like. Which promise the wife or
daughter is not bound to perform, if the husband or the father by and by
gain ^aye. Than if a vow here be not taken for a gift or an offering, but
for a promise of any lawful thing, which promise in some A gift
persons, at some times, in this chaptre is declared not to bind, It follows
that those vows do not pertayne only to the feast of tru^ pettes, but to every
time and age, when so ever any such vow shall be lawfully made.

Responsio.
Where as I have in that sentence changed the sygnyfycacyon of a vow, ye
could not therwyth be much offended, were ye not of a froward, crooked, and
quarellynge nature. Peuyshe.
For ye best of your doctors in expownynge the scriptures, does so, so well as
I, and are driven thereunto by the dyuersyte of the places and circu^staunce of
sentences. For restraynt of those vows in the. xxx. chaptre of Numeri, to a
feast called Clangor, I shall answer you here after. I spoke it in deed, that a
vow is a promise, and the scriptures before alleged, out of Genesis xxviii. and
Psalm. lxv. Scripturs
has born me good witness, yt I spoke ye truth in it, which to rehearce again
were but superfluouse. But where as ye say, I spoke it generallye for all
vows of the Bible, ye shall take it to ye again, as a lie of your own
forging. For I never mean al vows, when I speak of a vow, no more than I
mean all men, when I say, a man. And as I called it there a promise, so call I
it here a Meaning
gift, a praise, an offering, and a thanks gyuynge to God, and in all these
will the scriptures honestly bear with me.

It is written Leuit. xxvii. Homo qui eximium aliquod votum nuncupauerit, iuxta
A gift
estimationem dabit. A man that will give a syngular vow to the Lord, shall
give it according to the value or wayght. Lo sir, here is votum a gift,
requyrynge value or weight. Wha^ Jacob vowed a vow to God, Genes. xxviii. in
the day of paymente, that vow was an offering of the tithes of all that he
had given him. Wha^ David entered into the house of the Lord, Psalm. ixv. the
vows that he paid were fatt burnt sa Offerynges.
cryfyces with the smoke of rams, and offerynges of bullockes and gotes. Uota
pinguium vestrorum non respiciam, says God, Amos. v. I will not ones look
upon your fat offerynges, Moreover it is written Psalm. lxiiii. Te decet
hymnus Deus in Syon, et tibi reddetur votum in Jerusalem, exaudi orationem
mea^, etc. It besemeth the (Lord God) to have praise in Syon, a vow shall be
performed to the in Jerusalem, hear thou my prayer. Lo, here is a vow
called a praise, a prayer, and a thanks geuynge. In the. lv. Psalm are vows
A vow.
named laudationes, that is to say, praises or commendacyons. And where as
Solomon says, Prouerbio. xv. Uota iustorum placabilia, all good exposytours
calls vota there, prayers. An hundred like testimonies are in the scriptures
of the old law.

Now let us return to the. xxx. chaptre A gift
of Numeri. There is it written. Si quis virorum votum domino vouerit. If any
man vow to the Lord, etc. I am sure yt to vow a vow, is not to vow the
wurdes al ready spoken, but the thing promised in that vow ynge. It follows
after in the text. Si congnouerit pater votum quod policita est. If the father
shall know the vow that his daughter has promised et cet. This vow was not
the promise of a promise, for than had it been like the vow that Dauy the Dauy
Walshe man made upon the sea when he was in danger of drownyng, to offer a
candell as much as the ship maste, when he come ones to land, which ended
in the promise and went no farther. But it was the thing promised, which is
in some places of the scripture, a gift with praises to God, and some where an
offering with thanks giving, as I have proved here before. Ye axe me this
question, how a vow ca^ be both ye promise of a thing, and the thing
promised? Whereof I greatly wondre, consyderyng that for your pleasure, ye
grant Question
a much more maruele, that is to say.

In your massynges, after your breathinges upon the bread and wine, ye
confess the accydentes thereof to be Christ's body and blood. For ye say,
that the former substaunces of bread and wine are taken away by a new
creacyo^, which ye prodygyously name a transubsta^ciacyon. By this ye should
Miracles
seem to be in doubt also, whether Christ which was promised, was the same
very Christ which came at the time appointed, Gala. iiii. or nay. If it were
lawful to axe such questyons, I might also axe of you, how Sara might be
both wife and systre to Abraham? because I find it so written, Sara.
Genes. xii. and. xx. Such fryuolouse and unlearned questyons, bringing
nothing else but contencyon, S. Paul forbyddeth us to move. ii. Tim. ii. and
Tit. iii. ye ar a great wise prelate and well ouersean in matters, if ye judge
votum in all parts of the Bible to importe one meaning. Ye fare like a simple
surgeon or dog leche, who^ I sumtime knew, which had but one drink for all
dyseases, and one salve for all sores. Uotum in yt scrip tures has not one
only sygnyfycacyon, but A surgeon
many. Some where it is a knowledgyng of Gods benefyghtes, some where a faith
in his promyses, some where an adoracyon, a worshypp, a dedycacyon, a fre gift,
a promise, an offering, atythynge, a praise, a prayer, an abstynence, an
ordinance, a ceremonye, a sacryfyce, a thanks geuynge, Uotum.
and in certain places, a devotion, a desire, a danger, a destruccyon, an
Anathema or separacyon by death, and such like, but never any forswearynge of
marryage.

Before ye were much offended because I called a vow a promise. And now to
prove it to be no gift, ye admytt it for a promise (such are your mockes and
A promise
toys) and ye prove it to be so, by this sentence of the same. xxx. chaptre.
Si vouerit et iuramento se constrinxerit, vt per ieiuniu^ vel ceterarum
virtutum abstinentiam, affligat animam suain. If a wife has vowed and bound
her self by oath, to humble her soul by fasting or other kind of abstynence
etc. And I grant it you, that by this it is a pro myse. But if ye had gone on
a little farther with the text, ye had found it a gift. For Gone on.
anon after it follows. Quicquid vouerat atque promiserat, reddet. All that
she has vowed and promised, she shall pay. Though it were but a promise at
the bargayne or covenant making, yet is it a thing promy sed in the
perfourmaunce or at the payment day. Time and place has changed many
things. That was in the house a promise, becomes in the temple a payment.
Have ye forgotten your old sophystycall dystruccyon potentie et actus,
wherewith ye were wo^t to bind b^ares at your pleasur? what reme^ bre
youreselfe. Ye fare like them in this Pharisees
point, which reckened a swearynge by the temple or aultre, for no byndynge
oath, but the swearynge by the gold of the temple and offering of the aultre.
Mathe. xxiii. Christ says there, he that swears by heaven, swea reth by the
trone of God. Lo sir, how may heaven be heaven, and the trone of God?

Either ye were in doubt of your allega Plesaunt
cyon, Si vouerit, by these staggerynge sayenges (It may seem, It apereth)
before and after, or else ye were ^^yrily dysposed in your toyenge dalyaunce, but
ye have work manly mocked your self in the end with a manyfeste lie,
calling Si vouerit, the last sen tence of that chaptre. By like ye were in
such post haste, that ye took no head what followed. Look better upon it an
other time, for your own honestyes sake. Ye call abstynence and fasting
things lawful, and Fasting
so do I also in the kind God left them in by his appointed rules. But your
monkerye and massynge presthode, for whom ye presentlye contend, are nothing
so, wa^tyng allowaunce of the scriptures, but they are wicked offices and
abhomynacyons in the blasphemouse kyngedome of Antichrist. Where as ye say, yt
the wife or daughter, are Not ho^^^
not bound to perform such vows, if the husband and father says nay to
it, ye speak it truly, for the scripture there affirms the same. Why than
compel you prestes, monks, and nonnes to an indyspensable keeping of their
vows, of whom a great nombre had never the full consent of father and
mother? O deceytfull mockers. Scorners.
Yea, why so tyrannouslye bind ye them, to that filthy Sodom, without
redempcyon? O illuders of righteousness. God our eternal father, Hierem. li.
God his eternal son, Mathe. xi. and God his eternal sprete, Apocalip.
xviii. has myghtely called us from thens.

Our mother also, which is Christ's immaculate spowse, by the voice of Saint
Paul, has given this charge, to her children. Nolite iugum ducere cum
infidelibus, ii. Corinthio. vi. Bear not that yoke (meaning Warning
your vow) with the infydeles. Ne commisceamini fornicariis. i. Corinth. v.
Accumpauye not with those filthy fornicatours. Than conclude ye with as
folyshe an end, as ye had pryncyples before. If a vow (say you) be not here a
gift but a promise thereof, for certain times and persons, then pertayne not
those vows to the feast of trumpettes. Well said maistre per sone, and
reasoned full like a polityque pultar. If a net be not a net, but yt
shadow of a net than are we not like with our net tes to ca^che any
wod^cockes this year. Ser, it is so well taken there for a gift as for a
promise, as is declared before, and there for your v^discrete argument is
discharged. Clangor
But where as ye pluck those vows from the feast of trumpet blowynge, ye do
them great wrong. Better had ye done for them, to have left them there still,
or else in some other place fit for them, than to have left them here so
desolate, not knowing where to become. For there is now neither age nor time
fytt for the^ among christianes, though you, not onlyke a Iewysh Rabi, appoynte
the^ al times and ages. Neither have they been ^ibamina
sens Christ's ascension lawful. S. Paul sets so little by them, that he
calls them feeble tradycyo^s and beggarly ceremonies, threttenyng the
Galathianes dampnacion, forturnynge to them again. Gala. iiii.

Obiectio.
I se no cause why ye should say, they pertayne only to that feast, seeing
that fasting, abstynence and such like paynefull works be not gifts and
offerynges appointed by God to be offered in that feast only. I think, you
Wylye
think it no good reason to say so, because in the chaptre before, mencio^ is
made of that feast and of such things as God. will have offered unto him,
than I can not se why this chaptre should more ^e restrained to pertayne to the
chaptre before, tha^ the next to this, entreating all three of clean diverse
matters. Therefore I Bernard.
would know what reason ^ ground ye take so to say. For as yet I think (and
have good cause why I should so do) that vows here be neither gifts nor
offeryngs, neither they pertayne to that feast only, and that the feast
continued longar than. vii. days, as it apereth by the text it self. And
therefore by the conclusyo^, that these vows were not perpetual, I under stand
not what ye mean, except it be that the Blind
feast nor the offerynges of the feast, were not perpetual, being but
shadows, which saying follows not of that before.

Responsio.
Repetynge your matter, ye se no cause why, I should report vows in the. xxx.
chap. of Numer. to pertayne only to that feast etc. A gnatte ye strain out
very sore here, to swellowe in a camel, but it will not prove to your mind.
I se good cause why I should A gnatte
say it, and I speak it (I think) as a frynd. For if they remain not there,
they are like to have but a simple dwelling in this age, except some
superstycpouse grandame, or some old dottynge sir Dauy, will harbor them for a
time. Who will now vow, to offer up a young kydde in sacryfyce? What, think
you that we know not in what taking Sacrifyce
the dark ceremonies of Moses are now? Moses is dead and buried, we have
Christ alive in the mountain for him. The Gospel succedeth the law, wherein
the precepts are spirytuall, and must be of us fulfilled in sprete and veryte,
and not in old ^n sprete
worn out shadows. Remyssyo^ of sins comes only now by Christ's offering
upon the cross, and not by the old leuytycall expyacyons. Christ has wholly
and perfyghtly supplied in his most innocent flesh, yt was prefygured in the
serpent of brass in the wilderness, that no man from hens fourth should go
back again thereunto, for recover of y^ Recover
venemouse bytynges of any other serpente, Numer. xxi. for no man can peryshe
that believes in him, but is sure to have the life everlasting, Joan. iii.

That feast of trompet blowynge, I trom ped ye in as a toy to help ye forward
in your Iewysh creacyo^s, because ye sought so earnestly to establish the
chastyte of your presthode by that. xxx. chaptre of Nume. I gave ye it by the
way to make you merry with, Fylthines
and not to ground any christen doctryn upon it. How this word only leaped
into it, I can not tell. For when I conferred your copy with mine, I found it
not therein. You yt can so co^nyngly dymynysh and add, cut of and set on, pull
out and put in, as ye have done before in your Augustynes allegacyons, are able
enough to show your conueyaunces Lonnyng.
here. As well could you here pull in this word only, as ye there cloughted in
a qua^do. I am not so far ouerseane in the scriptures, but I know that more
Iewysh feasts are contained in the. xxix. cha. than festum tuba^um in the
first day of the seventh month. For in y^ tenth day of the same month, was
Fastes.
the feast of propycyacyon, and in the. xv. day was the feast of tabernacles.
I gave you therefore the feast of tro^pettes, as an end like to your pryncyples.
For I told you after that, of S. Georges gyld at Norwych, where I wylled you to
bestow those vows.

If ye bestow the fastings and abstaynynges of the scriptures now, upon such
Ie wyshe feasts, ye do as ded your pay pay, Pay, pay.
your papa I should say, which appointed the^ to his ydolatrouse days of
ydelnesse. Those pain full wurkes (as ye call them) which are for a
humyliacio^ of y^ soul, may now be appointed to no such feastynges. In deed I
know no good reason why they should. But where as ye say, ye ca^ not se why y^
chap tree afor should be restrained to pertain to this chaptre, more than y^
chaptre following, I must say to you again, yt I can well see it. For in yt
scriptures is no co^fuse order, but a conform and co^sona^t order, one chaptre
alwais Syghte
approuyng and declarynge an other. These. ii. cha. treat not of clean
diverse matters (as you uncleanly report the^) but they both co^clud to one end
of ceremonials. The. xxix. chap. makes mencyon of. iii. of their pryncypall
feasts, shows what sacryfyces should be done in them, and on what day of the
month they should be celebrated. The. xxx. cha. declares the perfourmaunce of
vows and Feasts
offeringes, both of the fre and of that which is under subieccion, as of the
father and the daughter, of the husband and the wife, besides the wydowe and
deuorsed to the profyght of the mynysters and levites.

Ye would know what reason and ground I take thus to say, or to join y^. ii.
chapters. I have for my ground this last sentence of Ground.
the. xxix. chaptre. Hec offeretis Domino in solennitatibus vestris, preter
vota et oblationes spontaneas, in holocausto, in sacrificio, in libamine, and
in hostiis pacificis vestris These things shall ye offer to the Lord in your
solempnytees, besides your vows and devotion offerynges, in your
brentofferynges, meat offerynges, drink offerynges, and peace offerynges.
This is my ground, put you the reason to it hardely. Ye say, ye Uowes.
think that those vows be neither gifts nor offerynges. Of that thinking,
ye are suffycientlye dyscharged before. Yea say, ye have also good cause so to
think. And I think y^ goodness of your cause not wurth the leap of a lowse.
Ye say, they pertayne not to y^ feast of tro^pet blowing only. That only, as
it stands, is yours and not mine. And if it were mine, I would ye ded byqueth
it to S. Georges gyld at. N. as I have done Iewysh
your feast with the Iewysh vows and all. But where as ye conclude, that the
feast continued longar than. vii. days after, it shall still rest there till you
be able to prove it. Ye say, it so apeareth by the text it self, but ye are
like to find it contrary as ye come ones to the trial.

Because I said, that vows in the old law, or vows in those feasts were
not perpetual, ye understand me not. In this ye fare like the back or owl,
which sees all An owl.
in the dark, and nothing in the clear light. Where as David speaks of the
mercy, wurkes, wysdom, and veryte of God, Psa. xci. he concludes with this
sentence. Uir insipiens no^ cognoscet, et stultus non intelligit hec. An unwise
man will not know these things, neither will a fool understand A fool.
them. The Babylonyanes (says Micheas) knows not the thoughts of the lord,
neither understand they his counsels, Mich. iiii. All they believed not in
Christ, which saw him do miracles, Joan. xii. In your excepcyon, ye admytt
the feast and offeringes for mere shadows, and why judge ye not the same also
of the vows there? I pray you let the cause go fourth with his effect, and
The cause
be not more parcyall to the one than to the other. The vows were for the
offerynges, and never were they performed, till the other were done in
effect. And as those offerynges were fynyshed, the vows had always their
end. How will ye then make these vows perpetual? Me think, I offer Answer
you a good honest answer, and to the pur pose of that went before. And it
seems much confirmed, in that Christ never taught this doctrine of
perpetual vows, by this nor yet by any other old scripture or example.

Obiectio.
For the perpetuyte of vows in deed, me think that no vow is perpetual to
all then, but only to him that makes it, which vow Maker.
he is bound to perform, during all the time he intended to bind himself,
and no longar* Moreover that vows may lawefully be made, is a perpetual true
doctrine. That we be bound upon pain of deadly sin to perform our lawful
vows, is a perpetual true doctrine, and yet we may vow to do a thing
Doctrine
but for one time, and upon a condycyon also. As Anna did. ^. Reg. i. And also
the children of Israel did, as apeteth. Numeri. xxi.

Responsio.
Se how this papyste toyeth and tryfleth here, how inconstaunt, vnagreable, and
contraryouse Uowes*
he is also to him self. Before he says, that there are some vows perpetual,
which are by commandment required of all men* And for example he brings
fourth yt vow made in baptysme. Contrary wise he affirms, that no vow is
perpetual to all men, but only to him that makes it. What think you of this
same fellow, is he a philosopher or a fool? Here confesses he plainly, that
a perpetual vow is a crea ture or image of synnefull mannys creacio^. And what
is it than? Is it any other tha^ wyc Sin.
kednesse? Have we any other than sin of our selves? It is written by Moses,
Genesis vi. Uidit Deus quod cuncta cogitatio cordis hominum intenta esset ad malum
omni* te^pore. God beheld it, that all the ymagyna cyons and thoughts of
mennys hearts, were at all times evil. Sensus enim et cogitatio humani cordis
in malum prona sunt ab adolescentia sua, Genesis viii. The understandings (says
God) and conjectures of mannis Ma^^^.
heart, are naught eue^ from his very youth. All are become unprofitable. All
men are corrupt (says David) and becomes abhomynable, there is not one that
does good, Psalm. xiii.

All men are sinners, Psa. l. Al men are ly ^rs psa. cxv. Alienati su^t
peccatores a vulua errauerunt ab vtero, locuti sunt falsa, Psalm. All men.
lvii. Men are untoward from their mothers womb, they err from their birth,
and speak lies. Consydre this weighty saying of Esdras. Iniqui omnes filii
hominum, et iniqua illorum omnia opera, et non est in ipsis veritas. Hi in sua
iniquitate peribunt, et veritas manet. iii. Esdre. iiii. All the children of
men are vnryghteouse, and all their wurkes are wicked, and there is no truth
in them. In their unrighteousness shall they also pe ryshe, but the truth
endures ever. Se now what the vows be, which are made by me^, Peryshe.
as this enemy here openly confesses. They are fruits of menys inuencyons,
conjectures, and thoughts without Christ's appointment. They are things
unprofitable, corrupcion, error, falshede, lies, presumpcio^, naughtynesse,
abhominacyon, and sin. If they be reckened a righteousness before me^, they
are such a one as the prophet Esaias speaks of. Quasi pannus me^struate,
universe iusticie nostre. Esa. lxiiii. Our universal ryghteousnesses, are
before God, as clothes Ill fruit.
stained with meustrue. Is not here ple saunt gere (think you) to make a
perpetual bond of? Yea, and it were to make a perpetual sacryfyce of your
dyrte.

O so domytycall beasts and hypocrytes. When will ye leave boastynge of that
ye were never yet able to perform? Never Not one.
was there one of your oyled and shaven generacyon yet chaste, for all your
stout bragges and crackes. No, not one. I am able to prove it before God and
man. Yea, I have declared it in the first part of my votaries, and will by
Gods grace, declare it in the other. ii. parts, by the styukynge acts of the
holiest hypocrytes among you, because I find you past all shame and without
repentance. I wondre where this hypocryte fyndeth it, that men are bound to
perfourm Hypocrite
such ydell vows without Christ's commandment. We have of him many
fryuolouse bablynges, but nothing proved by the scriptures. He says, it is a
perpetual true doctrine, that vows may lawfullye be made, but he shows not
what vows. If he means y^ vow of syngle life, I say, he lies falsely, to
the face of him. For by the Doctrine
space of more than three thousand years was no such doctrine, therefore it is
not a per petuall doctrine. Neither is it a true doctrine Sayucte Paul says,
but a doctrine of deuyls, pronounced by deceytfull hypocrytes. i. Timoth. iiii.

This monkysh pratler shows yet ones again, from whens he comes. A
perpetual true doctrine is it (says he) that we be Bound
bound in pain of deadlye sin, to perfourm our lawful vows. Mark this
same, we* hardely, and ye shall find him an old cytiezen of Sodom and
Egypt, Apoca. xi. It were mete first of al, to prove his vow law full, which
he has not done yet, ere he went about to add deadly sin to the breakyng
thereof. David brake such a vow, S. Bid David.
says, and yet had he no conscience therein of any deadlye sin. And although
it were a perpetual doctrine that men might make vows, and that they ought
to perform them in pain of Gods high dyspleasure. Yet were not your popyshe
purpose thereby much furthered, consyderyng your vows Name.
are not of that kind. For all that bears name of a thing, is not the same
thing. All that is called an apple or a fox, is not a natural apple or a
fox. In the end he comes with a legerde main of time and condycyon, for him
and his monkysh brethren. For there is an other we. And yet we may vow
(says he) to do a thing but for one time, and upon a condycyon also. Here he
tymeth and condycyoneth with God, which approves nothing, his own doctors
says. Is not this (think you) a strange Time.
proving of a perpetuyte in vows, by a how for one time, and by a vow upon
co^dycyon?

So well may this folysh reason stand, as that. Abraham one time begat Isaac.
Ergo he was begettyng Isaac for the term of his life, and all begetters after
him. If Robyne whode shote ones in Barnes dale, Folyshe.
he was shotynge at Barnes dale all ye days of his life, and all shoters after
him, are bound to shote at Barnes dale. These vows for one time and upon a
condicyon, he craftelye brings in, confirmynge them by examples of scripture,
to shaddowe his perpetual vows of Gomorra with. O crafty face of the serpent,
how long will thu deceyne Deceyte
the simple with that fruit of falshed? Thu canuyste say, scriptum est, as ded
the Devil in the wilderness, Mathe. iiii. for thy vows for a time and upon a
condycyon. But where are thy scriptures, to prove a perpetuyte in thy
Gomorreall vows, thu filthy Gomorreane? I tell the, that neither the vow of
Anna. i. Reg. i. nor yet the vow Uowes.
of the Israelytes, Numeri. xxi. is now unto us christianes a perpetual true
doctrine to be followed in effect. For than we should dedycate our children
before they were borne, to the service of the old Iewysh synagoge, and off^e up
calves or young bullockes with the^. So should we also, as we had the ouerhand of
our enemies, destroy hoth them and their cities. For that was the vow of the
Israelites
Israelytes. If we should follow this vow in effect, as a perpetual true
doctrine for us christianes, we should not leave one blasphemouse papyste, nor
one false prophet of Balahams mark alive.

Censura.
In this solempnyte (and other like) Offerynges.
their vows stood not in renouncing mar ryage, but in offering of young
bullockes, rams, sheep, and gootes, in brent offerynges, smoke offerynges,
drink offerynges, and peace offerynges, as is spe cifyed in the chaptre before.
Aaron, Eleazar, Phinees, Samuel, Sirach, zorobabel, Mathatvias, and zachary,
Johan Bap tystes father, which all were prestes, observed Prestes.
these vows, yet they never renou^ ced marryage.

Obiectio.
Ye perceive what moved me to think, that the vows in this feast stood not
in offering of young bullockes etc. For in this chaptre God does give laws
between the man and the wife, the father and the daughter, and for every other
person concerning making and byndyng of vows in all times. Nor we read
Laws.
not that any man ded vow to offer in that feast or any other: But the
offerynges for every day, were appointed by God, what they should be, and ded
no hang upon every private mannys vow. For so the service of God in y^ feast
might (ye know well) have been left and defrauded, seeing it lay in the
husband to stop the vow of the wife. But this chaptre Deuocyo^
of vows, is an absolute peace, and pertayneth to the law. And therefore is not
restrained to take place only in that feast, but at al times Laws
is to be observed, except you can show the contrary.

Responsio.
It is no matter what you do mean, so long as your purpose tends to so
naughty an end. I have good witness of the scriptures, Hebrews
yt the Hebrews in their private vows* were they in their great feasts or out
of the^, offered beasts in diverse kinds. Abraham offered a ram. Genesis xxii.
Anna offered. iii. young bullockes. i. Regu^. i. Samuel offered a suckynge
lamb. i. Reg. vii. David said al so. Holocausta medullata offeram tibi cum
incenso arietum, offeram tibi boues cu^ hircis, Psalm. lxv. I will offer unto
the, fatt brent sacryfyces with the smoke of the rams, I will offer bullockes
and gootes. Laws between the man and the wife, are matrymonyal Offerynges.
laws, and no laws for offerynges. The laws also between the father and the
daughter, are laws of Christen educacyon and obedyence, and not of Iewyshe
deuocyons, as both Peter and Paul has descrybed them. In the. xxx. chaptre of
Numeri, is no such matter contained. If ye mean it for making and byndynge
of vows, as follows in your process, put out, at all times. Put out.
For that is your own pharysaycall lenen, wherewith the devil and you would
corrupt the whole batche, Gal. v. I tell you ones again, as I have told ye
often before, yt those Jewish shadows are not for all times, though your Jewish
head so appoint them.

Christ will not have his pure Gospel, myngled with Iewyshnesse. Peter, Johan,
and Paul, has told ye often that tale, and yet ye believe it not. What ye
read, I can Apostles
not well tell, for I am neither of your popish professyon, study, nor yet
counsel. But for pryuate offerynges in this feast and other, ye are answered
before. Nothwithstandyng, I add this much more unto it, that they made not
buttons nor shoe buckles at those solempnytees. Some occasyon (I am sure) they
had of resort to the temple tha^, besides A clause.
their commanded sacryfyces. And the lattre clause of the. xxix. chaptre,
calls them fre will offerynges, or offerynges of devotion. God wylled not the
prestes and levites, to have any possessyon among the chyl dren of Israel, but
only to live upon the tithes, first fruits, and ob^acyons. For he said unto
Aaron, Numer. xviii. In terra eorum nihil possidebitis, nec habebitis parte^
inter eos. Ego pars et hereditss tua in medio filiorum Israel. You shall in
their land No possessyon.
have non enheritaunce, neither yet any porcyon among them. For I am only
thy porcyon and enherytaunce among the chyl dre^ of Israel. And in the same
chaptre a little before. Omne quod ex voto reddiderint filii Israel, tuum erit.
All that is given by vows of the children of Israel, shall be thine.

And Deuter. xviii. Sacrificia Domini et oblationes eius comedent, et nihil
aliud acci pient de possessione fratrum suorum. The Offerings
sacryfyces and offerynges of the lord shall they eat, and shall have none
other enherytaunce among their brethren. By this ye may see, that the
offerynges in those feasts, ded as well hang upon every pryuate mannys vow,
as upon the solemn sacryfyces for every day appointed. Else had a great
nombre of the prestes and Leuytes, gone to bed a hungered. Neither was Gods
service thereby left nor defrauded, Folyshly.
as you insipyently write, but rather set forewarde and furthered thereby,
being a great porcyo^ thereof, as the text declares. What though it lay in
the father to stop their daughter, and the husband the wife, upon
impedimentes laufull? Yet ded not all fathers stop their daughters, nor yet
all husbands their wives. But all these dark shadows are paste, and will
not now serve to mey^tayne the buggeryshe vows Fruits.
of your massynge presthode. Ye say, this chaptre of vows is an absolute
peace, and pertayneth to the law. Who ever heard of a more unlearned,
blasphemouse, and folish sentence? For more than. ii. thousand and. v hundred
years, had the Jews this. xxx. chaptre of Numeri, ere they had an absolute
peace.

If this chaptre had been to them an absolute peace, what neded they to have
looked A peace.
for Christ, by whom only they hoped for that absolute peace? If that
absolute peace had pertayned to y^ law, little need had we to have had the
Gospel, which brought that peace. But perauenture ye mean, that the chaptre
pertayneth to the law. Than ar ye a very fool, to call it an absolute peace. Ye
think your folly to be excused, because ye have upon your own absolute
authoryte, exempted it from the ceremony all law. O absolute ass head,
ydolatrouse monstre, and Absolute
witless ydyote, y^ thus will depryue Christ of yt which is only his? Christ
is our peace, Saint Paul says, and not the. xxx. chap. of Numeri. Ipse est
enim pax nostra, qui fecit ex vtrisque vnum, et interstitium macerie diruit,
simultatem per carnem suam, legem ma^datorum in decretis sitam, abrogans, vt
duos conderet in semetipso in vnum nouum Abrogate.
hominem, faciens pacem, vt reconciliaret ambos in vno corpore Deo per cruce^,
perempta inimicitia per eam, etc. Ephe. ii. He is our peace (says he) which
has made of both, one, and has broken down the wall Hatred.
that was a stop between us, and has also put away, throw his flesh, the
cause of ha tred, even the law of commandments contained in the law
written, for to make of twain one new man in himself, s^ ma king peace, and
to reconcyle both unto God in one body throw the cross, and slew hatred
thereby.

Thus are both your. xxx. chaptre, and law dyscharged of that absolute peace,
yea, the moral law also, if ye so mente it. After that Christ had given to
his dyscyples most sovereign Christ.
consolations against all troubles, he thus concluded, Johan. xvi. Hec locutus
sum vobis, vt in me pacem habeatis. These wnrdes have I spoken to you, that in
me ye might have peace. This peace was never manyfested to the world, till the
Angels with joy proclaimed it at Christ's natyuyte on this wise. Gloria in
altissimis Deo, and in terra pax, hominibus bona voluntas, Luce. ii. Glory to
God on high, and peace on the earth, and unto men a good will in receyuynge
it. Thus in the end ye conclude. Because that chaptre of vows is an absolute
Peace.
peace, and pertayneth to the law, therefore is it not restrained to take place
in that feast. Moses in the read sea is Christ that was crucyfied on
Lal^ary, and belongs to gods malyson, therefore may he not banquet at mydsomer
bone fire. Here is a well slauered reason, All times
is it not? And as for your, at all times to be observed, ye may now keep it
to ye, for your own occupyenge, to play therewith the Iewysh papyste. For it
is like in these days, to do non other service. I have suffycyently showed you
all this before.

Obiectio.
Moreover your own wurdes makes the matter to be more dark than it was.
First ye A vow.
^ all a vow in the old law, an earnest promise to fulfill Gods
commandment. Then ye call a vow a gift or an offering with thanks ge uynge.
Now ye say, a vow stands in the offe ryng of a gift. I would gladly learn
of you, by what reason it may be taken all these. iii. ways in one place? Ye
say, their vows stood not in renouncyng of marryage. Wherefore this is brought
in, I can not see, except it be to Buggery.
dyscommend^ the vow of chastyte, whych^ Christ and Saint Paul does commend
so much, and exhort all persons unto it, that can take it. No man says,
they renounced mar ryage. For either they were married and so could not
renounce, or else they were syngle and desired it because in Moses law, that
person was taken to be under a maledyccyon, that had no seed in Israel. But
in the new law it is not so* but Qui habent vxores, sint New law
tanquam non habentes. i. Corinthio. vii. Et sunt enuchi qui se castrauetu^t
propter regnum Dei, Math. xi^. which dyffynycyon Sayncte Augustyne does
declare playnelye, in the. vii. ^ viii. chaptre de bone viduitatis.

Responsio.
More dark can no man make the matter, yt you seek to defend here, than it is
of it self. The truth truly told, is ever (I se well) A blott.
a blott in your way. Ye go about to prove the whoredom of an whore, to be y^
highest kind of chastyte that ever was in the world. And for the precysenesse
thereof, ye only appoint it to your new God makers or masmongers. For in deed
those transubstanciated Gods, were known for no Gods before that
prodigiouse kind of chastyte was Antichrist.
canonysed for the^, of your great Antichriste the holy high Idol of y^
Romans. And this chastyte ye will approve by the offerynges of maidens and
wives in the. xxx. chaptre of Numeri, for that is yt scope of our whole
conte^cion, or the pryck that we al this time shote at. This is a prodygyouse
enterprise of you, and will have but slendre success, being women's matter, as
I told ye before. Women
For they might in no case fulfill their vows, were they never so stro^gely
made, but by lice^s of father and husband. If ye take that chaptre for your
ground, ye can do no less than grant the same to all them that has father
and mother till time they obtain their full consent. Ye say, by that I have
called a vow in the old law, a promise, a gift, and an offering, I have
darkened all your matter. Then has the light sore The light
darkened your matter, and the scriptures of God much blemyshed the same, for
they have myghtely borne me out therein.

I have declared before of the^, that a vow in the old law has a great
meany more than these. I shall not now neade again A mock
to repete the^. It is but a slye mock of you, to say y^ ye will learn of me.
For (I know) ye mind nothing less than to be taught of me, either yet of
any of my professyon. Nevertheless, for so much as ye desire to know by
what reason, a vow in one place may be taken for all these. iii. that is to
say, for a promise, a gift, and an offering, I will bring ye in a scriptur for
your reason, ye may Scripture
take it for a reason, if ye list. It is written Le. xxvii. Animal quod
immolari potest domino si quis vouerit, sanctu^ erit, et mutari no^ pote rit.
If any man vow a beast to y^ Lord, which may be lawfully offered, it shall be
an holy gift, and may not be altered. Also Deute. xii. Omnia que voueris, et
sponte offerre vo A vow.
lueris, et primitias manuum tua^um, cora^ domino Deo tuo comedes, in loco que^
elegerit. All things that thu shall vow, and freely determyne to offer, and
the first fruits also of thy hands, thu shall eat before the Lord, in place
of him appointed. Lo sir, here is your vow, a promise, a gift, and an
offering, and in the lattre text, comprehended iii. in one
under one relatyue. A gift is it, that is in a vow promised, and an
offering is yt gift, wha^ ye promise is ones performed.

If I said, that their vows stood not in abiurynge of marryage, as do the
vows of our smered massemongers, I uttered such a truth, as all the vow
scriptures of the A truth.
old testament affirms. Neither have I there in dyscommended true chastyte.
For marryage in my opynyo^, is an order of chastyte, what your adulted
conscience thinks of it, I can not tell. I reckon always that mar rpage
vnperfyght, which has not chastyte and clennesse resident. Had not Mary
Christ's Maria.
mother holden marriage for an order of chastyte, she would never have had
Joseph to husband. I was never dyscontented with your former allegacyon out of
Saint Augustyne, concerning vows syngular, quod alius vouit castitatem
co^iugalem, that some man voweth conjugal chastyte, or faithful clennesse in
marryage. Why than report ye of me, that I here dyscommende the vow of
chastyte? Ye are very ill aduysed thus to do. If ye mean that vow in your
oyled co^panyons, truly it may well stand in promise, but I dare boldly
say, it came never Inpromis
yet to perfourmaunce, no, not in the holiest of all your smered rabble. And
that is y^ chief cause (I think) that you determyne all your vows here, to
extend no further than promise.

Ye say, that both Christ and S. Paul does much commend the vow of
prestes chastyte. What a shameful slaundre is this A slau^dre.
to them both, and how blasphemouse a lie? How should Christ and Saint Paul
commend, that they never ones named in all their doctrynes? Prove me that this
wurde ^otum, either yet vouere, is ones expressed in all their teachynges, and
win the maistry. O brockyshe Gomorreane, how dare thu presume to father thy
fylthynesse upon the author of all puryte, and upon his cho sen vessel of
eleccyon? Thu sayste also, they Paulus.
exhorted all persons unto it, that could take it. It is thy utter shame so
to report them. For when Christ said, Math. xix. Qui potest capere, capiat.
He that can obtain it, let him hold it. He meant nothing less than a vow.
For chastyte there, is a gift of God, in fredo^ and not in bondage, for
preaching the Gospel in the kingdom of God, and not for loyterynge massynges
in the kyngedome of Satan. When Christ Chastyte
cured Peter's wives mother of a feruente fever, Math. viii, He ^ad him not
break up how should and profess a new found chastyte.

Sayncte Paul says, Romano. i. that the wrath of God has lyted upon you
from heaven, for changynge his truth to a lie. A change.
And has given ye clean over with your unchaste vows, into most shameful
lusts of uncleanness, one burning in abhomynable lusts to an other, and
defylynge your bodies among your selves for want of the natural use of
women. It is the plain text that I tell you, declarynge the holy consecrate
fruits of your wyuelesse vows. Boast no longar, but repent and be ashamed
Repent.
of them, ye beastlye boryshe buggerers. If ye deny it not, but all they in
the old law favored marryage, the married for the bonds sake, and the
v^marryed for fear of the maledyccyon for barrenness. Why ground ye
thereupon, a relygyon that than was not thought upon, and judge it a state more
perfyghte? Ye say, the new law is not so. What not so? That when they are
married, they may renounce marryage? Or when they are syngle, they ought not
for any need despre it? Deuylysh
Though Saint Paul says. i. Corinth. vii. Qui habent vxores, sint tanquam non
habentes. Let them that have wives, be as though they had no^. Yet teaches he
no such doctrine. For he says before, about the beginning S. Paul.
of that chaptre. Propter stupravi tanda, suam quisque vxorem habeat, et suum
queque virum. For avoiding fornycacyo^, let every man have his wife, and
every woman her husband.

Saint Paul's meaning is not in the text before, that the man should abst ayne
from his wife, nor the wife from her husband. For he says in the same
chaptre, that the Mark it.
husband has no power over his own body, but the wife. And in like case, the
wife has no power over her own body, but the husband. Therefore he
understands it not that way. But this is his meaning, that men being
married, should not be over vexed with the cares, troubles, and sorrows of
marryage, Troubles
but so quyetously content themselves therewith, as though they were clearly
with out them. For therein must the man eat his bread with double sweat,
having more to provide for than himself, and the woman must suffer the
sharp shoures of her trauaylynge in delyueraunce of child, Gent. iii. Neither
will Christ's wurdes, Math. Christ.
xix. serve your most fryuolouse purpose. Et sunt eunuchi, qui seipsos
castrauerunt propter regnum celorum. Also there be gelded men, which have
gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven. Though this were by an abstynence
from marryage for a most godly purpose, as is the mynystracyon of Gods wurde,
yet can it not be proved to be No vow.
by vow, nor yet by yt office of ydolatrouse massynge in Antichrists
kyngedome. For your Augustyne, de bono viduitatis, ye are answered before, I will
spend no more time about it.

Obiectio.
Ye reckon upon certain of the old fathers that were prestes, and yet ded not
renounce marryage. Which thing made me to muse, because Musing
I never read y^ all those were prestes, although some of the^ were. I will
doubt of come of the^ a while, by your leave. As of Samuel, seeing neither his
father nor son were prestes, nor he borne of the stock of Aaron, and by his
mothers vow, offered to serve in the temple. Which she neded not to have
done, if he had been a priest borne. And also of zorobabel, which was de tribu
Judah. But in such small tryfles is no zorobabel
great matter. Put the cause they were all prestes, as ye may reckon a great
sort more, seeing they had wives, as you say, why should you affirm that they
never renounced marryage? except ye say so, to mollify the matter, and to use
men to bear that prestes had wives in the scripture. But why do you not put
here your dystinccyon between prestes of the old law, which must needs be
married, because their Diffinicio^
order was mayntayned by succession only of the stock of Aaron, And prestes
of the new law, which for their virtue are chosen unto that order, as S.
Ambrose says, et ^et.

Responsio.
Upon* ii. things here ye muse, by your own confession, one is, that in
reportynge ii. things
certain of ^^ old fathers to be prestes, I should say withal, that they never
renounced marryage. Here is no small matter to muse at. If ye be not out of
this musing till I ryd ye of it, ye are like to dwell in it a great while, I
know my matter so good. An other thing that ye muse at is this, and it
concerns your own propre person. It is even your self that ye muse at. For
ye never read (ye say) yt al those men, whom I have Prestes.
rehearced, were prestes, though some of the^ by your own conce^t, were
prestes in deed. Ye are contented well, to allow Aaron, Eleazar, Phinees.
Sirach, Mathathias, and Zachary, Johan Baptistes father, for prestes. But
Samuel and Zorobabell ye will not admytt, but doubt of them a while ye say.
And full manerly ye axe me leave so to do, which I grant with good will.
Tha^ fall ye to a nughty strayning of this gnatte. Your doubt first of all,
is of Samuel (ye say) considering that neither his father nor soune were
prestes. This reason is to Samuel
slendre to hold ye still in that doubt, unless ye will doubt of purpose. For
Melchisedech was the priest of the highest, Genesis xiiii and yet we find not
that his father was a priest, neither yet his son after him.

But this dare I boldelye affirm, that both Samuel was a pressed, and Helchana
his A priest.
father after him. And after y^ death of Heli, not only he succeeded in the
seignourye or pryncypalyte over the Israelytes, but also in the high
presthode. Mark his authoryte. i. Reg. iii. his intercessyon and sacryfyce for
the people. i. Reg. vii. which all pertayned to his presthode. This confirms
Da uid. Psalm. xcviii. Moses et Aaron in sacerdo tibus eius, et Samuel inter eos
qui i^nuocant nomen eius. I^uocabant dominum et ipse exaudiebat eos. Moses and
Aaron among his prestes, and Samuel among such Moses.
as call upon his name. They called upon ye lord, and he heard them. The like
is written also, Hier. xv. Si steterint Moses et Samuel coram me, non est anima
mea ad popu lum istu^. Though yt great prestes Moses and Samuel stood before me
to make intercessyo^, yet have I no heart to this people. For the prestes were
they which ded that office, Iohel. ii. S. Augustyne writes thus, in. xii. lib.
co^tra faustu^. ca. xxxiii. No^ne ab ipso regu^ ex Samuel.
ordio co^mutatu^ est sacerdo tiu^ in Samuele^, reprobato Heli, et regnu^ in
david, reprobato Saul. Is not the presthode, from the very beginning of
kings, changed to Samuel, Heli being rejected? and the kyngedom given Heli
pressed.
to David, Saul being dysalowed? Bid has also the iyke, super primo Regum, et
Roman. vii. Moreover Ioha^ Carrion says, in the second book of his Chronycles.
Incertitudinem imperii indigne ferens populus, postulauit a Samuele summo
sacerdote, regem certum designari, qui preesset A king.
regno. The people grudgyng at the incer taynte of their empire, required of
Samuel the high priest, that a king might be certainly appointed to govern
them. Petrus Equilimus in sanctoru^ Catalogo, shows the same.

And for his father, Conradus Pellicanus says upon the first chaptre of the
first book of kings, Pater Samuelis sacerdos erat, matter prophetissa. The
father of Samuel Helcana.
was a priest, and his mother a prophe tysse. It is also in the Bible text. i.
Reg. i. quod Helcana immolauit. I pray you, what call ye that? Lo sir, this is
enough to prove Samuel a priest, and to dyscharge your great doubt. Yet for
so much as ye reason further, ye shall have further answer. Ye say, Samuel
can not be proved a priest, because he came not out of the stock of Aaron.
Aaron.
This declares in you a blocky she ignorance, and as though ye had seen
nothing. Josephus in the first book and the. xv. chaptre of his Antiquytees,
says, that Helcana Samuels father was vir Leuita, a man of the stock of Leui.
Althamerus writes also in sylua Byblicorum nominu^, that the said Helcana was
genere Levites, a Leuyte by his birth. Pellicanus comes after, and he
Pelican.
confirms it with this sentence upon the. xcix Psalm, as he nombreth the^.
Erat sane Samuelex genere Leui per Cahat, ex quo and Aaron et Moses nati sunt.
Certaynely (says he) or without questyon, Samuel was of the stock of Leui by
Cahat, of whom spronge fourth Aaron and Moses. And he sends us there to the
pedigrew of the Levites. i. Pa ralip. vi. where as it is regestred at large.

Yet are ye not contented, but Samuel must still be no priest, because his
mother Temple.
offered him up to serve in the temple. Which she neded not to have done (ye
say) if he had been a priest borue, O brutysh bussarde ac stolidu^ caput. This
is a reason, as though Gods fauer and syngular grace had been bound under
law, as in that age synnefull men were. This phantasy of yours. S Hierome with
your other old doctors have dyscharged, Pellicanus comprehendynge their
minds in this only sentence, Preter legem erat, infantem Leuiticum offerre
doceretur mino. Sed quia myraculose promissus et ge Miracle
nitus diceretur, susceptus est ab Hely, et velut peculiare Deo munus oblatum,
diligentius curandu^. It was above the law to offer the lord a child of
Leuyes stock. But because that Samuel should be famed abroad to have been
promised and borne by miracle, Heli sacer dos.
he was received of Heli the high priest, and offered as a peculyar gift to
God, to be more dylygently looked to. The Bible ma keth mencyon of Leuytes and
Aaronytes, but not of prestes borne, as ye do call them. For prestes borne are
no babes, but great lubber knaves, as I have both heard and seane.

I remember ones at Cambridge, a good fellow complained to doctor Edmondes
tha^ vycechau^celler, yt his wife was delivered yt night before of a great gray
friar. And at London in an inn within Smithfeld Ione Prestes borne.
Swepestake was delivered of the limitour of Ware. Which swepte clean away
his clock, cowle, purse, petycote, botes, hatte, horse and all, leaving him
in bed al naked. I heard it also at Thornedo^ in Southfolke, by them that
found out the game, that the sexte^s wife there was delivered of the parrysh
priest, at eleven a clock in the night. I have read of Paulus tertius ye last
bishopp Paulus.
of Rome, yt his own dear daughter at dynerse times delivered him, besides
many other wonders* Some time these mysteryes were hydde^ by the terror of
walkyng spretes, but now they are known wale enough. Whored^
I could no^bre ye out a great sort of your un chaste mass mongers, yt have
thus been delivered of late years, and yet they will have no wives of their
own, so holy a thing is whoredom in your whoryshe church. Now come we to
Zorobabel, which could be no priest (say you) because he was de tribu Judah.
If that rule should stand, than must ye also deny Christ's presthode, which
was de tribu Judah both by Matthew and Lukes Gospel, and by all the other
scriptures.

I am the boldar to confess Zorobabel a priest, because the prophet Aggeus,
by the Aggeus.
express mouth of god, uses him as a fygur or former example of Christ. Agge.
ii. the same is confirmed, Eccl. xlix. For yt which zorobabel ded in reparing
ye temple and aultre made by hands, ii. Esd. iii. Jesus Christ performed in
ye temple and aultre without hands, Heb. ix. Et zach. iiii. Manus zorobabel
fundaueru^t domu^ ista^, et manus eius perficient ea^. The hands of zorobabel
have laid the foundacyon of this house, and his hands (that is to say,
Christ's) shall fynyshe it. This also augmenteth my opyuyo^ in this behalf,
that Christ.
after the captyuyte of Babylon, the Jews were ruled most of all by the
prestes, which brought in sects, as Pharisees, Saducees, and Esseanes, and
were the fynall decay of that empire, as were the papystes of our christia
nyte. An other manner of presthode was prefygured in Zorobabel, than was the
Leuytycall presthode, for that continued, and the Christ.
other peryshed. For Christ being of the trybe of Judah, and a priest after
the order of Melchisedech, turned over the Leuytycall presthode, even from the
very foundacyon, and left nothing remaining thereof, let the Jews boast of
it never so much, and the papystes occupye the spoil by theft and robory in
their aulters, copes, miters, oils, belles, and hablynges.

If there be no great matter in such small tryfles, why sturred you the coals,
and made A case.
so great matter of them? Now put you the case, they had beue all prestes, as
we may reckon (you say) a great sort moo (and I know it to be true) why should
I affirm that they never renounced marryage, seeing they had wives? That why,
in deed has a what. For it were no good reason, that they which have wives
should abhor marryage. That were against the doctrine of the holy Ghost A cause
through all the scriptures. But this I uttered, that no man should think
vows an impedyment to marriage. For when y^ doctrine of vows was in most
force, as in the old law, marryage was never hyudred by them. Much less
than in the new law, which shows no manyfeste doctrine of them, being but
ceremonyall shadows and no moral precepts. If we now mollyfye that you have
made hard, we do not amys, nor yet to your dyscommodyte. You have made it
death, a pressed to marry a wife, Make f^^t
like horrible tyrau^tes, to your own damp nacyon. Ye have also by yt means,
brought into the world an exec^able art, which had else never been so largely
known, that is, the prodygyouse occupyeng of Sodom and Gomorre, to double the
same da^pnacion.

If we have mollifyed these hard extremitees, we have not deserved hate at
your hands, but love. For we have thereby sought your salvation by
repentance, if it may To save.
frutefully come forewarde. To this end in deed, we use me^ (as you term it)
to hear that prestes had wives in yt scriptures, yea, we earnestly beat it
into their heads, as a necessary truth to be known, in spyght of
Antichrists wicked hypocrysy. Why I put not here a dystynccyon between prestes
of the old law and the new, is this. That dystynccyon is yours and not mine.
Marry this I read in the scriptures, that in the old Pr^^es.
law were prestes of the order of Aaron, but in the new law is non other
presthode, tha^ after the order of Melchisedech, and I find no more but one of
that order, even Jesus Christ the son of the living God. He is contented to
admytt mynysters under him, as bishops, superintendentes, or watchmen,
Officers.
preachers, eldars, and deacons, but all presthode he reserueth to himself
only. And S. Paul says, that he has made but one peace offering, or full
sacryfyce of himself for all, Hebr. vii. though he holds still a perpetual
presthode.

Sanctificati sumus (inquit) per oblationem corporis Jesus Christi semel
peracta^, He bre. x. We are (says he) sanctified by the offeringe Offering
of yt body of Jesus Christ ones for all. Though the Lenytycall prestes, the
pagane prestes, and the ydolatrouse popysh prestes, have innumerable times
offered, yet were they never able with all their dead sacryfyces, to take away
one sin. Hic vero (says Saint Paul) vna pro peccatis oblata victima,
perpetuo sedet ad dexteram Dei, id quod superest expectans, donec redd^ntur
inimici ipsius scabellum pedum eius, Hebreo. x. But this priest, after he had
offered one sacryfyce for sins, sat him down Scabellu^.
for ever on the right hand of God, and from hence fourth tarryeth, till his
enemies be made his footstool. Ye have nothing in all the new testament, yt
ye can justly ground upon, for a presthode, no, no more than ye have to be
kings of the earth. Unless ye take this, which is commen to all y^ faithful.
Erunt sacerdotes Dei et Christi, Common
Apo. xx. They shall be y^ prestes of God and of Christ. And yt can not be. For
there shall be no such kind of presthode, till ye general rysyng of yt dead be
past. Let not this word presbyter any lo^gar deceive you, for it is an elder
and no pressed. Ye say the prestes of the old law must needs have been
married, because their order was mayntayned by succession. Deceiue^
Here are ye deceived for want of an other dystynccyon, for it was not their
order, but their stock, that was mayntayned by succes syon. Their order was
mainteyned by sacry fyces, first, fruits, tithes, vows, deuocyons, and
offerynges. Herin have ye fowlye over shoten your wits. But I maruele, ye put
not in, Gods ordynan^ce. Leu. xxi. and Eze. Forgoten.
xliiii. For a cause why they married. That was fowly forgotten of you also. As
concerning prestes of the new law, surely we can find no^ such, neither in y^
Gospel nor yet in epistle. Only behold we there, Melchisedeckes presthod, and
yt never was there any mo re of yt order tha^ Christ gods son, as I told ye
before. Ye say, yt by their virtue, they are chosen No prests.
to yt order. Truly we neither know them nor yet their order, for a state
allowed by yt scriptur, besides yt we find them of al men furthest from virtue.
Therefore let them seek up some other name, if they will be reckened men godly.
For this will not be allowed of them that know chese from chalk, no, though
Deceyuers.
they bring with them three Ambroses for their witness. Christ told us ones
that a certain kind of men, should in the lattre days be among us, which
should say, unto us, here is Christ and there is Christ, but he told us
withal, that we should find them false prophets, false Christ's, deceyuers,
and no prestes, and earnestlye he bad us to be ware of them. Math. xxiiii.

Obiectio.
Saint Ambrose says. i. Tim, iii. Ue^^ribus idcirco concessum est Leuitis aut
sacerdo tibus, vxores ad vsum habere, quia multum te^pus ^xores.
otio vacaba^t a ministerio aut sacerdotio ^^. Ita vt tempore quo non illos
co^tingebat desit uire altari, domorum suarum agere^t curam. It vbi tempus
imminebat ministerit, purificati aliquantis diebus acc^derent ad te^plum
offer^^ Deo. Nunc autem septem diaconos esse oportet, aliquantos presbyteros,
vt bini sint pet ecclesias, et vnus in ciuitate episcopus, ac pet hoc omnes a
conue^tu femine abstinere debert, quia necesse est eos quotidie presto esse in
ecclesia, nec habere dilationem vt post conuenium legitime purifice^tur, sicut
veteres. Omni enim Abstinere.
hebdomada offerendum est et ce. Si plebeis hominibus orationis causa, ad
tempus abstinere se precipit, vt vacent orationi, quanto magi^ Leuitis aut
sacerdotibus, quos die nectuque pro plebe sibi commissa oporteret orare.
Mundiores ergo esse debe^t ceteris quia actoree Dei Argument.
sunt. Therefore your argument is of small strength in my mind, when ye reason
that prestes now may take wives, because prestes in the old law had wives.
For the cause is gone, and the presthode is not al one. And their my ^ystracyo^
is as much dyffere^t, as between brute beasts and Christ's body.

Responsio.
Who ever heard it, that Saint Ambrose wrote to Timothe S. Paul's discyple,
which was not borne almost three hundred years after him. If ye will have here
your Meaning
meaning taken for your writyuge, as that Ambrose wrote upon S. Paul's first
epistle to Timothe, ye must show some figure for it, else will it not so be
received* Your place of Ambrose, is nothing to the purpose of that we have
reasoned here. Our whole dysputacyon is of prestes, and not of deacons, no more
tha^ it was before of women, It is a mattre much to be wondered at, that ye are
so earnest therein, and neither can find scriptures in the new testamente to
serve A wondre.
your purpose, nor yet express places in your doctors, but ye must be
compelled thus beggarly to borowe of deacons and women. It is a plain token
that your matter is very weak, when ye seek to prove it by so slendre
authorytees. Well, ye look to be answered, and ye shall be no less than
honestlye and truly answered. First we must way, what Answer.
S. Paul has done in that first epistle and third Chaptre to Timothe, ere we
meddle with your Ambrose which wrote thereupon at his pleasure.

S. Paul declares there, what manner of man a bishop ought to be, and what
conditions, he, his wife, and his children, should or ought to have. He shows
also the properties Ministers
required in a deacon or minister, and in his wife and famyly. It behooves a
bishop (says he) to be fautlesse, the husband of one wife, sober, discrete,
and so fourth. Like wise must Deacons be honest, not double tounged, nor given
to much drink. et cet. Wives.
Even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers, but sober and faithful
in all things, that is to say, both the bishops wines and the deacons wives.
What can this further your purpose, that prests of the new Testament may have
no wives, when S. Paul appoynteth none other to be bishops and deacons, than
be the husbands of one wife, by this wurde oportet, it be houeth or Ambrose
is necessary. If your Ambrose brings fourth any other doctrine upon that
chapter than this is, he falsyfyeth the text^. But I would feign know. ii.
things of you. One is, whi ye ded not here as well allege Paul, which wrote the
text, as ye have done Ambrose, The gloss
which made but ye gloss? for always is the text of more authorite tha^ is the
gloss. An other, why ye have not as well taken matters belonging to bishops, as
ye have taken matters belonging to deacons.

For more force would it have given to the Strength.
thing, to have been taken from the superior, than from the inferyour, and
much more would it have fortifyed your cause. But ye are a wyly watte in the
kingdom of craft and generation of falsehede. Now will we go to your
Ambrose, by him to declare yet your falshede more depely. Answer me this first
of al. Why took ye not his gloss upon this text of the same chapter. Oportet
episcopum Textes.
irreprehen sibilem esse, vnius vxoris maritum. It behooves a bishop to be
unrebukable, and the husband of one wife. As well as upon this text for your
pleasure. Diaconi sint vnius vxoris mariti, qui liberis recte presint, et
proprijs familijs. Let ye deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as
rule their children well, and their familyes uprightly. I could in declaring the
causes, A Devil.
of this subtyle conueyaunce of yours, payn^e ye out like a dyuel in your
colors, were it not for making this book to long. To short. Your Ambrose
would not serve you in that point, and is like to do you as little good service
in this. Now will I English your Ambrose, yea, rather your ragged god bettes
taken out of Ambroses gloss, the best parts left always behind you.

For this purpose (says your Ambrose) was it granted to the Levites or
prestes, to have wives for their use, because they had much vacaunt time from
their mynystracyon No cause.
or offices of their presthode, etc. Than leap ye over. ii. long sentences
and an half, to the nombre of. xliii. wurdes, and there ye begin again
after this sort. So that they might se to their howses (says he) for the
time that their course was not to serve the aultre. But as the time of their
mynystracyon Cleanse.
approached, preparynge themselves certain days before, they drew toward the
temple, to do their accustomed service to god. Now must we have seven deacons,
and some auncyentes or eldars, that there may be in every parysh a couple, and
also one bishop in a city. And thereby all they to abstain from womannys
cumpany, for so much as of necessyte they ought to be always at hand in the
church, without excuse or delay, that after they have cumpanyed with their
wives, they might lawfullye be puryfyed, Iewysh.
as were the old Leuytes. For every weke must they offer etc. Tha^ ouerleape
ye again, the resydue of that long clause and an other whole sentence besides,
comprehendynge xxxiiii. wurdes, and thus ye conclude.

If he has commanded men of the com men sort, for prayers sake, to withdraw
No levites
themselves for a time, how much more the Leuytes or prestes, which ought to
pray day and night for the people to them committed. Therefore must they be
more clean than the other, for they are the factours, or bayliffes of God.
These are the fragmentes of your Ambrose. If ye were godly wise, as ye are not,
ye should well perceive them no thing to the purpose, either of the text that
he takes in hand, or yet of any sincere chri Frinolouse.
ste^ order. S. Paul speaks nothing there of y^ Leuytes, whose office was to
serve in the tabernacle of witness, Numeri. iiii. but of deacons, whose office
was to mynystre to the poor, Acto. vi. The offices are as like, the one to the
other, as a table is like a temple. Therefore your Ambrose was as great a wise
gentle man, to prove the one by the other, if it were his deed, as I doubt it
much, as your self were when ye proved prestes chastyte, by the chastyte of
women, which holds no longar in a great number of the^, Floyshe.
than it is in promising.

And your own dear Ambrose is against your self here, for you said before,
that the cause of their marriage, was succession in No causes
that live, and he applies it to their vaca^^ time. I would you both had
applied it to Gods ordinance, and than had ye done it more rightly. But that
ye clearly forgote. In that your Ambrose appoynteth to your prestes the
Iudaycal expiacio^s, for compani^^ with their wives, and charge them s^
earnestly with an ydel watchyng in the t^ple upon ceremonies, with an
abstynen^^ from their wives, and with an vnco^mau^ded offering every weke, the
study of God^ Baggage.
scryptures not once remembered, and in the end judges marriage an unclean
state ^^ living, forsooth it is a praty Ambrose. Wh^^ pure christianite can we
recke^ in him, whi^^ appoynteth our mynysters to the office o^ Leuytes, to pray
and not to preach, to syng^ and not to feed the flock, to cleanse by outward
ceremonies, and not by the inward^ faith? I boldly affirm it, nothing at a^^
Boldly.
fearyng the holiness of your Ambrose, th^^ this is no Christen learning, but
a doctri^^ of hypocrisye, ydolatry, Iewyshnesse, yd^^nesse, and deuilishnes, a
forsaking of Chr^^^ a curse, and dampnacion, as S. Paul ^^clareth through all
his epistles.

If any man teach you (says he) any ^ther Gospel, or kind of doctrine, that
have taught you, hold him accursed, Galathians. Accursed.
i. If any man (says S. Johan) will add to Gods book, God shall add unto him
the plages therein contained, and wipe away his part out of the book of life,
A^o^calyps. xxii. Among so much baggage, ^s ye gathered of your Ambrose, why
left ^^ this clause behind you, upon the same ^^xt? Ostendit istos vnius
vxoris viros esse ^^ere, vt hi ad ministerium Dei eligantur, Mariti.
^^i non sunt egressi constitutum Dei. Ho^^ni enim vnam vxorem decreuit Deus,
(...)m qua benedicatur. The Apostle shows (...)t these deacons (says he)
ought to be the (...)a^des of one wife, that those only might (...)chosen to
that Godly office, which had (...)ouerleaped the instytucion of God. For
(...)only wife ded God give to man, to be (...)with blessing. If ye had taken
this in One wise
(...)re way, ye should thereby have been (...)syoued, to have removed from
your (...)hode all whoremongers and Sodomy(...). Ye should also have thereby
known, (...)t marryage of wives has Gods (...)ssnge.

But perauenture ye left it out, for the (...)xte clause following, which
smells of (...)anyfest lie. Nemo enim cum secunda (...)edicitur. No man has
Gods blessing ii. vxo^.
(...)the second wife* O gentil Ambrose, where learned you this doctrine? Was
Mary Christ's mother not blessed, because she was Joseph's second wife? I
think Bethsabe David's fourth wife besides concubynes, was as blessed in her
fruit, as was Michol his first wife in her barrenness. Your Am Ambrose
brose upon the.xi. chaptre of S. Paul's second epistle to the Corinthi anes,
seems to be of an other opynyo^, than he apereth here. For there he says,
Omnes Apostoli, exceptis Ioanne et Paulo, vxores habuerunt. Et vide, an
conueniat accusare Petrum Apostolum, qui primus inter Apostolos est. All the
apostles, except Johan and Paul, had wives. See therefore if it be fit to
accuse or speak ill by the Apostle Peter, which is Peter.
the chief among the Apostles? But I thynk, this Ambrose is not the same
Ambrose, but some other. And whether he be or no, it is no matter, so long as
he is so dyscordaunte to himself.

Upon this broken, broused, battered, and broyled authoryte of your Ambrose, ye
conclude that my argument is of small strength. But ye do well to add unto it,
after your opinion, which is most popysh and folysh. Wisely.
It was never my argument, neither yet my reason, that prestes now may take
wives because prestes in the old law had wives. For than I should grant as
much authoryte to your prestygyouse presthode in the new law, as I did to
that selected pressed hode in the old law. Which I can not do, Presthode
that being of God, and yours of Antichrist and the devil. I told you before,
that the scriptures of the new law, have non other presthode, but only
Melchysedeckes presthode, which Christ left not here in earth still behind
him, but took it clearly away with him to the right hand of his father,
therein to make contynuall interpellacyon for us. Hebre.vii. et Roman.viii. In
him as we are a kyngedome, so are we a presthode Christ.
to our Lord God, Apoca.i. et. v. not by oylynges and shauynges, but by an
uncorrupted faith in his sufferynges.

His prestes may have wives by his ap poyntment, and never the less be
cytiezens with yt saints. Your prestes are utterly forbidden to have wives by
Antichrists com maundement, how should they else become No wives
the cytiezens of your great spirytuall city, called Sodoma and Egyptus,
Apoca.xi. If I should have made the reason, I would not have said, take wives
because the prestes of the old law had wives. But I would have said with
Paul, throw from ye that abhomynable yoke of the infydeles. ii. Cor. vi.
repent of that fylthy snare of the devil. Asuare.
ii. Timothe. ii. and take ye christen wives, because it is Gods holy
institucion, and because it is better to marry than to burnt. All this could I
have said. Ye say, the cause is goue, which is a meruel to me, the effect
remayuynge and Gods ordinance being the cause, for avoiding fornicacion. Ye
say also, the presthode is not al one. And that I grant you in deed, for they
had not both Not al one
one father. As great dyfference and more is betwyxt them, as is between Israel
and Aegypte. But of this I have told ye enough before.

Ye say, their ministracions are as much dyfferent, as between brute beasts,
and Christ's body. O blasphemouse speaker, and devil A Satan.
of al deuyls, full wicked is thy wretched body, to have so ungodly vtterau^ce.
O lord, how uncomely is this fylthy talk of thine? how dare thu take upon
the, so hyghlye to prefer the Gomorreall presthoode of thy Belphegor of Rome,
above a presthode peculyarly ordained of our eternal God, having no
authority of his wurde so to do? Come down (I say once again) thu filthy
Down.
find and arrogant Satan, that thus exaltest thy chair of pestilence, and
seat of wicked scorners, above that almighty God and his Christ, for the table
of the Lord, is not al one with the table of deuyls, neither yet is the cup
of the Lord al one with the cup of deuyls.i. Cor. x. Though in the Leuiticall
Levites.
presthoode they offered beasts, yet ded not Christ leave it to thy massynge
presthode to offer up his holy body and blood, thu traiterouse massemonger.
For he was able enough of him self, to offer up one effectual and perfyght
sacrifice for all, hebre.ix.

Censura.
Uouete.
Uowe (says David) and perform your promise. But who shall do it? Al you
(says he) that be round about, bryng^yng presents unto the Lord. Psa. lxxv.

Obiectio.
David says, vow, and you seem to say, Buggery.
vow not. David says, perform your promyses, and you say, a man need not
keep his vow of chastity, but may break it for every temptacion, and calls
it here after, a way to fylthy Sodometry and a profession to fylthynes
unspeakable. This terrsemeth to subvert al your purpose. If ye will restrain
David's Psalter, and say, it pertayneth only to the feast of trompettes in
the.xxix. Chapter of Nume. Doctors
Than you say your own mind alone, for I never read any ancient doctors
that said so. What does David teach us here? But that it is good to vow, and
sin to break a vow once lawfully made. Uouete et reddite. Thus does
Saynete Augustyne expound it. Nescio que castimonialis nubere voluit. Quid
voluit? Quod et virgo quelibet. Quid voluit? Quod et matter ipsiue. Aliquid mali
voluit? Mal^ plane. Quare? Quia iam vouerat Facete.
domino Deosuo. Quid enim dirit de talibus Apostolus Paulus, cum dicat viduas
adulescentulas nubere si velint? S^d tamen art quodam loto. Beatior autem erit
si sic permanserit secundum meum consihum. Ostendit beatiorem si sic
permanserit, non tamen dampnand^ sinubere voluerit.

Responsio.
I will herin follow your former request, yt is to say, use a dyffynycyon of
vows. Not for that I seek any help thereby in this mat ter, but rather more
clearly to manifest your Distinctio
madness. There is votum legale et votum monachicum, a vow of the ceremonyall
law, and a voluntarye vow of monks. Where as David says, vow, meaning
after the rule of the vows ceremonyall, as follows in the text, qui afertis
munera, you that bring offerynges. I will say also, vow, but it shall be after
a farte other sort. For where as he bids you in that place, Souete.
to vow the offering of calves, gootes, bullockes, and other kind of beasts.
I will bydde ye vow your own sowles and bodies to God, in his perfyght fear
and obe dyence. I will exhort you with Paul, not to receive the grace of God
in vain. ii. Lorinth. Abstain.
vi. to encreace in virtue, to abstayn from fornycacio^. i. These. iiii. and to
walk in love, as Christ has loved us, and to leave your couetouse pyllage,
Ephesi. v. David would also in an other place, that your sacryfyce were a
contrycyon of the heart, Psalm. l. All these vows pleases me well.

But when ye come to the vows of monks and prestes, which are monastycall
and So we not
voluntary, and abhorred of the holy scriptures. Than will I say, vow not,
concludynge with that voice which S. Johan heard from heaven. Exite de illa
populus meus, ne participes sitis delictorum cius, ne be plagis eius
accipiatis, Apoc. xviii. Come away (my people) from that wicked Babylon, yt ye
be not par^takers of her sins, that ye receive not of her plages, I grant
you with David, that promyses are to be Promyses
observed, so long as they are godly and in our power. But as for your vow of
chastity, we know non such, unless it be that which stands in promise and
goth no further, which was yet never performed. The vows of the old law
were not promyses only, but substancyall offerynges also, your vows are but
mocking promyses, bringing fourth nothing but the styukynge offerynges
Offerynges.
of Sodom. I can name ye a thousand of them that has broken that vow, but
not one that throughlye fulfilled it, no, not the holiest of your canonised
rabyes, as Dunstane, Boniface, Bregwyne, Becket, Anselme, and a great sort
more.

I have spoken it in deed, and speak it now again, y^ chastity spedeth not
well, wha^ it is vowed in that kind, but has a most fylthy procedyng: for the
professors thereof, both prestes and monks, are given over of god Illfrute.
into most prodigyouse lusts of their flesh, for contempt of his heavenly
verite, Romans ^. Tushe, dysse^ble the matter no longer with your five, smothe,
counterfeit looks, and your hypocrites bragges, for we know what ye are well
enough, al fryre Bongaies mystes are not able to shadow you, to deceive Songay.
us in these days. I say not, ye may break it for every temptacion, for ye
never kept it in your temptacions. But I say, ye ought of necessyte, if ye
will be saved by Christ's merytes, utterly to forsake and go from it, for the
holy Ghost calls your spiritualte, a Sodom, Apocalypse. xi^^* for that Sodom.
myschefe only. Fugite de medio Babilonis, et saluet vnusquisque animam suam,
Hieremie. li. Flee away from that Babylon (says the good Prophet Hieremie)
and every man save his soul. Blame me not therefore though I call it a filthy
Sodometry, and a profession to myscheues unspeakable, neither will David's text
subuerte my true David.
purpose in that point, for he never had ye offen such dyrtye presents to
God, as are the promiscuouse occupyinges of whoredo^ and buggery.

I never in my life restrained David's Psalter to the feast of troumpettes in
the xxix. Chaptre of Numery. For than had I been as mad as ye were, when ye
called Franti^^^
the next Chaptre following, an absolute peace pertaynyng to the law. I gave
ye in a manner, yt feast of mockage, to illude your tragycal folly therewyth. In
your ancient doctors ye are so hyghlye ouerseane, that no wise man is able
to compare with you. Let all men mark your good handelynge of S. Augustyne
here, to prove by his sayings that it is good to vow papystry, and great
sin to break a vow of that kind. Papysme.
S. Augustyne in his lecture upon the. lxxv. Psalm, being frankly disposed,
told a merry tale of a nune which would be married, like as I have heard good
Catimer do, with the best preachers of our time, to refresh the spirits of
their audience. This brings fourth here this great gyaunte of our papystes,
as a mighty buttrasse to uphold his maungy matter. But. ii. ways he is like to
have dishonor thereof, one is, because it is a light fable, an other because it
is but a matter of a sylly sorysister, yet will I not altogether Dyshono:
dyssallowe her, because she so honestly setketh, rather to be a married woman,
than a wicked prestes whore.

The hombly tale of S. Augustyne is thus to be Englyshed. Anune (says he)
whom Anune.
I have forgoten, or whose name I have not now in remembrance, would on a time
needs marry. What wholde she? That all wa^ ton wenches would. In good earneste
what would she? Even that her mother would, ye know what I mean. Would she ill
in that? yea marry. And why? For she had vowed before to her lord God. If she
might not so do, what mente the Apostle Paul, which Paulus.
said, ye the younger widows might mary if they would? I grant, but yet he
says in a certain place, the happer shall she be in my opinion, if she continue
syngle. For she shall have yt less to do. Well sir, though he says, that she
is more happy if she so remain, yet does he not condemn her, if she be
willing to marry. Thus ends the first fytte of the tale. A very syngle
shyfte has this captain of the papystes, when he is drpue^ to seek this for
his bucklar of defense. For The nu^ne
this nune is not here condemned yet for marryage. He sets no great price
on his matter, that begins his process with Nescio, I know not, I am
ignorant, or I can not tell, as S. Augustyne does here.

If it had been a storye of credit, as it is a matter of daliaunce and
pastyme, yt party had been named, and also the place of her dwelling. As S.
Luke describinge the hystory of Christ's concepcion, shows Nameles.
the condition and name of the messenger, from wh^ns and from whom he came, to
whom he was sent, what waa the name of that virgin, the name of her husband,
and the names of the contraye and city where she dwelt, and finally what was
his messsage. Luke. i. without these or other like Historia.
circumstaunces, is no story of authoryte. No such grounded matter find we in
this tryflyng fable, which this folly she papyst brings in here, to fortifye
his cause with. Your matter is of a nu^ne, and ye know not where she
dwells, nor yet what her name is, forsooth it is a firl prati matter. By
Fabula.
like it was some nu^ne of wax. Well, ye shall have lycens to offer her up to
saint fool, when ye will.

Mock not your brethren thus, ye obstyuate and indurate rank papyst, to hold
them still captyue in these wicked snares Snares.
of the devil. What articles of false faith will ^e build upon these
beggeries? first ye had widows ware to approve your po posh vows, tha^
brought ye fourth the office of a deacon, and now are ye driven to (...)elpe of
a nu^ne and to fatche your (...) at her tail, and yet ye can not tell, (...)
she ever lived or no. Scryptures (...) none, of Gods holy Testament, (...) we
it welynoghe, they will not (...) execrable purpose. O abhomy^^^le papystes and
minysters of Satan, which thus seek to demente, the simple hearts of the
people. Let all them which love God, mark you in these kinds of conuepaunce,
that they be no longer seduced by your sorceryes and wytchecraftes. By the name
of S. Augustyne, ye think to Augustine
terrify us, and to drive us from the wraste lyng place compellinge me^ to
believe what you list, but ye shall not so find it in the end.

Obiectio.
Quid autem ait de quibusdam, que vouerunt et non reddiderunt? habentes,
inquit, damnacionem, quia primam fidem irrita^ fecerunt. Quid est, primam fidem
irritam feceruut? Prima sides.
Uouerunt et no^ reddideru^t. Nemo erg^ positus in monasterio frater dicat,
recedo de monasterio. Neque enim soli qui sun^ in monasterio, perue^turi sunt
ad regnum celorum. Et illi qui non sunt, ad Deum non pertine^t^ Respondetur ei:
Sed illi non vouerunt, ^u vouisti, tu retro respexisti, et cet. Et Paul post.
I am quia ista tractauimus, forte volebas vouere, et modo non vis vouere. Sed
quid dixerit psalmus, attend. Non dixit, no^ ^ouere.
lite vouere, sed dixit, vouere et reddite. Quid audisti, red dite, non vis
vouere? Ergo vouere volebas et non reddere? Immo vtrumque far. Unum sit
exprofessione tua, aliud ex adiutoaio Dei perficietur. Aspice eum qui te ducit,
et non respiries retro vnde te educit et cet. Also he says, de bouo
viduitatis. La. xi. plane ano^imus
no^ dub it auerim ditere, lapsus et tuinas a castitate sanctiore que vouetur
Deo, adulteriis esse peiores.

Responsio.
Here goes S. Augustyne forward with his dialogical process, concerning this
nu^ne Nameles.
without name and monastery. When he has showed on the one side, that he does
not condempnt her for marryage, though he thinks yt single life more
co^modiouse, being without charge. He follows with his matter after this
sort. What said S. Paul (says he) of some which promised, and yet brake
covenant? Dampnacion is theyrs, because they have broken their first faith.
What mean ye by that, they have broken their first faith? Marry they have
vowed, and not performed it. By He lies.
that means may no professed brother say, I will depart from the mouastery.
And yet shall not they which are in the monastery, come alone to y^ kingdom of
heaven. Partayne not they which are without it, as well to God as they? To this
will I answer. They never vowed, but you haste vowed, you have looked back or
behind the, and so fourth. Than leapeth he over. xxvi. clauses, contaynyng
Falshede.
more than* ccc. wurdes, thynking to be dyscharged by et cetera. But sure he
escapes me not so. Breuely will I tell ye the contents thereof, that ye may
se the ma^nys conueyaunce.

S. Augustyne brings fourth the saing of Christ conceruyng Lothes wife. which
being in the way of delyueraunce from Lothes wife.
Sodom, looked behind her again, and was turned into a pyller of salt. This
puts he not only to relygyouse monastery brethren, but to al christen men,
for an high example of wisdom, that none should go back with his lauful
promise to God, for he says: Illa vxor Loath, ad omnes pertinet. That wife of
Loath (says he) touches al me^. Where is now our namelesse nu^ne, either yet
the vnwyuyng vow of pfestes. I would feign ones we might have prestes matters,
and not wome^s matters, to prove Prestes.
our presthode by, least in the end we thereby make it a womanly presthode. We
pretend by vow, not to meddle with women, and yet we can not prove a chastity
in our presthode without women. This is a prodigyous order of prouyng. It
follows in the text of Augustine, which this chaplain of purpose left out.
Maritata mulier voluit facere adulterium, de loco suo quo per uenerat retro
respexit. A married woman A wife.
would do aduoutry, she has looked back from the place she was come to. A
professed wydowe would marry (for pleasure, and of no necessyte) a maid that
is a nu^ne, will be drunk, proud, and busy tongued, both they have looked
behind them.

O tu virgo Dei, nubere voluisti, quod licet, extollis te, quod non licet.
Melior vir go humilis, quam maritata humilis, sed Better.
melior maritata humilis, quam virgo superba. Que autem respexit ad nuptias,
no^ quia voluit nubere damnatur, sed quia ia^ ante recesserat, et fit vxor Loath
respiciendo retrorsum. Non sitis pigri qui potestis, quibus aspirat Deus,
apprehendite gradus meliores. O thu professed virgin of God, thu wylt not
marry, which is leful, but thu wylt be proud, which is unlawful. I confess it,
that better is a meke spreted maid, than a meke married woman, and yet is a
meke married woman, better than a proud virgiu. She that looks toward Mekenes
marryage, is not therefore condemned because she would marri, but because she
has refused it before by an ungodly promise, or a vow of yt which never was in
her power, so becommynge the wife of Loath lokynge backewardes from God toward
Sodom. Be not you stowe in vowynge, that have power to perform it, lay you
of power.
first hands upon it, to whom God has given that gift for a better purpose,
that is, for the true ministracio^ of his wurd, and neither for idle mo^kery
nor ydolatrouse presthode. I would we well marked this doctrine of S. Augustine,
who^ this chaplayne has theuishli left out here, for it is worthi note.

Et Paulo post, is an addicion of his own, next cosyne to et cet. and is given
us instead of al this hydden process of S. Augustyne. Augustine
Is it not (think you) a propre and profitable change? But now he follows
with his lattre patch. I am quia ista tractauimus. now because we have spoken
these things, happily where thu were well minded before to have vowed, thu wi^te
from hens fourth not vow at al. But first atte^d what the psalm has uttered.
It says not. Se thu vow not. But it says, vow and perform or keep
promise. Because thu hear, Keep it.
keep promise, you wylt not vow. This is as much to sai, as thu would
promise, and not pay. Yes, do both. Let the one pertayne to thy professyon, and
the other will be performed by the help of God. Behold him well yt leads the,
and look not behind, to that from whe^s he has brought the, et cet. And what
is all this to the purpose, yt prestes Prestes.
should have no wives? Not ones has he named a priest in all this rehearsal or
declaracio^ of vows. The office of christen ministers, who^ this chaplain
without autho rite calls prestes, was not in those days to make vows, but to
receive the vows of professed widows, after paul's doctrine, for they were
co^me^li y^ husbands of one wife.

As in the old law (if ye will so take it) though yt prestes received the
vows and oblacio^s No vowers.
of ye people, yet they themselves were no common vowers, for it was not their
office to vow nor yet to offee, as y^ commen sort ded. S. Augustyne wylleth us
here, to perform our vow made in baptism, and to follow Gods
commandments. And not to turn back from Christ's appointed rules, to our
own dreams and inue^cio^s, our vows and blind deuocio^s, for yt is to
return to Sodom, as yt end thereof has declared, by many a most filthy
example. If these vows Examples.
must of necessite be performed, than must our vows also to Romr, to
Jerusalem, to s. James, and to walsingha^ be performed, specially the old
vows of the. ii. universities to be always obedie^te to the malyguaunte seat
of Antichriste. Yea, if all things must be persolued, that has been
promised in papisme, than must king King Johan.
Ioha^s most in iuriouse and hurtful vow, be also fulfilled in all his
successors, kings of this realm, to the utter destruction of the same both
ways which the eternal God forbid. For all these were false promises to God,
made with a sole^pne deliberacion, as ye say by diffynicio^, your unchaste vows
are.

Still ye bring in your wome^s matters, like a womanly captain, to prou^ a
chastity in your Romish presthode, whereby ye show your self to be much better
learned Women.
in women's affairs, than in me^nys. O^te of ye. xi. chaptre de bono
viduitatis, which ye falsely father upon S. Augustyne, have ye torn out a text
without either top or tail, Plane non dubitauerim et ce. I would not doubt
plainly to aff yrme it, the slydinge^ and ruynouse fallinges fro^holi
chastity, Chastity.
which is vowed to god, to be wurse tha^ aduowtryes. And this ye allege of
purpose, to condemn the lauful marryages of them, which at the voice of God
has of late years forsaken your papistical pressed hode and monkery. But your
armor is to weak, being but women's ware, and so A thief.
theuishly stolen. Ones again have I here deprehe^ded you in your falshede, ye
purse pyker, and find ye more fytte for the pyl* ^ery than the pulpet. Thus
does your doctor handle it, in the lettre end of yt. x. ch^

Fit autem per hanc minus considerata^ opinionem, qua putant lapsarum a sancto
proposito feminarum, si nupserint, no^ esse Iulianus.
coni^gia, no^ paruum malum vt a maritis separentur quasi adultere sint, non
vxores. Et cum volunt eas separatas reddere continentie, faciunt maritos earum
adulteros veros, cum suis vxoribus viu^s, alteras duxerint. Ca. xi. Quapropter
non possum quidem dicere a proposito meliore lapsas, si nupserint feminas,
adulteria esse, non co^ingia (now follows his fragme^t) sed plane non
dubitauerim dicere, lapsus et ruinas a castitate sanctiore, que vouetur deo,
adulteriis esse peiores. Si enim, quod nullo Impostor.
modo dubitandum est, ad offensionem Christi pertinet, cum membrum eius fide^
non seruat marito, quanto grauius offenditur, cum illi ipsi non seruatur fides
et ce.

Great myschefe follows of that inco^uenient, when men, by this not wisely
digested opynion, do think the marriages of professed nu^nes* to be no
marryages, and thereupon compel them to be separated from Married nunes.
their husbands, as aduowtrouse women and no wives, for when they by such
dyuorcementes attempt* to drive the^ again to the nu^nery, they make their
poor husband aduowterers in deed, in taking other women, their own wynes
being alive. Ca. xi. Wherefore I can not justly report, the marriages of women
fallen from relygyon, if they chance to marry, to be ^ot vows.
aduowtryes and no marryages. But I would not much doubt, to call the flydinges
away from holy chastity, things wur^e than aduowtries, for if Christ be
offended, by all me^nys opinion, when his membre is unfaithful to her husband,
how much more than may he be offended when promise is not kept with him
self? et cet.

Here is a great difference between you and your namelesse doctor, for your
opinion is, that the maryages of vowers are Opinions
plain aduowtryes and no marryages. His opinion is all contrary, that they are
so lawful marryages as may be. For he calls the professed nu^ne so married,
a lawful and perfight wife, and judges her separacion from marryage, a most
daungerouse and da^pnable inco^uenie^t. The scrupul or spyced conscience that
he has in the matter, is concerning y^ break of her promise made to God, and
that puts he in here, vngroundedly, doubtfully, hypocritically, and utterly
against himself, as to note her in one Godly office both a lawful Impostor.
wife and an whore. This is, as though he would seem to allow it for Gods
institucions sake, and at pleasure again to disalowe it in an other idle
respect. He would feign give the mastry to monkishnes, but he tre^bleth at the
matter, as he may well enough. I utterly deny S. Augustyne to be the author
Augustine
of this superstyciouse, unsure, and doubtful doctrine. For I never yet could
se him so far ouersene, as to prefer our voluntary works to the set
ordynaunces of God. He was not so forgetful of this old saying of Esaias, that
al our righteousnesses, appear they never so holy, are as y^ clothes stained
with menstr^e. Es. lxiiii.

This nameles author of yours, does S. Paul much wrong, to call the state of
a syngle life, an holy or Angelical state, because he has called it a state
happy or co^modiouse, being without charge. i. cor. vii. More ^re.
for he never meant it so. The spowsage of Christ stands not in the deuyses of
mannys idle head, as are your voluntary vows of monkery, but in a sincere
faith not passing y^ rules of his uncorrupted wurde. This author of yours,
called Iuliane, a Iulianus.
Moore borne, and bishop of Tolete in Spain, seems wonderfully much against
himself, for treating in the. viii. Chaptre, why marryage ought to be
permitted to relygyouse wydowes, he has this clear sentence. Si non
continent, nubant. Malo enim eas ^^bere quam vri.

Hoc enim dixit, vt effrenate li^idinis malum non precipitaretur in
turpitudinem slagitiorum, cum exciperetur honestate nuptiarum et cet. Uolo
igitur iuniores nubere. If they can not abstain, let them marry, for I had
much rather that they married, than brent. This spoke the Apostle, Marry.
least the unbridled affeccion should throw them into all kinds of
fylthynes, whyls it might well be restrained by the honesty of godly marryage. I
will therefore that the younger wydowes marry. He has also this clause in the. ix.
Chapter of the same book. In coniugali quippe: vniculo, si pudicicia
co^seruatur, damnatio no^ timetur. Fear not
In the yoke of marriage, is no dampnacion to be feared, if clennesse therein be
observed. So how this sentence of your own doctrine, co^fou^deth your
allegacio^.

Obiectio.
And also, Cha. viii Proinde quise non continent, nubant antequam continentiam
profiteantur, antequam Deo voueant, quod Infama^tur
nisi reddant, iure damnantur. Alio quippe loto de talibus dicit. Cumenim in
delitus egerint in Christo nubere volunt, habentes damnationem, quoniam primam
fidem irreta^ fecerunt, id est, voluntatem ad nuptias a proposito continentie
destereru^t. Irritam quippe facerunt fidem qua prius vouerant, quod
perseuerantia implete voluerunt. Further ye ask who should do it? and answer
by the verse that follows: Al you that be round about, Offerings
bryngyng prese^tes to the Lord. If you restrain perfourming of vows, only to
the bryngyng of outward presents, tha^ ye make a sense of this verse after
your own mind alone, and expound it other wise tha^ the doctors do. For both
the sentences after S. Augustynes mind, and all other doctors that I have
read, be general, and pertayne to all A question
good me^. Who be they that be round about the Lord? They amongst whom God
is, they that be just and gathered in his name, they that be humble and fear
God, and offer to him to do him service, their bodies, sowles, and all the other
gaftes of God. All such be about him, and al such be exhorted to vow and
perform their vows.

Responsio.
More mangled testymonyes brings this chaplain fourth here, but both is his
doctor Iuliane of doubtful authority, and Women.
also they pertayne to women and no men. And therefore this presthode, for whose
unknown chastity he contendeth, is like in the eude to appear a doubtful
womanlye presthode. Thus are his borrowed sentences out of the. viii. Chaptre de
bouo viduitatis, to be Fuglyshed. Wherefore the wydowes which can not abstain
(ye may se, sum what went before, that he would not gladly touch.) Let them
marry husbands before they profess a chastity, and before they make vows to
God: for if they perform Profession.
not their promise* they are lawfully dampened. And in an other place, the
Apostle says of such women, when they have bego^ne to were wanton, than will
they marry in Christ (your doctor Iuliane b^lyeth the text) having
dampnacion, because they have broken their first faith, First faith
that is to say, they have turned their will from a purposed chastity to
marriage. Thus have they made their first faith void, where by they promised
before that they never intended to perform by perseueraunce.

It is deuylyshly done both of you and your doctoure Iuliane, thus to deprave
or to vyciate the holy scriptures. Neither is S. Paul a condempner of
marryage, nor S. Paul.
yet a persuader of vows making, but calls the^ in that kind, a plain
doctrine of deuyls. He never taught any other profession, tha^ that which is
common to al christian men and women. In all the new testament is no doctrine of
your vows, why than impute you da^puacion to the breakyuge of the^? If
da^pnacion be due to the^ that break Da^pnacio^
your commandments, tha^ are ye in authorite equal with God. From whens
comes this usurpation and pride of yours? Even from that adversary and son
of perdicion, which exalts himself above all that is called God. ii. Thessa.
ii. The wydowes y^ S. Paul speaks of. i. Tim. v. were no professed nu^nes,
but nome^ destitute of fryndeshyp, whom he wylled to be Nomines
provided for of yt common alms. And none other admitted he thereunto, but
aunciente matrones of. lx. years of age and vpwardes, such as were known to
be of a most honest and Godly co^uersacion. The yongar wydowes were none of
that nombre. Neither was wantonness imputed unto Wa^to^nes
the^ because they would marry, for marriage is there appointed them, but
because they would marry ungodly with the unfaithful for pleasures of this
world, abhorringe pouerte in the christen profession.

For this wa^to^nes is not a marryage in Christ, as your dottyng doctor
Iulyane Against Christ.
and you here do take it, for so might every marriage in Christ, be noted a
wantonness to da^pnacio^, but against Christ, or to Christ's dishonor, for
it follows in the text, y^ many of the^ turned back, and went after Satan,
in renou^cinge the christrn faith. Thus is not the da^pnacion due to the^ that
break your vows, but to them that forsake Da^nacion
their Christen professyon. Neither is dampnation here taken, for the hateful
indygnacion of God or depryuacion of the life everlasting, but for a foul
blotte of infamye, or a notable staundre to the christen profession, for it
follows in the text, that occasion was gynen by such wantonness to the
adversaries to speak evil of the Christen relygyon. Thus was it the mind of
the Apostle, that provision were always made for the yo^ger wydowes, to marrye
within the congregation least by extreme pouerte they were compelled to Pouerte.
forsake their Christen believe, and to give an occasion of dampnable slau^dre
against the Gos^el. He that will say with you and your Doctoure Iultane, that
prima fi^ des is a vow voluntary, or a purpose from marryage to an
uncommanded chastity: I say, he is a liar and a ^euyl.

Prima fides is a faith in Jesus Christ, to follow the rules of his Gospel in yt
common Prima fide^.
christen relygyon, and not a professyon of monkery nor yet such a bastard
presthode as has of the scryptures no manner of authorite. But I pray you,
let me ask ye a question, you deceytful sonldyour of Sodom. Why cut ye of
this conclusion from the lattre allegacion of yonre doctor? Muptiarum igitur
bonum, semper quidem est bonum, sed in populo Dei fuit aliquando legis
obsequsum, nunc est infirmitatis remedium, in quibusdam vero humanitatis est
solatium. Filiorum quippe procreationi opera^dare, non canino more Louingi^.
per vsum promiscuum foeminarum, sed honesto ordine coniugali, no^ est in
homine improbandus affectus, etiam ipsum tamen laudabilius transce^dit et
vincit celestia cogitans animus Christianus. Therefore is yt co^modite of
marryage, always a good and a godly commodite. But where it sumtyme was among
Gods people, an obedient Marriage
service of the law, it is now a remedy of yt fleshes infirmite, and also in
some meu, an humayne consolacion or natural comfort. To be given to begetting
of children, so that it be not by a confuse occupyinge with women ^yke dog
and bytche, but in an honestor dece^t order of marriage, that affecte or
natural incliuacion in man is not to be reproved, yet is that Christen Minds.
mind much more to be praised, which over comes that affecte, by the
medytacion of things heavenly. All this could we have thankefully received of
your doctor Iuliane, but it was not to your deuilyshe purpose.

I do ask in deed, who should vow and perform it, after David's meaning. I
know certainly, that they were not your popysh monks and massemongers. For
Monks.
they were not wont to bring offerynges of their own from round about, but
their gapyng was to receive the offeringes and gifts from al quarters about,
and to give nothing again, onles they gave their bastardes to the disheretinge
of the true and right heirs. None otherwise do I restrain the vows of the
old law, then they restrain Restrain
them selves here in the end of this verse, by bringyng of presents to the
lord. As for your interpretatiue and scolasticall doctoures, I never regard
them nor yet their exposicions, when they thus varye from the truth of the
scriptures, but account them both blasphemouse babelers and liars. Ye say,
that vouete et reddite, after the mind of S. Augustine and all the Generalli
other doctors that you have read extends generally, and pertains to al
good me^. Why do you then restrain it to your monks and massemongers,
which are men neither good nor godly? Yea why have you al this long time
been hatcheynge of that cockatrices egg?

Ye ask, who they be that are round about the Lord, for south it is a proper
wise question, and as wisely afterward of you Lo^passed.
auswered. I never heard it before, that god was ever compassed of the^ yt
brought presents to the temple. How can he that contains al things, having
heaven for his seat and the earth for his footstool. Acto* vii. be compassed
of men mortal? Though God do much regard them, which are of a lowly troubled
sprete, and that stands in awe of his holy words. Esaias. lxvi. yet Lo^passed.
suffers he not him self to be compassed of them. In answering your own
questyon, ye say, that they be round about god, amongst who^ he is, over,
undre, and on every side. This must I needs deny you, because his beyuge
among them, is not all one with their being round about. God is a sprete, how
can ye tha^ prove him circumscriptyble or local? How can he be Over all.
closed within limytes, that ouerspreadeth the heavens and contains all
things? This dyuinite of yours is but dougyshe daubry. We know that God is
with the^ yt ar ryghteouse of his ryghteousenes, but not with them that are of
their own righteousness righteouse, for them he leaves always to themselves.
Romans i.

He is at all seasons assystent in deed, to them that assemble to gyther in his
name, Names.
but not to them that are gathered together in the names of Benedict,
Domynycke, and Frances, nor yet to them that are colledged and mynsterde in the
names of Dunstane, Swythune, Becket, Erkenwalde, Paul, Wylliam, and Hugh, with
a great sort more of yt like, nether yet to the^ yt has mustered together and
flocked in their feasts of ydelnesse, to call upon them for help. I deny it
not but that he has showed his good fauer to them who^ he has found meke and
lowly of heart, and to them that ^owlye.
has feared him and followed ye right rule of his wurde. But as concerning
them which has offered bodies and sowles to do him service, not after his
appointed order, but after their own deuyses, they may well be about him and
compass him, as the great fat bulls have done his son Christ and his
faithful members, Psalm. xxi. yet am I sure, they shall not catch him. The
service yt god allows in man, comes Service.
ueuer of ma^s voluntary offering, but of Gods own free calling and
eleccion. If your professed and never fulfilled chastity and obedience, be the
boasted gifts that ye offer, ye shall have good leave to take them home to ye
again, for he never yet had pleasure in them. Al these, ye say, be exhorted
to vow, and perform their vows. If that exhortacion were given by David to
this lattre sort, it was of late David.
years in some secret vysyon, for in his time were no such dysgysed
shauelynges and shorlynges, and I maruele why they are so slack in
perfourmaunce.

Censura.
Of all these heavy burdens and ^arke mystye shadows, yea, from the feast of
trompet blowynge and al, has y^ son of God most mercyfully delivered us. The
brotherhed of S. Beorges gylde at Norwyche, may observe those Christ.
vows by their own appointment, if they list, to make them selves myrry
therwyth. But Christ's redeemed brotherhede are clearly dyscharged, and ^ede
no more therwyth to meddle. He that from hens fourth uncircumspectly and
unbrotherly seeks to clogge us with these vows, myndeth to se^d us again A
clogge.
back to Moses, and so utterly to depryue us of that salvation which we have
in Christ Jesus. Bala. v.

Obiectio.
Take away your ground, that is to say, that vows be heavy burdens and dark
misty shadows, and so abrogate by Christ, tha^ will all the rest fall, which is
builded upon that Coelebatus.
ground. To keep a vow that is lawfullye made, is a commandment of Gods law
natural, and so commanded in his moral law, and also in his Euangelical law.
And is not a ceremony or a shaddowe, as you say. And is contained under the
second commandment. Non assumes nomen Dei tui in vanu^. Borrowed.
Thus did I always conceive of the doctors before. If nature abhor, that one
man should break promise with an other, much more it abhors, that a man
should break promise with his Lord God. Ecclesiastes says, Ca. l. Si quid
vouisti Deo, no^ moreris reddere. Displicet enim ei infidelis et slul^^ Eccle.
v.
promissio. Sed quodcumque voueris, read. Multoque melius est non vouere, quam
post votum, promiss a non reddere.

Responsio.
My ground is so sure, so stedy, and so strong, that neither you, your
dreaming Deuyls.
doctors, your dyrty dawbers, nor yet all the deuyls of darkness, which has
mainteyned your cursed generation in all kinds of deceyte, sens the days of
Cain, shall be able ones to remove it. As Ioha^ Baptist in the wilderness
declared the coming and office of Christ, he began by and by Gospel.
to build upon this fou^dacion. By Moses (says he) was the law first given,
but grace and veryte comes only by Jesus Christ, Johan. i. Instead of the
law, he has given us a Gospel of fre forgiveness, and a saving veryte instead
of unprofitable shadows. Christ has given it also to us as a ground to
build upon, that the law and prophets were no longar in force, tha^ unto the
time of Johan Baptist, Mat. xi. There they ceased, there were they fully
discharged, and went no further. S. Paul says, that the law wurketh pre,
Romans iiii. The law is a power of sin. i. Cori. xv. The law
The law brings no man to perfeccyon. Heb. vii. By the law is no man
iustyfyed. Roma. iii. We are not under the law (says he) but under grace,
Roma. vi. If we be led by the sprete, tha^ are we no subjects to the law.
Gala. v. Christ is the end of the law, and a full righteousness to the^ that
believe, Roma. x. This foundation of mine, will not be puffed away with all
Fou^dacio^
your sophystycal blastes, for it is not builded upon the sand, but upon the
hard rock. Math. vii. The power of hell shall not prevail against it. Math.
x.

Now come I to your specialtees, as burdens, mystes, and shadows of the law.
Burdens.
Christ earnestly promised, not only to take from us the heavy burdens of the
law and of sin, if we resort unto him, but also to refreshe us with his
Gospel (which is a law of lyberte, S. James says) and to give unto our
consyences a perfyght quietness in him. Math. xi. S. Paul wylleth Bondage.
al Christ's servants to stand fast in the lyberte, wherwyth Christ has
made them fre, and not to wrappe themselves again in the yoke of bondage (as
are ceremonyal vows) for so many ar gone from Christ, as think to be instified
by any point of ye law. Gal. v. The false teachers (S. Peter says) which
bryugeth in da^pnable sects (by vows) living at pleasure in all deceyuable
ways (by vows) ar clouds carried about of a tempest (by those vows) to who^
is reser ued y^ mist of darkness for ever. ii. Per. ii. The law
The law (says s. Paul) had but a shadow of good things to come, and not the
things themselves in their own proporcion, for it rather sygnified sumwhat,
than braught things to effect, Hebre. x.

Christ has broken down y^ wall, which was a stop between us and the
Jews, and has also put away through his flesh, the cause of hatred, that is
to say, the law Hatred.
of commandments contained in ye law written, Ephe. ii. He has abolyshed
utterly the hand writing of obligacio^ that was against us, contained in the
law written, and clearly taken it out of ye way fastening it to his cross,
Collo. ii. What ground will ye now have, to prove your ceremonyall vows, no
heavy burdens, no cloudy mystes, no dark shadows, and so not abrogated by
Christ, when this ground will not hold them but utterly reiecte them? Ground.
Heaven and earth shall pass, but this doctrine will never be found untrue,
dispute what ye can to the contrary for your beggarly vows. Take that ground
away (ye say) and than will all the rest fall, which is knylded thereupon. And it
is truth in deed I am glad we have brought you to that conclusyon. But your
head is so mad that ye will not there stay, but follow on still fourth in
your frenesy. Ye can find Frenesy.
it now, that to keep avowe, that is lawful ly made (which can not of your
vows he veryfyed) is a commandment of god. Before ye could not find it in
Anna and the Nazarees. I see it well now, that ye can at your pleasure both
find and not find.

But ye have stretched your g^atte so far, that he must needs burste, no
remedy. of vows.
Ye say, the obseruacyon of vows is commanded of God, in the laws natural,
moral, and Evangelical. It is sonner said, than proved. Of lykelyhode ye are
some prothonotary of Rome, that ye would your wurdes to be believed without
reasonable proves. It is like here to remaiue for a fabulouse lie, till ye hane
proved it by the scriptures, a law of commandment in the law of nature. And
also till ye have made it good, that the ceremonials and judicials A fable.
of Moses law, are all one with with the morral precepts and the Gospel. Ye
say, that obseruacion of vows, is neither ceremony nor shadow. It was both,
when vows were in strength, that is to say, for the time of Moses law, If
ye think them now changed, bring fourth your honest probacyons, and ye shall
be Proves.
heard. If ye have none other thing to stay it by, but the second
commandment, ye are far wide. For this is ye second commandment of god.
Non facies tibi sculptile. Thu shall make the no graven image, Exodi. xx. This
helps not your matter, but utterly confounds it. For vows are like as
images are, wurkes only of ma^s Images.
ymaginacion, without commandment of God. For ye have granted all this time,
that they are wurkes voluntarye, and so have ye dyffyned them.

If ye meant the third commandment, Ouersene
Non assumes nomen Domini Dei tui in vanum. Thu shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vame, than were ye fowly deceived, to take the third for the
second. It is a plain token, that ye are much better exercysed in the Iewyshe
ceremonies, than in Gods holy commandments, when ye know not the one from
the other. In deed I would wyshe, ye were su^what Swearing
wyser. This third commandment will not serve your turn, for it pertayneth to
swearing and not to vowyng, as Christ has expownded it. If ye take vowynge for
a kind of swearing, than has Christ utterly dyscharged you, by this mighty
wurd of his. Dico vobis ne iuretis omnino. Math. v. I charge you, yt ye swear
not at al, that is to say, that ye vow in no wise. ^o, where are your vows
become now, by your own confession? Now have ye, by your own procurement,
brought them even to Al lost.
nothing, your old doctors were yet much more wise than you are. For they
judged the^ with all the other ceremonies of Moses* to pertayne to the forth
commandment, Sucked.
concerning the Saboth day.

Though ye have always conceived much (as ye boast your self here) by your
exercise in the doctors, yet took ye no head in this point. Ye have succked
much of the diui^^te doggerel of that dronken papist Ioha^ Eckius, in this
matter. As the saying is, like will to like, as the devil fyndeth out the
colyar. I marvel much of your ygnoraunt beastlynesse, or else of your obstinate
hypocrisye. Ye play here the Pelagyane Pelagyan
right out, geuynge to our corrupted and synnefull nature, that is only due
to the grace and mercy of God. In this ye take from faith her perfeccion, ye
defraude her of her office, and depryue her of her glory. Ye know not Gods
eternal power, ye understand not his wurkes wonderful, neither gloryfy you him
as the author of al goodness. But become obstinate, wicked, and unthankful,
yea, ye were full of vanitees in your ymaginacyons, your folyshe heart covered
with a dampnable blyndnesse, for contemning his truth, Roma. i. Al vapu^.
Of nature are we, the fleshly, sinful, and wicked children of Gods great
indygnacion and curse, Ephesians. ii.

Than is it not nature that abhors to break promise, but faith, which only
is the gift of God. If we be faithful to god and our neighbor, it is not of us
but of Faithful.
him. All that is not of faith (S. Paul says) is sin. Roma. xiiii. And
without faith can we keep no promise to Gods pleasure, Hebre. xi.

In your allegacion of Ecclesiastes, ye seem to be a great multyplyer. For his
book has but. xii. Chapters in all, and yet Eccle. v.
you can allege the. l. Chapter, ere ye come to the myd part thereof. It is some
figure, ye wurke by, either of falsehede or else of forgetfulness. If thu have
made a vow to God (says Ecclesiastes) be not slack to perfonrme it. As for
folyshe vows, he has no pleasure in them. If thu promise any thing, pay it.
For better it is, that thu make no vow, than that thu should promise and not
pay. Ecclesi. v. for what Purpose.
purpose ye brought in this text, I can not conjecture: unless it were to put
us in remembrance, that all your prestyshe and monkysh vows, are vanite,
ydelnesse, folishnesse, frenesy peuyshnes, madness, and myschefe unspeakable.
Not pleasing, but dylpleasynge our almyghtye maker, for so much as they are but
mockyng promyses of things impossyble, unprofitable, parelouse, wicked,
uncertain, above our strengthes, and al contrary to Christ's doctrine. This
text allurynge men to perform The text.
their vows, wylleth them to be very circumspect in the making of them. For
if they be made after ma^nis wisdom and not Gods (as ye say, your vows are
voluntary) than are they wicked and folyshe. And the fulfyllyng of them, is
both a dyspleasure and a mock to God.

Obiectio.
Also the breaking of a lawful vow, is one kind of infidelyte, which Paul
proves i. Time. l. Habe^tes damnationem, quia primam fidem irritam fecerunt.
How should a Infamy.
man bind himself to God, to do any thing, but by a vow or an oath, which is
a testimony of his promise or vow? Therefore a christen ma^nys obedyence, in
keeping his promise with God, is the true inward service of God, and required
by gods plain commandment, as I take it. Not an outward Take it.
ceremony or shadow pertaynyng to one feast, which is abrogate by Christ's
coming.

Responsio.
If ye only mind to speak of vows lawful, tha^ are ye much to blame to
trouble Sole life.
us with your vow of the sole or syngle life for swearynge marryage, for that
ungodly vow was never yet lawful. I will prove it by Ecclesiastes in the
fourth chaptre. Ue soli (says he) quia cum cecid^rit, non habet subleuantem
se. Woe to him that is alone, for if he fall, he has not an other to help him
up again. If woe, be ^ods order
here a curse or da^pnacion, as it is holden in the scriptures for yt more
part, it is double to you that has made thereof a vow or perpetual band. To
this end has God ordained his creatures, yt one should help an other. He
created man and woman yt the one should be a solace, an aid, and a comfort to
yt other. This order are you able to dysolue, by the impote^cy (omnipote^cy I
would say) Exempt.
of your vow, as a God of your self. But more parelouse is your fall, both
ways, than ye be aware of. Ye will paraue^ture object against me, that Christ
was syngle. I must desire you to grant him extraordynary, or exempte from the
comme^ order of men, being the only son of the highest. If ye lay Mary
Christ's mother, ye must lose your labor, for she was married to Joseph, and
never dysdayned yt godly estate.

If ye bring fourth Hieremy and Ioha^ Baptist, I answer you, that it was in
them and certain other by special privilege, and not by any vow voluntary.
If ye ca^ show us by the sacred scryptures, that ye Privilege.
have the same priuylege, either yet if we se in you, that ye bring fourth like
fruits of doctrine, tha^ will we credyte you for doctrine and privileges sake,
but not for your vows sake, for we know to much thereof. Ye write in your
Chronicles, that Edward.
Etheldrede and Edward remained still byrgins after long marriage. Suffer
maidenhede than, rather to dwell under marryage than under your doubtful vow,
for so should it be in much less danger. I could much commend your
synglenesse without vows, if ye cared for the things A vow.
of the Lord. i. Cor. vii. But I can not away with your synglenesse in vows,
for in the^ ye seek but bell ye profyghte. Though the breaking of a lawful
vow, which is a vow allowed by the scriptures, be a kind of infydelyte, Yet
is not the breaking of your fylthy and popish vows, which are both unlawful
and condemned by the scriptures, yea, your presthode and all, a kind of
infidelyte in the^ yt break the^, but an evident Nombers
proof of most faithful obedience to God. Ye are but weakly seen in no^bers,
wha^ ye know not. v. from. l. Ye allege ye. l. chap of S. Paul's first epistle
to Timothe, and y^ wholepistle has nomor but. vii. little ca. But this will I
ons again ascribe to your oversight

Your text, habe^tes da^nacionem, is in the. fyft Chapter, and is thus
Englyshed* Having First faith.
dampnacion, because they have broken their first faith. By this would ye prove,
yt the breking of your popish vows were a kind of infydelyte. But it is
nothing to the purpose, for ye are no young widows. Neither is prima fides a
vow of our making, but the necessary covenant of our christen professyon.
And the dampnacyon there, is a blotte of infamy, or an uncomely report, to the
great blemishyng of christianite and slander of the Gospel, as I told ye
before. Your question, how should Question
a man bind himself to serve God, but by a vow or oath? is both wicked and
folyshe. For all we that believe in Christ's name, are children and no
servants. Ioha^. i. Our estate and relygyon, is a state of lyberte, and no
bondage. Ioha^. Our law is a law of liberte and no bondage. Iaco. i. Now ar we
become sons by eleccio^, fre heirs and inheritours with Christ, Gala. iiii.
If we be made fre by his death, we ought no Bondage.
lougar to serve that way, in bondage. For the servant knows not the mind
of his maistre. But to us as to his dear children and friends, has he opened
al, Ihoan. xv. If we now do anythyng to God, it must come of a love in
fredome, and not of a vow or an oath in bondage.

Men have done things to god, which never bound themselves by vow. We read
of many which after the due search Good me^.
of his holy w^rde, have showed themselves godly wise, humble, gentyl, meke,
mercyful, kind, peaceable, pytyful, temperau^t, chaste, sober long sufferyng,
forgyuynge, thankeful to God, and faithful to al men. They have embraced love,
which is the che^e of perfeccio^, Col. iii. Yea, they have therwyth fulfilled
the law, Romans xiii. et Charity.
Gala. v. and all without profession of vows. Ye call an oath a witness of a
promise, and a vow a testimony of a vow, which is a strange kind of
dystynynge. I might ask you here, how a vow could be both a vow, and the
witness of a vow, an oath and the testimony of a promise, so well as ye axed of
me before, how a vow could be both a promise and the thing A vow.
promised. But I think it to folyshe, to bestow any time thereupon. Because a
vow is the witness of a vow, and men bind themselves thereby to do things
to God, therefore (ye say) a christen mannis obedience in keeping his promise
with God, is the true inward service of God, and required Service.
by his commandment. I think, a more folishe conclusion was never heard. And
therefore ye do well to add, as you take it.

A christen mannis obedyence stands not in the fulfyllyng of fanaticall
vows, In faith.
as they have been used, better broken than kept) but in the faithful
obseruacion of Gods holy precepts, declared by Christ in his Gospel. Though
I have taken the vows of the old law for ceremonies and shadows abrogated
by Christ, Yet ded I never take your vows for ceremonies, but for horrible
supersticious, Antichrists dyrte, and most filthy dregs of y^ devil,
pertaining to the feast of Satan's intronizacyon A feast.


If we will needs serve, being the children of the fre woman, Gala. iiii. Let
us seek to serve in lyberte and not in bondage. Let us bear no longar a
strangers yoke with the unbelievers. ii. Cor. vi. Let them to whom god has
given knowledge, shake of those shackles, and repent of those Snares.
snares of the devil ii. Tim. ii. for they are the very charactes or marks of
the infernal beast, whereby Antichrists mynisters have power to bye and to
sell in that blasphemouse kingdom, Apocalip. xiii. They that will hold of
that mark, must drink of the cup of Gods wrath, Apocalips. xiiii. and
finally be turned over into the lake of burning fire and brymstone, Apocalips.
priests.
xir. Having their names clearly wyped out of the book of life. S. Paul
would never entangle the Corinthianes with such a snare, as these your vows
are, but gave them erudycious honest and comely. i. Corinth. vii.

Censura.
The forbyddyng of marryage is a S. Paul.
doctrine of deuyls, S. Paul says. i. Timothe. iiii. Where as the observing
thereof is a comely fulfyllynge of Gods institucion, which Mary Christ's mother
honored.

Obiectio.
All this is very true, being Gods wurd. But for what purpose ye bring it in,
I do not plainly see, except it be to subvert an other truth. As though the
exhortacion or professynge of vyrgynite, or blaming of men No sight.
that break their vows, were a forbyddyng of marryage, and so a doctrine of
deuyls. It is to strange to say, that the commending of the higher gift of
chastyte, should be a condempnynge of the lowar gift of marryage. Every man
ones in his life, has lybertye Liberty.
to marry, from the which marryage no man forbyddeth him.

But if he forsake his lyberte, and bind himself by his vow to God, never to
marry. Than he may be lawefully forbydde to marry, not forbyddynge marryage,
but bidding him keep his vow.

It is a deuylyshe doctrine (as I think) Doctrine
to forbydde a married man to marry, his wise being alive.

And also to forbid him to marry, that has consecrate his body and soul to
God, and professed to live chaste without marryage.

Responsio.
In case is this hypocrite chaplayne, as was the devil, whom Christ drove into
the^ A Devil.
herd of swyne, Luke. viii. For this devil, called Region* both knew it and
confessed it, that Christ was the son of God, as this busye chaplayne
confesses, that it is both a manifest truth and also the wurde of God, that is
uttered here before. This knowledge and confession notwythstandynge, yet this
devil entering into the swynysh bishops, prestes, and lawers, wythstode his
heavenly veryte, and pursued him for it to the very death. Who can think this
malyciouse and frantike chaplayne, not to be possessed with this devil?
Possessed.
He does the same things that this devil ded. He knows it and confesses it
to be a veryte of God, and yet he impugneth it with to the and nail. If it be
not a sin against the holy Ghost, to wythstande a known and confessed
verite, what is a sin against the holy Ghost? If he be not in this All true.
point a son of perdicion, who ever was the son of perdycyon. Ye know
(master chaplain) yt these se^te^ces be true, why do ye not than allow the^?
Yea ye know, they be very true, that is to say, certainly, groundedly, and
perfyghtly true, why tha^ believe ye them not? Ye know also, they be the wurdes
of God, why than do ye not honor them, love them, and follow them, but wyckedly
impugn them?

Ye can not se, for what purpose I bring in these verytees, that the inhybycion
of marryage is a doctrine of deuyls, that the A wife.
taking of a christen wife, is a following of Gods institucion, and that Mary
Christ's mother honored that holy order. For none other purpose do I bring
them in, than for that only purpose which god appointed, as for the allowaunce
of matrymony, which is gods ordinance. Ye have in times past, torn and taken
away from Gospels.
Christ, Homo quida^ nobilis, in some churches, and Ego sum Pastor bonus, in
the other churches, and given it to Thomas Be^ket the trayter, both at mattens
and mass, upon his ydolatrouse days. Homo quida^ peregre, to your Romysh
Apostle Augustyne, to Anselme, Cutbert, Chadde, Swithune, Dunstane, Erkenwalde,
Oswald, Osmunde, Edmunde, and a great sort moo. Beati pauperes, to dead men's
bones Gadders.
and relliques, Euntes in mu^dum, to gadders, pilgrims, and ydoll sekers. Amen
dico vobis, ye appointed for battle, Petite et dabitur, for sick beasts,
Factum est in vna dierum, for fair wether, Nolite soliciti esse, for rain,
Discumbente Jesus, for mourners, Surgens Jesus de synagoga, for pestilence, and
Dixit Simo^ Petrus, for S. Antonyes evil, bestowing Dixit Martha ad Iesum, for
all christian sowles. This Souls.
was a great study of you, and a clerkely distributing of y^ scriptures
su^tyme. Ye ca^ not think my scriptures welbestowed, because they are not
applied to that use and end.

Ye fear least this truth here expressed, should subvert an other truth. But
ye need not so to do* for it is not ye nature of a truth to subvert or destroy
a truth, but rather to ratify, mainteyne, and uphold a truth. But paraue^ture
it is some truth of your own, that ye mean, and than is it a very falsehede.
A truth.
For you are they that call evil good, and good evil, making darkness light,
and light darkness. Esaias. v. Your commen custom has been evermore (S. Paul
says) to wythholde Gods veryte in unrighteousness, and to turn his truth to
a lie, Roma. i. This truth of yours, is an exhortacion Enemies.
to a wyuelesse life, or a professynge of vyrgynyte. This word exhortacion
has a fair show, virginite seems a bewtyful thing. Undre this pretensed
color or fair face of the serpent, your ye will hyde all the crafty
persuasions of Sodomites.
your religiouse sodomites, prestes, monks, and fryres, which has compassed
sea and land to make proselytes, both by confession and other ways. And in
the end ye would have them taken for virtuous counsels and godly professions.
But doubtless ye come to late. Ye would that neither this, nor yet y^ blamyng
or rebuking of me^, that break Uowes.
their unlawful stynkynge popish vows, should be judged any forbydding of
lawful marryage, or taken for a doctrine of deuyls. But it shall be so holde^,
and axe you no leave so long as y^ tree is known by his fruit.

Ye will have the braggynges and boastynges of a feigned and false chastyte,
which is none other than a fylthynesse unspeakable, Beastly.
to be holden as a pure comme^dacio^ of y^ true chastyte. But it will not be
granted you. That detestable professyon of a life so enormiouse, shall be a
prohybycion of Godly marryage and a doctrine of devils in hipocrisy, though ye
show a thousand colors to y^ contrary. What devil of hell has inspired you,
so clearly to separate christen marryage from chastity, as it had no porcyon
therwyth? What will ye make of lawful marryage, ye synnefull Marriage.
Sodomytes and utter enemies of God, that ye thus cruellye seclude it from all
kinds of chaste honesty? Do ye judge it a whore dome, an uncleanness, a
beastlynesse? or what do ye reckon of it, you that so malyciously thus handle
it? This dare I be bold to affirm, and will stand in the opynion to the very
death, that all kinds of continency, of clennesse, and of chastyte in the old
testament, from the beginning of Genesis to the lattre end of the Machabees,
Co^me^ded.
having the blessyng of God, pertayneth to marriage. There is no such ungodly
separacion of virginite from marriage, but virgins were reckened there, most
fyt for that honest, comely, and godly estate.

Uirgynite without fruit, is there deplored, sorowed, lamented, and bewailed, as
in the daughter of Iephte, Iudi. xi. Where as marryage is called a chaste
generation Marriage
with virtue, her memory being immortal before God and man, Sapi. iiii.
Uirginyte without fruit, deserved no praise, neither in the law of nature, nor
yet in the law of Moses, but as a thing not regarded, dwelt under contempt,
obprobry, and rebuke, without benediccio^, as apered in An na. i. Reg. i. and
in Helisabeth* Luc. i. Wha^ Uowes.
vows were of most value and of Gods allowaunce, they could not better
virgynytie, how can they than now better it, being of less value, yea, wurkes
of our own innention, and not of Gods commandment? The blessing continued in
succession of Marriage, from age to age, and from generation to generation, till
the promised seade was come, which was Jesus Christ. Though he in the new
testament, beatyfyed virgynyte (as he also by many clear arguments, did
marryage) geuyng there unto, the grace of prophecy, as apered in the. iiii.
daughters of Philip the Evangelist, Uirginite.
Acto. xxi. Yet ded he not license you to vow it, to brag of it, to huylde
your presthode upon it, to make it your bawd, your cloak, and your ydol of
uncleanness, to color your sodometry with it, nor yet to contempne lawful
marryage for it.

I could well commend vyrginite many ways, but not after your handelynge.
Uirginite
As it is Gods fre gift, I can praise it, but not as it is under band of your
vows, for I know the fruits to be fylthy. Ye call it the hyghar gift, and
marryage, the lowar gift, thereby eralting your shauelinges above the layte.
This is a practyse of your old scolemaysters the Pharisees, which preferred
their ydell tradycyons to Gods holy commandments. Math. xv. Because that
vowed chastyte comes from Rome, which is beyond the Alps, with The alps
oylynges and with shauynges, therefore is it the hyghar gift, for none other
virtues has it. But if ye way it by the sty^chyng fruits, ye shall find it
the lowar gift, and the gyuer out thereof, a very mean gentilman, even he that
seeks whom he may denouee. i. Pet. v. Much boast is made of virginite, and
yet they which brag most of it, knows least of all what it is. Uyrgynite
leads not toward heaven, unless it be coupled with ye wisdom of god.
Wisdom.
For we read in the Gospel, that the. v. folyshe vyrgyns were put clearly
back, for not having oil and light in their la^pes, Math. xxv. This is an
euydent example, that vyrginite is nothing, without other Godly prouisyons. No
better is that vyrginyte which serves it self alone, than is the talent hyd
under the ground. Mat. xxv.

I deny not, but it is an easy, pleasant, free, and commodiouse estate, but
without maide^hed.
other virtues, it is of small value. It is like a dead body which has no
life. Where S. Paul lays fourth the fruits of the sprete, Galathyanes* v.
which all are well allowed in marryage, he makes no mention of vyrgynyte.
Though Mary Christ's mother be named a vyrgyne in ye gospel* yet is she much
more commended there for her faith, than for virgynyte. Helisabeth full of the
holy Ghost, proclaimed her blessed among women, and not vyrgynes, blessed for
her beleues sake* and not for vyrgynytees sake. Marriage should Mariag:
not seem all void of vyrgynyte, by that S. Paul says to the married
Corinthyanes. Adiu^xi enim vos vni viro, vt virginem castam exhiberetis
Christo. I have coupled you to one man, to make ye a chaste vyrgyne to Christ.
ii. Corinth. xi. The vyrgyns which follows the lamb, whyther so ever he
goes. Apocalypse. xiiii. being his undefiled congregation, were married people
for the more part. Johan Tompson*
Tompson an old Doctoure of yours in his abreuiacions of Ryde^aus commentaryes
upon the Mythologyes of Fulge^tius, affyrmeth it out of S. Augustyne, as a
grounded doctrine, that Abraham's marryage was in dygnyte equal with the
vyrgynyte of Sayncte Johan Baptyste.

In marryage God preserved Sara from the unlawful handelynges of Abimelech.
Genesis. xx. Where as he suffered Dina in a presumtuouse vyrgynyte to be Dil^^y.
corrupted among the Sichemytes, Genesis xxxiiii. In the dyl^^y or general
floude he saved the married how should of Noe, ye fore^ virgins peryshyng
therein. Genesis vii. his blessing was upon the married for increase, Genesis i.
viii. ix. xxxv. He also blessed in Abraham's sede, all peoples of the earth,
Gene. xxii. Christ in this flesh at marryage was present, Joan. ii. but never
at orders gyuyng. When he delivered the woman taken in aduoutry, he wrote upon
the ground ye unknown faults of the holy hypocrites, Johan. viii. The
Esseanes which were chaste men without wives, Esseanes.
ye scriptures does not allow, but rather co^de^pne them, Apo. xi. For this
special cause sprang the most worthy me^, Isaac, Jacob, Samson, Samuel, and
Johan Baptist of ^arren women, that frutefulnesse in the flesh should be known
to be of God.

Ye say, every man ones in his life time, has lyberte to marry. I think ye
mean every popyshe man, and not every christen man. For the christian man (S
Paul Christian.
says) is always, and not ones in his life, at lyberte. ii. Cor. iii. From
this lyberte of marryage (ye say) noman forbyddeth me^. We thank ye for
nothing. Ye have here forgotten your holy brethren the Tacianes, Eustachyanes,
and Marcionistes, which utterly detested marryage. I count ye more perverse in
opinion, than your great Doctor Iulyane. For he says, cha. viii. De bono
viduitatis. Nuptiarum bonum, Iulianus.
semper est bonum. The co^modite of marryage, is always good. Et ca. xi. Hec
disputo, ne arbitreris vel secundas nuptias crimen esse, vel quascunque
nuptias, cum sint nuptie, malum esse. These things do I reason at large, least
thu should judge the second marryages sin, either yet recke^ any marryages
at all to be evil, being marryages in deed. What speak ye than, of your,
ones in this life? I heard never a more papist make vtteraunce. But A papyst.
if he forsakes his lyberte (say you) meaning your own professed cattle.
Than goes he quite from Christ (say I) and S. Poule confirms the same,
Gala. v. And bind himself (say you) by his vow to God, never to marry. If he
be ones in the snare of the devil (say I) ye will hold him there still.

God will not agree to it (I say) to be served in bondage and not in freedom,
taking Fredome.
us for his fre children, and no bond servants. Have our fredome cost him so
great a price, as is the dear blood of his blessed son, and now we will
throw our selves again in bondage? What a lewd mock is this? What an ydiote
fool is he, that will bind himself prentyse, having nothing for it, at his
fourth coming, and might for his fre service, possess his fathers
inheritance? I say, he is well worthy to lose it. What reward lokeste thu to
have, for thy vnrequyred service in forsakyng marriage, as thu here namest it,
Service.
thu Priapus vower. Thu shalt have the reward of Ouan the wicked sodomyte,
which spylled his seed on the ground, Gene. xxxviii. eue^ the maledyccion and
great curse of God, with depryuacion of the life everlasting. Such a wone, as
thus byndeth himself not to marry, may lawfully (you say) be forbidden to
marry. That is true (say I) if ma^nis invented tyranny be a lawfulness, or if
the great customer of Tiranye.
Sodom, or terryble termagau^t of Rome, be allowed for a law maker above God.
Else not. For God by his Apostle, permytteth every man without excepcion to
marry, that can not abstain. i. Cor. vii.

This inhybition (you say) is no forbiddyng of marryage, but a byddyng to keep
his vow. There ar none of your mischefes without a color to cloak them with.
What is it else but a forbyddynge of marryage, A color
when ye say, thu shall not take a wife under pain of perpetual
enprisonment, or death? Nothing is found so perniciouse and contrary to your
vow, as is marriage. Ye may keep co^cubines, whores boys, or bytches, and yet
your vow not broken, neither yet any greuouse punishment appointed you for it,
of your own Frindes
generation. Yea, and ye shall have a much greatter nombre of the world to
uphold ye in your sodometry (I speak not of Justices and lawers) than shall
they which would gladly walk in the way of righteousness. Ye think it (ye
say) a deuylysh doctrine, to forbydde a married man to marry, his wife being
alive. God is a Tiranye.
good God, which suffers you, not only to err for your vnbeleues sake, Roma
i. but also to express and utter your own error to rebuke and shame I say,
and will prove it, to the utter confusion of your deuylyshe hypocrysy, that it
is no deuylyshe doctrine, but a doctrine of God, to forbid him to marry which
is married and has his wife alive. Where, how, or wha^, can ye appoynte him to
marry, which i^ married already, and has his wife alive?

Ye think to blind us with your bablynges, Pitchers.
do ye not? No, no, go do your feate among old dried up pytchers, for where
as grace, wit, and learning is, ye can do no great harm with these black
thondre boltes. But your teaching is here none other, than ye have for your
times put in open practyse. The examples are to many in no^bre, to be here at
this time rehearced. Ye follow on still with your matter, and call it also a
doctrine of deuyls, to forbid him to marry, which has consecrate his body and
soul to God, and professed to live chaste with out marryage. We consent Agreement
with you in this, and are glad we have you at yt advantage. For here ye
condemn all your former arguments, and confess your whole process to be a
plain doctrine of deuyls. There lacks now nothing but an earnest
repentance of your former euyls. I think it best to take good hold of you,
whils we have ye in this good mode, for I fear me, it will not last. Ye will
^none turn again to your old frenesye. Frenesy.
O Forde, what a miracle is this? that ye now confess it a doctrine of devils
to forhyd them to marry, which has professed your presthode and monkery? I
fear me your head is to ydell, to persyst in this true confession.

Obiectio.
S. Augustyne says, libro. xxx. Contr^ faustum Manicheum, ca. lx. Iterum si ad
vir ginitate^ sic hortaremini, quemadmodu^ hoy tatur apostolica doctrina, Qui
dat nuptum, i. Cor. vii.
been farit, et qui non dat nuptum, melius facit, vt bonum esse nu^tias
diceretis, sed melidrem virginitatem. sicut facit ecclesia, non vos
spiritussanctus ita pronunciaret, dicens, prohibentes nubere, Ille enim
prohibet, qui hoc malum esse dicit, non qui huic bono aliud melius anteponit,
et cet. Marryage is lawful in every person^, but the mocking of God, Mockyng
breaking of promise, and intidelyte with God, going back from a godly
purpose after his vow, is da^pnable in every person, as S. Paulc says, as I
understand him.

Responsio.
I judged before, that this bnsy chaplain would not long persevere in the
truth. He falls now again, as a dog, to his vomyte, and as the sow that
was washed, into his old fylthy puddell. ii. Pet. ii. For A sow.
here he seeks to prove, that the tyrannouse enforcementes of Antichrists
shaven captains, to the odyouse obseruaciyn of his profane vows, is no
forbyddynge of christen marryage. But he goes here to preposterously ^o wurke,
to thryue by his occupacion. For in these his arsewarde procedynges, he would
have us judged Manychees, that do affirm christen marryage to be an order
lawful for all sorts An order
of people, which otherwise can not avoid fornicacio^. But he and his ungodly
rabble, shall supplye the rowme of those Manychers, so long as they shall
attempt by such hypocrytycall colors, perpetually to seclude their
sorcerouse shauelinges from that godly estate, leauyng them weltering in the
foul lake of all fylthynesse. For the Manichees were not they, which affirmed
maniches.
the christen estate of marryage to be lawful, but contrary wise detested it
as a thing horrible and hateful, their selves leading lives in all beastly
abhompuacyons. And therefore this typpet captain, in bringing fourth here S.
Augustynes authoryte against Faustus the Manyche, is like to be pierced through
with his own weapon, and proved a malygnaunt Manyche.

But mark first of all, what plage does follow of this chaplaynes
inconstauncit? In bringing fourth the. xxx. book of S. Augustyne, against this
faustus the Manyche, for the maintenance of a mischefe, Augustinus.
he allegeth the. lx. chapter, that whole book not having so many chapters by.
liiii. And thus is his allegacion in that. vi. and not. lx. chaptre, to be
Englyshed. Again, if ye should so be exhorted to virginite, as the Apostolyque
doctrine uses to exhort, As thus: He that joins his maid in marryage, does
well, and he that joins her not, does better, that ye might say, marryage
were a good thing, but virginite the Better.
better, like as yt church does. et cet. Mark here the christen procedinges of
S. Augustine. The Manichees judged both meats and marriage to be things wicked
and unclean. And in detesting the^, under color of abstinence and virginite,
they maynteyued most execrable mischefes, as ded of late years our
ungracious papystes. He wylleth the^ here by the Apostles doctrine, in such
Papists.
kind to persuade virginite, that they thereby seemed not to condemn marryage,
or at the least, to give matrymony a good report, which they had not done
before time. He denies it the^ not, but that virginite or the life single, is
the better estate of living, that isto say, more co^modiouse, easy, and Esyar.
free without charges, cares, and sorrows. But not the more peyfight, for
perfeccio^ is measured by faith and not by maide^hede.

Thus defyneth the church (says S. Augustine) que vere Christi est ecclesia,
spe cially that church which is unfeignedly Christ's. These five latyne words,
this S. words
chaplayne clearly bannyshed, declarynge thereby (as I take it) yt he me^t
nothing less tha^ Christ's true church. Now follows y^ residue off.
Augustines text. If ye had so me^t it (says he) ye holy Ghost had not thus
detected you, in calling you ye forbidders of marriage. For he forbids
marriage, which calls it an euyllthing, and not he which to yt good thing
prefers ye better, etcet. If the Manychees had so preferred maniches.
maidenhed, that they had not condemned marryage, Gods sprete had not showed
or declared them as they were in very deed, eue^ deuilish teachers, seducers,
deceivers, mockers, hypocrytes, heretyques, and blasphemouse apostataes.
Neither had Gods open veryte condemned them, for preferrynge vyrgynyte as the
better or more co^modyouse gift, or as S. Paul notes it, more free to all
godly funccions, having Offices.
always the fewar impedymentes. i. Cor. vii. if they had not there with utterly
forbidden marryage, namynge it a very naughty or detestable thing, falling
thereby to many inconuenyencyes, as follows in the said. vi. chapter.

Denique vos eum precipue concubitu^ detestamini, qui solus honestus et
coniugalis est, et quem matrimoniales quoque Couenau^tes.
tabule pre se gerunt, liberorum procreandorum causa, vnde viro non tam
concumbere quam nubere prohibetis. Concumbitur enim etiam causa libidinum,
nubetur autem non nisi filiorum. Nec ideo vos dicatis non prohibere, quia
multos vestros auditores in hoc obedire nolentes vel non valentes, salua
amicitia tolleratis. Illud enim habetis in doctrina vestri erroris, hoc in
necessitate societatis. Furthermore, ye chesely detest that act of generacio^,
which only is honest and conjugal, and that which the matrymonyall couenauntes
also bears Honest.
or aloweth for increase. Whereupon ye forbid man, not only the act of
generacio^, but also the very lawful office of marryage. Copulacion may as
well be for wanton lusts, as else, but marryage is only for propagacion.
Therefore excuse not your selves, to be no condempners of marryage, because ye
bear with a great nombre of Bearers.
your sect, which neither will nor yet can be able in that point to obey you,
to hold them still in friendship. For the one (which is contempt of marryage) ye
hold in your erroneouse doctrine, and the other (which is a tolleraunce among
your selves) ye are compelled to suffer, least their more nombre would break
from you.

In this does S. Augustyne declare the manifest hypocrisyes of the Manychees,
as we may in these days the most deuylysh dyssymulacions of our papystes. Se
Dissemblynges.
now what this busy chaplain has wo^ne here. Now follows he with his own
conclusion, as much to the purpose, as to set Paul's steple on the top of
Charynge cross. For though S, Augustyne speaks here of virginite, yet makes
he no mencyon of vows. Marryage (says this chaplayne) is lawful in every
person. This is true (say I) for it is both Christ's doctrine, Doctrine.
Math. xix. and also S. Paul's. i. Cor. vii. et. Heb. xiii. Why than does his
wicked geueracion so tyrannously inhybyte any person to set hold upon it, as
upon a refuge against fylthy fornycacyon? For the mocking of God (he says) in
breaking of promise, is dampnable. All this do I grant him, the promise being
made according to yt rule of Gods wurd. But if it be fashyoned after the vain
deuyses Deuyls.
of mannis ydell heart, either yet of Antichrists Romyshe decrees, which is a
wicked adversary and mocker of God (I say) they are to be broken, set at
naught, and utterly abhorred, as present poisons, blasphemouse mockes, and
daungerouse fruits of dampnacyon.

For the Lord says, Deuteronomy. xii. Ye shall not do, yt seems good in your own
sight. But se ye do those things only which I command you, nothing adding
or dimynyshyng. Precepts.
Neither is it a point of infidelyte against God, in them which has
braynyshly, ungodly, and dampnably vowed, nor yet a going back from a godly
purpose, the vow being presumted, dyssembled, and feigned. For it is in the
whole, top and tail, length and breadth, begyunynge and ending, but
hypocrysye, Falsehede
craste, and falsehede, have it never so gloryouse a shine of relygyon and
holiness.

This rash vow has doubled the wickedness of Sodom, such a preciouse
thing is it. For where as before it was a known wickedness, the world does
now, for this vows sake accept it for an holy relygyon. O ydoll most
perniciouse, and abhomynacion unspeakable. This chaplayne or proctour of hell
concludes, that the breaking of this unadvised, yea, rather most unhappy vow
is dampnable Popyshe.
in every person, without excepcion. Here were a gorgyouse lie, if he had his
full canonyzaciou. And se (I pray you) how well fauerdly it is fathered upon S.
Paul. But it is as he understands him, without any text. Were not S. Paul
well set forwa^de (think you) if he had many such understanders?

Concerning unadvised vows, they ought of necessyte to be broken. For not
only are they lies in hypocrysye, but also false promyses, blasphemies,
mockes, dyssemblinges with God, takynges of his Mockes.
holy name in vain, and such ydell wurdes as the general judge shall call
men to a reckenynge for, at the latter day. Therefore I counsel all men and
women, which has abused gods holy name in such ydell professyons, to break
them, forsake them, repent them, detest them, abhor them, utterly defye
them, and to spytte at detest the^.
them, as at the most fylthy dyrte of the beuyll. When David had made an
earnest vow to slay Nabal and all his me^ servants, and was by the wisdom
of Abigail, compelled to break that promise, he never repented the breakyng
thereof, but lawded God and praised the woman, calling the David.
breach of so unadvised a vow, an high preseruacion of God from doing of
most daungerouse evil. i. Reg. xxv. The. xl. Jews, which bound themselves by
vow, neither to eat nor drink till they had slain Paul, neded none other
penance for the breaking thereof, than the torment of their hu^gry panches,
Acto. xxiii. if they had not take fode till their vow had been The jews.
fulfilled. For God delivered him, and suffered them to dwell still in their
unadvised vows, vnfulfylled.

Censura.
The vows of Romysh monks and prestes, whose end is most fylthy sodometry,
were never commanded of Christ, neither yet took they ground of the Apostles
doctrine. For they had wives Apostles.
in marryage, not women unfaithful, but systers, that is to say, women of the
same Christen believe, that their selves were of. i. Cor. ix.

Obiectio.
Romys^ prestes we know none. For prestes be by Christ's ordinance, stewardes
of his mysteryes and sacraments, and preathers of his word. That the vows of
such, Uowes.
have their end most fylchy sodometry, is, me think, sum what to far
spoken. For I will not so uncharitably judge, that every man and woman, which
profess chastity or widowhed, do it for that end, to live in such filthy
abhomynacion. That the vows of monks and prestes were never commannded of
Christ, I do assente. If ye take vows, not for Uowes.
those which be commen to every Christen man, which, as you said, be Gods
commandments, but for those which be private and syngular after every mannys
devotion. For to make such vows, is not commanded. But to break the^ when
they be made, is prohibyted by Gods word and commandment. Yet they be
commended by Christ, and men ethorted unto the^ by Christ, Mat. xix. That
Think.
these vows ded take their ground of the Apostles doctrine, me think, I am
able to prove. Ded not wydowes vow chastyter l. Timo. v. Ded not Ananias and
Saphira. Acto. l. vow and promise to bring in the price of all their
possessyo^s? what vengeance came to the^ for breaki^g their vow, ye know.

Responsio.
It is wondre to me, that ye know no Romyshe prestes, and are so great a
captain, Prestes.
counselor, and good ghostly father among them. Me think, ye should not be so
neglygent as ye make your self, neither yet forgetful of a name so essencial
to your sinered and shorn generation. But do ye not know Romish prestes in
deed? Knew ye never them which were prestes by oylynges and shanynges, by side
gowns and by typpetes, by massinges and mo^blinges, by cream boxes and
confessyo^s, by stools, fa^uonis, and superaltarees, by beckinges, Known.
vowynges, breathinges, knockinges, knelynges, crossynges, calkynges, candell
droppynges, stauerynges, slomberynges, gapynges, gaddynges, ydols sensynges,
and watter co^iurynges, with many other fine toys, which all came from Rome?
Were ye never acquaynted with byars and sellers in the temple, ydolmongers,
bedemo^gers, portasmo^gers, and masmongers, with crowns pyepycked and
dysguysed like daunsyng Apes, i^bberyng, whysperyng, and mutteryng in corners,
false fyenge the Apes.
holy scriptures, and lyenge in wait to betray pore christianes? Know ye none
yet, which goes to old wynes, and bid them believe as they have done, and as
their fathers ded before them, calling the veryte sediciouse learning?

Are ye sure there are non in these days, that of set purpose rebelleth
against the Gospel, contempneth thereof the maynteners, pursues the dylygent
readers, spurneth Enemies.
aside the kings ordinances, dysdaiueth his godly procedynges, calling David's
psalms good christmas carolles, and Christ's holy communion, Robine Whodes
banquet, like stought sturdy saucy sir Iohans? Dwell ye so nygh Deuenshyre and
Cornewayle, and are not acquainted with those ragynge ruffyanes of Antichrists
broad, which of late days sturred up the lew de people against their liege
king, for their old Latin service which they Rebels.
never yet understood, for images, masses, ceremonies, presthode, coufessions,
funtehalowynges, holy water co^iurynges, and other dyrty dregs of the Romyshe
monster? If ye know not those chaplaynes, your companyons, which of late
years not far from Maluerne hills brought wenches to their beds to help
their vow of chastyte, by a charm called: Hec Acharme.
dona Hecmunera Hec sancta sacrificia Beelzebub et Berit and so fourth, ye have
su^what less co^ning tha^ I have, for I both know yt story and have their
inchauntme^t to show. They little need marriage, y^ have so religiouse and holy
spiritual prouisio^s

If ye know no Romish prestes, I dare boldly say it, that ye know no prestes
at all. Forther is none other order of presthode, than is the Romyshe popets
order. Presthode
The church that Christ sanctyfyed to the service of his eternal father, had
never any massinga presthode. He only sent fourth Apostles and dyscyples,
faithfully to instruct the multitude in our christen believe* The Apostles by
authorite of his commission, ordained in every city receyuyng his word,
preaching bishops, elders, pastors, deacons, and other godly ministers to
uphold and increase the christen religion, which he had perfightly planted
without masses. No presthode was left here to Relygion.
be occupied in the christianyte, but clearly was it taken away to the right
hand of the father, the great sacrifice once performed, as I have declared
before. This chaplayne says, that prestes by Christ's ordinance are stewardes.
We read not in all the. iiii. Gospels, that Christ ever had any Gospels.
other steward of household than Judas, and he was a thief. If ye take him
into the order of your presthode, much good do it you with him. In some great
me^nis howses (I have herd say) full ill rule has been, where as prestes have
been stewardes.

But the meaning of this chaplain is, that prestes were stewardes of Christ's
mysteries and sacraments by his appointment, and preachers of his word, which
is a manifest lie. For he neither made A fable.
pressed, nor yet appointed his Apostles to make them. Neither took he prestes of
any other making, for they were most unfit for that godly office. None could
than be admytted to Christ's relygyon, that had in those days been a pressed,
unless he first of all renounced his presthode utterly. His preachers were men
without ordres, unless preachers.
they were of the order of faith and of the holy Ghostes inspyracio^, whereby
they become mynisters admittted of the Apostles. This chaplayne accompteth it
to far spoken, that the end of prestes vow^s should be fylthy sodometry. But
surely the naughtye examples of them, extends A plage.
much further. It is a sore plage (S. Paul says) left them of God, for
their ungodly presumpcion, Roma. i. So charytable is this chaplayne, that he
reckeneth no spiritual sodomytes to be evil livers, wha^ he judges the
Gospellers (as he does call them) foul heretyques and men worthy of death.

He will not (he says) so vncharytably judge (yt me^ bawdes of Rome have yt
like in their mouths) that every man and woman which professes chastyte or
widowhed, Profession.
does it to that end, to live in such filthy abhominacion. If they ded (say I)
hell were to good both for them, and for him that so earnestly defends their
execrable myschefes. That judgment is not allowable, which depends on the
naked cause, the effect not following. And therefore Christ taught us, not to
judge the fruit by the tree, but the tree by his fruit. Of their Fruits.
fruits (says he) are the false prophets and hypocrites known, Mat. vii*
What godly wise man can think, that vyrginite is the better, because it is
vowed, or chastyte the holiar because it is professed? Is it better in
synnefull ma^nys bands, than in the free hand of God which is yt gyuer? The
shameful success thereof, should seem to declare it otherwise. But answer me to
this, Answer.
ye patron of bawdry and fylthynesse unspeakable. Were the prodygiouse
occupienges of Sodom and Gomor in use among the christianes, before the
profession of that counterfeit vow of yours? If ye say, yea, I can prove ye a
deep liar.

Either yet, were there ever so many prodygyouse kinds of that filthy
occupyenge, in practyse, as there has been sens the professynge of that most
wicked vow? Profession.
If ye say, there were, I am able to confound ye be a thousand examples,
authorytees, and authors to the contrary. Your obstinacye in this myschefe,
has caused me much more to travail in stories and chronycles of times, tha^
I would else have done. If I co^de^pned your whole holy ghost
generacio^ for that wickedness of Sodom, I should do none other tha^ the holy
Ghost has done, which never yet could err. He has proclaimed it to the world
by his elect Apostle S. Johan, that your whole spirytua^te is a wicked Sodom.
Apoca.xi. He has also louyngly admonyshed his servants, by his chosen
vessel S. Paul, that your vow is a folyshe presumpcyon of your own blind
hearts, deseruynge most da^pnable plage, for your vnbeleues sake, Romansi. Ye are
not able to overthrow bulwerks*
these.ii. bulwerkes with all Antichrists artyllery though ye be of nature
most obstynate rebels against the truth of God. I say therefore unto you,
that there is nothing so wicked upon the earth, as are your relygyouse and
prestyshe vows, if the tree may be judged by his fruit.

This chaplayne assenteth, that the vows of monks and prestes, were never
commanded of Christ. What has the christen Nothing*
man or woman to do with them than, say I? Are there other law makers for the
soul besides him? Or are there other commandments to be observed in
conscience than his? This instrumente of the devil, holds his peace at this
point, and dare not utter what he thinks. Notwythstandynge to color the
matter, he brings in his old dystinccio^ of vows commen and private, if I
so take them. No sir, I am not in these days so Jewish, Iewyshe.
as to think that those vows are to every christian man now commen, whose
perfourmaunce God so earnestly in the old law required. Bullock, Calfe,
Sheep, and Got offerynges, be now all past. My opinion is therein, as S. Paul's
was, that no christen man ought to do them. For the light being present, the
shadow must give place, as is said before. And as for pryuate promyses, or
syngular vows after every Devotion
mannys devotion, this chaplayne affyrmeth, that no man is commanded to make
them. Than is he a lewd fool (say I) that wylleyther make them or do the^. For
they are but vain worshippinges (Christ says) when they are at the best.
Math. xv.

No man shall receive any reward for them at the latter day, unless it be
the reward of dampnacion, for leauyng Gods Reward.
commandments to do such ydelnesse. God has declared by the mouth of his
prophet, that he estemeth them no more, than he estemeth y^ vile dyrte of me^.
Mala. ii. For when they are not of his commandment, they are none other than
mannys ydell and wicked inuencio^s. But to break these (says this chaplayne)
when they are ones made after every mannys devotion, is prohybyted by Gods
wurde and commandment. But he shows not where Forbid.
that wurd is placed, nor yet where that commandment is to be found out. He
is a prothonotary of Rome. His wurde stands for an authoryte, if it may be
so taken. No, no, maistre papyst, that world is past. If ye thynk to be
dyscharged by, vouete et reddite, ye ar fowly deceived. For David Dyrte.
bid ye not there, to vow your own inue^cions, neither yet to offer up your
own dyrte. For such high deuocions not ordained by him, are but your own
styncking dyrte. If ye apere before God with such an uncomely present, what may
he say to his Angels? Away with that fylthy knave, that spyghtful mocker, that
tordemonger, which dysdaynynge my preciouse precepts, prese^teth me with his
vile dirty donge.

God abhors his own lawful ordynaunces, when they pass after mennys
devises, Esaias. i. Hiere. vii. Amos. v. Mich. Traditions
vi. Zacha. vii. much more than the self ydell devises. Are not they (think
you) plesaunt gentylmen, which stand before god, all trapped, dysguysed, and
decked in their own stynkynge dyrte, as are monks in their cowles, fryres in
their coats, and shaven prestes in their dysguysynges? I think he has a more
just cause to call the^ mockers, than their predecessors in the old law,
Psalm. xxi. Because ye have no scriptures to prove that Christ commended Christ.
your popyshe vows, it shall stand still for a lie to your shame, and for a
foul blasphemy to your dampnacion, if ye recant it not. Though ye be a
natural mocker by kind, yet we pray you, not to make Christ your mocking
stock, for your own ease hereafter. Say not that he exhorted men to your
sodometrouse vows, Math. xix. for if ye do, ye blasphemously belly him. Qui
potest capere, capiat, is not to profes your ungracious vow, nor yet to
become Profession.
an ydell masmo^ger, but that they lay hands on the free gift of God, which
may obtain it, and no longer to presume thereupon, tha^ he does give it for
the kingdom of heavens sake, which is the Gospel preachinge, whom you detest
and abhor.

No man is there exhorted to gelde himself for that only kingdoms sake. Only
Chastmen
is it declared of Christ, that such there be, by the special gift of God. I
have told you this before. Ye think your self able (ye say) to prove yt your
wyuelesse vows have taken their ground of yt Apostles doctrine. But ye are
like to come vengeably short. Ded not wydowes vow chastyte? say you. i. Timo.
v. If they ded, as yt matter is doubtful, what is this to the purpose for
prestes? Wydowes and prestes were sumtyme diverse, both in kind and office. Are
they now become all one? This is truly a full mo^strouse order. Me think All
ou^.
wydowes should have nothing to do in this matter, consyderyngo they want the
ware that ye wot of, which are most chefly required in that holy order of
presthode. Spadones, eunuchi, et castrati, non sunt in sacerdotes ordinandi,
the Cano^ law says, Neither geldynges, eunukes, nor yet dysme^bred me^, may
be received to presthode. Wydows
Much less the wydowes which never yet had those members. The great priapus of
rome, is always proved by his cullio^s, an able cock and no hen, ere he be
admitted to yt seat of Antichrist. what should yt religiouse widows tha^ meddle
in such high matters. It is enough for the^ to believe as holy church does
teach the^, and to be obedient in their vocacio^, when yt holy fathers has
need of Obedient
their help, and uot to come before they are called The widows were not admytted
off. Paul, till they were of. lx. years of age, and past all hope of child
bearing. If ye will have prestes after their rule, admit none to vow chastity
in y^ presthode, till he be so old, yt he is past getting of children. And
than ye shall have as chaste prestes, as S. Paul left wydowes. Else will not
Ananias.
this rule serve you. Ye ask if Ananias and Saphira ded not vow? but your
allegacion is to far out of square, for ye number. l. for. v. as one much
seen in multiplicacio^s. Of a lykelyhode ye feared to come to short, that ye
ra^ne so fast before. Ye must come back again. xlv. degrees, if ye will touch
your matter a right. For the story of Ananias and Saphira, is in the. v.
chaptre of the Apostles acts, which book lacks. xxii. chapters of your set
nombre. Ye ask if they ded not vow? No truly, unless No vow.
ye call dyssymulacion a vow. For the text says, that they dyssembled, lied,
and tempted the sprete of God, which is no honest kind of vow making. Lo,
here have yt as far ouershote your wits in judgment, as in nombre of your
chapter before.

Ye say, they promised to bring in the price of all their possession. The
text speaks of no promise, but it says, that they sold a possessyon, and
kept away part Profession.
of the price, Than this pertains nothing to a vow. What vengeance came
upon them, I know in deed, for the storye is plain in that matter. But it was
not for the breaking of a vow, but for their colorable deceyt in a feigned
christianite, as is your cou^terfet chastity in a false and deceyuable
presthode. If it had been a vow, No vow
yet was it no vow for that presthode, for neither he was a priest, neither
yet his wife a prestesse. Neither was it a vow against marryage, for he had a
wife, and she a husband. But in deed it was like your vows,, in as much as
it was a dissymulacion. Ye thought this example, wha^ ye brought it in, very
fyt for your purpose, and I think it also very fyt for your matter. For what
other is your vow, than an hypocrisy? What other is your presthode, Hipocrisy
than a false relygyon? Yea, what other are they both, than a lienge to the
holy Ghost? By this storye could I wonderfully descrybe your dyssemblinge
profession, were it not for making my book here to long.

Obiectio.
Of this matter speaks Basilius Magnus de vita solitaria. What is mentiri
spiritui sancto? but to promise and vow a thing to God, and not to keep his
vow. Nonne mane^s, tibi manebat, et venundatu^ in Mentiri.
tua potestate erat? If he had not put himself out of the propriete of his
goods, which he ded by his promise consecrate to God, his fact had been no
sin, for every man does not sin, that sells not his lands, and brings
not the price to the Apostles, except he had promised so before. That these
vows were grounded of the Apostles doctrine, and of the practyse of them in
the Apostles time, Eusebius declares in Ecclesiastica historia, Grounded.
li. ii. ca xvi. et. xvii. Now your reason that for loweth, is very slendre and
simple, which is this. ^owes take no ground of the Apostles doct^yne, because
they had wives themselves. As though a married man, might not erhorte an other
to chastyte or virginite. A man that has well dyned himself, may yet teach
and Fylg^t.
set fourth y^ virtue and goodness of fasting. Ye said without exception, that
the Apostles had wives. Of all the rest, except Peter, if it be a veryte, it
is an vnwrytteu veryte. And yet S. Ambrose excepteth Johan and Paul. ii. Cor.
xi. which were never married.

Responsio.
Basilius Magnus has much wrong here, to be brought in for a witness against
prestes marriage. For why his father Basilius y^ elder, was a pressed, Gregorius
Nazia^zenus Basilius.
says, in his funeral sermon called Monodia, Whereas he reports his sober
nes to be such, y^ marriage in him was neither an impediment to virtue, nor yet
to the study of godly wisdom, though he had by his wife Eumelia, a daughter
and. iiii. sons. In statu (inquit) co^iugali vita^ ac ritu^ seruauit
sacerdotale^. Ex quo tria hec, castitas, matrimoniu^ et sacerdotiu^, que
diuersa sole^t vi iii. kinds.
te genera co^stituere, nequaqua^ in eo pugna^tia fuere, aut virtuti vllo modo
offeceru^t In the matrimonyall state (says he) this man observed thoroughly,
both y^ life and office of a pressed, whereby these. iii. things, chastity,
matrimony, and presthode, which are wo^t to co^stitute diverse kinds of life,
were never in him repugnau^t, yt one to y^ other, nether yet any hindraunce to
perfeccio^. This one confusion has our chaplain by Basilius. Confusion.
An other. Though y^ said Basilius were a collect our of monks or solitary men,
and made the^ rules according, yet makes he no great mention of vows in
the^, neither yet has he taught any sound doctrine of vo was private, in all
his writting, though he sumwhat doubtfully dallyed about them.

In his epistle, ad Gregoriu^ Nazia^zenu^ de vita solitaria, no manner of
mention makes he of Auanias and Saphira, which is an other blot to this
chaplain. But in y^ last A blotte.
chapter of his book, called, Institutio illorum, qui vita^ cupiu^t ducere
perfecta^, this sentence we find. He y^ has kept himself uncorrupted (says
he) all his life, haih surely obtained the perfight gift of virginite. And this
he applies as well to marryage as mo^kery, as follows anon after. Tha^ goes
Goes on.
he on. And y^ we may hold it (says he) let vsco^tinually take heed, and
with all endeuer possible, labor to come again to the symylytude of God. Let
us also be ware, least we admit any thing vnwurthy that promise and sure hope
of ours. Ne in Ananie crimen incidamus, least we fall into the crime of
Ananias, which was frawde and deceyte. This perteyneth as All men.
well to the married as unmarried. For it follows there. Hoc inire ac optare
licet, sine in matrimonio, seu celibem agente. This ought to be understand and
looked for, as well in marryage as in them that live sole. What may be spoken
more plainly?

Here meant this chaplayne some craft (I believe) in brynginge fourth an author
without his authorite, and in sendyng us He se^deth.
to a place, where no such matter is. But sure he took one doctoure for an
other, as Basyle for Gregory. For in deed, Gregory has this clause, and it is
alleged in the bishop of Romes decrees. xxvii. q. i. cap. Ananias. Ananias deo
pecunias vouerat, quas postea victus persuasione diaboli, subtraxit. Sed qua
morte mulctatus est, scis. Siergo ille mortis pericuso dignus gregorius
fuit, qui eos quos dederat nummos Deo abstulit, cousidera quanto periculo in
diuino iudicio dignus eris, qui non nummos, sed temetipsum Deo omnipotenti, cui
te sub monachali habitu deuoueras, subtraxisti. Ananias vowed money to god,
which afterward he again wythdrewe by the deuyls persuasion. But how he
dyed, thu know. If he than were worthy death, Worthy*
that wythdrewe the money ones given, Considre thy parell in the lattre
judgment, which have given, not money, but thyselfe to the God almighty,
wythdrawynge the again from him, to whom thu were professed under a monks
cowle.

No gentill Gregori, no, Ananias never vowed that he took away. Who taught
you to call a lie, a vow? Ye would by Monkery
this means, have monkery a perfeccion in the christianite. But yt shall be,
wha^ a lie is all one with a vow. It is a money matter ye go about. Ananias is
most fytt, to be set in such a foundation. Take you no thought for reckenynge
of your monkery at the lattre day. For it shall be plucked up by the roots
before, as that wythered plant which the eternal father never planted. A
plant.
Math. xv. This was the text that this chaplayne meant, but he feared the black
blotte of treason for maynteynynge monkery, which his prince had condemned
before. Well, in dyssemblynge both the author and the place, he has workemanly
played the false part of Ananias. Now asks he what it is, Mentiri spiritui
sancto? And answers it as fondely. It is (says Mentiri.
he) to vow and to promise a thing to god, and not to keep his vow. As
though the scriptures pertayned only to monks and prestes, and to no sorts
of people else.

But I will tell you, maistre person. Me^tiri spiritui sa^cto, is to face
down the Dyffyned
holy Ghost with a lie, to seek to deceive God by a falsehede, colourly and
slyely to dyssemble, to deface a truth with hypocrisye, or to speak one thing
and think an other, as (the text says) he ded, which kept away part of the
live lode, and as you do which profess a mo^kery or false presthede, which the
scripture knows not but to co^dempnacion. Satan has filled the ydell hearts
of all the^ yt either vow or profess such beggeryes, as he ded the false
hearts of Ananias and Saphira. Now stampeth Ananias.
he like a Lion, and steppeth fourth boldly like a gyaunt. No^ne mane^s tibi
manebat, et venundatum in tua potestate erat? Remained it not wholly thine own,
and being sold, was it not under thy power? Well said maystre person, with
whom do ye reason? with dead Ananias for land selling? What is this to the
purpose of prestes vows? If he had not (ye say) put himself out of propriete
of his goods. Yt Propryete
smell here of a monk, maystre person, which he ded by his promise consecrate
to God. Where have he learned, that a mannys wicked promise, coupled with
dyssymulacion, falsehede, and hypocrysye, could ever yet consecrate?

I se well, ye can find out, more ways co^secracion tha^ one. A prodigiouse
co^secracion do that heart send fourth, where Satan has take possession before.
I think yt devil Satan.
himself, had never yet a doctrine of more blasphemy. If he had not done this
(ye sai) his fact had been no sin. O maistre person, Beatus qui intellegit,
say I. Ye apere by this doctrine, a much better cellerer than scripturer. A
more expert rent gatherer, than Gospel preacher. Every man (ye say) does not
sin, that sells his land. Gyuyng.
No sir, geuynge the money to you, to be prayed for, though he, like an
unthrift, thereby dysheryteth his whole posteryte. There is no sin found,
where you are fatted. And that is the cause, that ye sole^pnised and se^sed so
many dead confessors, both Kings, Bishops, and Abbottes, which had founded
mynsters and monasteries. If the Apostles were here, they were like to have no
part of that price. Heirs.
For Ananias heirs are yet alive, and it was not promised them before. Here is
much a do, and little help to the furtheraunce of this matter, concerning
prestes vows. The text says, that his only dyssymulacio^, without all these
other vain bablynges, made his fact wicked and blasphemouse.

I wyshe, that all men took head of this false Apostle and messanger of
Antichrist, co^utiau^ce
marking here his deceytfull conueiau^ces. He allegeth the. xvi. and. xvii.
chapters of the second book of Eusebius Cesariensis, in his ecclesiastical
history, to prove y^ prestes vows were grounded upon y^ Apostles doctrine, and
upon y^ practyse of the^ which taught in yt Apostles time. I assure you, he is
in this point as he is in all others, a ve ry false harlot and a liar. For in
those. ii. cha. is no such matter to be seen, neither yet is there any
express doctrine of vows in all the whole wurke containing. ix. books.
Doctrine.
The. xvi. chaptre is very short, showing of the first coming of S. Mark the
Enange list into the land of Egipte, and how he declared Christ's doctrine
there. If he fatcheth the ground of his vows from the sober life, modesty,
continence, temperaunce, and other virtues there me^cioned, he does exceeding
wrong to the christen faith of that Godly multitude, which was called to God
by the said S. Marks S. Mark
preaching. For they were no professed prestes and nu^nes, but christien men
and their wives. Neither were those virtues bred of vows, but of faith in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. For there are they called Credentes, and not
voue^tes, beleuers and not vowers.

Philo the Jew, which there describes the lives of abstayners, dwelling in
solytary places, means neither chauntery nor college of prestes, neither yet
any covent Colleges.
of ydel cloisters, but companyes of them which followed Christ's doctrine.
Notwythstandynge Eusebius concludes there. Quod hi qui sub Apostolis ex
Israelitis credebant, Iudaicis adhuc institutionibus et legis obseruationibus
inhereba^t. Those of the Israelytes (says he) which were by the Apostles
converted, were as yet much given to Iewysh tradycyons Traditions
and obseruacions of Moses law. Therefore some scrupulouse persons among the^,
might parauenture hold those abrogated vows, though it be not there
expressed. But with them has Christ's true prufessour, nothing at all to do.
In the. xvii. cha. of the said Eusebius, does Philo call the faithful
beleuers, Cultores et Cultrices, y^ is to say, tyllers or worshyppers, because
they tylled with Gods holy word, y^ rude Hearts.
and bare^ hearts of the people, perseuering in his true worshyppynges with a
most pure conscience. Anon after were they called Christyanes, but not vow
makers. Every where appointed they howses of prayer (not of vows making)
called conuentycles, or places of assembly for sober honestmen, and not for
prestes and nu^nes.

Upon a comely clennesse (says he) and an honest chaste behauer they planted
other virtues, but not upon any vow of syngle Women.
life. Women they had among them, of whom some were very ancient mayde^s,
integritatem casti corporis non necessitate aliqua, sed deuotione servants,
observing a bodyly chastity, not of any necessyte but of a devotion, not by
constraynt but of fre conscience, for the only study of godly wisdom.

Thus has vows here no manner of Vows.
ground of the Apostles doctrine, neither yet took the captyuyte and tyrauny
of them, any hold upon the practyses of the preachers of their time. My reason
is reckened, of this chatteryng chaplayne, very sle^dre and weak, that vows
should seem to take no ground of the Apostles doctrine, because their selves
had married wives. Saint Paul thought that reason not evil, when he argued
with the Marry.
crooked Corinthianes about like matter. An non habemus potestatem, sororem
mulierem circumducendi, quemadmodum et ceteri Apostoli, et fratres domini, et
Cephas? Aut solus ego, et Barnabas non habemus potestate^ hoc facie^di? Have
not we power to lead about a sister to wife, as A sister.
well as the other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and as Cephas?
Either have I only and Barnabas not power this to do. i. Corin. ix.

By that which follows, he thinks to confute both Saint Paul and me. That
were (says he) as though a married man, might not exhort an other to chastity
Exhort.
or virginite. A fool (they say) is nothing worth without his babble. Truth it
is, that chastyte is a virtue to fylthynesse repugnaunt, whose office it is,
chefely to dwell in marryage. For without chastyse, which is a refraynynge from
whoredom, marryage is no marryage. And therefore one married man, may
conuenyently and brotherlye exhort an other to chastyte. But if he ded so
persuade him to vow the Persuade.
syngle life, than were he an utter enemy unto Saint Paul's doctrine, which
wylleth the men to render to his wife, due benyuolence, and in like case the
wife to her husband. But where has this chaplayne learned, that one married
man, may exhort an other to vyrgynyte? they having no power over their own
bodies, but their wives. i. Corin. vii.

In this point here has he showed Calfam.
himself, a very wise calfam. An other of his clerkly reasons, to confute both
me and S. Paul. A man (says he) that has well dyned himself, may yet
teach and set fourth the virtue and goodness of fasting. Is not here (think
you) a lompe of good wholesome learning?

A great bellyed monk with a scarlet face, whose panche is well pampered and
stuffed up to the throat with all manner of delycates, and a platter faced
priest, with Preachars
a pair of chekes as bygge as a boys buttockes, well vytayled also, may
conuenyently stand fourth and preach of good abstinence. A wanton gyglot
may call me^ to sorrowful repentance, whils she is yet in her gawdes, and the
maystre of the stews may persuade me^ to chastyte. Where are than the
examples, which ought to prevent Examples
the doctrine of a Christen preacher? Now forsooth ye are a good robine Swine.
We had already out of your generation of vowers, to great a nombre of this
sort of teachers, that would say much and never do the like. Ye report me to
say it without excepcion, that the Apostles had wives. Here is a sore matter
now against me. Marry sir, I say it again, to confirm Confyrme
mine own wurdes, and all without excepcion. And I trow, S. Paul without
excepcion will do the same. For he says, that Cephas, otherwise called Peter,
had a sister to wife, which was among the Apostles, chief in estimacion.

He reports also, that the brethren of the Lord, had systers to wives. i.
Cor. ix. I A brother.
know not one of them, that was not a bro there to the Lord, by his own
admyssion. If this chaplayue do, let him bring the^ fourth, and he shall be
soonar heard than believed. When Christ sent the women to declare his
resurreccion and ascencion to his Apostels, he called them all brethren, and
not one was tha^ exempted out of that commyssyon, Math. xxviii. et Johan. xx.
It is a written veryte, that I tell this chaplayne, what though he of
obstinacye, malice, and wylfull blindness, do confess Malice.
it a veryte unwritten. Yet have we wo^ne sumwhat of him, in that he confesses
it a verite. What though your Ambrose excep teth Johan and Paul, yet shall not
your Ambroses authoryte be able to confound. S. Paul's truth in that matter,
which says, that the brethren of the Lord had fysters to wynes. We hold your
Ambrose Ambrose.
accursed, if he teach any other doctrine, tha^ S. Paul has taught us. Gal.
i. Ye do your Ambrose wrong, in reporting him the authoure of the. ii. epistle
and. xi. chaptre to the Corinthianes. I wyshe ye were sumwhat wyser, for your
own honesty, if it might be.

To prove that S. Paul had a wife, I pray you give me leave, to allege out of
y^ same author, yt ye took sor your vows Sped not.
when ye sped not. For I can speed therein deed, for Paul's marriage, and that
strong ly. Eusebins Cesariensis, in the third book and. xxx. chaptre of his
Ecclesiastical storye, inueyghenge against them that wyckedly impugn marryage
(as our papists do now) brought fourth a strong wysnesse from an ancient
writer, called Clemens Alexandrius, which lived before Ambrose Clemens.
about. ii. hundred years. An et Apostolos improbant? Petrus etenim ^c
Philippus, vxores habuerunt, et filias etia^ viris nuptum dederunt. Sed et
Paulum non tedet Apostolum, in quadam epistola sua, mentione^ vel salutationem
facere co^paris sue, quam se ideo negat circu^ducere, vt ad predicatione^
Paulus.
Euangelij expeditior fiat. Will those blasphemouse hypocrites (says Clement)
condemn the Apostles also. It is out of question, that Peter and Philippe had
wives, and that they bestowed well their daughters to me^ in marriage. Neither
dysdayned Paul in a serten epistle or gentle salutacion, to make mention of
his A wife.
yoke fellow or wife, whom he at that time minded not to lead about with him,
because he might always be in a more spedy readynes, concerning yt office of
preaching.

Of S. Johan the Evangelist, your old quere service reports, that he was
married in Cana a city of Galyle, Christ being S. Johan.
there present. And Guilhelmus Postillator says, upon this Gospel, Nuptie
fact sunt in Cana. Johan. ii. that his wives name was Anachita. If this be a
lie, than have ye in your solempnytees saluted god with lies. For with this
have I heard you at mattens, upon S. Johannes day within Christmas (as ye
call it) bidde^ him good morrow, the candels being light and white rochettes
on your backs. But Rochettes
that Christ should pluck him away again from his wife, for example of
virginite, it is a most manifest lie, though it be so uttered of Isydorus, in
his book de ortu et obitum sanctorum patrum, and of certain of your other old
doctors, and also in our time of Baptista Mantuanus in libro. xii. ma^tuanus
Fastorum. And this can I prove, by S. Johan the Evangelist, though it now be
nothing to his derogacion. That he many times lost the virgynyte of his soul,
which only is accepted before god. As thus.

He ambyciously sought, by the instaunt suit of his mother, equally to reygne
with Christ, Mat. xx. He complained of him that ded cures in Christ's name,
Marci. ix. He S. Johan.
would in his fury, have consumed the Samaritans with fire, Luke. ix. He
arroga^tly contended with others, for the superiorite, Luke. xxii. Persuaded by
Judas, he murmured against the costs of Maryes ointment. Math. xxvi. When
Christ was He fled.
ones taken, he fled away from him, Mark. xiiii. And among other he doubted of
his resurreccion* Marci. xvi. In these and other like fa^tes, was faythes
integrite broken, which is the true maydenhede of ye soul. The other
maydenhede, without this, is nothing, as well apereth by the. v. folysue
vyrgynes, Math. xxv. All this have I uttered, ^yrgyns.
because ye make of S. Iohans vyrgynite, an ydoll of defense, and a craftye
colored cloak, for your bawdy Sodometrouse vows.

Obiectio.
But put case, they had all wives, yet they were not married after they were
called to presthode, but before. Timotheus, Titus. Clemens, and such other, as
Ignatius sa ieh, ep i^tola ad Philadelphienses, never had Loclebes.
wives, because they were made prestes in virginitate. S. Hierom co^^ra
Iou^anu^ teaches plainly, how that in the necessite of the prymatyue church,
married men being sober and learned, were exalted to presthode. But he says,
prestes being called in virginite, never descended down to marryage, nor no
man after the second marryage, was ever called to Second.
presthode. As for the authoryte of S. Paul. ^. Cor. ix. it pertains in my
judgment to an other purpose. For although the English Bible, be translated
according to your understanding of this place, Yet it is not in latyne, Ducere
sororem v^orem, as you say, but circumducere sorore^ mullerem, which is, to
suffe^ rythe women to go about with the^ in their progress of preaching, to
bear their charges, as Peter and the other Apostles ded To pay.
For it is euydent by the place it self, which speaks of taking hy^ living
for his preaching, where never one wurde is of a wife in that place, as the
doctors also say.

Responsio.
In that taking is this chaplain here, that a merry fellow was in, on a time,
who^ I knew. In remouynge from Boston to Eye in Sothfolke, he hired. iii.
carts for Example.
conueyenge of his stuff thydre. But wha^ it come to the point, it was no more
than he might well bear away in a pyllowebere. Therefore he thanked them, and
said, he would take the pains to carry ^t himself. He chanced in the
iournay to be lodged at an ale house, where the drink pleased him so well, y^
there he left behind him y^ whole carryage, except the pyllowe ^ere The case.
which he put in his bosom, and went away much lyghter than before. So does
this braggyng chaplaiue here, which has at the latter, atter long turmoile
and allegynge of doctors, brought his matter to a case. For now is he driven
to his uttermost shyfte (as the i^star was to his pyllowbere) to play Jack
sophystre altogether. He puts me here a case, that all the Apostles had
wives, as he seyth nothing against them, but they might well all have Apostles.
had wives. Yet were they not married (says he) after they were called to
presthode, but before. Here is a sore reason, if ye mark it, and as myghtely
proved.

But where dwells that presthode, which they were called to? and when were
they called unto it? This will be learned ly answered, ad calendas Grecas, when
Answer.
mattockes are men. For they have no such presthode to show, by the scriptures
of the new testamente. The Apostles were no prestes, but preachers, no
masmo^gers, but ministers of the Lords communion. They made no new
sacrifyces, but put the people in a perfyght remembrance of one perfight
sacrifice ones made for all. They stood not at aulters, with their backs to
the multitude, but out of the pulpet they Apostles.
turned their faces unto them, and syncerly taught them the doctrine of the
Lord. The record which he takes of Ignatius epistle to y^ Philadelphianes, is
a most shameful lie, as he does handle it. As that Timotheus, Titus, Clemens,
and such other (Euodius is left out) had never wives, because they were made
prestes in virginite. Ignatius Ignatius.
speaks not one wurd there of a presthode, but after the rehearsal of their
names, this is his conclusion, qui in castitate de vita exierunt, which
departed this life in chastity. Where is than ye cause why they had no wives? O
beastly babbler and prodigiouse liar.

The clause which follows next, consoundeth his whole practyse in this matter,
and takes clearly away the abateme^t of his case. Non detraho autem ceteris
The text.
beatis, qui nuptiis copulati fuerunt, quorum nunc memini. I hyndre not herein
(says he) the other blessed me^ which were married and had wives, of whom I
now ^ade mention. These were the Apostles, elders, and deaco^s, alitle before
specified. Opto enim Deo dignus, ad vestigia eorum in regno ipsius inueniri,
sicut Abraham, Isaac, et Jacob, sicut Joseph et Esaias, et ceteri prophet,
sicut Petrus et Paulus, et reliqui Apostoli, qui nuptiis fueru^t sociati.
Married.
Qui non libidinis causa, sed posteritatis subrogande gratia, coninges
habuerunt. My despre is (says good Ignatius) that I also as the feruaunt of
God, may be found in his kingdom, worthily to follow their fotesteppes, as ded
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as ded Iosephe, Esaias, and the other prophets, and
as ded also Peter, Paul, and the residue of y^ Apostles, which were under yoke
of marryage. Which all had wives, not for fleshly pleasure, but for the
continuance of succession. Loo, here does Wives.
this holy martyr Ignatius, being yt bishop of Antioche, nombre himself
among them that had wives, as a married man, and reports the blessed
prophets and Apostles to be married men.

This might not be touched of this proctour of Sodom, and chaplayne of the
devil. Doctrine
For though it were a true christian doctrine, and grounded upon both the
testame^tes of God, yet was it not for his gostly purpose. Though holy
Jerusalem ded always allow it for her godly citiezens, yet could bawdy
Babylon, that cage of uncleaness, and synke of all synnefulnesse, for her
wicked shorlynges and sorcerouse souldyours, never abide it. The crafts are
not small, nor the conueia^nces few, that this Enemy.
enemy on every side seeks out, to drive his generation from it, and to make
them abhor it for the fylthy feats of Gomorra. Now rests he all upon this,
when nothing else will serve his crafty inggelinnes. That though the Apostles
had wives, and though the bishops and ministers after them had wives also, yet
married they not (says he) after they had received presthode. This is a
building without Presthode
a ground, and a very quarellynge of the temptyng serpent. Whereunto I answer,
that this is no good argument. They ded not marry, ergo they might not marri.
For why, marryage was than fret for all kinds of men, by S. Paul's doctrine.

Pro vitanda (inquit) scortatione, suam quisque vxorem habeat. Et qui se non
continent, Nubere.
nubant. Melius est autem nubere, quam vri. For avoiding fornicacio^ (says
he) let every man have his wife. And they that can not refrain, let the^
marry. For better it is to marry, than to burn. i. Corin. vii. This freedom
is general, no kind of men secluded. Oportet episcopu^ irreprehensibilem
esse, vnius vxoris maritum. A bishop must be vnrebukable, the husband of one
wife. i. Timo. iii. Honorabile est inter o^nes con^^giu^, ac torus immaculatus.
Wedlock is honorable among Wedlock.
all sorts of men, and the chamber undefiled, Hebre. xiii. The word of God
has sequestered noman from this lyberte, neither yet mannys ordinance, till
the year of our Lord a. M. lxxiiii. Wherein Gregory the. vii. otherwise called
pope hyldebrand, a fylthy sodometrouse monk of ^lunyake, made a wicked
constitucio^ in the general synod at Rome, that none should from thence A
Synod
fourth be admytted to presthode, unless he were sworue never after to marrye.
And thus entered that execrable poyso^ and most dampnable mischefe, by layser,
into all the christen nations, to make of our christianite a very Sodom.

This witless chaplain dwells not alone in this most folish opinion, but he
has more fellows. For the last time I was at Oxforde, it was told me of
diverse learned Oxforde.
men, that one doctor Cole warden of the new college there, should openly
speak it, that he never yet could read, that any man after presthode, married.
In this he shows a great ignorance, or else yt he has been vnwyllynge to
find it. For he that seeks shall easily find. I have by my final reading,
found of that matter, a great heap of examples, and of them that begat
children after their presthode, an innumerable Begetters
swarm, but yt is not wayed of these gnatstraynynge and spyder weauing
papists. Only is it marryage that troubles their whorysh orders, for that
makes y^ blind people, not to reckon them so holy as they have done.
Lambertus Shafuaburgensis, Examples
writes in his chronicle, that Burchardus the prouoste of Tryere in Germany,
was married to the prince of the Russianes sister, after his presthode, by
dyspensacyon of pope helhounde, Hildebrande I should say, anon after prestes
marriages were for bydden. Loo, se what money was able to do, when Gods laws
were ones put a back. Uolateranus in. iiii. libro Geographie, reports, yt
Nicolaus Iustinianus a Nicolaus.
monk, married Anne the daughter of Uitalis Duke of Uenys, after his
presthode, by dispensacio^ of Adrian the. iiii. An English man. The bishop
of Siracusa had also a wife, Huttenus says.

Gaguinus in libro. iii. de gestis francorum says, that one Daniel a pressed,
was constitute king of france, and married Constans.
by dyspensacion, like as one Constans a monk of Wynchestre ded here in
England among the Brytaynes, and Ethelnolphus among the English kings,
which had been bishop of Winchestre (Roger Houeden says) and had. iiii.
sons by his wife Osburga, which all were kings after him. Iacobus Mayer in
Chronicis fla^drie, shows, that Petrus Elsatius the bishop of Cameryck,
married Leonor the countess of Niuerne, by dispensacion. Robertus de monte
Michaelis in opere chronicorum, says, that Remelius a monk was made king of
Arogone, and married a wife called Mawde after his presthode by difpensacion.
Achilles Gossarus witnesses in his Epitome of Chronicles, that Coloma^nus
Achilles.
the bishop of Uaradyue was by dyspensacion made king of Hungary, of purpose
to have issue. Iacobus Guisianus testifies in annalibus Hannome, that
Bochardus Auene^sis, a great beneficed pressed, married Margarete Baldwynes
daughter, that emperor of Coustantinople. Polidorus polidorus
Uergilius, in libro. xx. Angliee history, tells that Johan the bastard
son of king Ferdinandus, being a Cistrane monk, married Philip Johan of
Gau^tes daughter, that was than duke of Lancastre, after his presthode, and was
made king of Portingale. Albertus Crantus in sua Dania, shows that Canutus a
monk of the order of Clunyake, had by dispensacion a wife for money, so had
the good abbot of Readyng here in England. Aldewyn An abbot
had a daughter, being bishop of Durham, whom Utred the Earl of
Northumberlande dysdayned not afterward to marry. Ex chro. Dunelme^sis monachi.

Hieronymus Squarzaphicus reports in vita Petrarch, that Franciscus
Petrarcha, a cannon of Padua and archedeacon of Parma, had one Laureta to wife,
by the Laureta.
grant of Benedict the. xii. Henricus Agrippa in his declamacion aduersus
Louanienses, makes mencio^ of a Cardinal, whom the bishop of Rome permitted
to take a wife in marryage, that he might have children to possess his
inherytaunce. Ioha^nes Bertandus in. iii. libro de cognatione S. Iohannis
Baptiste declares the Wives.
order for Cardynalles and bishops wives, by the rules of Pa^ormitanus, and
of Johannes Andreas, which was a prestes son. I can not think that Alwynus
the bishop of Wynchestre, had any dyspensacion, when he lay with Emma S.
Edwardes mother, because she ded penance. Let these examples suffyse till
more come. And as touching those which abhorred matrymony, and yetin their
presthode had store of children, besides these ix. adulterouse bishops and
abbotes, gregorius
that Gregorius Turonensis makes mention of in the. x. books of his stories,
and a great nombre more in other authors. Our English chronicles tells,
that an abbot of S. Albo^s begat pope Adriane yt fourth, Robert the abbot of
Winchestre begat bishop Herbert of Norwyche, and Robert Peche the bishopp of
Chestre and Lychefelde begat Rychard Peche archedeacon of Couentre, and
afterward bishop of the same dyocese. Because the no^bre Begetters
is unreasonably great of this sort of prestes begettyng children in their
presthode without marryage, therefore Iompt them for length, till such time as
the second and third part of my Englysh votaries come foreward, which will
be, god willing, out of hand.

Never saw I this chaplain yet allege his doctors without falsehede, craft,
and lies, as though the name of the doctoure A doctor
were able to authoryse a lie. Now brings he fourth S. Hierome against
Iouynian and reports him to say, that in the necessyte of the primative
church, married me^ being sober and learned, were exalted (come down I say)
to presthode. But prestes (he says) being called in virginite, never
descended down to marriage, neither any man after the second marryage,
Second.
was ever called to presthode. And all this he reports him to speak very
plainly. The saying of Hierome is this, in his first book against Iouinyan.
Eliguntur mariti in sacerdotium, non nego, quia no^ sunt tanti virgins, quanti
necessarij sunt sacerdotes. Number quid quia in exercitu fortissimus eligendus
est, idcirco non assume^tur et infirmiores, cum omnes fortes esse non possint?
Married men are chosen to Married.
presthode, I deny it not, for there are not so many maiden men, as need
requires prestes. Because that the stronger me^ are to be chosen into an
host, shall not the weaker therefore be taken, seeing all can not be of like
strength? And this is all pertainynge to that purpose.

Now confer the one with the other and see the beastlynesse of this bragger.
Here is no exalting or prankynge up aloft Prankyng
named, neither yet any second marryage condemned. I would that both he and
his Hierome should well know it, that the church was never stronger, better, nor
perfyghter, than wha^ it had sober, discret, and learned married men, for
mynysters. The primative church was in much less necessyte, having them,
than was the church in Hieromes time with her prestes Hierome.
in vyrgynyte. For that church knew never of so many superstycyons and
lecheryes. These lofty vyrgines were never like Mary, which threw her
vyrgynite to the ground. Luke. i. Christ wylled his dyscyples to be lowly, and
not high. Math. xi. to be servants, and no lords, to be ministers, and no
masters, Luke. xxii. Be not as lords in the congregation (says S. Peter) but
show an example of lowlynes and meekness to Mekenes
the flock. i. Pet. v. This hawty speaking of your Hierom and you, sauereth of
that Antichrist, which exalts him self above all that is called God ii.
Thessa. ii. As for your presthode, ye may both wype your tails therwyth, for
any good ground it has of the scryptures. Here is it praised for so holy and
high a degree, as may not come down and be dystayned with marryage, as though
marryage were but a vile iakes in comparyson thereof. Yet as A Iakes.
touching the second and third marryage, the said Hierome says in yt same
book. Duotiescunque vxor moritur, toties duce^da est alia, ne fornicemur. Dui
secundas tertiasque nuptias co^cessit in domino, primas cum ethnico prohibet.

As often as one wife dies, so often may an other be married, that we fall not
to lechery. For he that grants the second Marriage
and third marryages in the Lord, forbyddeth the first with an unfaithful
man, for it is without the Lord. Also in his Apology to Panmachius, against
the said Iouinian. Aperiant queso, aures obtrectatores mei, vt videant me
secundas et tertias unptias concessisse in domino. Qui secundas et tertias no^
damnaui, primu^ potui damnare matrimonium? Concedit Apostolus secundas nuptias,
sed volentibus, et Second
his que se continere non possunt. I desire that my deprauers may open their
ears wide, and that they may well perceive me to grant the second and third
marriages in the Lord. Could I than, which have admytted the second and
third, condemn the first marryage? The Apostle freely grants the^ to those
that will, and that can not otherwise refrain. In an other place also.
Erubescat calu^niator meus, Can not.
dice^s me prima damnare matrimonia, qua^do legit. Non damno digamos, immo nec
trigamos, ei si dici potest, octogamos. Habeat cui libet, octa^^m maritum, et
esse desinat prostituta. Let him which wrongfully accuses me be ashamed, in
reporting me to condemn the first marryages. I The first.
condemn not them that has been twyse married, neither yet the^ which has
been thrice married, nor if it might be said, y^ has been. viii. times married.
Let her that likes it, have the viii. husband hardely, and not make her self
commen to every man.

Now will I say my mind and conscience, concerning this Hierome. I have
Hierome.
ouerloked his. ii. books and answer against this Iouinian, a monk. For his
sore travail in translatyng y^ scriptures, I judge him worthy much praise.
But as concerning his doctrine for marriage, of christian men he is rather to
be abhorred tha^ lyked. With so spyghtfull rebukes he taunteth marryage, as
though it were a life fyt for no christen man. Never red I Tacianyte,
Encratyte, Phrygiane, Maniche, Mercianyst, Heretykes
Montanyst, nor any other heretyke, that ever was more malycyouse against it.
He calls marryage a flesh rebellinge against the sprete, the sea that Pharao
was drowned in, the cloak that Joseph left behind him, an uncleanness, an
excess, a filthynesse, a whoredom, an evil, an ydoll, a blasphemy, an Egypt,
a servitude, a syn, a darkness, a wound incurable, barley, Blasphemy.
stubble, claye, a coinquynacion, a defeccyon from Christ, and an utter
perdycyon. He compares also a married wife, to an unclean beast in the ark of Noah, to a pot so^e broken, to a draffe sack, bringing in at the last, the
obprobryouse tauntes Women.
and raylynge reproaches of the Paganes against women. The kind of women ought
rather to have had praise, being the high wurke of God, and marryage his due
commendacion, being the dyuine ordinance, than so abhomynably to have been
rayled on. But what can not the devil do, when he finds an apt instrument.

He shows here, what he was able to do by his rhetoryck, as some vain
gloryouse bablers have done in our time with Gardener
their sophistry of the devil, whose pride God has well abated, blessed be
his holy name for it. Now will I show some of his detorted scryptures, that
men may se how shamefully he has wrasted the^ from their right meaning.
Gene. iii. In the sweat of his face, shall the married man eat his bread. As
though the unmarried shaulde not do the same. Luke. xvi. No The same*
servant can serve two masters. As though Matrymony were a service of
Mammon and not of God. i. Cor. vii. Ye are dearly boughte, become not the
servants of me^. As though marryage were an unchristian servitude. Roma. viii.
If ye live after the flesh, ye must dye. As though marriage were so fleshly a
life, as deserved Reward.
no less than death, Math. xix. The gelded shall receive the reward of the
kingdom of heaven. As though christen marryage had therein no manner of porcio^.
Who could more peruersly haut interpreted these scrip tures, than this Hierome?
which is one of the great ydolles of the Romysh Synagoge, and a deep maintener
of their fylthy sodometry. This kingdom of heaven in An office.
this lattre place, is no reward, but an office of preaching the Euangelycall
doctrine, whose reward is here persecucion, and in heaven a crown of
immortalyte. ^e ware of these doctors.

With. ii. things is this chaplayne much offended, concerning S. Paul's
authoryte. i. Cor. ix. One is, the right understanding Offenses.
which by Gods merciful gift, we have therein An other is, the Englysh
translacion of the Bible. With these is he greatly accombred. That authoryte
(he says) after his feeble understanding, pertains to an other purpose. What
pur pose, can ye tell? Nay, that secret he keeps to himself. It is some
purpose that he would not have known, or else that he is ashamed of. Why
should it not else be uttered? For although the Englysh Bible Bible.
(he says) be translated according to my understanding of that place.

He calls the truth, my understanding. No sir, it was the latyne Bible, that
was translated into Englysh, and not the Englysh Bible translated, unless it
were into Welche or Iryshe, which I would wyshe with all my heart, if any good
men would No pain.
take such labors. Much fault ye find, with that ye never took pains in,
neither can ye any skyll of it, as apereth by your good Englysh, that is to
say, with the Bybles translacio^. In deed that godly wurke is much sooner
found fault with, than amended.

It might well be said to you, that Apelles said to y^ braggyng sowter, for
passing your lymytes so far, but I let it pass. Yet is it not in latyne
(ye say) ducere Latyne.
sororem vxorem, but circumducere sorore^ mulierem. I would ye should not
latyne my English, unless ye ded it more workemanly. For I never heard yet,
that ducere was to have, but to lead or to marry, as it is here taken. Though
your Hierome, Erasmus, and Stunica the Spanyarde, has sororem mulierem, or
sororem muliercula^. Yet has Laurentius ^alla, Faber Interpreters.
Stapule^sis, Zuinglius, Pelican, Pomeran, Luther, Erasmus annotacions, Biblia
Tigurina, and other, which are more faithful, indyfferent, and pure
interpretours, mulierem vxorem, Ignatius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, and
Isidorus, confyrmynge the same. For S. Paul commenly uses this Greek word
Gy^aica, for a wife, in his epystles. This testyfyeth your Hierome also, in his
before alleged Hierome.
first book against Iouinyane, in declaryng the said Greek wurde, though he
were a most spyghtfull adversary to marryage. ^ndoubtedly S. Paul, speaks
here of his wife, whom he by their mutual agreement, left behind him to the
service of the Gospel, least she should in his so large a progress, through
out al Grecia and Asia, from Jerusalem to Illirium, been partaker with him of
all his daungerouse Labors.
labors, parels, hungre, thyrste, needs, strypes, stonynges, cheanes,
imprisonme^tes, shypwrackes, and a great sort more, not possible to have been
suffered of a tender and weak woman.

In that he wylled all men to be as he was (if it be objected) he wyshed them
so As he was
fre a conscience without fleshly affeccio^s, as chanced to him by the gift of
God, tamed, not by vows, but by co^tynuall affliccions and labors for the
Gospel. Circumducere muliere^ sorore^ (you say) is to suffer rich women to go
about with them in their progress of preaching, to bear their charges. Truly
this is a prodigiouse kind of interpretynge or declarynge the scriptures. Where
find you, that circumducere is to suffer? Either yet where have declaring.
ye read, that soror mulier does sygnyfye rich women, yea plurally? It is no
maruayle though ye find fault with y^ Bybles translacion, being so fond, I
should say, so fine an interpretour. That vain co^ iecture have ye borrowed of
your holy doctor Hierome, which in his foreseid book against Iouinyan, says
that the Apostle Hierome.
seems to speak of those women, which after the Jews manner, aided the
preachers with their substance, They might aid the preachers (I grant ye)
and yet not go about with them. For if they were wives, and had how sholdes,
their office was to have seane to their famylyes at home, and not to gadde
about. Riches also Women.
might sone have been changed to pouerte and penury, without daily occupyeng,
and by traualynge so far. Where was also for y^ time, their husbands
obedience?

If they were wydowes, yet was the sight uncomely and the example ungodly,
Gadding.
specially among the Gentyles, to gadde after men in so long a iournaye, as
is Corinthe from Jerusalem. Again, it was vnco^uenient to use the Iewyshe
customs in the forennacyons, which abhorred them. If ye seek to maintain your
purpose, by the Sunamyte which refreshed Eliseus the Prophet. iiii. Regum.
iiii. ^yther yet by the good women which followed Christ, and mynystred to him
of their substance. Luke. viii. as your Hierome does. I answer both you and
your Answer.
Hierome, that it is nothing to the purpose of that place. For the Sunamyte
went not out of her house, neither Christ beyond the lymites of Iewry, as the
Apostles ded. Moreover y^ Apostles had wy^es of their own, so had neither
Eliseus nor Christ. Your Hierome says only, it apereth or seems to be the
Apostles meaning, as one not all sure of the matter. You as bold as blind
Baiarde, say, that it was his meaning Bayarde.
in deed. I am sorry that Erasmus of Reterodame, so depends upon so vain a
fable, in his learned paraphrase upon S. Paul's epistles, and has so well
declared the other opinion in his annotacio^s. But that in following me^ (as he
ded this Hierom) we must needs err. Ye say, that Peter and the other Apostles
suffered rich Apostles.
women to go about with them to pay their charges. I say, that example had
been to uncomely, as to have led other me^^ys wy^es about with them, and to
have left their own at home.

But I ask ye this question by yt way. What shift they made wha^ all was
spent? I know their progress was great, as ye Progress
were wont to versycle it on their days. In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum.
And I think their substa^ces were neither eternal nor yet omnypotent. How
will ye answer this problem than? Ye say, it is evident by the place it
self, which speaks of taking his living for his preaching. No by saint
Mary sir, that place does rychely confound your folyshnesse therein. It were no
reason, that S. Paul preaching at Corinth or Philippos should have No reason
his charges paid by women of Jerusalem. But I think, it was most
convenient, that they should pay his costs, to whom he preached yt Gospel. I
know this was his meaning when he said. Have we not power to eat and to
drink. i. Cor. ix. Tha^ was it surely for some other purpose, that Purposse.
they led women about with the^, and none other than their own wives, as is
said before. Though you like an ass head, have written it, that there is not
one wurde of a wife, in that place of S. Paul. And as for your doctors, for
the more part, so far as I se in them, they are like your self, as the adage
goes, such cup such cover, I little ca^e for your doctors, so long as
Adage.
I have Ignatius that holy m^rtyr which was in the Apostles time, Clemens
Aler^ndrinus which followed immediately after. Eusebius Cesariensis, and
Isidorus hispalensis, to fryndes in this matter.

Censura.
The vow of popysh chastity, is a Popysh
profession to filthynesse unspeakable, in the blasphemouse obedience of
Antichrist and the devil.

Obiectio.
The vow of godly chastity, is a profession of godly living in the obedience
of Christ, a way toward the perfection of the Gospel, falsehede.
and a perfight ymitacio^ of Christ, and the Angelycall life, vbi nec nubent
nec nubentur. sed sunt sicut Angeli Dei, Mat. xx^i Your saing lacks proof,
and my saying is proved by S. Augustyne. De fide ad Petrum, ca. iii. Ceterum,
quisquis seipsu^ castrauerit propter regnum celoru^, et in cord suo
continentiam deo vouerit, non solum si mort^ifero fornicationis crimine
maculetur, verumetiam si aut vir vxorem accipere, aut mulier nubere voluerit,
secundum Apostoli sententiam, damnatione^ habebit, quia prima^ fidem irritam
fecit. Sicut Nubere.
ergo secundu^ Apostoli sentenciam, dignu^ est vt vxori vir debitu^ reddat,
similiter vxo ^ viro, quia si q^is acceperit vxore^, no^ peccat, et si nupserit
virgo, no^ peccat: ita secu^dum eiusde^ ^postoli dictu^, qui statuit in cord
suo fi^mus, no^ habens necessitate^, potestate^ au^t habens sue volu^tatis, et
vouerit co^tinentia^ deo, debet vsque in finem tota me^tis solicitudine
^nstodire, ne da^natione^ habeat, si prima^ fide^ irritam fecerit. Similiter et
coniugati viri, t^ Custodire
to^iugate mulieres. si ex co^sensu pere^nem deo vouerint continenciam,
nouerint se sui vot^ obnoxios detineri, nec iam sibi debere commi^tionem
carnis, qua^ primitus licita^ habueru^t, sed deo se debere co^tine^tia^ qua^
voueru^t.

Responsio.
If I should reason the matter with you, and ask ye this question, why chastyte
is godly? I think, ye would make me answer, Answer.
because it is of God. For it is not in synnefull ma^s power to make things
Godly, but in Gods power alone. Like wise if I should demand, why chastity is
good? I would look again to have y^ same answer, because it is of God, for so
much as Christ has so earnestly spoken it in the Gospel, Luke xviii. Memo
bonus, nisi solus Deus. None is good, save only God. Upon this I conclude, yt
chastyte is both Godly and good. And as much may be said of vyrgynyte and Godly.
marryage, because they are both of God, y^ one being his gift, and the other
his godly institucion. But as for your vows and massyng presthode, they are
neither good nor yet godly, but wicked and blasphemouse, as their innumerable
fruits have declared They are neither works nor offices of yt gospel to yt
glory of god, but wicked ways of synnefull men's inuencio^, for covetousness and
vainglory of yt world, to apere more holy tha^ yt co^me^ sort. Pope Helhou^de
was Hypocrisy
the first after Satha^s coming fourth, yt fashioned out his prestes and his
monks by the^, and that made the^ indispe^sable, unless it were for great
su^mes of money, as yt chronicles of all y^ christen nations declares.

Ye may call them manly or womanly, because they are of you which has vowed
them or made them, for you in so doing are their only creatours and makers,
Makers.
as the pressed is of his holy water, wha^ his blessyng is a curse, Mala. ii. But
godly ye can not call them, because ye are no Gods. I say therefore, that your
newly forged diffynycion here, is abhomynable, prepos^erouse, blasphemouse, and
wicked. When ye call your vow, which is your own wurk, a vow of godly
chastity, ye take to much upon you. For in so doing, ye make your self both
equal with God and sumwhat Above god
above him, in that ye will be seane an authoure of his heavenly gift, which
is a most dauylishe presumpcion. Ye say moreover, that this monstruouse myngle
mangle of Gods wurke and of yours, is a profession of godly living. Ye arrogate
much to yourselfe, if ye promise to pay that God has in his hand, and you no
just title of claim to it. Your vow is a professyon (I say not nay) but
that godly living is a fruit thereof, ye are not able to prove, unless ye set
God for nothing. In Christ's obedyence is it not. For he obeys Not able.
not Christ, that voweth in presthode and monkery, but he obeyth pope Helhounde
and his successors, Ye say, it is a way to the perfeccion of the Gospel. O
blasphemouse Antichrist, herin have thou show ^^ thy full imperfeccion.

Can mennis ydell inuencious add any perfeccion to the Gospel? How feeble
make thu Christ here? and how vnperfyght Gospel.
make his Gospel? that would have vncomman^ded vows, which have brought
fourth innumerable sodomytes, to add perfeccion to the Gospel? The Gospel is
little beholden, either to the or yet to thy maynteners. God ones amend you, or
^^s take ye from this life. Ye say, it is a perfight ymitacio^ of Christ. what
a shameless lie is this, and what a bold brag to bolster out fylthynesse?
It is no ymitacio^ of Christ, for he never made vow, neither proponed he any
doctrine of vows No vow.
making, much less than any perfyght ymytacion of Christ. Rather is it a
defeccion from Christ, and the same that Paul speaks of. ii. These. ii. for
none were ever so obstynate against his doctrine, as they which professed those
vows. Ye conclude, that your vow is the Angelycall life, in places where they
nether marry, nor be given in marryage, but are as Angels of God. The head
place where your great vowers in Cardynall hattes, myters, hald Roms.
crowns, and cowles of all kinds, marry not, is the mighty mo^strouse
Sinagoge o^ Rome. The meaner places are your minsters, monasteryes, coue^tes,
colleges, and personages of other nations, where as also ye may not, for your
vows sake, be given fourth in marryage.

If ye say, that these lead an Angels life Examples
by their vows, we are able to condemn your saynges by the daily examples of
their buggeryes and other beastly occupienges which we know, besides that we
have of the scriptures, Roma. i. et. Apo. xi. which can not lie. The place ye
bring in here, Neque nubent. Mat. xxii. ye clearly wrast from all true and
godly meaning. For it is not spoken of the^ which dwell here in this mortal
and corruptible life, though your Hierome so unaptly uses it, but of the^ yt
shall apere with immortalyte in yt lattre resurreccion, Resurreccion.
In yt resurrection shall they neither marry, nor be given in marriage, as here
upon earth but they shall be in heaven as the Angels of God, where no such
offices of marriage or maydenhede shall be required. If ye will needs have your
vowers here like Angels, they shall be like that Angel of darkness, which in
all deceyt possible, seek who^ he may devour. i. Pet. v. or else like those.
iiii. cruel Angels of Gods permissyo^, which Angels.
stops y^. iiii. wyndes or preachinges of his eternal testament, Apo. vii.
My saying (ye say) lacks proof. What saying is that? I pray ye repete it.
Marry that the vow of popysh chastyte, is a profession to filthiness
unspeakable, in the obedience of Antichrist and the de^yll.

Why master chaplayne, is this the vow that ye have here maynteyned? Is it A
vow.
this yt ye call, a vow of Godly chastyte, a professyon of good life, an
obedyence of Christ, a perfeccio^ of yt Gospel, an ymitacion of Christ, and an
Angelycall state out of marryage? I heard never a more traitor make
vtterau^ce. You that make so much of this vow of a popish chastyte, ye make
sumwhat where ye dare, for yt vow of popish obedience, which is yt greatter of
both. If my sayenges lack proof (as I think they do not) in this Apology.
They shall Lack none
lack no proof in the. ii. lattre parts of my votaries, which are coming
forward, as spedyly as may be. Your saing (ye say) yt a popish vow is no
ungodly professyon to Antichrist in yt deuyls obedience, is proved by S.
Augustyne, in the third chapter of his book de fide ad Petru^ diaconu^. But ye
had need first of all to prove that book S. Erasmus.
Augustynes. For Erasmus has already denied it, for the coursenesse of the
phrase and vnpurenesse of the doctrine, and also for that he makes thereof no
mencyon ^^ his wurthye work of retractacyons, with diverse other cawses.

The long laryne allegacion of this unknown doctor, is thus to be Englyshed.
Furthermore (says he) who so ever has Gelded,
gelded himself for the kingdom of heaven, and has vowed chastyte in his
heart, not only if he be spotted with the deadly crime of for^ycacion, but also
if either the man attempt to take a wife, or the woman a husband, after the
Apostles opinion he shall have dampnacion, because he has broken his first
faith. As it is therefore the ma^nis dewty, after the Apostles meaning, to give
unto his wife due benevolence, and ^e^i^o^^ce
like wise the wife to the man, for he that takes a wife, synneth not, neither
yet sins ye maid which marries an husband, so like wise after the saying
of the same Apostle, he that has surely fyxed in his heart, having no need,
but having power over his own will, and has so vowed chaltyte to God, he
ought with all en devour of mind, to the end of his life to keep it, least he
have dampnacion, if he break his first faith. Prima fides.


Like wise the married men and the married women, if tehy by their both
co^sfntes do vow unto God a perpetual chastyte, be they sure, they are bound
to fulfill that vow, and not from theus fourth to have any carnal copulaciou,
which was lawful unto the^ before, but to keep that chastity to God which they
vowed.

Notwythstandynge that all this matter has been answered before, yet find I
sumwhat herein to be spoken. None authoryte can S. Augustynes name add to this
Autorytr.
doctrine, because he is not the author of that book. The author of it, is
such a one as S. Paul speaks of, Roma. i. which withholding the truth of God
in unrighteousness, has turned his veryte into a lie. Many wicked errors do
I find in this doctrine. One is, where as he calls Errors.
geldynge or making chaste for the kingdom of heaven, a voweynge of the single
life, which Christ never meant. Math. xix. For Christ spoke it of them which
sought the soul health of his people, by the grace of the Gospel, and not of
them which pryuately thought to win heaven to themselves alone by their
folysh vows. These sequestered themselves from al carnal and worldly
affeccions, not by vows, but by the mere gift of God. Not to win heaven By
gift.
to the^ selves, but to call other unto it by preaching the doctrine of
salvation. For heaven is not gotten by vows, but by fearing, beleuynge, and
faithful following of the Gospel.

An other error, that vows ought so to separate man and wife, as they may
never mete again. This usurpation is not vsurpacio^
tolerable, that mannys ydell inuencion, should put Gods work aside, either
yet his wauerynge will wurke, should make Gods set ordinance of none effect.
Christ has earnestly forbidden it, Mat. xix. that any man should put a
sondre, that God has ones coupled, either yet that any man should put away
his wife, except it were for aduoutrye. What manner of new tradicion, Tradycio^
will this namelesse doctor make than? If man be naught of nature of what
value is the wurke of his synnefull will? Shall it be able to overthrow Gods
buildinge?

Is mannys workemanshyppe above man, either yet above God? Where is tha^ their
former profession become, that the one shall not depart from the other, till
death separate them? Oh, these are ye wicked deuyses of Antichrist. If it be
objected, Objected.
that they may withdraw themselves, the one from the other by consent. i.
Cor. vii. I grant it, but that is only for time of prayer and fasting, and
not for any vow private. For S. Paul wylleth them to come again together,
least Satan tempte the^ for their incontinence.

An other error. He cloggeth him with dampnacion, which beholding his own
presumpcyon, forsakes it, and submytteth Submyt.
himself to the high wisdom and ordinance of God, not understanding what
prima fides is, nor yet what is damnatio there. If it had been prior fides,
altera fides, or secunda fides, a former faith, an other faith, or a second
faith, it might sumwhat have served this doctoure for his vow.

But being prima fides, the first faith, having none other faith before it,
it must Faith.
needs be the christen faith, or professyon in baptysme, and so dysapoynte him
at his most need. Damnatio is not always taken for a fynall destruccyon, but
sumtyme for a scathe, an infamy, a reproach, a blotte, a blame, an harm, an
hurt, a damage, a wrong, and such like. For Erasmus says: Damnatus
dicitur, qui damno afficitur. He is called damnatus, that is endamaged or hurt
any ways. If Da^nacio^.
it be there a dampnacyon in deed, it is for a full renouncing of the christen
faith or mockyng of the Gospel, and not for breaking of an ydell vow which
God never commanded in that kind. But all this is declared before.

Obiectio.
Tu^e enim vnusquisqne regnum celor^* quod sanctis promittitur, possidebit, si
obliu^scens que retro sunt, et in anteriora extendens seipsum, secundum quod in
psalmis dicitur, Impostor.
voucte, et reddite Domino Deo vestro* quod seit esse licitum, et ad prof^ctum
melioris vite pertinere cognoscit, et ^ibenter voue^ at, et celeriter reddat,
et in hoc quod votum reddit, meliore semper conatu proficiat. Omni enim voue^ti
Deo et reddenti quod vouit, ipse quoque deus reddet ^el^stis regni premi^ que
promisit. And also cap. xlii. Firm^ssime tene, et nullatenus dubites, nu^c^as
quoqut diuinitus institut^s ^t benedictss, et melius quidem si quisquam sine
coniugio sit, vt libetius Nuptie.
atque before cogitet que sunt dei, quomodo placeat deo, tamen illis qui
continentia^ non voueruut, nullum esse peccatu^, si vel mulier nubat, vel vir
vxorem ducat. Nec solas primas nuptias a Deo institutas. sed etiam secu^das et
tertias, pro eorum qui se continere non possunt infirmitate con^cssas. Eis ver^
Continere
qui sieve coniugati, sieve a coniugio liberi, continentiam deo vouerunt, admodum
esse damnabile, si vel illi co^iugale opus volu^rint appetere, quo se non
accessuros, vel illi repetere, a quo se recessuros, illi libera, illi commun^
professi sunt voluntate.

Responsio.
Because the lyenge sprete of this counterfeit Augustyne, is fytte to be known,
I have Englyshed his latin text here. Tha^ Possess.
shall each man (says he) possess the kingdom of heaven, which is promised
to the saints, if he forgertynge that is past, and applyenge himself so that
is before him, according to that is said in the psalms: prompse, and perform
it to your Lord God, which he understands to be lawful, and knows to
pertayne to the profit of a better life, let him both gladly Yeldynge
vow, and swy^^ly render it, and that in yeldynge his vow, he may
prosperousiy go forward. For to every one that perfourmeth his promise, God
will also give y^ heavenly reward, which he has promised. The seid doctor
also says, in his. xlii. chapter. Take this assuredly, and in no wise doubt of
it, that marriage was both ordained of God, and had his blessing. Yet might a
man do better, if he were without it, for so might he more freely and largely
Frankely
think upon Gods matters, how he should please God. Yet is there no sin to
them imputed, which has not vowed chastyte, if either the woman marry, or the
man take a wife. Neither were the first marriages alone instituted of God, but
as well the second and the third, and also granted for the weakness of them
that could not refrain. But to other which has vowed chastyte, whether they
were married or Uowed.
unmarried, it is very dampnable, if they either desire the coniug all wurke,
or go to it again, which they have ones forsaken, y^ one by a fre and the
other by a co^me^ co^se^^.

Many filthy errors are in this doctrine contained, which proves it to be
Church.
none of S. Augustynes. As the church be ga^ne to gather corrupcion, certain
false Apostles there were and masters of superstycyon, which to plant
hypocrisy, a very wicked sede of the old serpente, put fourth many noughtye
works, under the name of S. Augustyne and diverse other good doctors, that
they might the more strongely take place. And this lewd book was one of them,
which having the preciouse title of faith, is full of all wicked errors, and
infidelite. Mark in this lattre Of faith.
allegacion, how blasphemouse and ma ny they are. The author calls the^
saints, which has superstyciously vowed, and promyseth the possessyon of the
kyngedom of heaven, to the man that leaves his wife, and the woman that
leaves her husband, by their commen consent (as ded the Priscyllyanystes) for
that deuyly she yoke. As though heaven might be gote^ by our volu^tary works,
and as though they Heaven.
were a perfec^io^ far above the Gospel. He hyghly commends the spurnynge
aside and utter contempt of matrymony, for the apprehensyo^ of that ydell kind
of life in the monasteryes or de^nes of belly ease.

S. Augustyne upon the. lxxv. Psalm, uses vouete et reddite, after a far
other Author.
sort, as is before declared. And though this blind author seems at a blushe,
to bring the same kind of doctrine that he brings, as how the vower should
vow that thing, that he knows to be lawful and to pertayne to the better
life. Yet varyeth he from S. Augustyne in this point, for he would have it of
things possible and in our power, and only taken for ma^nys tradycion.
Hipocrisy
This monkysh hipocryte boasts it, for a work deserving heaven, being no
wurke of Christ, but of ma^nis ydell head. S. Augustyne does not so. He
wickedly affirms, that Christ has promised heaven to vows making, and that
he will give it to the^ that keep vows, which is a false and blasphemouse
opynion. He grants that marriage was both ordained and blessed of God. Yet
prefers he monkery, an inuencion of man, far above it, as though Monkery
man in his practices, were wyser tha^ God. To confyrme his folly, he wringeth
in the wurdes of S. Paul, that the syngle man cares for the things of the
Lord.

As though that care, which is a fruit of faith in fredome of the sprete, and
an office of the Gospel, had proceeded of vows which are Antichrists yokes in
^owes.
fleshly bondage. He conse^teth, that it is no sin to marry, no, the second
and third time, if need so requires it. And in that he is much better, than
our heretic chaplain here, which in diverse places of his mangy obieccions,
condempneth with y^ Tartulianystes, Cataphrygeanes, and Catharistes, y^ second
and third marryages. This author admits those marriages for infyrmytees
Author.
sake, and for none other respect in the scriptures. In the end he condempneth
without respect, all them which breaks that yoke of Antichrist, if they be
unmarried, either yet that throws aside that s^are of the devil, and
returns again to their marriage, if they were married before. I could have
brought in, out of the third chapter, which this chaplain Married
here first alleged de fide ad Petrum, to confound this naughty doctrine of the
same book, as that all is good which is sanctyfyed of Gods mouth, that
marryage is Gods wurke, blessed, good, honorable, unspotted, clean, no sin,
an honest remedy, a chastyte, a mutual faith, at liberte, unspotted
always lawful, fyt for Gods servants, and other like, which I omytte for
prolyxite.

Censura.
The obedience of such monstrous vowers and their vpholders, is not to
vp^^lder^
be trusted of christen princes and their faithful subjects, which have be^e
so often times betrayed by them.

Obiectio.
They be no monstrouse vowers, but faithful vowers, if they keep their vows,
and better to be trusted of princes, following Christ's exhortacio^ thereunto,
tha^ they which break their vows and be unfaithful in their promyses. It is
not lykely, ye he will be faithful Break.
to man, who can but kill the body, that will not be faithful in keeping
promise with God, that has power to send both body and soul to hell.

Responsio.
Before ded I speak of such vowers, as in the obedyence of Antichrist and the
devil, professed such a chastyte, as ought rather to be called a fylthy
Sodom, than a Sodom.
chastyte. These (I said) were monstrous vowers, for so much as both their
vows and their chastyte, were so preposterous and prodygyously monstruouse,
their execrable fruits and examples declaryng no less. Now come you after, and
ye boldly say, that these were no monstruouse vowers. Ye go further in the
matter, and report the^ to be the very faithful vowers, if they keep their
vows, yea, those obedye^t vowers of Antichrist and ye devil. For there ^owers.
were none other vowers spoken of. Of a lykelyhode ye have not yet vowed to
your king, to be his obedyent true subject. And if ye have, yet are ye but a
mo^struouse vower. For ye seem not faithfully to keep your vow, that mayntaine
such kind of vowers. Ye can not justly say, y^ ye mean any other, than these
fylthy vowers. But that they are the very same, that ye so earnestly defend,
even the bishop of Romes rank cattle. For ye have not as yet, ones Defend.
blamed their evils, though they have been laid before your nose. But manfully
have ye defended them for necessary virtues, like a valiant captain of
theyrs, and a stought been factour of Sodom.

If the foul beast, with the. vii. heads and. x. horns, which bare the great
whore arrayed all in purple and rose color, Apoca. xvii. may be proved an
odyouse mostre, I have no doubt of it, but I shall Monstre.
be able to find out a fylthy rabble of monstruouse vowers. For like as the
faithful congregation of God, are the mystycall members of his son Jesus
Christ, so this dysguised rabble of rauenours, are the mystical members of that
monstruouse beast, by virtue of their vows geuynge up themselves to his
ydolatrouse obseruacyons, and upholding y^ filthy whore his Sinagoge of Sinagoge
^orceries, in all blasyhemy, supersticio^, and pride. These are sealed (I
say) by virtue of their vows and professio^s. They have the mark of this
beast in their right hands and foreheades, they are full of ^lasphemouse
names, they can open their mouths against god, they can speak blasphemies,
they have power of y^ great serpent, they may bye and sell by his authoryte,
Apo. xiii. they can wurke such wonders and do such Miracles
miracles, as God can not do again. For they can make false Gods, and give
to them latryall honor. They can also set them up aloft, salute them with
lies, perfume them with sensynges, and cause a great no^bre of people to
worship the^ upon ye earth. Soche mo^struouse doers are they.

If these be no mo^struouse vowers, that are y^ members of this odyouse monster
by their pilde popish vows, and ca^ do so many Feats.
prodigiouse feats by their prestish professio^s, tha^ are they nothing at
all. They are no vowers after ye right shape of vowing, as were y^ Iewysh
vowers in y^ old testament, offering calves and bullockes. Neither are they
vowers after y^ Gospel. For vows are no wurkes of y^ gospel, but of an ydell
presthode and mo^kery, which y^ Gospel never knew. They ca^ not therefore be
called works Eua^gelical, but works papistical sacerdotical, monastical, and
fa^tasticall. The Office.
office of a man or woman professinge Christ, is to do all things in fredome
and not ^^ bondage of vows, consydering he is freely regenerate, and has a fre
woman to his mother. Gal. iiii. They are therefore unfaith full vowers that
profess those vows, and much more unfaithful that keep them. Ye say, those
vowers are, above all other, of princes to be trusted. But ye do not tell us
here, what prynces*ye mean* Bishops with ye help of abbottes and other
ghostly Abbottes.
fathers, were wont to be princes of this world, under the great Mahounde of
Rome, when they had the consciences of kings under their subieccio^. Though
these prycke eared princes might trust those vowers, as hawks made to their
hands, yet would I counsel the christen princes in no wise to trust them.

For as we find in the English chronycles, they have in confessions, made
kings wives and daughters, to make vows ^awdries
of vnchastyte unto them. And for full perfourmau^ce of ye same, they have sent
their folysh husbands by vow, on pilgrimage to Rome. Look the lives of kyuge
Inas, Ladwallader, Kenredus, Ethelwulfus, Offa, Ethelredus, and diverse other,
besides them that were poisoned, deposed, and made monks, to give place to
they^ unknown bastardes. Who can rec^en them fyt to be trusted of christen
princes, which have for their carnal commodities, so often changed the great
monarchy of the Carnal.
Romyshe emppre, from the Romans to the Greeks, from the Greeks to the fre^th
men, from the french me^ to the Germans, and now would they translate it from
the Germans to y^ Spannyerdes. They have Pleasures
in a manner, made all the christen princes their captive slaves* til now of
late years. They have at their pleasures, disposed diverse of their king
domes, yea, they have enforced them to anthoryse their lies, to fauer their
hypocrisyes, to uphold their ^ira^nies, to support their sorceryes, to main
teine their ydolatryes, to magt^^^ye their whordomes, and to worship they
^^wdries.

Not one king has been in England sens the conquest, but they have twygged
him one way or other, and had their false flynges at him, I could show it by
course. Flyng^^.
It were great pity therefore, but these vowers were trusted of christen
princes, they have been so faithful, specially in keeping the vows of their
Romysh fathers obedience. What caused them of late years to stnrre up
commocio^s in the North, and now the last year in Deuenshire and Lor^wale, for
their Romysh remnauntes, but the relygyous fulfyllynge of their vows to holy
church the mother of their old ma^metryes? Before God, I judge you, to be one
of that lewd assembly, either by Mother.
your act or council, by this your five workema^ship for their defense. Ye
would never else so earnestli have called the^ faithful vowers, in keeping
their vows so well to your mind. But truly ye have done Christ much wrong,
to call him an exhorter thereunto. For he never exhorted a ny man to such vows,
neither yet to any other Gospel.
kind of vows. For his gospel is no doctrine of vows, but of faith. These
prodigiouse vowers, ar y^ locustes y^ came out of the bottomless pyt, to stinge
men's cenfeie^ces as does scorpio^s. Apo. ix. And they for fulfiling their nowes
in y^ service of y^ rose colored whore, shall go into perdycyon. Apoc. xvii.


If ye conde^pne all them for unfaithful me^ in their promises, y^ have broken
vows made to y^ ydolouse mo^ster of Rome. Tha^ must ye conde^pne all those
kings of this Conde^pne
realm which followed after king Ioha^, and so continued till the. xxvi. year
of king Henry the. viii. because they fulfilled not that profession, which he
made for himself and his successors. The vow y^ he made by their co^pulsio^,
is this word by word, as I find it regestred in co^pendio noui chronici de
gestis regu^ Anglicorum collected by a monk of Cantirbury, Ego Ioa^nes rex
Anglie, Wallie, et Hiberme, in Uotum Regis.
to fidelitate^ Deo et sancte ecclesie Roman, ac domino Innocentio tertio
pape, ad manus Nicolai Cardinalis ei^sdem pape penite^tiarn, ad tenendum regnu^
Anglie de eo sine detractatione aliqua imperpetu^, redde^d o domino pape
Innocentio tertio a^n^ati^i nulle marcas argenti, et suis successoribus
canonice intrantibus. I Johan King Johan.
king of England, Wales, and Ireland, promise by oath to be faithful to God,
and to my lord pope Innocent the third, at the hands of Nicolas a Cardinal
and penitencer of the said pope, to hold the kingdom of England of him and his
successors for evermore, without any contradyccio^, ^^ienge to them a thousand
marks by year. Uowes.
And the bishops and Barons of England, co^straiued him for his own part to
fulfill this ungodly profession. After this sort were all y^ monks vows, the
friars professio^s, and y^ prestes promises for degres in y^ vniuersi tees,
which this wicked chaplain calls faithful vows, and would have the^ still
kept.

He accounts them unfaithful in their promyses, yt has broken these vows,
but of breaking gods co^mau^deme^ts and disobeiing of his holy word, he makes
no reckening. Word.
It is not lykely (he says) yt he will be faithful to god y^ thus breaks
promise ^^ man, Yes without doubt, it is most lykely that they be faithful to
God, that in their good doings dysobeyeth that sort of noughty men, and so
Christ meant it, when he said. Fear not them that kill the body, and be not
able to kill ye soul, Mat. x. Ye know maystre chaplain, that God is able to
destroy Destroy
both body and soul, and to throw them into hell, and yet ye fear not to
blaspheme both him and his holy word. Care not you for the fydelite of them
toward christen princes, which abhors your monstruouse sorceries. For
their faithful hearts are known good and godly, where as yours be false and
deuylyshe. To conclude. Your vows were never other, tha^ might always be
dyspensed with for money. For Johan Skuish a Cornish man, has in his English
chronicle, taken out of Matthew Paris and other old writers, that in the year
of our Lord a. M. cc. lviii. a Graye friar called Mansuetus, came in A friar.
post haste from Rome, as a great commissyoner from pope Alexander the forth,
to dyspe^se with all periures, forgers of falsehede, and vow breakers. And
many wise men, the storye says, deryded that wicked folyshnes. I marvel
therefore, that ye make so much a do for those vows.

Censura.
The vow in christen marryage, is godly every way, and serves in avoiding
fornycacio^, and other most detestable Marriage.
fruits of fylthynesse in the flesh.

Obiectio.
This is true, in them that may lawfully marry. But in them that have vowed
the contrary, tales nuptie sunt peiores adulteriis. as S. Augustine says, de
bono viduitatis, ca* xi. And as Chrysostom says, epistola. vi. ad Theodorum
monachu^. Angelorum enim societate Chrisosto^.
semel iunetum, illud relinquere, et vxoris laqu^is implicari, adulterii crimen
^^curr^re est, Quamuis freque^ter hoc ipsu^ nuptias voces, ego tamen et
adulterio tanto perus illud affirmo, quanto mayor ac melior mortalis Angelus.

Responsio.
God shall not be true in your opinyon, as apeareth here by your writing, nor
yet his instytucion lawful, but when it shall like the stout rabyes of your
vaynegloriouse Rabyes.
Synagoge so to allow them. Ye affirm it now to be true, that marryage is a
thing godly, and that it is a prouysion, ordinance, help, remedy, and way,
provided of God for man to avoid fornicacion and other uncomely vices. All
this y^ admyt at this time without contradyccion, but it has a tail. For ye
say, it is only true in them that may lawfully marry. Lawfully
Than is there a kind of people, which may not lawfully marry? And those are
your vowers, ye say. God ordained marryage for his people, to keep them in
good order. Pope Helhound ordained vows against marryage for his professed
cattle, to bring them out of order. Thus is marryage an holy instytucion of
God, for the conseruacion of man. And vows against marryage are a wicked
constytucion of pope Helhounde, for destruction of body and soul. Matrymony
must be good, because Co^stitucion.
it is of him that is good, which is God. Uowes against marriage must be
naughty and deuylyshe, because they are of him that is deuylysh, which is pope
Helhou^d.

That thing which is good, is fyt for all the^ that are good. And that is
naught, is only fyt for them that are naught. Herein are to be seane, the
diverse natures and Diverse.
disposicions of men, and the one to be known from the other. The nature of a
good man, is not to forsake by vow, that thing that is good, but that which
is evil. Contrary wise, the nature of an evil man, is to refuse, as evil,
that thing that is good, as you papystes have done marryage, and to admyt that
poison which is perniciouse to the soul, as ye have done wicked buggery.
Buggery.
A more euydent open sign can not be of an Antichrist, tha^ to say nay, to
gods yea, and yea to his nay, as you do heart* God says, that marryage is
lawful in his. Gene. ii. et Math, ix. You say, it is unlawful in yours. He
says, it is holy in his. You say, it is unholy in yours. He holds it for a
right ousnesse in his. You hold it for an unrighteousness in yours. Thus are
your ways not all one with Gods ways, nor your people all one with his
people. But so diverse is the one from People*
the other, as is light from darkness. Yet must your people, be the holy
spiritual people for their vows sake, ordained by pope Helhound, and gods
people a lewd lay people, only because of their marryage, which is of God.

This is (I think) a preposterous order. S. Paul says. Honorabile est inter
o^nes co^iugiu^, ac thorus immaculatus. Heb. xiii. Wedlock is honorable among
al people, Wedlock
and the bed thereof undefiled. Either your people holding marriage dishonorable
in their order, ar no people, or else they are such a people as are not reckened
in this universal nombre of Gods electes. An other text has, y^ marriage is
honorable in all things, which proves, y^ either your vows are no things,
for not holdyng marriage honorable, or else yt they are things Things
ungodly. And I think, ye are no things in ded, for god created al things in
y^ begini^g, and by bringing your selves by vows, into a new creacion and
use, I reckon you to be nothings to his use. This is my conjecture Uowers.
of you, becommynge Antichrists creatures. But truly, though you with your
vows take no place in this text, yet your conversation being as it is, ye may
be sure to take place in the next. Scortatores autem et adulteros, iudicabit
deus, in ye same chaptre. Whore kepers and aduonterers God will condemn.

If the readers of this book, would earnestly mark you in this point (which I
ii. euyls.
desire them instauntly to do) they should well perceive that your vows and
presthode, are no less execrable and deuilyshe, than is before declared. I will
go no further than your own writing. Ye say, that marryages in them that
has vowed the contrary, are peiores adulterijs, worse than aduoutryes. Than
will I say, that no poison is like your vows, neither yet any other
deuylishnesse to be compared to Marriage.
them. Marriage of it self, is godly, good, honest, holy, and ryghteouse, for
it is gods own institucion. What can make a good thing naught, but that which
is naught in the self before? What else can make it wurse than sin? but that
which is wurse than sin of it self. Have ye not well promoted your vows?
And I think in deed, they are no better than you report them here. All
christen men therefore be ware of them, as of a most peruyciouse poison. I
thought one time or other, ye would thoroughly dyscouer your own myscheues, as
mischeues
ye have now done in deed. And we thank you for it, for we shall be the warer
of the^. But ye do S. Augustyne wrong, to make him the author of your
conueyaunce. He never made that book, de bono viduitatis, but one Iulianus a
Moore borne, which was bishop of Tolete in Spain, as I told ye before.

And him ye slaundre also. For he in the x. chapter of the same book, calls
your opinyon concerning those marryages, a very wytlesse and wicked opinion,
concludyng Wytlesse.
therewith in the. xi. chaptre. Propterea non possum dicere, lapsarum a meliore
proposito feminarum coningia, adulteria esse, non coningia. For this cause
(says he) can I not report the marryages of nu^nes, to be aduoutryes and no
marryages, but I must call the^ true marryages. Thus does your own author
prove ye a wicked liar, and a spyghtfull enemy against marryage. That which
follows, sed plaue follows
no^ dubitauerim dicere, lapsus et rumas a castitate sanctiore, que vouetur
Deo, adulterijs esse peiores, touches not their marryages, but their slydynges
away from their vowed chastity. And yet he is much more gentle in that also,
than you ar. For he says, he would not much doubt, to call those slydynges
wurse than aduoutryes, which proves not that he expressly so calls Spyght.
them. But you spyghtfully, call the very marryages so without any honest
aduysement. Wherefore ye shall go for no less, than for a deceitful prophet
teaching lies in hypocresy, to maynteyne the doctrine of deuyls, and to forbid
marryage as ded the Esseanes, for Iewysh superstycions or vows. i. Timo. iiii.

Much were it to declare your folyshnesse and ignorant beastliness, in
alleging Chrysostom. For ye report that raw and ragged clause which ye have
untowardly A clause.
torn out of his. xxi. homely, in the second tome, to be in the* vi. epistle,
ad Theodoru^ monachum. But I can tell what deceived you, and I would my readers
should not laughe thereat. Ye took a page or side of a leaf for a pistle, and.
vi. for. lxvi. For that homely, otherwise called posterior parenesis ad
Theodorum monachum, begins in the. lxvi. page of the second tome of
Chrisostomes works. If ye be not a Chrisosto^.
wise clarke, and much good fruit to be had at your hand, I report me. Your
decurted or headless clause, Augeloru^ enim ^t cet, is thus Englyshed. For
that is ones joined with ye cu^pany of Angels, the same to forsake, and to be
wrapped in the snares of a wife, is plainly to enter into yt crime of
aduoutry. Though you never so often, call that thing marryage, yet I say unto
the that it is so much wurse than aduoutry, as is Wurse.
the mortal Angel greater and better. All this is to be considered in this
matter. Chrisosto^ wrote all in y^ Greek tongue, and his Latyne interpretour
has no name, and therefore we can not judge of his faythfulnesse.

Moreover ye self author Chrysostom, was to much addycted to monkery, and
gave it more commendacyous then was convenient, abusyuge the synceryte of the
Abusyuge
holy scryptures. Theodorus, to whom he wrote this homely of admonicion, was a
monk, and in the time of his monkery, frequented the company of an whore. Unto
this fallen monk, he wrote an other treatise before, called prior parenesis,
which he entytled, de reparatione lapsi, of ye repair A monk.
or restauracio^ of ye fallen. Wherein he declares the aduoutry of this monk
after this forte. Beatus David casu decidit no^ leuiore, qua^ tu modo, immo no^
ta^tu^ equali, subinde enim aliud flagitu^ adiecit, n^pe ced^ atrocissima^
innocentis Dry. Blessed David chanced to fall, the condition thereof being no
less greuouse than thine, but yet not all one. For he added thereunto an other
great sin, even the vnpptie full Drias.
slaughter of innocent Dry. By this it appears, that it was an other ma^nis
wife, and not his own wife, that this monk occupied, which was not only
reprehensyble but also abhomynable.

If Chrysostom calls this wicked kind of copulacion, or rather mysusynge of
an other mannis wife, no kind of honest Wicked.
marryage, but a wickedness more to be detested than open whoredom, we hold
with him therein, and as depely do abhor it as he ded. But where as he calls
a mo^k a mortal Angel, I think he took one for an other, as the Angel of
darkness for the Angel of light. For S. Paul says, that Satan can
transfourme himself into the Angel of light. ii. Corin. xi. And though
Chrysostom denied monks to marry, yet Chrisosto^.
he never wythstode the marryage of married prestes, for it has ever been in
use among the Greeks. Neither does Chrysostom in all his wrytynges, maynteyne
any doctrine of Dowes, search them who list. He writes much against them
that improueth marriage as an unclean thing, specially in the fourth homely of
his first tome. Where as he much commends marryage in Esaias the Prophet, in
Moses, in Abraham, in the mother of the. vii. Machabees, in Peter the Apostle,
in Philyp, in Zachary Johan Baptistes father, and in Mary Christ's mother,
declaringe Petrus.
it to be no impedymente to any kind of Godliness. Christ (he says)
honored marriage with virginite. Only is it Antichrist which dishonors it
with all kinds of filthy occupyenge, under color of the same.

Thus have I answered (right worshipful sir) your popyshe chaplayne at large,
and according to your request, declared the matters and doubts, wherein ye
thought Doubts
your self not fully resolved. If it be more sharp than ye looked for, ye
shall the less blame me, because God is in your writing so depely dishonored,
and his heavenly veryte blasphemed. For though I can let mine own injuries
pass by vureuenged, yet can I not suffer with conscience, his so great
dishonor unrebuked. I exhort Beware
you therefore, as ye tender your own salvation, to be ware of these deceytfull
Sirenes or flattering whysperers for that whoryshe kyngedome, but yet
unlearned, whose pleasant balletes, allureth to destruction. Be not carried
about with their diverse and strange learninges, Heb. xiii. Be not led away
with every wind of uncertain doctrine, into wicked errors by the craftye
wyles of these Sophisters. Ephe. iiii. for by their subtyle ways we may doubt
in things which we need not Doubt.
to doubt of, and be caught in snares of deceyt, which we need not to be caught
in. If it be a folly to stycke unto shadows, the clear light sh^^ynge over us.
It is more than a folly, yea, it is mere madness to lyngre still in the
darkness self, the myd day apearyng fresh. The presthode and the vows
about whom we have all this long time contended, what are they else but Iewyshe
supersticions in their best aperell? Iewyshe.
Let us than with all godly endeavor, abhor the^ both, and be no longar
obstinate papystes to Gods high dyshonoure and our princes dysobedience.

So be it.

Thus ends the Apology of Johan Bale against a rank papist, which otherwise
may be called a dyspatche of vows and presthode by the word of God. Fynished
in the year of our Lord. M. D. l.
Here follows a brefe exposy^^on upon the. xxx. chapter of Numeri, which was
the first occasion of this present varyaunce.
Because the. xxx. chapter of Numeri, wrasted, detorted, and depraved, by the
vyolence of this wicked captain, was compelled against his good nature, to
give the first vuset against the lords verite in this battle. Therefore now yt
enemy overthrown and the victory obtained, by him which co^sumeth ye wicked
one with the mighty breath of his mouth. ii. Tes. ii. I will not only restore him
again to his place and office, but also cause him to discern his friend from
his enemy, and to bestow his service where as it ought rightfully to be
bestowed. And all this shall be done by a co^me^tary added thereunto, to y^
right understanding of the same chapter, that it may thereby apeare to y^
readers, nothing to per tain to y^ vows of Antichrists presthode. That
chapter treats only of vows, wha^ they ought to have been kept, and when
they ought to have been omitted. He was bound to pay the^ in Moises law, that
was under no yoke of bondage, neither of marriage, chyldhode, nor other
servitude. The other sort paid them by lycens or allowaunce, of father or
husband. Servants by like, were exe^pted, for here they are not placed.
Prestes had nothing at all to do with them, but only to receive the profytes
of them toward their lyuynges. The text thus proceeds.

The text.
Moses told to the children of Israel, all things as the Lord had commanded
him.

The exposycion.
None other was Moses, than a prince or high magistrate, peculiarly chosen of
God, to govern, to instruct, and to lead his people the Hebrews, into ye
land of promise. By him God wrought great wonders in Egypt, in the sea, and
in the wilderness, to establysh the faith of that people. He apeared unto him
face to face, and gave him a law with his own hand written, which he
publyshed unto the^. He neither fed them with the fables and inchauntmentes of
Pharaos sorcerers, nor yet taught them the wytty speculacyons of the
Egipcianes, though he dwelt among them, but he gave them that pure doctrine
which came only from the mouth of god.

This is left for an example to the christen mynisters, not to teach mennys
doctrines, sentences, decrees, legendes, fables, nor lies, but the sincere
doctrine of faith and Gospel of salvation.

The text.
And Moses spoke unto the heads of the trybes of the children of Israel,
saying. This is the thing which the Lord commands.

The expocisyon.
Because the exceeding great nombre and multitude of the children of Israel,
were much more than could by any possybylyte be satysfyed by the voice of one
man. Therefore he relygyously and soberly, called unto him by the high authorite
of God the inferior magystrates of every several trybe or kynred, gyuynge
them out commyssions of that which god had commanded, to se it with all
reverence executed and obeyed in the fear of God. The law was at that
present, concerning the perfourmaunce of vows, what order should be taken in
them. In whom they should take effect, and in whom none, to stay the
variete of opynyons, which else might have grown among me^ thereupon.

The text.
If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath and bind his soul, he
shall not go back with his word, but shall fulfill all that he has promised.

The exposicion.
Se here what the person ought to have been, by Gods allowaunce, that should
in those days make a vow or an oath to his honor. A man, the text says, no
babe, no fool, no hare brain or rash body. These iii, things the^ were
looked for in him that ded vow or make an oath, a perfight age, a full
dyscressio^, and a ripe deliberacio^. They therefore which after all these due
circumstau^ces had vowed or sworn, stood bound in conscience by this law,
till they had thoroughly performed their oaths and promises. Neither was it
lawful for them to go back, or to pretermit any part of them undone.

And as concerning the things that were vowed, they might not be of things
impossyble, but of things which were in ma^s power. Neither myht they be of
any thing which was to Gods dyshonoure, or against his commandment. For the
bond of y^ promise, stood only in things agreeable to Gods word, law, decre,
pleasure, commandment, and honor. Wicked vows were in no case to be
observed, but to be broken, rejected, and abhorred, as things not of faith but
of error and blasphemy. As are now the vows of monks and of prestes,
professynge their own inuencious.

The text.
If a damsel vow unto the Lord, and bind her self being in her fathers
house and unmarried. If her father hear the vow and bond, which she has
made upon her soul, and hold his peace the^to. The^ all her vows and bonds,
which she has made upon her soul, shall stand good. But if her father forbid
her the same day that he hears it, none of her vows nor bonds which she
has made upon her soul, shall be of value, and the Lord shall forgive her,
because her father forbad her.

The exposicion.
All this was spoken for maidens, remaining in the howses of their fathers
till the time of their marryages. What so ever these had promised, either by
vow^ or by oath, the perfourmaunce thereof lay in the only arbytryment of the
father. For in his power it was, by the set ordinance of God, at his
dyscressyon to allow it or dyanulle it, were it never so stronglye made. No
ground can our papists take of this parcel, for their superstycyouse vows,
though they had left their christianite, and were become professed Jews in
deed. For it is only for maidens being under cure of their parents, and
toward marryage.

Their vows are nothing like these, for they are without Gods authorite,
will, word, law, institucion, and order, of things unprofitable, repugnaunt
to nature, and impossible to be observed. They had also annexed unto them,
perpetual transgressyon before God, though not always before me^, their knottes
being indyssoluble, and their snares irremedyable. These vows were after the
ordinance of God, perteyninge only to such things as were offered in the
temple, and had an end as the offeringes were done, being also dyspensable at
the fathers discression, as here apeareth.

The text.
If she had an husband when she vowed or pronounced ought out of her lyppes,
wherewith she bound her soul, and her husband heard it and held his peace
thereat, the same day he heard it. The^ her vows and her bonds, wherwyth she
bound her soul, shall stand. But if her husband forbad her, the same day he
heard it, than has he made her vow which she had upon her, of none effect,
and that also which she pronounced with her lips, wherewith she bound her
soul. And y^ Lord shall forgive her.

The exposycion.
A woman being a mannys wife, or a maid made handefast or sure to a man in
the house of her father, might well make a vow of offering to the Lord, but
she might not perform it without the consent of her husband, being ones his
wife before God. It was always in his power, at the first apearaunce or
knowledge thereof, to have said yea or nay unto it, or utterly to have made it
void and of none effect, though it had been never so strongely made before.
This declares the man, not only to be the head of the woman, but also to have
a power or dominion over her. How this law has been abused of our papystes,
I think few men of dyscression are alive, but knows. What tre^tals, soul
grotes, and other leuse ends has gone abroad by men's wives, for Scala celies,
five wound masses, alterclothes, images, candels, and other practysed
pageauntes of the slow belly prestes, their husbands not ware thereof, it is
to far above nombre to be declared. In their sacrifyces and temple toies,
they are contented to apeare all one with the supersticiouse Jews. But in
refusal of those women's offeringes which wanted their husbands consent, they
never would be Jews nor yet honest men. Where as it is said in the end here,
y^ God shall forgive her, which thus breaks her vow. It is referred to
Christ, by who^ only comes the remission of all sin, that our heavenly
father forgiueth.

The text.
The vow of a widow, and of her that is deuorced, and all that they have
bound their sowles with, shall stand.

The exposicion.
If widows which were fre by y^ death of their husbands, either yet other
women which were released from the yoke of marryage by libels of diuorceme^t,
had had at any time than vowed, their consciences were bound to the
perfourmaunce of their vows, like as they had promised before. And these vows
were only for offeringes and for humylyacions of the sprete, and not for
chastyte of body. For thereunto were they bound by other statutes both of the
laws of nature and of Moses.

The text.
A wife, if she vowed in her husbands house, or bound her soul with an oath,
and her husband heard it, and held his peace and forbad her not, tha^ all her
vows and bonds wherewyth she bound her soul, shall stand. But if her
husband dysanulled them the same day, than nothing that proceeded out of her
lips in vows and bonds wherwyth she bound her soul, shall stand. For her
husband has losed the^, and the Lord shall forgive her.

The exposicion,
Women married out of their fathers howses, and dwelling under tuycion or
governance of their husbands, might vow at their pleasures, if they minded
so to do. But in no wise might they actually perform their vows in effect,
without the full grant and agreement of their hus bands. No, though they had
bound those vows with double oath, yet might they not hold without their
consent. Notwithstanding the silence of the man, was accepted in the law for
a full grant of the matter, if he heard it with his ears and made none
answer to it at the same present. And all this was only for frewyll offerynges
to the Lord. I can not think, that this law was ever plesaunte to our
cloynynge papystes, monks, massing prestes, canons, chanons, and friars. For
they had all their packynges and proulynges, wha^ the good men were out and
abroad. The stories are to many, to be rehearced at this time. The breach of
these vows by contrary commandment of the man, was al so released by the
death of Christ, which was the vnyuersalll and whole pacifycacion of the
fathers wrath for sin.

The text.
All vows and oaths, that bind to humble the soul, as of abstynence and
fasting, may her husband estably she or break. But if her husband hold his
peace from one day to an other, tha^ he establysheth all her vows and bonds
which she had upon her, because he held his peace the same day he heard them.

The exposycion.
Uowes concerning the sowles humylyacion (as here appears) were promyses of
fasting, prayer, and abstyne^ce, as they were used in Moses law. Mennys
wives might vow these vows also, at certain times for the chastysement of
their bodies, having their husbands consent, else not. But how ded popysh
prestes abuse this rule of God, when they kept their mart of confessions? They
never sought the consent of their husbands, when they appointed men's wives, by
penance as they called it, either to fast or yet to pray. The husbands might
be of counsel in nothing that they ded, though god had a thousand times
commanded it. For their holy father Antichrist, was in their lewd opynion, a
law maker far above God. They can fatche their vows from hens, but this
godly order of obedience of the wife to her husband could they never find,
but utterly subdued it in their most deuylysh confessions. If any ever made
these vows unlawful, it were they which after this naughty sort most wyckedly
abused them, in thus vsurpinge an authorite over men's wives above their
husbands, against Gods manifest word here, exalting themselves therein above
god.

The text.
And if he afterward break them, he shall bear her sin him self.

The exposicyon.
So stood this vow in the wife, that if the man heard it pronounced, and said
nothing theragainst, she stood bound in conscience before God, both to follow
it and perform it. But if he dyssembled ye hearing thereof, and afterward
upon light dyspleasure forbad her the fulfyllynge of it. Than if it had been
broken, it was his inyquite and not hers. The woman stood clear, and he from
thensfourth was bound to the perfourmaunce of it, so strongly as though he had
vowed in his own person. And this comes of consent by a dyssymulacion and
forgetfulness. Se therefore what it is to dissemble in things of Gods
ordinance.

The text.
These are the ordynaunces, which the Lord commanded Moises, bitwene the man
and his wife, and between the father and his daughter, being a damsel in her
fathers house.

The exposicion.
Of the whole chaptre, is this clause an epyloge or brefe conclusion, repetynge
in few wurdes the substance of all that is therein treated. God is here
declared to be the author of these laws, and his high magistrate Moises the
publisher of them, concerning vows within the housholdes of the children of
Israel. The father had power to dyssolue the vow of his daughter, and the
husband to make the promise of his wife that way of none effect, were they
never so strongely made. Why than may not Gods wurde, which is that eternal
power of his, wherwyth he made all, governs all, and at the latter day shall
judge all, do the same in his great howsholde here, or congregation milytau^t?
I know this to be an earnest restraynte thereof, to al the^ yt has vnsesonabli
vowed in Antichrists church, pronounced both by the prophets and Apostles,
Gene. xix. Esaias. xlvii. Zacha. ii. Hiere. li. ii. Corin. vi. it. Apoca. xviii.
Come away from her my people, least ye be partakers of her syns, and to
receive of her plages. This voice would both be heard, believed, obeyed, and
followed.

The conclusyon.
NOw may ye se (gentle readers) how folyshe, fantastycall, and beastly our
papystes are which take this, xxx. chaptre of Numeri, for a mighty stay and
most strong buttrasse of vpholdynge the fantasyed vows of their monkeryes and
massynge presthode. Ye may well perceive, that it is no more to that purpose,
tha^ is Chariuge cross, to uphold Lyncolne mynster. Uowes in this chaptre, are
of Moses commyssyon under shaddowe of the law, and not of Christ's commyssyon
under light of the Gospel.

The making and perfourmaunce of the^, pertayned to private how sholdes and
not to the temple, to the commen people and nothing at all to the prestes.
Married men and young men toward marryage, married women and maidens toward
marryage, wydowes and dyuorced women, were only of power by this law, to
promise them. They were not perpetual, but for a small time, they were of
things possible and in mannys power, and easily they might be broken and
dyspensed with in the wife and the daughter. Never had the prestes any thing a
do with the perfourmaunce or making of them, but only to receive them in
offeringes, to the mayntenaunce of their lyuynges. For they had none other
possessions else among the other trybes, but these voluntary oblacions, first
fruits, and the tithes. What will our folysh papystes have of the^ tha^, wha^
they are so far from their purpose?

Mannys reason (I suppose) and y^ true fear of God, by the rule of his holy
word, should govern our whole man, both within and without, in body and in
soul, as the father does his daughter, and as the good husband does his wife,
concerning affeccions of things temporal and mocions toward religyon. No
man ought to vow, or to promise any payment to god, unless he be able of his
own substance to do it, and have it in possessyon ready at all times to be
paid, as the Hebrews had. For it is else but a mockinge of God. Nothing can we
offer of our selves to God, that is in any point correspondynge to his gifts.
All the goodness we have, is far to little for that we already owe him for
our creacion and redempcyon. What will we than pay him besides our dewty,
which are not able to do that? Our ill deeds are not fytte to be vowed unto him,
and yet we have none other of our own. As God is wholly ours in Christ without
vow, so are we his wholly again without vow. He does no great act tha^,
which offers himself in bondage by vow. To a godly man are vows nothing
necessary, for he serves God in lyberte of sprete. Uowes only proceed from the
carnal man, which knows none other ways of pleasynge God, but his own ydel
inue^cio^s. The father of mercy and God of co^solacion, deliver his church from
this wicked blyndenes, and reduce it again into the way of right knowledge. So
be it.

Thus ends the brefe exposicion upon the. xxx. chaptre of Numeri wyhch was
the first occasyon of this present varyaunce. Anno do. M. D. L.
The Table for this book.
ABbot of ^. A* bons begat a pope. 126. Age of voweyng after Paul. xl.
years. Fol. 41. 87. 113. Albertus patryarke of Jerusalem. Fo. 19. All the
Apostles had wi^es. 120. Ambrose teaches hipocresy. 74. Ambrose is a deep
liar. 75. 120. Anantas and Saphtra, no vowers. 113. Angels of darkness, are
vowers. 134. 147. Anna the w^fe of Helcana. 29. Antichrist known hy his
fr^te^. 46. 76. 86. 127. 134. 144. Apostles had wy^es. 75. 119. 120 123. 148.
Apostles what they were. 122. Aristotle's m^nde for dyffynyr^ons. 26. A scoffer
with his pyllowe ^ere. 122. Augustine had. iii. conc^bines. 13. Augustine
refuses author^^e. 42 Augustine was not supersticious. 85.
B
Basilius the eldar was a pressed, 114 Basil^us the yongar taught no vows. 115.
Bedas against vows. 46. 58. Begetters of childro^ after presthode. 124. 126.
Books of Moses, five. 16. Book, de bono ^iduitatis. 38. Boys, praised for
vows making. 24.
C
Chaplayne confounds himself. 10^. Chastyte vowed, prospers not Fol. 78.
Chastyte in marriage. 68. 99. 119. Chastyte is good and god^y, and why. 133.
Christ's spowsage declared. 40. 85. Christ is our peace. 61. Christ, Ma^y,
H^e^emy, and Johan. 94. Christ made no prestes. 109. Church prymatyue had
married mynysters. 127. Circumducere ^ororem, falsely. interpreted. 130.
Cyrillus the Greek herem^te. 19 Concordan^ces of the Byb. e. 18. Consecracions
more than one 117.
D
Dam^nacion, what it sygnyfyeth. 87. 95. 137. David b^ake his vow. 47. 58.
107. David was a vower, and no priest. 48. David's faith declared in vows 149.
Dauy the welche man, voweth a candell. 51. Deacons and prestes not all one 72.
Dyfference of vows and marryage. 144. Dyffynycions of vows. 21.
Dyssymulacyon, taken for a vow. 113. Dystynccion of vows, 23, 44, 46, 77,
111, Dystynccio^ of vows and presthode. 3. 8. 70. Dyuersyte of prestes. 76
Doctors maynteynyng vows fol. 12. Doctor Cole at Oxforde. 124.
E
Epiphanius against vowers. Fol. 35. Erasmus judges of Augustine. 38. 135.
Erasmus deceived by H^erome. Fol. 131. Error in nombre. 93. 95. 104. 113. 146.
Error most shameful. 103 Errors of a doccour. 136. 138. Esseanes, not
allowed for vyrgyny^e. 101. 146. Etheldrede and Edward, vyrgynes. 95. Example
of a bower. 11. Examples of Chastyte. 34. Examples of them that married after
presthode. 125. Exposycion of the. xxx. chaptre of Numera. 149.
F
Fable of a nun, by S. Augustyne. 79. Face of the serpent. 59. 98. Falshede
of this papy^^. 39. 54. 82. 83. 115. 117. 126. Fea^e of trompet blowynge. 54.
79. Fea^es of the Jews, diverse. Fol. 55. Fryndes, Plato and Socrates. 1^
Frances, made equal with God. 22. Friars, monks and prestes, sor cerers. 20.
Friar Mansuetus dyspenseth with vows. 143.
G
Gloss preferred to the text. 73. Glottons preach o^ abssynence Fol. 119. God
abhors vow makers. Fol. 112. God only makes things good Fol. 133. Gospel
and law, what they wurke. 90. Gospels b^asp hemouse^y used. Fol. 98. Gregory,
Hierome, and Ambrose. 12. Gregory is proved a liar. 116. Gro^nde, in ioynynge
scryptures. 55.
H
Hebrews vowed and offered Fol. 8. 60. Heretykes against marryage Fol. 101.
139. Hierome, Ambrose, and Gregory. 12. Hierome taunteth marryage. Fol. 128.
Hierome blasphemeth the scriptures. 129. H^^bebrand instituted vowers. 5. 124.
133. 144. Honorable and holy is marryage. 35. 145. How God compasses, and is
not compassed. 89.
I
Ignatius a bishop, had a wife Fol. 123. 132. Ignorance of this papist 52. 72.
92. 120. 146. Impossyby^yte in vows 4. 11. 33. Inchauntment or charm wenches.
109. Ioha^ Baptist b^uldeth on Christ. 90. Johan the Evangelist married. 121.
Johan proved no vyrg^ne. 121. Johan Chrysostom maynteyneth no vows. 147.
Johan king of England. 83. 142. Ioha^ Compson a doctor. 101. Iohau Carton a
chronicler. 67. Ioha^ Sk^ysh, a chronicler. 143. Ione Swepestak, at the bell. 68
Isidorus against vows. 24. 46 Iulianus bishop of Tolete. 85. 101. 146.
K
Kings earnest in matters of relygyon. 2. King Iohans vow broken. 83. 142.
King of England die scharged vows. 25. Kings which were ydell pilgrims.
141.
L
Law and Gospel, what they wurke. 90. Laws of father and husband. 90
Levites, filthy vowers. 35. Lothes wife, for example. 81. Lukes descripcion in
storye. 80.
M
Maniches, are the papists. 104 Married after presthode 125. Marryage, an
order of chastity. 64. 99. Marryage and virginite. 12. 64* 99. 133. Marryage
byspraised of Hiero^, 128. Marryage of Apostles and pro phetes. 148. Marks
dysciples were no vowers. 117. Massing presthode, what it is 4 Mentiri spiritui
sancto, what it is. 116. Monkery, when and by whom it sprange. 18. Monkery is a
wythered plant. 116. Monkysh rhetoryckes, smelled out. 15. 34. 58. 116. Moses,
what he was. 149
N
Name of a pressed, to be abhorred. 6. Names concerning Christen ministers. 6.
70. Nature of good and evil. 144 Nature of a promise. 10. Nazarei, or
abstayners, 31. Nicolaus Gallus, a wryrer. 20. Numeri, a book of Moses. 17.
51. Nu^nes marryages allowed. 84. Nu^nes marriages, none aduoutiy. 146.
O
Orders of monkery and presthode. 23. Order of the scriptures, cousonaunt. 55.
Order of chastity, is marryage. 64. 99. Ordres of presthode. 3. 70. Order and
stuck maintained. 71. Orygynall of vows. 8.
P
Paphuutius, dyffynyg chastyte. 34. Popysh pressed of Thornedo^. 68. Paul and
Christ, understood 65. 85. Paul led not his wife about, and why. 130. Paulus
terrius, lay with his daughter. 68. Pelagyane, an enemy to says. 93. Peter's
vow to be marked. 12. Peter, Paul, and Philiyp, had wives. 120. Philo
describes the church. 118 Presbyter is an eldar, and no priest. 71. Priest of
Melchisedech, only Christ. 7. 71. 76. Prestes and women. 38. 74. 81. 83. 113.
Prestes borne, are whoremongers. 68. Prestes were no vowers. 83. Presthode and
vows, what they are now. 4. Presthode mockyng both Aaron and Christ. 8.
Presthode now is only of Antichrist. 109. Priapus of Rome, known. 113 Prima
fides, what it is. 44. 87. 95. 137. Protession of friars. 22. 28. Profession of
prestes. 28. Promise of what nature it is. 10.
Q
Questions resolved. 9. 14. 51. 87. 95. 931. 133.
R
Remelius a monk was married. 325. Reward for vows keeping. 111 Ricardus de
Media villa. 22. 28. Robert Peche and Robert of Wynchestre gendryng prelates.
126. Robries of this papist, 42 Romysh prestes are know^. 108
S
Samuel was a pressed. 67. Shamfull shyftes of this papyst. 80. Six parts
played at ones. 4. Systre Christine, sore vered. 20. Swea^ynge and vowynge, not
all one. 92.
T
Theodorus, an aduoutrouse monk. 147. Thomas of Aquine dyffyneth vows. 22.
33. Thomas Cantiprate^sis, a writer. 20. Tratery proved in this chaplayne. 135.
140. Translation of the Bible. 130. Truth what nature it is of. 98. Tyranny of
papisies. 53. 70
U
Uirgynyte and marryage. 12. 64. 99. 133. Uirgynyte commended. 25. Uirginite is
nothing without says. 100. Uirginite, no fruit of the spret 100. Uirginyte is
wurse for vows. 110. Ueit es without vows. 95. Uo^^n, what sygni^ycacion it
has. 51. Uouere, when it was in use. 18. Uouere, dyffyned of Augustyne. Fol.
43. Uouere, is not taught of Christ Fol. 64. Uowers, rewarded with Onan Fol.
102. Uouers mo^strouse, described. 140 Uowers what myscheues they have done.
141. Uowes in this age of none an thorite, 4, Uowes, what orygynall they ha^.
8. Uowes what they are now able to do. Fo. 9. Uowes are now to be broken. 9.
24. ^3. 76. 78. 83. 91. 96. 106. 107. Uowes, what they bring men to. Fo. 10.
145. Uowes of papystes, how folish they are. Fol. 11. Uowes have destroyed
England. Fol. 13. Uowes, in the. xxx. of Numeri. Fol. 17. Uowes made of friars
and m^ kes. 22. Uowes of the old law. Fo. 26 Uowes are unprofitable. 57.
Uowes doubleth the wyckednes of Sodom. 107. Uowes unadvised, what they are.
Fol. 107. Uowes brought in b^ggery. 110 Uowes are no wurkes of the Gospel. 8.
141. Uowes and presthode, what they are, 133. Uowes are a most execrable poi
son, 145,
W
Wydowes and prestes, all one Fol. 38. 74. Wydowes are no prestes, 113, Women
following the Apostles, 131,
Y
Ye shall, and ye shall not, 27,
Z
Zacharias slain of vowers, 35* Zurobabel was a pressed, 69,
Thus ends the table.
Faults which has chanced in y^priuting
Fol. iiii* pagi. ii. line. xx. Regu^. xviii. fo. viii. page ii. li. xiiii. put
out, to the. fo. x. pa. ii. li. xxvii. of fect. fo. xii. page i. li. i. Such.
fo. xx. page ii. li. ii. Ca^prate^sis. fo. lxviii. pagi. i. li. vii. before. fo.
lxxvii. page ii. li. xiiii. a nu^ne, over al. fo. xc. page ii. li. vii. dprt.
fo. xcv. page ii. li. xv. Ioa^. viii. fo. ciii. pagi. i. in the margende,
error for tyranny. fo. cxvi. page ii. li. xxix. ye learned. fo. cxvii. page i.
li. iii. ways. i. line. of. fo. cxviii. page ii. li. xi. servants. fo. cxix.
page i. li. xxiiii. the man. fo. cxxv. page ii. li. vii, Aragone et. li. ix.
Gassarus, li. xx, Cysteane. et li. xxiiii. Cra^ts. fo. cxxv, i. pagi. li. xxv.
those. With many mo.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. These books are to
be sold at his shop, by the little Conduit in Chepe s^de.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


