Tessaradelphus, OR The four Brothers.

The qualities of whom are contained in this old Riddle.

Four brethren were bred at once
Without flesh, blood, or bones.
One with a beard, but two had none,
The fourth had but half one.
Collected and translated. By THOMAS HARRAR.

permissu superiorum, 1616.

To the Reader.
REader, I having travailed in diverse parts of the Christian world, chiefelie
to take a diligent view of the sundry sects (which some call Relgions) which
are now in these parts thereof; and finding that to one obiecting their
disagreements one with another, they presently answer: that they agree all in
fundamental points, although they dissent in some matters, which they say,
appertain not to faith. Knowing by experience this answer to be most false, I
thought it worth the labor to set before thine eyes very briefly, yet
plainly, the four Principal Sects, which are either allowed, or permitted in
some countries here in Europe; out of which, the multitude of petite Sects
issue, to the end thou may see the irreconciliable differences amongst them.
And when thou have dilligently considered them, I hope thou will say of them,
that recitasse est confutasse, the rehearsing of them is the confuting of them.
They are obscurely comprehended in the Ridle aforesaid, for they were all
bredde with Martin Luther, although they came forth some of them after, as thou
shall see in this little Treatise. I call them brothers, as they (partly forced
by Catholics, and partly to deceive the ignorant) do sometimes style
themselves, although in their writings they condemn one another to the pit of
Hell. Thou would know who these four be: Marry Lutheranisine, Caluinisme,
Anabaptisme, and Anglianisme. Some will perhaps say, that Religions or Sects
should rather be termed sisters, because they are in the latin tongue of the
feminine gender; but I answer, that Sects and Schisms taking their
denomination of their Authors, who were men, may be well of the masculine
gender, I call the religion of England Anglianisme, because it among the rest
has no one especial Author, but is set forch by the Prince, and
Parliament. The same Religion is now received in Scotland, because the King is
one and the same of both Kingdoms, as also of Ireland, and other Isles. These
four brothers (as I term them) are without flesh, blood, or bone, because
indeed there is no substance at all, or sap of religion, but certain
shadows and shows in them, as thou may see in the sequel. One of them
has a beard, that is, some seemley face of a man; I mean ceremonies of
Religion, as Lutheranisme has, and two, to wit, Caluinisme, and Anabaptisme,
no beardes at all, except here and there a fewling hair, that is, no
ceremonies to accoumpt of, but some few remnants not worth the reckoning.
Anglianisme has after a fashion half a beard, for that it retayneth yet some
ceremonies of ancient Religion, although dayli decreasing. In reading this
little book, thou may take a view of them all, and consider well with thy
self, whether there be any hope of salvation in any of them, which are
opposite to the universal Catholic Church, so renoumed over the world, for so
many ages together.

Farewell in Christ.
CHAP. I. Of Martin Luther.
MArtin Luther, the Author of this first Sect, was borne at Isleb in the County
of Mansfield, Anno 1483. the two and twentieth day of October; his father was
called John Ludder, and his mothers name was Margaret, people of mean degree;
some say that his mother conceived him of an Incubus: but whether that be true
or no, I will not here dispute. Many write that the Devil and he were very
familiar one with another, and that they did eat a bushel of salt together.
And how on a time, when the Gospel was read at Mass, erat Jesus eijciens
demonium. Luther threw himself to the ground, crying that is not I, that is
not I: he changed his name from Ludder, which signifies in their tongue
Mocker, These, or Filth, into Luther, which betokens a pure man. So the
Manichees changed their masters name Manes, that is, mad, into Manichee;
which signifies to power down Manna. Lib. de here. c. 42.

After that Luther had bestowed his young years in humane letters, and had
been brought up in the colleges of Magdeburge, and Senach in Turing, he gave
himself to the study of civil Law, but presently after, one of his
companions walking with him out of the town, was strocken stark dead with a
thunder-bolte, Luther not hurt, but all on a smoke; with this chance he was
so frighted, that incontinently he left the world, and put himself into a
Monastery of Augustine Friars in the town of Erford, Anno. 1504. his companions
wondren at this change in him, having never seen so much as one: spark of
religion, or piety in him, but rather plain signs of debanchements and
disorders. He had scarce ended his year of probation, but he grew proud, and
haughty, having indeed some more learning then his fellows, over whom he
would dominiere and play the Master. For which cause as an unruly fellow, he
was sent from thence to Wittenberge, to a Covent of the same order, Anno 1508.
And at the same time there being a division between certain howses of that
order, (for seven Monasteries banded against their General) Luther took part
with the revolted, and was sent to Rome as an advocate of their cause. After
this, Pope Leo the tenth having set forth Indulgences, for such as would
contribute to the wars against the Turks, the promulgation whereof was assigned
to the Iacobin Faiars, and not to the Austenes, as they desired; Stambitius
General of the said Austenes took it in evil part, because such charge had
been accustomed to be committed to his Order, which was matter of no small
credit: And for very spite set up Luther, whom he knew to be fit for
seditious exployts, and tongued at will, as also bold and venterous, to preach
against the abuse of Preachers, and Collectors of Indulgences. This Stambitius
was emboldened so to do, by the countenance of Frederick Duke of Saxony, who
was soar offended with the Pope, because he had not the Bishopric of
Magdeburge, but it was given to the Arche-Bishoppe of Ments, who under the Pope
had the assigning of the preaching of the Pardons. Luther then mounting into
the pulpit, thundered against the Collectors, and Preachers of Pardons, more
vehemently indeed then Stambitius would have had him to have done, flouting,
mocking, and scoffing at them, and now and then girding at the Pope himself,
insomuch as it irked Stambitius that he had set him on work; but now it was
past his help: For many grew cold in devotion toward this contribution, by
reason of Luther his preaching against it, and sent the Collectors back not
only empty handed, but loaded also with contumelies, and reproaches. He growing
more malapert for that the people gave ear unto him, was so audacious, as he
wrote to the Arch-Bishoppe of Ments, and to him of Brandeburg against the
Collectors, who made no reckoning of him, nor of his letters. He set forth
also certain Theses or propositions against the foresaid, taxing
Eccliasticall persons of negligence and ignorance. Tekell superior of the
Iacobins, set forth contrary propositions, answering his, and calls Luther
Heretic.

At this time in very truth, there was great corruption in manners, and the
Clergy was nothing so vigilant and careful, as aforetime; which things
facilitated Luther his proceedings. All the Christian world was Catholic, and
for many hundred years together, had no Heretical enemies to reckon of: Not
any Protestant, or Puritan had ever been heard of, which made Churchmen to
grow leffe watchful, and to live at their ease, wallowing in wealth and
pleasures. Pope Leo hearing of these tumults wrote to the Duke of Saxony, to
send Luther to his Legate Caietan, who was with the Emperor Maximilian, or else
to send him to Rome, where the cause might be heard; but the Duke excused the
matter, and Luther wrote most humbly unto the Pope, and offered to be silent
hereafter, so that his adversaries would surcease. Nevertheless, the matter
grew worse; for Siluester Prierias a Iacobin, Master of the Popes palace,
buckled with Luther, and extolled the Popes authority above all Councels, and
powers on the earth, in such sort, as Luther enraged with his assertions,
abased the same more then ever. Diverse Iacobins took Siluester his part, and
many Augustines defended Luther: And the broils grew so hoate, that at length
Luther his accomplices, called in question the power of the Pope about
Indulgences, and questioned works meritorious, and satisfactory, and sundry
other matters not doubted of before; but Luther himself would not seem to
doubt thereof, for in his first tome he avouches the same, affirming, that the
Pope the immediate Vicar of Jesus Christ, has authority to distrubute
Indulgences.

After all this, he humbled himself again to the Pope, and confessed his
faults and was sent to Cardinal Caietan, before whom, he confeffed the
Catholic faith; and with great protestations submitted himself.

He was yet once again cited to Rome, but he appealed to the future general
Council, protesting that he would not deminish the authority of the Pope, so
that he be of a sound opinion, for that was his clause. He wrote unto the Pope
also praising him, and dispraysing his Legate and officers, and laid all faults
on others. Many giddy-headed people at this time ran headlong after Luther,
stared on him, flattered him, and encouraged him to higher matters. He writes
to the Emperor, to Knges, and to Princes, crying upon them to reform the
Church, which phrase of speech pleased many, protesting that he would change
nothing, for he lived as yet within his Covent, and said Mass. The people
applauded him on each side, which made him more proud and arrogant, insomuch
as he would say, turn thine eyes toward me Germany, I am sent to save thee.

The first Clergie-man that ever followed Luther, was Carolastade Archdeacon of
Wittenberg: This man and Luther disputed with D. Eckius a Prebend of
Ingolstade, at Lipse before Duke George, brother to Frederick Duke of Saxony;
and they both submitted their opinions to the Divines of Erfor and Paris, but
still revolted again. In this hoate conference, Luther burst forth into these
speeches. This quarrel was not begun for the honor of God, neither shall it
be ended by him. The Pope wrote again to the Duke of Saxony, blaming him for
protecting of Luther, but he sent him a mild answer, saying that his holiness
his Nuncio was of opinion, that Luther should not go out of that coaste, for
fear of scattering of Heresies else where. But indeed Luther had resolved, if
he had been driven out of Saxony, to retire himself into Bohemia, yet feared
he the Hussites, because he had affirmed them to be Heretics. In fine, the
Pope seeing him so rebellious, and so turning in and out, excommunicated him by
name, in Bulla Caena Domini. Who presently when he heard of it growing
desperate, vomited out all his poison, calling the Pope Ante-christ, and
understanding that his books were burned as heretical, he in a rage at
Wittenberge burned the books of the common Law, with the Bull of Leo. He cried
out to the people, let us wash our hands in the blood of the Pope, of the
Cardinals, and of all the Romish filth. So in the dsputation at Lipse when he
was admonished to use modesty in speech, and writings; I will write (said he)
other kind of stuff, if I knew that it would displease the Sea of Rome:
Whilst they triumph over some heresy of mine, I will invent new (says he) in
Praf. cap. Bab. He used still in speaking and writing, most filthy words and
terms of ribaudry, and caused the Pope and Cardinals, to be pictured, and
set forth in diverse places, in most filthy and ugly shapes. He resolved
forthwith to build a Religion of liberty, and to abandon Austerities, Celibates
or single lives, Fastings, Chastities, and such like, and to give every man
leave to beloeue what him list: And so it should be most pleasing to flesh and
blood, and consequently, be easily received of many. To this end he wrote that
it was lawful to believe what he would; that we were either predestined, or
reprobated, so as we could not do withal: That every Christian was a priest,
and might preach the word of God.

The Emperor Charles came into Germany, before whom Luther was conuented, with
letters of safe conduct (this was at Worms) where he behauing himself
heretically, yet with great dissimulation, he was sent back, and condemned by
the Emperor for an Heretic: he retired himself into a castle called Alstat,
belonging to the Duke of Saxony, yet with commandment, that he should keep
himself secret, for fear of the Emperor. This he termed his Pathmos, here he
wrote books sarsed with all manner of contumelies, and opprobrious speeches;
he called the university of Paris, which had condemned his doctrine, the
uttermost hall of Ante-Christ, the back-dore of Hell. At this time at
Wittenberge they began to assault the Mass, (for Luther was yet in Friars
habit, and said Mass still and to break down Images, which Luther
understanding, was very much offended with them. He did forbid that either
Aristotle, or Plato, should be taught in their universities, or any thing but
the Bible. Catolastade and Melancton his followers, were now become the one a
ploughman, the other a Baker, for that they would live by the sweat of their
brows; but Luther called them back, and rebuked Carolastade for breaking
Images, affirming, that no Image was forbidden in the Scriptures, but only of
God: he translated the Bible into the German tongue which was presently burned
in most places. There were noted only in the new Testament, 1400 places
corrupted and falsified, yet notwithstanding, a Lutheran minister in
Wittenberge, instituted a feastiuall day, and called it the translation of the
Bible; being the first Lutheran feastiuall day that ever was. And for all this,
Luther altered the said Bible three times after, and changed many things of the
first. Then did others leap out and make translations of their own, as
Zwinglius, whose version was by Luther condemned, yet still others made
translations, to the number of 67. versions, one condemning another, and
taking away, and putting in what them pleased; yea, they rent out of the Bible
whole books, which made plainly against their opinioms.

Carolastadius began to deny the real presence of Christ, in the holy
Sacrament, but Luther opposed himself against it, and reprehended him sharply,
which made Carolastade to leave Wittenberge; but they two meeting in an Inn
afterward, and Carolastade saying, that he durst defend his option by writing:
Luther took to his purse, and gave him a florence of gould, to do so if he
durst against him, which he took on that condition. So Luther bought the
wars against the Sacramentaries, whereof afterward, he had his hands full;
he and Zwinglius brawled about the translation of the Bible, he renounced all
general Councels, and ancient Fathers, and would not endure the word Clergy.
He permitted men to change their wives, would have no visible head of the
Church; he would gladly have denied the real presence, but the words were so
plain he could not, as he. He caused Carolo stade to be banished: whilst
Frederik Duke of Saxony he durst not alter the Mass, but he pulled out of the
litanies, the name of the holy Trinity. He with Melancthon would have abandoned
all liberal arts. He could never endure the Zwinglians, nor Sacramentaries, but
termed them Apostles of the Devil; Arians, Pelagians, etc. He did all that he
could in despite of the Council of Trent, and protested that he would oppose
himself, against the doctrine it should set forth, be what it will. He was
both in doctrine and manners an enemy to good works, and taught that only faith
was sufficient, which doctrine brought sorth fruits accordingly; as for
example, one of his Disciples a woman of Lipse a widow, by her own son was
gotten with child, who when she was great retired her self, and caused the
child being a girl to be brought up, her son (the father) not knowing of it;
when this girl was twelve years of age, the son father of it, married the
same girl, which by this means was his sister, his daughter, and his wife;
his mother knowing all. This sinful woman lying on her death-bedde, confesses
all to Luther, who with his scholars of Wittenberge pronounced, that the
quietness of this marriage ought not to be troubled, and that they must permit
the woman without other punishment, to go to heaven with only faith. He
stirred up the common people to rebellion, foa which, many thonsands of them
were slain, and was the cause of the great wars of Germany, vvherin was most
cruel carnage, and slaughter. He liked fair women so well, as that espying a
beautiful damsel, in the Duchess of Saxony her train, he protested that if
all the Devils of hell were such, he would gladly be amongst them, which speech
the Duchess thought strange, to proceed out of the mouth of him, who
preofossed himself to be the Reformer of the Christian world, but the Duke
answered, that Luther was flesh and blood as other men be: He made love
secretly to one Katherine Bore, a Nun, but durst not marry her as long as
the Duke lived.

Yet Carolastade first of all Priests married a woman, not secretly, but
openly; and that with triumph. This wretched Priest (as he himself says) was
so enraged with lust, that he was like to lose his senses; and at his marriage,
was Mass song after a new fashion, and this collect was made and put in: God
which after so long and wicked blinduesse of thy Priests, have vouchsafed to
give such grace to blessed Andrew Carolastade, that he first of al not
respecting the Popes law, durst enterprise to marry a wife, grant we beseech
thee, that all priests coming to their wits, fallowing his steps, their
concubines cast out or married, may be converted to the fellowship of a lawful
bed, through the Lord etc. Then follows the prose. God in thy power, Andrew
Carolastade does exult and rejoice, coupled in marriage; diverse others such like
stuff was thrust into that Mass which I omit, and ended with this collect:
Let the mysteries of the sacrament received, O Lord, succor us, and as we
rejoice in the connubial celebrity of Andrew Carolastade, so cause, we beseech
thee, that marriages of priests may happily begin through the whole world,
more happily go forward, and most happily end, through the Lord etc. Many
Friars, Moncks and others followed this example of his, leaping out of the
monasteries and cloisters, and got them wenches, and so became Gospellers; some
casting their Habites got great breeches, and short cloaks with swords by their
sides, and preached in that attire, some in one color, some in another, some
of one Sect, some of another; insomuch as almost every day, you might see a new
religion coined; but every one had his woman, or else no bargain: Luther
also, after the Duke was dead married his Nun, and had by her three sons.

Many more things are recorded of this man, which are easily seen in diverse
writers: These may suffice to give the unlearned Reader a taste of this
Reformer; and now you shall see what he lest to his followers.

CHAP. II. Of Lutheranisme.
FIrst then, the Churches of the Lutherans stand still as they did in the old
time, and the Cloisters for the most part in vvoods, and in desert places, as
those of the order of S.Bennet, and of S.Bernard nothing defaced, (except
Images is some places, where Carolastadius came) in such sort as a Catholic
entering into the Lutheran Temples, will deem that he is in Catholic churches.
For there shall he see the quier separated from the body of the Church, but yet
not altogether the same which was before. There is the great Altar still
standing, the Crucifixe above the Images of the twelve Apostles, diverse
Chapels and places of prayer, the font for Baptism, in many churches are the
Organs, Tapers, and other ornaments of the Catholic Church; all in outward
show have the marks of the ancient Religion of their forefathers: In cross
high ways the Crucifixe is to be seen as in Catholic time, which the
Lutherans reverence.

The people passing by little Churches in the country, enter into them, to say
their prayers before the Astar, they keep their Chapels neat and fine, in
good reparation, they never enter into their Temples (for so they term them,
and not Churches) but they kneel down, turning their faces toward the great
Altar, they keep the shadows of Bishops and Priests, yet have they changed
the names of them, in steed of Bishop, is the name Superintendent. This has
under him diverse parishes, and every parish has his Curate, whom they call in
the German tongue Pfather, and Deacons in their language called Helffers: The
Superintendent has either some reuennewes, or else is maintained by public
contribution.

But to know the diverse fashions of Lutherans, it is first to be understood,
that Luthers Sect is divided into two principal Factions: The one is called the
Confession of Ausburge made by Melancthon, Anno 1530, and presented to the
Emperor: The other is the Interim, which was a provision made, Anno 1584.
until the Council had determined matters of Religion, which Interim after
took force, and was reciued in Soxony, and in diverse Imperial towns, as in
Hamburge, Lubecke, Luneburg, Magdeburg, Hall, Noremberge, in the Marquisate of
Brandeburg, and in some other places. The book of this Interim in the German
tongue is called Rijrchenordming, that is, the ordinance of the Church, wherein
are written the forms and ceremonies of their Masses, made of an new fashion,
yet retaining many things of antiquity, as Kyrie eleison, Alleluia, and Dominus
vobiscum. The Pfather coming near the Altar, says Confiteor, with other
prayers as the Catholic priest does, and consecrateth, and communicates as he
does, but mingleth withal diverse prayers in the vulgar tongue, and also
recites the gospel in the same. They do not eleuate, for that they think the
body of Christ to be present there to be eaten, and not to be adored but only
of the receauer; yet many of that Sect hold it as a thing indifferent, whether
it be elevated or no, and so was it left in a Sinode by the Lutherans of
Denmark in Norway, 1537. and in another, 1549. and allowed by Pomeran and
Camerarius. The Lutheran priest when he says Mass is vested with a Surplesse,
and with a Coape or Vestment, and has two Deacons assisting him, the one
reads the epistle, the other the gospel; in some places in latin, and in
others in the vulgar tongue: coming to the consecration, and to other
ceremonies, he recites in his language the same words that the Catholic
priest does, he holds the Host, and the Chalice as he does, the Altar is
prepared, and Tapers burning upon it, as amongst Catholics: Their Chalices are
all of massiue gould, and that great ones yea in country Churches. The Pfather
ending his collects, turns toward the people and blesses them, making the
sign of the Cross, unto which all bow themselves kneeling.

They say but one Mass in one Church on a day, those who will receive come
near to the Altar, and kneel as Catholics do, the priest so vested turns
gives benediction, and puts the Host into the receivers mouth, as it is to
be seen in Saxony, and else where: Then the Deacon gives the Chalice with
wine consecrated. They never say Mass but some communicate, for Luther
abandoned all private Masses, so he termed them. They say their euensong in
the latin tongue, answering one another, after the manner of Catholics: Thus
much of the Lutheran Interimists.

They which follow the Confession of Ansburg, have not their Moss as the
Interimists have: Their Temples are in the same manner as the others, their
Pfather or Helffer, mounteth into the pulpit with his Surplesse, and there
preaches, having done he goes down, and before the Altar he says diverse
prayers alone, after, turning toward the people, he prays with a loud
voice, and so says a kind of Mass, although not with such ceremonies and
ornaments, as the Interimists use, for he has neither Coape nor Vestment, and
he reads the epistle and gospel himself. Having ended the collects, he
rehearses the institution of the Supper, in the vulgartongue, and consecreteth
the Hoasts; they who will communicate come before the Altar, the
Superintendent or pfather, takes the paten of gould in his hands, on which are
the little Hoasts consecrated, and making the sign of the Cross, puts them
into the receivers mouths, with such words as the Catholics do. After him
follows the Deacon with the Chalice, and gives to every one saying take,
drink, this is the true blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee. They who
receane, pray before and after by themselves as Catholics do: the actions and
benedictions being ended, every one goes his way. When solemn feasts draw
nigh, the Preachers exhort the people to confess, and to receive, so Luther
ordained. Upon the even of the feastiuall day the Churches are open, and the
Superintendent, and the Helffers, are near the Altars where they hear
Confessions: Those who come to confess draw near, and standing upright do
speak to the Helffer: If they desire to be instructed, three or four come at
once: If any have his conscience burdened, he confesses secretly, demands
pardon of God, and receives absolution. In many places they kneel, and none
are married, but such as go to confession, and receive the Sacrament: When one
is sick, he sends for the Pfather, who goes with an Host not consecrated,
he caufeth all to go out of the sick man his chamber, and then exhorreth him
to discharge his conscience by confession, which done, he gives him
absolution, making the sign of the Cross upon his head, then there is a
napkin spread upon a table, on which he fetteth the Chalice, and Paten, and
haning rehearsed the words of the institution, he consecrateth the bread and
wine: After the confession of the sick man, the people come in again and
kneel all there, and then the Pfather takes the Host, with the consecrated
Chalice, and gives them to the sick man, as he does in the Church,

Yet do not all keep their ordinances so strictly, as they are set down, by
reason that every man may belecue what he will: For one said in giving the
Sacrament, drink, and cate, and do not forget thy God: some others will say,
take cate, and remember the Lord: other say only a Pater noster: another having
forgotten his Chalice, and not finding a glass, took a pottage dish out of
the kitchen, powered the wine into it, and giving it to the sick man, said,
take and drink this dish of the new Testament in forgiveness of sins. They
never reserve consecrated Hoasts, for Luther taught directly against all
antiquity, that out of the Communion, Christ's body was not there.

In some places they say their euensong as the Interimists do, they sing them
every saturday, and have the Organs answering, as the Catholics have, and
singing boys which sing psalms, and notes. The bells found at the dawning of
the day, at noone, and at night, as among Catholics. Yet is there difference
amongst them in diverse places, for some do these aforesaid things in one
manner, some in another. In the Marquess of Brandebutge his Chapel, after
every psalm, in liewe of Gloria Patri, etc. (which Luther put away) they
discharged their pistols, which made an hideous noise with fire and smoke.
Both the Interimists, and Confessionists solemnize feasts, they highly
esteem Maundie thursday, on which day they confess and receive, and do
celebrate with religious reverence good friday. Above all, they keep holy the
feasts of the blessed virgin Mary, of the Apostles and Martirs, as Catholics
do: And no other difference is seen, but that the Catholics observe the
Gregorian Calendar, and they the old use; yet confessing that the reformation
is right. This is to be seen in Ausburg, Spires, Worms, Franckforte,
Ratisbone, and in other places without any contention at all. They bring their
children to the Fonts to be christened, which were In ancient time, and after
the P father has recited the institution of Baptism, he absolueth the infant
from original sin, coniureth the Devil to leave this new Christian which
he baptiseth, making three times the sign of the Cross; and other things
after the Catholic fashion. They observe also the Catholic ceremonies in
Marriage, for the most part they abstain from flesh on Fridayes, Saterdayes,
and in Lent, their Churchyardes are esteemed holy, and when one is dead, there
comes singers with boys kept for that purpose, which go before the Corpse,
and sing psalms in the vulgar tongue all the way, and in the Church: Many of
them believe that there is Purgatory, and do pray for the dead: The
Ecclesiastical persons in Imperial Cities enjoy their revenues, and so do
the Religious also.

But the Religious, which are in Lutherane Dutchies and Countries have been
banished, and poor children are put in their places, and brought up in
learning: Ecclesiastical persons amongst them, differ in habit from the
Laytie: The Confessionists are in many Emperial towns, as in Ausburg, Vlmes
Dingnelspil, Bibrace, Norlingen Hedpron, in Colmar, Strausburg, Haganan,
Wisemburge, Landan, Spires, Worms, Oppenheny, and Franckeforte. There be
diverse Princes, as the Duke of Wittenberg, the Lantgraue of Hesse, the
Marquess of Brandeburg, and other Counts and Lords which follow the Confession
of Ausburge, with an oath to admit no other Religion in their Territories.

When all the Country was in an vproare about these new Sects, many Sectaries
met together at Spires, and although they were of different opinions, yet
joined they in league against the Catholic Church, and against the Emperor,
protesting that they would dye in their opinions; And of this protestation
they were termed Protestans; but this league was afterward more established
at Smalcade.

See here many ancient ceremonies yet amongst the Lutherans, which make up a
just beard in the face of the eldest brother Lutheranisme: Now to John Calvin.

CHAP. III. What manner of man John Calvin was.
HE was borne at Noyon in Picardy in France the tenth of July, Anno 1509. His
name indeed was John Chaunie, son of Gerard Chaunie, and of Jane France: But
as Luther changed his name, so did he, and called himself Calvin; and because
the Anagramme of his name makes Lucian, he would be called Alcuin, who was
the learned master of Charles the great. After his infancy, in some forte
bestowed in learning sit for that age, he was sent to Orleans, and after that
to Bourges, to study the civil Law; and there meeting with one Melchior Wolmer
a Germane, the greek Reader, was by him drawn to the study of Divinity, for
that he espied a ready wit in him; and Melchior himself was sectetly a
Lutheran, but outwardly showed himself a Catholic: He opened unto Calvin the
secrets of Luther his Sect. After some time spent with Wolmer, of whom he
learned Luther his Religion, and some skill in the Greek tongue, he left the
University, and returned to Noyon, where his father had provided for him a
Prebend, and a Cure in the country: Yet Wolmer solicited him still by letters
to become a Lutheran, yea, after that he was returned into Germany. But he
went from Noyon to Paris, where he began secretly to teach his own opinions,
and being suspected he went to Angolesme, where he was maintained for the space
of three years, by one Tillet curat of Claixe, and Canon of Angolesme, to whom
he did read greek: And there it was said, and diverse have written it, that he
was accused and convicted of a most filthy crime. Here he began to frame his
Institutions, and did read the same to diverse secretly where he durst; he was
abstinent and of a sharp wit: but he abstayned (as himself confessed) not for
cause of Religion, but because his stomach was weak, and he was subject to
the Megreame. He would not as Luther his custom was to do, vomitte out all
that he thought, but kept still some things to himself, outwardly showing
himself otherwise then he was within; his words were few, and he given to be
solitary, for naturally he was Melancholic, opening himself to few, and not
delighting in company, and ever had in his mouth, Nunquam minus solus, quam cum
solus: That he was never less alone, then when he was alone. At Angolesme in
Tillet, his Gallery were some 3000. books and manuscripts, which Calvin still
turned over in such retired sort, as his chiefest friends could hardly come to
the speech of him. Luther was cloquent and had a great gift in speaking, and
preaching; but Calvin contrary was very silly in his sermons, and had neither
grace nor action in the pulpit, so asneuer any auditor was moved, but only by
the name of Calvin: he in his speech so unpleasing, and redious with his
quidmoror common in his mouth. He was more skillful in latin then Luther was. he
would often say, that Luther had done nothing vvorth a button, and that
Christendom was no more beholding to him, then a poor trauailer is obliged
to one that shows him his way a far of; that it was to no purpose to follow
his steps, which was (said he) to be half a Papist; but better it were to
build the Church altogether new: for he scorned to be any man's Disctple.
Dispite and desperation, made Luther an Arch-Sectary; and the desire of glory
and estimation, made Calvin another author of worse Heresies: for this he
writes of himself. All who desired pure doctrine came to me to learn,
although I my self had but new begun, Prafat, in Psalm He called himself a
Ptophet, and spoke and wrote in his own praise, and was very eloquent in his
mother tongue, which caused many unlearned to read his books with delight.
He used most dispitefull, and reproachful words against Kings, and Princes,
calling them brute beasts, fools, and asses. If they band against God (that is
to say, against his sect) says he, we ought rather to spit in their faces,
then to obey them, in 6. Daniell, he would endure no man, except he submitted
himself to him. Wolmar, who first founded the disposition of his wit,
vvriteth thus of him, to Farell his associate, in the conquest of Geneua: I
fear not so much (says he) the ouer-thwartnesse of his wit, for this vice is
sit to advance our affairs, to make him a stout defender of our opinions, for
he vvil not so easily be catched but that he will be able to entrap our
adversaries. This letter, caused great stir betwixt him, and one Christian, a
Minister of Poytiers, who scattered copies of it, by reason of the emulation
which was between him and Calvin: Whilst he stayed in Angolesme, he sayned
himself to be a Catholic, and said, in conference with his companions, that
what he said, he did it but by way of disputation, to find out the truth. He
passed from thence into Germany, and took Geneua in his way, and saw many
which were revolted, and amongst them Bucer, who brought him to Erasmus
Roterodamus (who then did but cry aim) and the same Erasmus, having sounded
Calvin, said to Bucer, pointing at him: I see a great plague spring in the
Church. Calvin returns again into France to Poytiers, where he got some
disciples, and he told them, that indeed Luther had found out but a little
spark of light, which gave a little aim a-farre off, to those who trauayled
in the dead time of the night, to give them some small glimmering of their
journey. But to come to light indeed, the Mass must be altogether abolished,
and the supper put in place thereof, where Christ (said he, to unite the
Lutheranes, and the Zwinglians) is really, but eaten spiritually, and by faith
only; that the communion of the material flesh, might enter into the soul by
the irradiation of the holy Ghost. But diverse of his disciples oppugned this
assertion, and invented new. When he had some few disciples, he sent them
abroad with new names; for one that was Reader in a Hall of the Institutes of
law, they called Monsieur le Minister. And although the name (Minister) be a
general name for Seruiteurs in the Church, and in the comonwealth, yet Calvin
first appropriated it to the Pastors and Teachers of his new Church; and yet
before it was never proper to any order or kind of men of religion. Another
was called the Gatherer: afterward, when their number increased, they ordained
Ministers, Carders of wool, Fullers, Drapers, Embroderers, and other
artificers; which secretly preached; there was hardly to be found amongst them,
no not in the year 1540 any learned man. He raised great stirs at Geneua, but
after many tumults he became their chiese Pastor, where he changed all, and
judging criminal causes. He married the Widow of John Estordeur borne in
Liege, in religion an Anabaptist, which left that sect and became of Caluins
religion; she was called Idelette de Bure, a name not much differing from
Luthers name: He never had child by her, although she were young and
beautiful, he married his brother Anthony Calvin, to the daughter of Nicholas
de Fer, who at Antwerp had played such prancks, as he was glad to run away,
and to shrowde himself at Geneua (which town was then become the receptacle
of bankrupts, vvhore-mongers, murderers, and of all debauched people which
flocked thither out of diverse countries, and became of Caluins religion,) He
made his brother a booke-seller, that he might disperse his books. But his
daughter being taken in adultery, and delivered to the Bonreau to be whipped,
and catted, shamed her uncle John so, that he could scarce look up or behold
the people, to whom he delivered this new gospel. He sent some few of his
disciples into America, to preach his gospel there, because he would seem to
be as zealous in planting, as the Catholics were known to be: But by that time
they came there, their provision of wine wasall spent, and not knowing how to
minister their communion for want of wine, they sent to their master Calvin to
know his opinion, who answered, that being constrained by necessity, they
might use in stead of wine, any other kind of drink, used in that part of the
world: Beza was of the same opinion, and so was Luther who taught also, that
for want of water, they might baptize in Ale, Beer, or Milk. Thus he taught
what him best pleased, and his resolution to his followers was an Oracle: he
lived and dominiered much at Geneua, where he ended his life most miserably,
being eaten with vermin to death, as histories do record.

CHAP. IIII. What religion Calvin left to his followers.
HE allowed of no Image at all for Religious use, turning away the word Idol in
the Bible, into the word Image, yet did he reserve the picture of the Devil.
He allowed of no feast day, but the seventh day, which they term the
Saboath; his church indeed was a long time without sorme, or fashion, for every
one used his own manner, some in one fort and some in another; yet they al
termed themselves the faithful children of Christ. They cannot endure the
sign of the Cross, nor Altars, nor any honor to the name of Jesus, nor
fasting days, nor chalices, but in their communion they use glasses. They will
have no head of their Church, but in steed of Bishops and Priests, they have
them whom they term a name, not known in that sense to antiquity: Their
ecclesiastical officers are divided into Ministers, Ancients, or Watchmen and
Deacons. In the ordinances of Geneua, there was a fourth kind, to wit Doctors,
but that continued but a small space: Their Ministers dot preach, administer
their Sacraments, and have sovereign authority. When one will bea Minister, he
is proposed to the Consistory, in the presence of the Minister, and Ancients,
(these be ignorant artizans) afterward he is admitted to trial, where a
chapter is assigned him to discourse upon, in the vulgar tongue; he must in no
case allege any thing in latin in sermons: But one chief point is, that he
be well able to rail against the Pope and Catholic religion, as one of them
began his sermon in this manner. The great locke-master (meaning the Pope)
brought up and fed fat in the ki^^hin of Satan etc. which the audience
applauding the preacher for his conceirs was much commended. The minister to be
after trial in this sort, is by the President of the assembly (having taken
suffrages) called in, who tells him his faults and wants, and also commends
something in him: Then he gives him his hand of association, and others do
the like making signs of amity, and ciuility; and this is all their making of
Ministers. Yet before he be a received Minister, some church or congregation
must make means to have him, and thither he goes, and if the people like of
him, three or four Ministers assemble, and receive him into the Ministry, and
for their brother and companion, after that he has subscribed to the
confession of their faith, his auditors maintain him, but his pension thirty
pounds, or forty pounds a year at the most, if he be unmarried, if married, he
may have two hundred crowns pension: some would have had them to serve without
any wages at all, as the Anabaptists do.

If he which is called to the Ministry has bin a Monk, Friar, Priest, or
such like, he must attend a while, until he have disgorged his Monkery (as
they term it:) They are always jelous of such persons; first they disgrade
them, dismonke them, and then call them to the Ministry. In disgrading them
they use this ceremony, the party puts off his habit, cursing him who vested
him therewith, then treads he it vuder his feet or renteth it: some of them
dye their habit to make coats for their women, or children.

If he be not married before, he takes a woman, and then they account him
their own sure; for you seldom or never shall find any such, which left not
his calling by the motion of the flesh, and not induced by the spirit: If any
one would live a single life, they cry our presently with Luther, that such are
not exempt from badde. Thus much for their Ministry; yet he who is a Lord of
Fee, if he think him self able and sufficient, without any more ado, may go
up into the pulpit, and teach subjects-

They now and then leave the Midistery, and become Advocates, Physicians, and
School emasters; for they have many occasions of chaunges, as want of
maintenance, the auditors liking another better then their own, with many such
like: By the ordinances of Geneua, no Minister which has been a Religious
man, can be President in their National Sinodes.

The Ancients watch and mark if any of theirs commit any scandal, especially
if they go to Mass, or to the Jesuits: and they report the same to the
Consistory. The Ancients and Overseers are much like, yet there is some
difference, for the Overseers are Assistants or Counselors to the Ministers,
and much inferior to them; they are indeed, as it were Beadles: The Ancients
may depose the Ministers, or silence them, until the next Colloque, or Sinode.

The Deacons keep the purse for the poor, they gather the Ministers pension,
visit the sick, make Collections among the people, to defray common charges
of warte, or of other affairs: They allure such as can bear Arms, and bring
their names to the Consistory. These Deacons serve al turns, they be Porters,
Readers, Servants to the Consistory, Asistants to the Ministers in the Supper,
and distribute the glasses: their Chaunters begin their psalms, Aduertisers,
as Apparitors who summon the accused to appear.

The Ministers, Ancients, and Overseers, hold Colloques, which are voluntary
assemblies of Ministers, three or four times a year, and every Minister has
his Ancient, where they dispute of doctrine, and appease disorders, and take
notice of memorable matters to be related to the Sinode; for the Sinode
determinethal, being divided into Prouincial, and National, for general they
can have none: For Lutheranisme has no participation with them; neither in
Faith, Religion, nor Ceremonies, no more has Anabaptisme, nor Angliansme. In
the Provincial Sinodes which are kept yearly, they choose one whom they call
a Moderator, and he is President of the Sinode.

The natural Sinode, is every second or third year, where every Province has
his Minister, and Deputy: that is their highest Court.

Their Consistory is composed of al sorts of persons, Soldiers, Citizens,
Courtiers, Artizans, and of the basest sort of people, which many found fault
with; but Calvin would have it so. In these assemblies, seven at the least
must judge cases concerning the soul, for they may excommunicate any of their
Sect, be he King or Kezar, bannish him out of their assemblies, and deprive
him of Sacraments.

This Consistory, is kept in the Ministers house who presideth, or in their
Temple.

The Ancients prye into the actions of their neighbors, and inform against
them, and then the Aduertiser is sent to summon the accused: If he appear not,
he is called by the Minister to the sermon, and after three times warning, is
cut off from their Supper. If he appear, he is brought into the Consistory,
where he stands bare-headed, and is forced to ask pardon, sometimes there,
and sometimes publicly at the sermon, where his fault before unknown, is made
public. If any have daunced, they are greatly punished for it, and for
curling their hair, and for such like: If it be a personage of high degree,
they conceal the crime, but declare publicly, that such a person has made
satisfaction for his fault. But by this means many offenders known to few,
come to open reproache, and many lose their good name, which they had before.
In very deed those Consistories and Sinodes are plain instruments and trumpets
of war; for they will command Kings and Princes: And to this end, Beza wrote
to the Ministers in France, that they should not receive into their Cities,
Captains and officers in war, but such as were chosen and approved by their
Consistories and Sinods.

They have ruinated Churches where they could prevail, and beaten them down
to the ground, and they exercise their Sect in vaste places of towns, in
barnes without any decking or hanging at all; for they abhor the Churches of
Christians, and will do no exercise of Religion in them, but down they must,
if it lies in their power: In other places, they make stables for horses, or
ware-howses for Merchants of goodly Churches. In their new Temples they have
benches, as in Colleges, for people to sit on: There they meeting salute one
another, especially the delicate dames, for other reverence there is none to be
done, neither to God, to Angel, nor to Saint; no body knecleth, for then they
cry out a Papist: Whilst there they expect the Ministers coming, some Brother
or Cobbler mounteth up in his artizans array, and reads to them a chapter of
the Bible, or an homely of John Calvin.

The Minister comes in a gown sometimes black, sometimes of other color,
sometimes in his cloak, with a hat of the common fashion. The Minister or
Preacher to the sister of Henry the fourth King of France and Navarre, never
came to her, but with his sword by his side, and in a blew or violet cloak,
with dublet and breeches of yellow chamlet, and one of them preached in a
garden, and made his pulpit the pommell of his sword sticking in the ground,
sometimes they preached booted and spurred: And all this after, they have had
liberty of conscience, for otherwise it might be excused; Yea. Anno 1599. the
Minister of Cottendiere preached in a suit of ginger color, with his sword and
dagger at his side.

The Minister mounted into his chair, makes his prayer for all, they some
standing, some sitting, here and there some kneeling, or as they please: the
prayer is very short, some twenty lines.

Then he preaches a sermon of some psalm in the vulgar tongue, with a loud
voice, all the people follow, men, women, children, and servants, some high,
some low, some in tune, some out of tune, with great confusion, without order
or harmony. Then falls he to his sermon, which being ended, he prays again
very briefly, and then they sing the section of the psalm out to the end. You
shall never see any among them, lift up their hands or eyes to ward Heaven, not
never knock their breaste, nor sigh; the most part among them will never
kneel: In brief, there shall thou see no more devotion, then is at a
stage play.

They have two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper. They baptize not by the
ordinance of Geneua, but at the preaching so amongst them: If they dye without
baptism, they are saved. At baptism, some infants are holden in the arms of
their godmothers, some lie in their cradles, and after the Minister has
rehearsed certain words, he throws a little water upon the childs face, and
says, I baptize thee etc. As for godfathers, or godmothers, they little regard
them: and they admit father and mother in stead of them. They give them new
names, but no names of Idolators (as they term them) but rather names of
Jews, and of such as were never Catholics, but not the names of Saints.

Their Supper they celebrate four times in the year, they go to it as to a
sermon, without any preparation; the Minister having ended his preaching,
comes down, and presents himself before the table, covered with a
napkin; upon the table, there is a basin full of common bread, cut in pieces,
and botles and glasses standing: The Minister takes a piece of bread and
gives another to the chief of the Consistory, some saying one sort of words,
and some another. The common people kiss the Minister his hand in receiving
bread of him, but if they are persons of account, the Minister kisseth the
bread before he give it to them. The Deacon gives drink in a glass to the
Minister, after, others drink: They kneel not at all, but cate it either
standing or walking; they never go to the sick with it, nor celebrate it, but
in the assemblies.

Marriage amongst them is no Sacrament: They who are to be married, present
themselves at the preaching, and there without ring, prayer, benediction, or
any ceremony at all, they are espowsed: No degrees are excepted, but brother,
sister, father, mother, diversity of religion, and fornication, with them
dissolueth the bond of marriage. If a Monk or a Friar apostate marry a woman,
and after leaving her, return to his Monastery again, she by the authority
of the Magistrate may marry another. If a man marry a woman, and she prove
with child by another man, he may forsake her, and marry another.: If a woman
will swear that she saw not her husband for the space of a year, nor
knows not where he is, she may marry another.

There is nothing that has drawn multitudes to be of therir Sects so much, as
the singing of their psalms, in such variable and delightful tunes: There the
soldier sings in war, the artizans at their work, wenches spinning, and
sewing, apprentises in their shoppes, and wayfaring men in their travail,
little knowing (God wotte) what a serpent lies hidden under these
sweete-flowers, what venom is in this pleasant liquor, and what distraction
is in this Sirens song: this craft and sbutilty did old Heretics use. These
divine psalms are by them transported out of the Church, into the dwelling
house, out of the Quire into the shop, and as absurd it is for a shoemaker
sowing his shoe, to sing one of these psalms, as it is to sing Misereremei. or
Deprefundis. in his petitions to God Almighty.

These Rithmes or Rimes in the vulgar, are rather Bezaes ballads, and Marots
muses, then psalms of David; for they vagary and go out at their pleasute,
from faithful translation and from the sense of the holy Ghost, to make up
their Rhyme: For it was hard, yea impossible, to fall right upon the feet of
the Hebraicall poesy, being full of allegories and figures. They seeing this
absurdity confuted in an assembly at Mountpeliere, put the psalms into prose,
and so to stop the mouth of Papists, by singing them in the old tune, and to
leave of Bezaes and Marots Rimes; but for fear of condemning their former
invention, they left the matter undecided. Marot in the very first psalm,
inueraeth the sense of the Prophet: Their Rimes indeed, are rather Paraphrases
of their own brain, than the text of Scripture, and so are nothing else but
the ballads of Beza, and of Marot. As for Marot he was a wanton Courtier, a
Poet, and a Musition, altogether unlearned but in the mother tongue; a man in
regard of his ignorance and lose life, most unfit to meddle in such divine
matters, or affairs. At the first they were taken but for ballads, and diverse
sung them to what tune they liked best, some in hunting and hauking, some in
other exercises, but they were not sung at sermons: In the end Marot fled to
Geneua, and there made up some fifty psalmicall ballads: But continuing his
lose life, and it being known that he had debaunched his hostess, for the
which he was openly whipped, he fled from thence into Pyemont and there he
died; after whose death Beza made up the rest of the Psalmical ballads, and
Calvin caused musitions to put ditties and tunes unto them, wanton, light, and
whatsocuer was delightful. In the year 1553, they ordained that they should be
sung in their Assemblles by sections: This singing of ballads, is the only
principal office, and ordinary exercise of their Religion; and what had they
before.

When any one dies he is put in a sheet, and without ceremony pomp, or
prayer, he is carried by two poor fellows unto the fields, or ditch, which
the magistrate has appointed for that purpose: There must be no weeping,
lamenting, nor sadness at all, nor sign of Christianity.

The minister goes not with the corpse, nor has any thing there to do, but if
it be a person of account, the minister perhaps will accompany them as a
private friend, but not as a Pastor: In this business no body must pray, for
fear of being accoumed a Papist. Behold Caluinisme the second brother without
a beard, that is without any ceremony at al, no, he renounceth al as you see
even at his death: and so let him be buried. Geneua is the chiese seat of the
Caluinists, and they are in the Palsgraue his country, but jarring in some
points about their Supper. There are many of them in France, but they have no
exercise of their Sect in Cities and Port-townes, except in Rochell, and some
few besides. There they call themselves brethren of the Religion reformed, but
ordinarily they be called Hugonots: There be some of them scattered in other
parts of Germany, and in other countries, as also in great Britain; but there
they have no liberty, nor free exercise of their Religion.

CHAP. V. Of Anabaptists.
BAlthazar Hubincer learned the doctrine of the Anabaptists first of Luther,
and was burned for the same: He would not content himself with Luther his
Sect, but broached Anabaptisme in Morauia; of the same faction was Thomas
Muncer an apostata Priest, disciple of Carolastade, Nicholas Stark was
another; these drew their doctrine out of Luther his books: They feigned that
the Angel Gabriell appeared to them, and revealed their Religion.

Muncer cried out against Catholics and Lutherans, he made show to detest
vices were they never so small, and exhorted his followers to fastings,
prayers, and to austerities to chastise the flesh. Menna another of the same
Sect, called Luthers doctrine carnal, dissolute, and more impious then the
Religion of Turks and Tartars. This Muncer made show of wonderful simplicity,
not only in his preachings but also in his cerriage, in his atire, and manner
of life; he often feigned to be in meditation, as in an ecstasy, and after
told marvelous visions, as though he had talked with God, his his prayer was
this, lifting up his eyes toward Heaven: Father, power into my soul a zealous
desire of thy justice, which if thou do not I will deny thee, and al thine
Apostles: the like did many others his companions. He taught that al were
brethren as children of a damme, and that it was against reason that some
should starve, whilst others swimmed in wealth, and that the Apostles had
nothing of thrir own, but al was common: This doctrine drew infinite numbers of
people, and caused strange commotions, seditions, and wars. Some counterfeired
miracles, and some suddenly could read, which knew no letter in the book
before; who coming again to be Catholics, lost their skill in reading, This
Muncer afterward was put to death, who took it patiently, and with wonderful
courage, and exhorted Princes to read the Bible, and to understand the word of
God.

After this man's death, they made themselves a King, and Prophets, who took
upon them, to inspire the holy Ghost into others; but they were after taken and
suffered death.

CHAP. VI. What Anbaptisme is.
THey first hold as all Heretics have done, that nothing is to be believed,
but what is expressly set down in the Bible, and by that they prove what they
will, as the Lutheran does, who takes in hand to prove by Scripture, that
drunkenness pleases God. In a book printed at Lipse, and dedicated to the
Countess of Mansfield, they affirm, that there is no true Church but theirs;
when they will choose their Pastors, they assemble the people, and the most
ancient shows the necessity of such a flock unprovided: every one gives
his voice for the election, and upon whom the lotte falls, he takes an oath
to govern and rule well the flock. This new dignity gives the Pastor neither
title nor degree, for being a craftsman, he carries the marks and habits of
his trade, and has no show at all of a Pastor; they have Deacons also in the
same fashion, they have no pension or wages, but live by their labors as others
do, and from the pulpit they go to the plough or cart, or to their work,
according to their trade. They will meddle with no churches nor temples, but make
their assemblies in howses, as is to be seen et Flushing, Midleboroug,
Dansieke, Camfer, Amsterdam, and in other parts of the low Countries. They
come not where Catholics or Lutherans do govern, but are in Friseland,
Westfalia, Prussia, Silesia, Morauia, in some parts of Bohemia, and in some
places belonging to the King of Poland.

They baptize none, until they come to the years of discretion, and if any
come to be of their Sect, who was baptized when he was a child, they christen
him again, and of this they take their name. They cannot endure the Mass, but
content themselves with prayer and preaching, they believe not Purgatory,
neither do they pray to Saints,: they have no Images or sign of the Cross,
neither do they any reverence at the name of Jesus. They teach that no man
ought to be forced for his faith, but that every one must be free in such
things: They believe and celebrate the Supper as the Caluinistes do, for the
most part, but these receive standing only, and carry it to the sick, but
they never singe psalm, ballad, not any song.

When any man or woman comes to be baptized, he presents himself to the
assembly, and upon his knees he desires it, and gives testimony of his faith:
and if he be a magistrate, he must forgo his office. If they knew him to be
of good life, the Pastor casts water upon his head, saying, I baptize thee in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, without
anything else.

They outwardly show great piety and zeal of Religion, and cuery one assures
himself that he has the holy Ghost, and that he does not sin; and indeed in
their negotiations and worldly business, what injury soever is offered unto
them, you shall never see them passionate or in choler, but always mild and
quiet, and most bold and constant in their profession.

They persuade themselves that they see many visions, and that the spirit
reuealeth unto them things to come: but how often have they been deceived.
John of Lerden their first King, and second prophet, foresawe that he should be
the Emperor of the world; but he was soon dispatched by the hangman. A woman
prisoner at Basil, prophesied that she should live without meat, which she
did nine days together, but dyed the tenth day. Many times they have
fore-tould the day of judgment, and have expected it lying in the cold night
upon rocks, with a white sheet about them, waiting for Christ his coming. A
young woman amongst them married to a Monk, being so poor that they had not
bread to put in their mouths, she had a revelation that she should inuit her
friends and neighbors to a feast, with promise that nothing should be
wanting; she did so, and many came invited, all ran after to see the
miracle: She borrowed many tables, at which the guests were placed, expecting
their victuals, she willed them to have patience a while, and they should see
Angels bring meat abundantly from Heaven; she prayed with sighs and sobs
even until night, but nothing came, which made her guests in a fury half
famished, to go home in haste to get some victuals. Hoffinan their great
preacher, taught them to suffer wrongs without murmuring, not to defend
themselves, hut to endure all for the honor of God, to do good for evil, to
bear no arms, nor use any words, or weapon, but only prayers. They apprehend
no malefactor, they will be no magistrates, they say that their Pastors and
assemblies suffice for all. They detest swearing more then any thing in the
world; yea, in courts or before Judges. They can abide no Images, and when one
dies, he is carried without pomp or ceremony, and buried in the Churchyard
amongst other Sectaries.

This Sect is divided into many petite Sects, and one amongst another. So as
if an Anabaptist of Sueuia, or Morauia, come into Holland, he cannot be
admitted into their Synagogue, except he will be baptized again. The
principal Sects amongst them are Apostoliques, which say that they live as the
Apostles did, these have all their goods in common. In Morauia are many
thousands of this sect, none has any goods, or possessions, they til the
ground for others, and have trades, but all have equal profit, none can be of
their Religion but such as will labor, they get much and spend little, which
causes them to maintain themselves well.

They have ouer-seers, which see, that every one has what he needs. They
have besides spiritual Fathers, which instruct them in Religion, and read the
prayers in their assemblies. Whilst the Father reads with a loud voice,
houlding his hands together, the rest sigh, joining their hands, but speaking
no word. Then they depart every one to his work. They have no other
preaching, nor other kind of prayer. They celebrate their Supper twice in the
year, and men and women sit at it pell mell, inuiting one another to eat with
great modesty. They use also great temperance in their houses, for sitting
down at table, they remain almost a quarter of an hour with their hands
joined against their mouth, not speaking a word, but do meditate and pray by
heart, whilst they eat they have an old Archimandrite, which marketh them
without speaking any word, when they have eaten they return in great silence
to their labors. At work you shall see thirty or forty together, and never
speak word one to another. In all their doings they greatly observe
cleanlynesse, and silence. To be brief, they live much like unto well ordered
religious persons.

They observe no feast days, they have their Bible curtaild at their pleasure,
and are very skillful in the Text, expounding it most commonly after the
Letter, and their own brain. They will not dispute, nor reason of Religion.

There are other Anabaptists termed pure, which say they are without sin, and
therefore put out of our Lords prayer, forgive us our sins; and hold that
Christians after baptism cannot commit sin.

There are besides these the free anabaptists, which will not pay tribute, nor
obey Princes: These affirm marriage to be spiritual, and have their women in
common, and say it is the motion of Gods spirit. Feliciatus Capitonus
records, how one of these brethren entering into his friends house, told
him that the holy spirit commanded him to lie with his wife, to which he
accorded, but afterward seeing his daughter fair and young, no said he to the
wife, the spirit says I must lie with thy daughter; the husband returning in
the morning, and finding him in bed with his daughter, how now (quoth he) is
the holy spirit a deceauer; the same spirit commands me to punish thee for
it, and presently he stabbed him to death with his dagger: many such tragedies
have bin seen amongst them, issuing out of their doctrine.

There be many more diversities among them, which here to recount would be over
tedious, let these suffice for this brief treatise: Behold the third brother
with no beard at all.

CHAP. VII. Of Anglianisme.
Sects of Religion are diversely termed, some take their names of the authors,
as Arianisme of Arius, Lutheranisme of Luther, etc. Some of the matter, as
Anabaptisme of repaptizing, or not baptizing infants, some of the country where
it is, or of the people thereof, as Turcisme of the Turks, Ethnicisme of the
Heathens, Anglianisme of England, or of the English, who profess the same
Religion, being not precisely in any country but in England, and in Lands
belonging to that Crown.

Every one knows, how from the christening of this people, they were still
of the Catholic Religion, until King Henry the eight his latter days, in
which upon displeasure taken against the Pope, because he would not divorce him
from his wise Lady Katherine, and permit him to marry Lady Anne Balleine, he
renounced the Pope, and called himself head of the Church in his Dominions,
and supreme governor in Eeclesiasticall causes. He was emboldened so to do
by Luthers reuolte, which was in his time, albeit Luther would allow of no
visible headship, neither did he regard Luther nor his doctrine: He took upon
him this title first of all Kings christened, yet did he not change Religion
but in few points, but put down Abbeis and Religious howses.

In the days of his son King Edward being a child, the Kingdom was
governed by his uncle the Lord protector, who to make himself great put down
Catholic Religion, and brought in a religion composed by his preachers, partly
of Luthers, and partly of Caluins Sect: but the child King dying within few
years, Catholic Religion was restored again by Queen Marie, who lived not
long. To her succeeded Lady Elizabeth her sister, who beginning her reign in
November, suffered the Catholic Religion until midsomes after, because they
had nothing yet framed to put in place thereof, for she would not allow of
her brothers Religion in all points, nor of the Bible: She could not endure
the Caluinists, nor she had no liking of Luthers Religion. She deemed with a
french Hugonot of Gascony that Caluins Religion was too lean, and the
Catholic Religion too fat, because the one had many ceremonies, the other
none. She would have the Churches still to stand, and the names of
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Cannons, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
etc. She appointed her Bishops, and made them by her letters Patents, and
confirmed them in that calling by the authority of the Parliament. The manner
of their ordering is this: The Prince nominateth them, then an Archbishop with
two more Bishops consecrateth them (as they term it) with prayers, and
imposition. Their habit is something Priest like, with a corner-cap and a
rochet; all the clergy mengoe ordinarily in black, but the most part of them
wear ruffes much like merchants, but not altogether so large: as for jerkins,
dublets, breeches, and such like, many of the Ministers make them after the
newest fashion taken up, as the lay men do. They be al married except very
few, which may marry also if they will; Bishops, Deanes, Archedeacons, yet the
Archbishop of Canterbury the Metropolitan of England lives unmarried, but that
is voluntary and not by any bondage. These Bishops make Deacons and
Ministers, with imposition of hands, and with few other ceremonies. The Bishops
have the same Bishopriks which were in Chtholike time, and the same places and
titles, but not so large revenues. The Ministers have parsonages, vicarages,
and other benefices as in old time, but many of them are curtaild. These
clergy men are bound to no offices nor prayers, more then the lay men be, but
if they have benefices or cures, they must read their service in the Church,
or preach upon sondaies and holidaies: their Injunctions appointe them to read
something in the Church, upon wednesdaies, fridaies, and upon vigils and euens,
in manner of an euensong; but that custom is little observed, and in few places,
as also their holydaies grow out of use, and are little regarded. They use
churches which were in Gatholike time, but nothing is left within them but a
table for the Communion, and a pulpit or seat to read prayer in: In place
where the Crucifixe was behind the high Altar, there are the Kings arms, but
no picture or image of Saint is seen therein, no, scarcely in the glass
windows.

They have a form of prayer, which they call divine service, consisting of a
kind of general confession, with a kind of inuitatory, three psalms, two
chapters of the Bible, some collects, a kind of litanies, ten commandments,
epistle, and gospel, a few collects again, and then the peace of God which
passes all understanding.

But of this many make small account, but all the reckoning is of a sermon, and
ordinarily they have two upon sunday: as for their service they say it by
pieces omitting what they will, yea if occasion, serve, before and after the
sermon they sing a section of a Geneua psalm, turned into rhyme in the vulgar
tongue, here all sing, boys, wenches, women, and all sorts.

The Minister in his sermon upon these days, should by their laws wear a
surplesse, and a corner cappe, but great stirs have been and are yet
sometimes about this business: Some would wear them, but their wives will not
consent thereto, some for refusing them have lost their benefices, and some
have fled away and become Caluinists, and some of other Sects, and these kind
of men ordinarily dislike their service, and ceremonies

They have two sacraments, baptism and the supper, and the Bishops sometimes
do confirm after a new fashion, but account it only a ceremony, and no
sacrament, neither do they much urge it. They baptize most commonly at the
font in the Church, with some ceremonies taken from the Catholic Church, as
with the sign of the cross, but that is most odious to the purer sort. By
the laws they should minister their Communion in singing bread, as Catholics
use, but many will none of that, but use common loaf bread in steed thereof,
and they have a silver cup wherein they give the wine: all by the law must
receive kneeling.

The Minister at the first beginning coming to the Communion table, must turn
his face into the west, but that was after altered, and he appointed to turn
to the north, which yet at the length was changed, and now he has his face
toward the south, and the west, when he reads service.

The Prince with the Parliament may determine of Religion, and what by them is
set forth must be observed.

They have besides, many other obseruauces taken from Catholic Religion, as in
some Churches wearing of coaps, playing on organs, singing in the old Sarum
tune and such like: they wed with a ring, and bury with solemnity the Minister
meeting the corpse, reads prayers and other things.

Their laws bind them to celebrate and keep holy the days of the Apostles,
and of many other Saints, as also to fast lent, on vigils, and to abstain
from flesh on fridaies and satterdayes, but few observe them, or fast or
abstain from flesh any day, if any do he is suspected to be a Papist. Indeed
great personages, and such as be in high offices and dignities, will usually
have their tables furnished with fish and some dishes of flesh on such days,
and every man may cate what likes him, but if he eat no flesh he is deemed to
be no sound Protestant, for so they term them of their Religion, but
impropetly, for the name is proper to the Lutherans, as is said, and agrees to
none other.

King James since he came to the Croune, has caused sondaies to be most
strictly kept, and this they call the Saboath, and observe it almost as
precisely, as the Jews do their satterday, but of other holidayes there is
little regard.

There are besides in this land other petite Sects lurking in corners, as
Brounists, Anabaptists, Family of lone, and Traskites now beginning not heard
of before, but because they be obscure and not allowed of, I pass them over
with silence.

Hear may thou plainly see that the religion of England, is composed of
Catholic Religion, of Lutheranisme, and Caluinisme, and yet approves no one
of them, but differs much from every one, singled out by themselves. Diverse
ceremonies thou see in this Religion, and diverse rejected, so that this is
plainly the fourth brother with half a beard.

Now ponder with thy self, (my gentle Reader) and then judge whether thou have
reason, to leave the Catholic and universal Church of Christendom, continued
throughout the world for so many ages together, and still is flourishing, to
join thy self to any one of these late risen Sects; and of which soever thou
art, all the rest will condemn thee: If thou have but the least spark of Gods
grace to assist thee, thou will easily determine to take the best and safest
way.

And so fare thou well.
Finis.

