A RECANTATION SERMON PREACHED IN THE GATEHOVSE AT WEST- minster the 30. day
of July 1620. In the presence of many worshipful persons, by John Harding,
late Priest and Dominican Friar.

Wherein he has declared his just motives which have moved him to leave the
Church of Rome, and to unite himself with the reformed Church of England,
whose faith and doctrine, the ancient fathers and holy Martyrs hane confirmed
both by blood and writing.

Showing herein the gross errors of Rome, in matters of faith, their corrupting
the Fathers, and their present declining to some strange and future Ruin.

LONDON, Printed by Barnard Alsop for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his
shop against the Counduit in Fleetestreet.

1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT Nanton, Knight, chief Secretary to his
Majesty's state and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
HE that has passed a dangerous sickness, and has recovered his former
health again, is bound in a double Obligation: The one is to be grateful to
the Person by whose means he recovered his health: The other is to use all
means possible, that those which be sick of the like disease, may by his
recovery be the better: According to that of our Savior, Et tu co^uersus
confirma fratres tuos: And therefore right Honorable, although it be somewhat
besides custom to make Dedications of printed Sermons; yet it is my duty to
offer to your Honor the first fruits of my conversion: Your Honor being next
and immediately under God the chief worker thereof. The which as it is a
gretaer benefit then any worldly thing can afford me, so does it require a
fuller acknowledgement then as yet, I could at any time manifest: howsoever I
have most earnestly desiredit. In which respect being over entreated by some of
my friends to publish this Sermon of my Recantation, and to set down to the
open view of all, the just reasons, and sollid grounds that moved me there
unto. I have made hold to pass it under your Honors name, hoping by your
former encouragements, of your loning acceplance. And albeit they be but my
first Assayes in this kind, and therefore may chance to seem: but harsh, yet
because my desire is only to set forth God; mercy toward me: your Honors
loving kindness showed to me, And to stop the mouths of some malicious
Papists that rail against me, I trust that your Honor will accept of this my
weak endeavor as a token of my thankful mind, which I in all duty recommend
unto your Honors favor, and your self and yours, in your affairs unto the
mercy, and bliss of the blessed Trinity, who ever so asssist your Honor in
all your proceedings, as that after these present toils and troubles, your
Honor may receine that happy Crown of glory, Quam repromiscit Deus
diligentibus se.

Your Honors ever in Christ Jesus John Harding,

A RECANTATION SERMON, PREACHED BY A DOMINICAN Friar.
Psalm. 119. verse 71. It is good for me that I have been in trouble, for
thereby I have learned thy Statutes.
De elementiaad Neronem.
SEneca a grave Philosopher, writing unto Nero, and tracting of Cinna an
ancient Roman, and public Rebel, he uses these words: Periti medici vbi
blanda medela non pracedat tentant contrarium. It is the use of good Physicians
that when a gentle Meditine does take no place, they presently apply a sharper
salve, and more bitter corrasiue: The like course takes Almighty God with
those that be repugnant unto his holy will and rebellious against his known
truth, when fair means and loving kindness cannot prevail, then goes he non
alliciendo sed compellendo, not by alluring or enticing, them but by compelling
and enforcing them, vt quod non possit per disceptatione saltem pos sit per
vim, that those whom he cannot win by loving exhortations he will bring them
home by extremities: For as Isocrates an ancient Grecian says, (...),
afflictions are our instructions, and extremity is Gods opportunity. The
prodigal child would not return vn-his father until extremity compelled him,
Manasses living in his pomp and pleasure in Jerusalem, planted groves, and set
up Idols against God and godliness, but being in prison in Babylon, and
chained in a dungeon the Scripture says, that he did turn his heart unto the
Lord his God and besought him earnestly: therefore says Solomon to all things,
there is an appointed time, and a time for every purpose under the heavens: God
has his time to afflict us, that we may the more earnestly seek after him,
multiplicatae sunt infirmitates, eorum postea acclerauerme: as our Savior
says, seek and you shall find? But how must we seek? it is said we must seek
him by Prayer. Inuoca me in die tribulationis and ego exaudiam te, call upon me
in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee.

The Prophet David being much afflicted in many of his Psalms, does often call
upon the Lord, as in the 120. Psalm ad Dominum cum tribularer clamaui: when I
was in trouble I called upon the Lord, and in the 130. Psalm, de profundis
clamaui ad te domini, domine exaudi vocem meam, out of the deep of my heart
have I called unto thee O Lord, O Lord hear my prayer: so that as prosperity
does cause many to forget God, and to neglect their duties toward him: so does
adversity call them home again, and makes them more careful to seek after
him, and to walk more warily in his ways. And therefore, the Prophet David in
another place of this Psalm says, Before I was in trouble I went wrong, but
now have I learned to keep thy laws, and so concludes in the seventh verse
saying, bonu^ est mihi quia bumili asti me, it is good for me that I have been
in trouble. The like may I say at this time right Worshipful and my loving
auditors, it was good for me that I have been in trouble, for before I was in
trouble albeit I had a zeal to serve the Lord, yet I had not the true way and
means to serve him as he ought to be served: having lived as long time from
the truth as from my country and friends, being from my first arrival into
this Land, deteyned in prison, sequestered from all conversation and society. In
this my affliction and long misery I prayed both instantly and fervently to the
Almighty that he would vouhcsafe to open mine eyes, enlighten my darkness, and
incline my heart unto his testimonies, that I might serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life, for in him only, and for him only, I
desired to live and dye, refoluing my self that whatsoever shall be fall me
in this life, I will esteem it all happiness, for the peace of conscience and
the glory of Gods most holy name.

As I was thus communing with my soul, there came into my mind that worthy
precept of St. John when he says, Trust not every Spirit, but try the Spirits,
whether they be of God or no: Likewise I did much ruminate and ponder with my
self, the place of the Prophet Esaias, where he says; to the Law and the
Testimony If they speak not according to this Word, It is because there is no
light in them. Whence I did gather, that all Services and Doctrines of Religion
are not acceptable before God: For Faith comes by hearing and hearing of the
word of God: so that if they speak not according to this Word it is rather
fancy, then faith, humane traditions, then Gods institutions, and consequently
condemned by our Savior in the 15. of Matthew, where he expressly reproved the
Commandments and traditions of men. And St. Paul rejects as Bastard slippes
all voluntary Services what appearance or outward show of devotion soever they
bear.

By which and other like places, I was moved to examine my profession whether
it were of Gods institution, and especial command specified to us, or whether
God were the author of those Services and Ceremonies which now beat great sway
in the Church of Rome: and after due examination I found out for certain that
many points of the Religion, now embraced by the Romanists are not to be found
within the volume of Gods Word. When I considered this, and perceived the
weakness of the grounds that must warrant our souls, it gave me occasion to
forsake my communion with the Church of Rome, in whose bosom I have been long
detayned; of whom I may justly complain as the Prophet Jeremy did of the false
teachers in his days, they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what
wisdom is then in them.

Likewise I often busied my self in reading of Books, treating of Religion,
and such as handled matters now in controversy: as the Apollogy of the most
reverent Father and learned Scholar John Jewel, Bishop of Sarisbury, written
against a friend and near Kiseman of mine Docter Harding; together with
another no less reverent then learned, Marcus Antoniuus de dominis Archbishop
of Spalato, whom after I had well perused, I found such comfort in my
conscience and such sollid doctrine for my soul, that I made no doubt to say
with the Prophet David, a domino factum est hoc, this is the Lords doing. Now
the Sun is up, and the Clouds of ignorance are gone, the truth shines, and
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, therefore I may say with my Text, bonum est
mihi quia humiliastime. It is good for me that I was in trouble, for thereby I
have learned thy Statutes. But what are these Statutes? they are the Word of
God, contained in the Law and the Prophets: which are the rule of our Life, and
the square of our Faith, and the very Oracle of Almighty God, from Heaven to
reveal his will unto us, for certain it is that Christ came not to destroy
the Law, but to fulfill it: he swarued not from the Law and the Prophets,
neither did the Apostles teach any thing upon their own will and discretion,
but the Doctrine which they received of Christ, they faithfully delivered it
unto the people, and Nations.

And this they preached at the first in viua voce:, that is, in a lively Voice,
and afterward delivered it unto us in writing, to be the foundation and Pillar
of our Faith, Qui hoc credit (says Tertullian) nihil habet quod vitra credat:
He that believes this, has no Obligation to believe any thing else: and this
is that which we ought to believe without either adding or diminishing.

I would now demand of the Pope and his Papalins, in what Gospel, in what
Apostle, in what Prophet or Evangelist, or Book of Moses, they find either Pope
or his supremacy? where are his Pardons? where is his Mass? where Images?
together with many other his Fopperies, which now they hold to be very
precious. We read in the 20. of Exodus, that almighty God does expressly forbid
the making of any Image, to represent the Person of Almighty God, or to do any
service and obey sance to any Picture, or representation of the creature: for
first God is a Spirit invisible, incomprehensible, and Eternal, and therefore
he cannot be signified by any Image or creature, which is both corporal and
momentary, and therefore God in his second Commandment forbids all service
done unto Images: but contrary unto this the Church of Rome does command and
allow not only the making of Images, but also does command the serving and
worshipping of them, as by incensing them, in lighting of Candles unto them, by
kneeling before them, and by yielding up their offerings, and devotions unto
them.

All which can be no less then gross Idolatry: for albeit, they do not
worship their Images, as stocks and stones, but as they represent either God or
some Saint: So likewise did not the Isralits, worship their golden Calfe, as
the true God, but they did worship the true God in the Calfe, and yet
notwithstanding, the Text says, that they did commit Idolatry, and many of
them were severely punished for the same, Exodus 32. so that the Idolatry of the
Church of Rome is as gross as that of the Isralites. What can be more
iniutious unto God then to hope for help of him, and yet notwithstanding to
pray unto a senseless stock? The faith of the Patriarchs and Prophets, and
righteous Fathers from the beginning of the world, was the same as ours is, and
ought to be, as the Apostle says, that they were all baptized in the red Sea,
and did eat the same spiritual meat, and iniutious unto drink the same
spiritual drink, as we do now: But was Abraham, Isaac, or Iaacob, Papists?
did they fall down before stocks and stones? before Idols or Images to pray or
offer unto them? did they go on pilgrimage one to another Relikes to do
devotion unto them? there is neither show nor shadow of these things in the
Word of God.

Chrysostom says, that Christ, nee discessit a lege neque a Prophetis: but
none of all this is to be found in the Law or the Prophets, therefore in no
wise to be admitted.

As touching the distinction which they use betwixt Duleiam and Latreiam,
affirming that they give to Saints only Du^^iam; that is, a kind of Religious
Service, and that they give Latreiam unto Almighty God, intimating thereby that
they both worship God and serve their Images: Our Savior confounds them in
the 4, of Matthew saying as is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve.

And Saint Paul persuades the Corinthians to turn from Idols and Images, and
to serve the everliving God, where he does use the word Duliea, for the
Service of the true God, showing hereby the opposition that is betwixt the one
and the other, that he that serves Images, cannot in any wise serve the
Almighty God:yea God himself speaks it plainly, in his first Commandment,
to worship and serve him, only, neither will he give his Honor to any other.

In the first precept God condemns all false Gods, in the second all false
worshipping, of the true God, as making of Images unto God, or yielding unto the
Image any part of devotion which belongs unto the Lord. For it is not enough
to know the true God, and to acknowledge him alone to be worshipped, according
to the first Commandment, and yet break the 2. by worshipping him amiss: As
in setting up of Images, and bowing and kneeling unto the^: for as the Almighty
God says in the 27. of Deuteronomy. verse 15 Cursed be the man that shall make any
carved or molten Image, for it is abomination unto the Lord, they that make
them are like unto them, and so are all they that put their trust in them. For
as Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron by offering of strange fire before the
Lord, became liable to his wrath and maledictio^ for their presumption: so the
Papists that do add strange doctrines and new invented traditions to the Word
of God, and service of the Lord do incur his heavy wrath and continual
displeasure. And therefore we are willed by the holy Ghost to fly from them and
their abominations, least we be partakers of their sin, end so likewise of
their punishment,

The 2. Motive that moved me to leave the Papists, is, because they do as it
were hood-winke the people in their religion, giving a Service in a language
they understand not, amazing them with many outward Ornaments, and huge heaps
of Ceremonies, calling Ignorance the the Mother of Devotion, and Images
Layemens Books. But we read in the Council of Tolledo in Spain, that
Ignorantia est matter omnium errorum, Ignorance is the mother of Devotion, but
rather of Atheism, and the root of all error. What should it avail Moses to
speak in Hehrew to a man of Africa, who understands no Hebrew, and what may it
avail the people of other countries to hear their common Service in a tongue
they understand not: for albeit they hear with their ears, they understand
not with their hearts, they are not much better then Birds and Parrats which
babble much, and understand nothing: Therefore in the primative Church; when
Faith was then in learning, the prayers and other Service was set fourth in a
common tongue, known unto the people that they might understand what they did
profess, and to be able to give a reason of their faith.

When Almighty God appointed Moses to open the Law for the direction of his
Church, he decreed it as an everlasting duty to all his people, that the book
of the Law should not depart out of their mouths, but that they should meditate
therein day and night, to observe and do according to all that is written: But
how should they meditate in them if they be unknown to them? and how should
they know the^ if they be in a tongue they understand not? is not this the
curse which God by his Prophet denounces saying, I will speak unto this people
in another language and by strange lips, so as they shall not understand me: who
would not justly suspect such a church, yea and co^demn it, when to maintain
and continue their error, they will have none of the people either to search
the Scriptures, or to understand their common Service that they hear daily?
Thus the silly Papalins are led like blind men they know not whether, and with
her fides implicita that is, to believe in gross (for their part) they know
not what are lamentably seduced. The people go to see Mass, but not to
understand it; and ofttimes the Priest himself understands not what he says,
and this is done for a double end, the one is that the people may be kept still
in Ignorance, and the other is, that it may be a mark of the Popes dominion,
in that they use his language in their divine Service, and so might be thought
to hold their Religion from the Popes Chair, even as the Spaniard constreyneth
the Indians to speak Spanish, the better to reduce them under his Dominion.
But the Prophet David says Psalm. 86. Dominus narauit in Scriptur is populoru^,
God has opened and declared his ways and will in the Scriptures: but in whose
Scriptures? Hierom upon this place answers thus, the Scriptures of the
people, so called, because they be read unto the people, that is to say, that
all may understand, because the Princes of Christ which were the Apostles and
Evangelists did not write them for afew, but for the whole people, not that
afew, but that all should understand.

Saint Paul writ long Epistles to the Corinthians, Ephesians, and Philippians,
in his own language, that all might read and understand what he wrote unto
them: Why then may not others read the same Epistles in their own language as
the Corinthians and Ephesians did in theirs. St. Hierome, in an Epistle to
Laeta, writes thus, Let thy daughter love divine and heavenly Books instead
of silks and precious Stones, let her learn of the Psalms to despise earthly
things, let the Proverbs of Solomon teach her to live virtuously, let the
Ecclesiastes accustom her to renounce worldly vanity, let Job teach her
patience, let her take the Gospel of Christ into her hands, and let it not
depart from her, let her diligently study the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles.

And when she has enriched the Closset of her heart with such riches, then
let her learn the doctrine of the Prophets, and the books of Moses. This was
the practice and use of the Church in Saint Hieromes time, and long after him,
as may appear by Saint Gregory, in his Pastoralis.

If the reading of the Scriptures may be forbidden because some abuse them; in
the using: then also may the Sacraments be forbidden, because they are
sometimes abused in the receiving, which to do were a thing much dissonant to
Gods will and pernicious unto his Church: and therefore the proposing their
service in a strange language, and forbidding the people the reading of the
Scriptures, is altogether against Gods word and the ancient custom of the
Primative Church, and so by consequence is not to be followed by any of the
children of the Church of Jesus Christ.

A third reason that moved me to follow this pious resolution was, that they
hold against all Scripture, and authentical reason Purgatory, that is, a
purging fire after this life to cleanse our sins. Against this opinion of the
Papists our Savior himself in the 16. of Saint Luke does much confute, where
he makes mention only of 2. places; namely, Heaven and Hell: saying, that the
rich man's soul presently after death went to Hell and there was tormented; and
Lazarus soul, at his death, was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, a
place of joy and comfort. For as Saint Ciprian says against Demetrian, that
after this life there is no place of Repentance, there is no satisfaction more
to be made, life is here either lost or won by the due worshipping of God, and
the fruits of faith; So the same Author says in the same Treatise, that if a
man in the departing hence does sincerely acknowledge his sins, and truly
embrace Gods Word, thus confessing, and thus believing, he has free pardon and
forgiveness granted him of all his sins, by Gods goodness and free mercy,
and at that very instant passes to immortality: Even in the last moment of his
life God refuses not Repentance, and whatsoever is truly done, is not to late
done.

And Saint Ambrose in his Book Debono Mortis says, that he that in this life
receives not remission of his sins, shall not have remission in the world to
come.

Now if their sins be forgiven in this world, likewise the punishment due to
the same is also forgiven in this world, and so there can remain no Purgatory
to torment them in the next life. But certain it is, that the blood of Christ
does cleanse us from all our sins, as Saint John says, and is the only
Purgatory, that a Christian man should hold, which does deliver his people as
well from the punishment due to sins, as from the sin it self: for as the
Prophes Esaias says, our punishment was laid upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. Saint August. in his Sermon De tempore 232. says, there are but 2.
places, he that reigns not with Christ at his departure hence shall perish
with the Devil without end, so that in what stare the last day of our life
shall find us, in the same state the last day of our life shall judge us.

Now if this be true, as most true it is, then the propitiatory Mass so much
esteemed in the Romish service, is but a forgery: For first it cannot be
propitiatory for the dead: for as the Tree falls so it lies, and as man is
found in his departing, so goes he to Hell or to Heaven. A third place is not
mentioned, now if any be in Heaven, Masses cannot avail them, for they enjoy
all bliss possibly already, if they be in Hell, we read, ab inferno non est
redemptio, out of Hell there is no redemption, for as the Prophet David says,
a man can by no means redeem his brother, he cannot pay his ransom to God, so
precious is the redemption of souls, and the continuance for ever.

And so it is clear, that for the dead it cannot be propitiatory, and as for
the living it cannot benefit them, for then were it derogatory to the Passion
of Christ once offered for all upon the Cross: whose Oblation was absolute and
perfect as Saint Paul in the 5. to the Hebrews 6.7. speaks, and therefore
needs not Mass, or any thing else to help it, yea it were gross and
damnable to suppose any imperfection in that Sacrifice and Oblation of our
Savior once offered on the Cross, seeing that God the Father twice spoke from
Heaven with a loud voice, saying this is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased.

The fourth Reason, that moved me to renounce my former profession with the
Romanists is that, they quite contrary to the words of our Savior and the
whole use of the ancient Christians abuse the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
partly by adding, and partly by diminishing, from the same, when our Savior
spoke these words, hoc est corpus meum: This is my Body, he expounded himself
presently saying, it is the Spirit that gives life, the Flesh profits
nothing. These words are spoken spiritually, therefore you must understand them
spiritually. Saint Augustine in his Commentaries upon the 98. Psalm says, you
shall not eat this Body that you see, neither shall you drink that Blood
which upon the Cross was once shed: for our Savior recommended unto us a
Sacrament (to wit) that which you see on the Table is Bread, and that which you
see in the Cup is wine, but touching that wherein your faith is to be
instructed, is the Body and Blood of Christ For as Baptism does change a man
according to grace, yet notwithstanding he remains the selfsame man according
to visible measure as he did before, but inuisibly by grace is made another
man; outwardly nothing is added, but inwardly all is changed: So in the blessed
Sacrament, outwardly nothing is changed, but there remains true Bread and
true Wine, but inwardly by faith, we apprehend the Body and Blood of Christ.

But these words which our Savior spoke figuratively, the Papists expounds
them literally, and thereby they cause the people to commit Idolatry, by
adoring Bread as God: for they hold that after the words of Consecration, there
remains no longer Bread nor Wine, but there is really and Transubstantially
the Body and Blood of Christ. But Saint Peter says, that the Heavens must
contain the Body of Christ until the end of the World.

Now if Christ's Body be in Heaven; then it cannot be in the Earth at once,
and the same time: for as Saint Augustine, Tractatu 3. in Iohannem. Corpus
Domini in quo resurrexit, vno tantum in loco esse potest. If they say that it
is done by miracle in the Sacrament, then it should be visible, to the outward
eye and senses. When Christ turned water into Wine, it was visible Wine. When
Moses Rod was turned into a Serpent, it was a visible Serpent, and so if the
Bread be turned into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood of Christ, it must
also be a visible body.

But if they expound these words of our Savior, hoc est corpus meum literally,
to belong unto all, why should they not also expound the words following
literally, that when he took the Cup, he said, This is my blood, should be
appertayning to all as well as the Bread. In the old Law Circumcision was called
the Lords Covenant, when it was not the Covenant but a Sign thereof: For the
Covenant was this to Abraham: Ego ero Deus tuus and Deus seminis tui.

Likewise the Pascall Lamb was called the Passover of the Lord, when it was
but the sign of the Passover, as passing over the red Sea, so that it may
stand with good Reason, that Christ called the Bread his Body, as he called
the Pascall Lamb his Passover, and yet was but a sign thereof, so the Bread
is called his Body, and is but a sign or remembrance of the same: and
therefore it is called a Sacrament because that in it one thing is seen, and
another thing understood that which is seen is Bread, and Wine, and has a
visible appearance or form, but that which is understood has a spiritual use
and profit.

So that the thing which signifies, is oft-times called by the name of the
thing which it signifies, as Saint Paul calls the Rock Christ, yet it was
not Christ by substance, but by signification; even so our Savior said, This
is my Body, when he gave Bread the sigue of his Body, and the Apostle said, the
Rock was Christ, for that the Rock which they spoke of signified Christ. The
Gospel stands not in the words of the Scripture but in the meaning.

Therefore Saint Paul says, that the Communicant does eat Bread after
Consecration; for if the Bread were wholly and truly Transubstantiated into the
Body of Christ, hence it follows that every one that does receive the
sacrament does also eat the Body of Christ, and consequently cannot be damned.
For our Savior says, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has
eternal life: and so by this rule the wicked shall be saved as well as the
godly. Moreover if Christ be present according to his humane Nature, then is it
no Sacrament: for every Sacrament is a sign, and inanis est signi visus vbi
resipsa presens est the sign is to no effect, where the thing it self is
present. And it is to be noted likewise, that the sign must have some Analogy
with the thing that it signifies: Now the thing signified is the Body and
Blood of Christ, which is true meat and true drink, as our Savior himself
witnesses, in St. John's Gospel, but the species or accidents of Bread and
Wine are not true meat, nor true drink, and by that means cannot give any
fit proportion with the thing signified by them. Further it is an Axiom in
Philosophy, that accidentis esse est in esse, that the being of an accident is
to be in some subject. But these accidents as color, savor and roundnesse,
they cannot be in any subject and so by consequence they cannot exist in the
Sacrament.

For they cannot be in the body of Christ because it is glorified: but the
accidents are subject to corruption; and therefore they must either exist
without a subject, which is contrary to Philosophy, or else to be seated in
the Body of Christ which is now glorified, and this is impossible. It is
further to be noted that the Church of Rome does mutilate and curtall this
Sacrament, for they take the blood of our Savior (which is our redemption)
from the lay people: yet certain it is that our Savior did institute this
Sacrament under both kinds, and as he said to all, take and eat, this is my
Body: So did he likewise speak unto all, when he delivered the Cup; saying,
drink ye all of this? and Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians says, As
often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye show forth the Lords
death until he come

For as Alexander of Hailes says, whole Christ is not contained under each
kind, but the Flesh only under the form of Bread, and the Blood under the
form of Wine. And here upon Gelasius, Pope, made a Decree that they should
either receive the whole under both kinds, or receive none at all under any
kind: For there can be no division of this one Sacrament and high mystery,
without great Sacrilege; so that by their own Doctors it is evident that they
commit great Sacrilege in dividing this Sacrament, and do much abuse the
people of God in deceiving them of the precious Blood of our Savior.

The 5. Motive which moved me to persist in this my enterprise, is, that the
Pope challenges authority unto himself to forgive sins, and thereupon
sends forth his Bulls, Pardons, and Indulgences, pardoning whom he list, and
as he list, as if he were God himself, having absolute power to do what he
list, insomuch as Traitors and Rebels against God and their lawful Prince, he
will not only pardon without exception, but he will enable them in their
damnable courses, to the overthrowing of themselves and their Princes. What the
Religion of Rome is, it may easily appear by this, that a man may have for
money a License, or dispensation for any sin, a Popes pardon is sufficient
for all: but to what end serves pardons, when as there is no Purgatory? for
neither the ancient Fathers make mention of it, and the Grecians until this
day believe it not. Siluester Prierias in his Book against Luther, says, that
Pardons are not known unto us by any authority of the Scriptures, but by
authorie of the Pope, which is greater then the authority of the Scriptures:
Vox bouis non hominis. It is the voice or saying of some Beast, and not of any
Christian man.

Certain I am that the Pope cannot justify an unrighteous man whom God
abhors, neither can he condemn the faithful who^ God does much tender and
favor: therefore his Pardons are rather pernicious then any whit commodious to
the persons that buy them, bearing them in peace and security, when indeed
they are in much peril and misery.

Where do they find that the Pope has any superiority over Kings, Princes,
or Emperors; that he has any authority to depose them from their Crowns,
and dignities, and to absolve their subjects from their Oath and Allegiance
which they have sworn unto their Princes: That upon his Excommunication it is
lawful for them to rebel against them, and so practice all Hostility to
depose them?

There is not one word sentence or place out of the Scripture to prove it; no
precept or example of antiquity to warrant it, and yet they commend it for a
chief point and ground of Catholic and Christian faith.

By what right does he claim this supreme authority: if he claim it as a
successor of St. Peter, it is impossible, for that Saint Peter never had any
such Title or preeminence over the rest of the Apostles.

It is true that Christ said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church. These words hitherto give no superiority to Peter above the
rest. Only they show that the Church is built non super petrum sed super
Petram, not upon the person of Peter but upon the Rock: Of which Saint Paul
says, Petra autem erat Christus, the Rock was Christ, whom Saint Peter
confessed to be the Son of the everliving God.

This confession of Saint Peter is, that Christ is the Rock whereupon the
Church is builded, aliud fundamentum nemo, potest ponere nisi id quod positum
est Christus Jesus. Other Foundation can no man lay, but that which is laid
already: namely, Christ Jesus.

Where then shall we find that Peter was made Prince of the Apostles, to rule
over all the rest, as our Popes do now?

But what has the Pope to do with Peter? or what does the Pope do as Saint
Peter did? Saint Peter did convert souls, plant Churches, and preach the Word
of God unto all Nations, but in what Pulpit has our Popes ever set foot?
where have they preached the Gospel or expounded the Word.

The first Lesson that Saint Peter teaches us, is to fear God, the next is,
to Honor the King. Quis haec est voluntas Dei, for this is the will of God.
But the Popes say, that they are Princes above Nations and Kingdoms: they can
depose Kings, and pull down Emperors, they have authority over their
subjects, to discharge them from their Oaths, they have the right and claim
unto both swords, as well temporal as spiritual: And that all Kings and
Princes ought to depend at their beck, and to swear obedience, unto their
holiness, as to their supreme heads and Sovereigns, under the pain and
loss of all their Dominions.

We read that Boniface the eight because he could not have the treasury of
France, at his command, endeavored by all means possible to remove Phillip
the French King from his estate, and under his Bulls and Letters Pattents, made
a deed of gift of all the state of France unto Albertus then King of the
Romans.

As touching the Kings of this our Realm of England: as our duty and
allegiance binds us, we may justly complain that Pope Alexander the 3. by
violence and tyrranny forced King Henry the second to surrender up his Crown
Imperial into his Legates hands, and afterward for a certain space to content
him in private estate, to the great indignation and grief of his loving
subjects. Like wise that Innocentius the 3. stirred up the Nobles and Commons
of this Realm against King John, and gave the inheritance and possession of
all his Dominions unto Ludeuicus the French King, Pius Quintus of late days
gave away his Kingdom to Philip the 2. King of Spain. Shall any one think
that these be deeds of holiness, and that he does all this by right and equity
through virtue of his spiritual privilege.

Surely no, it is mere sacrilege against God, and tyrranny over his Princes
and Vicegerents, and not the part of any Minister of Christ or successor of
the Apostles.

For first Christ himself says, that his Kingdom is not of this world. He
himself likewise refused to be made a King. He himself paid tribute unto
Caesar, and commanded others to do the same, saying, give unto Caesar those
things that be Caesar's.

Now if Christ himself was subject unto Caesar, and commanded all others to be
subject and obedient unto him, it is a shame for the Bishop of Rome to exalt
himself above Caesar, and to animate others against him. Imperium in Principe
and obedientia in subdito, est de inre diuino, Rule in the Prince, and
obedience in the Subject, are both immediately from God; and as every member of
the body natural must subject it self unto the rule and regiment of the head
if it mean to live and thrive: So must every subject in the body politic, be
subject and governed by the Prince which is the head of all, and above all. And
therefore they are called in the Psalms Vosestis Dij, ye are as Gods, so that
he which contemns them, contemns God; they are called noursing Fathers,
that we should always love and reverence them like unto our Fathers; they are
also called Kings Princes and Rulers of the Earth, which are Names and Titles
of honor, so that those whom God vouchsafes thus to Honor, we ought without
all contradiction, to love, honor, and obey. Therefore every soul that is
subject to God must be subject to them, because he that calls them Kings
calls us subjects: this is their Patent that God has chosen them Kings, and
set them upon the Throne to rule his people, and has commanded every soul to
be subject unto their power Si omnis anima, if every soul must be subject unto
their power, then doubtless must both Popes and Bishops be subject to their
Prince: Qui vos tentat ab hac vniuer salitate excipere conatur decipere. He
that goes about to exempt you from this universal Law, goes about to beguile
you. For our Savior as he commanded it, so did he in his own person
perform it. Exemplum dedit vobis vt sicut ipse fecit and vos faciatis: He
left you an example that as he did, so should you also do.

So that it is a thing most certain that the Pope of Rome has no authority
over Kings either in Ecclesiastical or Temporal matters, but is therein an
Usurper, Intruder, and a most odious Traitor, both to God and Prince: for all
the ancient Churches have affirmed, and ever acknowledged, the supreme
auhority of Princes, above all Priests and people whatsoever.

Tertullian an ancient Doctor and Priest, in his Book ad Scapulam, has these
words, Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum and soli Deo minorem: We
honor the Prince as next and imediatly unto God, and inferior only unto God.
And in his Apologeticks, he says, that Principes sunt a Deo secundi post eum
primi ante omnes and super omnes: That Kings and Princes are the second to God,
next unto God, above all and over all. Optatus lib. 3. Contra Parmenianum
says, that supra Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem. It
was the Lord which appointed Moses, Joshua, David and his posterity to rule over
Israel, It was the Lord which moved the peoples heart to fear honor and obey
them, for as every beam is from the Sun, and every Branch is from the Root,
so does every power proceed from God, so that it is Deiure deuino, that Kings
have rule over their subjects, and therefore all subjects by the Law of God and
nature are bound to honor and obey their Princes.

Good Kings are Gods Images, and evil Princes are his Executioners: Asher, was
his Rod; Nabuchadonezer, his servant; and Cyrus, was his anointed: And
therefore aibeit God uses them as a Father does his rod, first to correct his
children by them, and then breaks and throws them away, yet the children
and beloved of the Lord must submit themselves under his instrument of
correction.

The Rubenites, Gaddits, and half the Tribe of Manasses, said to Solomon,
whosoever shall resist thy will, or will not obey whatsoever thou command,
let him be put to death. So that in Israel whether their Kings were faithful
or ungodly, the people ever yielded civil faith and obedience. For as Saint
Peter says, this is the will of God, and whosoever resists this obedience,
resists the will of God, and so heapeth unto himself vengeance against the
day of wrath: and so consequently this doctrine of rebelling against Princes
must needs be very damnable and odious, and worthy to be contemned of all those
that fear God. But it is not my purpose or intent to set down here in
particular all the erroneous parts of Doctrine at this present professed and
embraced in the Church of Rome; for there are many other points and pernicious
grounds by me observed, which in no point agrees with the word of God, but I
suppose that these few positions which I have already touched may be
sufficient enough to make it manifest unto the world that I have enterprised
nothing without good reason; and that my conscience could never have suffered
me to have lived in quiet and rest, if I had done any otherwise: all which
things duly and carefully balanced in my mind, have exceedingly stirred me up
to this my pious resolution.

It is a difficult thing to resist Gods voice, to fight against the truth;
which discovers her self so apparently; my conscience still urging me, I
could do no less then retire my self back unto the Lord, from whom I have
long erred and gone astray, saying as Aristotle was wont to say, Socrates is my
friend, and so is Plato my friend, but the friendship of the truth is far above
all. I can no longer bear witness against God, it is no longer secure, to
call good evil, or evil good, light darkness, or darkness light. I must
not be ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for it is the mighty power of
God unto salvation: It is now high time to set aside all blind affection, and
to judge uprightly. It is dangerous to join with them that have burnt Gods
Word; and scornefully called it a leaden rule, and a Nose made of wax, that
call ignorance the mother of Devotion, and dumb Images Lay men's Books, who
forbid marriage, and license Concubines, who have devised unto themselves a
strange Religion, contrary to the Scriptures, ancient Counsels, old doctors,
and example of the Primative Church: whom so many Kingdoms, countries and
infinite thousands of godly people have forsaken: From whom the holy Ghost by
express words has commanded us to depart: as it is written in the Apocalips,
Come away from her O my people that ye be not partakers of her sins, lest ye
be also partakers of her plagues: for she has falsified the holy farthers with
such translations and expositions, not as may best express their meanings, but
as may best further their own pretenses, and purposes, they wrest them, they
alter them, they put to them, and take from them: sometimes they take the bare
words against the meaning, and sometimes they frame a meaning against the
words: they imagine counsels that were never lied, Canons of counsels that were
never seen, they bring forged Pamphlets under the name of Athanasius.
Anacletus, and other godly Fathers by whom they were never made. These are not
errors in manners which may be in any good Church, but they are errors in Faith
and Doctrine, which cannot stand with the true Church. And therefore as Saint
Ciprian says, let not lies deceive us any longer, it is night until the day
spring, but when the Day appears, and the Sun of truth is up, both the
darkness of the night, as also the thefts committed in darkness will
appear and give place. Now the Sun of truth is up, and the Clouds of
ignorance are scattered, I will say with Saint Paul, Let us cast away
darkness, and put on the armor of light: To maintain a fault known, is a
double fault: Error cannot stand but by error, and the mouth that speaks
untruth kills the soul. Therefore I may safely and joyfully say, Bonum est
mihi domine, quia humiliasti me, vt discam instisicationes tuas, It is good for
me that I have been in trouble, for thereby I have learned thy truth.

O my God lead, me in the truth, teach me to do thy will. Albeit I have erred
and strayed like a lost sheep, Ego tamen filius tuus; and fillius ancillae
tuae, Yet I am as child of thine inheritance, and borne and brought up of thy
Handmayd, which is thy Church and Spouse. Open mine eyes, and suffer me not to
be deceived by the abuses of the world: Sweet Jesus confirm me in this my
resolution, help my unbelief, increase the Faith which is within me;
fructify in me that assurance of Abraham who believed in hope against hope:
arm me with thy promises: deliver me from mine enemines: replenish me with the
Spirit of constancy, to the end, and in the end, that having gotten the
victory, I may say with the Apostle Paul, Bonum certame^ certaui, fide^
seruaui, cursu^, consummani, de reliqu^ reposita est mihi corona iustitiae quam
reddit mihi in ill^ die Iustus index. 2. Tim. 4.7.8. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith. 8. Henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that Day.

FINIS.

