ABSALOMS FUNERAL: PREACHED AT BANBYRIE BY A NEIGHBOVR MINISTER: OR, THE
LAMENTATION OF A LOVING FATHER FOR A Rebellious Child.

Pro. 11. 31. Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth; how much
more the wicked, and the sinner?

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM HALL for Thomas Man. 1610.

TO THE READER.
SEe here (Reader) way made to the Hebrew Proverb: 1. Sam. 10. 10. 11.
Is Saul also among the Prophets? His friends held it strange to see him
prophesying, or singing holy songs (as it is expounded:) and it will be as
strange to all that know me, Vide Vatabl. ad locum.
to find me in the Press, both in respect of mine insufficiency, (in which
regard the word is put upon me by him that applies it to such smatterers) as
also in regard of my disposition and affection, Polyd. Virgil. Adag 374.
who have in others disliked this ouerprinting, and for my self always
affected (it may be too much) priuacie and retiredness. But see what
importunity can do. In the second of the Kings, chap. 2. there is a very
absurd motion made to Elisha by well meaning men, and Elisha in the end yields
to them in a sort against his will. And why? they were instant upon him till
he was ashamed, verse. 17. This motion of printing was to me at first as that
to him; yet now at last, (being ashamed to be inexorable) I have said with him,
Send. Now if the Printer (the chief actor I mean in this business) return
as wise as they, having his labor (with them) for his pains, my answer is the
same with the Prophets, Said I not, Do not go? Thou have my defense (Reader)
for the printing. If any thing offend thee in the Sermon preached, thou must
remember, that I meant it to an assembly known, not to strangers unknown: and
therefore do not blame me for not using the Latin or Greek tongue, unless
thou can help my hearers to Latin or Greek ears, and then I shall make no
more scruple of Latin then English: In the mean time I dare promise no more
then that I think is as familiar to them as English, yea such English as they
understand; for some English is Hebrew to the vulgar sort. If thou take
exception further at my naked margent, because it is so empty of humane
Authors, I pray thee be satisfied with this answer: First, our Auditors in
these parts are content to take Gods bare word, without any further band or
testimony: Secondly, I cannot discharge my self (I judge not others that use
it) of pride and ambition, if I should be quoting: for all that know the
smalnesse of my standing, weakness of my body, greatness of imploiment, in a
place undertaken with as much fear and unwillingness, as it is undergone with
pain and heaviness, do well know that my reading cannot be great; and my
own soul knows, that there can be nothing to work me to this practice (in
these parts) unless I would be ambitious: for to what end should I tell poor
people of Fathers and Historians? What should move me to it, when I know
before hand, they will think never the better of me, nor of my doctrine, for
so doing? (verb. gra.) In speaking of Jobs children, in the first point I
allude to a place in Chrysostom: to what end should I amaze them with his name
and his homily, Ad pop. Antioch.? In another place, speaking of sin in the
godly, ad agonem, I remembered Austins discourse about that matter. In speaking
of Popes, I thought of Polydore Virgils note in that behalf: and the bringing
in of David speaking to his son, put me in mind of Caesar's patheticall
speech to Brutus, (...)and the very mention of Absaloms rockie heart, not
yielding, brought to my remembrance Hannibals practice with the rocks, to make
them give place. Now (I pray you) had not I little to do, if I should thrust
all these into a Sermon? If I should do so in such an Auditory, would not my
heart say, Now thou seek thyselfe? What others do, I know not; I judge
none; my heart would smite me for it in this place: and therefore bold me
excused (good Reader) till I see further reason for such a practice. In the
mean time, if this Sermon be too plain for thee, leave it to them that love
plainness. If thou find any benefit by it, bless God, thank the Printer,
bestow one prayer on me, who desire increase of grace on thee, and on all the
Israel of God.

Hanwell this 25. of August. 1610. Thine in Christ, Robert Harris.

A Sermon, PREACHED AT BANBVRY BY A NEIGHBOVR MINISTER THERE.
2. SAM. and (as our books distinguish it) CHAP. 18. VERSE. 33. Then the king
was moved, and went up to the, chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he
went, thus he said; O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom: would God
I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son.


We read in the former Chapters, of Absaloms strange and unnatural practices
against his own father: in this we read of as strange a judgment (as strange
sins do beget strange plagues) executed upon him from heaven. The Lord
having trussed him by the hair, (fit matter for an halter) and Ioab with his
men dispatched him, the King his father is now to understand, the news; who
waiting the tidings at the gate of Mahanai^^^, and receiving a message
contrary to his expectation and desire, (for he desired nothing less then
Absaloms death) was exceedingly moved (as the word implies) and finding
himself ouercharged with grief, he takes covert as soon as he can, gets into
the nextroome, there to weep it out: but before he could come thither, his
heart would break unless it found a vent, and therefore he discharges
himself at the stairs as he goes, and breaks forth, as you hear, O my
son Absalom, etc. which words are uttered, you see, upon the report of his
sons death, and contain a report of his behavior what time the tidings was
first brought to him. Plain they be of themselves, and lie open to the
shallowest brain, so that we need no Comment: and for method, it is against
method, to observe any order in them. Yet if you will, (to the end you may the
better see the grounds of the points to be gathered) you may observe in them
two things: First, David's sorrow: Secondly, the occasion thereof. The occasion
is implied in the first word, which is capable of more readings then it has
letters in it by far: and here we render it [ Then.] His sorrow is set
down, both as it was inwardly conceived, and outwardly expressed; conceived,
he was moved; expressed, partly by deeds; he wept, which is amplified from
the place, on the stairs, and in the chamber: partly in words, words (I say)
of complaint and wish, and all for his son Absalom. Let us begin with the
first: and since time will not give me leave to speak of all, let us gripe as
much at once as we can, and bind many things together within the compass of
few points. Then (says the text). i. when he had received news touching
Absaloms death, the King, i. David, Absoloms father, Isreal's King, was mooned:
the word imports some great alteration in a man by reason either of some
fear, or grief, or anger, or all. Now howsoever all these did meet in David,
yet in this place his motion is chiefly from grief: fear had the precedencie
before, whilst he was held in suspense, and the issue of the battle was
doubtful: anger took its place after, when he^ had more leisure to think on
Ioab: now grief was predominant, which at the first did amaze him, and after
uttered it self in tears and complaints. When a man has some deep gash, or
sudden chop, you shall have for the present a great silence (as it were) and
the flesh on each side will be wanne and pale, and then soon after, the blood
(which had carried the news to the heart) issues forth most furiously: such
was David's wound in this place, the news struck into his heart and astonished
him for the time, but having a little recovered himself, he powers it forth
as you hear and see. Now in that good David, who is here termed the King, is
found thus deeply wounded upon the receipt of so heavy tidings, and weeps so
bitterly upon so near an occasion, (I mean the death of his dearest Absalom)
let us hence note this, in the general, from the party sorrowing, and the
occasion and measure of his sorrow laid togethers That Gods dearest children
are exercised with near and piercing crosses in this life. Doct. 1.
It may seem to be no good congruitie, to say that David wept, that king
David mourned; for Christians to mourn being poor, or Princes being wicked,
it is no strange matters but when a man has God for his friend in heaven, and
a kingdom on earth too, what should trouble him? yet for such a one the Lord
has crosses, and those sharp, those near, those cutting. Read his life in
the books of Samuel.
Witnesso David (the man in question) a man after Gods heart: what a life had
he in his father in law his time? when went he to bed with dry eyes? when
lived he a merry day? what comfort in Michol his wife? what troubles after
Saul's death? what breaches in his family? what heart breakings in his Thamar?
in his Amnon? in his Absalom whilst he hued? and now when a man would have
thought him spent and drawn dry, how many tears does he spend afresh upon
his death? these crosses come close, cut deep, here are griefs (in his
familiars shall I say? Read his story, from the 28 of Genesis to the 46. Chap.
nay) in his kinsfolks, his father, his wives, at Ziklag, his children, his
Absalom. And was not Jacob in the same case? was it nothing to be rended from
his own fathers house? to live in fear of his own brother? to be so used by
his own uncle? to be so cosened of his own wife? to have his only daughter
deflowred? to have his dearest wife to die so upon his hands? to have oue son
banished? another an adulterer, another incestuous? many murderers; near
crosses, when uncle, when cosins, when wives, when children shall be our
crosses. And what would you say of Job, were his case your own? It may be you
would think it a loss to part with so much goods and cattle so soon, to be
worth a thousand pound in the morning, and to have all your grounds vnstockt by
night: it may be it would trouble our patience to hear the scorns of base
fellows, and to see that contempt in our own servants: but (alas) if our
kindest friends should quippe us, and they that were religious censure us, if
our own wives should begin to be weary of us, and we should have the burying
of ten children, and first vnburie them, and there see how lovingly they sat
together, and what provision was there made for the chearing of their hearts,
and here pluck out one, there another (perhaps) lim-meale and lay them all on
an heap: would not this have wrought upon us? But then, if to all this there
should be added such plagues on the body, such terrors on the soul, would we
not say, our crosses were sharp? yes (brethren:) we may say that Jobs were
sharp, and sore and near, when friends, when servants, when children, when
wife, when God and all seem to minister matter of grief. It shall be
needless to draw you further in examples, these are beyond exception, whether
you look to the goodness of the men, or the greatness of their crosses, in all
whom we see that verified, which once Solomon the son, and David the father
delivered in more general terms, the one touching the number of the
faithfuls afflictions, Pro. 24.16. Psalm. 34.19.
that they come by seuens (i troops) in one and the same day, the other
touching both number and measures that they are many and great, in number many,
in nature weighty, as the word signifies both. But leaving testimonies, what
might be the cause that Gods best children are so sped? Is it their religion?
Is it their profession? No, Reason. 1.
no, it is because they are set with corruption (if you will have it all at
once) and therefore must be purged: For first (a little to enlarge our selves
in the unfolding of some few amongst many reasons) Gods best children will
sometimes venture on noisome meats and hurtful poisons, they will feed on
the grosser sins, they will drink in very puddle, I mean iniquities, and
when the child has so done, what should the father do? If David will lie and
commit adultery, and fall to murder innocents, what can God do less for
David, unless he would have him damned, then scourge him thoroughly? what should
he do but lay it on his skin, yea and lash his conscience, and when he will
be walking so near hels mouth, take him by the heels and make him believe he
will throw him in? what though he do cry? what though he be crossed of his
will? Is it not better he should cry here then in hell? and receive his
payment here rather then his judgment there? Is it not better he should lose
his sin, then God his child? So then, one cause why the Lord does thus lay load
on his children here, is, because they defile themselves (sometimes) with
gross sins, and therefore must have much washing; they take the deadliest
poison, and therefore must have working physic. David was gone so far this
way, that to this place he has not recovered himself, he deals not like
old David as yet, and therefore every month almost he must have a purge; and
whosoever he be that will venture after him in these dangerous paths, shall be
sure to pass under the rod, as David did, if he be Gods as David's was.
Secondly, Gods children if they fall not to deadly poison, yet will they surfeit
of lawful meats and pleasures unlawfully, so childish we are when we are
turned loose to delights, that for our lives, we cannot keep a mean; we
cannot have prosperity but we will abuse it, we swell, we brag, we
snuff, we look over our brethren and forget our selves, even the best of us
all. Poor David that scarce ever came where prosperity grew, had but a little
rest, and he began to dream of golden mountains, Psalm. 30.
he thought crosses had now taken their leave of him, and would be afraid to
look into the court, and therefore Absalom is sent out of his bowels to confute
him. And good Hezechiah who was first humbled at the coming of Saneherib, 2.
Kings 20.
and the second time, brought to deaths door by gricuous sickness, had no sooner
a little respit, but he begins to look big and to lay about him, whem
ambassadors came to visit him, he carries them from place to place, and sets
the best side outward: he swaggers not only with them, but with Esaias too (who
took as small pleasure in this his courting, as many of his cloth do now in
preaching:) o Esaias (says he) you cannot tell who have been here, great
states; the king of Babell sent Ambassadors to us, such Princes so far from
us take notice of us; and they (I would have thee know) were royally
entertained, we showed them withal what store of gold and silver our
treasuries could afford; we would have them know, that all the wit and wealth
is not lodged in Babell, but that Gods people have it in them and about them
too, as occasion shall serve. Thus Hezechiah thought he spoke but reason: but
the Lord seeing him so rank, thinks it time to let him blood, and therefore
Esaias gives him a cooler, you have made (says he) for so in effect he speaks)
a fair hand of your wealth you have; you have brought the wolf to the fold,
and now keep him out if you can: Gold-thirsty Babell now knows where to have
a draught: and as for your self, since you think the better of your self for
your wealth, the Lord has made your will, and the king of Babell is your
executor. Thus because Hezechiah surfeited, he is physickt: and this is onother
reason of the Lords thus dealing with his people, because the difference is not
great whether you eat bad meat, or surfeit on good. relish our meat, and
discouers in us such a laziness about our business, he thinks it reason to
provide some remedy in time, lest these forerunners of sickness break forth
into worse inconveniences; and surely David's practice and case may affright us
all; for (alas) how did he gather mud, when he had stood still a while? and how
would his corruptions again have grown to some head, had not Absalom been
raised up to breath him, and to disperse them? Now if David were so foggie
after so many breathings, David a man of so good a diet, how resty should we
be if never walked? how grounded on our lees with Moab, if never turned forth
from vessel to vessel? It stands the Lord therefore upon, if he will provide
for his harvest, and our good, to take some pains with us, lest otherwise he
fail of his vintage, whilst we want dressing.

David by this time had almost emptied himself of all pride, that all
passions, all love of the world, all carnal affections had been well nere
buried? but see, see, when crosses come, how he lays about him, he sobs, he
roares, he would die in a passion, as if he knew not what he did, or cared not
what he said; now should not such a stomach as this be taken down? yes, the
child had been spilt there if the rod had been spared: and therefore God
lays it on. Now if good David after so much breaking and so long standing in
religion, be so waspish, so impatient, so passionate, do not you think that
there is some store in us? let us be crossed a little, cannot we chafe? let us
be abused, cannot we find our tongues? add to this our worldlines, cannot we
be content to liuelonger in this world (bad though it be?) do we not dote too
much on one Absalom or other? be not our hearts yet unbroken? why then you see,
God must smite and smite again, and smite home, and draw blood: for no sound
heart must go to heaven, as none but sound hearts must come thither, sound (I
say) from hypocrisy, but broken with sin and sorrow: thus we see great
cause of great affliction on Gods part, since our sins are great which must be
purged and prevented, our surfers great which must be cured, our deadness
great, which must be quickened, our inside bad, which must be cleansed. Time
will not give to speak of all: One more reason shall be drawn from our own
practice, and so an end. As God lays many crosses on us, so we may thank our
selves for many too, not only in that we do deserve them, but in that (...)
work them out of our own bowels: for many we diaw upon our selves by riot,
Idleness, vnthrif^nes, rage, etc. and the most we make more heavy (that are
heavy enough already) through our own folly, and that is whilst we rake into
our wounds looking no higher, and what with unbelief and impatience, do
double the cross on our selves. David's burden was heavy enough already, he
did not need to increase it: yet such is David's weakness, he cannot choose,
it is his Absalom, pretty Absalom, and therefore he must pay for his passions;
and thus, when God afflicts us in measure (as ever he does his children) we
make our crosses beyond measure, because we keep no mean in mourning, and not
only so, but we provoke our father to give us somewhat for brawling and for
struggling: and thus we see some reasons of ours so great and near afflictions,
taken partly from our selves, partly from our God. The wicked will happily
think themselves wronged, that we give not them and their master the credit of
the Saints troubles, but (to speak properly) they are no causes, but only
executioners, they are hangmen and bedles; when an execution is to be wrought,
and the Lord has assigned some of his shrewdest children to punishment, they
shall have the office sometimes to be the jailer or belman, that is their
preferment. Leaving therefore these scullians in the kitchen there to scour a
vessel or lick a dish when they shall be called upon, let us make our use of
this so large a Doctrine, and see whether we can be briefer there. First then;

Is this so, Use 1.
that Gods dearest children have and must have such great and piercing crosses
in this life? then must all who would be known by that name, make account of
such and prepare for them. Such is our folly (for the most part) when the
sun shines, we never think of a dark night, and when the morning is fair,
we never fear a storm, and therefore are sometimes taken without our cloak
(as it were.) Such also is our conceit of our selves, and confidence in worldly
helps, that we hope they will not see us want; or if they fail, yet we think
to shift better then others can, and to live by our wits: hence it is, that we
are almost grown to Babels conclusion. Though others be widows, fatherles,
childlesse, comfortles: yet we shall see no sorrow. But it will be granted (I
trow) that our nature needs physic, as much as other men's (there is no
difference in the mould) and that our carriage has not been so good, but that
justly we may fear some brushing. It may be, David was as honest a man as some
of us, Mat. 7.14.
perhaps Hezechiah was not far behind us, possible Paul might match us in any
grace, and have as little pride, hypocrisy, self-loue, passion in him as the
best of us all; yet were these (holy men) greatly afflicted and wonderously
straightened, and why should we dream of peace: If wealth would discharge a man
of crosses, Hezechiah was not poor: if honor, David was a king: if either
wit or grace, Paul was no babe: but these will not serve the turn, kings
children must have physic (if sick) as well as poorer men's; why should they
not? so must the Lords. Our Prince is consecrated through afflictions, our way
is an afflicted way (as you would say) and it is the voice of heaven, that
through many tribulations we must enter into heaven. Now then, since the case so
stands, that either we must disclaim the right of children, or else endure
afflictions, either pass under the rod or be bastards, let us (unless we
mean to shame our selves) arm our selves for crosses before hand, and not
prepare only, but prepare for all, yea the nearest of all. For what has
befallen David and others, why may not the same befall us? some wives have
great crosses in their husbands, some husbands in their wives, some parents in
children, some children in parents, some are nearly touched in their body, some
in their estate, some other in their name, in their soul othersome, and where
is our discharge? who has exempted us? may not we need them as much as
others? does not God love us as well as others? are not these things written
for our use? O then let us think on these things in this our peace, and now
lay in for a rainy day, now whilst we can pray, now whilst our bodies are free
from distemper, and our affections from trouble, now whilst we are our own
men, and have freedom (as it were) of heart; now let us hoard up prayers
against the time of trouble, when as either in respect of sickness in body, or
sorrow of mind, we can say no more then David now can (my son, my son, my
pain, my pain, my heart, my heart.) Now let us treasure up faith and
patience, and wisdom, as loseph did corn, since a day of utterance will come,
a day of spending, not of getting, a day wherein our own stock and the
Churches treasury too (I mean others prayers) will be little enough: do
notthinke it sufficient to have somewhat before hand, we are not at agreement
with crosses to depart when we give warning; never forget David, a man not
meanly graced, nay a great husband, who had his soul well stockt, and in good
plight, and yet how unhandsomely does he now behave himself? Ah David, thou
wast wont to have prayers, and gracious meditations, as ready as Aburs sword
that would drop out of the sheath: But now here is nothing but my son, my son;
and little do we know how we shall fling out in distresses, unless we are
very well appointed. Now lastly whilst the Lord does offer himself unto us as a
loving father, let us come unto him like obedient children, let us confess
against our selves, and reconcile our souls unto him: Let us seek to him (as
once the Sidomians did to Herod) through Christ (as they through Blastus) for
his favor (as they for Herod's love,) Act. 12.
and then being at peace with him in our peace, and acquainted with him in our
prosperity, he will know our souls in adversity, and we shall always have a
rock to sly unto in the greatest waves and surges. Thus we see what course
must be taken if crosses shall not hit us on the bare, and take us on the blind
side: the practice we put upon you, as you love your ease, for there is little
comfort to be hoped for in crosses, unless there be some preparation for
them. Men may think themselves armed when they have men and money to befriend
them: but then, (never till then) are we fitted for crosses, when God and our
own consciences are friends with us, and stand for us, and therefore if we
will make sure work, let us go to heaven for friends, not to the earth, and be
more careful to get grace in our hearts, then gold in our chests, for crosses
be as the mind and man be, not as the outward estate. And this is the first
use that I would have made of this point. The second stands thus:

David for murder and adultery once committed, thus entertained, what will
thy end be, who still live in the ordinary practice of such like sins? yea
answer this (if thou can) are Gods own people who have the spirit of God to
pray in them, Christ, and all the Saints on earth to pray for them, who judge
themselves daily, who walk consta^tly with God, (are they) thus handled in
case they do at any time break forth? then tell me what thy doom is like to
be, who never praiest, never repentest, never striuest against sin, but have
sold thy self to do wickedly? Go on then with thy tale, Gods children are
afflicted, and greatly afflicted too; I will grant you all; but wot you what?
if Gods children (whom he loves next unto himself in Christ) cannot be
exempted from crosses, (bitter crosses) notwithstanding all their repentance,
all their tears, all their prayers, but their souls shall groan, and hearts
ache, because they be so stubborn and perform holy duties no more, no
better; I report me to thee, whether thou do not think that Gods justice will
one day have thy blood, thy life, thy soul, for all thine abominations which
thou do not repent for, but laughest at, which thou do not pray against,
that they may be pardoned, but fretrest that they should be disgraced, and
which thou art so far from leaving, that thou could drink his blood that
reprooues them in thee. And if so, then either make use of the faithfuls
troubles, and quickly judge thy self, or else, take every disgrace, every
disease, every affliction that befalles them, to be a pledge of that
everlasting shame, and those everlasting torments, woes, plagues, curses, that
shall seize upon thee for evermore. I know thy plea before thou speak, but
(alas) it will not hold; Christ (thou will say) will salve all, he died for
sinners, and what needs all this? And did he so? could not Christ when he stood
in our room, and sustained the person of a sinner (though in himself
sinlesse) could not he (though he were the heir and first borne) escape,
until his blood was shed, and flesh rent, and soul poured forth as an
offering? then either make it good, that thou art in Christ, and become a new
creature, or else take thy leave of all hope and comfort: nothing remains but
a fearful expectation of judgment; and that is thy use. A third we thus
infer, but briefly:

David's, Paul's, etc. so must it cause us to look upward, to wait for our
redemption, and to sigh for heaven, where we shall be free from all these
miseries. When we are from home amongst our friends, our hearts are still
homewards though our company be good, our welcome kind, our entertainment of
the best, fare, lodging, all better then any we shall find at home: yet home
is homely (say we) and away we go, entreaty will not fetch us again: Now if
we can be content to change for the worse, because the one is our home for a
few days; how much should we desire heaven (the only true mansion) where we
are sure to change all for the better? where our estate shall be bettered, and
our company and our bodies and our souls; how ought we to reach after this,
and to thirst for it? If David panted after the suburbs, the Church on earth,
what should our affection be toward the City it self? If Moses preferred the
Saints troubles before the treasures of Egypt, what treasures on earth should
keep our desires from the glorious estate of Christ in heaven? and if the
Queen of Sheba was content to go from home, and from much of her wealth, that
so she might be acquainted with Solomon, why should not we desire home, that
we might grow acquainted with Jesus Christ, and see him face to face:
especially, since in this journey we shall part with nothing but what we may
well spare, sin and corruption? how thankful ought we to be for Gods mercy,
that whereas our fathers lived some five hundred, some six hundred, some more
years, and served a long apprentiship, the Lord graciously has shortened our
lease, and calls us from this trouble some sea, into the haven by that time they
were well entered? This is a matter that should somewhat refresh us in this our
journey, and work those to patience who cry at the mention of heaven, how
long? truth it is (to speak one word to them) the earth is tedious to such as
have been in heaven, they do not like to be pilgrims here, when once they
are enrolled Citizens there: but since we shall (hereafter) be always
receiving wages, why should we not be pleased to do a little work? and since
our God has cut off so many of our sorrowful days, why should not we with
cheerfulness bestow these few upon him? I know no affliction is for the
present ioious, all are tedious: but if we will but look forward, and fasten
our eyes upon that crown and kingdom that shall so shortly come into our
hands, and backward, and see our desert, and what others have felt, how we fare
and lie, and go every day better then Christ here did (the most of us) our
crosses will not seem so strange, as Gods mercies and patience toward us
wonderful: As for that cross of crosses, (sin and corruption) whereof you
would be so gladly eased, (alas) how should I comfort you against that? I
cannot blame you, nor marvel at it, if you be willing to be any where (much
more in heaven) so you may be rid of sin, that indeed is a bad neighbor,
which will put a man to Rebeccaes complaint, I am weary of my life: but yet
(my brethren) since we do but drink as we brewed, nay, since the Lord mingled
this wormwood with so many sweetes, and much allayed the strength thereof: since
these our corruptions have received their mortal wounds, and are now breathing
out their last breath: since the Lord will so suddenly dispatch them in
comparison of former times, that long we shall not dwell together: since he sees
some use of this poison and turns that to good, (a common good) which in it
self is hurtful: since further he has given us some graces, as he has left
in us (for our exercise) some corruptions: since (lastly) grace hereafter shall
only come in question, and our debts shall be set upon another score, and for
the present, he puts a difference betwixt us and sin in us, (as betwixt
poison and the box that holds it) let us have patience toward him (though not
toward sin) and so fall out with corruption, that we forget not mercies: But
I have stepped a little aside to call upon some friends: I now proceed. Having
thus dispatched the first thing growing out of these circumstances named, we
must come to a second, which is almost as general (for when should we have
done, if we should descend to particulars?) this that we may make way unto, let
us a little view David's behavior in this his distress. There is none of us
can deny, but his occasion of grief was great, great reason he had to
mourn, who says to the contrary? It was no small crosie to see ones child die
in such a quarrel: but yet there is a mean in all things (as the proverb
runs) his behavior is very strange, his mourning not like David's: for
whereas this river and flood of tears may seem to be fed from a threefold
spring, flesh, nature and grace, and so his sorrow to be partly spiritual, for
Absaloms soul, partly natural, in that he was his son, partly carnal, in
that he was his Absalom: yet the truth is, his sorrow is rather carnal then
otherwise, if the parts be considered: for first, nature goes not so far as
to wish the destruction of it self, as David here does; O that I were dead,
dead for thee, or in thy stead: and as for grace, it would never bring forth
such fruits of passion, as to wish death in coffeehouse, nor provoke to
whining in this indecent manner, but would have composed the affections rather,
and have taught him to mourn in silence; Besides, his sorrow is too much to be
good, and comes with too much ease from him, and is too soon ripe to be
spiritual fruit. Howsoever then we deny not, but David was a sanctified man,
and so had sanctified affections, and withal was full of natural affection,
yet in this particular, and at this instant; he was more unnatural to
himself, then natural to his son, and bewrayed more flesh for the present
by far, then spirit, yea, that so drowned this, that the motions thereof,
could not as yet be heard. Now this light being thus given to the words
following, you see the points do offer themselves so fast unto us, and come so
thick upon us, that we know not well which to receive, and what to put back.
This (if you say the word) shall lead the way: In that this man (no worse a man
than David) thus exceeds in sorrow upon this occasion, in so carnal a manner:
Doct. 2.
Let us learn, that Gods best children are apt to grieve too much, and to
exceed in passion for outward things; as in mirth, when once we are in, we are
apt to forget our selves; so in sorrow, when once we yield unto it, we are
in danger of surfeiting upon it. A man would think that David should be as
little troubled with this disease as any man living; for whether you look to
nature or grace, the banks seem to be so sound, that no excess of sorrow can
ouerflow them: for first, if you look to complexion, he seems to be made of
the lightest timber, a man whose ruddy face seems to promise a resolute and
cheerful heart: if you look to natural helps, his skill in music (to say
nothing of any else) was not ordinary: and as for spiritual means, the best
medicines to cure discases, the king was behind none in these matters: his
graces were very eminent, his experience much; and yet if David will but plod
awhile on crosses, nay, if he will not be prepared for them, it is strange to
see how unlike himself he is, he cries as if he had been stickt. In the next
chapter he takes up the same note again: nay, he will die forsooth, he will be
gone, he will to his son: and why? he is his Absalom. And what think you of
Job? Job 3.
the Lord himself gives him a good report, out of doubt he was an honest man;
but did you ever hear a wise man so far forget himself? he is angry with
the light, quarrels with the night, has a saying to the stars, to his mother,
to the midwife, there is no dealing with him in his fit, and yet the occasion
outward. Instances of this kind there be more then enough, but they are
unpleasant, and therefore I will content my self with one more, and that is
Jonah, as strange a man of an honest man as you have lightly heard of. This
Jonah was crossed (as he thought) first in his credit: Jonah 4.1.
how bare he that? untowardly enough, the matter seemed naught, stark naught
to him (says the text) he chased exceedingly: and what was the matter? the
Lord preferred many men's souls before the satisfying of his lust: a great
matter: yet this man would not brook it at Gods hand, till the Lord took him
down: well, the second time, he was crossed in his ease, and a root (I cannot
tell what to term it, whether tree, or shrub or stalk; a trifle it was which
he pleased to fancy for his turn) but would you think that a Prophet would
chase at the loss of such a thing? why, this and his heat put him into his
old tune again, he will be dead in a passion; God comes to pacify him, it
will not be, he is angry, Chapter 4.
he has reason to be angry, he will be angry, yea, would he could burst and
kill himself with anger. What is the matter? It is belike for some great
sin, because he has offended God: no (sir) he is the plaintiff, God had
rather (in his conceit) trespassed him: and this is Jonah; let us stay in him
(for we can hardly match him, and yet a good man) what may be the reason of
these excessive fits for outward things? Reasons 7.
The reasons are many; amongst many these are some: first, a great mistaking
and error in judgment, we ouerprize these outward things, and promise to our
selves that from them, which never any found in them: and therefore we
ouer-greeue, when we are disappointed of them. Thus David thinks Absalom the
pretiest fellow in a country, no man had such a child as was Absalom: and
therefore when he is dead, David cannot live: thus because the judgment makes
too great a report of outward things to the affection, the affection makes too
great ado about them, the one being blinded, the other is bewitched: and that
is a second reason (since we are fallen into it) namely the distemper of the
affections, when we have outward blessings we love them but too well; and
therefore when we lose them we grieve too much; for make a breach in one
affection and you weaken all, as the whole army is weakened if any part be
disordered, the whole building the worse for the removing of someone stone, and
the whole body infeebled by the wouding of one part: Thus because David will
pass over his affections to his son in his life time, and settle his joy in
Absalom, he cannot be master of them nor command them when he is dead, he will
be fond whilst he has Absalom, no body must touch him, the wind must not
blow upon him, therefore he will extremely lament when he loses him, and no
body must comfort him, because his Absalom is not. Add unto this in the third
place the deceitfulnes of our own heart, which does but cosen us, and the
subtlety of the devil, who to the end he may carry us headlong with the
whirlewind of passion into a sea of troubles, will bear us in hand, that we
have reason to grieve, and to be passionate. Thus Jonah stands unto his cause,
and being drunken with passion, he cannot see but he has the better of God:
Thus David (had a man closed hith him, and asked him, what he meant to be so
loud)? would quickly have been his talsemaster, what? (would he have said)
would you have me insensible of such a stroke as this? is there no thing to be
done by the pare^t, when the Lord thus singles out his child? ought not the
father to take notice of it? especially I must, since I did not the part of a
father to him: he should, ere this, have been executed for his sins, I let
him run on, but now the Lord has met with him and me too to my woe: It is
just upon me, and I am persuaded, I ought not to let it pass without some use;
I must grieve: and yet, were I sure, his soul were now in heaven, I would care
the less, but (alas) the example is searefull, so to live, so to die. Fair
words (good David:) he speaks as he thinks (good man) but he knows not his
own heart, is this the cause that you would have died for him? was it because
he had sineed? because you had failed in duty? (alas) what could your death
do for his soul, or your own discharges no, no, he was your darling, you
cannot spare him, you must always bear him in your eye, hence those tears:
and thus we run on many times in a tale, and would feign persuade our selves,
that what we do, is done with judgment, when (God knows) our sorrow is as
full of flesh as David's here was; and thus what through the errrour of our
minds and disorder of our affections, and deceitfulness of our own hearts,
and Satan's cunning, it comes to pass, that we are in the depth of sorrow and
passion (as the Aramites in the mids of Samaria) before we know where we be.

Now this being so, Use 1.
that the best of us all are subject to immoderate sorrow for outward things,
we must not only learn to bear with one another in this our common frailty,
but further every one for himself must fence and mound his heart against these
absurd passions and excessive griefs. Many outward things be so base, (in
respect of man) that they should not once move him, they be not worthy his
cares or thoughts, unfit to belodged in the meanest room of man's soul; to
name them the same day with man, were to set them above their place; to bestow
tears on these, were to wash stables with sweet water, not worth the while,
nor the cost. All of them are but finite, none absolutely good, and therefore
our grief for them must be limited with respects, and used with great
moderation, else it will degenerate and turn carnal. Neither will it serve the
turn to plead that our sadness hurts no body, but our selves, and that
therein we are enemies to none but to our selves: for were this a true plea,
yet were it insufficient; for who gave us a commission to hurt our own
persons, and to practice murder upon our own bodies? but this is not all, for
besides a private wrong, we rob God of his glory, and men of that service we
owe unto them; indeed, worldly sorrow makes us both unthankful to God, and
unprofitable to man, Rules. 1.
and unnatural to our selves (as hence might be showed, but we cannot stand on
all) and therefore let us strive against it. Let us, (will some man say) let us
if we can, but how should we be armed against the excess of worldly sorrow?
can you give me any preservatives against it? Answer, some we will, many we
might, but so far as we practice these following, we shall be freed of this
unprofitable guest.

1. Let us deny our selves in all worldly matters, and not engage our
affections unto them, either to be eagerly set upon them when we have them in
chase, or to be foolishly puffed up with them, when we have them in possession;
for if we do not leave them, till they leave us, it is sure they will leave us
in the lurch in the end: witness David, Absalom was gone ere David had denied
himself in Absalom, and therefore now here is nothing but roaring, whereas if
he before had sacrificed his name, and crucified his affection; he would never
have stood upon those terms, o my son my son, what will the world say, that
my son should come to this? but he would have comforted himself in his GOD
(as elsewhere he did) and said, 1. Sam. 30.6.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems best to him: and so, if we could
deny our selves in our husbands, wives, children, names, etc. we would never
take on so, when we part, my son, my son, my husband, my child, etc: but as we
were not doted with them whilst we had them, so neither would we be discouraged
when we lost them. But here is the misery (let us see it and amend it) we lay
the whole strength of our affections upon the things we fancy (as the creeple
lays his full weight upon his crutches) and therefore when they are taken from
us (as Pharaohs chariot wheels) we are down upon all four, and stick in the
mud: yea we set on our affections as the Be his sting, with all our might and
strength, we convey unto others our very bowels and hearts, and therefore when
they are gone, we are heartles. We see the error, what is the remedy? Rejoice
as if we rereioiced not, and then we shall mourn as if we mourned not; be not
too glad when the sun shines, and then thou will not be too sad when a cloud
comes. David, and as soon as David? Absalom was lusty in the morning, dead ere
night, may not the like crosses steal suddenly on us? but this was David's own
error, he thought when God had given him a fine child, that he must needs
bring comfort and peace to his father, call him Absalom, (says David) I hope
he will be a good man and a peaceable child one day; and to say the truth,
where should a father look for comfort sooner then from his child? but yet,
it proves otherwise you see, Absalom is named (as they say Popes be) by
contraries, his name and nature agree like a boatman and his oars, that look
two contrary ways; poor David met with nothing less then that he expected.
Let us learn some wisdom from his misery, let us not become sureties for the
world in a debt of comfort, but rather suspect her and correct our selves,
saying, I now take some comfort in this child, I solace my self in this
outward blessing, but let me be moderate, who knows what sorrow it may breed
me ere I die? Thus if we could forecast perils before they come, and be well
appointed to receive them when they do come, we might better quit our selves
in crosses then usually we do; but when we are in our iollity, we cannot
hear on that side: O spare your speech, or else you kill my heart, do you
say, that I must part with my husband, and bury my child? what my Absalom? I
hope I shall never live to see that day, at least not yet a while, and thus you
will not hear of crosses till they come, and then you cannot bear them,
because they come so suddenly. Others know well enough there must be a time of
parting, what need you tell them that? but in the mean you must bear with
them, for in truth they cannot choose but love their friends, and take their
part in all God sends (as if there were no difference between loving and
doting, between moderate drinking, and excessive drunkenness) and they do
not doubt, but when God calls them to crosses, he will fit them for crosses,
and thus they run on. But is it like lie that he will bear afflictions
patiently, who cannot with patience hear them spoken of? Is this the way to
be furnished for winter, to sit still and say, if God call me to winter, he
will fit me for winter, and in the mean time make no provision, but say,
whiles he sends warm and dry weather, I will take my part? No, in summer thou
must think of winter, in thy prosperity, of adversity, else thou will be
soon in David's tune.

if we be crossed in them, we shall soundly smart for it, because those
crosses will come with a sting; David was not so found in the matter of
Absalom, as with more credit he might have been, and therefore Absalom sticks
by him longer then he should. And (surely brethren) crosses are like pinching
frosts, they will search, they will examine where we are most vnsou^d, we shall
soonest plain, and where most corruption lies, there we shall most shrink
when the burden comes: would we not then grieve too much for outward things?
let us not sin in the use of them: would we keep out carnal sorrow? keep out
cursed sin: if we let this canker cate into our hearts, Gods medicines must
pierce as deep, else what recovery? build on this (brethren) sin always makes
way for sorrow; in that measure that sin taints us, crosses will sling us;
this is a true saying and of all men to be believed. But I am slow.

Aarons rod the Egyptians, and false is evermore hurtful and violent then
true, as bugbeares more affright children then true men. Again, godly sorrow
kills worldly grief, as spirituallioy mars carnal mirth: let sin ly heavy, and
outward crosses will be light; mourn that thou have displeased God and
defaced his image, and thou will have little leisure to mourn for worldly
matters: again, if Christ be all thy joy, and all thy comfort be shut up in
the Lord, thou can never be left comfortles, since Christ ever lives in thee
and for thee. But here is the spite, we mistake the mark, we pass sin, and
spend our sorrow on the world, we leave Christ, and bestow our affections
elsewhere, hence we are to speak of comfort when we should use it, and lose
our labor in sorrowing amiss. Thus David bestirs him for Absalom, and when
all is done, he must unwind and unwrap all again. How happy we, if we now
learn to place our joy and sorrow aright? Paul's prescription to the Philip,
Chap. 4.6.
you may write probatum est upon the head of it; for there is no cross so
great under the cope of heaven, but prayer and thanksgiving will lighten it; as
there is none so easy, but plodding and unthankfulness will make it heavy. Let
then our complaints be made to God, and let that time which is spent in
aggravating crosses and unkindness, be spent in recounting mercies and
deliverances, and then crosses will be as small in our esteem, as they be in
truth: and had David thought on this, to have cried, o my son Solomon, in stead
of Absalom, and seen Gods mercy in the one, as well as Gods justice in the
other, and in this heat of passion drawn himself into Gods presence, and
listed up one faithful prayer, these storms would have vanished (as a mist
before the Sun) and he would have saved himself a great deal of pains: but
he cannot as yet pray, and therefore as yet here is no comfort. O let our
sorrows bring us speedily to God, and then comfort will come riding upon the
clouds toward us. Let us presently fall to prayer and thanksgiving as once Job
did, and betake our selves to the word and promise, or to some holy conference,
when our fits do come upon us, and we shall quickly break the course and
strength of them. Thus if we will learn to deny our selves in worldly things,
using them so, that we abuse them not, if we will think on crosses before they
come, and not leave all till afterward; if we will be just in getting, and
upright in using the things of this life, that we do not enuenim them with
sin; if we will bestow our sorrow on our sin, and make that our chiefest
grief and greatest cross; if (lastly) we will be much in prater,
thanksgiving, meditation of the word, etc. our strength will be so much against
crosses (at least) our comfort in them, that we shall not need to fear any
hurt from them, but may comfortably expect benefit by them: fure it is, if
these means keep us not dry-shod, Act. 27.
they will keep our head above water, we shall be but washed with Paul, Act.
27.
not drowned. And this of that use; you shall find me brief in all that
follows. A second use is this: David's case? But is not this (will some say) a
vile thing that we should more grieve for outward things, than for sin against
God? It is so, and does it not show, that we are wonderful carnal? It does
so: why then; what then? How ca^ I be Gods child? why? how is David? did you
ever hear him more loud for his sin then here for Absalom? did he not weep at
Ziklag for outward things, 1. Sam. 30.4.
till he could vveep no more? and yet for all this I would not say that David
loved outvvard things more then God, or that his sins lay lighter then his
crosses: for first, he had more sorrovv for his sin, then he should or would
have had for outvvard losses when he was David. Secondly, a little godly
sorrovve is more then a great deal of vvorldly; more (I say) in substance,
though not in bulk, as a little balm water is vvorth a poole of mud, a
little gold comes to more then a great deal of brass. Thirdly, his carnal
and vvorldly forrovv was but a sudden storm, a land-flood, his spiritual a
constant guest; though it were composed and silet (as the deepest waters are
most still) yet was it deep and soaking. Now what we say of David, the
same (if you change the name) must be understood of every good christian, who
is not to be considered according to that he is, when he is drunken with
passion, but according to that he is when he is his own man and in his
wits; neither must we look what men do, but what they mean and would do:
and therefore so long as we desire to make our sin our greatest sorrovv, and
judge our selves for our security, so long as we give all entertainme^t to
godly sorrovv, and stand to keep out worldly, we are in Gods account more
spiritual than carnal: as with men, he that keeps a constant house all the
year, is said to keep a better house then he that lays it on once in a
twelve month. And this for that point; Now it follows: Q my son] From David's
mourning and behavior in this particular, let us note one thing more: you
hear the man, you see his behavior, was David wont to bear crosses so?
nothing so; but you see how it fares with him now, Doct. 3.
he can not help it. Hence learn we, that Gods children, who bear some
crosses with great wisdom and moderation, are sometimes foiled in othersome,
and fail in both. Who could behave himself better then David in the matter of
Shimei? who worse in the case of Nabal? Read 1. Sam. 25. and 2. Sam. 16. and 2.
Sam. 12. etc. 2. Sam. 15.26. etc.
how sweet his carriage in many passages between Saul and him? how admirable
his behavior in one child's death? how absurd in another, nay how diversely
affected with the cause of one and the same Absalom? what gracious speeches did
he once utter when he fled from Absalom? what a bedrole have we here at his
death? who could more forget himself then place, on such an occasion? How
far was this from policy, how far unlike his carriage in other places? good
David, the same that would make to heaven at other times, so soon as the
cross had given him summo^s; the same that was used to bear afflictions as
patiently as he bears this, (to say no more) immoderately. And touching Job,
Job 1. vlr. verse.
could any man living behave himself better in some crosses? In all this
(says the Lord) summing up his behavior in the first conflict) did not Job
sin, nor show the least folly in charging folly upon God: in all which? not
in all that first conflict wherein he was so nearely touched, in his goods and
children, but his behavior it was most religious, he humbled himself and
worshipped, his speeches very gracious, The Lord has done all, he is righteous
in all, and blessed be his name. Thus Job at that time, on that occasion; See
chap. 13, 3.16.21. and. 23.3.4.5 etc.
but how afterward? who he? he challenges GOD into the schools to dispute it
out, if he would not take the challenge it was because he was notable to stand
under his arguments. The like may be said of Jonah, a man of good behavior; in
the first chapter, he makes an honest confession both of his faith and of his
fault, lettles himself to die, and looks as if he would to heaven anon; but
at another time in a smaller crosle, he is no more like himself, then an apple
is like a nut, he chides handsmooth with God, and will stand to it that God
knows not when a man speaks reason if he would term him unreasonable in his
passion. But what might be the reason (to pass more instances) of this so
vvide a difference? what might be the cause that these so worthy champions
are thus sometimes foiled? Reason 1.
I will tell you: first, It pleases God sometimes to set on a cross, and to
make it stick by a man, either because the same party would look besides
former crosses, or kick them off too lightly, or else because he would let
him see himself, and know what he is of himself, or for some other cause
unknown to us, but alvvaies just in it self, and well known to God: Now,
if he purpose so to do, either to withdraw his assistance, or to increase the
smart, alas, who can stand under it? and thus we see Gods best children more
troubled now and then with a trifle (in comparison) than with greatest
torments at another time; and as Christ's looking back on Peter, did more affect
him, and work upon him when he pleased to work with it, then many words
did at another time; so many times a word misplaced, a countenance mis-set does
more gaul us, then twenty greater matters, (when God is pleased to pay us)
because ever that is the cross which he will make the cross, that most
pierces which he sharpeneth most.

David any where else, he had been for you, he could have borne it, but if you
touch his Absalom, you pare the quick, you touch his life, us, they do but
nettle us, and then they raise those tempests which they cannot lay, they do
but bait, they do not worrie our corruptions, and so they make us chafe. Job
35. penult:
Thus (in Elihues judgment at least) the cause why Job did so beslir him and
lay about him, was, because God had not dealt in extremity with him. Thus
Ionab, who was tamed when he should be drowned, was a little too lusty for a
goard. And surely (brethren) if our crosses were sometimes more, I do not
think but our firs would be fewer, our outward carriage (at least) better.
Three ierkes sometimes make the child yield, when one would make him dance and
stamp. David can say somewhat to this also; he was fitted for crosses when the
child borne in adultery died, his heart was sofrned; he had reason to expect
its death, since he was told no less, 2. Sam. 12.
but here he looks for no such matter, he gives in charge that the young man
Absalom (an old traitor (though his boy) should be looked unto, he will not
suffer himself to think that Absalom must die, he will not be humbled for his
fondnes past, because he did not mean to amend it: and therefore this lies
upon him more heavy than sand, he cannot bear it, as he bore the other: and
thus we must leave the point as we found it at first, and tell our judgments,
that one cross foiles us, yea, laics us on our back, when another (perhaps a
stronger) cannot stir us, because the Lord sets on one more then another,
because we are less sound in one place then another, because we are less
mastered by one cross then another, because we are less prepared for one then
another.

Now the point is proved, let us not suffer it to pass without some use,
though we be the briefer. Use. 1.
Learn hence at least a double point of wisdom: the first respects our
brethren; them we must not too lightly censure for their weakness and
tenderness in some crosses though light, since that cannot be light, which God
will make heaute; since that may be light to one, which is as a mountain to
another; since those our brethren may manfully bear far sorer crosses then
our selves, though humbled in some particular; since briefly, that which is
heavy now, may anon be light to them; and that which now is as a thing of
naught to us, may anon be somewhat if God shall set it on: soft then (my
brethren) let us not be too eager upon David: it may be we have buried no
Absalom as yet, (at least dying in such a sort) it may be we would have busled
more then David did. Had Shimei so greeted us, or Saul so pursued us, like
enough David would have been at patience before us, in twenty other crosses,
and so may our brethren too, even those we most censure: and therefore have
some patience and mercy toward the afflicted, account not cuerie one proud, and
carnal, and froward, that is foiled, when we stand.

David is before us herein: he fought more battles then twenty of us, and that
with great courage and good success, yet is not David able to stand against
this cross: his Absalom, his Absalom could not be forgotten. And what though
we have buried a friend? It may be we know not what it is to bury a father, a
child, a wife, a husband. If Amnon be dead, we cannot tell what an Absalom
may work when his death shall be untimely. Say poverty be no great burden to
us, it may be pain and sickness will make us roar: if these blow over, a
cloud upon our names may happily trouble our patience: if we can be patient
when other men's faults are served into us, and laid in our dish, yet it may be
we shall not claw it off so well, if our kinsfolks, servants, 1. Pet. 2.13.
parents, children, yoke-fellowes, shall break forth, and vnmuzle the wicked
against us. O then let not him brag, that puts on harness, as he that puts
it off: let no man be secure, but ever stand upon his guard, still ready to
receive and to award these blows that fall upon him like hail and shot: and
so if he do, then on the other side, let him not cast away his buckler because
he was wrought a rap, but look better to his hand another time. What though
David be now down? he may rise again for all this, and prove himself old
David still; though he be a little eclipsed, yet may he shine forth afresh, and
make many an holy prayer and Psalm after this: and though he now fly, yet may
he fight and triumph again ere he die, and so may thou too, though for the
present dejected. That Peter that was once afraid of a wenches face, will not
after fear the threats of any adversary: and he who is sometimes base in a
trifle, may after play the man in greatest trials. Say not then, if I cannot
bear the loss of a child, of a friend, of a little wealth, a little ease, a
little sleep, alas, what shall become of me if it should come to fire and
faggot? How shall I part (part I must) with my dearest pledges, and nearest
friends, and with all my goods? Yes man, hear me in one thing that I shall
say, Jonah may with more patience part with his life at one time, then with a
root at another: and that God that can make light crosses heavy, and shadows
of crosses look like mountains, can (if he call thee to them he will) make
heavy crosses light, and mountains shadows. And thus briefly for that point.
Bear me companiethorow one point more, and I will trouble you no further, and
will be brief in that. For whom does David thus mourn? What is he whose death
is thus lamented? Hear him, O my son, my son. Which son? O Absalom,
Absalom. Absalom is then the man. And heerea strange matter is offered to those
that know not the heart of a father. The son practices against his fathers
house, robs him of his children, abuses him in his wives, seeks to spoil
him both of life and living: and the father, what does he? he weeps for him,
he mournes over him, he would die for him: thus does David. In whom see what
a kind and godly fathers affection is to his child. Doct. 4.
No undutifulness, no practice on the childs part, no not death itself can
divide between him and his child. What though Absalom can forget David? yet
David cannot forget him; what though he be a very ungracious impe; yet he is
my child: my child (says David) I cannot but love him: and indeed he ouerloues
him, which I do not commend, but only observe to note the strength of parents
love if it be natural, a love indeed as strong as death, Cant. 8.
as hot as fire, like that which Solomon speaks of in another case, which
cannot be put out with water, nor bought out with silver: and can it be
otherwise when parents be religious, since God and nature both command grace
and nature, both enforce love, though not fondnes? you that be parents save me
the proof of this point, and do but hear why I note it.

First do kind and godly parents so love their children, Vsc. 1.
that you may sooner find too much carnal, then too little natural affection
in them? then shall they never make it good to their own or others souls,
that there is any goodness in them who bear no affection to their own
children. Those parents that have no natural affection, can they be
spiritually affected? Does that spirit which makes us loving to all, lodge in
the unnatural breast? Can they love Gods children, that bear no love to their
own bowels? Can they love their enemies, can they call God Father, that are
tyrants to their own children, their own flesh? No no: it argues gross
sins, and a fierce conscience, when men be so fierce and violent against
(mankind I might say, I must say) themselves. What, parents not to feel their
children when they cry, Father? not to find their bowels moved when they
think of a child? what not of a religious child? Why then blush ye Dragons,
and be ye ashamed, O Bears and Tigres, that your Lords should be (so beastlike
say I? nay) so devilish: for what creatures but Devils hate their seed? Nay
could Devils have natural seed, would they hate their own trow ye? But why
spend we words on them, who have the curse under seal, as Paul shows? Romans
1.5.

but love their children; and out of their love, grieve at their unkindness,
weep for their impiety, mourn for their sorrows, and take to heart their
folly? why then the children of such parents must take to heart their former
stubbornness, and for the time to come forbear those practices that might be
matter of grief to their parents. How can thou refresh thy self with that
which is a sword in the heart of thy dearest friends? how can thou think to
escape the hand of God, when thou will feed upon the blood of thine own
parents, and make them as weary of the light as David now is? Is it not
sufficient, that already they have cared, and sighed, and groaned, and wept for
thee; but still thou will kill their souls with grief? What if thou can
shake it off? Can a father shake out his heart? Does their love nothing move
thee? nor their care, northeir pains, nor their tears? nothing? O that
Absalom had seen or heard his fathers complaints: he thought that now, because
he loved not his father, his father could not love him: but that is thy error
(cursed viper.) The father loves, when the child hates; and then can David say
most feelingly, 5: verse:
Handle the young man Absalom well, when Absalom could say (if shame did not
stop his mouth) Handle the old Carle David roughly, at my request: yea then can
David die for Absalom, when Absalom had as leese die as see David live. Had
Absalom known this, would not he (think you) have relented? would not his
rockie heart have yielded? What could he have said, if David had said but this
unto him, O Absalom, O Absalom, did I call thee Absalom for this? Is this to be
a child? Do thou also think my griefs too few? Was it not enough to be
crossed in my familiars, in my father in law, in my own brethren, in my wife,
but my own children must add unto my grief? Must Absalom, that I loved so
well? Is it not sufficient that thou have robbed me of my children, and
brought me almost to the grave, but now thou will have my crown and my blood?
Did I spare thee for this? Was I a means of thy life, and will thou be of my
death? Would I die to do thee good, and will thou die vulesse thou may hurt
me, what thou my son; Is not David thy father, Maacah thy mother, do not know
us etc. can thou forget us? have thou been a father thy self, and yet risest
up against thy father? what (I say) could Absalo^ have said to such a
salutatio^? but he is not so happy to hear his father, and therefore he
proceeds till vengeance will not suffer him to live, but hangs him up against
the sun. And let all disobedient and rebellious children take warning by this
one thus hanged up in gibbets, and know, that if the kindness of their parents
cannot break their hearts, and work them to remorse, the hand of God will be
upon them and pursue them, till the ravens of the valleys have picked out their
eyes, and the flames of hell have scized upon their souls.

Egyptians for Jacob, Zach: 12:
that of the Israelites for Josiah, that of a father, for his first, his only
son? how dear should the name of our God be unto us, how tenderly should we
take those contempts and indignities, that are cast upon him, who is so feeling
of every sorrow that befalls us? O Lord, that we had an heart to weep over
Christ, and that the rebukes of God did fall on us, Psalm: 119:156:
o that our own sins could cause such tears, as other men's did wring from
David? O that the word would smite our hearts, and cause water to gush out of
these rocks; o that we stood affected to God as Mephibosheth to David! he
mourned, he fasted, he wept in this distress of David, we laugh, we feast, we
do not, we cannot weep, though we our selves have risen against our
sovereign, and helped to dethrone him. Ah (brethren) shall David mourn for
others sins in his Psalms? shall not we for our own? 2: Sam: 10:
Shall David's good subjects take to heart his afflictions? shall not we
rebellion against our king? As Leuir: 24:11:
shall David's servants be ready to smite him through that shall rail upon him,
and shall (...) our hearts arise when the name of our God is smitten (...),
when our father is railed upon? nay, shall David (...) out, my son, my son, for
a wretch that would have k^^^ h^^^; and shall not we mourn over Gods son whom
w^ ^^^^ mine? yes brethren, we must mourn, if we will be comforted (...) make
Gods case ours, if he shall make ours his; which (...), then behold what
comfort is here offered: for (...) is there such affection in an earthly
father? what then may we expect at Gods hand who is an heavenly father whose
love as far exceeds ours as the heavens are above the earth? can David (I
lead you no further) love Absaloms such a child, because a child? can his heart
came after him, can he be pacified toward him at Ioabs request, when he has
slain his son; and is it not possible that GOD should be friends with v8 at
Christ's request, though we have slain our selves and the Lord of life? Can
David love Absalom, when he has defiled his concubines, when he seeks his
kingdom, his life? can he then die for him, when Absalom would be his death,
can he do all this, though his son does not submit, does not repent, does
not crave pardon, but is up in arms against him; and will not God (whose love
is infinite) for Christ's sake, forgive his children when they come unto him,
confess their fault, be sorry for it, and desire amendment? O my brethren, do
not we wrong God exceedingly when we will not yield him as kind as David? say,
thou have been as bad as ever Absalom was, unholy, unclean, unnatural, would
not David be friends with Absalom, if he had confessed his fault; and shall we
doubt of God? O but David was fond, God is just; yea but the question is,
whether David has more fond love than God has true love: say it were his
fault, here is the point, is there so much badnes in David as there is goodness
in God? nay, I put it upon thy self, whatcan thy child do, but thou canss
pardon the trespass against thee, so now he will behon (...) wherefore then
(for conconclusion) this I say, what soever thy sins be, never (...) down
discouraged, despairein thy self, but ever hope the best of God, so long (...)
itself his means, thou hear that he is a m^^^s;ust (...) do now as Benbadad
did to Ahab, humbl^ (...), 1. King: 20:
confessethy sins, bewail them (...) off (...) of them, and endeavor new
obedie(...), and (...) had as many sins upon thee (...) the sea shore, and
those (...) great (...) should (...) find mercy and be pardoned (...)
sin(...)ere find God only insinite. Thus in a more general manner, we have run
through the chief ma^ters of this text. Now it shall sulfice to name only the
particulars, or rather some few of them, such as are these following. In that
(...) this stir it for Absalom, (...) delight, we see that the, more Gods
children serther hearts on an outward thing, the more they shall be crossed in
it. Let David please him solse too much in Absalom, and David shall smart for
is this his greatest joy shall prove his greast cnosse.

Again, if Gods people can be content that their children should cross God,
God will be content ^^t their children shall he crosses to them. If David will
be so tidde that his child must not be chid nor shent, God will be so good,
as to give him his payment for it.

Again, if Rulere will give life when God calls for death, they shall help
either themselves him to sorrow, and their friends (so spared) to shall if David
will be so nice, alas pretty ducke, who can find in his heart to execute, yea or
to correct such a sweet baby and so let him go, God will find a time to pay
David, and to reach Absalom for it. Again in David we see, that in the best
when crosses come, the flesh will play its part and lay about its while, David
must run himself out of hi^^h, before an^ can stand on (...) ground, etc.

FINIS

