TIME Is a Turne-Coate. OR Englands threefold Metamorphosis.

Wherein is acted the Pensive man's Epilogomena, to Londons late lamentable
Heroical Comi-Tragedie.

ALSO A Panegyricall Pageant-speech or Idylion pronounced to the City of
London, upon the entrance of her long expected Comfort.

Qui color ater erat, nunc est contrarius atro.

Written by JOHN HANSON.

LONDON, Printed for I. H. and are to be sold at the sign of the Bible in
Paul's Churchyard.

1604.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS BENNET KNIGHT, LORD MAYOR OF the famous
City of London, the right Worshipful Sir William Romley, and Sir Thomas
Midleton Knights, and Sheriffs of the same City: increase of honor and
euer-flourishing felicity.
RIGHT Honorable and right Worshipful, I have long expected, that some men of
greater experience and grauer judgment then my self, ere this should have bent
their studies to co^gratulate your prosperous designements with their learned
Labors: not only in this regard, that it has seemed gracious in the eyes of
Heaven, to turn the time of destruction into mirth and exhilaration, to
dispell the clouds of desolation from the splendant Sun of this City, and to
seal up the jaws of that starued Tiger, ravening and ranging too and fro with
insatiate appetite, to gormandize indefinitely without partiality: but also in
respect of the proceedings in your general functions and callings; therein
manifesting your ardent zeal to the Church and Commonwealth, in the
reformation of some particular and monstrous enormities nurced and fostred up
in the same City, wounding the hearts of many with the sting of Security, who
thereby fall into a Lethargy of their own ruination: they being naturally
like the Basilisk, who by stinging a man, provoke him to conclude his
destruction with the period of a sweet sleep; which to discuss upon more
amply, were but to light a torch, when the Sun boasts in his vertical
point, or to multiply leaves to a green tree. But perceiving the turn of
Times event to fall out opposite to my expectation, and a time of respiration
exhibited unto me by sacred Providence, (for Deus nobis haec otiafecit) I
(though most unfit, not so much in regard of my little scholership and reading,
as in respect of my iuuenilitie and less experience, though Assidue discens
plurima, fiam senex) have thought it not impertinent to my duty, as also
consonant to your dignities, to cast this poor mite of fervent affection and
congratulation, into the rich treasury of your honorable and worshipful
Patronage: being enforced hereupon to use the means of that poor man, who
having neither gold nor jewels, presented both his hands full of running water
to Artaxerxes. And the rather, for that I behold many presidents and pregnant
demonstrations of a flourishing Springtide of happiness substituted to your
predomination and government; in the constituting of necessary and requisite
laws for the supplanting and depopulating of vice; and being constituted, are
strictly observed and executed by your importunate industry, (which (as Caesar
says) is Fortunae Imperator, and urges an assent vltra vires rationis)
leading this city as peaceable Conductors, (or as Theodosius did Rome) to a
fruitful Autumn. For Archidamus being asked, what made the Lacedaemonian
kingdom to flourish, answered: First, the laws; and next, the Magistrates
observing the Laws: and Aristotle says, that Magistratus est custos legis,
also Xenophon: (...) Non differt bonus Princeps a patre bono. Whereupon may be
inferred, that Magistrates (as Patres patriae) ought seriously and with
judicial precaution, not only to prescribe ordinances tending to the general
benefit of a city or commonwealth; but also to be respective (as the father
tendreth the successiue fortune of his child with care and vigilancie) that
they foreslow not their progression in the performance of their due execution:
for Non decet principem virum totam noctem dormire, cui populi gubernacula
commissasunt, and a cuius cura pendent ingentia rerum momenta. But lest any man
should object against me, that I pretend by a kind of aemulation and
blandiloquence to adorn your merits like a Barbarian image, as Alexander was
by Midius: or on the contrary, to tax me of calumniation with this inueterate
Axiom: In medio tutissimus ibis: (which two, prove the Cankerworms of a
flourishing country: for Diogenes the Cynicke being asked, what kind of beasts
are most devouring; he answered: that of tame beasts, the Flatterer, and of
wild beasts, the Back-biter,) therefore so to abandon the first, as not
culpable of the last, I will cleave to the golden Medium, breaking off that
discourse, and cease to discuss upon such a Theme. And now to return to my
old task, I humbly entreat your favorable entertainment to these my
unpolished lines, being hewed out and squared by one of the meanest of
Appolloes Artificers. And I the more seriously desire it, for that I am deeply
resolved, they shall find a sufficient shelter under the wings of your Honorable
and Worshipful names and Patronage, as under the receptacle of a strong
fortified Testudo, against the yelping chaps of those snarling Zoylists, qui
potius pro consuetudine, quam proferocitate latrant, barking more for custom
then curstness: who by disgorging their mud-mixed censures upon the studious
essays of particulars, (for Apollo nullos habet inimicos, nisi nimbos) do
resolve with themselves by that means to win a purchase of a laureall
applause, and to erect an eternal monument of reputation to themselves, upon
the disgraces of other men's endeavors: but thereby proving culpable to
themselves of their own ignorance, and ripping up the bowels of their
imperfections and gross fatuities, in the calumniating of ingenious
enterprises, and by bringing back with impudent arrogance those stolen sparks
which they snatched from Appolloes sacred flames, whereby the moistened muddie
motions of their brains are enforced to euaporate in a smoothering heat; do
appear to the world, to surpass in immanitie, the Anthropophagi or Canibals;
who, though they gormandize on other men's flesh, yet will not devour
themselves. Thus hoping, that these unlettered lines shall pass without
disturbance under the covert of your worthy protections, I humbly entreat your
Honor and Worships, to admit this poor pittance into your rich
banqueting house of acceptance and tolleration, with no less willing mind,
then by course of affectionate congratulation it is presented unto your hands;
which, if it may find free access, I will turn my sequel essays with the
turn of ensuing Time, more deeply to converse with the Muses thereby to bring
forth a further manifestation of my ardent affection toward your worthy
personages. In the mean time, Heavens prosper your worthy proceedings.

London, 26. of March. 1604. Your Honor and Worships humbly devoted: John
Hanson.

The Author, and his Book.
Book. Help, help, alas, else am I quite undone,
O shroud me close from sight of these black feends,
Who wound with Scorpions stings: I cannot shun;
Alas for aid, some aid, sweet gentle friends!

Aut. Why, how now Book, what news? what, do thou dream?
Or art thou quite distract, of sense bereaved?
Or do thy Thoughts discuss on doleful Theme?

Bo. Yea sure, I dreamed, yet not by Dreams deceived:
For in my Dream, me thought thou badst me post
Through every Country, City, far and near,
To take my lodging with each erabbed Host,
And bear the lash of each lend Censurer.

Aut. Why, so thou must: then run, no time delay:
Stand not amazed at every carping brain;
And if thou meetst a Cynicke by the way,
If he look grim, look stern on him again.
But if grave Cato chance to meet with thee,
And deigne on thine his Judgment to suspend;
Do thou him reverence low, with cap and knee:
Tell him, for learned advice to him I send.

Book. What if proud Argas meet me in the street,
Who robs Apollo of that sacred Fire,
Which kindles ardent rage in his cold sprite,
And drives his muddie-frost-bit-Braine t'aspire:
He Will turn me ore, and toss me in his snare,
Chopping my Subject in his snarling chaps;
And in his turning, turn my coat threed-bare,
Within the pocket of his threed-bare stops.

Aut. What, that starved hungry catch-pole-paper knave,
Who never durst look harsh Horace in the face?
That stealing-Sense, that Sentence-snatching slave,
Who feeds on fragments scraped from each place?
What he, that does his Brains a begging send,
For some ragg'd Theme to comment on at large,
Catching a puddle-wharfe-Discourse by the end,
Chaunts it like whore-house tales in western Barge?
Who he, that still his Sunburned Sense inclines
To turn his state, till feign to turn his purse;
And tears his huing from lascivious lines,
Turns Good to Naught, and Naught does turn to worse?
What he, whose Wit the whore and strumpet plays,
Got great with child by Latins two or three;
And then cries out, (for midwife never stays)
Deliuerd of some monstrous Bastardie?
Turn him off to the whipping-post of Time;
Tell him, his loathsome stinking breath infects thee:
Then turn his chaps to chop some rascal Rhyme,
To chew some hobling doggrell Balladrie.
But if he swears, he will turn thy coat with spite,
And turn thee leaf by leaf, and line by line:
Bid him go turn his nap-lesse coat by night,
Who turns his coat more often, then thou turn'st thine.

Book. But he that on his Sattins seats his Thought,
Sinking to hell between his Dockesies arms,
Will turn his Fore-top, swear by heaven, it is naught,
As though that oath coniur'd, like Magic charms.

Aut. Turn that word (Naught) down to his heart again,
From whence that viprous term forced free access,
Where caves of ugly venim'd Snakes remain:
There let (naught) sting his soul without redress.

Book. Yet will Carnalitie, the usuring Atheist,
The Murderer, the immane Sodomite:
The Cruel man, and terr ene Sensualist,
Turn are my leaves and tear them in despite:
Turn back with scorn my wholesome Counsel given,
Turning me off, my grave advice expel.

Aut. Then turn them up into the hands of Heaven,
Who Will turn them down into the chaps of hell.
Now get thee hence, post on with turning Rhyme,
Turning thy sense to all, thy self to pain:
And turn thy hap to every turn of Time,
Though to thy self returns the smallest gain.

Vade, ambula, volens iusta.
R. B. De Argumento huius Libri encomium.
EN tibi depingit Diuum been gesta Libellus,
Funcra Magnatum, lugubria Fota virorum:
Sicvolat ipsa dies, velox vt semita Phoebi,
Ore vorat tacito, fallitq, volubilis aetas,
Tabida depellit, cunctus incorpore morbos:
Instruit exemplis inopem; detorquet and aegrum.
Vis prudens fieri, sis foelix temporis ipse
Filius, vt renouat varios aduertito motus:
Augescunt aliae gentes, aliae minuuntur;
Mortenigra breuner mutantur saecla animantum,
Et quasicursores vitarum Lampada tradunt:
Fulmine diuino trepidat sic mundus iniquue.
Libri and Authoris Encomium.
COgitur iste Liber (mel tanquam floribus) horte
Musaico, nitidis splendens lectisque coronis.
Tempore sis foelix, foelix Genio quoque tempus:
Lauriferas lauds sapiens cantabit Apollo.
Tempure confulges, insusus Palladis art,
Tu quia Pernassimontes renouasque, ruinas.
Tempore virescis, brumali tempore flores,
Nectare perlautus, hauslisq, Aganyppidis vndis.
Tempore, frendit Aper, ringitq, Lupus, Leo rugit,
Tu tamen in mundo, vt splendet, lucebis, Eous:
Tempora temporibus transuertis tabida firmis:
Foelici viridis decoret te tempore laurus.
T. G.

To the judicial Reader.
I write not of victorious Hanniball,
Of Romes old murdered sons, nor Pompeys fall,
Of valiant Hector, nor Achilles shield,
Burning Vesuvius, nor the Elysian field;
Nor of huge arme-strong Hercul's Iole:
Of lone-sicke Attis, nor beauteous Danae,
To whom (she imprisoned in a mured Tower)
Old Saturnes son rained down the silver shower:
Nor of Jove's conquering heir, nor Pryaps bed,
Nor of the sports of wanton Ganimed.
But of that Fair, the fairest of Earths Fair,
To whom in troops supernall Nymphs repair:
A shining Diamond, a radiant Bright,
Which in earths Center yields clearest Light:
A precious Pearl, clear as Aurora's Sun,
Whose hote-reflecting beams will not be done:
A glorious Star, to Heaven and Earth combined,
The brightest Gemme that ere in Albion shined.
Of height, of depth, of earth, of heaven, of hell,
Of ugly monsters, shapes that do excel:
Ofioy, of woe, of horror, mirth, and fear,
Of restless Motions whirled about the Sphare,
And turned circumferent with Typhonian Time:
Thus Time has task't me to a turning Rhyme.
Two ardent Passions kindled by Desire,
Within my breast at once began t'aspire:
Grief bad me write, but Joy straight answered, nay:
Joy bad me sing, then Grief advised me stay:
Grief waxed pale, while Joy more stern did show,
Joy sprightly stood, Grief scorned the overthrow.
Thus Joy and Grief, striving with adverse spite,
Twixt Grief and Joy, I framed my pen to write:
For turne-coate Time perforce directs my quill,
To urge it sing consorting to his will.
But since my Muse wants that Heroicke spirit,
In stately strains to eternize their merit;
Proiects her self to grauer Judgments sight,
Catching swift-winged Time on instant flight.
If smooth-toung'd Caliop these lines peruse,
The want of Age does want of Art excuse:
My head's ingirt with iuie, not with baies,
Ordained for deeper wits, that merit praise.
Friendly scan all, yet scandalize me not,
With the detracting Tongue of every Sot.
If well, then censure well, if ill, dispraise it;
Yet would I know, if he be wise that says it.
Nec Momum nec Mimum metuo.

TIME Is a Turne-coate: OR Englands threefold Metamorphosis. Post tristia, Leta.
Panaite Pierides vestro sacra ostia vati.

YE foule-fac'd Furies which the Stygian keep,
Ye grizly Feends of the Cymmerian deep,
Ye hel-hounds droupe, and howl in sulphur'd caves;
Stand ye amazed grim Plutoes damned slaves;
Rise up from torride lakes, and gaze afar;
Lo! Earth presents to Heaven a glistering Star.
Ye Powers divine which in the heau'nsare fixed;
Ye Spirits that with the wandering stars are mixed:
Conioyne in one ye Sphaeres caelestiall:
Ye Muses nine, perform this Funeral;
Condole her death, whose glorious life was so,
As by her life, her death was freed from woe:
Whose life repleat with grace, exempt from strife;
Whose death's transformd to neuer-dying life.
Cynthia, fair Sister to black lady Night,
That Gehons streams with golden Icons dight;
To whom heavens senior Lights proffer their duty,
For thy surpassing and refulgent Beauty:
Renounce thy borrowed Shine, revoke thy race,
With clouds of Languishment remaske thy face.
Sad Melpomen with tragic Scaenes relent
Each Marble rock and obdurated Flint:
Sigh forth deep accents of thy sacred Love,
To cause the stonie-hearted Savage move:
Strain out Threnodiae, thy assiduall note,
For Time has roab'd himself with sable Cote.
Ye sacred Nymphs hang down your Sun-bright hairs
Bedew your cheeks with penitential tears:
Conduct me to some solitary Cell,
Wherein I may with pale-faced Sorrow dwell.
Alas, my Muse does faint ere she proceed,
To tune Encomions on a mournful Reed:
Wise Caliope, sweet Queen of Eloquence,
Inspire her Thoughts with sacred influence.
Take courage (Muse) pure Zeal shall stand thy bar,
Look not aghast on every frowning Star:
Pluck up thy sprite from pitchie Acheron:
Solace amidst the fields of Hellicon:
Now bath thy self in the Pierian spring,
Where thy sad Sisters mournfully do sing:
Go seek that Phoenix mounted in the sky,
Transformed to euer-during Dignity;
The Phoenix of our age, Earths only Fair,
Faiths Empress, and heavens high glorious Hair:
Englands Phoenix admired for Raritie,
For Beauty, Virtue, and pure Chastity:
O she is consumed with heavens resplendent Light,
That from her ashes one might rise as bright,
And flourish forth upon the verdant ground,
Whose parallel in Art is scarcely found.
Why strives my Muse to stellifie her name?
The bright-eyed-wondring world diuulg'd her fame;
And Fame it self flies swiftly from her nest,
To blaze her honor from the East to West.
Sad Sickness, the pale Harbinger of Death,
Foredoom'd the loss of Syrinx daughters breath:
Black furious Fate, that wrought such deep despite,
To lock fair Phoebe from Endimions sight;
I mean Eliza: o write that name again,
That with reuoluing Time it may remain:
Eliza, she who was profound in Art,
Is now struck dead with Thanatos his dart;
Eliza, who in many dangers stood,
For Gods high glory, and her subjects good:
By her, th'incarnate Gospel was possessed;
Through her, all Britains I Will Iehoua blessed;
For her, the heavens rained down such plenteous store,
As Natures greedy Sons could wish no more.
Honor embraced her, Art by her did stand,
Prudence attended on her genious hand,
Justice in Mercy with her bare the sway,
Glory infinite her last Catastrophe.
The fatal Sisters jointly have decreed,
Old Atropos should cut that vital thread,
Which counites the Substance with the Soul;
Nu^bing each Sense with leane-chapt Deaths co^troule.
This state is incident to Natures lot;
Drawn through the world in Times still chariot,
With two unruly Steedes, and hurled along
By restless Motion and Mutation:
At length they leave her on Deaths dismal stage:
As being weary of their carriage:
Then his grim Sergeant comes without control,
T'arrest her body, dis-unite her soul:
He takes no bribes, but strikes (impartial)
The Beggar, Baron, Caitiffe, King, and all.
If Death had feared to stop Astraeaes breath,
Then had he spared Queen Elizabeth:
Whose soul is now enthroniz'd boue the skies,
Where glorious Cherub's sing her Exequies:
Through Jove's broad milk-white path now is she gone,
And stately royaliz'd on Angels throne:
The silver Vault with Epods deep resounds,
Of her rare Virtue which on Earth abounds.
I wish Eliza from us could not pass,
Who made each place a heaven wherein she was.
The Almighty Jove so locked Virginity
From Antidotes and banefull Treachery,
That burning poison never effected harm,
Although confected with a Magic charm.
How many treasons, direful accidents,
Base-bred complots and experiments,
Conspired her death; yet still preserved was she
By heavens eternal Triple-Vnitie?
How many strived to stop Elizaes breath?
Yet (to their shame) she died a living death;
For which we laud The Immortal Deity,
Who mixeth joy with sad calamity.
Her fame on earth is painted by all Seven,
Her corpse in Lead, her soul a Saint in heaven.
Eliza lived, now is Eliza dead,
And David raised in her Angellike stead;
She Is quite extinct, yet has she left behind
The true Idaa of her princely mind;
Right royal JAMES, the Britons gracious King,
Whose honor through the circling Globe does ring.
The Rose is cropped which glistered in each face,
And yet as fair sprung instantly in place:
A Rose most sweet and odoriferous,
A Rose of grace to cheer and comfort us;
A Rose that springs in a Northern blast,
A Rose whose luster does in Winter last.
O Wonder: that rough Boreas dropping wing,
Should waft such showers to a desired Spring!
England, prostrate thy self with folded hands,
(Whose joys are numberless even as the sands)
Before the powerful and almighty Throne,
Who gave regard unto thy grievous moan,
Sending to thee such an Athenian King,
Whose learning is the round Orbs wondering:
A sovereign Balm unto thy Corasiue;
Which did thy half-dead-wounded heart revive,
When Phoebus Lute tuned his mournful note,
To make Time turn his glistring golden cote.
Courageous Cato with his warlike trains,
While ranged in rank upon the champion plains,
Sweet-breathed Zephyrus up softly blew
The fragrant flowers which in meadows grew,
Upon their glittering targets: then they cride:
Aglorious Triumph shall to us betide.
Even so the Flowers of fruitful Brittanie,
(Blown with the wind of zealous Loyalty)
Did congregate in troops, proclaimed a King,
Whose name once heard, most gladsom joy did bring.
When glorious Titan has his compass run,
The foule-maskt gloomie Night ensues thereon;
Bright Sol declined, Luna skips in the sky,
Approou'd by Nature in Philosophy.
Iehoua derogated Englands Light,
And yet pursude no duskie darksome Night;
No sooner Britain had her bright-Eye lost,
But straight another gazed from Northern coast:
No sooner did Eliza take her flight,
But instantly king JAMES appeared in sight:
For whom true hearts render immortal praise
To high Iehoua, who this Star did raise
To yield them light, to stand their sovereign Lord,
And Patron pure of the soule-sauing word.
(O blessed Time, when peerless Princes preach,
When David does his son Gods precepts teach!)
He is the sense-concluding Period
Of Englands solace, charactred by God;
The pure quintessence of her flourishing state,
To whom her life is worthy subiugate.
O what a learned Varro has she gained,
(Who moved blithe Gelos even when hearts complaind)
A Cicero for flowing Eloquence,
A valiant Caesar for Magnificence.
Don Phoebus rising from his scarlet bed,
Out of his eastern Closet thrust his head;
Spreading his flame-hair'd broad vermilion locks,
Upon the earth, the sea, the trees and rocks;
Espide a fairer shining here below,
Plucked in his head, no more his face durst show.
Now England, England, shake off sad annoy,
Thy forts are full replenished with joy;
Let all thy Turrets glister in the air,
Thy Fair not turned to foul, but Foul to fair.
Now boast thy self amidst thy summers Pride,
Thy Ebbe's transformd into a flowing Tide
Of Mirth and Gladness: honor God for ay,
Who turned thy Night into a Sunshine Day.
What greater graces to thee could he bring,
Then grace thy Land with such a gracious King?
Who lends an ear to every clients cry,
Decides his case with princely Gravity.
Lycurgus-like has he prescribed his laws,
To keep poor Codrus out of Croesus jaws;
He succor sends to all oppressed by Might,
Defends true Irus, and maintains his right.
By him thou reapst the wished fruits of peace;
And for his sake God gives thee huge increase
Of thy fat harvest and thy wel-til'd fields,
Thy withered Plants do bud, and blossom yields.
For Phoebus Lute descants a gladsome note,
Whereat Time skips, and turns his sable Cote.
What if the Almighty had stretched out his hand,
To scourge Impiety within thy Land;
And razed thy walls with flat confusion,
With civil broiles and proud Rebellion.
Then had thy famous Cities gone to wrack,
And every town been subject to the sack:
Then Rigor would have ruled and borne the sway,
Reason exiled and banished quite away.
Then would the mother dread her dreadlesse child:
Then spotless virgins would have been defiled.
All these (O London) to thy extreme pain,
With present spoil were likely to sustain:
Then had thou languisht in th'effusion
Of bloody murder and occision:
Then Phoebus Lute a Threnos would have strained;
And Time with tears his golden vestments stained.
Me think I hear the wailefull weeping cries,
Of wretched Dames in dreadful miseries:
Me think I hear the thundering Canons sound,
Whose bullets against the battred walls rebound:
Me think I see huge troops of glistring shields,
And coursing Palfreys trampling ore the fields:
Me think I see how soldiers wounded lie
With gasping breath, and yet they cannot dye.
But heavens great King to thee propitious,
In lieu of Mars sent graces wondrous;
Permitting still his Light to shine with thee,
That thou might walk in perspicuitie.
Romes Minotaure, that monstrous enemy
To brave Britanniaes peerless Progeny;
In rancor guzled for his annual food,
T'imbrue his throat with Innocencies blood;
Whetting his black exacuated fangs,
To murder sacred souls with tortring pangs:
Till Albions Theseus with his conquering hand,
Redeemed her state from tributarie band;
And slew this Beast distent with irefull fell,
Grapling with death in his prodigious cell:
By Jove's decree reduced her Babes away,
So wan the love of heavens Pasiphae.
Adopted England, sweet Elysian I Will,
Observe, how God reuiewes with a smile;
Accumulates a sympathy of joy,
To countervaile thy late-sustain'd annoy.
Remember, that twice twenty winters told,
Thou never tastedst of that freezing cold,
And indigence of true Religion,
To thee obliged by perfect union:
Mercy has set a supersedeas free
On Justice, which conuicts Iniquity:
So loath is Heaven to take revenge of sin,
Grants thee more spacious walks to solace in;
Reuiues thy saplesse Trees which withering did,
Thy walls of Grace with Truth reediside.
Even as the Parent educates his child,
By obsecrations and corrections mild,
To fraught his soul with filial reverence,
Extenuates Rigor by sweet Indulgence:
Yet still if he progress in lusts content,
Then he inflicts a triple punishment.
So does The Almighty powerfully entice
Thy feet to walk in heavens fair Paradise,
And fosters thee with nurcing milk of life,
Which yields an end to endless terrene strife.
His glorious eye, Scrutator of thy heart,
Delighting not to view thy ruthlesse smart;
Protracts revenge to thy affections lust,
As though the Judge forgets to be just.
Numbers of days have thou possessed the light
Of his pure Gospel in thee shining bright;
And now to enrich thee from his treasures store,
Has caused it shine far clearer then before.
Yet still thou lie in dark Obscurity,
Wrapped in the depth of Sensuality;
Repugnantly, with Aesops frozen Snake,
Reiects his mercies and his grace forsake:
Spurning the Clemency which he has shown,
To monstrous crimes and deep transgressions known
And most perspicuous to his piercing Eye,
Vindicta's battering against the lostie sky.
Thou sufferedst Virtue in thine iron age,
To tread the lonelesse path to Hermitage:
For which his heavy Judgment forth did fly,
To counterchecke that great Solemnity,
Which thou esteemedst at so high a rate,
And consonant with Kings renowned state;
Far dissonant to thy expected Fame,
Who still aspires to dignifie her name.
Consider how he has stretched out his hand,
To scourge the Mother-citie of thy land,
Breaking her sinews by divine Pretense,
With fiery shafts of fever Pestilence:
Withered her Flowers with blasting-venim'daire,
Driving her vp-growne Trees to trembling Fear.
His arrows sharp in every corner fly,
And every street did wound outragiously;
In fury smiting father, son, andall,
None could eschew the stroke of sudden fall.
Even as the Tygresse ravening for her food,
In furious rage does range along the wood;
Who in some darksome den has long been pent
From meat and sustenance, which makes herrent
And tear the next she meets by the way,
As nothing partial, so she gains a pray.
Even so this Plague, the Tygresse fierce of heaven,
Such lethall wounds, such large assaults have given;
Consuming, seuering, midst the hugest throng,
The youth from age, the aged from the young:
Insatiatly devoured in every place;
None could persist fore her contagious face.
O heavy England, now behold and see,
Thy Beauty stricken with the leprosy
Of blasphemies, embraced without regard:
To whom the Lord has sent a just reward.
Thy grievous sins with dreadful noise did cry
For just Revenge unto his Majesty;
Who can both strike and heal, preserve and wound,
Erect thy walls, or raze them to the ground.
How many wonders for thee has he wrought?
How many heavenly Lessons thee has taught
T'asswage thy arrogance, suppress thy hate?
Yet still thou stand in a fearful state.
As he reduced his chosen Israel,
From savage cruelties of Egypts fell;
When they were plunged in perils dangerous,
At his command (O wonder marvelous)
On either side the barking billows stood,
Whilst that they marched through the brinie flood,
When their pursuing foes would them have slain,
Were ouerwhelm'd amidst the troubled Maine:
Yet did they murmr in the Wilderness,
As too ungrateful for their rare success.
But heavens just Judge incensed with wrathful ire,
Powrd forth his plagues upon their vain desire;
While they took repast on their lustful will,
Vile venomous beasts their grauer age did kill.
Even thus (o England) God has dealt with thee,
Conducting thee through seas of misery;
Redeemed thy Race from rage of foreign spoil,
Casting thy foes to base-dishonor'd foil:
Yet all these graces not incite thy heart,
With humbleness to cure thy curelesse smart;
Demurres thy days in dilatorie care
Of worldly lusts, which Heaven will never spare:
But in thy height of pomp and iolitie,
The massacring Angel came to visit thee;
Slaughtring thy people with reuengefull sword,
The Harbinger of Death sent from the Lord.
These sad events arose and came to pass,
As it befell to old Diagoras;
Who when his sons the Olympian games had won,
Casting their garlands in their Trophies done
About his neck: the men's applauding voice,
And rare delight did make his heart rejoice:
But while his soul repleat with cheerful grace,
Was stung by Death ere he moved from the place.
Even so whilst thou in Pleasures gardens stood,
Thy silver lakes were turned to brooks of blood;
Thy floods of joys were turned to seas of tears,
And lightsome Mirth to interrupting Fears.
Thus cast from top of climing Dignity,
Into the depth of darkest misery;
The hungry Earth devoured thee up, alas,
As Corah, Dathan, and Abiram was:
Thy Anthemes, Trophies, and thy Excellence,
Were swallowed up by starued Pestilence:
Thou were consumed with Death on every side,
As bold Belshazzar was amidst his pride.
Naught but Threnodiae danced amidst thy throng,
Whereat Time wet his cheeks, and slunke along.
Corrupted London, Sink of Surquedrie,
Thou that supports this yoke of misery,
Imposed upon thee by The Almighty Lord,
For the rejecting of his sacred word.
His Minaces brought no remorce to thee;
But sleptst secure in beds of Luxury,
Feeding thy Will with Pleasures lustful beite,
Did cast thy Soul the husks of sly Deceit.
The Prophet Jonah, Troubler of the sea,
Sent by heavens King to sinful Niniue:
So soon as he approch'd her streets so wide,
With vehement speech in vengefull spirit cride:
O Nineveh, thy monstrous facts avoid,
In forty days else shall thou be destroyde.
Then King and Commons jointly did agree,
With humbled hearts and zealous feruencie,
In mourning sackcloth seriously to pray
The worlds chief Judge, his burning wrath to stay:
(The brutish Animals which harmless be,
Were taxed with this general penalty)
With bleeding souls and drearie countenance,
The glory of the Highest did advance;
Sincerely turning to Submission,
That he might turn from them Destruction:
So sweet atonement Mournings did afford,
Restrained the stroke of his two-edged sword.
Not forty days, but forty years and more,
(Wherein thou might thy grievous sins deplore)
Thousands of Ionahs sent by heavens great Lord,
In thee resolved to preach his sacred word.
Bonarges thundering in every street;
Thy deafe-charm'd sins would not his voice regreet;
But Mole-like plunged in slavish Lusts content,
On which the Lord inflicts a punishment.
As wise Martha, the Syrian Prophetess,
With Marius carried through his wars success;
By Necromancie in her Sacrifice,
Presaged the trophies of his victories:
But once not tolerating her advice,
He bought the day (too dear) with bloody price.
So God has sent his Angels from above,
Still to be resident with his sacred love;
Preaching the tidings of celestial Joy,
Which wars nor pestilence can ere destroy:
He conquered Death, and in his conquering brought
Life in thy death; yet thou setst him at naught:
Till he in wrath thy stubburnnesse conuicts:
On grievous sins, most grievous plagues inflicts.
Foul noisome crimes in every corner swarm,
Deadly-infectious wickedness does harm:
In every house and loose-led Families,
Are fostred up these dainn'd enormities;
These take their place as chief, commanding all
Amongst thy precepts Oeconomicall:
Pride, Murder, Avarice, Usury, Deceit,
With savage Sodomie, hels alluring bait;
Blasting Blasphemy, Rape and Cruelty:
These are the Actors in thy Tragedy:
Shrowding Tractates of viperous Popery,
Under the shades of civil Policy,
Reiects the tidings of heavens Messengers,
And quite subuerts the sacred Ministers.
Thy Widows mourn oppressed by cruel might:
Thy Orphans weep, dis-franchis'd of their right:
Thy Trades Mechanical are taxed so hie
With Rent and Lease they fall to penury:
With craft thou grindst the faces of the poor,
To feed thee fat, while they starve at thy door.
Thou sitst in silk and costly soft array,
And viewes thy brother perishing in the way,
With pinching cold lie shiuering on the ground;
To sow him coats no Dorcas can be found.
When thou perceiu'st thy friends Extremity
Traduced to Want by Fortunes casualtie:
Nescio, thou' criest, no Mercy can thou show,
No streams of Pity from thy heart will flow:
To his penurious Lack no succors sends:
When wealth declines, thy flattering friendship ends.
Xanthippus dog condemns thy savageness,
Who, when his master iourneyed on the seas,
Swam by his ship even from the shoarie sand,
Till he arrived in Salamina's land;
And left him not till he the city spied,
With wearied lims then laid him down and died.
Thy Friend thou leauest in his deep Distress,
Wrapped in the waves of endless Carfulness:
Scorning Compassion, no Comfort bring;
But as the Swallow, Herald of the Spring,
Will sing with us while Summers beauty lasts;
But takes her flight when Winter breath's his blasts.
So while his Sommers-flourishing wealth does flow,
Most firm in Friendship thou thy self wilt show;
And wilt converse in smooth-fram'd words each day,
Thy tongue pronounce supposed Apocripha:
When Fortunes freezing frowns benum his store,
Thou art a Stranger, he thy Friend no more.
Thus weakest Wants the smallest Succors gain,
The nakedst Need the latest Helps obtain:
How true is that which may be answered then?
More kindness often is shown by Dogs, the Men.
Thou studiest still Invention to suffice,
And deckst thy self like Protean Prodigies,
In monstrous shapes, and garish rude attire,
Deuotes thy soul to swelling Prides desire;
In worldy joys consumest every day,
With Zeal affoording scarce an hour to pray.
That crystal Ice, which lends my body light,
Has been dissolved to tears, deprived of sight;
My hart-strings broke with dolorous complaint,
My soul has mourned in forcible constraint;
When I have ambulated longst the street,
And often this Monster have I chanced to meet:
A Britain borne, bedight Castilian-wise,
A Ganle in shape, a Thuscane in disguise;
His bravery lined with envious Pride; at least
A Man in form, in facts a brutish Beast.
O that Semper lachrimabat.
Heraclitus were resident,
To power forth streams of tears in sad lament,
For Albions virgins, who from Grace do slide,
Surpassing Sions Daughters in their pride;
Prides shop it self full fraught with Fopperie,
May patterns draw from their Variety.
As Helens shape, (the woeful wrack of Troy)
Was bravely limned by Apelles boy,
In rich attire, and sumptuous shining gold;
Yet foul in face, not amorous to behold.
So some resemble Helens picture here,
That bigly brag in gorgeous garments dear;
But nothing beautiful to Reasons eye,
Patch the defects of Natures poverty;
Adorn with silks, infuse them with perfumes,
Like ietting birds bedeckt with others plumes.
How can thou think (thy sins grown up so hie)
With hapless hope t'escape Impunitie?
Can thou resolve, that God will spare his hand,
To view such Hydra's fostred in thy Land?
No, no, his Wrath consumes like smoking fire,
Thou lie as Flax before his burning ire;
He Will crop thee of from full Maturitie,
And cast thee forth to bitter Misery.
At his command, the sword shall ruinate,
Thy gates shall mourn, and streets be desolate,
Thy City groan, enthralled with deep distress,
And Iim howl within thy Palaces:
Satyrs and Apes shall dance within thy bowers,
Ostriges and Scrich owls cry in ruinous towers:
No voice of man on thy walls shall thou hear,
Nor light of lamp in any house appear.
Heavens grant thy heart t'affect and fear this so,
As that thou never feel or taste this Woe.
Thy children dear in their quotidian sport,
Blasphemously the name of God extort;
Their battring oaths against the heavens rebound;
This hideous noise in house and street does sound.
They scoff Elisha in decrepit age,
With arrogance revile the grave and sage;
Till Jove sent forth a she-Beare from his wood,
To gormandize on their decocted blood.
How earnestly thou striu'st (for their defense)
To curb them from contagious Pestilence;
For their souls health thou never take care:
Such as the Parents, such the Children are.
Thy Tradesmen watch to undermine each other,
And early rise to circumuent their brother,
In buying, selling, traffiquing for gains;
By which poor Truth impouerishment sustaines.
Thy headstrong Servants impudently stray
From sin to sin, upon the Sabbath day,
Heaping up Mischiefs on themselves and thee,
Pluck on their heads earths just Calamity.
These are the swords of Desolation,
These are the Agents in subversion,
These are contagious Plagues, diseased, foul;
These are the sores and botches of thy soul,
These are ordures which noysomnesse afford
Up to the nosthrils of the glorious Lord:
These are the Scourges of thy lewd offense;
These are th'Inductors of heavens Pestilence.
O London, then what terror were to see
Thy streets exempt of popularities?
And naught but cries and doleful horrors yield,
Ore-growne with grass as in the verdant field:
The master from his servant snatched away,
The servant from his master bearing sway:
The children fatherless each where were found,
The fathers childlesse in deep Dolor drowned:
The husband from his neare-espoused wife,
The trustfull friend bereaved of his life:
No kinsman scaping to interre his brother,
Not one scarce left to mourn and weep for other.
Thy tender Virgins sprung from Natures grace,
(Who once adorned and beautifide the face
Of all thy streets, with rosiall visage bright,
As splendant Stars, a clear and glorious Night:)
Besmeared their pure and proper Lineaments,
With scalding Sighs, and pitiful Complaints:
Their Feature decked with diffidentall Fears,
And drowned in salt vncessant-flowing Tears.
Thy Youth howled out, amazed themselves to see
Bereft of Vigor and Validity.
Thy ramparts mouln'd, thy gates condol'd their state,
Because no stranger ingresse sought thereat,
To view thy stately Towers at solemn Feasts,
Replenished then with Owls and loathsome Beasts.
Thy paths breathed sighs which did vntrampled lie,
No huge Recourse or Concourse walked thereby;
Nor scarce one foot-step figured on their face,
But clinging Brambles did usurp their place.
Thy streets which once with gloriousness did show,
Kneeled as Homagers to solitary We;
Where noble States obtained most free access,
Resembled then the vast of Wilderness.
Thy self did weep, yea weep in mournful wise,
And fair Aurora visited with thy cries,
And from thy bitter anguish could not cease,
When Vesper drew to his declining ease.
Each bird and beast with tranquile sleep possessed,
When Night appeared, embraced their usual rest:
But thou consumdst the day in deep Complaints,
Disturbdst the night with loathsome Languishments;
Thy Eyes like two deep Fountains ay did run,
Whose brinie springs and streams could not be done.
Thy friends admired at thy diseases foul,
As fluttring birds fly wondering bout the Owl:
Amidst thy griefs thy Lovers thee forsake,
Fled from thy sight, as from an Aspe or Snake:
Thy foes reioyc'd at this confusion,
Using these terms with proud derision:
Is this that Mirror, reverenced with duty?
Surnamed, The full perfection of BEAVTIE?
Then hissed with hate, and clapped their hands to see
Thy Glory spurned by pale Perplexity.
Thus Woe was drawn thy badge, and Want thy crest,
And hungry Famine did thy skirts inuest:
(For she is the handmaid of Calamity,
Attending still on common Misery.)
Thy tender infants young did gasp halfe-dead
In mothers arms, for indigence of bread:
Thy worthy Magistrates high-growne in age,
Expected viols of Jove's ardent rage,
To be powered forth upon them from above,
To notattending on his sacred love.
Grizly Thanatos slinked through each street,
Waiting t'arrest each person he did meet;
Dragging him headlong to his centred cave,
Out of whose mouth no man himself can save:
In harsh discordant sound each banefull Bell,
Rung forth a Requiem with his doleful knell:
No Prospect opposite to thy blear'd eyes,
But horrors, howlings, mournings, weepings, cries.
These are external Plagues to secret sin,
And most transparant to entrap thee in;
O these will drive each heart to hideous groans,
Though most inflexible, as flintie stones.
The constellation of the twinkling stars,
Nor the four Humors with discordant iarres;
The revolution of Comets bright,
Nor corrupt Meteors blasting in the night;
Nor yet the welking of a Pleni-lune,
From whence, some do the cause of death assume:
Nor distillations exhaled by the Sun,
Falling in mists, when Vesper has begun
To draw his sable Curtains ore the sky,
Could be th'Efficient of this Misery.
No secundarie Cause, nor all of these,
Discussed at large in Ephymerides:
These are but Means, managed by heavens great King,
Though without means he comprehends each thing:
Alas, the venime of thy souls offense,
Poisoned thy flesh with viprous Pestilence.
Physicians Skill, nor Galens learned Art,
To whom the Heavens deep Secrecies impart,
Could rightly censure, or discern with eye,
The nature of this venomous Quality.
Strange are thy plagues, far stranger are thy crimes,
Most strangely nourished in these modern Times.
Therefore the thought of this devouring Smart,
With fear may penetrate each Christians heart:
Deep sad Remorse may aggrauate each one,
To wail his sins with sad Contrition;
T'admire this Plague with lamention,
Lament in faith with admiration;
Deeming his age the length of Natures span,
A Monarch now, to morrow not a Man.
Thou that did fly from Heavens consuming spoil,
To stand secure within the countries soil,
Know, that this Plague devoured from East to West,
God strikes where, and when he seems best.
The thirsty Sword does watch without the gate,
Within the walls fierce Peftilence lays wait,
And boundless Famine which tormenteth all;
No path lies straight to shun their deadly thrall.
Thy firme-built walls, thy viands, house and ground,
Wherein thou wertst inuelloped around;
Thy purged Aires, and pleasant Palaces,
Could not protect thee from this dark Distress.
If thou should run up to the mountains steep,
Down to the wilderness and deserts deep,
Resolving there to dwell secure and free;
He can pursue thee there with Misery:
His Messengers more volatile then Thought,
Fore thou can think, such Accidents are wrought:
In Sions Songs then David sings well:
Heaven can ore-take me if I run to hell.
When thou resolud'st by flight to escape his hand,
Thy life and state in deepest dangers stand.
Like the Viator traveling by the way,
Who meets a Bear out-ranging for her prey,
Through urgent passions shifteth from her claws:
Then straight a Lion comes with wide-stretch'd jaws,
To lacerate his flesh, imbrude with gore,
Which strikes a deeper terror then before.
Yet by good hap pleuents the Lions rage;
And then with joy holds on his pilgrimage:
But drawing near to his abiding place,
(Fore-deeming not the Fates pursude in chase)
When least he thought of such a timelesse smart,
A Serpents sting does wound him to the heart.
So when thou think to sleep in safest rest,
Then art thou by Gods judgments most suppressed:
His sword can wound both woman, child, and man,
From North to South, from Bersheba to Dan;
It Is like a Shadow which a man eschues,
Swifter he runs, the faster it pursues.
Thou great Soldado, earths Magnifico,
That conquers joy by Lazarello's woe,
Heaping up gold by each deceiptfull way,
Resolving still that thou shall live for ay;
At first, thou sprangst from a small womb of Sin,
At last, a little grave shall close thee in:
Thou griping fool, the Pestilence this night,
Can wound thy corpse, and burn thy hearts delight.
When king Lisymachus, through Fortunes hate,
By thirst proiected to the Scythians state,
And captiuated with his kingdoms all;
O heavens (quoth he) how dreadful is my fall,
To yield great Provinces and regal seat,
For liquide drops to quench my thirsty heat.
So when thou rifest from eternal sleep,
And viewes Heavens glory from the cole-blacke Deep:
Then will thou cry: O wretched creature I,
To lose such joys for carnal Vanity;
For momentanie Pleasures which decay,
To miss heavens Grace, so permanent for ay!
Then look to Heaven, whilst thou on Earth do dwell,
And not (with Dives) when thou lie in Hell.
Too late, alas, to wish heavens glorious Light,
When thou art wrapped in black eternal Night;
When Time turns off his partie-coloured cote,
Thy soul in hell must howl a mournful note.
Thou Usurer, which Penury do rack,
And surfets in thy needful neighbors lack;
Thy Debtors watch with care, while thou do sleep;
Thy State sings Requiem, while their Senses weep:
In nightly lucubrations spend their hours
To puff thy Sponge, which all the drops deuoures,
Distilling from their brows with burd'nous grief;
Not able scarce to minister relief
Unto their children dear and family:
Because thou suckest (with the sluggish Be)
That Mel, which they in harbring hiues would keep;
Clothing thy back, with wool from their poor sheep.
What Is this, but even to kill and trucidate?
And all man-slaughtrers, God and Angels hate.
Thy state is matched with Lillies in the field,
Which flourish now, and straight to withring yield:
Though thou in terrene Shadows did excel,
Yet shall not Gold redeem thy soul from hell.
Then let this Sentence in thy sense remain,
The sweetest Pleasures taste the sowrest Pain:
Quodque tibi nolles, aliis fecisse caueto:
Quodque tibi velles, aliis praestare studeto.
Thou ravening Vultur, gormandizing Kite,
Thou greedy Wolf, which builds thy chief Delight
On dross, and drinks the blood of Perjury,
Feeding upon the flesh of Cruelty:
Whose deep-delv'd throat of Gain deuours more food
Then do the Amazons or Styrian brood.
Thy dropsie-Conscience sweld with moist Desire,
The more it drinks, the more does still require:
Hunger torments thee midst abundant store,
Thou staru'st in Wealth, in Riches still art poor:
Like Tantalus which in the Stygian lies,
And sinkes in water, yet for moisture dies:
Like drudging Indians, which dig with pain
The golden Mines, yet others reap the gain:
Or Pharaohs Kine, who gormandiz'd up clean
The fat-fed Beasts, yet still themselves were lean.
The Day thou spendest in turmoiling pain,
Selling thy soul for temporary gain;
In deep of Night, thy mind extrauagates,
And wanders through the perilous gulfes and streits
Of Ne're-enough; when good men take their rest,
Thy restless Thoughts are tossed, with cares possessed:
Still pining Piety, so lean in thee,
As is the big-bon'd bare Anatomy.
Thou plantest thorns in thy souls barren field,
Which naught but griefs and molestations yield;
Whereby not only Equity is choked,
And Virtue extirpated and revoked;
But also stinging pricks spring sharp and small,
That thou thy self art wounded therewithal:
Yet thou perceiu'st not, All goes well with thee,
So thou can please thy hearts Rapacitie,
Which is insatiat as Fire and Flood,
The last drinks Rain, the first deuours the Wood:
Or big-bon'd Behemoth with vigor fraught,
Who thought t'exhale deep Jordan at a draught.
Thus do thou sing amidst thy weeping woes,
As moiles who feed with burdens and with blows:
What else remains, thy senses never see,
(Profoundly cast into a Lethargy
Of deepe-Desire) till Death appears in sight,
Rowzing from sleep thy solide-slumbring sprite.
O then how fearful will it seem to thee,
To be secluded from earths Vanity!
Thy death will be far terribler then hell,
Because in life, true Life thou did dispell:
Most griping griefs and dolors shall thou find,
To lose Earths Idol, which thou leau'ft behind.
And when the Sunset of thy youth draws near,
And occidentall Age begins t'appeare,
Those ill-got goods, which Avarice did intend
To be preserved, lewd Luxury shall spend;
That wealth whereon thy mouth did never taste,
Unthrifty Ganeo shall consume and wast.
Thus does thy sin incur a double sin,
Whereto thy soul (fore heavens great Bar brought in)
Shall answer as a thirsty Murderer,
A swallowing Gulf, a deep Extortioner.
Not all that wealth which thou have falsely won,
Can bail thy soul from fiery Phlegeton;
But will condemn thee in that dreadful Day,
And glutinate thy Soul with Hell for ay.
O damned wretch, then fearful is thy state:
These words pronounced, Repentance haps too late:
Abi, thou cursed to eternal fire,
Embrace the flames of due-deserued hire.
Then know: though never so sweet Earths Sirens sing,
An upright Conscience is a sacred Thing.
As worms cannot corrode the Laryx tree,
Which never rots, nor scarce can burned be;
So neither Hell nor Horror, Worm nor Sting,
Can fret thy Conscience guarded strong within.
Thou that in Sickness wilt thy sins deplore,
That never did embrace good Thought before,
Orat the object of a blazing Star,
Fore-dooming, that some Judgment is not far,
Wilt then to mournful deprecations rise;
But being banished from thy restless eyes,
And nine days past, thou have recourse amain,
With dogs and swine, unto thy filth again.
But if thou will redeem thy soul from hell,
Weep for thy sins, and mourn whilst thou art well:
When Death has stung, there is no time to pray,
But line in Death, or die in Life for ay.
Thou that surmounts in pompous dignity,
In Pleasure, Beauty, Wealth, and Bravery;
In Luxury thy precious Time do spend;
Remember, that these Shadows must have end.
And that, from whence thou reapedst chief delight,
With loathsomeness shall work thee worst despite.
Like to Tarpeia's bracelets bright of gold,
For whom, with Guile the Romans castle sold
Unto the Sabines, won by treacherous Fate:
But yet these bracelets brought her general hate,
Wherewith at last her self was pressed to death,
And quite bereft of vital sense and breath.
So Pleasures press thee down to gauling Grief,
Or glance away, and leave thee sans relief;
Like ranging Hawks that soar in lofty sky,
With swift-wing'd flight from Lure of Falkners hie.
Demosthenes that famous Grecian,
Fau'ring fair Lais, Corinths Curtisan;
Most vehemently desired (by Fanciefed)
To have access unto her brothell bed:
Whom she desired three hundred crowns to send,
If lustful Will, her wish would apprehend:
High heavens forbid (quoth he) that hot Desire,
Should heap such flames to Pryaps burning fire:
Though Lust allures, yet does true Virtue hate,
To buy Repentance at so dear a rate.
This heathen Mole, had Reasons eyes to see,
That Pain attends on Pleasures surquedrie.
The buzzing Be that sings in Autumnes field,
Does from her labor, wax and honey yield,
Which to man's senses, many comforts bring;
Yet in her tail there lutkes an angry sting.
So Pleasure has her honey of Desire,
Inflaming wax dissolved in Follies fire:
But yet behind a dreadful sting remains,
Which wounds the heart, enwrapt with Fancies pains:
Her meager joints are tentred on deep Cares,
Her vigor racked on imbecile Despaires:
Times revolution frets her pleasing prancks,
As waters wash and wear away their bancks.
And as the dew from heaven to earth assigned,
By heat exhaled, or scattered with the wind:
Or crystal bubbles which on rivers play,
With agitation vanish quite away:
Or Characters deciphered forth on sand,
Which by Eluuion perishes out of hand;
So Earths masked Joys but for a moment last,
And soon extinct by Times oft-changing blast.
Peruse the Songs of sweet-toung'd Solomon,
Isreal's great King, fair Iuda's Paragon,
Sions Melodes, the sourse of Sapience,
Bedewd with drops of sacred influence;
For whom the Sabian Queen did journey far,
To view the splendour of so bright a Star:
When he had heaped millions up of gold,
Erected buildings glorious to behold;
And planted trees, fed with sweet fluent Springs,
And treasures won by captiuated Kings;
And singers with harmonious melody,
Concording in Amphyons simphonie;
And all delights which Reason could devise,
Were set as Objects to his restless eyes:
O vain (quoth he) is all the Earths delight,
But pictured Glosses, and disturb the Sprite:
I now discern by Faiths celestial eye,
Pleasure's but vain, most vain, and Vanity:
For with Times-turne their semblant Beautie's gone,
Whirled round with Change, as Sysiphus rolling stone.
Thus man's Delights, and earths Felicities,
Are but even pleasant-seeming Vanities.
In Turn of Time all Creatures shall decay,
(For Time it self in time must pass away)
The winged-people of the various Sky,
The scaly Troop which in the Surges lie;
The heavens, the earth, and seas shall burn to naught:
(Not to that Chaos, whence they first were brought)
The Worlds great Synod formally combined,
With pure celestial Fire must be refined.
Don Phoebus Steeds their glistering coach must stay,
The burnished Gates include heavens Bright from Day,
The Stars, and Phoebe's feuer-shaking Light,
Shall mask their Beauties from the dismal Night:
The Comets, Meteors, with each Hemi-sphaeare,
To work strange Operations shall forbear.
Old white-hair'd (...) with strikt compas'd pace,
Must cease to course his artificial Race:
The Sea, the Flood, the Spring, and watrie Lake,
Must by Times turn their liquide Caves forsake,
Which from the Cesternes of the Center deep,
Through Earths wide Nerves in curbed manner creep.
The flourishing Ver, and fruitful Autumnes grace,
The icie Vizard of breme Winters face;
The Year, the Month, the Hour, the Night, the Day,
Shall subject stand to Heavens Catastrophe:
Heavens wondrous Works, which thus in strictness turn,
When Pan appears, in sulphur'd flames must burn.
All Wights that wander through this Orb below,
Must pay that sum which they to Nature ow:
All must dissolve, even from the Cedar tall,
Unto the Hysope, springing on the wall,
When heavens loud Trump shall sound Earths sumning note,
And Time turns off his rainbow colored cote.
But Ates brood, true Model of the Maker,
That Angel-like of joys are made partaker;
Indude with Reason, Dangers to eschew,
Iudicially Times Accidents to view:
Casting an eye to things past and forgone,
To suprauise th'Euents ensuing on;
By retrogredience to Times height and fall,
In their progredience can discern them all:
These that in portraiture all Shapes excel,
Must mount to heaven, or flutter down to hell.
Therefore let Reason fervently apply
His soul to live, as still prepared to die;
In all essays his heart uprightly bend,
As one that swiftly marches to his end:
Though he on Earth all worldly Pleasures have,
Yet let him deem one foot still in the grave.
The valiantsouldier marching longst the plain,
Courageously, to his immortal gain,
Assaults his foes, and near to them does come,
Although most near ensues his banefull doom;
Swifter he marches them with blows to spend,
The swifter still approaches to his end:
Desire of Fame kindles an ardent rage,
While leane-fac'd Death attends him as a Page;
Yet armed in heart, of furniture well sped,
Resolves to die in Honors valorous bed.
This world's a warfare, thou a soldier,
Wherein thou striu'st to stand Deaths conqueror,
Contending with hels Dragons damned host,
From woes to joys, from joys to woes ytost.
Without, the World alluresthee with Delight;
Within, foul Sin thy intellectual sprite
Suggests; and opposite to thy dark Eye,
(T'entangle thee) sly Satan's engines lie:
Behind, a strict-bound Conscience clogs thy heel;
On thy right hand, mounts Fortunes lofty wheel;
And on the left, Adversity does wait,
To feed thy Thoughts with Cares penurious bait:
Under thy feet, the Grave does gape each hour,
With wide-stretch'd mouth to swallow and devour;
And ore thy head, Heavens heavy ludgements lie,
Prepared still to be powered forth on thee.
Then not unaptly grave learned Writers call
Thee, (...) or Small world of thrall.
Thy state of life may be compared thus;
Unto the Mariner, in storms dangerous:
(When blustering Aeolus opes his vented Caves,
And Neptunes rorall beard's bedasht with waves:)
He viewes the Heavens ore-vail'd with pitchie clouds,
Huge tempests rise, each beast in shelter shroudes;
And foaming billows beating against his Bark,
Then waits each hour, to diue in Deluge dark.
But when Dan Titan, with bright golden ray
Does guil'd the pale-greene Palace of the sea,
And with his purging Fire refines the sky,
He skips with joy for his delivery.
So in this Orb thou sail'st through seas of Woes,
Again, with pride scorns Fortunes overthrows:
Often Fortune storms, and her clear Sunshine fails,
Then Joy retires with wofull-battred sails.
Thus art thou subject to Times turn, and Fate,
To be transformed in Person, Life, or State:
For Time can turn to set the World on flote,
And straight can urge him sing poor Niobs note.
If the Embryo foreknew these woes, entombed
Within the walls of his dear Mothers womb;
If he could see, before he sees heavens Light,
Earths Languishments, as Objects to his sight;
Would never contend to open the Matrice wide,
By Generation naturally to glide
From tranquile Calm, to surging seas of Cares;
From silent Mansion, to a mass of Snares:
But rather wish in dark Oblivion cast
Without a Being, then on Earth be placed,
To gaze upon the Suns bright Orient,
His Beams, Meridian course, and Occident;
The worlds delights would hold in spiteful scorn,
Entirely wishing he should never be borne.
This was observed by the Drausians,
And as an Axiom high decretall stands:
That when a Babe from fruitful womb did rise,
Would mourn, weep and lament in wondrous wise:
For that they knew, he was brought forth to stand
In this frail Orb, as on the shiuering sand;
Ready to sink into the depth of Fears,
Enuiron'd round with intricate Despaires.
But when one died, then gladly they rejoice,
With rauishing Musicks-simphonizing voice:
In this respect, they held him then set free,
From out the vale of cankred Misery.
Thus Man by Nature is conceived in woe,
From generatiue Seed continues so;
Still turned about with Times soft motion,
Disturbed-wise, as Sysiphus rolls his stone;
Or boiling Eurypus, which hurles along
With neuer-ceassing Agitation:
Fast marching forward like a Soldier brave,
Yet step by step descends fast to his grave,
Till the last travel of his mother Earth,
Shall purge him with regeneratiue Birth.
But in earths war, prepare heavens furniture,
That in thy death, of life thou may be sure.
As Nauigators first forgo the sight
Of friends, and next, of cities fair and bright.
And finally, lanch out from bank and shore,
With resolution never to see them more.
So Man's deprived first of Infancy,
Next, of his Youth and strong Virilitie:
In fine, out-worne with his vnwealdie Age,
Loses the sight of this Orbs spacious stage:
When hoarie Eld his stooping back does bend,
With concau'd eyes viewes then his rest and end.
Thus ( pedetentim) Man exhales his breath,
If not prevented by immediate Death:
Even as the Dials shade, deposed from Rest,
In one days space does course from East to West;
By circumuersion slily passes by
Gradatim wise, yet not discerned with Eye.
So Man craules on twixt earth and heavens bright rays,
Toward the west and welking of his days:
Yet knows not when grim Death shall stop the race
Of his life's hours, moving with gentle pace;
As nothing is more sure then loss of Breath,
So nought's vnsurer then the kinds of Death.
Aeterna Lex has sacredly described,
(From whence the event of Life and Death's derived)
A general vniformall path from Womb,
But various by-waies to the grave and tomb.
As diverse ships lanch from one port and deep,
Yet sundry ways upon the Surges sweep.
Some bound for East to frost-bit Scythia,
Others for West to fair America,
Some subject fail to Austers brief controules,
Others range through breeme Boreas frozen poles:
So all atchieuc one entrance from their birth,
But various passage to their grandam Earth.
How many plunge to tristall timelesse fall,
(As may appear by proofs Authentical)
By Murder, Shipwreck, Beasts, Eluuion,
By Fire, by Sword, by Wars confusion:
By Famine, Pestilence, (Earths Misery)
By wondrous Accidents thrown down from hie;
By Thundering, Lightning, Tempests that arise,
By desperate Sprites and damned Fallacies;
By Joy, by Penury, by Wealth, by Woe,
Some apprehend unnatural overthrow:
By Nonnage, Youth, Old Age, some strangely hie
To the dark Mansion of Obscurity.
Young Drusus Pompey, Claudius lineall heir,
Amidst his sport was choked with a Pear:
Eurypides was torn with dogs alone,
Anacreon stifled with a Raisins stone:
And Catulus pursuing timelesse death,
With stinking smoke did suffocate his breath.
When Marius soldiers swiftly did pursue,
Embraced this death, a better to eschew.
Valerius, Carus, Emp'rors great through might,
Perished by thunder and celestial Light:
Pliny was burnt by wondrous fires, that blazed
From mount Vesuvius, whereon still he gazed,
To comprehend the nature of that light,
Wherewith his days were consumated quite:
And hundreds mo, which might in tragic verse
Be instanced, too tedious to rehearse.
Thus various stands Times imminent turn of Men,
They know to die, yet know not where, nor when.
The heavens bright Eye knows when t'include his rays,
But Man knows not the Vesper of his days:
So whether thou incline to Good or Ill,
Or frame thy heart to Natures wilful Will;
Or plant such trees, which bring forth bitter fruit
In thy Souls soil, following with hot pursuit
Earths soure-sweet Pleasures, various in their tastes;
Yet still thy Lamp combusts, thy life's Oil wastes:
Wheeling about with blasts of whirlwind Time,
To Deaths dark den of dust and putride slime.
Admit, thou reapst Youths flourishing verdant flours,
And overrun the glass of Nestors hours:
Yet at the last, Life's root will withered be,
And stock traduced to gross Morositie:
The Sap once dried, Life instantly is gone,
Even as a Dream, or Apparition.
And as green fruits by ripeness fall from tree,
Or sparks, which of themselves extinguished be;
So Nature must thy fruitless branches send
To the succincting Period of their end.
Then let this Dish be served last at thy Feast:
Memento mori, VIR incertus est.
He that his Soul to sinfulness does bend,
Let him recount the Sorrows of his End;
When heavens shril Trump shall rowze him from his sleep,
And Goats sequestered from the harmless Sheep:
Before the general ludge shall he be brought.
To plead Peccaui for each triuiall Thought:
Like as his life, shall be his Death and end,
What Death abandons, Judgments apprehend:
What Life and Death in Good or Ill defrayes,
The Judge in judgment to his Soul repayes.
Heavens workmen then their wages shall be paid,
When slothful slugs in Dungeon shall be laid;
Where Fire shall burn, yet not consume them quite,
Nor to their comfort yield them any Light,
There shall they die in life, and live to die,
Such Horrors wait on hels Eternity.
O London, meekely prostrate on thy knee,
Fore heavens great King with pure Sincerity;
Reuolue his praise, (Creator of that Day,
Wherein the Organs of thy Senses play)
Who has preserved thee from Sedition,
From thirsty Sword, and starved Occision:
Better it is a thousand times for Sin,
To fall into the hands of God then men:
For brunt of fiery Wars are merciless;
But God in mercy will thy woes redress:
This caused the princely Prophet wars refuse,
By inspiration Pestilence did choose.
Thou that art poisoned with this fierce disease,
And fiery torments furiously increase;
If all external Remedies were gone,
Have thou recourse to heavens Physician:
Perfume the inward rooms of thy Desites,
With savors sweet, and holy-heated Fires:
Moisten thy couch with reares for thy offense,
To quench the flames of burning Pestilence:
Sing sadly forth to Heaven this sacred Dittie,
Thus stir Iehoua to soules-sauing pity:
If thou should search the poisoned heart of man,
If thou in ludgement should his indgements scan:
If thou should view how vile his Nature is,
If thou should notice take what is done amiss:
Then would his name be written in the air,
Then would Oblivion wrap him in Despair;
Then would he never atchieue Heavens crowning Fame,
Then would in hell be charactred his shame.
O mighty Jove, omnipotent in Might,
O, I Earths-worme craule fore thy gracious sight:
O God, o King of kings maiesticall;
O who can stand, when thou commandst to fall.
Thy Grace shines perfect indiniduall,
Thy glorious Power extends it self to all:
Thy Mercies pass the numbers of the sand,
Thy Fountains flow, thy Wel-springs never stand.
Turn down thine Eye, behold my mournful grief,
Turn these my crystal tears to Pearls of life:
Turn back thy face from my corruptions,
Turn these corrections to Instructions.
My Soul surmounts Aurora's dew-moist Lark,
My Sense is kindled with a sacred Spark,
My Heart is rapt above the third Degree,
My Sprite with lofty euolence flies to thee.
Thou art that Balne, wherewith my soul is cured,
Thou art that Law, whereto my heart's adjured,
Thou art that Mount, whereon my sprite must rest,
Thou art that House, wherein my Sense lines blessed.
Then will thy souls Physician come to thee,
Ministering Mercy to thy misery,
And cheer thy Senses with supernall Food,
Which shall redound to thy immortal good;
Thy heart will then desire (amongst the blessed)
To be dissolved, and to sleep in rest:
And as the Sunne's most swift at his descending,
So shall thou be most blessed at thy ending.
London, with tears thy grievous sins lament,
Thy flintic heart with humbleness relent.
With fastings, mournings, greet him by the way,
Prevent his plagues with spacious Niniue;
And purge the inward Man of foul Offense,
That God may purge thee of this Pestilence:
Embrace his Love as sweet Preferuatiue,
If in heavens Eden thou do mean to thrive.
Discute that damn'd-aspiring Enemy,
That puft-sterne-dropsie-swelling surquedrie
Of Self-conceit, which suffocates thy Soul,
And in thy Heart does Purity control:
Lest thy Selfe-ruine so be brought to pass,
As to the Basiliske, which in a glass
Beholds his beauty long, until at length
He be deprived of his vital strength;
And whiles the glass his beauty forth does send,
His own reflecting-poison works his end.
Or lest thy Springs be turned to Gulfes of blood.
And Beauty drowned in fair Narcissus flood.
To muse on Heaven thy Senses eleuate,
To walk upright, thy Spirit animate.
Let not heavens Light obscure thy dazeled eye,
And be the Deaths-man to Virilitie;
Let not the Embassage of the glorious Lord,
And powerful Essence of his sacred Word,
(Life's pure Elixer, Sunshine of thy Day,
Which can with Joy, Hearts corasiues allay)
Harden thy heart, and eke thy soul compel,
To tread the broad-beat-path that leads to hell:
As scorching Titan with his ardent ray,
Dissolues the wax, and obdurates the clay,
So does Heavens voice the humane heart relent,
Or works it harder then the sparkling Flint.
Approou'd by Pharaoh, who would never grant
(His heart being closed in tombs of Adamant)
A free dismisment to poor Israel,
Bur did the Legate of heavens Lord dispell;
And against his Prophet did peruersly stand,
Till Ione sent forth strange plagues upon his land.
So has thy Toad-swel'd proud rebellious heart,
Increased the rigor of thy general smart;
Which at thy gates has forced Intrusion,
To thy Conversion, or Confusion.
Therefore in Jove gush out pure streams of tears,
Enuiron round thy heart with sacred Fears;
And to renounce thy crimes with Zeal intend,
Lest Heaven reserve thee to a fearful end.
Shake hands with Sin, and bid him now, Farewell,
Prepare thy Soul with Godliness to dwell;
Redeem that Time which thou haft lewdly spent;
In this Times-turne, with Faith be penitent:
For Heaven has sent thee to thy souls desire,
More blessings then earths Nature could require;
So many Graces to thy hearts Content,
Which to the World does argue wonderment.
But since from him thou turnedst back thy face,
He turned these Mercies to thy deep disgrace;
And tedious Taxes fastened on thy head,
In that thy Pride was not abandoned:
But still relapse from Grace, and fall from Truth;
The Nerves of Age, the Complements of Youth.
You immane Atheists who in darkness dwell,
To horride Devils the damned Centinell:
Affoording Nature that sole high renown,
Which natures Author wears as a crown:
Old grandam Earth does loath your noisome breath,
That die in life, and live, to live in death:
Th'insatiat Gulf prognosticates your merits,
It grieves the Air to feed your vital spirits.
Can newborn Sucklings frame their steps to go?
Can Youth, grave Eld Experiences show?
Can the Puple, his learned Tutor teach?
Can the damned Reprobate heavens Towers reach?
Can the Palace direct the Framers hand,
To build so firm, that it for ay might stand?
Or can base Nature, cauteriz'd with shame,
Abstract one Iod from Jove's great glorious name?
Can abject Dust (by heavens predestinate,
Though collocated in Angellike state)
Assume or derogate that Work divine,
Which can to naught but filthiness incline?
With terror muse, with trembling cogitate;
To higher Thoughts your souls exasperate.
Heaven is the Iusticer of Natures heart,
Nature's the workmanship of heavens great Art,
Art is the root of humane natures Skill,
Skill lets loose the reins of Natures Will,
Will works The Effects of Natures own decay,
Decay must Nature, God perfists for ay.
How could her power confirm Times Accident,
Turning sad woes with joys circumferent?
How could The Effect without th'Efficient,
Redound these glorious graces imminent,
To Albions comfort, by Iehoua wrought,
When Hope lay frustrate of aspiring thought?
Then, when the Zodiac of Earths Sun was ended,
And our Horizon on the Fates attended,
Who robbed Apollo of that fairest Fair,
Whose bright Meridian gilded Albions Air:
Yet of aires benefit it self deprived,
From frozen Pole a brighter Sun revived;
It led to the Occident of fatal Rest,
A clearer Orient started out from West.
Again, to mix the poison of Annoy,
With her delightsome cordials of Joy;
Amidst her cheerful wines to mingle in
The bitter Potion of the dregs of Sin.
Now search your hearts, in heart imagine now,
Hels deep damnation branded on your brow.
O gaze to heaven, grouel not on the ground,
Earth you corrupts, in Heaven all joys are found:
Heaven is the haven of true perfect rest,
Heaven is that place assigned to the blessed,
Heaven tendreth all, that do heavens Truth auerre,
Heaven trophies yields to Natures Conqueror.
Therefore awake from th'Ecstasin of Shame,
By earthly Conquest, purchase heavenly Fame:
Out of your hearts Earths drugs euacuate,
To heavens great All, Qui Dro repugnant.
all praises arrogate:
Accursed to Hell such as (...),
Do calcitrate against the gates of Heaven.
Now since, o Albion, Ione has full decreed,
To send thee succor at thy extreme need,
Shrowding thee under his Al-couering wing,
And still protecting thee from Sorrows sting;
Be grateful therefore to his Sovereign Might,
Who always held thee gracious in his sight.
In thee no rumors run of civil wars,
Nor of Sedition and tumultuous iarres;
But all with joint applause do sing of Peace,
Of plenteous Autumnes, and a sweet Increase:
(O sacred Peace, by thee are only found
Th'exceeding joys, that every where abound!
Thanks, sacred Ione, that has sent us a King,
Who turns our Winter, to a gladsome Spring.
Now Mars may drag his Ensigns in the dust,
His Adamantine coat may lie and rust:
Brabling Bellona now her broils may stay,
And in her sacrificing Temple play,
Turning shrill Cries, to tunes of Musickes sound;
Harsh Discord now, with Concord sweet is drowned.
For Phoebus Lute descants a newfound note,
Whereat Time skips, and turns his Protean Cote.
Rippe up the womb now of the fertile field,
And prune thy trees whose graffes abundance yield:
Now may great Pan trauerse the verdant woods,
To view the springing plants and sprouting buds.
Now may the shepherds when they chance to meet,
Trip ore Narcissus with their trampling feet:
Now may they dance their rusticke roundelaies,
Now philomele may warble on the spraies:
Now sweld-cheekt Thro^bus midst his vines may swim,
And fill Castalian bowls up to the brim.
Now may thy full-fraught ships for Merchants gain,
Divide the furrows of the watrie Plain;
Neptune who knockes his curl'd-locks against the sky,
Has how resigned his full Supremacy.
Now may earths Load-starres (ore-vail'd by Night)
Without disturbance spread their sparkling Light:
For Phoebus Lute quauereth a heavenly note,
To make Time dance in his Camelion cote.
Honor late closed in tombs of Infamy,
Now burn pure lamps of Generositie:
Truth once ore-caft with clouds of Errors strong,
Shall now appear with grace in thickest throng.
Virtue revive, thou Mirror of thy Race,
Thrown by malignant Sprites to low Disgrace,
And prostitute to Fates exorbitant,
When Shrubs ore Cedars grew predominant.
Awake Renown, great heir of Chivalry,
Spread out thy Name, though in earths womb do lie:
Hence old Oblivion, claspe thy black-leau'd Book,
Virtue disdaines in thee t'affoord a look:
Against hels despite, her beams on earth shall shine,
Though registered amongst the Saints divine:
While solid dromedarie Sprites shall be
Blind Homagers to base-bred Progeny;
Who once seemed bright, stamped with Honors mark,
Like glittring Glow-wormes glimpsing in the dark;
Fretting their gangrened scars, shall lie halfe-drown'd,
With inundation of Disgraces found:
For Phoebus fingers strike a sacred note,
Constraining Time to turn his sable cote.
Thou worlds-Confusion, thou rust-fretting Spite,
Deflowring Virtue and her Virgins-right,
With stretched Stratagemes, and Forgeries,
As treacherous Sentinels raise false descries:
To please thy self, Melpomens music sings,
By making Kings poor vassals, vassals kings.
Times past, thy crew and Machiauellian Race,
Constrained the Horse, to serve the servile Ass;
Superficial syllogismes propounding still,
Wrested Truths key to open thy cankted Will.
Thy quelling hand suppressed huge-growne Oaks,
To Abide the brunt of base-bred Pesants strokes,
Poisoning the fluent streams of Honors Spring,
With thy infectious venim'd aspish sting:
(If Richard had not been by Envy led,
Brave Bucchingham had never lost his head.)
Thou pale-sac'd Fate, thou Minister of harms,
Inueigling Dian with supposed Alarmes:
Then, when the wide-mouthed Beasts pursude in chase
The light-foot Roe, tripping with nimble pace,
T'escape the chaps of those Hart-senting hounds,
Stripped through the Plains of Dians sporting grounds:
But yet the yels of their foot-following cries,
Incensed the Goddess with a deep surmise;
That, through her Walks without respect he rones,
Spoiling her silver Fountains, Shades and groves.
Whereat she storming, snatched her stiffe-steel'd bow,
With quiuer-bearing Might did wound this Roe:
O Dian fair, yet foul disastrous Luck,
To foil faire-Play in foiling of this Bucke!
So soon as he received this lethall blow,
Heart-trembling Fear, and Sense-appalling Woe,
Rudely rusht through the Heard disturbed-wise,
With vlulations, shrikes, and Mandracke-cries:
Thus woodly ranging, these exclaims forth powered:
The Beauty of our beauteous Breed's deflowred!
The Syluanes eyes distilled pure crystal Tears,
And Dians Nymphs rent their dissheauled hairs:
The Cedar (mal-content) hung down his head,
The dwarffie Shrub did quake astonished:
The Aspiring hills sad mournful murmures sended,
The dales cride (woes) before their woes were ended;
Their daughter Echo with her tripled Tongue,
Did Tel-tale-like reduplicate this wrong:
Through rocks and groves this tatling news did sling,
Which caused the concau'd vastie anters ring.
Pan wakening with these universal cries,
Began to start, presaging Tragedies;
And gazing among his flocks on champion ground,
Espide his Fair struck down with mortal wound.
Then bloud-congealing Fear enwrapt his heart,
Each actual Sense forgot to act his part;
And Natures functions slackt their usual charge,
From whence life's Organs force free passage large.
Thus ouer-quel'd with palsey-quinering Dread,
Plucked up the sluice and floud-gates of his head,
From whence gushed forth a Pleni-tide of tears,
Which trickling down, hurled through his snow-white hairs.
But vital Motions being reduced again,
Inioyn'd Hearts-bloud to course through every vein;
Then Sighs and Words (confused) did issue forth,
Like blustering storms from cloud-dispelling North:
Each word breathed sighs, each sigh braith'd out a word,
Even as the treasury of his Thoughts was stored:
While blasting Fear, his branching Nerves did kill,
Quauered this Threnos on his rusticke Lill.
Thus he began: What Death-presaging Star?
What monstrous Meteor, or sphaericall Jar?
What black disastrous Planet blasts from sky
T'infect these woods? What envious Destiny
Has thus conspired my Paragon to slay,
My flocks chief Guide, Conductor of their way?
Light to mine eyes, Ease to my burdened heart,
Sweet Delian Music to assuage my smart;
Sap to the Plants, sweet luster to each Flower,
Fair Flora's Joy seated in fragrant bower:
Phoebe intrail'd him with a loue-sicke grace,
And with a smile Titan adorned his face.
Ver's sweet Blossom, Daphne's fairest Fair,
Queen Clores Pride, and Natures best-fram'd Heir;
Nay, Natures self, her self has foiled to frame him:
But Sighs have drowned my Tongue, it cannot name him:
Silence seares up my lips they must not open,
While raging Thoughts perforce my brains have broken
But oh, what foaming floods beat against my breast?
How are the waters of deep woes increased:
Now, now, per violence their streams burst out,
Though with a thousand floud-gates hemmed about.
I must speak I, though with Pythagoras Ring
My mouth were sealed: Necessity rules a King.
Misled Diana, misinformed Queen,
What furious Nymph did animate thy teene?
What ouer-ruling Fate, ore-rul'd thy hand,
To strike the fairst that tript on scorching sand:
Ore-ruled Goddess, yet ore-ruling All,
Ore-rul'd, t'approoue this ouer-ruling Thrall.
O would thy sinews had beneloosened so,
As thy stiff arms could not have bent thy bow;
O that thine eyes had slackt their instant sight,
That to thy shaft gave iust-directed Flight.
Accursed that Bird, who forth her plumes did fling
Next to that Shaft, whose root of whisking wing,
Sits quaffing Juice, till Joy with Sorrow sings;
Eke rules the Earth, and earths Confusion brings;
Raising up one, basely detecting other,
And sowing Variance twixt Man and his brother:
I say accursed, who beats her flaggering wing,
To make it sing and weep, to weep and sing.
O that thy nimble fingers wide had slipped,
Til he might through some uncouth paths have skipped
From dint of Dart, remote a distant space
From plotting Fox, Wolf, and abiected Ass.
Wishes are wind: ay me, that Darling's slain,
Whose crimson blood thy crystal brooks does stain.
His waxen Shape so true proportioned.
Lives now to Jove, to rural Syluanes dead;
Who once was deemed (before this tragic part)
The pure subsisting Essence of thy heart.
The Satyrs left their Cells t'affoord him duty,
The Faunies leapt, as ravished with his beauty,
The forest gods rude rusticke Carols chanted,
The ietting Birds on spraies and branches vanted:
Warbling his praise, this sweet-stretcht strain did sing:
This is the king of Herds, the herds great King.
Once thou did grant him license free to roue,
Through every valley, mountain, shade and grove;
As rapt in sprite to view so fair a Creature,
Of Lineaments divine and famous Feature:
To Heaven adiur'd, in Earth admired of all,
Adorned with Virtues Metaphysicall:
Until the Wolf, sly Fox, and Ass with charms,
Rung in thine ears Enuies extent alarmes.
Often have I seen the Wolf of lambs make prey,
The clamorous Hound hold the swift Heart at bey,
And piercing-sighted Eagle soar above,
To fix his tallants on the mournful Dove:
(Though these be Accidents assiduall,
Yet in their kind th'appeare tyrannical:)
But never saw two Gemels wound each other,
Or symbolizing shapes devour their brother:
Yet (Dian) thou have spoiled thy self in spilling
This guiltless blood, and killed thy self in killing:
For Nature in this moral Axiom shows,
Precedent Wrongs, have on pursuing Woes.
Thou might have aimed thy deep Hart-wounding shaft
Just at the Wolf and Fox, who slunke with craft
Through every Plain, to spoil the harmless flocks,
Tearing their lambs, who skipt on craggie rocks:
This done, came crooching with a courtly grace,
As masked Homagers with Ianus face:
Fierce Leopards in works, yet Lambs in words,
Their Enterprises, enter-piercing swords;
Vulturs in thought, yet Doves in semblant graces,
Monsters within, without faire-painted Faces,
Honying their Tongs with Angels protestations,
Poisoned their Hearts with devils dissimulations;
Nay Sphinx nor Proteus (turned to colors strange,)
Could change in time, as they with Time would change.
Thou might have roused the burden-bearing Ass,
Who strived t'immure him self midst fatning grass,
Until with years the Lion's ouer-worne,
Then calcitrates him with insulting scorn:
Who neigh'd to move a Smile, laden with pride,
Though loathed of all thy virgin-Nymphs beside.
He seeking shelter in Minerua's Tower,
From distillation of each silver shower;
Lay listening Echoes, that done, gins to snort,
Carrying their tatlings to Diana's Court:
This seruile-solide-Lumpe plods back again,
To blab what News with Dian did remain.
This fawning Drudge in ponderous gold did swim,
Like Marius moiles, who toiled, yet slicke and trim;
Supporting ay light Courtiers onerous ieasts,
As Natures bond-slaues, borne to bear like Beasts.
For Pallas spurning him from out her Hall,
Cride: Get thee hence, I know thee not, nor shall:
And Mars did scorn, that such a dul-pac'd Jade,
Should be officious to his warlike Trade:
Yet thou did grant him an admitment free,
To be the Pandar to false Forgerie.
These bloud-sworne Beasts unto their Dens scarce trudged;
But still with Envy this Hearts swiftness grudged:
(Consulting with grim Midnight.
Mesonyxion)
Observed his footings, and ranged tracks each one:
And then pursude with eager hunting close;
Yet smoothed it up, not deemed to be of those
Who steeled their fierce fangs, and took their Stand,
With his hearts-bloud t'imbrue the Forests sand:
But highly honored him fore Dians face,
Yet in his absence dragged him to Disgrace.
Faire-seeming Pictures dazeling thus her Eye,
Foul seemed Fair, Truth seemed Treachery:
Thus Dian decked with monstrous Semblancie,
Her self seemed not her self, she was not she.
But the sole solace of my soul, is this,
Betwixt their Kinds to oppose Antithesis:
Albeit, this Fair by Destinies was chased,
And in bright Splendour by foul Beasts disgraced:
Yet in his Occident, (with Light repleat)
Great Jove reserues him for a dainty meat:
Whiles they in death shall as vile Carrion lie,
Of Heaven abiected, loathed of earthly Eye.
A second Fair shall spring from out his blood,
Whose branching horns shall beautify the wood;
Whom i will range in from Wolfes and Tigers jaws,
Each Nymph and Satyr lend him their applause:
Whiles their Offspring slinke slily to their Den,
Aghast, to look on Satyrs, Nymphs, or men.
Thus Pan ore-wearied with this tasking style,
With whispring Silence breaths himself awhile,
And bids the Nymphs from neighbor-caues arise,
To solemnize the Heards-kings Exequies.
Then that performed, runs swiftly through the plain,
To fetch his flocks up to their folds again.
But soft, swift Muse, too fast thou postest on,
Time bids, Range in this stern Idilion:
Conclude with Time, when Time cocludes with thee,
For Times and Motions must concluded be:
Music with Time affoords sweet harmony,
And as united native Twins agree:
But this was Enuies harsh-discordant Song,
To make Time wash his cheeks and creep along.
Envy go hang, thy viperous word's no Law,
Thy Toad-like-swelling looke's not worth a straw.
Thou can not now Defame, Depose, Deprive;
Truth scales thy walls, thy kingdom cannot thrive:
She now dispels white vizards from thy face,
And eleuates her Throne by thy disgrace:
For Phoebus Lute descants a newfound note,
Whereat Time skips, and turns his Protean cote.
Now may the flocks securely range at large;
For Jove himself of them has taken charge.
Now tender Lambs may skip from out their pens,
While Romish Tigers slinke into their dens;
Like wandering Spirits midst the drearie Night,
Whose Apparitions do abhor the light;
Charming poor Fosters with their Magic Spells,
Till the great- Hunt shall rowze them from their Cells:
For now Apollo takes his Lute in hand,
Time leapeth on with Joy, and scorns to stand.
As Foxes now in anters they remain,
Scraping each dustie concaue of their brain,
For putride Arguments, to hold dispute
Against Heaven it self, yet still themselves confute.
As slipperie Eeles with sound of dreadful thunder,
Scud from their chinkes, and separate asunder:
So of they creep from out their slimie caves,
Plunged in the mud of deepe-despairing waves;
Fluttring like Schrich-owles on the craggie rocks,
Yell forth Effata's to their senseless Blocks.
They lash forth loathsome libels of Confess,
With soules-seducing triuiall Treatises;
So far unfit to save a Christian,
As is the Turkish truthlesse Alcoran.
The march as Maskers in disguised shapes,
Tossing their Beads with tricks, like mimicke Apes:
Or Cornish chaughs, that in their nests do chatter,
Neither to Reason, Sense, or any matter:
To Seigneur Crux such hote-breath'd sighs they send,
As make him frown, and vow to be their end:
An Altar apt for such a Sacrifice,
For what they crave, his Worship never denies:
The place is Shame, through Malefaction,
And there with Shame they share Devotion.
Now has the Italian Serpent cast her sting,
And wounded lies by JAMES, fair Albions King;
Whom, Heavens protect from fawning Gnato's crew,
That turn (with monstrous Time) to Protean hue;
Or as bright Comets, whose blaze lasts pure
No longer, then their exhaled Fires endure:
Or Hecticke fits, now hot, now cold within,
Now burns the heart, now frigerates the skin.
Extirpate Traitors, o heavens expel
The crafty Counsels of Achitophell,
The soothing Humor of each Midius brain,
That by blandiloquence seeks his state to stain:
The damned stratagemes of Romish Favorites,
And all Spanized bloud-sworne Jesuits;
Who long expected that a day would come,
Wherein with blood they might work Albions doom:
Covering their face with vailes of Loyalty,
Their poisoned hearts consort with Villainy,
To trucidate and murder Prince and Peer,
Whose blood, both God and man esteem most dear.
These are Illusions sprung from Popery,
These are the fruits of false Imagerie.
In Nomine Jesus, yet their facts must rise,
O slight Preludium to their Tragedies:
Their actions are exhaust from Purity,
Yet practice naught but devilish Treachery.
Are these Devotions? nay, Delusions,
Detractions, and their own Destructions.
Let no man dread Romes Hydra bearing sway,
For Albions Hercul's crops his heads away:
One Head entire does on his shoulders stand,
Which will be broke by James own royal hand.
For Phoebus has devised an heavenly note,
To make Time laugh, and turn his Sphinx-like cote.
But hark, Muse, hark, me thinks some voice divine,
Echoes the mountains of the Muses nine:
Stay, genious Muse, thy ouer-tired teame,
Cease to discuss upon so deep a Theme:
Now take repose in Aganyppe's vale,
And mark the tenor of this sequel Tale.
A Panygericall Idilion pronounced to the City of London before the entrance
of her long-expected Comfort.
NOw London rise from dreadful Dungeon,
Of dark disastrous deep Destruction;
Wherein thou did embrace foul hood-winkt Night,
Prodigious horror, indigence of light,
And Sense-appalling Fear, with short-drawne breath,
Fast gripped betwixt the chaps of ravenous Death:
Against whom, Heavens wodrous works opposed were,
Each Planet, and incomprehended Sphare,
The restless Poles, and high-remoted Stars,
Against thy Pride conspired direful wars:
Apollo masked his face with beams of blood,
While trembling Phoeb' exanimated stood:
With ioyntagree thus adunited all,
To captiuate thee with perfidious thrall.
Erect thy bruised stormie-battred head,
Basely dejected like the high-sprung Reed,
Or grassie plains, where Ver bids flowers abound,
Whose stems are urged to kiss the foule-fac'd ground:
When as the furious Fire with discontents,
(Included close midst liquid Elements,)
Along the sphaerie Frame does range about,
With burning ire to find some passage out;
At last breaks through with roarings violent,
Like to a Lion in some dungeon pent;
And then dissolues that grosse-congealed matter,
To fierce tempestuous hail and floods of water.
Then Aeolus ope's his vented anters deep,
That curl'd-hair'd Boreas through the world may sweep
Whose steele-strong breath does penetrate the rocks,
Disturbes Damaetas and confounds his flocks:
Affrighting Nature with celestial Thunder,
And stoutly strikes the Cedars tops asunder.
Whereat huge Aetna quakes, proud billows rise,
And Amphytrite's Towers confront the skies:
The sinewie Oak with fear falls flat to ground,
Earths Center trembles at this terrible sound.
But when Latona's Heir transcends his Light,
From queen Aurora's crystal Palace bright,
Gazing about the World with cheerful Eye,
Intrailes the Earth with robes of Majesty;
Intreates the vpright-towring Lark to sing,
The low-laid grass to rise, and plants to spring:
Instructing Man by course from East to West,
To rise with Labor, and lie down with Rest:
Then boasts queen Flora in her fragrant bed,
Who erst did droupe with tempests ruined.
So thou, since Heaven respects thy mournful moan,
From the high Solium of Jove's sacred Throne;
Spreading his glorious beams of quickening Grace,
Upon thy woeful storm-beat withered face:
Suck vigor from his nourishing fervent rays,
He yields thee life, yield him immortal praise.
Sin as the Lodestone, drew this Plague upon thee,
And sins expulsion, must expel it from thee;
Sin grounds the Cause, and Judgment frames The Effect,
T'asswage th'Efficient, Sin thou must reject:
Had thou not sinned, Heaven had not cride, Repent;
Where reigns no sin, there needs no punishment.
Rig up thy Bark split through with storms of woes,
Sail to the port where Pactolus ore-flowes;
Condenst from Tmolus mount in Lydia land,
Where golden gravel guilds the silver sand:
Flourish in spite of interdicting Fate,
Reduce thine Honor to his ancient state.
Lachesis now (who erst so swiftly spun)
May sit and rest, her tedious task is done:
For mighty Jove (the Olympian king) foreshowes
The calculation of thy bypast woes,
To lie inundate midst pure founts of Love,
Distilling from the Ambrosian Springs above.
As flame-hair'd Phoebus melts by degrees,
Drop after drop the weeping Ysicles,
And so traduced to Dissolution,
Are by the thirsty Earth absorbed each one:
So, as he managed Judgment with Increase,
Does mitigate it with a sweet Surcease.
Now bath amidst Macenas silver streams,
To Europes eyes extend thy golden beams.
And as the Satyrs skipping through each street
Of ancient Rome, with Orpheus music sweet,
Sounding Amphyons quickening simphonie,
Threatened the death of Marcus Antonie:
So let The Geddesse of Mirth.
Euterpe on the adverse part,
Pluck up her sprite, and euer-chearefull heart,
T'infuse thy streets with heavenly iocond mirth,
And sacred solace for thy prosperous Birth.
Thy Ephori put on their scarlet Die,
To intertaine his royal Majesty;
Who longed to view thy face, (from him exiled)
Even as a father does his long-lost child.
Produce thine Ornaments and ensigns fair,
Let shril-toung'd Trumpets penetrate the air;
Let bells concord in Musickes simphonie,
Let Anes dim the Meteors of the sky:
Iouissance divine reeccho in each place,
Each creature cry: God save king JAMES his grace:
Echo, the tatling Daughter of the hill,
Shall iterate that Speech thrice-doubled still;
For Phoebus tunes a sweet celestial note,
Whereat Time skips with Joy, in golden cote.
When worthy Pompey, Lord of Africa,
Was chosen Chief to scour the surging sea
Of Pirates, brauing with ore-swaying might;
So high his Fame soared in the Romans sight,
That all applauded him with shoutes and cries;
So pierced the thin vast air beneath the skies,
That certain fowls amazed fell flat to ground,
Hearing such clamorous noise, and thundering sound.
So let the Steel of pure Affection,
Strike fire of Zeal and true Subjection
Upon thy Vulgars hearts, inflamed with love
Of due Alleigiance, sparkling from above:
That so they may conform their Loyalty,
Consonant to Caesar's Solidurij;
Who (when they were enrol'd in martial pay,
If chanced by brunt of fight to lose the day)
For grief would kill themselves with their own hands,
So near succincted with Affections bands:
Then shall thy walls enclose him plausibly,
As to his Throne he entered peaceably.
Thy Muses flow with Archimedes Skill,
That they thy streets with Rarities may fill.
For when young Cato that brave Roman Peer,
With his wel-manned ships approached near
The Syracusan walls strong fortifide;
By Archimedes caution were descride:
They full resolved to raze them flat to ground,
By him such warlike Engines rare were found,
(Which from the Tower thereof his Art down sent)
Who turned their strong-built Barks circumferent
With bottomes upward, drawn from out the fount,
And cast upon the high confronting mount:
He framed a Dove of wood by Art so rate,
That for some space perpended midst the air
Seeming alive, and counterpois'd so right,
Was thought to fly, most strange to humane sight.
So shall thy Muses from sweet Sapience,
Infuse their Thoughts with powerful Influence:
The learned Thalia that does on Pernasse dwell,
Shall Nectar quaffe from Aganyppe's well,
That they with deep Designs may move delight,
Beyond the motions of sharp Reasons sight:
From midst their Rarities shall Caliope sing:
Great King of kings, protect king JAMES our King.
Now genious Muse, drink of Castalian Springs,
Then soar aloft with swift Pegasian wings,
And mounting Euolence to th'ingenious brain;
There bid thy turret-climing sprite remain:
Survive thy Thoughts, ere all the Musick's done,
With Pallas dance in this Idilion:
Let Phoebus rauishing Lute thy Music be,
Salute great Pan with this Panygerie.
Divine Apollo, Harbinger to Jove,
To Earth descend from moving sphaeres above,
With thy bright Chariot, by proud Eous led,
Where heavenly Queens are high enthronized;
That they as Guards may wait with rare delight,
On Albions Caesar's royalized sprite.
Let fair Wisdom.
Sophia seat the chiefest part,
In the Bedchamber of his peerless heart;
That by converse she may pure Motions lend,
From whence all Motions draw successful end.
Let lovely Prudence.
Phronesis with clear Diamonds dight,
Be ever resident fore his Princely sight;
Feeding with her bright Shine his piercing Eye,
To search the drifts of wresting Sophistry:
So sincere Truth shall chieue the upper hand,
Ore-topping Vice, while she amazed does stand.
Let Concord.
Melos tune her siluer-sounding Song,
Within the groves of his minds Motion;
That Heavens Astraea, sacred queen of Grace,
Just measures there may tread with lofty trace.
Justice.
Soter, vnsheath thy neuer-danted sword,
Strike downright Blows, as full-eyes can afford,
With strict attendance on his right side stand,
Mercy on left, t'asswage thy rigorous hand,
And counterpoise thy scales with Paritie,
Rejecting squint-eyed Partiality:
Then shall thy Deity be adored of all,
Congratulated both of great and small.
As bright-eyed Day Star.
Eous Don Phoebus Page,
Attends his Masters sweating Pilgrimage,
Sliding upright with burning flames accrude,
To his Meridian climing altitude;
And then descends till his hot task be done,
Toward the Wests extracted Horizon.
So let these glorious Empresses attend
Upon his Acts, from Alpha to the end;
That by their Conduct he may view the way,
To dignifie his Throne, and Scepter sway:
Pursuing still his princely Thoughts with speed,
That their rich fruits The Event may always feed.
As' Numa was supposed to spend each day
In deep conuersing with Egeria;
By whose advice he constituted Laws,
Consorting to the Vulgar sorts applause:
So by sweet Conference with all of these,
Shall he prescribe his Laws, Acts, and Decrees;
Which in their good Success shall stand upright,
Fore mighty Jove, fore Heaven and humane sight.
Then Albion thou, abundantly increase
In Wealth, Tranquillity, and joy full Peace:
For that is true Peace, which Ius to kingdoms brings,
Kings subject to their Laws, not Laws to Kings.
Now Mercury, surnamed Light-soot.
(...),
Plume thy light wings, make have, no time delay;
Be swifter then Palladius Persian,
That through the Roman Confines quickly ran
To Theodosius, where he did remain,
Showing, The Romans had the Persians slain:
Desist not then (if thou will purchase name)
To thrust this Motto in the chaps of Fame:
Al-seeing Jove fair Albions isle has blessed,
With a renowned King, and tranguile Rest.
Whose Virtue glistering from his stately Throne,
Gives sight unto his Substitutes each one:
Even as the Sun with his transcendent Light,
Tiends all the twinkling Candles of the Night.
Fair Phoebe dance on Ganges argent streams;
Dan Titan laugh with bright-reflecting Beams;
Protract thy course from burning Ida's hill,
Command thy burnisht coach to wander still
Under the starrie Round, and third Degree,
Till Earth be crowned with Angels dignity.
Great Court of Heaven thy Synod counite.
T'adorne his heart with crowns of true Delight,
That neighbour-kings admiring at his state,
His Princely steps may strive to imitate;
And that by Sovereign bliss his Reign may be
A rare Memorial to Eternity.
O blisfull Concord bred in Heavens pure breast,
For Albions sacred and assured Rest,
By Jove, who rules the restless ranging sky:
By thy Decree, that glorious power does lie,
With sweet Accord to keep the pugnant stars,
And each foul Planet from disastrous wars.
Celestial Ens, that Earths Ens framed of naught,
And by Creation, Light from Darkness brought:
Thou that refined those vital Elements,
From the confused Chaos quintessence:
By whom we live, respire, move, stand, and be;
Compounded of indifferent Quality.
Thou that commandst Heavens Axletree to move
Upon the distant Poles, the Sphaeres above
To turn with measured Course, and never stay
From Agitation neither Night nor Day:
Yet in the midst, Earth have thou framed so fast,
That shall perdure, till Heavens huge Frame does wast.
Thou art that First, and last things do pretend;
Yet sans Beginning, and without an End:
Thy glorious Power does comprehend each one,
Yet comprehended can thou be of none.
Thou did prepare the mountain Ararat,
(When the wide World in blindfold Deluge sat)
To entertain the waue-tost Arc with Rest,
From whence each Kind abundantly increast.
In thee, in thee such powerful glory bides;
From thee such Lenity and Friendship slides,
As may command this Universe to bend,
As mortal Ens can never comprehend.
By thy Decree the lusty Cedars spring,
The bloomie Ver abundant fruits does bring:
Thou do increase the grouth of Summers seed,
For to supply the breeme-fac'd Winters need:
Thou do inspire the hearts of peerless Peers,
In ripening Youth to choose their flourishing Feeres:
"And look how fast to Death Man pays his due,
"So fast again do thou his Stock renew.
As by this President Albion now may see,
Who does enjoy JAMES royal Majesty:
To whom I wish long, long, and happy Reign,
Wherein he may the Gospel pure maintain;
Old Nestors years (o Heavens) let him excel,
And be a Father grave in Israel.
Grant sacred Jove his royal Stock to stand,
His Branch to flourish in fair Albions Land,
So long as Titan treades Heavens silver tracke,
To analize Times complete Zodiac:
Till Time himself leave turning of his cote,
And Phoebus cease to strike Time rauishing note.
Thus each true English heart sincerely pray:
And he that seeks his Person to betray,
Fierce Proserpina with her Daughters three,
Shall dragge his soul to cole-blacke Tartarie;
To fearful Hades, or the darkest Hell,
Where naught but Devils and damned Spirits dwell:
Mean time my genious Muse this Note shall sing:
Heavens prosper JAMES, the Britons lawful King.
CECINI.
Nuncibo interea, and Pernassi in rupibus altis,
Donec Musa iterum in beat me exire, latebo.

PASTORAL PANEGYRICKS.
Iacobo Regiaeterna Gloria.
In Winters wrack the torrents rage and flow,
And sheapheards forced to leave their pleasant rocks;
Cold-wrinkled furrows seated in his brow,
Out bids them drive their weather-beaten Flocks.
But mighty Pan commannds a Cedar spring,
Out of whose root faire-flourishing Branches grow;
Rising in height, Heavens Quire about him sing,
Each lofty Oak does pure Alleigeance show.
Graze now ye tender Lambs, skip and repast
In fruitful Groves, under this Cedar shroud,
Esteem not of fierce AEolus blustering blast,
Turn not from fields when mists bright Titan cloud.
Eager Roma
Phaea, the wild Cremonian Sow,
Ravening abroad, and searching for her prey,
Naught can obtain but dreadful overthrow;
As Flocks suruine, she surfets in decay.
Great Cedar spread, in lasting glory spring,
Leaves, Viburnes, Flowers, All shall sing thy praise,
Our (...) and Astraea's King,
Recrown'd be thou with neuer-fading Baies:
In Albions Grove, flourish thy royal Blood,
As long as Rivers flow, and Cedars bud.
Astra Deo nil maius habent, nil Caesare terra: Sic Caesar terras, vt Deus
astra, regat.

Anna valeat Regina.
Astraea peeping from the sky,
Nymphs and Satyrs gazed to spy
Nature work her own Despair,
And foil her self to frame that Fair.
Up Flocks and dance, pipe rusticke Swains,
All fragrant flowers adorn the plains:
Lo, Astraea comes at hand,
( Ever Lucina by her stand:)
Astraea glideth from the air
To guild the Groves; she fairest Fair
Reuiues the Plants, recures the Sprayes,
Eternal be her Crown of Bays.
Gaze may the Sun with splendant Bright,
In dark does she surpass his Light:
Now sweet Muses ye behold,
Astraea trip on earthly Mold.
Semper virescas.

Henricus Princeps vivat.
Ho, Syluanes, Nymphs, leap from your silver lake,
Erect your viols filled with golden praise:
Now Satyrs sing, your Cynicke Cells far sake:
Rodanus, thy madide beard from Rivers raise:
In sweet agree,
Come sing with me,
Unto that Star that deignes to glide these ways.
Sweet Flora now imbellish thy fair Bowers;
Paris, thou shepherds Joy, Heavens music bring,
Reuolue thy Lils, tripping amongst these flowers,
Infuse rare Tunes, and rural Paeans sing:
Note his bright Face,
Combined with Grace:
Echo with Aues bid the mountains ring.
Phoebus intraile him with thy golden ray,
So fragrant Clores, Summers verdant Queen,
Unto his Progress, thy vert shades display,
Inuellop him around with Chaplets green.
Unto this Shrine,
All joys divine;
To Heaven a Sun, to earth a Load-starre seen.
Sempersplendescas.

PIELODES.
Laeta sit ista Dies, totumque canenda per orbe^,
Qua Princeps nobis Rexque IACOBVS erit.
Plebs pia cumque pia laetetur plebe Senatus:
Read Deo grates ANGLIA tota tuo.
Attulit illa Dies fessis miserisque Leuamen,
Et Lumen caecis, attulitilla Dies.
Tempora temporibus mutantur tristia laetis,
Succedunt summis Gaudia summa Malis.
FINIS.

