A famous dittie of the Joyful receiving of the Queens most excellent
majesty, by the worthy Citizens of London the xij day of November, 1584. at
her graces coming to Saint James.
To the tune of Wigmores Galliard.
THe twelfe day of November last,
Elizabeth our noble Queen:
To Londen-warde she hied fast,
which in the Cuntry long had been
The Citizens went then apace,
on stately steeds to meet her grace.
In velvet coats and chains of gold,
most gorgiously for to behold.
Each company in his degree,
stood orderly in good array:
To entertain her majesty,
as she did pass along the way.
And by each man did duly stand:
a wayter with a torch in hand.
Because it drue on toward night:
along the way her grace to light.
The people flocked there amain,
The multitude was great to see:
Their Joyful hearts were glad and fain,
to view her princely majesty.
Who at the length came riding by:
within her chariot openly.
Even with a noble princely train:
of Lords and Ladies of great fame.
Her majesty was glad to see,
her subjects in so good a case:
Which then fell humbly on their knee,
desiring God to save her grace.
And like a noble prince that day:
for them in like sort did she pray.
And courteously she answered still:
I thank you all for your good will.
And bowing down on every side,
most lovingly unto them all:
A poor man at the length she spied,
which down before her grace did fall.
And courteously she then did stay
to here what he had then to say.
To whom he did present anon,
an humble supplication.
Then plesantly she passed on,
til she unto Saint James came:
And always as she went along,,
the people cried with might and main.
O Lord preserve your noble Grace:
and all your secret foes deface.
God bless and keep our noble Queen:
whose like on earth was never seen.
What Traitors heart can be so hard,
to hurt or harm that princely flower:
What wretch from grace is so debard,
that can against her seem to lower.
Which is the only star of light:
that does amaze all princes sight.
A most renowned virgin Queen,
whose like on earth was never seen.
The daughter of a noble King,
desending of a royal race:
Whose fame through all the world does ri^g
whose virtues shines in every place.
The Diamond of delight and joy,
which guides her cuntry from anoy.
A most renowned virgin Queen:
whose like on earth was never seen.
The peerles pearl of Princes all,
so full of pity, peace, and love:
Whose mercy is not proved small,
when foul offenders do her move.
A Phoenix of most noble mind,
unto her subjects good and kind.
A most renowned virgin Queen:
whose like on earth was never seen.
The servant of the mighty God,
which does preserve her day and night:
For whom we feel not of his rod,
although the pope has done his spite.
The cheef maintainer of his word:
wherein consists our heavenly food.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen:
whose like on earth was never seen.
And such as hollow hearted be,
partakers of the romish rout:
Which thinks mischeef secretly,
the Lord will suerly find them out.
And give them their deseruings due:
which to her grace is found untrue.
But Lord preserve our noble Queen:
whose like on earth was never seen.
In many dangers has she been,
but God was evermore her guide:
He will not see our gracious Queen,
to suffer harm through traitors pride.
But every one which sought her fall,
the Lord did still confound them all.
And such as thought her life to spill:
them felues most desperately did kill.
And every traitor in this land,
Whose wicked thoughts are yet unknown
The Lord consume them out of hand,
before they be more riper grown.
Whose hearts are set with one accord:
against th'annointed of the Lord.
But God preserve our noble Queen:
whose like on earth was never seen.
Lord send her long and happy days,
in England for to rule and reign:
Gods glory evermore to raise,
true Justice always to maintain.
Which now these six and twenty years,
so royally with us appeers.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen:
whose like on earth was never seen.
FINIS.
Richard. Harrington.
AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde for Yarath James and are to be sold in
Newgate Market against Christ Church gate. 1584.


