AN ANATOMY OF THE METAMORPHO-SED AJAX.

Wherein by a tripartite method is plainly, openly, and demonstratiuely,
declared, explaned, and eliquidated, by pen, plot, and precept, how unsavory
places may be made sweet, noisome places made wholesome, filthy places made
cleanly. Published for the common benefit of builders, housekeepers, and
house-owners.

By T. C. Traveler, Aprentice in Poetre, Priactiser in Music, professor of
Painting, the mother, daughter, and handmayd of all Muses arts and sciences.

Inuide quid mordes? pictoribus atque Poetis.
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
AT LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blackfriars. 1596.

To M. E. S. Esquier.
SIr, my master having expressly commanded me, to finish a strange discourse
that he had written to you, called the Metamorpho-sis of AJAX, by setting
certain pictures thereto; there came unto my mind a tale I had heard, perhaps
more merry then mannerly. How a plain, or rather a pleasant Seruingman, waiting
on his master at the Popes Court, happened to be present one day, when the
Gentleman, after long attendance and great means, had obtained the favor to
kiss his holiness foot. The man seeing what his master did, first stale out
of the chamber, and then ran out of the house, hiding himself for a pretty
space. The Gentleman hearing of it, pitied his man's simplicity (who perhaps
was crafty knave enough for all that) and asked why he went away? Alas sir said
he, when I saw that a man of your worth and worship, in so public a place,
might kiss but his toe, I doubted they would have made me, have kissed him in
some homelyer place, and so I might have been shamed for ever.

If that seruingman had cause to run out of the house, my think I may seem
to have more reason, to run out of my wits, to have so strange a task
appointed me; for when the very face, and head, or title of the book, seemed
so foul and unsavory, what might I think the feet or tail thereof were
like to prove? Wherefore I would gladly have shunned so base an office: but
having my masters example joined to his commandment, I took heart to me, and
first I read over the discourse, to see what was promised therein on my behalf
(viz. certain pictures.) But I assure you in the reading of it, whether it
were the well ha^dling of the matter, or my partial opinion (a fault that I am
seldom charged withal) my mind was altered, and I compared the homely title
of it, unto an ilfauored vizer, Or to a road or a snake made in sugar, that
looks unsightly, but tastes sweetly.
such as I have seen in stage plays, when they dance Machachinas, which
couers as sweet a face sometimes as any is in the company. And even presently
therewithal, as if I had been inspired with the spirit of AJAX, me thought I
durst have adventured with my pen and pensill upon any thing. For, as the
saying is, Painters and Poets, claim by old enrolment,
A charter, to dare all, without controlment.


Wherefore by the Privilege of this Charter (as also by a Pattent I have of
serving two prentiships) I will go somevvhat beyond the bare words of my
commission, and yet not swerve much from the charge that is laid upon me. For
Sir, I would you knew it, though I never troubled the schools at Oxford, with
any disputes or degrees, yet I carried there a good scholars books after him,
and I trust I gat some quaynt phrases among them, as namely in steed of praying
the Cobbler to set two patches on my shoes, I could have said, set me two
semicircles upon my suppeditals, with much other eloquence beyond the common
intelligence. And yet notwithstanding all these great vaunts, I will not take
upon me, that I am able to say so much of the Metamorpho-sis, the Etimologie,
and the reformation of Don AIAX-house, as my master has said, or to defend
the words, illustrate the matter, and dilate of the form as he has done,
for who can stand against such an army of Emperors, Kings, Magistrates,
Prophets, Poets, All-hallowes, and all prophanes, even from the Bible to the
babble, as are by him brought for enobling of his arguments? Yet for Anatomysing
as it were of the shape and body thereof, M. Plat in his book against
famine, fol. vltimo penultimo.
because he has handled that point (in M. Plats opinion) somewhat too briefly
for common understandings, I must hear a little better open it: for as the old
saying is, ( bonum quo co^munius eo melius) and the old verse is, Scire tuum
nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. If that which follows offend the
reader, he may turn over a leaf or two, or but smell to his sweet gloves, and
then the savor will never offend him.

Goodness is best, when it is common shown,
Knowledge were vain, if knowledge were not known.


Wherefore now, seriously and in good sadness to instruct you, and all
Gentlemen of worship, how to reform all unsavory places of your houses,
whether they be caused by priuies, or sinkes, or such like (for the annoyance
coming all of like causes, the remedies need not be much unlike,) this you
shall do.

In the Privy that annoyes you, (...)is cestern in the first plot is figured
at the letter A. and so likewise in the second plot.
first cause a Cesterne containing a barrel or upward, to be placed either
behind the seat, or in any place either in the room, or above it, from whence
the water may by a small pype of lead of an inch be conuayed under the seat
in the hinder part thereof (but quite out sight) to which pype you must have a
Cock or a washer to yield water with some pretty strength, when you would let
it in. The small pype in the first plot at D. in the 2. E, but it ought to lie
out of sight.


Next make a vessel of an ouall form, as broad at the bottom as at the top,
ij. foot deep, one foot broad, This vessel is expressed in the first plot H.
M. N. in the 2. H. K.
xvi. inches long, place this very close to your seat, like the pot of a close
stool, let the ouall incline to the right hand.

This vessel may be brick, stone, or lead, but whatsoever it is, it should
have a Current of 3. inches, The Curre^t is expressed in the second plot K.
to the back part of it, (where a sluice of brass must stand) the bottom, and
sides all smooth: and dressed with pitch, rosin, and wax, A special note.
which will keep it from taynting with the urine.

In the lowest part of this vessel; In the second plot ^. L.
which will be on the right hand, you must faste^ the sluice or washer of brass
with soder or Cime^t, the Co^cauitie or hollow thereof, must be ij. inches and.

To the washers stopple, In the first plot G. F. in the 2. F. and I.
must be a stem of iron as big as a curten rod, strong and even and
perpendicular; with a strong skrew at the top of it, to which you must have a
hollow key with a vvoorme fit to that skrew.

This skrew must, when the sluice is down, In the first plot between G. I.
appear through the planke not above a straw-breadth on the right hand, and
being duly placed, it will stand three or four inches vvyde of the midst of
the back of your seat.

Item, This shows in the first plot K. L. In the 2. G. Such are in the
backside of watches.
that children and busy folk disorder it not, or open the sluice, with putting
in their hands, without a key, you should have a little butto^, or scallop
shell, to bind it down with a vice pin, so as without the key it will not be
opened.

These things thus placed: all about your vessel and elsewhere, must be
passing close plastered with good lyme and hair, Else all is vain.
that no air come up from the vault, but only at your sluice, which stands
close stopped, and ever it must be left, after it is voyded, half a foot deep
in clean water.

If water be plenty, the oftener it is used and opened, the sweeter; but if
it be scant, once a day is enough, for a need, though twenty persons should
use it.

If the water will not run to your Cesterne, These forces as also the great
washer you shall buy at the Queens Brasiers in Lothbery at the Bores head.
you may with a force of twenty shillings, and a pype of eighteen pence the
yard, force it from the lowest part of your house to the highest.

But now on the other side behold the Anatomy.

This is Don AIAX-house, of the new fashion, all in sunder, that a workman may
see what he has to do.
Here are the parts set down with a rate of the pryses, that a builder may
guess what he has to pay. A. the cesterne stone or brick, prise. 0. 6. 8.
B. D. E. the pype that comes from the cesterne, with a stopple to the washer.
0. 3. 6.
C. a wast pype* 0. 1. 0.
F. G. the stem of the great stopple, with a key to it. 0. 1. 6.
H. the form of the upper brim of the vessel or stool pot.
M. the stool pot of stone, prise. 0. 8. 0
N. the great brass sluice, to which is three inches current, to send it down a
gallop into the Iax. 0. 10. 0 And least you should mislike with this phrase I
had it in a verse of a grave author, that was wont to walk up and down the
Court, with a forest bill, I have forgot how it begun (like a beast as he was)
but it ended in ryme.




O that I were at Oxenford, to eat some Banberie Cakes.

I* the seat with a peke deuaunt for elbow room, the whole charge 30.
shillings eight pence, yet a mason of my masters was offered thirty pounds for
the like. Memorandum the scale is about half an inche to a foot

Here is the same all put together, that the workman may see if it be well.
A. the Cesterne.
B. the little washer.
C. the wast pipe.
D. the seat board.
E. the pipe that comes from the Cesterne.
F. the Screw.
G. the Scallop shell to cover it when it is shut down.
H. the stool pot.
I. the stopple.
K. the current.
L. the sluice.
M. N. the vault into which it falls: always remember that () at noone and at
night, empty it, and leave it half a foot deep in fair water. And this
being well done, and orderly kept, your worst privy may be as sweet as your
best chamber. But to conclude all this in a few words, it is but a standing
close stool easily emptyed.
And by the like reason (other forms and proportions observed) all other
places of your house may be kept sweet.




Your worships to command T. C. traveler.

But pah: All this is sweetened with this one sentence. Humani nihil a me
alienum puto.
what have I talked off all this while? of AJAX? Pa-pe, what an unsavory
argument is this? Nay fie, I marvel you would read it. I have lost all my
credit with our wenches, if they hear that my pen has thus polluted my
paper. But alas, Or, dulcia non meruit qui de(...)ignatur ama(...)a.
it is but my fortune and not my fault; I am forced thereto; when the Master
is in the Imperative mood, the man must obey in the Present tense, Fidelis
seruus (...)petuus Asi(...)us.
though he should be thought for his labor, As in praesenti, perfectum format
in aui, vt no nas knaui, etc. Quae mala sint Domini, quae ^erui commoda ^ascis.
Well, yet you see I have not forgot all my Grammar. Iwis it were better for us
seruingmen, if you Masters, would do more in the Dative case, ^ondile, qui
^^uum, tege^ esse diu.
and speak less in the Imperative moodes. If you will be lecherous, we must
be bawdes; if you will be quarellous, (...)y your lea(...) masters.
we must be ruffians: and now my Master plays the Physitio^, I must be
Potycarie. If he cast the water, I must minister the clyster, what is the
remedy? Delirant domini, famuli plectuntur: iniquum est.
The men still bear their Masters sin,
But little justice is therein.
But a great many of my Masters betters, may say for themselves: Meae
(contendere noli) stultitiam patiuntur opes. Horace.

To strive with us it is but vain,
Our wealth our follies will sustain.


Wherefore now to say somewhat for my self, and as it were to play one bout in
mine own defense (for if Zo^lus have already bitten at my Masters banquet, it
may be some Momes will mock me, for my short pittance.) First thefore to
answer some Ciceronia^s, Nolo ster^^^ curiae dici glauciam.
that maintain that such a word as Stercutius should not be named in
civility. (To omit, that where he condemns it, there he uses it, De orat.
157. Supra stercus iniectum.
and in one place beside) but I would ask some Rhetoric Reader (for
sometimes, Eloquence has thought it good, De diuina. 92.
to give the sword and buckler place) whether it be not as civil a phrase to
say, Stercutius is made a Nowne Adjective, as these few that I will here
recite, which if I should English, they world make some perhap cast up their
gorges. Oration in Pis^n^m.
Against Piso, a great noble man, his better in birth, his equal in office.

Cum hac me peste and labe confero? Meministicaenum; nescio quo egurgustio te
prodire obuoluto capite soleatum? Pauci tua lutulenta viti^ noueramus. Epicure
ex hara product^.
faetidam nobis popinam exhalasti. Vnde it is nos partim turpissime respondendo,
partim faedissime eructando eiecisti.

And against the worthy Anthony (whom so noble pens have celebrated) mark
what he says, and where? even in the Senate: But first, you must imagine that
Anthony had had a little mischaunce, while he sat in Judgment on the Bench
(perhaps some foolish Orator, that could not tell a slouenly tale cleanly had
bin arguing, of purgare and reficere cloacam.) Whereby the noble man being
queysie, laid open his stomach, and Tullie, owing him a grudge, a year after
lays it in his dish, in these sweet words.

Orem non modo visu faedam; O matter sloue^ly to be seen, to be heard
hateful, etc.
sed etiam auditu etc. In caetu po. R. negotium publicum gerens, cui ructare
turpe esset, is frust is escule^tis, vinum, redolentibus, gremiu^ suu^, and
totu^ tribunal impleuit.

Thus you see you M. T. C. when it pleased him, to displease others, would use
words as bad as the best of us.

But to argue succinctly (as they call it) I say, that that some call
scurrilitie, in this book* is indeed but a check to scurrilitie. I will prove
it. Gra^maria^s. Musicians. Daunsers. Fensers.
Teachers of all sorts, when they will teach one to mend his fault, will show
the fault in themselves first. Also the incomparable Poet of our age, to give a
most artificial reproof of following the letter too much, co^mits the same
fault of purpose.

You that do Dixionarie method bring, Sir P. Sid.

Into your rymes, running in rattling rows.
Further this book, A good trial of what spirit a book is written.
where it seems most loose, mark if it do not stop rather then open all
gaps of lasciviousness.

But least some bad disputers, confessing the premises to be true, This is to
you that be Scholars.
should deny the conclusion, let me deal Sillogistice in mood and figure.
And that the Sillogisme may be suitable to the proposition, A Sillogisme in
Bocardo.
let it be in the third figure the fifth mood called Bocardo.

Some homely words in necessary matters are not to be condemned. Mayor.


But all ages, all writers, all states, Minor.
have used these words in these matters.

Ergo, Conclusion.
the title of the book should not be condemned Now if any be in so fierce a
figure, and in so angry a mood, that he will reduce all to Barbara, I think
we should chop logic best with such a one in ferio.

But if an argument be brought against us in the second figure, A Sillogisme in
the first mood of the second figure.
in a sober mood, and in the sacred name of Cesare; in this wise:

No words obscenous, scurrill, and sordidous, 1
should come to modest, chaste, and virtuous ears;

But all words concerning the subject of the book, 2
are obscenous, scurrill, and sordidous:

Ergo, no part of the book is approuable. 3
Faith, then we are all non plus. I would our festino, had been caelarent; for
there is no denying nor replying to that mood, but only say, God save the
Queen, and pray for the Psalm of mercy.

Well, Egles stoop not at flies.
yet I trust how ever my master speeds I shall do well enough. Aquila non capit
muscas. Wherefore to conclude, and to grace my self a little with you and your
friends, let me tell you some of my adue^tures. A servants boast you know is to
be like his master, lo then how many ways I can liken me to him, First we
are near of an age, 1. This I learn of my cousin M. Tomas Cicero to praise my*
self.
past our fool age, neither young nor old.

Both of a complexion, enclining to the oriental color of a Croydon sanguine.
2


Like in Disposition, 3
not idle, nor well occupied.

One of my kin did teach him at Eaton, 4
and one of his kin taught me at Oxford.

We have been beyond sea, 5
but never out of the Queens dominions. Milford. Waterford, because it is on
this side the English pale.
In England beyond Wales. In Ireland on this side England, where we saw young
children mothers at xi, young women old at 23. we saw some fair with little
dressing, fat with scant feeding, and warm with thin clothing.

Excellent Religion; The 1. they call Gods service.
Mass in the morning, The 2. they call the Queens service.
common prayer at noone; The 3. some think the devils service.
common daunsing at night; we went as undertakers thither; we came back
ouertake^, as for those that mocked us so, God and our Lady, and one more go
with them.

Since this travel we have been both Poetical, 6
and I Musical and Pictorical, and though we may lie and steal by authority,
yet we are taken for true men, and have help to hang thieves.

At this hour some of our friends, 7
think us worthy of better fortunes the^ we have, but none is our friend so
much to help us to the^.

We have played, and been played with, 8
for our writings. Si quis quod fecit, patiatur ius erit equu^. If you do take
but such as you give, it is one for another, but if they that play so, would
give us but a piece of gold for every good verse we think we have made; Now
if the man such praise will have.
we should leave some of the^, but poor fellows. But soft, The^ what must he
that keeps the knaves Dametus in Arcadia.
if I should tell al, he would say, I am of kin to Sauntus Ablabius. It is no
matter, since he makes me to write of Sauntus Acacchius.

But now, that you may know I have been a dealer in Emblemes, I will conclude
with a devise not sharp in conceyte, It is good to set a name to the book:
For a book without name may be called a libell.
but of venerable antiquity, and yet by my masters own computation, it is not
so ancient as Dame Cloacyna, by 1800. years and more. Now riddle me what name
is this.

The (grace of God) guides well both age and youth*
Fly sin with fear, as harmless (hare) does bound,
Like precious (ring) embrace more precious truth,
At (tun) full of good juice, not empty sound,
In these right s^and. My sa^mos name is found.

