ULYSSES upon Ajax.

Written by Misodiaboles to his friend Philaretes.

Printed at London, for Thomas Gubbins. 1596.

Misodiaboles the worshipful, to Misacmos the right worshipful.
MIsacmos, I have spent 3. days in idle hours, to examine the months of your
meditations on a lothsom Ajax, and I find them so unsavory, as it is
impossible for you to be a sauer by the^: your pen has dropped excrements, and
you cannot wipe them clean with your wit. Alas, that so long filed, should
so filthily be defiled: you have spent labor without reason, and are seen for
a spectacle of folly, to those that cannot see without their spectacles.
Because the world laughes, you think it applaudes: but the most part that
outwardly smile, do inwardly pity. A good wit, and a gross subject, so much
I allow you: but if your ambition must needs clime, it is more comely in a
courteors habit, then in a fools antique. That I see your imperfections, I
make your self judge: that I pity your errors, my sparing reproof may
assure you. That I am ambitious as your self, I protest it, with discretion:
yet it greeues me that two good wits should wrestle for a dunghill. Come
come witty Misacmos, ouerlooke how I have looked over you. If this April
shower cleanse you, I will forbear the tempest. For as I am a Germane in nature
(who hate detractions) so can I be both a Molossian and Melitean dog, as
occasions are offered me. Would Misacmos be famous? why I yield him the means:
he is a courtier in regard, I a courtier in hope: he rich in ancient demeasne,
I in good demesne: he sprightly and witty; I diligent and pleasant: a lady
blessed his children, and God and our Lady my Lady mothers sons: he a Lincolnes
Inn man, I belonging to Lincoln. If any odds be, he has the interest of
money, I of Rea ding. Now sir: if from the means of a privy, he will become a
public gentleman, after this assault, let him bury his Ajax in a dunghill.
Then perusing his books, walking in his suit of Abrizetta, eating fat Capons,
and Venison, and drinking pure hypocras, let him make election of his readings,
and choose out a probable Subject, have with him from a fart, to all arts, I
refuse no encounter: let us jest like gentlemen, argue like scholars, be
pleasant without ^ailing, that good wits may gather treasures from our
travels, and our selves eternity by well deserving: If you rise by my fall, I
think my fall happy to make you rise: and if it be your destiny to sincke in
the incountry, though the desert be wholly mine, I give you the half of the
glory. If Ajax were the froath of your wit, let it die, as to weak for my
forces, and if one Cullis of conceit be left, yet play not the gormand, let
the world have part with you. Take the choice of the weapon, I offer every
advantage: if you will strive in wit, I am merry without detraction: but if you
play the scolde in steed of a scholar, I protest it will grieve me: for I
know the Echo of my wrongs will make double report in your ears: for renewing
my disgrace, you may live in your dishonors. Come, let us walk through Virtues
temple, and so sacrifice to Honor: and if Romans observed that custom, let
Christians use it. Otherwise, both of us may say as the duke of Northumberland
did to the lord Gray, as they rid through Shordich; The people press to see
us, but none say, God speed us, Pauca sapienti, I leave you to your sops and
muscadine. Protesting that if any offense come, it shall be by your seeking.

Misodiaboles.

Misodiaboles and his opinion of Misacmos and his metamorphosed Ajax, written
to his dear and learned friend Master Philaretes.
PHilaretes upon your entreaty and in satisfaction of my promise, I have
perused Misacmos and his metamorphosed Ajax, and not only pleasantly
ouerlookt it and laughed at it my self: But also communicated and commended the
work to the censure of many learned and discreet gentlemen; who (to be plain
with you) after they had red and conceited it, thought Auban: lib: 1 ca: 6. de
omni gent. rit. and morib.
it worthy no better usage then the brides have among the Nasamones a people of
Africa, who the first day of their marriage are both used, abused, and defiled
by all the guestes and strangers that accompany the festival. One said (as
Apollidorus did of Chrisippus works) that if other men's sentences were taken
out of his book, the rest would be fit for nothing but wast paper. An other
that he Bouchet au 3. Seree.
had plaide as mad a prancke as the malcontented fish wife in Bouchet, who
under pretense to shame others that had shrowdelie angered her, turned up her
naked tail in the market place to show the dominicall letter B in her
buttockes. An other said that as (according to Aubanus) Aethiopia was
mou^tainous toward Auban lib. 1. cap: 4 Horace. Mou^ corn^ cula risum nudata
furtiuis coloribus. Plin. cap: 21. lib. (...)
the west, sandy in the midst; and desert in the east: So this book was full
of ostentation and protestation in the end, barraine in the midst, and dull
in the beginning. Another compared it to Horace crow decked with many sethers.
An other to the herb Ferula which is only a pleasant food for asses, but a
poison to all other beasts. There were some that said that Misacmos wit was
lighter then Archestratus body: yet Mercurial: lib: de decorat: cap. 8.
both Aelian and Atheneus say this of him; That being taken by his enemies,
and wayed in a balance, he and his prophesying spirit were lighter then a
halfpenny. All which judgments as I commend them not for true, so I condemn
them not for false, but only leave them to his defying, and defyning, who
would feign sweeten A^iax by his wit and authority. Touching mine own
opinion (because you expect it, and the world may thoroughly know it) I will
observe Platoes law in it, and so apply my words to the subject, that I may
rather seem an apt and modest pleasant in writing truth, then a foul mouth
Critic in reproving bitterly, (not being untaught Gregor. in Ezechiel: lib.
1 Homel. 21 Ecce hoc est magisterium disciplinae, vt culpis and discrete ^ou
erit parcere, and pie resecare.
by Gregory descreetelle to spare, and aptly to reprehende offenses): Yet
would Philaretes should know, (because these times expect it) that as I will
forbear (...) and detraction as a fault; so (in as much as the obscenitie of
the subject will suffer me) will I observe (...) (pleasant and scholler-like
vrbanitie) which was admitted among the Grecians, and commended in Cicero.

Thus therefore in short touching this mouldie Metamorphosis: It is an affecta
tion of singularity; a fruit of discontent; a superfluity of wanton wit; a
madding with reason; a diligence without judgment; a work fit for Voluminous
the iester not Misacmos the cour teour. In form contrary to all rules of
science: In matter indecent, filthy and immodest: and touching the authorities,
they are so weak and so wrested, as no chaste or christian ear may in reason
endure them, which if I prove not by reason as I profess in words, let
Philaretes disclaim me for his friend, and Misacmos shake hands with me for a
fool; This is fair play my masters when I use friends with this equality.
Touching the form, Perseus scarre sits in Misacmos forehead; Scal. lib. poet.
3. cap. 98.
Ostentat obstrusam eruditionem, he labors to show much reading and profound
learning: and beside that is too formal which is no less grace in him then it
was in the Nun who (to cover her naked top from two Friars whom she let into
her monestarie) hastily discovered her tail, cum multis alijs quae nunc
perscribore longum est. Shall I rip up obscenitie in words as filthy as ever
Iuuenal used? shall I say that in detracting, and taxing sins, he instructs
them? ah las no, the world sees it, and as the welsh man said of the Comedy
before the Queen, I laugh, my cosen Peter laugh, Dauie ap Powell laugh, and
the Queen laugh, what a Hysteron Proteron is here to show the laughing at a
forced folly, a dull jest, and his idleness? Well on before (quoth Susembrotus.
the procession) hold up your torches for dropping, we shall have more mirth at
our next meeting. Where left I? at the stool? no let Misacmos see to it, it
was in the form, so so now let us descend to the subject: Subiectumcirca quod,
subauditur Ajax. Then Ajax is the subject: In good time say, but which Ajax I
pray you, was it that Ajax Telamonius, who won honor by his courage, and
madness by his discontent? whose mind too great for his fortune, made his
passion too strong for his reason? Toto erras coelo, he has no need to be so
mannerly. Oh I conceive him, I conceive him, he abhorres Aequiuocations it is
a iakes in deed that he means without all saving your reverence: Who
persuades him to this Paradox? Tarletons authority, and his cousens
encouragement.

Go to, the first diede; a fool for his labor, the next may smell of it while
he lives, and howsoever Misacmos stir him in the service, it will be but a
stinking stir tho he stir whilst he stiffle. I, but many have writ of
worse subjects, and why not he of this? A good reason, learnt be that
conclusion in Cambridge? Faith it shall never do him credit, no more then did
the Curates Argument, who applied the authority of his Horse against those
that denied purgatory.

Fie fie, who knows not this, that an evil custom is no instance for an
other to follow it? and that it is too weak an answer in a wanton, to excuse
her self by saying, forsooth my mistress taught it me? Men are richest in
infirmity, and weakest in foresight, apt to entertain privy pleasures,
ignorant to reform them, who therefore limiteth his studdies by others
industries, and rather observes what othermen do, then what he ought to do;
rowleth Sisiphus stone to his own misery, and is foolishlie diligent to
register his own infirmities.

A las alas has the good gentleman no friends to tell him this, that it is
better to suffer a few surfit in their own sins, then for him to communicate
with them in their courses, causes and shame? I will talk with his friend, and
mine, (the Chaplain of Lincons Inn) about this point, and he shall inform him.

Now sir, what is next? The petiagree of Ajax, prevented with the authority of
Rabbelais, (a condemned Athiest by the last counsel of Trent) and some
course fictions (as filthy as Iyllyan of Braindfords fartes,) wherein (as the
vomitte of a corrupt and envious mind:) Holinsheds Chronicle has a quippe,
and Hale the old Counsailer has a lie for his labor. Well well, it were good
Misacmos considered this of Plautus. Plaut. iu Bacaludib.


Eia Lide leniter qui saeuiunt sapiunt magis. Plaut in Bucaludib. Mercurial.
lib. de deco. rat. cap. 8.


The bush that lent him a thorn to prick them, will aford a thousand to gaul
him, except he be as fat as Nichomachus of Smirna, who could not feel a pin
thrust into his buttocks, or stir nor touch his back parts he was so gross
in the belly. To the petigree the petegree, for there is the mystery (the
misery Il a trouue le febue au gaste ^u.
I should say, and the sruite of much idleness:) Stercutius or Saturn the
great grandfather: how prove you this? he first brought up in Italy the
dunging and mannuring of earth, Ergo he is grandfather to A-iax: I deny the
argument. By whom shall it be tried? by the old Tusean husbandmen at this
day, and those in Romagna and about Rome, who being taught by Saturn the
trimming of their vines, have likewise learnd to fatten their mould by burning
them after the time of their vintage: Would not this puzle Misacmos invention
Philaretes if it were well followed? He is a Lincolns Inn man, a toward
fellow, Rafe Wilbram the pleasant witted Barister knows him, and for his sake
in perpetuam hominis imbecillitatem (memoriam, I should have said) I remitte
it. On a gods name, Quidnouarum rerum, what new matter follows? Lies worse
then Lucians, which being affected are more ill favored, and howsoever he
understand Omne verbu^ otiosum quod lo quutifuerint homines, etc.
them, he shall not be able to stand under them: Verba otiosa, idle words,
which (if the Apostle fail not) must be soundly answered for; not spirando
ambitionem in a latin style, sed lamentando incuriam, before a severe judge.
Songs worse then the Priapies of Virgil forbidden by Plato in his fourth book
of laws, and by the law of the twelve tables condemned among the Ethnique
Romans; A song not less filthy then that Tertulian in Apologia Eusebius,
Nicephorus li. 1. Ciril. epi. 20. 6 inter epistolas Augustini. Gregory's
limitation of the defense o song.
which the Pagans used in the primitive Church, or more prodigious then that
for which Cirils kinseman was condemned to hell fire: A song wherein words are
idle, wanting both rationem iustae necessitatis and intentionem piae
vtilitatis, the reason of just necessity, and intention of godly profit.
What Is the hymn? Suitable absurdity to the song; a preposterous show of
reading, where notwithstanding there appears some error, (in dividing Aetius
the heriticke from Atheos,) if ancient and ecclesiastical histories may be
believed. Touching the Etimologies of Ajax, what think you of them? Faith they
are triuiall, the froth of witty John Watsons idle jests, I heard them in
Paris 14. years ago: besides, what balductum play is not full of them, as
this? Nose quasi no hose, Capon, quasi cap one, I would Misacmos would be
covered: who lives not could not ad more if he made profession to be idle.
Rumsey, my Lord of Pembrokes Iester is full of them, if Misacmos want coppie,
he will instruct him. For his friend Philostilpnos, (with whose name he ends
this vnsauered induction) I would feign know his godfathers to chide them for
his bringing up: for he has raised up a sent) by his encouragement) far
worse than the Popes legate, who brought the last Iubile into France; who
fearing the Pages, who by custom bustled about him to divide his Canipie, and
suspecting Treason among them; so dainelie laid that you wot of in his
britches, enough I warrant you to feast Ajax for one meal if he were a
hungry. I am thus pleasant contrary to my custom, to let Misacmos know his
own counterfeit in my Plut. Tom. 1. in vit. licurg. fol, 118.
glass, using therein the customs of the Spartanes, who (to bring their
children in hatred of drunkenness,) caused their slaves to drink great store
of wine, and in their presence to sing illiberal, and lascivious songs, and use
antique and filthy actions, knowing that example as it breeds encouragement,
so it yields and inforceth shame. Thus much for this Philaretes, now descend
we to the rest.

Misodiaboles examination of Misacmos authorities, and arguments.
1 Wherein he finds scriptures abused profanely, 2 Learned men reproved
unjustly, 3 And observations employed wickedly. Sic tres sequuntur tria.


NIcke Beomond (a witty and pleasant gallant) being one day invited to a rich
gentleman's table, who took delight to hear himself speak, perceiving many
matters begun by him, and no man suffered to answer, at last (with a knock
or Aut Tussi, aut crepitu, a man may fart by authority of Erasmus.
a hem to make the thing mannerly) he let me a round crack that was heard
throughout the company, which the host stomaking and the rest merely laughing
at, tut tut said he (to the gentleman) you must not be angerie, for if you
will not hear us at one end you shall not choose but both hear and smell us
at the other.

In like sort (if not less clenlie) does Misacmos handle the world, who
perceiving some his precedent works either by wisdom obscured, or reason
contemned; his Ariosto bawdie, condemned by a counsel: his translation
barrain and servile (such as Horace disdaineth) seeing the world so full of
Horat. lib. de. art. poet. Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus Interpres
mark this Misacmos.
good wits generally read and applauded, and himself so unworthy as he
cannot be heard; in a malcontented humor in stead of a witty treatise, has
turnde me out to light his vnsauored Ajax; which howsoever clothed like an ape
in purple (as he himself confesses) and perfumed with his iestes (which would
make a man smell though he were of Alexanders complexion) is worse and more
stinking then Beamondes fart (by three ounces of Troy weight) though himself
hold the balance and poise them. For which cause how happy had he been, if
in steed of Cloacina, he had honored and sacrificed to Numaes goddess
Tacita, since Plutarch To^ in vita Nume:
in his silence he had proved wise, where in his discourse he is condemned for
inconsiderate: And in him rightly appears the misery of the curious, (and
the mark of folly, whereby men were signed after Adams fall,) who biting his
fingers, beating his brains, loosing his repose, and scantling his repaste, to
attain an opinion of deserte in the world; has condemned himself, in
censuring others, gathered a handful of evil wind, to loose it in a breath
of short life, being sure to leave nothing eternal after him, but his
ambition without measure, his envy without reason, and his labor without
fruit: which that your judgment may apprehende, as my words do express it,
consider wisely what I write, whilst I set down faithfully that which I
have Grego. in Izechi. lib. 1. ^o. 7
considered.

It is Gregory's opinion that a good work must have discreet eyes: And
Scaliger thinks it is the better half of the felicity in a poem to have a
good subject: for who so imployeth his wit to inuente, and his pen to set
down, a frivolous matter in good words, fares like yoonge children, that
score out their castle in the sand, which are defaced with every breath of
wind. Wit, and folly drawing in a yoke, reasons chariotte is ouerturned;
and a curious workman caruing a knottie timber, shall have toil without
end, for his election without Judgment: A croopt shoulder is a blemmish how
soever it be boulstered, and who paintes an old face, shall hardly hide the
wrinckles.

Such a subject is only sit for a virtuous and learned Misacmos, as in his
own naked perfection (like Architas the musitions Lute) can speak for his
own Master. Does not he want election that in a whole field of corn
pickes out one cockle to labor on? and wants he not discretion, that having
a whole field of virtue before him, Phylosophies of either kind, sciences of
great observation, wordlie casualties to merease judgment, alteration and
disposition of policy (an excellent subject) had rather with Daphidas be held
a rayler, with Menedemus a seller of tryfles, with the fools of the world, a
looser of time; then with the learned Timon. de Mened. Ille supercilium tollens
and vendere nugas etc.
of his coat, an honor of his Country? Ah las for this man, who takes glory
to boast of that filthiness which brute beasts (by natural instinct) after
they have purged themselves do cover. What judgment has this man that
strives to find a law of reason, against the law of reverence? Children
disabled to help themselves, are notwithstanding taught by their nurses to
give modest warning; and those of discreet years (though never so unnurtured)
find many necessities of nature to be done, that are not plainly to be
talked off. A circumlocution and a blush is sufficient to interpret a filthy
necessity, whereas he that takes pleasure in speaking that which infirmity
forces or lust draws him to do, shall have a tongue worse then his tail,
though the worste of the tail be the T, with his complements: Shall I be
pleasant a while and trifle like Misacmos, and wax as impudent at he was that
showed his tail to the Senate, Consuls, and Pretors in judgment? Not no
neighbors not so, but as clenlie as we can (quoth the maid when she wypt
her dishes with the dogs tail.) What think you of this jest my masters?
give your opinion of their clenlinesse. A certain grocers wife walking through
the streets, (and holding up her gown behind her, because the weather was
durtie,) met with a merry companion; who desirous to laugh and be fat,
spurde her after his merry manner this homely question; Misteres said he I
pray you sell me some of your spices whilst your hand is in the box. To
whom she answered; (trussing up her gown more higher;) Sir if you have a
months mind to them, put your hand into the box, and boldly take them: Was
not this more seemly for her to answer then with Misacmos flatly to have
told all to her utter discredit? What think you of this likewise? Did not the
husband talk more seemly, that said an old ship is always leakie, then
if he had said in Misacmos broad language) his wise had bepist the bed? I
could tell you more as he has done (out of that most learned author the book
of merry tales from whence his best iestes are derived) but that as the old
Manciple of Brasennose College in Oxforde was wont to say; There are more
fools to meet with.

Lucius Catiline accused by Marcus, Cicero for raising a flame in the City, I
believe it said he, and if I Valerius: lib. 9 cap. 11.
cannot extinguish it with water, I will with ruin: Into the like intemperance
is Misacmos fallen, who having kindled a fire of folly by publishing his
filthy A-iax, since he cannot color it with modesty, will countenance it
with wrested or wicked authorities (whereby religion is soonest ruinate.) But as
the Be loses his life by employing his stinge to wound others, so shall the
world easelie perceive that the sword whereby he defends himself shall be his
own death, and those authorities and arguments (whereby he seeks to entangle
others) are the verie-nets, trappes, and toils to ensnare himself. To beat
out therefore a plain path in tracting whereof we may easelie discover his
treatcherie, consider a while in Misacmos his reasons and authorities. How
approves he the praising or writing upon A-iax? Mary thus; Men once in 24.
hours visit him, if they be in health, Ergo the homlimes of the name, and
praise of the same may be borne withal, temples to be raised, genealogies to be
reckoned up, Aetimologies to be sought, Hymns and Dirges to be devised, filthy
and immodest iestes to he used, etc. Non sequitur, non sequitur, you may be
ashamed of it: Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua, Paul. (...). ad Corin.
cap. 8.
evil words corrupt good manners, (says both Paul and Menander); how
brooks Misacmos that counterbuffe? very easelie: The intent of the speaker
makes them badde. Pardon me, pardon me, Paul says the word, not the intent.
Intent is the corruption of the heart, but words the poison of the tongue.
Go to, go to, let us grant that out of the abundance of the heart the
tongue speaks, and that men form their badde words according to their
depraved thoughts. Now tell me this; whether a child yoonge in years,
toward in apprehension, dearly beloved by his parents, cockered by his
mother, learneth his swearing, idle speaking, cursings and blasphemies, by the
cuill intent, base mind, or filthy conceit of his father, (perhaps
breaking out into such impieties in his choler) or by the words spoken,
undoubtedly no ways intended by him to deprave his child? In deed that is
somewhat more then his host told him; But let it be, let it be, (said the
maid when the yoonge man kissed her,) we must have matters of more weight to
work upon Misacmos. Now therefore consider his groundworke and positions:
The use of homely words says he, is to be borne with in necessary
matters: How proves he that? Esaias compares our justice panno menstruatae,
the scripture uses, Anos aureos; the Psalm percussit eos in posteriora:
Exodus of Stigma, or Prepuce, Paul of Stercora, Saul went into a cave, vt
purgaret ventrem. Therefore Misacmos may write of A-iaxes, because a necessary
matter; write of shiting, because a necessary matter, let him beshite the
canuas that concludes so, though he stood to be proctor; For the words
precedent and before alleged, as they be in the scriptures, are, (as Misacmos
implies and confesses) properly to beat down sin and sensuality, but
not lewdlie to be inuerted by him in maintenance of his scurrilitie and
ribaldrie. For if he consider the scriptures as he ought, and deeply weigh
with the fathers, that the most words have their mysteries; he shall find,
this dragging of verbal scriptures unchristian like into his cause, is a very
pranke of Arius; Qui verba scripturarum simplicia sicuti in eis expressa
reperiuntur, itidem vt diabolus assimulauit. Who like the devil sinfullie
wrested the simple words of the scripture, as they are expressed in the same
(if Eusebius lie not;) who ever of all the fathers has taken on him this
custom? who ever this looseness of liberty? who ever this lightness of
vanities.

Augustine he says, that when any thing is found in the history of the
sacred scriptures, that see meth absurd or contrary to good manners, the
historical sense is to be left, and the metaphorical and mixed, is to be
embraced; and the reason is, because the sacred history contains nothing
which is not true, and consonant and agreeable with good manners: and an other
(agreeing therein, with Isodorus) says S. August. lib. 3. de doct. Christ.
cap. 5. and 1. Isodore. lib. 1. de sum. bone cap. 9. Nich. de Blo. ser. 38. D.
Oportet sic historam tenere, so ought we to keep the history, as that we
interpret it morallie, and understand it spirituallie: who therefore deals
otherwise, by the general concent of the fathers, may be termed a rash man
in applying scripture in that manner, which peruerteth the nature, order and
meaning of the same.

Ah las for Misacmos, (I mean, not a less for his bed, but ah las for his
folly,) let him leave his building gay Priuies, and get him good masters: for
it is more necessary to fill the head with true knowledge and christian
lerning, then to empty the belly of loathsome excrementes: Out upon this
wresting, it drives all wit out of harmony. Then pray Misacmos to leave it,
for I swear to him he shall never get three Bishopprickes in one year, as
Woolsey did for this doctrine, why this is worse then welchin steed of Hebrewe
in Doctor Propriums sermon.

Nomo contra vnanimem consensum patrum ipsam scripturam sacram allegare audeat:
(says the counsel of Trent,) Let no man dare allege the holy scriptures
contrary to the general concent of the fathers. Tut Misacmos cares not for
them they are too precise for his purpose. Let Gregory (in his seventh
homely on Ezechiell) say the scripture in words contains Pal: de figur:
sacrae Bib.
mysteries; Let Paleologus vow that the whole body of hystoricall scripture is
a school of moral discipline, and hidden doctrine; but he is a dunce. Let
Jerome talk of Anagogia, Tropologia and Allegoria, which united (with
history,) Jerome ad paul.
contain the whole matter of the Bible. Let him say of Deuteronomie, that it
is Euangelicae legis' praefiguratio; of Esaias and Ieromie, Quis potest
intelligere vel exprimere? It matters not for the words, Misacmos will abuse
them, he will dignifie his Ajax by disgracing your scripture. But hark I pray
you Philaretes what Jerome concludes, Haeresis dicitur Graece ab electione eo
quod sibi came eligat disciplinam quam putat esse meliorem. Quicunque igitur
scripturam vel scripturae verba intelligit aliter, quam spiritus sanctus
efflagitat a quo scriptura est, licet ab Ecclesia non recessit, tamen
Haereticus appellari potest. Heresy the Jerome super Gal.
Greek word (says he) is so called of election, because he that is
insected therewith, chooses unto himself that kind of doctrine which in his
own opinion he supposes to be best, whosoever therefore shall otherwise
understand either the scripture, or the words thereof, then the holy Ghost
requires (from whom the scripture is derived) although he has not departed
from the Church, yet may he be called an heretic. Let Misacmos gather how
he list vpoon this, he shall find the Puntilio of his hononr blunted, which
trust me, of set purpose, I handle thus in clouds without grating him to the
quick, because as Socrates did in Alcibiades, Effulgentem and magnum video
testimonium eruditionis and aegregiae indolis, Let him construe this if he
list, least the world should suspect what I mean not.

Now Sir if we descend to Cloacina (first deified or defied by Tatius^,) what
shall we say? but that in his readinges he has curiously observed matters of
less respect, and forgotten things of most decorum. For when Romulus and this
(draught deifie) the one Captain of the Romans, the other of the Sabines were
ready to wage battle, and by the entreaty of Hersitia and other ladies the
accord and league of peace was then concluded; A law was made in honor of
them as Plutarch witnesses. Ne ijs praesentibus quicquam obsoeni diceretur;
That no filthy or immodest speech should be used in their presence Now, sir,
had he marked and noted this priuieledge, as he was diligent in observing the
other, he had been more sparing in his loose speech, being taught modesty by
the very Ethniques themselves. And surely I think in my conscience it was a
chief cause why Romulus left Tatius death unrevenged, because he was so
superstitions in deifying a draught house. But perhaps he has read all
this and would observe none of it. Then may I sat with Valerius, Quod rectum
sit scit, sed id facere negligit: He knows that which is right, but he
neglects to do it; His Emblem and Elegy are pretty, and I have read
far wittier and better pende without the picture of a fellow in a square
cap, skummering at a pri^ u^e. And touching his observation of pictures, what
should I say in his commendation, but this. He has prettelie observed
absurdities; But should he pay for them as soundly as Captane Cheuilles
soldier did in Burbonois, he would beware of writing of shitten fingers,
whilst he lived. Which is his next descent? For soothe to Poets, Tireea
quatre cheuar.
and who marches foremost to fight the battle for him? Mar tial: Oh ho I
know wherefore he prefers him so much, it is because he read a Chapter
De Cunilinguis to him; he is very much behouldinge I promise you:

But what is this Martial? Faith a good wit ill employed like himself. This is
he, (I speak it in his commendations) that writ epigrams of Aethons farting
in the capitol, of his boys kiss; This is the incourager of letcherie, in
victor, Misacmos need Lib. 2. Epig. 78 lib: 11. Epig. 11.
not fear to allege him about Cacacanit, that gloried to fill Emperors ears
with flattery, bauderie and Sodomie. vaugh spurciciem, nugas. It is pity
that as in Catalogina, there is a law, that every Cuckold should pay a fine
or tribute; So among us there is not a statute that such as teach such
filthiness, should be publicly punished. I will not examine the Epigrams,
for they are too obscene to be looked upon; and who so rubbeth stinking
weeds, shall have filthy fingers. (Moore) ingenious, tho too ressolute, whose
learning deserved a better death, and whose death was accompanied with heroic
constancy. (Look how this Tode sucketh poison from the pleasant wit.) But he
that found the Merda, let him take it; and he that wresteth the Crepitus so
crookedlie, let him use it for a gale of his good fortune, till it blow him to
Cloacinas temple. For master Dauies epigram, I hold it for prittilie impure,
yet two bows and a half short of the cloute Haewod stuck in: and (by the way
for your self) a Young that will be old, (says thus) in behalf of old
Young that except you presently put one a habit of more conformity, if some
his enemies may promote you, you shall be the next dog shall be sacrifisd in
the Lupercalia, and therefore provide your self for it; (except you get a
bettertong into you head; or a modester pen in your hand.) Whither now
Misacmos? Cannot he who for piety is matchless, in lerning peerles, whose
judgment his friends admire, and enemies wonder at: cannot a spirit so
heavenly, a father so reverend, a Muse so sacred, escape your censure? Stoop
and shroud you night byrd, when this sun shines; he that clotheth religion
with simplicity and truth, clymeth highest by his humility, grows learned
in his zeal, and waxes famous by his diligence, may laugh at you, (whilst
like the Wolf you bark against the Moon) but you can not bite him. Come
come, a poor spring, sed by the Ocean of his wit: a little sparkle gathered
from his divine flame; a very worm of wit, a puney of Oxford, shall make you
more hateful then Battalus the huugry fiddler for this presumption.

Italici Angaei stabulum faedumque cloacam. Discit enim ci tius miminisque
libentius illud Quod quis de ridet quam quod probat and veneratur.


A te purgari Romanaque (...) tolli.

What fault is here? Forsooth an unapt metaphore. O gross, peevish and blind
absurdity! I challenge thee from the French to the Spanish; the Italian to the
Latin; the Greek to the Hebrewe: Run me over the whole library of baudrie,
thy legends of Athiesme, and prove me one metaphore better applied, and thou
shall be privy to me in my next necessities.

What fitter metaphore for so corrupt traditions, as our Church at this day
acknowledges, (the Church of Rome to yield?) which if it be glorious in so
sacred and matchless a maiden Princess, to exhauste and ou erthrow; it shall
be no indignity in her to admit the metaphore, (especially since) with such
decorum and art, he has couched it, as had Moore, Haiwoode, and the rest
observed; Misacmos might be ashamed to allege them. And what is that think
you? He has used Inu^nals modest moderation including that in Scal. lib. Po^.
3^ Cap. 98.
a Greek garment, which otherwise in his own tongue would seem uncomely.

But in this you fare like him I have read of in an author of yours, who
beginning to read a certain work of Erasmus entitled Moria, and having such a
Lege the book of merry tales, Tale 130. Fre learn to quote your plac^.
shallowe wit as Misacmos has, cast away the book, fearing he should fall into
some heresy, because the style was so high. I mean not that great style into
Mar^bone Park, near which the two Heroical and manly Knights fought there
Duellum: but Erasmus style which Misacmos has pretily met with, if he had some
of his pith and matter.

How proceeds he now? forsooth he heapeth on history.

To what purpose? to prove certain Emperors murdered privily, or at a privy,
or in a lakes, or at a Iakes; yet can I Lib Cro^ cum figur.
tell him this, that the Iakes Heliogabalus, (the last of the Antonini) was
dragged through per scurras, was per cloacaes by the sincks of Room, and through
the streets of Room, without all paraquestions quoth Tarlton, neither has his
knowledge attained all the secret of history on this subject beside Bassianus;
but that some of as serious observation are left for me: as that Traian the
Just of so famous memory, and Henry the seventh King of the Romans, both
died of the Discenteria alias dictus the laxatiue flux. Nabuchadonoser likewise
gave Zedechias (after he had made him dance and play before him a long while)
a laxatiue drink, so that like a beaslly old fellow (as there are many
According to an old ballad, and ^ll to be shitte was he was he
such betwixt York and London) totus deturpatus fuit he smelt as ill as your
AJAX.

Thus may Misacmos see that other men have examples of sent, (I would say
sense) as well as he, yet will I subscribe to him the dignity in all things.
First I acknowledge him as deep a Philosopher as Me^rocles who could never
argue without farting. I will set to my hand that he is well seen in a hawks
muting. Lastly I beseech Master Dalton to set up his name in Lineolnes In
privy, and register him there among the durtie writers of his time in steed of
a bastard Cronicle, because in his book, modesty is as hard to be found as
Adulteries in Sparta; and this done: O vos de Croidon o vos de rust^o Ro^don,
Bibite blakciackos pre gaudio soluite sackos.


Nay we will have yerses to which a dog shall not interpret: Here let the
people laugh, for here make I my breathing point.

Misodiaboles Perfume for filthy smells, containing a mad Purge for Misacmos
Lunacie of wit.
LIke as a good foldier in the beginning of a fight, first sends out his
light armed wings to begin the skirmish, and after brings on the battle,
wherein consists the force of his good fortune; so Misacmos (having distasted
us at first with certain homely fictions and vnciuell Epigrames) now marches
forth mainly with his Tatius, Tarquine, Claudius, Vespatian, Traian, Priscus,
and Hercules, by whose laws, proclamations, letters, and decrees, he laboreth
to approve, how carefully they provided, and diligently employed both their
time and treasures, for the building with great state, and the ordering without
annoiances, of vaults, common shoares, and sinckes: but without al
contradiction priuies. Touching which, as I consent with him in the three
first, so with the old dunce (Johannes de Portu Hibernico) Credo quod haud,
concerning the last. For though (besides Dollabellas caution, the office of
trium hominum, and many of that kind) I find care and dilligent provision made
for the common shoares: yet in particular name I am sure (except Misacmos him
self be interpreter) his foul breathed AJAX was never provided for. But I see
now it fares with him as with subtle sophisters, who wantyng matter to work
upon, do cavil upon words: For what signifies this Cloaca, on which he so
much works? fetch him Cooper (that learned father of famous memory) his
Thomas Thomasius (a diligent furtherer of good studies,) not with fie, fa,
fough, a smelles, but in plain dealing: What say they of Cloaca? a channel, a
gutter, a sink of a town, Cloacale flumen, besides (as Vlpian testifies)
there was Cloacarium, a certain fee or scot, paid to these tres bomines, the
suruayours of the common shoares, unless therefore (as in talking of all
kinds of grain) we set down Rye: For all millitarie and souldierlike
furniture, we nominate a dagger: so for all sinkes, shores, and vaults,
Misacmos use a privy, he shall get no more fame for this then Erostratus for
burning Dianaes temple. Well Gods blessing on his heart, Eras^us Apo^.
he is a toward young man, and has great cause to thank God for his knowledge,
(like the old dunce in Brazen nose college in Doctor Colmers time) who
coming from a school among certain sophisters, from a certain Quodlibet,
with a great sigh thanked god that now at last after seven years study in the
Predicables, he could define Proprium. Now fie upon it, fie upon it, what is
this to AJAX? you trifle, you are fond, marie that is true. Well, if this please
him not, let him stay till a second digestion, and he shall have Assets inter
main as assurance to prove how well I mean (...) among (...) Lawier 9.
him. Alas, alas how much I wrong him? believe me Philaretes, I am sorry for
my negligence; (...) I forget his succinct collection of history: his
compendious and apr obseru^o^s in the Emperors lives? God forbid nay you shall
have right Romain courage in me; praise for desert, though otherwise his
professed reprouer in ^ollie. What note? what note? Why thus much touching his
succinct observations out of the Emperors lives, I say (as Tully did of
Demostines oratio^s) I like that best, which is lo^gest. Yet for all this the
wo^lde apprehends his iud^scretio^; who trapping an ass in golden furniture,
sutin^ a course subject in rich ornaments of learning, has approved his great
wit, and little wisdom.

How more happy had it been for himself and more honorable for his
profession, to have observed the customs of the V^nctians and Germans? the
first of which banish b^llards from their counsels: and the next vouchsafe no
degree of learning, to any of them in their most famous Universities. Now if
in example of these, if his sentenses of condign merit, had been answered
with an apt, appropriate, and fit matter; nulla publica laudaetione indigeret
(as Valerius says of Romulus) his praise had been general, but in that Val.
lib. 3. cap. (...).
cleaving to rashness (the enemy ofendeour (and forsaking discretion) which as
Anthony the father said omnia laudabili fine concludit, ends all things
laudably Henri de vrmar. lib. 4. de perfect. int. hom. cap. 1.
he has betrayed his own fame to infamy. Qua E^am tum v^uit cum esse credas
mortuam. Plaut. in Pres.

Which then suruiues when thou beleeu'st him dead.

Who lives of any reading (were he content to surfeit in his folly) that with
A^ctrine could not talk of Nana? with an other of a red nose? with Perieres of
a pie and Piaux, I have seen an oration made in praise of a college custard,
and very much written in commendation of an ass; who in commending a goose,
could not bring in Plutarch to prove she was sacrificed to Juno; or in talking
of an ox, could not say it was ye stamp ye Athenians put on their money? say a
man were so foolish to make a book of lowsines, were it not possible for him
(that had red history) to bring in Scilla lousy, A^stus the son of Peleus
dying lousy, Mutiu^ Plutarch.
the lawier, Eunus the fugitive lousy; Arnolphus the Emperor lousy;
Phoerecides and Calisthenes lousy; or if this subject seemed too nittie, what
say you to Ioubert and his book of laughte^ the common place of faits (handled
in Bouchet) in helping a gentlewoman of the colicke?

Tut and I were set on a merry pin, I could write in praise of spindle
shankes, because Germanicus had such; and in commendation of pissing, bringing
in out of Valerius, the story of the Cretans, who beseidged by Metellus,
drunk their own piss. How vain a vain is this? Nay how vain is Misacmos
in his vain? trust me the very fear to hear of this folly, were sufficient
to make the domb son of Crassus to cry out mainely. How indecent is it for a
man, in years stayed, in birth noble, infortunes rich, in friends mighty, to
be so poor only in his discretion?

Better had it been and more worthy Misacmos learning to have digested custom
into a volume, and made a treatise of observations, wherein as especial, and
with more decorum (then he conceited) he might write how the privy that Arrius
died on, was hanged up ever after for a perpetual monument, till those of his
Heresy (to extinguishe Nicopli cap. (...) lib. (...).
the indignity thereof) raised and built a sumptuous house in the place. He
might gather out of Segonius, how capital it is amongst the Turks to dispute
on the laws of Mahomet, where amongst us here in England it is too common a
custom to break ours.

Besides if he would be pleasant and set down Ethnique heresies, what lets
him to remember that among the Turks it is an heresy to piss standing, and
here in England in Caesar's time, it was a profane thing to taste a hen, where
now a days it is good fellowshippe both to steal, and to roste it.

He might likewise seriously observe Diagoras banishment, who (more modester
Valerius lib. (...). Cap. (...).
then Misacmos) only wrote that he knew not the Gods, where he both knowing,
and reading, the Laws of God, and (which is most to be a bhorred) a Christian,
takes a felicity to pervert them.

But such is the custom of the world, and to blind the elections of men, that
the most part seek out the poisons of wit to corrupt the same and the world
like the maid (of whom Aristotle's comenter speaks) being accustomed to seed
on serpents, takes it now for a natural refection to nourish it self with
poison.

But return we to Misacmos teshe. I long to hear his conclusion: Forsooth and
please you the last part of his learned trea^se, is the manner and means how to
build clean, handsome and necessary priuies, not altogether of M. Dal^s built,
whom he handles (as Horace did Moecc^as) s^arce cleanly for his courtesies, but
with Hidraulique Engines a^ it seems (the manner whereof he has borrowed from
Vitruuius, or else taken some pattern from a travelers mouth who has seen the
Cardinal of F^rraras buildings at ^uolt) and truly of al his book, I hold
this the clenliest, since having devised and deified a Goddess so filthy, he
has at least wise found a cleanly conuyance to wash her f^e when she is too
slovenly.

But if with his patience I may speak, and by your courtesies be heard;
Philaretes, I dare promise a form, and prefer an invention, where (by the
help of wind ^as he by water) I will build you a priuye without Houldens wives
priuye fault, that shall neither far, foyste, nor stink, as she does in her
sleep; and how say you by that sir?



Mary Sir my Privy shall be a Round, (one of the five regular bodies in
Geometry) built like the tower of Babel, and upon vaults to, well tarras't
after the finest fashion: now for the tunnel I mean to raise it in the midst,
provided that diverse doors and windows shall be made on every side, that if
never so little wind blow (if a man be wetherwise) he shall be able to
empty his belly without diseasing his nose: et fiet say I (like the old end
of a doctors bill) I but how if no wind blow? mary then the poor milners in
Moore fields would be banckrout for their rents, and the witches to the
Northwards shall sell no merry gales to sailers for their money. Wier^s d^ pr^
^tigiis demon^ Carda^.
Let me not jest it out, it is a very great fault in my Colfabus; but thinks
Misacmos that he can escape me? no marie can he not as long as there is a escape
in my belly. Now what fault a Gods name?

Forsooth, he has provided no seemly glass windows for his AJAX, and by
that means he brings those that shall have use of it, into a great
inconvenience, and that shall I she we by an example (and the rather) because
exempla ^llustrant non probant. A certain gentleman of England going to
Bocardo to do sauereuere^ce, and having his quiver well furnished to offer on
Cloacinas Alter; after he had read a lecture of untruss, claps me a Corpus
cum causa on the face of Don AJAX, who darkning all the house with a frown of
his fury, made the poor gentleman groan and grin till he were disburthened.
Now sir, the privy dark and he in the heat of his service: behold (hold B. I
should have said) a maid of his being sick of Traianes disease and some what
laxatiue, notstaying the Qui vous la? or the word? but having her piece ready
chargd, lets fly into her masters lap at both ends, and set both her
winde-mill and water-mill a working. Out whore (quoth the Maysler) A'as, fie
upon me (quoth the maid) new clothes cries he with a vengeance, away runs she
bare arst without wiping.

By this example it were good Misacmos would bespeake Masons and Glasiers,
least sitting at his AJAX in great meditation on his Elegy; a maid of his
should serve a Lattitat on him and lay the ^bell in his bosom. How, say you?
is not this worthy deep consideration Philaretes especially, in so cleanly
Continu^. That is as neato as Lic^n in his app^l, and as manner he as (...)
country w^nch, (who^ the abbo^ ^ed) who instead of requesting le^ to dip ^ir
ca^ (...) (...) in the (...): d^sn, de^ bye Lo^ship that she (...) (...) her
a^e into his sa^ce. N^ta ^uod (...) ^ota nihil va^.
a gentleman as Misacmos? What, like you my advertisement? then have at it for
an other bout: And what is that? Mary it stands very much with the judgment
of Misacmos to alter this element of water (and if it were possible) and the
reason is, least some of Floras handemaides having Lots wives sickness, look
back on that she let fall in the water: Why what of this? Marrye a dangerous
thing, for since Ea quae per medium aquae apparent, groff^or avidentur, such
things as are seen in the water seem greater; it is to be feared least the
poor soul should take a strong imagination, and commit more trust to her
belly, then she can digest by her back parts. Yet an other, it must be ordered
(or taken order by Misacmos) that his AJAX have a door with a spring lock,
least some gentle woman going to speak with her-maid in priuity, have as il
fortune as a prity we^ch in my cu^try. Would you kno how it was, and what it
was? under promise you will show (Misacmos my good friend) how it hapened, I Will
instruct you. A certain noble man of England having two necessary delights
that accompany great fortunes; viz. a fair house to dwell in, and a fool to
laugh at: thinking it a decenter thing in him to chase his Iester, then for
Socrates to play with ^sla s^l. 1. (...). cap. 5.
Lamprocles, Ageselaus, to ride on a Reed with his son, and Architas to
play with his servants, one day in a merry and pleasant vain, drove him up
and down from chamber to chamber, (making him smart with a rod he carried in
his hand) he forest him into a necessary place where the close stool stood,
where the poor ass finding a wench at the privy, and very willing to defend
himself, because he was shrowdly pursued, he took her boldly in his arms
(her clothes about her ears) and bare it single on her buttockes. Now sir,
here grows a Quaere, and a Caution, in this place; the Quaeritur is, whether
if the poor wench had called on Cloacina for help, her Goddes-ship could have
delivered her? the Cautton, that henceforth both Misacmos (and whatsoever
builders) provide the^ sockes and doors to their AJAX, least some coy Dame
that fears to walk abroad without a mask, be so dainely scratched and ierke
over her face that has never a nose. Is not this gaye geere Philaretes? have I
not matched Misacmos at his own game^ believe me, beleeuemee, I blush as I
write, yet I write to make men blush.

For from my soul I protest, and to the world I publish it, that as the
compounders of Metbridate (before the whole body of the Venetian Se^ate) show
their simple poisons to make the^ known; and as the quacksaluers in Germany
swalow spiders in open assemblies to show the virtue of their confections: So
to let the world know, the poison of lewd language, to bring that in hate which
is now swallowed with too secure delight; I have swallowed those morssels,
which religion should not digest; and rather opened the cave to discover a
serpent, then to suffer men hedlong to post to hell on the back of vnciuell
pleasures. Ovid 1. (...). Impi^ sub dul^ m^lle ven^na (...)
Helleborum frustra cum iam cutis agra tumebit.
Poscentes videas, venienti occurrite morb^.
Prevent thy grief, in desperate estate: To many seek for remedy too late.

Thus far Philarites has thy friendship and Misacmos errors enforced me, yet
this style, and one field more, and thou have brought me home where I would
be: Come, come, tho the high ways are durtie, the fields are delightful, and
a little close of compass may have many trees of pleasure.

Me thinks I see thee wonder what story I have to tell thee, and smile to thy
self like lean Cicero, at the just reproof of this Cotta: Hark in thine
ear, Misacmos is a Satire, a quipping fellow: But sirrah, what if with the
merry Lord: in Homer, I should play the mad fellow, and aim at his Ulysses
head and polliticke pate with a neats foot? Do thou request me to do so?
why mine honest friend, I shall dispatch it quickly. But how? marry I shall
talk to him through thy letter, and teach him plainly that which I have
observed out of a French secretary: Que le trop cuider rouge les os, de l'sprit
iusques aux moesles de l'ignorance: that too much presumption Du Trauchi^ ^pi.
231.
gnaweth the bones of the spirit even to the marrow of ignorante: and that
when as malice and envy coupled with presumption and ignorance, bark against
the modestye of the virtuous, the fire refecteth to burn those that kindle it,
lighting those that are detracted from the ruins of the malicious, till they
have attained both the path and possession of honor.

Believe me (ill christened as thou are by thy Greek Godfather) as to
reprehend iustlye requires a due discretion, so to detract insriouslye, in a
great man, is a stain of honor, in a learned, a noat of irreligion, in all
sorts a plague of nature, rising from the thought of a corrupt, unbridled,
and sinful heart.

How much better matter had thou to remember, if thou have read much? and
what a thing oughst thou sooner forget, if thou regard socyetye?

But thou will say I have taxed none but such as deserve it: and yet I tell
thee (and therein tax thine indiscretion) that except thou have corrected
priuatelye, before thou have disgraced publiquelye, thou art a good Aristarcus,
but an ill christian. I prithee look back into the ages, and let my pen help
thy memory; and in the face of other men's falls, read thine own infirmities.
Whom has glory raised so high, that envy could not aim at? or virtue made so
temperate, that misfortunes could not torture? Who ever had felicity to
counsel, without weakness to fall? or his reason so strong that his passion
could not alter it? Alas Misacmos, it is a misery of wit thou art fallen into;
wherein the more thou art foulded, the more thou art fyled. Aemilus Paulus the
admired for constancy, yet was he contemned in poverty. (...) virtut^ ^solue.
The Marshall of S. Androw^ deuic^
Alexander the worlds wonder, though praise-worthye for his clemencye, in
ouercomming Darius: yet hated in his drunken furye, when he murdered Clytus:
So that his fortitude, liberalitye, magnanimitye, and continence, grace him not
so much, but that his unseasonable banqueting, inordinate excess, his ambition
in suffering the applause of his flatterers, his injuries to Calist henes, make
him subject to detraction. Alcibiades, astuiterer and inconstant, but that his
magnificence and bounty, redeemed those disgraces: Agesilaus a lover of his
citizens, yet suspected of Pedrastria with Megabates: neither was his honor so
great in contempning vain things, as his infamy deserved, in using all
impiety in obtaining kingdoms.

Crassus covetous in fortune, yet constant in misery. Demetrius constant and
liberal, yet pompous, profane, and lecherous. Cato (the sensor of men for all
his severity) had not so strong a shield of his continence, gravity,
fortitude, and perseueraunce, but that being studious to accuse others, he
was accused himself of contempt of Philosophy, hate of Physicians, praise of
himself, and inhumanitie in his behavior, nay they wrote this Epigram of him
which follows. Rufus mordaces solitusque illidere dentes
Omnibus et glaucus Porcius vt periit;
Ipsa timens saeue rabiem Proserpina li^guae.
Ullum (...) apud manes noluit esse locum.


Why press I further, where these few may suffice me? and what may not
Misacmos observe, if he disiest this consideratlie? If all these in the
brightness of their honor had some blemishe and infirmity, what privilege has
he far inferior to the worst of them? If he be not exempt from error (as I know
he is not) but that either passion denoureth him, ambition ouerhaleth him,
intemperance seduceth him, and a thousand other imperfections attaint him: why
is he so ready to breath out other men's reproaches, where the sachell behind
his back has sins enough in it to blast him with? has he a lock for all
men's tongues? a bridle Non videmus mantice quod intergo est.
for all men's pens? or impudencye to outface all disgraces? Cicero was more
eloquent then he, but counted a babbler; Demosthenes more wise then he, yet
known for a coward; Socrates a just man, but accused of impiety: Cities dies
mihi defic^ret quaem oration, there were no end if I should prosecute this. All
life whatsoever is bu^ a Chaos of infirmities, and who so will reprehend, must
either be a God amongst men without fault, or a byword to men for his foul
tongue. Fie upon me, whether am I grown? Misacmos is pleasant, why then in a
pleasant and a merrye mood, let us have liberty to talk with him. Nay first
lets shake hands as fencers do ere they play their Prises, for I am sure to
give the Venie, I feel my fist so nimble. But what weapons? what weapons?
faith with a pen in one hand, and a paper book in an other: None better, have
at you Sir, I would wish you keep your footing. Why, how will you use me?
Faith as the milkmaid of Hackney used that most witty and learned Master
Fleetwoode Recorder of London, (and that was scarce mannerly) and how it was
(without any further interogatiues) I shall presently tell you. This honest
Gentleman walking for his pleasure from London toward Hackney, by chance (at
the very towns 'end heard a bird of May singe, I think you call it a Cucko^.
Hereupon looking round about him to spy out some one to break his bitter jest
upon, he e^countred by good hap with this maid, whom so dainely and
pleasantly, he bourded with this question. Maid quoth he, who is this that
singes so merely, is it the vicar of Hackney? no forsooth said she, you
mistake your self, it is the recorder of London, (a foul on her for a lying
queen, how unmannerly she was?) Well he digested the matter like a wise
gentleman. Now in like manner must I try your patience: Was it you that
translated Ariosto? I marry was it sir. In faith you had been better to have
set your legs before it then your arms, for the lines are very gowty and to
untoward to climb Hellicon. What are you angry at this jest? for shame be
patient, you have vs' de a Doctor far worse, and therefore look for ill
chieuing. ^nall lib. 3. Sa^. 9. O Coridon Coridon secretum diuitis vllum esse
(...)*
I, but you set your arms before it, least after you were dead, cities and
countries should strive for you as they did about Homer: Fear not that man,
for what between Cloacinas Temple, the stationers pastbordes, the Grocers and
Chandlers spices, and mustard-pots, your books shall be out worn in your age
I warrant you. Only if so^e surviue by the mercy of a friends Library, the
after-world shall rather pity your lost time, then commend your diligence.
That's for master Daltons sake, and I pray you so take it. Now for master
Plat mine old and honest friend, why what of him? His life in^al men's eyes so
upright, his birth not to be contemned, his study for the commodity of his
country, you have lewdely Iybed against him being a gentleman of your own
society; and so iested at his coals, that you deserve to be burnt with them
for your labor. Bona verba quaeso: nay you shall not so escape it. Should a man
(because the Fishmongers boy saw you in a goodlye gay velvet cloak and on your
foote-cloth, and iestingly said as you past by him thorowolde old fishstreet
that you sat on your horse like a slouen on a close stool) that therefore your
writing in praise of AJAX, was foreprophecied? or to use (Charles Chesters
jest, because you are faced like Platina) 'would it not anger your heart
strings, if a man should say that you look like a sturdie Hostler that could
guird a mire til she sart again. Truly it were unseemly to use a gentleman of
worth so grossly: now if miu^ies to your self, disgraces to your own per^o^,
Iybing at your own writings so mightily move you: Imagine that in others which
you feel in your self, and if you take felicity to hear well, remember
carefully hereafter to speak well. But I forget my self, I forget my self,
there is a pad in the shaw, there is matter in it said the hostler when he felt
his horse back, there are reasons of discontent, which have moved this
desaster twixt master C^nelius Ag^ de vault Sce^c.
Plat and you: I mary bether sir, he is a seducer, his coals are like the
Alcumists Elixar, much t^kte of, but never bronght to pass: You deceive your
self Misacmos, and I dare swear it by as much honesty as you can pledge me,
that the coals Master Plat makes profession of to devise, are possible to
nature, not contrary to the rules of Philosophy, even now this t^a me ready
to be proved by a demonstration, so that as Fierouants said to the Galenists
of Italy (...) lib. 3. (...) (...) (...). et a^i.
and other chimicall fellows; Master Plat man boldly urge against you, mine
is the effect, dispute you on the cause.

I but your judgment (say you) apprehends not any such thing, and for that
cause you will jest at a truth, in that you suspect it a falshoode, Heeres
fair play Misacmos, and I offer open challendge.

Draw the quintescene of your wit, capitulate ^ll your readinges, make an
abstract of your experiments, and set me down what arguments you can against
these coals, and you shall see me make you carry coals till you fall tout plat
for your labor. For your conjecture of stale and cow dung, it stands not with
nature, it stands not with reason, you are mis informed, and it were good you
were reformed, learn a truer Credo, and we will sing a kinder Salve to you.

If you still brave it til your conceit be blu^t, I will steel it with reason,
and though master Plats maid has coulted your intelligencer, that would have
wrought the secret of these coals out of her, under pretense of a woing dance
(for which cause you are waxt so tetchie,) I Will use you more honestly; and not
only instruct you like a probable disputer, but with as good pillars as all
sciences consist on, I mean demonstrations (as sound matter as Aristotle's
Pasteriora. I warrant you) I could use Tarltons lie upon you touching the
secret of Barley: who (atte^ding one day at a great dinner on sir Christopher
Hatton Lord Chancellor deceased) by chance (amongst other pretty jests) gave
him unadvisedly the lie: for which, the honorable person merrily reproving him,
instead of submitting himself, he thus witily justified: My Lord (said he) is
it not a custo^e when a prince has spoken any thing note-worthy, to say he
has delivered it maiestically? Again when you ye are Mo^sieurs, my Lorts,
excellenses, Altesses, and such like, speak any thing: Saynot the assista^ts
straight ways, he concluded honorably? Nay in every estate, if either noble,
right worshipful, worshipful, gentle, common, honest, dishonest, poor or rich,
sick or whole (and sic ad infinitum) speak any thing; does not the world
conclude straight, that they have spoken nobly, right worshipfully,
worshipfully, gently, commonly, honestly, dishonestly, poorly, richly, sickly,
wholly? Naught without, alye my Lord (quoth dick Tarlton) naught without a lie:
He that therefore paies it with a frown, or a stab, forgets himself. But
thus will not I use Misacmos, least he that stands so much on his points,
should point me out with his poyniard; on elie this will I say (and that
modestly too) a^ Tully did of Voconius, and his children, and (E) only
deducted. Phaeb^ hand scinente hic seminauit libros. Pl^arch in ^a Cico. To. 3.
so. (...).



Which is as much to say, as the man had been happy if his book had lain
stinking in his studio. But here me thinks I spy a worse then Enthimi^
misery fallen upon you, (who abusing the Corinthians in jest, was plaugde in
earnest) for in discoursing your Monapole, wherein you angle for nothing Your
own word^ Avengeance on them that ^e these Monapol^ 17. Ed. 4. Sto^.
but Carps to feed other men with, you not only wax tooe bitter a curser of
your betters (a fault worse the^ Burdets, and it were pity it should be
expiated with his destiny). But you priuelye gird likewise at patents, (I mean
not the father and the son both witty and learned gentlemen) who (as I am
inspired) are the very Genii and good angels in furthering your best studies,
but Job serve not As gesclaus, law hear: Difficile est miser eriet ^pore, but
coldly past^ that over which might be wrought like wa^.
those pattents which being priueledges granted by a prince, fruits of her
royal prerogative, rewards of her trusty and honorable servants, acte^ for
humble subjects to receive with thanks, not to examine according to their
own shallow judgments private laws in being privileges, as both the legists
and schoolmen determine, are (...).
not groslie to be iested at, carelessie to be disgraced, or fondly to be dealt
withal. Beware of this good Misacmos, I wish you as a friend, and if hereafter
you mean to rest publicly, and force your wit to stem the stream of worlds
judgments, use Pericles custom, who determining to speak any thing publicly,
desired the immortal Gods, that no improuident word should passehys mouth.
Away with this serious talk, let us turkish this text into a merrier color.
One turn from Leaden hal corner into Gracious street, and so have with you to
West minster: Why into Gracious street? Because of al streets in London you
have thought this the best market to make proclamation of cuckcoldry. Now sir
what John of himself, or John by constraint know you there that hathinheritance
in Cornhil, who^ you so prettily iutitle to Hornden? Mum budget not a word. In
an inuentory of such household stuff it is ill falling to perticulers, such
universal propositions, or prepositions require noi^ance. If a gentlewench
have invited you to a banquet of Turnups, be not too talkatiue, least suting
your self in pure rash, your love repent her lying abroad, and you your
speaking too broadly. In ha^dling your common places, shut up your tongue,
least being Plenus ^arum, (as Parmeno said of him self) you be naroly looked
into O Misacmos since all men may be cuckolds, actu vel potentia it is
dangerous to talk of the^, but if you will needs bite on this morsel, beware to
be T^ent. Eunuch^
offe^siue, for to general terms none but the guilty take exception. Should I
play at this weapon what should let me to hit ho^e and yet observe the laws
of humanity? show wiht witout profe^g wrong.

As thus in a pleasant Irone, to disfigure a householder in a figure. The man
has a great charge, and therefore this dear year, it is good having
Cornucopia in his householde. (...), ^orn, the horn of plenty, or otherwise
plenty of horn.


This is a jest without gall, and this no less pleasant then the former. If it
be true that Physicians say, that the perfume of borne is a sovereign
medicine against the Pestilence; how happy shall many men's neighbors be that
have horns of their own to burn and drive the plague out of their Chambers?

This is a form I inform you of, because I know some exceptions taken
against your other deformed observation: Mend it, mendit, or burn your book
as the desperate Zanthians did their, City least from the Babell of A^s dict^
(...) Babble.
your pride, men say you derive your babbling. Hark what a tale I heard in
Gracious street of an ungracious turn, which was returned upon a gentlewoman.

A pleasant we^ch of the country (who beside Chaucers jest, had a great
felicity in jesting) incountring in a morning with a farmour of her husbands,
who came that Michaelmas day to pay his quarters rent (beside a dozen of
powtings for my Lanslady his mistres) seeing him scrape his courtesies a far
off, and very loath to come near and salute her, pleasantly said thus; Come
near Thomas, be not afraid, I neither fling nor bite: T the poor fellow
gathering heart of grace on this encouragement, returned her this answer: Bith
mass mistress, and you be so gentle, you are the fitter beast to be ridden:
here is Diog. Laertius in vita Memn, prae moerore laque^ vitam sibi e^torsit.
quid pro quo: a girde for a gibe: beware of mocking plain fellows, lest
after this sort in plain terms they thus mock you.

Go to Menippus in wit, God keep you from his fortune. Use citizens well. And
though you be as familiar with some of their wives, as Tullies epistles: yet
to the husbands read nothing but his Offices, lest they prefer you to an
office or officer. I have to talk with you for the Markams too, my worthy
worshipful and beloved friends: and therefore prepare new we apons, for I must
wring you for wronging them. Though their desert can out^ue your disgrace, yet
shall your disgrace live by your disgracing them: get therefore the grim sire
to seal you a pardon of Course, or my second Course shall be so current, that
I will course you out of breath: these are but easy tricks, as wrestlers
Plutare. In vita Alexand.
use before they begin their utmost. The other shall be labored like your own, as
ready to move laughter, as Naptha to take fire, which til you meet, make a
register of your best conceits, for I mean to make trial of the utmost of
your learned courage. Enough of this till the feast of enough follow. They say,
Once warned, well armed, thank me kindly for these courtesies.

What remains now? but in few words to counsel Misacmos: first, if he
pretend to jest, to observe the custom of the Spartans, in avoiding
scurrilitie: next, in the modest carriage of his words, to become an Athenian,
who had a custom to cover and color obscenities and filthiness with apt and
decent names, according as Solon taught them. Adubber to cry, Mother go
cacke, when he is able to trusse himself is indecent. Remember what your
grand mother taught you Misacmos, and make your Books more mannerly. Lastly,
in correcting, learn of Phitaroh to do all things in way of commiseration,
and not in contempt, for who reproves in derision, defaulteth in humanity and
judgment: To be short, instead of the salt of bitter language, let Misacmos
learn to seek the salt of wisdom: for as the one is fretting, galling, and
a sucker of blood, so the other (as says Gregory) Acquiritur per pacem, is
gotten by peace, breeds peace, nourishes virtue, instructs error, and
makes the life sauery, which appears in that of the evangelist Mark, Habete
in vobis sal, and pacem habebitis inter vos. Have salt among you, and you shall
have peace among you. To conclude with Misacmos, let me teach him two
receipts, and so leave him: First, to avoid evil smelles, let him get him a
clean tongue, and a sweet breath, for that is pleasing to gentlewomen: let
him use the incense of prayer, to kill the stinking venom of serpents lurking
in his heart, let him put less worm wood in his incke, and more continence
in his thoughts: and if his tongue will not leave clacking, let him learn to
light the candle of charity before him, as Gardners are wont to set lamps by
lakes sides: to put croking and troublesome frogs to silence. Finally: to
purge his lunacie of wit, I neither prescribe him Turbith, Agaric, Sarcocolla,
Trincauel de vsu med. li. 1. c, 14
nor a dram of Scammony, according to Dioscorides, neither rhubarb of Po^tus,
nor manna of Calabria, but an ounce of good thought mixed with a scruple of
Pythagoricum silentium, which shall so purge him of ambition, heal the
inflammations of his tongue, and exhale the venom of his heart, that when he
next meets me, he shall say, I am the happiest of Physicians (of whom Bouchet
iestingly speaks in the person of a bon Drole or Francatripe) Bouchet au 10.
Secr.
that the sun beholdes their good cures, and the earth covers their
grievous faults.

Thus kindly leave I Misacmos with his Car ie penscray acquerir plus de lou
ange au service de la virtue, que ie ne seroy pas a la suitte de vice.
cure, which if he requite with choler, let him resolve himself, that I have
wit and learning enough to make him as tame as Crassus lamprey: For having
truth on my side, and diligence my friend, I neither fear his grim looks, nor
his Martials pen. Bouchet au 7. Secr.
Let him write never so soon, I will become nouus homo a new man (with Cato)
rising from obscurity to same by his disgrace: Plutarch. in vita Cat.
and so I leave him. For thee Philaretes and thy friends, I end, in heartily
commending me: and since I am assured of your well-meaning, you may boldly
command my service. But even here in shutting up of my letter, a merry jest
incounters me, which I must needs tell you. Henry the 8. in his youth, a prince
of famous memory, riding a hunting in grass time with certain his nobles and
familiars, by chance made toward a gentleman's park of good estimation and
reckoning whom he highly favored; where (finding the park gate locked, and
being very desirous to enter.) he set his horn to his mouth, and merrily
winded it to call the Keeper. Sir Andrew Flamocke (a valiant and quick witted
gentleman) standing hard behind him (and that very instant troubled with the
chollicke) even at the very time the King drew his horn from his mouth lets
me fly a rouncing F. from his T. The King looking back, and angerly asking
who it was that durst be so beastly in his presence? Sir Andrew (after a low
congee) made this answer: If it please your Majesty, you blew for the Keeper,
and I blew for John the Keepers man. Now to allude this (Philaretes) in this
sort conceit me. For those of thy faction that kindly interpret, courteously
accept, and friendly protect my pleasures, I commit the kingly blast of
encouragement, I mean the matters of weight, worth, and discretion. For the
rest that captiously desire to pry, carelessly to condemn, and injuriously
detract, I commit the filth, worse then sir Andrew Flamoks fart to their
disgesting. And so to Tarletons Testament I commend you, a little more drink,
then a little more bread, a little more bread, and a few more clothes, and God
be at your sport Master Tarleton.

Misodiaboles.


