A SERMON PREACHED AT BROCKET HALL, BEFORE the Right Worshipful, Sir John
Brocket, and other Gentlemen there assembled for the trayning of Soldiers.

January 2 and 3.

By Edmond Harris.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin, for John Daldern and William Haw. 1588.

To the right Worshipful Sir John Brocket Knight.
IT was no part of my meaning (right Woorshipfull) to have communicated to any
that which I spoke by way of exhortation and encouragement to the Soldiers
that showed themselves before you the 2. and 3. of January. Notwithstanding, I
could not resist the daily importunity of my friends, desiring to be
partakers of such matter as the Lord of his mercy did at that sudden minister
unto me for the comfort of the which heard. Wherefore giving my self to
remember what I had spoken, I delivered them in writing so much as I could call
to mind again; which they finding means (I know not how) to bring unto the
print and certifying me thereof, that duty, which for your goodne^^ to me
ward I owe unto your woorship, caused me to present it unto you; and so much
the rather because you were the only man; which when the Soldiers were
readiero come before you, admonished me to employ my speech to such end and
purpose. Wherefore I beseech your worship to accept of this my small present,
being a testimony rather of my well meaning, than a reward of your benefits.
The Lord increase in you and yours his spiritual graces, and preserve you by
faith working through love unto the kingdom of his son.

Your worships to command in the Lord, Edmond Harris.

Dread not, neither be a fraide of them. The Lord your God which goes before
you he shall fight for you, according to all that he did in Egypt before your
eyes.

Deuteronomy. 1.
IT was my purpose (right woorshipfull) to have gone forward in the exposition
of S. Peter wherewith I began: but considering how the occasion of this days
meeting required other exhortations than the words which were next to be
expounded would minister unto us, I thought good to choose out an other portion
of Scripture, agreeable to the present matter: especially considering how some
evil disposed persons go about to weaken the hearts and hands of our
countrymen, as though we were not able to encounter with our Popish and Spanish
adversaries that now threaten us with encomberance of war in our own land.
The Scripture which I have selected and chosen for this purpose is found
written in the first of Deuteronomie: The words whereof are these, Dread not,
etc. which contain in them a prophetical exhortation, wherewith Moses the
conducter of Israel encouraged the people of the Lord, what time they seemed to
faint for fear of their enemies. For having beard sat, how they should
encounter with the sons of Anake men of giantlike stature, who did cate by
the Inhabitants of the land, and in comparison of whom the valiant men of
Israel were but as Grasshoppers to look too, they took so sudden discomfiture
at these ridings, that they rather desired never to see the promised land, than
to join battle with so strong and mighty adversaries. This Moses perceiving
comforted them with these words, faying: Dread not, etc. In which speech we
are to observe these two branches, whereinto the Scripture deuideth it self.
First, an exhortation. Secondly, the reasons of that exhortation. The
exhortation is this, Dread not, neither be afraid of them. The reasons are
two in number. The first taken from the saving presence of God among his
people. The Lord your God which goes before you, he shall fight for you. The
second taken from their former experience and trial of Gods mighty protection
to themwarde in the land of Egypt. According to all etc.

Concerning the exhortation, let us observe who are exhorted not to fear, and
whom they are exhorted not to fear: where the holy ghost says, Dread not,
neither be afraid of them, he speaks to the people of God, to them that
were sanctified and set apart to be a peculiar people unto himself, to such
as were the true professors of Gods word, thereby teaching us, how Christians
should not be faint hearted in a good cause, but courageous and bold as Lions,
especially when they are to encounter with the enemies of true religion,
Neither does Moses alone teach us this, but Christ himself also is of the same
mind, as may appear Math. 24. 6. For speaking of those troubles which should
come upon the world in the latter age thereof, he says, how They should hear
of wars and rumors of wars, but see that ye be not troubled, says he to
the faithful and believing, as who should say, that fear of the adversary
were not comely in them that make profession of the true faith. Mark this I
beseech you brethren as many of you as fear the Lord; Moses commands such
not dread, neither to be afraid: Christ commands such not to be troubled
though they hear of wars, etc. Now therefore as men that profess the Lord
to be your only stay and trust, lift up your hearts, that it may be known how
you have not professed in vain, and that you are the true Soldiers of Christ
Jesu, whom no force nor furniture of the enemy can fear, no rumors of war
can dismay, no hoastes of armed men can once abash or terrify. If your hearts
be weakened at any time with the reports of our enemies preparation against
us, know this for a surety that whenever you are dismayed therewith, that
day ye begin to proclaim and show your selves men void of true faith. For
why, such as are the true people of God, by the judgment both of Moses and
also of Christ hims^^^ should not be afraid of these things. Nay mar(...)one
thing more. Moses says to his brethren (...) Israelites: Be not afraid of
them. Of whom does he mean: It is manifest by the former verse he
understands the Anakins, that is to say, the Giants which enhabited the land
of Canaan, whom he charge the people of God not to fear, though they were
men greater and taller than themselves. Might not the scholars of Moses fear
Giants, and shall the scholars of Christ fear Spaniardes? Far be it of
from the least of us (brethren) ever to fear these enemies of the Lord.

To the intent that we may be the more courageous; let us consider of the
reasons which Moses adioyneth to his exhortation. The first reason is taken
from the saving presence of God among his people, or from his effectual power
and strong hand which he stretches over his Church to defend his enheritance
and to destroy the enemies thereof. The Lord your God (says Moses) he shall
fight for you, therefore be not afraid of them. As if he had said, They are
sure to overthrow their enemies in battle, whose part the Lord takes, and
for whom he fights: The Lord himself be fights for you my brethren the
sons of Israel, therefore fear not but ye shall have the victory over them.
This is a notable reason (dearly beloved) and much used in the Scripture.

In the 14. of Nomb. there is a notable place pertaining to the same matter
which is here spoken of. For when the people seemed to take discomfiture by the
tidings which the spies brought them concerning the inhabitants of Canaan, the
spirit of the Lord came upon Joshua, and he comforted them on this wise. Fear
not the people of the land (says Joshua) for they are but bread for us. And he
adds the same reason which Moses used. Their shield (says he) is departed
from them, and the Lord is with us, therefore fear them not.

With the like words does the good King Ezechia encourage the Captains and
Soldiers in his time, which were ready to fight the Lords battle against
the blasphemous boast of the proud Senacherib: as we may read 2. Chron. 32.
Be strong and courageous (says Ezechia) fear not, neither be afraid for the
King of Ashur, neither for the multitude that is with him. Dis reason he
adioyneth, There be more (says he) with us the are with the: with him is an
arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God for to help us, and to fight our
battles. Consider these things, my brethren; the Lord will fight for them that
profess his truth, and whom he fights for they shall undoubtedly prevail
and triumph over their enemies be they never so well prepared to the battle.
Let us then cleave truly and vufainedly to the Lord our God, so shall he fight
for us, and our ene. mies shall not be able to stand before us. He that is a
consuming fire shall go forth on our behalf, and the stubble of Spain shall
be consumed to ashes. The whitle wind of his presence shall scatter them as
chafe, and his vengeance shall follow after and pursue them till they be
utterly destroyed.

Ye will desire peradventure more special reasons and proofs in this case,
such as may make us see, that the Lord will fight for his Church in England (if
it depart not from him) against all it Popish and Spanish adversaries. Hearken
then to the word of our God which is true and infallible.

The Lord himself threatens to shed their blood which have shed the blood of
his Saints, as appears Deuteronomy. 32.41.42. I will execute vengeance on mine
enemies (says the Lord) and will reward them that hate me, I will make mine
arrows drunk with their blood, and my sword shall eat their flesh, for the
blood of the slain and of the captive. But he will be merciful (says Moses
in the same place) to his land and to his people. Here you see plainly
declared unto you (my brethren) how the Lord threatens to destroy them, which
have spilt the blood of his Christian people. This is the word of the Lord,
and therefore so sure and certain, that albeit heaven and earth do pass, yet
no one jot of this shall pass, till it be all accomplished and fulsilled.
Consiber then of our enemies which threaten us at this time, and for resistance
of whom we are assembled this day. Are they such as have spared the innocent
and barmelesse members of Christ Jesu? No verily. For it is notably known how
much innocet blood the Pope our chief adversary, and his Lieutenant the
Catholic King have shed in Christendom. The earth which greedily drinks
in cuery such thing, is weary with drinking vy the blood of Christ his sheep,
which the wooluish in quisitonrs of Spain, and bloodthirstie tormentors sent
out of the Roman sea have spilt. The histories are full of most lamentable
tragedies, declaring the savage, pea and more the^ beastly cruelty of these
our adversaries toward innumerable christian people which never lift up weapon
against them, but were lead as silly Lambs to the slaughter, not once opening
their mouths against their bloodsuckers. What then remains but that the
Lord now repay them again, according to all that they have done to his
Saints and children, and that the word of the almighty be fulfilled on them,
which says, that he will make his arrows drunk with their blood: which kind
of speech (beside other things) would not be lightly ouerpassed by us,
considering the bow and the arrowe are weapons of defense, wherewith the Lord
has armed our nation above the reft. Let us therefore be assured, if we
consecrate our selnes wholly to God, and rejoice in this to continue the people
of the Lord, he will per for me his promise in saving this his land, and us
his people; but destroying our enemies with most fearful destruction, causing
the arrows of us English men to drink the blood, and our sword to devour the
flesh of these persons, who have powered forth the blood of his Saints without
compassion as water upon the ground in great aboun, dance. This the Lord will
do (if we go for ward to serve him) though not for our sakes, which are but
miserable sinners, yet for his promise-sake, and for his Christ's sake, whose
name is called upon us.

This for their acts: Let us yet come nearer unto these our enemies, and see
what the Lord in his word has determined against them. If we look unto the
profession of those which bend themselves against us, we may find great
matter to encourage us withal. I stand not now to consider and show unto
you, how the Lord threatens generally all Idolaters and such as provoke him
with strange Gods (as they do) that He will spend plagues upon them; that he
will bestow his arrows upon them, the sword shall kill them with out, and
fear shall kill them in their chambers. Deuteronomy. 32. Only that I would have you
to note which is written by S. John, Revel. 14.8.9. The holy ghost having noted
in the 6.7. and 8. verses the breaking forth of the light of the gospel, and
there upon the fall of Babylon or the Romish sea ensuing and following, to
declare how grievously the Lord would be offended with such, as after the
decay of that Babilonish sea by the gospel of Christ, would not yield the
inselues obedient to the truth, but go forward in committing idolatry or
spiritual fornication with that whore of Babylon, whose shame full
abominations the Lord had detected before their faces by the plain preaching
of the word, he utters this most fearful judgment against them: If any
man (says an Angeli from heaven) worship the beast and his image, and receive
the mark in his forehead or on his hand, (that is, either openly show
himself a maintainer of that Romish sea, or secretly subscribe to ye
abominations thereof) The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea
of the pure wine which is powered into the cup of his wrath; and he shall be
tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels and before the Lamb.
Weigh this advisedly with your selves my brethren for to encourage you with
all. Ye know that the gospel has now along time been preached a fresh in the
world, and Babylon yt is ye Roman sea has taken a great fall thereby,
notwithstanding we see that they which now threaten us with war and trouble,
stick still to that whore of Babylon, they still worship the beast and his
Image the Popedom, they delight to she we them selves and write themselves
Papists, they will not be drawn from the breasts of that harlot, which the
rest of Christendom abhors as a most ^thie strumpet, and as the mother of
all Idolatry and spiritual fornication, they delight still more in her
painted falsehood than in the true and glorious beauty of the spoase of Christ
Jesus: what remains therefore (dearly beloved) for these popish adversaries
of ours, but that they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God: that is to
say, God will take bengeaunce on them in most terrible manner. Yea, but shall we
be the instruments of the Lords wrath against them, shall they be destroyed by
us, will some say: Although it skilleth not whether they be destroyed by us or
for us, yet mark what is written Revel. 17. 16. 17. The Kings which first gave
their kingdom to ye beast, but after ward fell to hate the whore, they shall
make her desolate and naked. They shall deprine her both of pourpe and power,
and shall leave her succourlesse and friendlesse in comparison. Have not we
(brethren) sometimes committed fornication with that Romish harlot, but do we
not now hate her as much as ever we loved her; it is then greatly to be hoped,
that if we continue to hate her still withal her whorish tromperies and
superstitions, we shall be the means of the Lord to make her utterly desolate,
by overthrowing these her only defendants, or by helping thereto.

This comfort and hope to preuasle we have by our enemies that threaten to
assail us; let us see whether any comfort and courage be ministered, by reason
of those which are means to set them on and exhort them to this assault. We
do all of us know (dearly beloved) how the Ambassadors which provoke and
stir up these and other Prinres against us are those rouing Jesuits, which
sent from the Pope of Rome, creep every where into Kings courts, exhorting
both them and their Nobility against us. Has the Scripture then determined
what event their counsels shall have, to what end the Princes which are
ruled by them shall come unto: Yea verily: look Revel. 16. and you shall find
it set down there. Saint John verse 12. of that chapter having (under the
figure of Euphrates dried up, by which means the old Babylon was destroyed)
prophesied the destruction of the Romish Babylon, he says in the 13. verse,
that He saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of that
drakon, and out of the mouth of that beast, and out of the mouth of that false
Prophet: The office of these frogs be describes to be this, to gather the
Kings of the earth to the battle of that great day of God almighty. Meaning
yt their purpose should be to stir up the Kings against the destroyers of
their Babilonian tower, and to bring them to build it again, if it might be,
but the Lord should otherwise dispose their labors, and himself take the
cause of his children in hand, making battle with them, etc. The whole
difficulty of this place lies in knowing who are meant by these frogs. Some
understand the Popish schoolmen: but that cannot be. First, because the
Prophet notes how these frogs should not come forth till the decay and way
made to the overthrow of their Babylon; as for the schoolmen they were in the
flourishing state of the Romish Monarchy. Secondly, it was not the office of
the Popish schoolmen to go from one country to an other, from one Prince to
an other, and to stir them up against the people of the Lord: but these
properties both of them agree to the Jesuits and to them only. For after the
decay of the Romish supremacy they were invented for this intent, that they
might go from one King and Kingdom to an other, stirring them to battle
against the decayers of their Babylon; And we see that they have not been
sluggish nor negligent in doing this. It is then out of all doubt and
controversy, that the Jesuits are meant by those frogs. What then shall be the
event of the labors of these Jesuits: They shall gather the Kings (to battle
against the Lord) to aplace, says S. John, called in Debrew Har Mageddon, the
mountain of Mageddo or Megiddo, a place famous by reason of great slaughter
there committed, meaning that they shall gather them to their own destruction
as the whole text manifestly declares. This serves greatly for our
encouragement (dearly beloved). The Princes which threaten us are gathered by
these Jesuits, not so much against us as against the Lord himself, whose word
we truly profess: therefore (if our iniquities and lack of following our
profession do not make separation betwixt us and the helping hand of God) the
end of those Jesuitish ambassadors council shall come upon the^: that is,
their gathering together shall be to their own destruction: for the Lord
will fight against them.

I will add but this one reason for the particular persons, and I beseech you
be are with me, if I be the longer in it, considering it poynteth out the very
time wherein we live, and contains our adversaries by name. The place is
written Revel. 20. where it is said, that Gog and Magog shall gather themselves
to battle, and shall compass the tents of the Saints about and the beloved
city, etc. For the more plain understanding where, of, I must needs declare
ye meaning of that which goes before in that chapter, and also of somewhat in
the 12. which has relation to the 20. In the 12 chapter of the Revelation,
after that Christ was ascended verse the 5. and the woman which is the Church,
delivered by flight from the Dragon, the Dragon went and made war with the
remnant of her seed which keep the commandments of GOD and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ: whereby is signified that Satan should raise
persecution against the true Christians, which was fulfilled in those ten
persecutions under the Roman Empire, which ended Anno domini 367. Here S.
John leaves to speak of the dragon, and speaks no more of him all the 20.
chapter, where be begins at the time whereat he left before. As if one
should demand of S. John what became of the drakon after those persecutions,
he answers from the end of those persecutions to the term of a thousand
years more the devil shall be bound up, meaning that be should not raise any
such open persecution against the Church for the faith, it might vee demanded
then what should become of such as were stain in those persecutions. S. John
answers verse 4. they shall line and reign with Christ all that thousand
years. Some might as ke again: what shall be the state of the people from
that year 367. to the end of those thousand years. S. John answers, They
shall be dead in sins and trespasses every day more and more through the
ignorance of the truth of Gods word, but at the end of those thousand yerrs
they shall revive again. With what resurrection shall they revive? shall their
bodies the^ rise out of the grave. No, says S. John, they shall live again by
the first resurruction, or rising of the man from sin: for at the end of
those thousand years. 1. Anno domini 1367. the gospel shall break forth
again, (and in do de then VVickleiffe began to preach) and men shall revive
again by the means of the true preaching of the word that then shall be.

Some might further ask, what shall Satan then be bound up still after this
time of one thousand years expired, that is after the year 1367: S. John
answers, no; but he shall be loosed again, and shall fall to persecuting
of the truth then preached, which persecution shall last for a little season.
verse 3. After all this (to come now unto our selves) it might be demanded by
whom Satan should persecute the professors of the truth that short time,
Saint John answers by Gog and Magog, whom he should at the last stir up
to make war against the Saints. Ye see now we are come (dearly beloved)
unto our own time. The Gospel which lay hid as it were till the year 1367.
than began to shine forth again by the preaching of Wickleife, since that
time which is but a short space in comparison the professors of the Gospel
have been persecuted: now Gog and Magog make war against the true professors
of Christianity. Who are meant, will some say, by Gog and Magog. Concerning
Gog, look Ezech. 38. and 39. and there you shall see that Gog is called the
Prince of Mesech and Tuball: by which Tuball are understood the Italians and
Spaniardes (as the learned may see in John Funcius his division of the world in
his chronicle) by Mesech the Turks, by Magog the Tartarians, and we do all
of us know, that these are they which at this time do persecute
Christianity, the Turks in the Cast Church, the Spaniards and Italians in the
West and North parts of Christendom. We see then who are God and Magog, as
also that our enemies which war against us, that is to say, the Italians and
Spaniardes are a part of them; what comfort have we by this, or how does
this put us out of fear by showing that the Lord will fight for us; that which
follows in the text will strengthen us in the Lord. For the holy ghost
tells us plainly, that Gog Magog shall compass the tents of the Saints
about, but fire (says he) came down from GOD out of heaven and devoured them.
verse. 9. Whereby is meant either that God will plague, punish and destroy them
with most terrible indgements from heaven, according to the phrase of the.
Scripture, Psalm. 18.12.13.14. Psalm. 11.6. Or else that the last judgment shall
come upon them, and take them in their wickedness, and whilst they are
warring against the Saints and people of God: both which are of force and
sufficient to encourage us. For if the Lord will fight for us with vengeance
from heaven against our enemies, against the Popish Italians and Spaniards by
name (which are a part of Gog.) what more available to encourage us against
them. Or else if the Lord will hasten his indgement, and for the salvation and
deliuetance of his people, whom Gog and Magog has compassed his Saints about
to destroy them, will oppress them with that revenging fire which shall
accompany that last judgment of his: what can be a greater consolation then
this, that our brethren wheresoever and we shall not long fight and strive
against these enemics of ours, before the day of indgement shall come and
utterly destroy them. O my brethren, I beseech you in the name of Christ Jesus,
let us not once faint nor be afraid, ye see the times agree, the enemies are
named, the trouble is begun (in some places a good while since (let us not
doubt but the Lord which never deceives will perform his promise in due
time, and take vengeance on our enemics. In y mean season let us be courageous
for our people, for our true religion, and for the cities of our God, and let
the Lord do that which is good in his eyes. 2. Sam. 10.12.

For the persons hitherto, let us now weigh the comfort and consolation which
we have by the causes for which they assail us, and in confidence whereof we
prepare and address our selves against them. It appears (dearly beloved) by
that which is written Iud. 20. how they which set upon any to destroy them
should have a good cause, otherwise they cannot hope and look for the help
and assistance of the almighty: The rest of the Tribes when they make
themselves ready to battle against the Behiamites, it is for want of
reformation and punishing of men which had committed most shameful and
detestable filthiness with a Levites wife, neither that alone but moreover had
murdered her by that means. Have our enemies any such cause of warring against
us: Uerely no. Wherefore then are they gathered together, wherefore do they
threaten Fire and Sword? There is no doubt whatsoever be pretended; the
setting up again of their Romish religion, the suppressing of the Gospel now
preached among us, the satisfying of the bloodthirstie mind of their proud
Pops is altogether intended by this war of theirs. This ought then to turn
unto our comfort, and setting all fear a part to cause us under hope of the
Lord his help and assistance, to go with courageous hearts against them.

They assault to drive us from the the Lord, we defend that we may not be
separated from him: they fight to bereave us of the true preathing of the word
the only comfort of our souls, we strive to keep, continue, and entrease
it amongst us: they bend themselves to fulfill the mind of Antichrist, we
withstand to accompish the mind of Christ: They war to bring Popery the
stuck of all sedition and ungodliness amongst us, we resist to keep it out,
and to retain truth the mother of peace and godliness still in the land:
Thus they fight for an evil, we for a good cause. Then let us boldly fight
this battle of the Lord. For seeing they do not come out against our
Sovereign and against our Country for any Evil that they have found in
them, but only rise up to persecute us and to seek our souls for professing
the truth, and doing after that which is right and equal, let us not doubt
but The souls of our Sovereign and of her people are bound up in the bundle
of life with the Lord their God, and that GOD will cast out the souls of our
enemies as out of the middle of a Sling. 1. Sam. 25.

Remember that worthic exhortation of Jesus the son of Sirach chap. 4. of his
book. Strive (says he) for the truth unto death, and defend justice for thy
life, and the Lord God shall fight for thee against thine enemies. For why his
delight is to defend his truth, and he takes pleasure in maintayning the
good cause of his children and chosen people.

These things being so: Consider I beseech you (dearly beloved) the most
comfortable examples of the holy Scripture, written for this intent and
purpose, that we being pressed in like case might have hope to prevail and
overcome in like manner. Although the Lord in great mercy has sown our land
both with men and cattle, he has taught our hands to war and our fingers to
fight: he has not been to us as an heath or a dry unfruitful ground, but
has blessed us plentifully with all things necessary for our defense and the
withstanding of our enemies. Yet suppose that it were not so. Let it be that
we were but few and our adversaries many in number, should that dismay us
which profess the truth: God forbid. Did not Abraham with 318. men of his
own house and no more, follow after and pursue four wicked Kings with their
whole retinue, and came home again from the slaughter of them with safety?
Gene. 14. Did not Joshua with a small host in comparison subdue and utterly
destroy 31. Kings and all their people? Joshua. 12. Did not Barake having at his
feet but ten thousand men overthrow Sisera, his nine hundred Charets of
iron, and all his host with the edge of the sword? Judge. 4. Did not David with
four hundred men alone set upon the host of the Amalakites, and smot them
from the twilight even unto the evening of the next morrow, so that there
escaped not a man of them save four hundred young men which rod upon Camels
and fied? 1. Sam. 30.27. Did not Adino a counsailer to King David stay himself
eight hundred at one time? Did not Eleazar the son of Dodo, one of the three
worthies of David defy the Philistines his own self, did he not arise and
finite the Philistines till his haud was weary and claue unto the sword, by
whose means the Lord gave so great victory that same day that the people
returned after him not to fight but only to spoil? Did not three of the
Captains of the same David when he longed to drink of the water of the well
of Bethelem, break into the host of the Philistines that was there, and drew
water out of the well and brought it to David? 2. Sam. 23. Let it be that
there were amongst us neither spear nor shield, nor any weapon of war,
should we therefore shrincke back at the fight and assaulting of these our
Popish adversaries? GOD forbid? Did not Shamgar with no better weapon then an
Ox goad destroy 600. of the uncircumcised Philistines and so deliver Israel?
Judge. 3. Did not three hundred persans and no more under the conducting of
Gedeon, by blowing the Trompets which they held in one hand and breaking the
flaming pitchers which they held in the other, discomfite the host of the
Midianites? Judge. 7. Did not the Lord with the sound of Rams horns and the
showte of men's voices overthrow the high and huge walls of Hiericho? Joshua. 6.
Did not Jonathan with his armor bearer alone (what time the people of Israel
had neither sword nor spear among them to help withal) set upon the mighty
host of the Philistines and ouerthrewe them? 1. Sam. 14. Let us not fear
then, a small company of the house of faithful Abraham will scrue to put
four Antichristian Kings to flight: one Joshua will be enough to subdue 31.
Princes of Canaan: Every Adino will kill his eight hundred: One Eleazar will
overcome the whole host himself, etc. An Ox goad were weapon enough in the
hand of one faithful Shamgar to kill 600. popish Philistines withal: An Ass
iaw will serve the Nazarite of the Lord to stay a thousand of them. Neither
think (dearly beloved) that these are such extraordinary examples as we may
not hope in some measure to match the^ in our selves. For the promise of the
Lord is general to the godly and faithful which war in desence of his
truth. Fine of you (says he) shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you
shall put ten thousand to flight. Leuit. 26.

Though we fail in these outward things, yet there is a notable palce in the
second of Daniel serving to the great comfort of Christian men, and such as
have renounced the trust and confidence in man to follow Christ Jesu alone.
The Prophet expou^ding the vision of Nebuchadnezar, shows how by the four
formed Image were understood sour Monartchies of the world: as by the head of
gold, the Chaldean Empire: by the breast and arms of silver, the Persian
kingdom: by the belly and thighs of brass, the Maccdonian Monarchy: by the
legs of iron with feet partly of iron and partly of clay, the Empire of the
Romans: which, as iron breaks in pieces and subdueth all things, so should
that overcome and subdue all other Monarchies of the world, and be the last of
the sour. After this, says Daniel, where as a stone cut out of the mountain
without hands smot the Image upon his feet and brake them to pieces and
destroyed all, the meaning is (says the Prophet) that the kingdom of Christ
shall subdue the last or Roman Monarchy, and in that all the rest: as for
the kingdom of Christ it shall endure and stand for ever, by the kingdom of
Christ not understanding the person of Christ alone, but referring that word
to the whole body of his Church also. Brethren, let us meditate on this to our
comfort: we make no question nor doubt but that we are of the Church and
kingdom of Christ, after whose name we desire to be called (not Catholics)
but Christians, and we assuredly trust that we are so, as many of us as do
faithfully belecue the Gospel now truly preached among us. What then
remains (dearly beloved) but that we assure our selves how the kingdom of
Christ, whereof we are, shall never be destroyed, but shall become a great
mountain, and fill the whole earth, as Daniel faith. We see (brethren) the
most part of this prophecy fulfilled, the 4. Monarchies destroyed, ye gospel
set up and prevailing every day more and more, the number of true Christians
cuery where increasing even under the Cross; let us not then doubt of the end
of these beginnings, to wit, that Christ shall prevail more gloriously every
day by his Church, till it has brought the remnants of that last and Roman
Empire (whereof our enemies yt threaten us are in a manner the sum) to utter
and perpetual desolation. For Christ in his Church and kingdom (that the
Scripture may be fulfilled) must needs triumph over the Roman Monarchy and
the adherents thereof. Some will say peradventure: why, the Papists also and
our enemies say as much for themselves, they boast how they are the Church of
Christ, and Popedom Christ's kingdom, wherefore nothing lets but that this
may serve their turns as well as ours. The answer is easy (dearly beloved)
Papists are not of Christ's kingdom. The reason is manifest, Christ's
kingdom is appointed to subdue as al other, so the Roman Monarchy and
Empire whether the beast or image of the beast: do the Papists fulfill this?
Nay clean contrary they with their Pope and Catholic King do all that they
can to restore it, and to bring again that Roman supremacy, which Christ by
his Church has overthrown, into every corner of the world. Will the kingdom
of Christ labor to build up that which the kingdom of Christ has destroyed?
No verily; but whatsoevuer they be which go about that (as out Popish and
Spanish adversaries do) they are out of all question of the kingdom of
Antichrist. To conclude therefore and to make an end of this reason; the
kingdom of Christ (whereof are as many as profess and practice the substance
of our religion truly, and whereof no Papists are) shall bruise the Roman
Monarchy in pieces, till it become like the chafe of the summer flowers, and
the wind carry it away, that no place be found for it any more, says the
Prophet Daniel; whereupon it must needs follow that they and all the eudeuours
of them which labor to restore and set up again that Roman suprematic shall
come to naught. I reason not of ye manner how these things shall be done; it is
enough for us, to know that God will set up Christ's kingdom, and make that it
shall triumph, especially over the Roman Monarchy and defenders thereof, or
any that labor to restore it, as these our adversaries do.

Thus ye see (dearly beloved) how the Lord will fight for his servants and by
them; that he will fight against them that have shed the blood of his children,
as these our enemies have done; that he will power his vengeance upon the
adherents of the whore of Babylon, by the hand of those which hate her, as I
trust all true English men do; that he will fight against them that are
gathered against his Church at the provocation of those croking Jesuits; that
he will fight from heaven with fire and most terrible judgments against Gog
and Magog, whereof these our enemies are a part, as I showed you. Wherefore all
these things considered and thought upon cry unto us; fear them not, because
the Lord which goes before us he will fight for us, especially so manifold
causes, wherein he has promised to help his, being added,

Some Papists will object peradventure: Nay, but the Lord he goes before
your enemies, and therefore ye cannot stand. Let us therefore see what that
phrase employeth, to the intent we may be assured whether the Lord go before
them or us: and so cousequently may be far of from fearing them as becomes
the true children of God.

When Mofes says, The Lord goes before them, he means that he was their
guide by who^ they were conducted, their Captain whom they followed, and under
whose banner they warred, which therefore would faue and defend his faith full
Soldiers. Does this agree to the religion of these our enemies: No verily. Why
so: Consider the reason (dearly beloved) and you will easily find it.

1 They which will in no wise be content, unless they may have a mortal man
go before them in the person of Christ, and as his pretended Uicar in their
Church, they show that the Lord himself goes not before them: for what
absurdity were it to have a Liuetenant or Uicar where the Prince himself is
not only in presence, but moleouer supplieth the office of going before his
people. Pet this do our adversaries: for albeit Christ continually go before
his Church and people in his own person, yet they will not be content unless
they may have an ydolatrous person under the name of his Uicar be their guide
and go before them in their Church: which declares that the Lord Jesu Christ
himself goes not before them. For then what needed a Uicar exercising such
authority, if the Lord himself fulfill the office and go before them in his
own person.

Add hercuuto that they pray unto Saints, deuring them to pray unto the
Lord for them; which were both needless and foolish, if it were so that the
same Lord which calls all his says full unto himself and not to the
Saints, were present and went before their Church and enery member thereof,
as we deleeue be does his true Church and every member of it.

For what a strange matter were it to desire a Saint, which is far of, and
whereof one has no sureite that he hears him, to speak in his behalf unto
the Lord, who stands by him and goes immediately before him that prays,
hearing his suite.

2 Moreover, the Scripture is plain which teaches us that there is no
agreement between God and Beliall, with Christ and an ydoll, so that there is
no doubt but he withdraws his presence where the idol is adummced, and goes
not before them before whom the idol goes. Consider than of out enemies
(deetely veloued) do not they carric before them the ydolatrous host or
masse-cake, yea as the Israelites said to their golden calfe, These are thy
Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, do not they
say in like manner to their breaden God, This is our very Savior O ye
Catholics, which died for us and delivered us from hell and damnation?
forasmuch then as that filthy Idol goes before them, it is apparent that
Christ our Lord, who can not agree nor will not join with Idols, goes not
before them; that he conducteth them not, and that they fight not under his
banner.

As for us (brethren) we know and feel the effectual presence of Christ our
Lord to be such to us ward, so mighty, so available, that we neither desire
a visible Uicar general, nor fly to invisible Saints; we abhor and detest
their idolatrous Pass, withal the whorish attire thereof; and therefore trust
that our Lord he goes before us (especially if we fly from all other things
which may prounke him to forsake us) and that he will fight for us, in such
forte that we shall not need to fear our enemies.

Let us come to the second reason of Moses erbortation, which (as I showed you
before) is taken from their former trial of Gods protection in the land and
deliverance out of the land of AEgipt; or is grounded upon the right use of
Gods benefits and deliverances, which his children before time have received.
for verily, God therefore delivered his people at one time, that they having
thereby erperience of his good will and power, might by faith resort unto him
another time, and trust to his help and assistance, and receiving help praise
him therefore. That I may not vee tedious unto you in this point, I will bring
one example and proof, which for the clear evidence thereof may serve in
stead of many.

In the 1. Sam. 17. there was a notable combat toward between David and
Goliath; the holy Ghost describes both the champions (that men seeing how
great a Giant was vanquished by so weak a person, might not trust in force of
man but in the Lord) as for example, Goliath was a man of great stature, David
but a little one; Goliath was grimme and rough, David ruddie and tender;
Goliath had armor and boots of brass, David could not bear any; Goliath was
armed with a mighty shield and a spear like a Weauers beam, David had
nothing but a sling and a stone at the brook in it. When Saul same this
vnequalnesse in the match, he goes about to withdraw David from the combat,
as one that in his indgement was sure to fall before his enemy. David with an
invincible courage aunsweteth again in the presence of the King, and to prove
that the Lord would fight for him and give him the victory ours his
adversary; he proves it by the former trial which he had of Gods defense
and protection to him ward, on this wise: Thy servant, O King (says David)
kept his fathers sheep, and there came a Lion and likewise a Bear and took a
sheep out of the flock, and I went out after him and smot him, and took it
out of his mouth, and when he rose against me, I caught him by the beard and
smot him and slew him, so thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear, what
does he conclude hereupon. Uerely, from this experience and trial he reasons
in this sort. The Lord (says he) which delivered me from the pawe of the Lion
and from the pawe of the Bear, he sal deliver me from the hand of this
Philistin. By the former protection of God against the Lion and the Bear, he
assures himself and prcoueth that be would also deliver him from the
vncircumrised Philistine. So in like manner (dearly beloved) the trial which
we have had hertofore of Gods delinering of us from these and such like enemies
ought to be so many assurances to all the^ that fear God, that the Lord will
now also deliver us and vestroy them, if we humble ourselves under the mighty
hand of the Lord, and ovey him. Let us therefore consider what the Lord of
late has done for us.

First, when the Spaniard was here in the days of Queen Mary, and had both
occasion given the^ to work upon, knowing that our gracious Sovereign, the
enemy of their popish religion, should succeed her sister, and also had
friends enough to further their purpose, the most of the Realm at that time
being Popishly inclined and given; did not the Lord even then deliver us from
these enemies of ours when they were in this Realm and had more friends, and
shall he not now deliver us when they are out of the Realm, and have less
friends by hundred thousands amongst us.

Secondly, in ye 12. year of her Majesty's reign, when ye Guisians of France
and Spaniards together wrought a co^motion here in our own land, making thereby
a way to their deuilish purpose against this realm and country of ours, did
not ye Lord suppress their endeavors, and disapoynt the^, saving us from their
hands, who thought to have embrewed the^ in our blood? The Lord which saved us
from these enemies at yt time, he shall likewise preserve us now and at all
times hereafter from the same, so long as we return not to the Romish and
heathnish abhommations, but have care to follow that truth which we profess.

Last of all, when Campion and his accomplices of late days practiced ye
bringing in of for rain power, the destruction of our Prince and country, did
not the Lord overthrow all their practices and save us! why should we then
distrust of our deliverance at this time also, if we continue and go forward
to walk with the Lord. Let us therefore conclude: The Lord which goes before
us he will save us from these our enemies, according to all that he has done
for us against them heretofore of his mercy and goodness.

To these consolations, there is somewhat that being cast in and muttered by
Popish spitites or such like, may seem to have some force and ability to
discourage weakelings, whereunto for that purpose some answer is necessary.

First, they put in men's heads that our enemies are politic, and therefore
must needs prevail. I answer, so was Ahitophell the counsailor of David,
yea so politic, that when one had asked council of Ahitophell, it was as if
he had asked council at the Dracle of God himself, in such estimation was
that man for his policy both with David and all the people: notwithstanding,
when he employed his policy to work ungodliness, and to set up the ambitious
and wicked Absalom and to put down the godly David, the Lord turned his
council into foolishness. 2. Sam. 17. So brethren, let us assure our selves,
that for as much as their whole policy tends to the advancement of some
wicked Absalom, the deposing of our faithful Sovereign, and the working of
wickedness, the Lord will turn it into foolishness and destroy it, according
to that which is said Job. 5.12.13.15. The Lord scatters the devises of the
crafty, so that their hands cannot accomplish that which they do enterprise:
He takes the wise in their craftiness, and the council of the wicked is made
foolish. But he saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the
hand of the violent man. Moreover, for as much (dearly beloved) as they bend
their whole policy to the overthrowing of our profession and religion, let us
not be any whit afraid of their politic heads. For why, to use policy
against the truth is to use it against the Lord himself, against whom no
council can prosper, as it is said, Proverb. 21. There is no council, there
is no wisdom, there is no understanding against the Lord.

An other thing there is which somewhat moves those that put not their
confidence in the Lord, which is this, because they see our enemies so forward
to mischief, that they address themselves to meet us and come unto us in our
own country. For answer hereunto, it is a most notable history and most fit
in this case, which we find written 2. Reg. 9. Declaring how the Lord is wont
many times to render blood again in that place where blood has been shed: As
for example, Ahab and Iesebell his wife shed the blood of Naboth in the field
of the same Naboth, it was therefore the ordinance of the Lord that there the
blood of Iesebell and of Ahabs son should be shed again. This was Iehu
appointed to execute, who when he went about it, Iehoram by the secret work of
God, being at the first in another place, met him in ye field, and there was
slain: consider then with your selves (dearly beloved) who are now said to
come out against us; are they not men sent from the Pope and King of Spain?
Were not the Spaniards in this Realm, in the days of Queen Mary, partakers
in the shedding of the blood of Gods children: for might not their Catholic
King have wrought the preservation of these Martirs, was not his consent and
theirs in the making and playing of that tragedy, was not the Italian Nimrod
the chief causer of that bloodshed: What then may we think (dearly beloved)
concerning their intent of assaulting us here in this land: Uerely (if we go
forward to fear the Lord) there is great hope that the Lord has hardened
their hearts, and put in their minds to come hither, to the intent he might
here requite them with blood again, who were in this place partakers in the
shedding of the blood of his saints.

Thus I have shortly (my brethren) showed you, according as this portion of
Scripture gave occasion, with what comfort and courage; with what hope and
expectation of victory we ought to prepare our selves against these enemies
of the Lord, abuse not (I beseech you) neither misconstrue mine exbortations.
You will ask peradventure, how that may be done. Uerely, what I have said,
whatsoever I have brought for your encouragement, as I have done it in
simplicity and single meaning, grounding on the word of our God: so if any do
think that hue they well or ill, seek they to know God aright or abide they
in ignorance, they shall enjoy the promises of the Scripture which I have
alleged, let such know that these comfortes pertain not to them. For I have
said nothing, but that which co^taining promise of help to them that are the
true Church, both so far appertain to us, as by embracing that true
interpretation and profession of Gods word (which our enemies are boyde of,
and without which none are the chosen people of God) we declare our selves to
be the true Church of Christ, as out of all question our popish adversaries are
not. To the intent therefore that we may not glory in our profession alone,
crying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord is amongst us, and
therefore to us simply both al belong, observe (yt as our profession does
minister hope unto us, so yt we may be assured to prevail) 3. things
necessarily to be performed of us.

1 The first is, that we trust not in our own valiantnes or furniture to the
battle but only in the Lord. In this confidence little David did set upon the
great Giaunt Goliath and prevailed. Thou come to me (says David) with
spear and shield, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, that
is to say, trusting in him are not in worldly weapons or defense. My heart
trusted in the Lord (says the same David) and I was helped. Psalm. 28.9.
Likewise the Prophet Hanani. 2. Chron. 16. teaches us the same lesson. For
speaking unto Asa the King, he says on this forte: Because thou have rested on
the king of Aram and not trusted in the Lord thy God, therefore is the host of
the king of Aram escaped out of thy hand. The Aethiopians and the Lutims were
they not a great host with charrets and horsemen, yet because thou did
trust in the Lord he delivered them into thine hand. By all which we may
perceive how the Lord is ready to help them which trust in him: as for such
as trust in the arm of flesh he gives them over to the pray, or disappoynteth
them of the victory which they hoped for, least they might say, how they
prevailed by the strength of their own hand. Wherefore let us so prepare our
selves to the battle, let us so exercise the weapons of this earthly warfare
that we trust not in them but in the Lord, and no doubt our enemies shall
fall before us.

2 A second thing required of us in this case, is that we put away ungodliness
far from us, that we repent us of our sins, and give our selves to
holiness of life, and a diligent following of the commandments of God. This
rule the Lord teaches us, Deuteronomy. 32.9. When thou go our with the host
against thine enemies (says the Lord) keep thee then from all wickedness. So
Leuit. 26. he promises victory to his people on this condition if they serve
him. Keep my Sabbaths (says he) reverence my sanctuary, walk in mine
ordinances, keep my commandments, then shall ye chase your enemies, and
they shall fall before you upon the sword. A. game, Deuteronomy. 11. If ye keep
diligently these commandments no man shall stand against you. Moreover, Deuteronomy.
28.7. If thou shall obey diligently the voice of the Lord, and do all his
commandments, the Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise against thee to
fall before thy face. Consider this (dearly beloved) for this purpose and
intent, that ye which fear the Lord may have confidence in the day of
battle, and that such as being appointed in the behalf of our country to go
against our enemies knowing this, may labor to reform themselves in knowledge
and behavior, before they set foot into the battle, least there the
vengeance of the Lord overthrow them. It is thought of some wicked persons,
that to have a pair of Dice in the one hand and a whore in the other, this is
Souldierlike; but woe unto such, for these are points of ungodliness, which
must by all of them be put away which will be assured to prosper in battle
against their enemies. We read in the seventh of Joshua how Achan sinned
against the Lord in the excommunicate thing, for which cause three thousand men
of the host of Israel (though they were the only true professors of the
world at that time) fled before the men of Ay, and the men of Ay smote of them
upon a thirty and six men: beware therefore that ye purge your selves before
the fight, for the battle is the Lords place of execution, and the enemies
are his axe which he holds in his hand, therewith to destroy all those that
with a stiff neck and a rebellious heart go on in breaking the commandments
of the Lord. Some will say, what is this a rule for Soldiers only? No verily,
but for all generally as well as for the^. It stands every one of us upon to
amend that which is amiss in us. The oppressor of the Lords Prophets, under
what color soever he does it, must take heed that he leave; the blasphemer
of Gods name must now begin to hallowe it; the peruerters of judgment must now
give upright sentence; the robbers of ye church must now live of their own
labors; the proud must now be humble; ye liar must now speak truth; ye
adulterer must now keep his vessel in holiness; the contemner of the word
must now begin to embrace it; the lukewarm Gospeller must now become zealous;
yea every Magistrate in his place, so far as his authority will stretch in
godliness, must effectually look to it, that sin be suppressed, so shall we
prosper against these adversaries of ours.

3 The last thing which is required of us in this case, is that according to
the present occasion ministered, we resort daily and diligently unto the Lord
in humble and hearty prayer, desiring the assistance of his mighty hand in the
tune of need and necessity. This if we do (brethren) let us not think that
the Lord will send us back without comfort. For why his promise is, That if
we call upon him in the time of trouble he will hear us and deliver us.
Psalm.50.15. and hereunto the manifold examples of Gods word give testimony.
When Joshua was gone out to fight against Amaleck, Moses prayed earnestly unto
the Lord in the behalf of his people, and by this means the Lord gave
victory to Israel, so that Joshua discomfited Amaleck and his people with the
edge of the sword Exodus 17. When Iehoshaphat in battle at Ramoth Gilead
against the Aramites was in danger to be stain, he cried in prayer to the
Lord, and the Lord caused the men of war to depart from him. 1 Reg. 22. 32.
When Ietur and Naphish cried vuto God in battle he heard them, because they
trusted in him. 1. Chron. 5.19. When Jerusalem was besieged of the host of
Senacherib, Ezekiah then King of Judah and Isaiah the Prophet joined together
in prayer unto the Lord, at whose petition, the Lord sent an Angel which
destroyed all the valiant men and the Princes and Captains of the host of the
King of Ashur, to the number of an hundred fourscore and five thousand. 2.
Chron. 32.

Among other, that is a most comfortable place which we find written Luc. 18.
where the wicked Judge which neither feared God nor reuerented man, though of
long time he would not do the poor widow justice against her adversary, yet
at ye last because of her importunity he did her right: Whereupon our Savior
concludes, saying: And shall not God avenge his elect which cry unto him day
and night, yea though he suffer long for them, I tell you he will avenge them
quickly. You see (dearly beloved) how much the Lord regards the earnest
prayers of his children crying for help unto him against their wicked
adversaries. Let us therefore never cease, let us put before God every day the
humble supplication of our hearts for the revenging of the blood of our
brethren, which these popish Aramites have stain here, in Flanders, or else
where; let us be importunate with the poor widow and never give over, till we
have answer of comfort from the throne of the Lord. He is not an hard
hearted or unkind, but a most merciful father to them that lift up pure hearts
and hands before him: he will not laugh at the tears of his children, but his
compassion will be moved, and the fire of his jealousy will burn and break
forth against these our adversaries, who assault his spouse and Church in
England to enforce her to commit fornication with them, and to forsake that
faithful covenant which she made with the Lord. Thus ye see (dearly beloved)
what comforts the Lord has laid up for them that profess his truth
sincerely, and that we also shall assuredly enjoy them, if as we she we our
selves by our profession to be of that kingdom of Christ, which shall subdue
all the kingdoms of the world, of the number of those Saints which God has
promised to deliver from the hands of Gog and Magog; so we trust not in our
own strength but in the Lord only; forsake our iniquities from the bottom of
our hearts, and pray earnestly to our heavenly father (not in the name of
Saints, as our adversaries do) but in the name of Christ his only son our
Savior, to be a tower of defense and a merciful protector unto us. God of
his mercy grant. etc.

FINIS.
Laus soli deo.

