AN INQVISITION OF THE TRVE CHVRCH, AND THOSE THAT REVOLT FROM IT.

BEING A SERMON pronounced at the second Session of the PARLIAMENT.

By CHRISTOPHER LO: Archbishop of ARMAGH, and Primate of all IRELAND.

^^^N. 21.10. Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of the
bondwoman shall not be heir with my son Isaac.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers.

Anno M.D.C.XXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ARTHVR LORD CHICHESTER, Baron of BELFAST, Lord high
Treasurer of IRELAND.
I Have dedicated this Sermon to your Lordship, who heard it pronounced in our
late Parliament here; when you represented the State and Person of a great
King. It was then expedient (as I thought) for the duty of my place, and
instruction of the hearers in that Honorable presence, out of holy Scriptures,
and writings of ancient Fathers, to express such marks or demonstrations, as
might distinguish and make the Spouse of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
be known from a step-dame. The true mother nourishes her children healthfully
with bread of life, and sincere milk of the Word: the other sets before
them quelques chooses of humane inventions, and unsavory plants which our
heavenly Father never planted. My endeavors therein, aimed at no other end, but
to leave Noah's fatherly blessing behind me: that is often in my mouth, and
never from my heart; God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem: that
living together like friends and contrymen, we might in some measure have
our militant Church on earth, resemble the triumphant congregation or city of
Angels and Saints in heaven. Amongst whom, nothing is more peculiar and proper
then (...), that happy agreement and consent which admits no strife, no
difference: Such holy concord would grow here with us (for all aspire to be
joined to that blessed Society) if we were reduced into one Fold. It may be
that some small debates come from our own brethren and comburgesses; moving
unnecessary and unprofitable questions in Ceremonies, things indifferent, and
Christian liberty: and therein I think we may say with Debora; The divisions of
Reuben are great thoughts of heart. Those will undoubted-cease (as they abate
daily) when we conteyne our selves under the rod and staff of our shepherd
Jesus Christ. Let him possess us wholly, and ceremonies can give no
impediment, as they be used in this Church. We put no merit, no matter of
salvation, no worship of God in them: but use them to nourish peace, and
charity, to keep order and decency in the Church; not for exercises of
piety: And most of them were used in the Church long before Popery did bear
sway. The abuses mixed with them by the Romanists, we affect not, we defend
not, we allow not: they have no portion, no right, no memorial in Jerusalem.
Things that have been abused, need not to be clean abolished: were that
proposition made general, it overthrows Churches, and many things else, as
well as the Rites and Ceremonies of our Liturgy. Our worthy ancestors (says
Saint Augustine) took the Temples dedicated to Idols, and converted them to
holy Oratories or houses of prayer, where CRIST JESUS is worshipped
sincerely, and his Gospel is purely taught. They took the revenues which were
devoted to the gods of the Gentiles, to Theaters, to Vestals, and turned them
to the entertaynement of Ministers, though they served not Antichrist before,
but Beelzebub the chief of the Devils. And Saint Augustine finds no solecisme
or incongruitie in it. Hoc de illis fit quod de ipsis hominibus, cum ex
sacrilegis and impijs in veram religionem immutantur. The grave and learned
Father avoweth, that there is not any other thing done in matters of this kind,
but that which happens unto men themselves, when they are turned from
sacrilege and impiety, unto Christian Religion. The sacred Vessels of the
Temple had been foully abused in Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar and Balthasser, yet
when Cyrus had given commandment for the restoring of them again, Zorobabel
made no scruple to employ them in their former holy uses. It was Saint
Augustine his practice, and is worthy to be observed: We correct those
things which Schismatiques or Heretics have corrupted, when they come unto
us from them: but do acknowledge and allow that which they held, as they
received it; lest, suffering our selves to be carried away in offense with
men's faults beyond the rules of Justice, we should do some vvrong to the
things themselves. For we see the Apostle Saint Paul even in an Altar of the
Gentiles where Idols were worshipped, to confirm the name of GOD, rather
then to disavow it. I will add no more to the conclusion of this point, but
the lesson which Saint Ambrose gave unto Saint Augustine, and was by him ever
after esteemed as an Oracle: There cannot be a better discipline, nor more
beseeming a grave and discreet Christian, then to do that which he sees
observed in the Church wheresoever he comes. For that is ever to be held
indifferent and to be performed for their sakes amongst whom we live, which
is neither against faith nor good manners.

The nature and use of these indifferent things is fully described by Saint
Bernard: Epist. 7.
Certain things are simply good in themselves; and men can challenge no
obedience that way: for they must be done, because they are enjoined by GOD.
Other things are altogether evil, and follow the same rule. Between these
things that be good or evil in themselves, there be other which be
indifferent, and may be good or evil as they be used. In this last sort, the
Christian Magistrate does exercise his power (or else he has no power left
him) and when he has interposed his authority, then do they in a manner
change their nature, concerning the use of them: for they are not then left
free to be omitted, but are necessary to be observed. In his fas non est
nostrum sensum sententiae praescribere magistrorum. In his omnino praelatorum
nec jussio nec prohibitio contemnenda. In these indifferent things every one
may not follow his particular fantasy (that would bring in confusion,
anarchy, and infinite tyranny) but all must comply with the Magistrate, with
the Church, with the governors of it; 1. Cor. 14.
The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

This limitation in the use of things indifferent, brings no diminution to the
freedom and liberty of a Christian: that has place or seat in the mind, De
votis Monastic.
and as Luther teaches gravely, it rests in the points that are between God
and me; for example, If I believe and am persuaded in mind and conscience,
that the Cross in Baptism, the Ring in matrimony, Kneeling at the Lords
Supper, etc. work nothing with God, and are not used in the Church to any such
purpose; I enjoy the full benefit of my Christian liberty, in the very use of
these and the like Ceremonies: But if I go about to draw my liberty into a
freedom of actions too, and to the things which are between my brother and
me, thinking to do what I list in them (because they are indifferent of
themselves, or in their own nature) without reverence to the Magistrates
orders, and respect of the Churches decrees; I do certainly bring my liberty
out of her true bounds, and turn it to a licentious disturbance of the Church,
the Magistrate, and every Christian brother which is wise unto sobriety.

Diligent care is to be taken, that we give not offense to our weak brethren
in the use of these indifferent things. And that will be discharged two ways:
first, if we consider who they be that pretend offense in this kind, Sure they
are not weak ones (who are only to be respected) but such as esteem
themselves stronger in faith then the residue. To these no just offense is
given, but they take offense unjustly; not of weakness, but of curiosity,
and overprizing their own inventions.

Another, and the second means to acquit and clear the Church from these
offenses, consists in the faithful labor of the Pastors. Let them be
vigilant to teach their people the nature and true use of ceremonies, and
things indifferent, as soon as any scandal arises, (for so they should do)
and the offense will wither in the bud, before it grow to strength or maturitie
to disquiet the Church. But when they which should extinguish offenses, bestow
their thoughts and indevors to nourish them; impressions of doubts or scruples
will be wrought in soft or tender minds easily: and it is not possible to
remove them again, without much difficulty and trouble. That can never be
welcome to the Church, neither is now seasonable or suting with my years and
infirmities: howbeit prepared I am, with the rest of my brethren, to endure and
devour all pains or travayle that may breed peace, concord, and unanimitie
amongst us. And I have the greater hope to prevayle, either by persuasive
reasons (which please me best) or by discipline (if the other be refused) for
the noble assistance that your Lordsh. does give me always in the affairs of
the Church. Continue those honorable respects; for they will make your memory
sweet and grateful to posterity, as they have obliged the Clergy now present
to acknowledge your goodness, and my self most of all to remain,

Your Lordsh. humble and affectionate servant, ARMAGH.

AN INQVISITION OF THE TRVE Church, and those that revolt from it.
1. John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: For if they had
been of us, they would have continued with us. But this comes to pass, that
it might appear that they be not all of us.


IN the former Verse the Apostle makes mention both of one, and many
Antichrists. For (as Hilary writes) every one is Antichrist, that does not
acknowledge Christ in the same manner that the Apostles preached him. So it
comes to pass that there be many Antichrists; according to Christ his
prediction, There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, to deceive (if
it were possible) the very Elect. Old father Simeons prophecy, when he took
our blessed Savior into his arms, sorted to the same conclusion. Immediately
before the good man did sing his Swan-like song of Nunc dimittis, he pronounced
freely, that which succeeding times have verified, That the child Jesus should
be set as a sign to be spoken against, not by one, but by many; He was in
the world, and the world knew him not. he came unto his own, and his own
received him not. But amongst those many contraries that Christ should have,
the holy Ghost in the Scripture points at one capital Antichrist, who would
exceed all the rest. All are dangerous adversaries, carefully to be avoided: to
that end we are admonished of them. And indeed, who are more to be avoided of
Christians, then they who oppose themselves against Christ our Lord? Yet none
of them are to be eschued with so much care or diligence, as those which cover
their oppositions against Christ with titles of piety, of holiness, under the
name and pretense of Christ; as if they were his Vicars, or Vicegerents, and
did all for him. Professed hostility and open contradiction could never have
advanced the kingdom of Antichrist: for who are so wretched, or Giant-like
desperate, to enterprise war with God? The devil himself, being the Prince of
darkness, when he would draw most awry, and seduce, is transformed into an
Angel of light: even so does Antichrist, pretending the name of Christ, the
keys of Peter, his seat, his succession, and the alluring name of the Church,
seduce great troops of unheedefull souls, that he could never gain with open
profession of impiety. Such is the efficacy of his deceiveablenesse, such is
the mystery of his iniquity: under these habits or sheep clothing, he
disguiseth his Wolvish ravin. Let us not then be miscarried with outward shows
or titles, but examine and weigh every thing by the balances of the
Sanctuary.

For our better information in this caveat, the Apostle, by the passage of my
Text, does brand this Antichristian troop with a legible mark, whereby you
may surely know them. They went out from us, they revolt, they fall away, they
forsake and slide away from the Church, and the doctrine thereof: they depart
from the fellowship and communion of Saints. Behold a visible mark, a true
cognizance to discern the Antichristian sort. And needful it is that we
should have such prints or characters to discover them, in regard of the great
perrill and danger which they bring to themselves and others that are swayed by
them. Quisquis ab Ecclesia segregatus jungitur adulterae, a promissis Ecclesiae
separatur: nec pertinet ad Christi praemia, qui reliquerit Ecclesiam Christi.
Alienus est, prophanus est, hostis est; habere jam non potest Deum patrem, qui
Ecclesiam non habet matrem. It is the sentence of S. Cyprian, De simplic.
praelator.
and very orthodoxe: Each one that is severed from the true Church, and joined
to the false, as to an adulteress, is certainly cut off from the promises
made to the Church: neither can he be interessed in Christ his promises, which
forsakes Christ his Church. He is a stranger, he is profane, he is an
enemy, he cannot now have God to his father, which will not reverence and obey
the Church as his mother.

The use of this doctrine is, to admonish us to gather our selves into the
society and fellowship of the Church. Psalm. 84.
How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? What happiness is it to be
joined in company and consort with the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
with the Prophets, with the Apostles, with the Martyrs, with the holy Angels of
God, and with Christ himself? Take heed therefore, beloved brethren, and
beware that you bereave not your selves of the comforts dispensed unto you out
of the Church: beware that you cut not your selves off from this heavenly
communion or company, through singularity or headiness of courage. Pluck
not up the Tares in prejudice or detriment to the Wheat; but suffer both to
grow together until the Harvest, and let him separate which has the Fan in
his hand to purge the floor.

I know it will here be objected, that the Antichristian sort may be well
discovered by their apostasy and relinquishing the Church, when the Church it
self is not controverted: but where the Church is ambiguous, that men make
question where the true Church is whether it be with those that profess the
Gospel of Jesus Christ sincerely, or amongst such as have addicted themselves
to the Bishop of Rome* there the notice of apostasy is not perspicuous, it is
not easily to be taken: For as Waspes make themselves combs like to Bees; so
heretics have their Conventicles, their Synagogues, which they adorn with the
style and title of Churches. And this painting has ever made a debate: Inter
nos and Donatistas quaestio est ubi sit Ecclesia; Quid ergo facturi sumus? In
verbis nostris eam quaesituri an in verbis capitis sui Domini nostri Jesus
Christi? puto quod in illius verbis potius eam quaerere debemus qui veritas
est, and optime novit corpus suum: novit enim Dominus qui sunt sui. When doubts
are moved where the Church should be, there are but two manner of enquests or
trials to find it: either by the marks which we have devised our selves; or
by evidences which Christ Jesus, the lively head of the Church has prescribed
for the manifestation of it. And this latter inquisition (by the judgment of
Saint Augustine) is the surer and fairer proof: for CHRIST is truth, and
knows his own body best. Does not the Lord know who be his? Yes
certainly, He calls his own sheep by name, Ioh. 10.

On the other side, sad experience teaches us that live in this age, how
miserably they are mistaken, that go about to point out the Church, not by
any certain demonstrations out of the holy Scripture, but by deceiveable
fantasies of men. Wherein they commend Antiquity first, for a special mark
of the Church: and consider not that it may be counterfeited or pretended
without any truth of right and just antiquity. Did not the Gibeonites plead
it in that manner for their rags, their over-worne shoes, and molded bread:
So they did, if they circumvented a wise and vigilant Governor, with such
colorable pleas: how much easier is it to beguile ignorant and simple people,
or to put them into error by maskes and pretenses of feined antiquity? And
though we have not any cause to avoid or shun the trial of true
antiquity, which comes from the Ancient of days, nor our adversaries to
presume of it: the unpartiall and due consideration of the thing it self, will
certainly evict, that Antiquity cannot be any firm or individual
companion of the Church, and so no good mark. For then, the Church must have
been ancient in the very infancy or beginning thereof; which is a thing
impossible. Antiquity is commendable: not in it self, or when it is alone,
but as it is joined with verity. Therefore I conclude this article with the
same exhortation that the Prophet Jeremy used to the men of his time: Stand
upon the ways and consider which is the old way, and the good way, and walk
in it, that you may find rest to your souls.

Let us pass on further, to the consideration of other marks, and you shall
see, it cannot stand good to make the Church always visible or conspicuous.
That would take away an article of our Faith and Creed. When we believe there
is a Church, we do affirm plainly that it is not visible, or ocularly to be
discerned: Heb. 11.
for Faith is an apprehension of things that cannot be seen. So believing
there is a Church, (as is by all professed) we acknowledge therein that the
same is not visible. Why should any speak of multitudes to be a mark of the
Church, Luc. 19.
seeing Christ himself calls it a little flock? Quid gaudendum ad
multitudines? This mark of multitudes had been a weak and impertine^t
allegation, when all the world was drowned, but eight persons saved in the
Arc; and that was then the whole number of the Church. Or when the five cities
were destroyed with fire, and Lot only escaped with his two daughters: or in
Elias time, when he complained he was left alone.

The Church is not ever in one state, but like the Moon, sometimes increasing,
sometimes diminishing; sometimes at the full, sometimes in the waine: and
therefore the multitude, or paucity of people in the Church being but
accidents, and not essentially inherent in the Church: are made marks of the
Church unproperly.

Thus they are deceived, and deceive others, that seek and set forth a Church
in their own words. Nolo humanis documentis, sed divinis oraculis sanctam
Ecclesiam demonstrari. I will not have any demonstration of the Church made
unto me, says S. Augustine) out of men's instructions, but from the oracles of
God. Seek then for the Church in the words of Christ, and the demonstration
thereof will be infallible. Our blessed Savior sends his Disciples into all
the world (that is the extent of the Church) he charge them to preach the
Gospel unto every creature, to baptize them in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, and to teach them to observe all that he has
commanded. These be the things which the Son of God would have practiced in
his house, and by them you may easily find out the Church of God. The sincere
doctrine of the Gospel, the true and right administration of the Sacraments,
and that form of discipline which may bring obedience to his commandments:
who can make that a Church where these things be wanting? who can deny it to
be a Church, where they be exercised? My sheep (says our Savior) hear my
voice. Therefore the Word of God must be read, it must be preached, it must
sound amongst them; else how is it possible that they should hear it? Ecce
Scripturae communes: Aug. Epist. 166.
ecce ubi novimus Christum; ecce ubi novimus Ecclesiam. The Scriptures which
are propounded to all men, says S. Augustine, are the usual marks to know
Christ and his Church by. So Christ says himself, If ye abide in me, and my
words abide in you, ye are verily my Disciples. But alas how can his words
abide in those which hear not of them, that are forbidden to hear or know
them? Non est pax sed bellum, Cypr. de laps. Ser. 5.
nec Ecclesiae jungitur qui ab evangelio separatur. There can be no peace but
war with such people; neither can they be joined to the Church, that sever
themselves ^^om the Gospel. Or put case they have the Gospel, yet if it be
not expounded truly unto them, if it be not taught purely and sincerely, what
advantageth it them? As all gold was not holy, but that only which belonged to
the Sanctuary; so every sense that is without the compass of Holy Writ,
glistering without never so much otherwise, yet can it not be holy unless it
be conformed to the word of God. Hierony. in cap 5 ad Galatas.
Quicunque Scripturam aliter intelligit quam sensus spiritus sancti flagitat,
licet de Ecclesia non recesserit, tamen haereticus appellari potest. Whosoever
interprets the Scriptures otherwise then the holy Ghost means, by which it
is written, may well be called an heretic, although he be not departed from
the Church. Are not the interpretations from God? Joseph teaches us they are
from God, in expounding Pharaohs dream: then much more are the interpretations
of holy Scripture from God. By the same Spirit the Scriptures were written, by
the same they must be interpreted and understood: 2. Cor. 2.
For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is
within him? even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God,
and those that are taught of God. Scripture is not of private interpretation,
but must be interpreted by Scripture; the darker places, by those which be more
plain and easy: and, as Tertullian writes, oportet secundum plura intelligi
pauciora: and ne unus sermo multa alta subvertat, secundu^ omnia, potius quam
adversus omnia intelligendus erit; The interpretations of the Scripture must be
made according to the meaning of the more places: and lest that one Text should
war against many others, that is to be expounded in a correspondency to all
the rest, rather then in a repugnancy unto them. And if you will try the
Spirits whether they be of God, or no (as S. John advises us) or examine
every interpretation; we have two rules to measure them by: The first
examination is, whether their interpretations and expositions be referred to
the glory of God or no? If they tend to the glory of God, our Savior Christ
gives them a warrant of truth: Qui quaerit gloriam meam verax est; He that in
his expositions seeks my glory, is a true interpreter. Let us now in the name
of God, come to the trial of particulars by this rule. Is it possible for them
to seek the glory of God in the question of Justification, which refuse the
justification by Jesus Christ, and attribute salvation to their own merits?
who magnify the abilities of humane nature, and extenuate the unsearchable
riches of Gods grace? I conceive no possibility or appearance of it. Quid illis
miserius quorum saluti salus ipsa no^ sufficit? Alas, how miserable are they,
which will not have salvation it self sufficient to save them? Beloved, let us
not abrogate the grace of God: for S. Augustine writes truly, Tutiores
vivimus, si totum Deo damus; We live in more safety when we ascribe the whole
work of our justification to God.

The second trial of interpretations, is, whether they be agreeable with the
proportion of faith? For he that prophesies, must do it accorcording to the
proportion of faith. Measure the doctrine of Romish Catholics by this rule,
and I think it will not prove Catholic. Can the invocation of Saints stand
with the proportion of faith? will they believe in Saints? and how can they
call on them, in whom they have not believed? I cannot stand upon many such
particulars, which you all do see might be alleged: but am forced through
straitness of time to conclude them in this general. Hierony. in cap. 1. ad
Galatas.
De Evangelio Christi, hominis, faciunt Evangelium, aut quod pejus est diaboli:
These interpretations of Scripture, which do not agree with the proportion of
faith, make of Christ, a man's Gospel, or a devils, and that is worse. The Ark of God and Dagon cannot stand together: there is no agreement between light
and darkness: the purity of the Gospel will never admit sophisticatio^s of
humane devises; howsoever the Council of Trent would have both to be received
alike, Sess 4.
namely, the books of both Testaments, and the unwritten Traditions, with
equal piety and affection of reverence. It is true that the Apostles delivered
many things ore tenus, which Apostolic men received and delivered again
faithfully to their disciples: but let that be well remembered withal, which
Ireneus writes, that all these things were (...), they were all agreeable to
the Scriptures, and their writings. Is it probable, or shall we believe, that
the Apostles writing, we should take heed and beware of Images, did leave any
tradition, that times would come, wherein the use of pictures and images would
be requisite or fitting in the Church? Is it credible, that the Idols of
Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, etc. should be cast out of all Temples by the Apostles
doctrine; and a tradition from the Apostles, to set up the portraitures of
Christ, of the blessed Virgin Mary, or their own pictures in place of the
other? Is it possible, that they which taught us to worship and call upon one
God alone, did ever give any tradition for themselves also to be worshipped and
called upon, when they were departed this life? That they which writ, We have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, did ever order that
themselves also would be our advocates? No, no. It was impossible, it is
incredible; it cannot be conceived without disparagement to the Apostles, that
men of their rank and integrity, inspired and governed by the holy Ghost,
should deliver or utter any thing by word of mouth, varying or dissenting from
the attestations they left in writing. The pure word of God, without addition
or diminution, is the true mark of the Church; and so the Hucksters that chop
and change it, to serve their own inventions or turns, carry not the right
cognizance of Christians.

Touching Sacraments, and the due administration thereof, which is another
mark of a true Church: they that are most confident, and make greatest vaunts
of the Church, do no ways administer them rightly; save that by God his
providence the essential form of Baptism is retained amongst them: otherwise
they profane it not a little, when they apply it to senseless things, as to
Bells; when they add Salt, Oil, and Spittle. Is not the element of Water
sufficient, which Christ instituted to represent his precious blood, to wash
away our sins, without those mixtures?

The other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they have not defiled, as they have
done Baptism: but they have quite altered and changed it into a cursed and
abominable Idol of their Mass. And so have prevented and annihilated Christ
his holy institution: For first, whereas two things be necessary in
Sacraments; the sign, and the thing signified: they take away the Signs, for
establishing of their Transubstantiation. Secondly, they should distribute it
unto others, and they keep it only to themselves, and so make it private;
whereas it should be a public banquet. Thirdly, they keep the Cup from the
people, which our Savior commanded should be given to all. Fourthly, in the
Supper Christ offers himself to us, and their Priests offer him unto God;
who indeed cannot be offered but by his eternal Spirit; nor without his death,
whereas he died but once for ever. And where these things be done, the
essential parts of the Sacrament are not kept; therefore no Supper, no
Sacrament, but an horrible profanation, and plain sacrilege. Adulterum est,
impium est, Cypr de laps.
sacrilegum est quodcunque humano furore instituitur, ut dispositio divina
violetur. Whatsoever is instituted by humane temeritie, to violate God his
ordinance, is adulterous, it is impious, it is sacrilegious.

As for those men's discipline, whereby people should be brought to the
obedience of Christ his commandments: the world sees their wilful
negligence. In which case, I must needs approve of that which S. Chrysostom
writes to the people of Antioch: Hom. 17.
Mihi Civitas non habens bonos cives omni villa vilior est; The City that is
not inhabited with good men, is more unpleasing to me then the basest village.

Seeing therefore the Church of Rome reteyneth not the sincere purity of the
word: seeing it has abolished one of the Sacraments, and corrupted the other
profanely: seeing it has little or no care at all of godly discipline; men
may peradventure make doubt or question, whether it be the Church of God, or
no? I dare not wholly take away the name of a Church from it. I know that
Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God: that Baptism cannot be administered
out of the Church: And when the entire form of Baptism is observed, S.
Augustine is resolved, Non haereticus, sed haeretici manu Christus baptisat;
There it is not the heretic that baptiseth, but Christ does it by the hand of
an heretic. Therefore the Council of Nice determined very gravely, that there
should be no rebaptization, of such as were baptized by heretics. Yet I do
not allow the Romish Synagogue to be a Church simply, but by equivocation and
(...). as the woman carries the name of your wife, which you did once marry,
and afterward found her defiled with adultery; yet because she keeps the
marriage Ring, and some other pledges of her former wedlock, she still bears
the name of your wife. So it is with the Church of Rome; albeit for her
adulteries she has deserved a divorce justly: yet because the Bridegroom has
not given her his bill of divorce, but suffered her hitherto to hold Baptism,
as it were the marriage Ring; I account it a Church, but miserably deformed,
and infected with infinite errors. I cannot reckon it less then a part of
discourtesie, and of more advantage then Gods truth needs so to contend with
the adversaries thereof, as not to admit of those graces amongst them, which
God is pleased to vouchsafe unto them. Let us give every one his right: let our
adversaries in the name of God hold their due: let us willingly yield them all
that does appertain unto them; and let us tax their corruptions nevertheless
with all freedom. This is heroical, this is Prophetical, this is
Apostolical, and much more then they will yield unto us. For without hearing
of us, or our cause, they which are parties against us, take upon them to be
our judges too, and to condemn us for heretics, for schismatickes, and to
have no Church at all. Like to Athalia, that seeing the right heir Ioas
crowned King of Judah, cried, Treason, treason, when she was greatest traitor
her self. Indeed if we unchurch Congregations for schism, or for simple
heresy, there will be no good warrant, unless the heresy impugn one of the
three persons of the holy Trinity directly; then the heresy is not single,
but arises to infidelity, which is the bane and cutthroat of all Churches.

But our adversaries do charge us also with Apostasy; and that is a mark of
Antichrist mentioned in our Text: They went out from us, but they were not of
us. Hereupon our Rhemish Seminaries note, that Luther and Calvin went out of
their Church, that is, of Papists became Protestants; but they came not out of
ours: and that is the Catholic Church which is forsaken. To admit that which
will not easily be proved, that England first received the Christian faith
from Rome, both in the time of Eleutherius their Bishop, and also in the time
of Augustine their Monk; yet will it not thereon follow, that we must still
fetch our Religion from Rome, as from the chief fountain and wellspring of
all godliness. For if any man fall away from that Church which is not Christ
his spouse, he cannot be charged justly with Apostasy: Nullus pudor est ad
meliora transire; It is no shame to change for the better. Or if a man do
leave and depart from a particular Church in body, and yet forsake not the
communion and fellowship of the Apostles doctrine, nor the Sacraments rightly
administered, but holds them with all other sincere Churches: that man is no
Apostata. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 46.
Non ille de Ecclesia exire videtur qui corporaliter exit, sed qui
spiritualiter veritatis Ecclesiasticae fundamenta reliquit; He goes not out
of the Church that departs corporally, but he that spiritually has forsaken
the foundations of Ecclesiastical truth. The right apostasy is a falling away
from the true Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, and therefore from
Christ; and that by revolting from the Apostles doctrine, and the communion of
the Catholic faith. They went out from us. If Luther, Calvin, and our selves
went out of the Church of Rome, we incur no crime of apostasy therein:
because we left that Church which was neither Catholic, nor Apostolic. We
left not Bethel, that is, the house of God, until it became Bethaven, that is,
the house of iniquity.

An Apostolic Church it is not, because it rests not upon the doctrine of
the Apostles, but is fallen from it, as we have formerly showed. In which
case, De unitat. eccles.
we have S. Augustines grave advise; Ne Catholicis quidem Episcopis
consentiendum est, sicubi sort fallantur, and contra canonicas Scripturas
aliqui sentiant. No consent is to be given to those Bishops which are
Catholic, when they are deceived, or hold any thing contrary to the
canonical Scriptures. We then in going out of that Church where the word of
God is not purely taught, and the Sacraments are not administered duly,
according to our Savior Christ his holy institution, and God is not worshipped
after the Apostles doctrine; make no default or departure from the Church, but
as Moses went out of Egypt, Lot out of Sodom, Elias from Baals Priests: and
that is no apostasy, but a renunciation of their apostasy, that we might
marshall our selves under the Standard of our head and Captain Christ Jesus,
and so enter into true Jerusalem, which is mother of us all. If the Church of
Rome give impediment to us in this passage, it is a step-dame, no true mother,
no Apostolic Church. Neither is it the Catholic, but a particular Church, as
the Churches were of Alexandria, Milan, Ephesus, etc. The Church is called
Catholic, first, in respect of place, when it is not appropriated or fixed to
any certain place (as the Jews did dream of Jerusalem long ago, and the
Papists do now dote of Rome) but reaches unto all parts and places of the
world: secondly, it is called Catholic in respect of persons comprehended in
it, because no sort of people are excluded or refused. For now the wall of
partition is pulled down, and we are all one in Christ Jesus: thirdly, it is
called Catholic in respect of time, that whenever it had beginning, yet it
continues for ever, either militant here upon earth, or triumphant in heaven.
So the whole family or house of God is divided. Fourthly and lastly, the Church
is called Catholic, in respect of doctrine therein professed: for it imbraceth
and maintayneth, not parts or portions, but the whole body of Prophetical and
Apostolical doctrine. The Church of Rome is not Catholic in any of these
respects; and therefore we plead, Not guilty of apostasy in leaving it. Let
our adversaries meditate rather how to clear the Church of Rome of apostasy:
for it is fallen away from them of whom it received the Gospel, Faith,
Religion, and the name of a Church. Let them refuse their Synagogues, forsake
their broken cisternes that will hold no water, return to that true and
ancient faith, for which they were once renowned through the world; and we
shall run together again in an holy union with them. If they will not, I
call heaven and earth to record against them this day, that they themselves are
fallen from the Gospel, from truth, from word, from Sacraments, from Religion,
from Christ, from the Apostles and church of Christ: all which we uphold with
great endeavor. For they have broken the bands, wherewith they were coupled to
the Apostles: they have relinquished that communion, which formerly they held
with the Church.

These bands be of two sorts, outward and inward. The outward bands may be cut
in sunder: as the profession of true doctrine, and the right administration of
the Sacraments. Both which bands are broken by our adversaries; as we have
showed some proof of before: And they shall never be able to throw any just
aspersion upon us in that kind; the Lord of heaven and earth be praised for it.
Amongst the inward couplings, Election is first: for all that belong truly to
the Church, are bound together in heaven in the bundle of life with their God.
The other is the band of Christ his holy Spirit; which works the same faith
and love in the members, that is in Christ our head. These inward bands cannot
be dissolved, or cut in sunder: for neither can God his eternal election be
avoided; neither can the faith of those that are elected, fail totally or
finally. The visible Church has in it self, two different sorts of people:
the one make an outward bare profession only; the other by inward election,
are firmly joined unto Christ. The first are in the visible Church alone, but
not of the Church invisible: They participate in the outward Sacraments of
Christ, but not with the inward blessings of Christ; and so they may fall away:
they may be in the Church, but not of the Church. They which are inwardly
coupled to Christ by his election, and holy Spirit, cannot fall away from
Christ and his church. So our Text teaches us their constancy and
perseverance; If they had been of us, they would have continued with us. The
outward joints and participation may be dissolved: for all they are not the
Israel of God, which are of Israel. No; many of the^ are Israelites: they were
amongst the multitude that was called, they were not of the small number that
was elected. Mali in Area nobiscum esse possunt, in horreo non possunt:
Hypocrites and false Gospellers may be in the Church with us; they cannot be
of the church: they are like Summer fruit, they hold not out, they continue not.

On the other side, they that be of us, they continue with us. After they be
matriculated, and have their names registered in the holy Rolls of the Church,
they do not revolt, but are established. All that the Father gives me, shall
come to me; and him that comes unto me, I cast not away. The counsel of
the Lord endures for ever. Vnde (says Saint Augustine) nisi de nobis quos
antea praescivit and praedestinavit? Quis tollit praedestinationem Dei? ante
mundi constitutionem vidit nos, fecit nos, emendavit nos, misit ad nos, red^mit
nos: hoc ejus consilium manet in aeternum, haec ejus cogitatio manet in secula
seculorum. How does the Lords counsel endure for ever, but in us whom he has
seen and predestined? Who can take away God his predestination? before the
foundation of the world he did foresee us, he made us, he reformed us, he sent
unto us, he redeemed us: this counsel of the Lord abides for ever, this
thought of the Almighty remains thoroughout all ages. Behold the ground and
certainty of their faith; mark how they which are inwardly coupled to Christ
and his Church, cannot fall away from the one or the other: for Christ says,
None can take them out of his hands. Another reason is expressed in the same
place: My Father which gave them to me, is greater then all; and none is able
to take them out of my Fathers hands. These reasons were not good, if they
might fall away from Christ which are inwardly coupled to him: for then Christ
and his Father must be weaker then he that did take them out of their hands;
and that is a blasphemy worthy to be detested.

If faith could fail, the elect might perish: for without faith it is
impossible to please God. But our Savior Christ does testify, that it is not
possible that the elect should perish: and therefore their faith cannot fail.
If their faith could fail, the elect should be regenerate often: but the elect
are borne of incorruptible seed; and as the seed is, so must the generation
also be incorruptible. To that purpose S. John writes, He that is borne of
God sins not, neither can he, because the seed of God abides in him. How
should faith be variable, that has God his promise? I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not go from me. If God will not have his to fall
away, how should they fail? If he will put his fear into their hearts, that
they should not fail, how can they lose that fear? No, no. Besides that, they
have a further preservative, namely, the efficacy of Christ his prayers, Keep
them in thy truth, Ioh. 17: Again, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith do
not fail, Luc. 22.

The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down; but my mercy
shall not depart from thee neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away,
says the Lord, Esaias 54.

Ioh. 15.
You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that you go
and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain. If Christ has ordained
that their fruit shall remain, who dare say that it shall not remain? Romans 11.
The gifts and graces of God are without repentance. Of David's faith, of
Peter's, and others that fell into enormious sins; I say with Tertullian, Caepit
arescere, sed non exaruit: mota fuit, sed non amota: concussa, sed non excussa,
nut extincta. Their faith began to wither, but it withered not: it was moved,
but not removed: it was shaken, but not extinguished. The grace of faith, and
the holy Ghost, may be, and are often lost even of them that are regenerate in
part, concerning some certain gifts more or less; but cannot be lost wholly,
because the Lord reserveth a seed in them. For example, David lost the
rightnesse of heart, and integrity of spirit, when he fell into his foul
sins of adultery and murder: yet was he not bereaved of these wholly; for
then he could not have prayed for restitution unto them. How shall they call
upon him, in whom they have not believed? Mark then in David that seed which
S. John says is left. Oh the unsearchable riches of our God his goodness and
mercy, that reserveth a seed of regeneration in our most heavy and sad
downefalls! For except the Lord of Hosts had left this seed, we should all have
been as Sodom, and as Gomorra.

Theophilact writes to the like purpose, of Peter, upon Luc. 22. Although
Peter thou shall find a concussion for a while, yet have thou the seeds of
faith left within thee: although the breath of the Tempter shake down some
leaves of thy faith, yet the root holds life, and thy faith shall not fail.
Will you see a lively representation or spectacle hereof? Look upon the same
man, the same Peter, Mat. 14. when he was walking unto Christ upon the Sea, and
trampling down the proud waves thereof with his feet: he began to be drowned
in that haughty enterprise; but Christ, reaching out a hand unto him, held him
up. Blessed be that sweet, that comfortable, that helpful, and healthful
hand of Jesus Christ, which is reached out to us all in our several
necessities. And so, to conclude this point with sensible divinity, which most
of us, that observe it, has experience of; though our faith be often shaken
(as Peter's was) with our own infirmities, yet it stands fast by the mercies
of God in Christ. He sees no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel:
or if he look upon it, he beholds all the Items and Obligations thereof
cancelled, and fastened to the Cross of his Son. So as indeed there is no
condemnation left to them that are in Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 4.8.
We are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress: we are in
doubt, but we despair not: we are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down,
but we perish not.

Hieronym. epist. ad Rusticum
Nihil Christiano foelicius eui promittitur regnum coelorum: nihil laboriosius
qui quotidie de vita periclitatur: nihil fortius, qui vincit diabolum: nihil
imbecillius qui a carne superatur. Nothing more happy then a Christian,
because he has promise of the kingdom of heaven: nothing more painful,
because he runs in hazard of his life every day; nothing more valiant,
because he overcomes the devil: nothing more feeble, because he is vanquished
by his own flesh. This sum is, that we have a great treasure given unto us
of God in faith and believing his promises: but we carry this treasure in
earthen vessels, subject to many knocks. Let us therefore work out our
salvation with fear and trembling: first, by distrusting our own abilities,
and attributing all to God through Jesus Christ: Secondly, in believing his
promises therein. So we shall be humble in our selves, with fear and
trembling; yet confident in God, which works all in us, both to will and to
perform. When we are weak, he is strong; and out of our weakness brings
forth his own power. He predestinateth us to be of his family by his eternal
counsel, inrolleth us by our Baptism, calls us by his holy word, nourishes
us with the body and blood of his Son Jesus Christ, seals and confirms us
to constancy by the effectual operation of his blessed Spirit. And so those
which revolt from us in these bands, what outward show soever they make of
Catholics, yet are they not of the true Church: but so persisting, they have
no portion; no right, no memorial in Jerusalem. Howbeit let us pray the Father
(...) Lord Jesus Christ, to take away the va(...) ^s laid (...) their hearts,
to the intent (...)red together into one fold, to (...) ^hip, to ^^^fesse, to
call upon Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three persons and one God, praised and
magnified in the Church throughout all generations. AMEN.

FINIS.

