The chronicle of Ihon Hardyng in meter, from the first beginning of England,
unto yt reign of Edward ye fourth where he made an end of his chronicle. And
from yt time is added with a co^tinuacion of the story in prose to this our
time, now first emprinted, gathered one of diverse and soundrie autours of
most certain knowelage and substanciall credit, yt either in latin or else in
our mother toungue have written of ye affairs of England.

LONDINI.

In officina Richardi Graftoni

Mense Ianuarii.

1543.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

RG

printer's or publisher's device

The dedicacion of this present work, unto the right honorable lord Thomas
duke of Norffolke, by thenprynter, Richard Grafton.
Lord Thomas of Norffolke duke most gracious
Of noble auncestrie and blood descended
A captain right worthy and auenturous
And from Scotland even newely retended
Where Englandes querele ye have revenged
In the behalf of our noble king Henry
I wyshe you all health, honor, and victory
And because it has pleased almighty God
In the right title and quercle of England
To use your stock as an iron rod
Wherewith to scourge the falsehood of Scotland
In whom is no truth ne hold of any band
Ihon Hardynges chronicle, as me thought was
Most mete to be dedicated, to your grace
For Hardyng a true herted Englysheman
An esquier valiant hardy and bold
And not unlearned, as the time was than
Serched out of chronicles, both late an old
All that ever by the same has be told
How from the beginning, Scotla^de does reign
Under kings of England, as their soueram
And Hardynges own self, has the party be
That from Scotland, often times has brought
Their seals of homage and fealtee
Unto the king of England, as he ought
Unto whom the Scotts then sued and sought
Yeldyng to live in humble subieccion
Of Englandes governance and proteccion
But that people of their propre nature
Has even from the first, been so untoward
So unsteadfast, inconstaunte and unsure
That nothing may possibly be more froward
So have they continued from thens foorthwarde
Never glad to be in quiet and rest
But to defeccion, aye ready and pressed
Wherefore Thon Hardyng, to his lord and master
Whom in his time he served without blame
Edward, first duke of York, and after
King of this realm, the fourth of that name
In this chronicle affermeth of the same
That they will rebel, till by provision
The king of England shall have made them both
And in deed England, has often been co^streigned one
The Scotts slackenesse in dooyng their homage
To prick forewarde, when they would have refreined
With yt sharp spur of marciall forceage
And to abate their wantonness of courage
With the iron rod, of due correccion
As often as they attempted defeccion
For ye Scotts will aye be bostyng and crakyng
Ever sekyng causes of rebellion
Spoils, booties, and preades ever taking
Ever sowyng quereles of dissension
To burn and steal is all their intencion
And yet as people, whom God does hate and curse
They always begin, and ever have the worse
England hitherto has never lacked power
As often as need were, the Scotts to compel
Their duty to do, and men of honor
England has had, as stories do tell
Which whenever the Scotts did rebel
Were hable at all times, them to subdue
And their obedience, to England renew
Emo^ges ye which noumbre, your noble father
In the twelfth year of Henry the seuenths reign
By aunciente record, as I can gather
Being of such credence as cannot feign
Yode into Scotland their pride to restrein
With se^bleable power (as books dooen auowe)
And like commission as your grace had now
That season he did so valiauntely
The Scotts vanquishyng and puttyng to flight
That they ran away most shamefully
Not hable of him tabide the sight
Nor hable to sustein, the brunt of his might
Soondrie castelles, he raced down to the ground
Which to the honor of England did redound
King Iamy also, making great braggue and vau^te
Having his army not a mile of that day
Your father as a captain valiant
Made in a moment, for fear to run away
The Scottish king, se^ding forth heraldes tway
Challenged your father, with many a proud word
Battle to wage, and try it by the sword.
And choose thou sir Earl, quod king Iamy then
Whether we shall fight, army against army
Orelles I and thou, try it manne for manne
For sparyng bloodshed, of either compaignie
That if it chance me, to have the victory
Naught shall I demand, for Englandes loss and thine
Sauig Barwike town, for ever to be mine
Then to the heraldes, said this noble knight
Show to your king, that in this place purposely
Battle for to wage, my tents have I pight
I am not come to flee, but to fight sharply
As where he stands, he may see with his eye
And first where he would, bloodshed saved to be
Thereof am I no less desirous then he.
Secundarily, where it is his likyng
That I a poor Earl, and of mean estate
May combattre, with him being a king
That our two fightes, may cease all debate
He does me honor, after such high rate
That I must needs grant, my self bound in this case
Humble thanks to re^dre to his grace
Now as for the town of Barwike, it is known
(Which your lord requires in case I be slain)
Is the king my souereins, and not mine own
So that grant thereof, in me dodeth not remain
But this may ye bear word to your lord again
My person and life, adventure I shall
More precious to me, then the round world all.
When king Iamy, by his heraldes two
Spedefullye returnyng, had due knowlage
Much otherwise, then he looked for thoo
Of the Earls stout answer and message
Fled out of hand, and would no battle wage
So that your father, returned home victour
With coumfort, laud, praise, joy and honor
The same your father, in the fyfth year
Of our most noble king Henry the eight
When his grace and his army at Turney were
And the same king Iamy, of Scotland straight
Against England, his banner dyspleyght
Vanquished the Scotts, and with your helpyng hand
Slew there king Iamy, and brought him to England
Again in the.xv. year of the same reygne
Your self in proper person, full courageous
Set forth against ye Scotts, without dysdeygne
Like a captain valiant and venturous
Where ye bre^t Iedworth, a town right populous
With diverse victories, that your grace then had
Which made all England, to rejoice and be glad
The year following also, as books testify
The Scotts came, with an houge power
Of.lx. thousand men under the Duke of Albany
Besiegyng Warke castle, thynkyng it to devour
But heryng that your grace, did approach yt houe
The Scotts trembled, and so did their Duke
And cowardly fled, to their shame and rebuke.
Sembleably, by this your last viage
Now this last October and November
Made into Scotland, to their great damage
It does as me seems, right well appear
That when pleases our king to send you thither
Your house in his right, is appointed by God
To be to the Scotts, a sharp scourge and rod
Wherefore this chronycle of Ihon Hardyng
I have thought good, to dedycate to your grace
Because the same in every manner of thing
Doothe best set out the nature of that place
With distaunce of tounes, and every miles space
Besechyng your grace to take in good part
Mine honest labors and beneuolent heart
The preface into the Chronycle of John Hardyng.
EMonges all writers, that have put in ure
Their pen and style, things to endite
None have behynd them, left so great treasure
Ne to their posteritee, have dooen such delight
As they which have taken peines to write
Chronycles and acts, of each nation
And have of the same, made true relacion.
By Chronycles we know, things ancient
The succession of times, and men
The state of policies, with their regiment
How long each party has ruled, and when
And what were all their procedynges then.
Chronicles make report of matiers dooen
And passed many thousand years gooen
By Chronycles we know, in each country
What men have been, of prowess marciall
What persons chiefly in actiuitee
When and between whom, wars have befall
Either civil or else external
How the same have been, conueighed and wrought
Or else appeaced, and to quiet brought
Chronicles do record and testifye.
Even from the worlds first beginninges
And do keep in continual memory
The course and process, of all manner things
The lives and manners, of princes and kings
As Well Gentiles as Judicial
As Well Just and godly, as tyrannical
What persons to their prince and country
Have been loving true and obedient
And at all times of necessitee
Have served the same, with good intent
And constauntly therein, have their lives spent
In Chronicles are regestred feithfully
To their immortal honor and glory
Contrary wise, who to their souerains
Or to their countrees, have been wicked traitors
Or by collusion and crafty trains
Have rebelled against their governors
Or the same to help, have been slack proctours
Are sembleably set out by name
To their endelesse infamy, reproach, and shame.
These things, and others a thousand mo
Whereby realms, have decayed or grown
Changed in process, and altered to and fro
Fruitful and expedient to be known
Are in Chronicles, so plainly shown
That things antique, to us be as apparent
As if at their doings, we had been present.
Wherefore Gods word and holy scripture
Which abandoneth all manner vanitee
Yet of Chronicles admits the lecture
As a thing of great fruit and vtilitee
And as a lantern, to the posteritee
For example, what they ought to know
What ways to refuse, and what to follow.
The bible books, of Judges and kings
Although most full, of high divine mystery
And far surmounting all Ethnike doings
Yet if they be read, and take literally
Has the form and course of a plain history
What kings served God, and who trangressed
Which thereby prospered, or were oppressed
The books of the kings every where
If things seem touched over briefly
To a larger storye, does us refer
Which were Chronicles of each manne truly
Set out at length, to our memory
Albeit those Chronicles (as it is evident)
Are lost, and do not remain at this present
The books inscribed, Paralipomena
A perfect membre, and piece of the bible
Is a summarye, of the kings of Judah
And therefore in Hebrew, it has the title
And appellacion, of a Chronicle
The Machabees also, by my deming
Is a plain historye, of holy writing
Which books, if they had never been set out
It had been a great maime to our knowlage
A lamentable lack, with outen doubt
A great cause of blindness to our age
And to our faith, inestimable damage.
But the spirit of God, the author was
That those examples, might be our glass.
Chronicles therefore, of true report
Whether of Christian realms or no
Are matier of pleasaunce, fruit, and comfort
And for a thousand causes and mo
Diligently to be attended unto
Yea, and all manner writers of the same
Worthy laud, thank, honor and immortal fame
Neither is any one to be rejected
That in this behalf, has dooen his endeavor
For though some be, such as might be corrected
Yet those that have, therein bestowed labor
Have minded to profit us to their power
Neither any is so full, but somwhere does fail
Nor any so bare, but does something avail.
And what an exceeding benefit trow ye
Is it for each manne, to have cognicion
Of all acts, both of his own country
And also of every foreign nation
As if he had lived, when each thing was dooen
And to view the acts of antiquitee
As though he did now, presentlye them see
Chroniclers therefore, I can highly commend
And emonge others, this author Ihon Harding
Who with all his power, to this point did conte^d
To the uttermost extent of his learning
That English men might have understanding
Of all affairs, touching theirowne country
Even to his days, from old antiquites
And though his co^ning, were not so much
As some others, nor his intelligence
Yet his good mind, intent, and zele was such
That in him lacked, no point of diligence
After such books, as he thought of credence
Feithfully to describe, such things in rhyme
As happened to England, from time to time
But in things dooen, before his own days
He follows his authors, at adventure
Without choice or difference of the true ways
Nor well assured, who were corrupt or pure
Nor whether they were certain orelles unsure
Whether fabulous, or men of veritee
Whether vain, or of good authoritee.
But what soever, in his own time was dooen
That he reports with all fidelitee
Right so as each thing, ended or begone
Without any spotte of insynceritee
Or dissimulation of the veritee
He found all means, the very truth to know
And what he knew certainly, that did he show.
From the beginning of Henry ye fourth king
Of this realm of England, after the conquest
Even to Edward the fourthes reigning
Which was three score years and one at the least
He leaves nothing unwritten at the largest
That was or seemed to be of importance
Touching peace and war, with Scotland or France
Unto the Scotts, he could never be friend
Because he saw them toward England
False from the beginning, to the last end
Never standing to any league ne band
Homage, fealtee, ne writing of their hand
Never so ready to make rebellyon
As when they promised most subjection
That if Ihon Hardyng, be a true man
And in this behalf inspyred with prophecy
They will never be, but as they were than
Fall to England, subtle, and crafty
Entendyng myschiefe, when they show contrary
Spoylers and robbers, that amend will never
Till our king shall have made them English for ever
Neither is there any, that ever wrote
Which in mat^ers of Scotland could better skill
Nor which their falshoode and untruth to note
Had more affection or better will
Or better knew water, woodde, town, vale and hill
Or was more feruente the Scotts to pursue
Who to England he knew, would never be true
Neither any Chronicler that ever was
Either does or can, more largly declare
Even from Brutus, how it came to pass
That kings of England the soueraines are
And over Scotland ought rule to bear
Himself is wytnes, of their subjection
And homage, under Englandes protection
In other things, the times were such
That though this work have some spice of blindness
Yet is the author, not to be blamed much
For Popyshe error, that season doubtless
Did all the world over go and oppress
Therefore such things, we must in good part take
And pardon that fault, for the times sake
Yet have we thought best, the autour to set out
Even in such form, as himself did endite
It were an vnquod thing, if we should go about
To alter and change, that old men have write
Secondly to us, it may be great delight
The blindness of those times to consider
From which has pleased God us to deliver
Finally the darkness of those days to see
To the honor of our king does redound
To whom by gods help given it has be
All Popyshe trumperye for to confound
Which thing, al true English hertes has bound
Incessauntly to pray, for king Henrye ye eyghte
Whose godly wisdom, has made all streyghte
And for as much as Hardyng, his book does end
With Edward the fourth, whose servant he was
And to whom also, this book he did commend
Considering also, the time and space
Being.lx. years and more, I could not let pass
So many goodly statutes and decrees
Battayles, and stories, not good to lose.
Wherefore I annexed them by continuacion
Beginning with Edward the fourth of yt name
Then Edward the fyfth, king by generation
Whom Richard the third, to his immortal shame
Cruelly murdered, the story says the same
But plaged he was, to his great greuaunce
With a shameful death, as Gods vengeance
Then Henry the.vii. next doothe ensue
Father unto our most dred sovereign lord
And of Henry the. viii, some thing that is true
I have here set forth, as writers do accord
Not in meter, but obseruyng word, for word
Mine authors, that wrote it all in prose
Reportyng the truth, without fraud or gloss
Now right gentle reader, thy part shall be
My good will and zele, my pain and labor
To entreprete and take in good part and gre
Giving to the same, such good words of favor
As may enforce me with all mine endeavor
The setting forth of mo works to take in hand
To thy solace, and honor of England
The Proheme of John Hardynge into this his chronycle.
THe most substance of power and of might,
Through age distilled, into debilitee
Of me yt am this time an aged wight
And great fault, have of habilitee
This labor now should have wthold fro me
But that my wit would have some diligence
My ghoost to keep from sin and insolence.
This work is great, and long to bring to fine
So does it ever fro time to time increase
And long has dooen, before Christ did enclyne,
In Marie mother and maiden without lease
To chronicle, so men have them put in prease
Some in meetre, and some also in prose
Some in Latin, full wisely did it close.
And some in French, they made for intellecte
Of men that could no Latin understand
More sufficiently endited and protecte
By far then I can it now take in hand
And some in lines two, their ryme ay band
But though my wit be not so curious
As theirs by far to make it glorious.
Yet will I use, the simple wit I have
To your pleasaunce and consolacion
Most noble lord and prince, so God me save
That in chronycles has delectacion
Though it be far above mine estimacion
Into balade I will it now translate
Right in this form with all mine estymate.
My lord of York unto your sapience.
I will remember a notabilyte
Of your elders rule and regymence
That had this land of old prioryte
Which ruled were after their dignitee
In virtue digne by royal governance
And in vice ruled and misgouernaunce.
By which knowledge your discrete sapience
All vice evermore destroy may and reprove
By virtuous and blessedfull dilygence
And virtue love, that may not ought grieve
How ye shall rule your subjects while ye live
In law and peace and all tranquyllite
Which been the flowers of all regalyte.
Edward the third that was king of this land
By right title, and very just descent
And king of France as I can understand
By his mother queen Isabell the gent
Sister and heir of Charles by hole intent
For Charles dyed without any child
The right descent unto his mother mylde
Why should yt French forbarre you of your right Numeri.xxvii.

Since God of heaven in libro numeri
Gave to Moises this law that now is light
In the chapter seven and twenty
By these words the daughter ryghtfully
Of Salphaat ask the fathers heritage Salphaat

Give them in possessyon among the cosynage.
This king Edward reignyng in his days
In mercyall acts, tryumphe and victory
Above all princes famed was always
Five sons had, the world out to cry
There were no mo such of one patry monye
Edward the prince and eldest son of age
Who gat Richard, that had the heritage.
Leonell next borne, after in Antwerpe
In Brabant land, that wedded unto his wife
The earls daughter of Vlster as men do karpe
And begatte on her Philip his daughter ryue
And also his heir, whom he loved as his live
Whom earl Emonde of March the Mortimer
Wedded to his wife and begatte the earl Roger.
Edward the third had five sons. Edward prince. Leonell. John duke of
Lancastre. Edmounde duke of York. Thomas of Woodstocke duke of Gloucester.


That earl was after of March and of Vlster
With wild Irishe that slain were in Irelande
Who had a son, earl Emonde Mortymer
That dyed without issue I understand
To whom dame Anne, his sister, unto his land
Was veraye heir, who^ the earl of Ca^bridge wed
And gatte of her your self as I have red
Why should ye not then be her veraye heir
Of all her land and eke of all her right
Since Jesus Christ of Jude land so feire
By very mean of his mother Mary bright
To be king, claymed title and right
And so did name him self king of Jews
So by your mother, the right to you acrewes.
After Lyonell that was duke of Clarence
And of Vlster the earl was, by his wife
And of Italy, for his great excellence
King should have been, without any strife
Of all Europe, without comparatyfe
The royal land, and to his espousaile
The dukes daughter of Melayn without fail.
John borne in Gaunt, of Flanders chief cytee (...)ke (...)orn in Gau^t.

The third soonne was, of good king Edward
That wedded dame Blaunch, full of feminytee
Duke Henryes daughter and heir afterward
Of Lancastre, by law of kind and forward (...) y^ (...).

Who gat and bare the fourth king Henry
That king Richard deposed wrongfully.
Who gatte Henry the fyfth like conqueroure (...) y^ (...).

Of Normandy, and mykill part of France
That excelled both king and Emperor
In marcyall acts, by his governance
Who gatte Henry the sixte at Gods pleasaunce (...) yt (...)

Of such symplenesse and disposicion
As men may se by his discrecion.
(...) For when Henry the fourth first was crouned
(...)ny a wyseman, said then full commenly
(...) third heir should not ioyse but be vncrouned
And deposed of all regalitee
To this reason they did there wits apply,
Of evil gotten good, the third should not enioyse
Of long agone, it has been a commen voyse.
How the maker of this book says his auyse in brief for the duke of York.
O my lord of York, God has provide
In this for you, as men sayen commenly
So that no sloth you from his grace deuyde
But take it as he has it sent manly
And rule well now ye have the remedy
But neretheles, let every man have the right
Both friend and foo, it may increase your might.
Treat well Percy of marchys line descended
To help your right with might and fortifye
By tender means to hold him well contented
Remembryng him, by wyttie polycye
How by process of time and destenye
Your right might all been his, as now is yours
Through gods might, make the^ your successors
Edmou^de was then the.iiij. son, at Langlay Edmou^d duke of york.

Borne, as known was well in the land
A noble prince after, as men might say
At battle of Orray, yt fought sore with his hand
And John of Gaunt his brother, I understand
That fought full sore, for Iho^ of Mountfortright
Again Charles of Bloys a manly knight.
This Edmou^de was after duke of York creat
And had a son that Edward had to name
Whom king Richard made to be denominate
In all his writtes exaltyng his fame
King of Portyngale, his father yet at hame
Living in age I trawe of.lxxx. year
A fair person, as a man might se any where.
Thomas Woodstoke, the.v. son was in deed
Duke of Gloucester, that time made and create Thomas of wood stoke duke of
gloucester.

By king Richard murdered whom for his mede
King Henry quyt with death preordinate
By Gods dome and sentence approbate
Who sleeth, so shall he be slain by his sentence
Well more murder which asks ay vengeance Mat. (...)vii.

Who lay before Paris, amoneth day
With host royal without any batell
Of all enemies most dred he was always
And Scotts most him bred without any fail
For as they trowed by their own rehersaile
Of prophecyes he should their land conquer
And make the king to England homegere.
Now have I made unto your own knowledge Edward prince of Wa(...) the eldest
son of king Edward the.iii.

A remembrance of Edwardes sons five
Your exampler to give you a courage
So noble princes, I trow were none alive
After my wit as I can discryue
The eldest son, whose life I have left out
Who yt in France and all lands was most doubt
Of the right and tytles that my Lord of York has to France and Spain
with Portingale and other lands by yonde the sea, Jerusalem and other lands.
At batell of Poytiers took king John
With great honor triumph and vyctory
By merciall acts, and verteous life aloone
And in Spain, as made is memory
The king Petro, by knightly victory
To his kingdom, he did restore again
By his brother put out, with much pain
The appoinctement bytwixt duke John and duke Emund who should be king of
Castle and Lion, and what the maker of this book saw and red at London, to
sir Robert Vmfrewill then lord Vmfrewill.
This king Petro to give him to his mede
Had nothing else but daughters two full fair
Which he betook, to that prince in deed
For his wages, for cause they where his heir
With whom he did, to England so repair
And Constaunce wedde, unto his brother. John
Emund his brother, the younger had anon
Dame Isabell, the younger hight by name
Between these brethren, was appoinctment
The first heir male, which of the sisters came,
The king should been, and have the regiment
To you my lord of York, this does appent Duke of York.

For your uncle Edward, was first heir male
To whom your father, was heir with out fail
So king of Spain, and also of Portyngall
Ye should now be, by line of bloodde descent
By covenant also and appoinctement whole
As I have seen of it the mununent
Under seal written, in all intent
Which your uncle, to my lord Vmfrewill
At London showed, which I red that while
For Spain and Portyngale bear the renoume
And commen name as I have herd expressed
Both to the realms of Castyll and Lion.
And so the king of Spain has aye adressed
His royal style in writing well impressed
King of Castill and also of Lion,
Accounted both so for his region.
Now be ye know, of your title to England The title of the kings of
England to Scotland and Ireland.

By consequens to Wales and Scotland
For they perteyne, as ye may understand
Of ancient time, to the crown of England
By papal bull, ye have the right to Irelande,
Gascowe, Paitowe and Normandye
Pountyf, Bebuile, Saunxie and Sauntignye.
And all the land beyond the charente
Of Dangolesme, Dangolismoys and Luyre zyne
Of Caoure; Caoureno^, Pyridor and Pirygu^t country
Of Rodis, Ronegeauis, Dago^, Dagenoyse yt fine
Tharbe, Wigor and Gaure should to you enclyne,
With all the fraunchyses and all souerayntie
As has the king of France in his degree.
No^. that I Ihon Hardyng maker of this book, delivered to king Henry the
syxte the copy of the treaty of this land as king Edward the third treated
and had them after the battayll of Poytours.
Calys and Mark, Colne, Ha^mys, Oye and Wale,
Sandegate and Guysons, with all the whole country
With all the lands and towns between the^ all
With all fraunchyses and royal souerayntie
All those of right be yours in property
What by treat and what by veraye right
As king Edward them had of mykyll might.
To Jerusalem, I say ye have great right
For earl Geffraye, that hight Plantagenet
Of Aungeoy earl, a prince of passing might
The eldest son to Fouke, and first begette
King of Jerusalem by his wife dewly set
Whose son Geffray foresaid gatte on his wife
Henry the second that known was full ryfe.
Yet have ye more fro Bawdewyn Paraliticus
King afterward, to the same king Henry
The croune sent and his banner precious
As veraye heir of whole auncestrie
Descent of blood by title lynyally
From Godfray Boleyn and Robert Curthose Godfray^ Boleyn. Robert cur those.

That kings were thereof and chose.
He sent him also the Sepulture keys
Resygnyng wholly unto him all his right
For to defend the land from Sarizenes
For he was sick and had thereto no might
And all the land, destroyed was to sight
By the Soudyan to great lamentacion
Of Gods people, and all Christen nation.
He sent him also the keys of David's tower
With Heraclye, that of Jerusalem
Was Patriarch and greatest of honor
And with templers, which brought him into this realm
Besekyng him yt he would the^ sustain
Full humbly askyng supportacion
For the cytiee and christen consolacion.
All these titles, the chronicles can record
If they be seen by good deliberacion
Many of them to these full well accord
As I have seen with great delectacion
By clerks written for our informacion
As in old feldes, corns fresh and grene grew
So of old books comes our cunnyng new Out of old books comes new
knowledge

Of this I will now cease and forth proceed
To my matter, where first I began
To chronicles of this land for worthihed
To remember in balade as I can
To that intent to please both God and man
And eke to please good femynitie The dukes wife named Cecely

Of my lady your wife dame Cecely.
That in Latin has litell intellect
To understand the great nobilytie
Of this like land of which she is elect
Time coming like to have the souerayntie
Under your rule as should feminitee
Which if it may please her ladyshippe
My heart will rejoice of her inward gladshippe.
For well I wot your great intelligence
That in latin has good inspeccion
Will pleased be of your hie sapieuce
My lady that is under your proteccion
Your heir also may read at their eleccion
Which if it may please your nobilitee
Of my labor I would reioysed be.
Also for your heirs and for your successors
In time coming to have a clear knowledge
How of this realm the noble governors
Have kept with help of Baronage
In victory, tryumphe and surplusage
Since Brute it wanne in his prioritee
It has been kept in worthy dignitee
But how this ysle enbrased with this sea
Vnedefied was known first and found
That Albion was named of propertee
Of dame Albione that first therein had ground
And after long, how Brute thereof was crowned
That of his own name called it Brytayne
And builded it, where all before was plain.
The end of the Proheme.
Here begins the Chronycle of John Hardynge.
The first Chapter.
Of the.xxx. susters that first inhabited this land and named it Albion, that
now is England Wales and Scotland.

THe while that Troy was reignyng in his might
In Greece there was a king right excellent
That Dioclesia^, some book says he hight King Dioclesya^ and Albyne his
wife.

And of Surray that had the regimente,
Dame Albyne hight his wife, a lady gente
Who daughters had.xxx. wedded to there degree
To kings all of great nobilitee.
Which fell in pride, and hye elacion
Thynkyng to be in no subieccion
Of husbands more, ne dominacion
But only by a fell conieccion
Took hole purpose and full affeccion
To kill there lords slepyng suddenly
Soueraynes to be, and live all severally.
The.ij. Chapter.
Note that women desire of al things soueraynte, and to my conceypt more in
this land then in any other, for they have it of the nature of the said
susters.

THe youngest suster, the matter all discured
To her husband, and to her father gent
For which she was of all that deed assured
But they were put in exile by judgment
So rightful were the princes of there entente
They judged them to be put in the sea
In ship topasse echeone fro there country.
As fortune would, to make there adventure
Which by process, with streams to and fro This chronicle is not true.

And tempests great, and sore disauenture
Of sickness great and mykell other woe
And most of all, they knew not whether to go
Till at last they came unto this ysle
That then was waste, as chronicles do compile.
But I dare say, this chronicle is not true,
For in that ylke time, in Surraye was no king
Ne afterward, to time that Saul grew
Ne no king was in Surray ever living Saul was the first king in the third
age.

That had that name, for Saul was ye first king
Of Surray realm, at the end of the third age
In Samuels time, the prophet wise and sage.
The.iij. Chapter.
Note that Hughe de Genesis a Romayne historiographier declares in his
chronicle all the kingdoms of the world, and all the names of such kings as
ruled in them, from Noes floude unto the birth of Christ. In which chronicle
the foresayed Hughe writes, that Danays king of yt Greeks had.l. daughters and
that Egistus his brother king of Egypt had as many sons that married
together, which daughters killed their own husbands, and for that cause were
banyshed, and saylyng on the sea were driven unto a certain ysle, which, Albina
being the eldest suster of them named according to her name Albio^, and Brute
after that called it according to his name Brytayne.

NE before Brute, was in no realm yt name,
No king on live, that hight ne called so
But of Arginos the king of full hye fame
Had daughters fifty, whose name was Danao
The king of Egipte, his brother Egisto
Had soonnes also fifty together wedde
In chronicles of old as I have read
Which daughters, slew their husbands echone
Long before Brute was of his mother bore
So find I by these women alone
And by these soonnes thus slain before
The chronicle true, in their persons more
Then in the daughters of Dioclesian
Were in no land that time so hight king none
So in the year of Aioth Judge of Israel
These ladies here landed full weery and sore
Seventy and two as Hugh does tell
Which was I say an hundred year before
That Brute came into this land and more
By five years truly, and well accounted
Of years ode so much more amounted
Also in Surray there was no king before
King Alexaunder dedde and expired
For Seleucius was the first king thore
By all chronicles that I have enquired
That chronicle should not be desired
Seeing that it is not true ne autenticke
By no chronicle unto the truth ought like
I dare well say he saw never Hugh Genesis This s^e(...) that our chronicle
is false in the beegynnyng,

Ne he read never the chronicles of Surry
Of Israel Jude ne of Egipciis
Of Argiuos, of Athenes, ne Thessaly
Of Macedon, Cesile, ne of Assery,
Of Lacedemon, of Lyde, ne yet of Latin,
Of Affrique, of Asis, ne yet of Babelyn,
Of Perce, ne Meede, Italye, ne Albany,
Of king Alexaunder, ne of his successors
That before time reigned dyuersly
In diverse realms, citees castelles and toures
Of Romany, ne of state of emperors
For had he seen all these and their stories
Of Dioclesian, he would make no memories,
The.iiii. Chapter.
How these ladies had this Isle in the year of Aioth.lxxii. in the third age
of the world, and she called it Albion of her name, and took feauty and service
of them all, as sovereign lady of this Isle, that now is England, Scotland
and Walis, as Hugh Genesis writes in his Dyaloge.

THese ladies so ay dwelling in this Isle
The years of Aioth seventy and two no lees
Dame Albyne was as me^ne can compile
The eldest sister, and thought she would encrees
Her self above them all upon the dees
Sittyng, she took feauty, then of them all
True to her to be, for aught that might be fall
And then she gave this Isle a propre name
Of Albion, out of her name as chief
And called it so, from thens forward the same
She ordained then bows to their relief
Arowes and boltes and bowstrynges made in brief
To slay the Dear, the Bull, and also the Bore
The Beer, and birds, that were therein before,
With pitfalles great and trappes they did begile
The beasts and birds to their sustenaunce
They gatte each day with nets and other wile
The fyshe in stagnes and waters sufficiaunce
Each day they made wyttye cheuesaunce
To help them self at their necessitee
For hungre, that they should not perished be.
The.v. Chapter.
How spyrites gatte Giauntes upon the ladies, which gatte other Giau^tes
within this land. Before Brute came were xii. M. Giauntes, what in this land
that now is England and the north that now is Scotland, and the west yt now
is Wales, as the Scotte Marian says in his dialoge.

THese ladies with meat and drink replete
And of nature reuigured corporally
And all there care forgette and under fete
Had great desire to play them womanly
As women yet will do full louyngly
For to fulfill the work of womanhed
And bring forth fruit, the land to rule and led.
So were they tempted with inward meditacio^
And vain glory within their hertes employed
To have comforth of men's consolacion
And knew nothing, how of them to provide
But inwardly them they glorified
So hot that spyrites in man's form
Lay by them their desires to perform
So during forth in such lust and delight
With nature of them self and feminacion
The spyrites gatte children, yt were Gyau^tes tyte
Of them through their own ymaginacion
By fervent hete, moved with temptacion
Thus gatte they then great Giau^tes full of might
Within short time that were long and wight.
The.vi. Chapter.
How the fathers lay by their daughters, the brethren by their systers, the
sons by their mothers and every kind with other, as Hugh Genesis reports
in his chronicles.

THe fathers then by their daughters lay
Mother ne sister again it not replied
Of chylder fell sons and daughters ay
They gatte each day and strongly multiplied
Of them this ysle then was so fortifyed
So strong then was this generation
None durst it noye for their malignacion.
Among them fell so great unkindness
According right well to there life inordinate
That echoue of them did other oppress
That none of them was left on live of ye estate
Of.xij. thousand within a little date
Whose pride fell before the incarnacion
Twelve hundredth year, by veraye computacion.
But Bartholomew de proprietatibus rerum
Says how this ysle of Albion had name
Of the sea banks full white all or sum
That circuyte the ysle as ships came
Fro ferrome seen, as they through the sea fame
Sailed by and by for rypes and roches white
To shipmen were great gladness and delight.
But Maryan says the chronicler to sewe
That dame Albion was the first that named it so
Both two might be together clear and true
That ships so saylinge to and fro
And at her coming they called it so both two
And so both ways may be right sure and true
From which there will no chronycler it renew
Of this now will I sease and say no more
To time come efte ye Brute has won this land Brutus

And slain them all in batell foughten sore
But now of Brutus ye shall well understand
How that he did in Greece and took on hand
And of what blood he came by clear discente
And how in Greece he had great regiment.
And how he gate this ysle by his prowess
And called it by name the ysle of Britayne
And of his name for their worthynesse
He called his men Britaynes ay forth certain
That Troyans were before not to layne
To which I pray the holy Trinyte
That is one God in persons three.
Of help and speed to bring this book to end The o^acyon of the authoure for
yt making of this book.

For simple is my wit of all science
Of rethoryke as yet never I kende
And simple am of all intellygence
Yet will I not so hurt my conscience
On old gods to muse or on to call
That false were ever and ever so will be fall.
Of Saturnus ne yet of Marcury The names of false gods.

Of Iubiter of Mars ne yet of Venus
Of Pallas ne of Mynerue ne Megary
Ne of Phoebus Ceres ne of Geneus
Of Cupyde ne yet of Thisophonus
Dyan Bacchus ne of Cerbery
All these I will refuse now and defye
And to ye god in heaven I pray in magestie
My wit to enforce with might and sapience
With langage such as may ought pleasant be
To your pleasaunce and noble excellence
For I am bare and naked of eloquence
By insuffycience and all symplicyte
To end this book as were necessyte.
The.vii. Chapter.
How Brute conquered Albion and called it Britayne of his The armis of Brute
own name, yt now is England Walis and Scotland, and the arms of Brute in
which he was clade first when he entered this ysle after Genesis the Italyane
Chronycler were of Gowlys.ii. Lions crown of gold Rampant and combattaunt.

AS chronycles tells and make notificacyo^ Brutus

who so them well shall know and understand
Of what kynne blood and generacyon
Brutus first came that conquered all this land
It to remember I have now take on hand
Through all old stories by philosyphers co^piled
In balade thus it shall be made and fyled
As out of old feldes new corn grows each year
Of old books by clerks new approved
Old knights acts with mynstrelles tongue stere
The new courage of young knights to be moved
Wherefore me thinks old things should be loved Dute of oldbokes comes new
wisdom.

Since old books makes young wits wise
Disposed well with virtues exercise.
At old Adam therefore I will begin
Who was I find, the first old creatur Adam.

Conueyng down lynyally in kyn
As descent in birth and in gendur
Next unto Brute, as mention makes scriptur
I shall report, as God will please to lead
My simple ghoost with language it to feed.
For well I wot, without his supportacion
For to report his veraye genealogy
How he by descent in all generation
From Adam down to Troyane Auncetrye
Gotten and borne certain in Italye
Full herd it is, although I would full feign The gene^a^ion of ^^ute

So simple be my spyrites and my brain.
Of Adam which was the first creature (...).

Came Seth forsothe and Seth gat Enos than
And Enos gatte afterward full sure
A son that hight and called was Canayn (...).

Who gatte Melaliel, as scripture tell can
Who gatte Iareth of whom Enoke came
That Matusaly gatte of mykill fame.
Matusale gatte Lameke, who Noe gatte
And Noe Iaphet, who gatte Cichym than (...)h. (...). (...)th. (...)m. (...).
(...).

That Cipre gatte after whom Cipres hatte
Cipre gatte Crete, that the ysle of Crete began
A famous and a right notable man
And Crete gatte a son hight Cely Cely. Saturn

Who gatte Saturn a wise man and a wittye
Of whom came then Iubiter of Frigy
Which is Turkey wherein Troyes city Iubiter.

In honor stood and in great victory
And Iubiter gate Dardanus no lee
That of Frigy in great felicitee Dardanus.

So reigned king greatly magnifyed
And as a God among them glorified.
Of whom came so his son Eritonus
Who gatte a son that first Troy edifyed Eriotonus. Troilus Ilis. Ilyon.
Hercules Lamadone.

That Troilus hight of whom came king Ilis
That Ilyon made a palace of great pride
Which for passing other was both long and wide
Where Hercules slough king Lamadone
And led away the royalles of the town.
Lamedone gatte the king Priamus Priamus.

Who made again his palace Ilion
And Troies city also more glorious
Then they were before their subuercion
And royal without peruercion
In joy and mirth they stood many a year Achilles was Priamus brother.

And Achilles with him his brother dear.
The.viij. Chapter.
A short lamentacio^ of the maker, for king Lamedone lose his life and his
estate that might have stand in peace and suertie, for a little succor of
Iasone in his voyage.

O Lamedon of Troy, that bare the crown
What fortune drove the, to do Iasone unkindness
Where he to pay, was so ready and bowne
For his vitayle that came in by distress
Of tempest great standing in heuinesse
Him for to drive out of the regyon
And not refreshe him at his requisicyon. Lamedo^ showed to Jason unkindness.

Which was the cause after of thy heaviness
When he the slough and destroyed all thy cytee
And cast down all thy might and great nobles
With little thing that sauyd might have be
O good lord? why should thy royal dignytee
To strangers show that cruel unkindness
That to thy land purposed no distress. Hector, Troilus Dephebus Helenus, and
Paris, came of Pryamus.

Of Priamus came Hector and Troylus
Dephebus Helenus and Paris
Of royal blood and dukes full glorious
Of excellence and greatest of empryse
Which were all slain by fortunes excercyse
All the sege of Troy knyghtly in the defense
In mercyall acts as princes of excellence
The palace great and the noble cytee Greeks

By Greeks seeged, long and many a year
Was won at last and wast as men yet see
This king and queen both two were slain in feere
Where Anchises and Eneas his son dear Anchyses, Eneas, Ascaneus.

And Ascaneus the son of Eneas
Escapyd away and on the sea did pass.
The.ix. Chapter.
How Eneas exyled out of Troy came to Cecyle and to Affrike to the cytee of
Carthage, and fro thence to Italye, and there was made king of Tuskayne and of
Latene.

ANd in Cicile they after did aryue
Where Anchises dyed and was dispent.
Eneas and his son to the sea began drive
With ships.xii. to Italy had they mente Eneas.

But wind them drove, again there intent
Into Affrique, where for Eneas sake
They welcome were and worthily vptake.
Fro thence after he took the sea again
And landed then in Italia
In Tibre mouth with trauayll and with pain
Where the town and port is of hostia
Where by the God he bidden was to ga
To help the king Euandre in his right Eua^dre.

For after him the God that land him hight.
To whom he went as him was prophesied
And welcome was into Italy
Of king Euandre greatest magnified
For his wisdom fame and cheualrye
For his worship and for his auncetrye
He gave him than great lordshippe and riches
And gold enough right of his worthynes
King Euandre made war on king Latene Latene. Turnus

In whose defense Turnus king of Tuskayn
Came, with great host of Tuskalayns so fine
Again Euandre, where Turnus then was slain
Eneas did that deed and that derayn
With mighty strokes courage and cheualrous
He wanne the field in batell fortunous.
Between Euandre so and the king Latene
The peace he made, rest and concordaunce
And king Latens his daughter yt hight Labyne
Wedded to his wife, by very good accordaunce
Between them forth was no more discordaunce
And Eneas king was made of Tuskayne
Of which the king Euandre was full feign.
Sone after then dyed the king Latene
Whose realm Eneas had also in peace
In which he made a castle fair and fine
Labynyon it hight without leace
His wives name to worship and encreace
Of whom he gatte a soonne, and dyed before.
That he was brought into this world and bore.
This worthy prince, king Eneas mortally
Ended his life that was of hye prowess
Where so God will to reign eternally
Within the house of fame, where as I guess
(...)er knights fell of noble worthynesse
That more desired in arms to have a fame
^hen be the best in deed, and bear no name
The.x. Chapter.
Of the house of fame where knights be rewarded after the merits in arms by
Mars the God of arms, some translate which kyrcheues of pleasaunce and some
with rings and onches, their sepulture in the field of pitee by heaven gates yt
have be veraye lovers of their lovers ladies and never panyneles but aye
graceles.

BUt than his soonne Siluius Postumus (...)

New borne so young and tender of age
King of this land was made Astanius
His brother dear that ruled his heritage (...)

And peaceably kept out of all seruage.
Twenty winter and eight full mannely,
And gatte a soonne that called was Syluy.
Which Siluius gatte and generate Siluius ye father of Brutus.

His soonne Brutus on Crensa labius nece
All priuelie by him de virginate
And sore besought by his subtilitees
And sumwhat of her womanly petees
That tendered him of god femynete
As womanhod would of all humilitee
So after sone, the fate of death would so
That pass away must need Ascanius
He gave his brother Siluius posthumus tho
His heritage and riches plentuous
But Brutus waxed echedaye full beauteous The praise of Brute.

And in mannehod well more in all virtue
Was none him like in no place that me^ne knew
Of.xv. year when he was commen to age
At huntyng as he shot at a dear
He sleugh his father unto his great damage How Brutus slew his father,

And at his birth as says the chronicler
His mother dyed as written is full clear
Anon after as he was of her bore
For which.ii. causes his heart was wonder sore
Seeing July this false fortunite
The soroes great in him so multiplied
That there for shame of his fortunite
In no wise would he no longer dwell ne bide
But into Greece his sorrows for to hide
He went anon where exiles were of troy
Whose sorrows great he leched all with joy.
Sir Helenus was Priamus son of Troy
And Anchises an old worthy knight Helenus. Priamus. Anchises.

And.vi. M. that of him had great joy
Of gentilmen of Troy exiled forth right
That him besought with instau^ce day and night
To help them out of their great heped sorrow
In which they lay oppressed even and morrow.
For which he wrote his letter in that tide
To king Pandras that king was of that land Pandras.

Requiryng him to let him pass and ride
Freely, where so they would withouten band
For which the king with power took on hand
To siege Brutus within his castle fair
To whom Troyans strongly began repair.
To Brutus so, to help them at there might Brutus. Anacletus

Who then anon sent forth Anacletus.
His prisoner, whom he had taken right
Unto the host, to tell them how Antigonus
Lay in the wood stolen away fro Brutus (...)onus.

Who went to them, that next the wood then lay
And bad them come and rescowe him or day.
Which ward so brake and to ye wood can ride
Brutus with that with all his hole power
There brake in and would no longer abide
But slough the Greeks and took the king infer
But than as says the very chronicler
No longer would he there abide ne dwell
But furthermore as chroniclers does tell,
With king Pandras, he made his appoinctement Pandras.

Him to deliver, on this condition
To wedde his daughter, by will and assent
Dame Innogen and shippis of his region
With vitaile and riches, to win land and town,
For there he would, no longer make soiourne
But with Troyans, to their land attourne
All this promysses and whole apoinctement
Fulfilled and speed, Brute with his wife
So sailed forth through the Grekish oryent The pillars yt Hercules made of
brass.

To marytayne, and two pillars ganne he drive
That Hercules also with busy live
To time he came to an old city
No creature therein, that time could see
But a goddas, men called Diane Diane the Gods,

That could declare, and expound destynie
To whom Brute anon went up alone
And lay before her, there full deuoutely
With candell brennyng, and with ceremony
Besekyng her, of succor and grace
Where that he might, her worship in sum place
With his Troyanes, therein for to abide
And inherit, to whom then said Dyane
By yonde all Gualle, an Isle full long and wide
Enclosed whole, within the occiane
With Giauntes kept his destyned, the alaan
And thy Troyanes, to have and enhabite
Therein to dwell, for evermore and enheret
So sailyng forth, by Colum^nes of Hercules
Which been of brafse, by Hercules their set
For when he came into the sea no lees
Of Spain, where that his meny Troianes met
Of their lynage as it was to their debt
They came with him echeone by one accord
Corneus their capitain was and lord Corneus capitain of yt Troya^s.

The.xi. Chapter.
How Brute came from Greece into Albion, and named it Britain and how he
arrived at Totnesse in Deuinshire

HE sailed so fourth by the sea Aquitaine.
Where yt he arrived yt now is Guya^ land
And sleugh the buckes of which they were full feign,
The bear and the bore and hearts all that they fande
With out license or yet any warand
Wherefore Guffor king of the land full fell
With Troyanes faught, but Goryne their bare ye bell Goryne,

Brute took ship and arrived in Albion
Where Diane said, should been his habitacion
And when he came the coasts of it upon
He was full glad and made great exultacion
Reioysed highly of his fortunacion
In arms of Troy covered and well araid
Of which Troyanes were full well apaid
He bare of goulis two liones of gold The arms of (...)e

Country Rampant with gold only crouned
Which kings of Troie inbataill bare full bold
To which from Troy was distroyed and confounded
Their children slain, the next heir was he found
And in tho arms this Isle he did conquer
As Marian says the very chronicler Maryan chronicler.

At Totnesse so this Brutus did arrive
Corneus also and all their coumpaignie Corneus

The giauntes also he sleugh down beeliue
Through all the land in battle mannely
And left no moo but Gogmagog only
In all this Isle, so had he them destroyed Gogmagog,

Whom in prisone he kept and anoyed
The.xii. Chapter.
How Corneus wrastilled with Gogmagog the giaunt of the Isle, and sleugh him.

But for he would know all his resistens
What he might do more then Corneus
He made them both do their sufficie^ce
In all wrastleyng which was most rigorous
And to defend or sawte most curious
On the sea bank, before Brutus they met
Where by accord the day and place was set
This Gogmagog so thrafte Corneus
That rybbes three were broken in his side
Corneus then of might full laborous
Thought he would sone revenge that tide
With that he stood and set his leggues wide
And gatte him up between his arms fast
And over the roche into the sea him cast
Which place hight yet Gogmagoges sawte
By cause he leped their from Corneus
All if it were nothing in his defaute
But by the might of Coryn, full vigorous Coryn.

Who was always in bataill fortunous
For which Brutus had him in great deynie
And gave him aye worship and dignite
This Brutus, thus was king in regalite
And after his name, he called this Isle Briteyn, This Isle Briteyne.

And all his men, by that same egalite
He called Briteynes, as chroniclers all saine
Of which they all were full glad and feign
To Corneus he gave to his avail
The duchy whole, and land of Cornwayle. Corneus.

The.xiij. Chapter.
How he builded the city of Troynouaunt, that now is called London. London.


SO was the name, of this ilke Albion
All set on side, in kalandes of achaunge
And put away with great confusion
And Briteyn hight, so forth by new eschaunge (...).

After Brutus, that slew these Giauntes strange
And wanne this Isle, by his magnyficence
In which he dwelled long time in excellence
The city great, of Troynouaunt so fair
He builded then on Thamis for his delight
Unto the north, for his dwelling and for his most.
Which is to say in our language perfect,
New Troy, in books as I can now endicte repeier
And novel Troy, in french incomperable
Of Breteyne, a city most profitable
This Briteyne is in length eight.C. mile
Fro Monsehole, that is in Cornewayle right The length and breadth of ye Isle of
Bryteyne.

Unto the northend of Catenes, to compile
And also in bredeth, from saint David yt hight
To Yarmoth, that in Norffolke, is by sight
Two hundred mile, accoumpted well and clean
As autours say, this Isle does whole contein
The.xiiij. Chapter.
How Brute set his laws and peace of Troy in this Isle without which a
king is no better then his subject or his leege manne.

IN which through out, his peace and law he set
Which been ye flowers of all regalite
With out which, but if they two be met
There may no prince hold prncipalite
Ne endure long in worthy dignite
For if those two, be naught up holden than
What is a king, more worth then his liege ma^ne
This king Brute, kept well this Isle in peace
And set his laws of Troy, with order, rites,
And consuetudes, that might the land encreace
Such as in Troy, he knew was most profittes
Unto the folk and the common profettes
He made them written, for long rememory
To rule the Isle, by them perpetually
His men he did reward full royally
With lands and rentes, yt with him suffered pain
And Troynouaunt, he made full specially
An Archflaume, his sea Cathedral certain
A temple thereof, Apolyne to opteyne
By Troyane law, of all such dignite
As archbishop has now in his degree.
The.xv. Chapter.
How Brute departed Britain in three parts to his three sons, the two younger
to hold of the elder, so that Wales and Scotland should do homage to England
by his ordinance by the law of Troy.

THis king Brutus this ysle divided in. iii How Brutus divided this ysle.

A little before out of this ysle he dyed,
To his three sons yt were full fair to se
After his days to ioyse he signified
And when he had the Isle all tripertyed
He called the chyefe Logres after Locryne Three sons of Brute.

That does extend fro Monsehole to Hu^ber fine.
Fro Humbar north unto the Northwest sea Locryne (...) Albanacte.

Of all Britain which he called Albanye
For Albanacte the king thereof to be
His second son, that was both good and manly
To hold it of Locryne perpetually
And of his heirs by homage and feaute
As to chief lord longs the suffraintie.
And fro the water of Waage right in yt southe
And Strigell castle to Seuerne all by and by
And so to Dee at Chester as it is full couth
Right in the North cambre he called for thy
For Cambre should it have all plenerly
And on Locryne it should ever be homage
And of his heirs evermore in heritage.
The.xvi. Chapter.
How by law Troyane the souerayntie belongs to the eldest brother or sister.

AS after the laws of Troy y^ soueraintie
And all resort of right does apertayne
To the eldest brother in property
The eldest sister right, so by right should been
Sovereign lady and over them all queen
By equytie of that ylke law and right
In place where it is holden law perfyghte.
This king Brutus made people fast to tylle
The land about in places both far and nere Brutus ordered ye people to
sow corn.

And sow with sede and get them corn full well
To live upon and have the sustynaunce clear.
And so in feldes both far and nere.
By his wisdom and his sapience
He set the land in all suffycience.
And as the fate of death does assygne
That needs he must his ghoost away relees
To his gods Dyane he did resygne
His corpse to be buried withouten lees
In the temple of Apolyne, to encreace
His soul among the gods euerychone
After his merytes trononized high in trone.
Fro beginning of the world to Brutus
Into this isle entered first at Totnesse
Four thousand year.lxxx. and.iiii. were thus
As the chronycles thereof bears witness
And after the incarnacion to express
A thousand hole, a hundredth and fyftene
And of Hely Judge in July was eyghtene.
In the third age he came into this ysle
And in the year as it is before expressed
But how long yt he reigned or short while
Walter of Oxforde has confessed
Four and twenty year, as he has inpressed
And other said he reigned three and forty year
But Marian says three score he reigned here
Which is most like to be verifyed
By all his works and great operacions
Which in short time might not been edifyed
Ne performed with short occupacyons
But in long time by good consyderacyons
Rather it is like he reigned three score year,
By his great works and beginninges yt appear
The.xvii. Chapter.
King Locryne the sovereign lord of all Britayne had Logres to his part, to
whom his.ii. brethren did homage for Albyne and for Cambyr.

THis eldest son was king yt hight Locrine
Of all Britayne having ye souerante
Having Logres as Brute did determine
To whom Cambre and Albanacte the free
Obeying both unto his royalte
There homage made as to yt lord sovereign
And Emperor of that land of Britayne. Locryne

There homage made and to Cambre went
Albanactus then rode to Albyne
And reigned so by life in one assente
Each one other to help and fortifye
And thus in peace holding their regalite
But as they satte so best in peace and rest
King Humbar arose in Albyne full priest
The.xviii. Chapter.
How king Humbar slew Albanactus, wherefore Locryne and Cambre gathered a
great power and disconfyted king Humbar, and ceased Albany by excheter unto
Lo^res again for defaute of an heir.

IN the river that called is Humbar now
Where Albanactus anon did with him fight
And in batel stroke Humbar on the browe
And field him were he never so wight
But Humbar arose again with all his might * The death of Albanact

And in that stoure was Albanacte slain
King Humbar had the field with mikyll pain.
King Locryne then and Cambre else his brother
With hoostes great upon king Humbar faughte
That of Humbarlande was king with many other
In Albany that mikyll sorrow wrought
And with him met where he before had fought The river of Humbar whereof it
took yt name.

Where sore for fight he fled to the river
And there was drowned in that water clear.
A great part of his hooste was drowned also
As they did flee in that water clear
And many slain that might no further go
And many other taken for prysonere
Locryne the field had, and his brother dear
And to the ships where they had all richesse
Their men to help that suffered there distress
All Albayne into his hand he seized
And held hole to Logres joined then again
As it was first and that land well pleased
Of the resort the people were full feign
But in the ships a little from Almayne
He fande the kings daughter of Germanye
Dame Estrylde that was full womanly.
Whom for his wife he held at his plesaunce
For which the duke Corneus was wroth
But friends then by noble governance
The plain troth to say in soth
Made him to wed, all if it were full loath
The daughter so of Duke Corneus
With all frendeshyppe they were accorded thus
Dame Gwendolyne ye hight by proper name
Of whom he gate a son yt hight Maddan
And in the mean while in preuy wise at hame
He held Estrylde as his love and leman
Thereof his wife vnwetyng, or any other man
And of her gate a daughter full femynyne
That Sabren hight as chronycles do deuyne.
In this mean time Corneus so dyed
To whom the queen Gwendolyne was heir
Whom king Locryne forsook and replied
And Estrylde weddid again yt was full fair How Lo^yn was (...)e in betrayle
by his wy^e Gwendolyne.

But Gwendolyn to Cornewayle did repair
With her power, and faught with king Locrine
Where he was slain and had none other fine.
She drowned Estrelde and her daughter dear
In a river which that time had no name
But fro thens forth for Sabryn far and nere
That river that was plentuous of name The river of Seuerne, wherofit took the
name.

Was called then Seuerne yt has great fame
Thus Seuerne first had name in propertee
Of that lady that drowned was in specyaltee
The.xix. Chapter.
Gwendolena. queen of Britain had Logres and Albayne Guendolena.
in peace and rest.xv. year.

GWendolyne so after fro king Locryne
Had reigned hole.x. year and was slain
The queen was of all Logres lands so fine
And of all Albaine also through out incertayne
Crowned queen and so reigned with main
And service took of Cambre for his land
Who governed well her time, I understand
Fyftene year and then her son she crowned
That Maddan hight and into Cornewaile went
And then she dyed with sycknesse sore confounded
And to her gods her woeful heart she sent
And thus this queen in her best entente
To set among the goddess euerychone
Ever to complain her wedowhed alone
The.xx. Chapter.
How Maddan king of Britayne reigned after Gwendolena his mother, and
reigned.xi. years.

MAddan her son was king of Britain then
Having Logres and also Albany
That forty year there reigned as a man
Keeping the land in peace from tyranny Madda^ king of Britain that is England
and Scotland.

In whose time was none in his monarchye
Durst ought vary or any thing displease
So was he dred, and set the realm in ease.
Through all Britayne durst none another dysplese
So well the law and peace he did conserve
That every man was glad other to please
So dred they him they durst no thing over terue
Again his law, nor peace but them conserve
So was he dred through his great sapience
Both in, and out by all intellygence.
He dyed so, and to his father yede
His sons two Maulyne and eke Memprise
A day then set which of them should precede
To the croune but then by couetyse How ye one (...) to be king.

And that ylke day the younger Memprise
Slew his brother Maulyne elder of age
To that intent to have the heritage.
Memprise thus king destroyed, his men all out
Their lands their gods or else their lives certain Me^pryse king of
Britain

He took from them all his land about
Fulfilled all with pride and great disdain
His comonnes all with taxes did distrayne
So tirauntely, he left them naught to spend
By consequent, thrifteles he was at end.
His wife he did refuse and foul forsake
Using the sin of horribilyte The wretched end of Mempryse.

With beasts often instead right of his make
Which by all right and equytee
Vengeance asked by fell bestialitee
And so him fell, as to the wood he went
A route of wolffes him slough and all to rent.
The.xxi. Chapter.
Ebranke king of Britayne had Logres and Albany. Also he had.xx. wives.xx.
sons and.xxx. daughters, he made York, Bamburgh, Edinburgh, Dumbritayne and
Alclude, Also he made an archeflaume at York and his temple that now is an
archebishoppe.

EBranke his son the^ crowned was anon
Who ships great made on ye sea to sail Ebranke reigned* lx. years.

Withhelde his knights with him so forth to gone
Upon war he went without fail
Then into Gaul with a full manly tail
Where that he had riches innumerable
To hold estate royal incomparable.
XX. wives he had as chronicles says
And.xx. sons of his own generation
And daughters fair.xxx. that were not laith
Which daughters so for their releuacion
Into Italy with great supportacion
There to be wedded in Troyan bloodde and married
For ladies their with Troyans were alyed.
In Albany he made and edifyed
The castle of Alclude which Dumbritayne The Castle of Du^brytayne in
Scotland.

And some autours by chronycle has applied
And some sayen on the pight wall certain
And the west end it stood that now is plain
And some men sayen it is York cytee
Thus stand men now in ambyguytee
But sooth it is, he made this Dunbrytayne
A castle strong that stands in Albany
Upon a roche of stone, hard to obtain
About the which the sea flows daily
And refloweth again nocturnally
Twyse in his course and to the sea again
In the which no horse may dunge certain.
He made also the maiden castle strong
That men now calls the castle of Edinburgh The castle of Ediburgh.

That on a roche stands full hye out of throng
On mount Agwet where me^ may see out through
Full many a town, castle and boroughe
In the shire about, it is so hye in height
Who will it scale he shall not find it light.
He made also upon mount Dolorous
A castle strong that this day Bamburgh hight The castle of Bamburgh.

That on a roche is set full hye and noyous
Full hard to get, by any man's might
The castle is so strong and so well dight
If men therein have stufe sufficient
Or it be won many one must be shent.
His sons all he sent to Germanye
To win the same land by labor and conquest
Under the rule of their brother Analye
Duke Assarake that was the eldest
A worthy knight proved with best
All Germanye they gatte at their intent
And lords were made their as there father meant.
Sixty year whole he stood and bare ye crown
Reignyng fully in all prosperytee
No enemies durst again him up ne down
War, ne do in no wise again his royaltee
He made a temple in * Ebranke city That is york.

Of Dyane, where an archeflame he set
To rule temples as that time was his debt.
The.xxii. Chapter.
How after the death of Ebranke reigned Brutus greneshilde.

BRutus Greneshilde then by his name full right.
Both good and true, and easy of all port
His people all that came into his sight
With all his might evermore he recomforte
Of all there sorrow that they to him report
And why he hight Greneshilde to his surname Brutus greneshilde reigned. xii
years.

Because he bare on grene ay where he became.
Xii. year he stood reignyng full well in peace
And dyed so and by his father buried
In Ebranke before Dyane no lees
With Britons hole thither accompanied
With all honors that might be multiplied
In any wise with all seruyse funeral
As longed to the fate of death over all.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
Leyle king of Brytayn had Logres and Brytayne, he made at Carlele a temple
flamyne and a flaume to rule it.

THe^ Leyle his son was king of Britain so Leyle king of Britain reigned.xxv.
years.

That Carleele made that time in Albany
That now Carleile is called by friend and to
Which in English is to say finally
The city of Leyle, for in brytayn tongue plainly
Cair is to say a city in their language The cytee of Carleile by who^ it was
builded.

As yet in Wales is there commen usage.
This ilke king Leyle made then in that city
A temple great, called a temple flaumyne
In which he set a flaume in propertee
To govern it by their laws dyuyne
Of Jupiter, Saturn and Appolyne
That then were of all such in dignitee
After their laws, as now our bishops be.
When he had reigned hole.xx. year and five
In youth full well, and kept law and peace
But in his age his people began to strive
Failyng his laws, cities would not war cease
Cyuill wars greatly began to encreace
And he dyed then setting no remedy
Buried at Carleyle in his city royally.
The.xxiiij. Chapter.
Rudhudebras king of Brytayne had Logres and Albany he made Caunterbury,
Wynchester and Shaftesbury, and three temples and three flaumes of them.

RVdhudebras his son was king anon Rudhudebras king reigned xxxix. years.

Cair kent he made, yt now is Canterbury
Cair went also and builded of lyme and stone
That Wynchester is now, a town full merry
Caire Paladoure, that now is Shaftesbury
Where an Engel spoke syttyng on the wall
While it was in workyng over (...)
In which citees, he made then temples three
And flaumes also as now these bishops been
To keep the rites after their moralytee
Of there gods, as in there books was seen
Of their falls laws as they did mien
When he had reigned by thyrtye year and nine
The dulful death made him to earth enclyne
The.xxv. Chapter.
Bladud king of Britayne had Logres and Albany. He made an vniuersitee and a
study at Stamforde and a flaume and his temple at Bathe his city, which
vniuersitee dured to the coming of saint Augustyne, and the bishop of Room
enterdited it for heresies that fell among the Saxones and the Britons together
mixte.

BLadud his son, sone after him did succeed Bladud reigned.xx. years.

And reigned after then full.xx. year
Cair Bladud so that now is Bath I read
He made anon ye hot bathes there infere
When at Athenes he had studied clear
He brought with him.iiii. philosophiers wise
Schole to hold in Brytayne and exercise.
Sta^forde he made yt Sa^forde hight this day
In which he made an vniuersitee Sta^forde.

His philosophiers as Merlyn does say
Had scolers feel of great habilitee
Studyng ever always in unity
In all the seven liberal science
For to purchase wisdom and sapience
In cair bla(...)m he made a temple right
And set a flamyne theirin to govern
And afterward a* Fetherham he dight A man decked in feathers,

To fly with wings as he could be descerne
Above the air nothing him to werne
He flyed on high to the temple Apolyne
And there brake his neck for all his great doctrine
The.xxvi. Chapter.
King Leyr of Brytaine gave away with his daughter all his land and had it all
again, and dyed king possessid.

HIs soo^ne was king high set in royaltee Leyr king,

Of all Brytaynes by name yt hight king Leyr
Who Laiceter made after him called to be
Cair Leyr his city that builded was full fair
He had daughters three to been his heir
The first of them was called Gonorelle
The next Ragan and the youngest Cordelle
Emonges them, as Leyr satte on a day
He asked them, how much they him loved
Gonorell said more then my self ay
And Ragan said more then was after prouid
For joy of which, the king was greatly moved
I love you more then all this world so fair
He granted them two, of three parts to be heir
Cordell the you^gest, then said full soberly
Father as much as ye been in value
So much I love you, and shall sikirly
At all my might and all my heart full true
With that he greuid at her and changed hew
Senne thou me loves, less then thy sisters twain
The leest portion shall thou have of Bryteine
With that Maglayn duke of Albaine
Gonorell weddid, and had the land all out
Euin of Walis, and of Cornwayle there by
That duke was of those two lands stout
Ragan weddid, to which two dukes no doubt
King Leyr gave rule and governance
Of all Bryteine, for age and none puissaunce
The.xxvii. Chapter.
How Leyr made a temple, and a Flamyne to rule at all Laiceter.

A Temple that in his city of Kaireleir
A Flamyne also, as he a bishop were
In name of Ianus the folk into repere
And then he went, Gonorell to requier
Of the great love, that she aught him so dear
That of her promise she failed unkindly
Wherefore he went, unto Ragan in hye
She failed also for all her great promise
And to Cordell that weddid was into France
Long after that he went in great distres
To help to win him his inheritance
She succurred him, anon with all plesaunce
Both with gold and silver of right great qua^titee
To get his land again in all suertee
Aganippe her lord, was king of France
That grant him men, and goud sufficient
And sent his wife with him, with great puisau^ce
With all array, that to her were apent
His heir to been, by their bothes assent
For he was old, and might not well travel
In his person, the wars to prevail
King Leyr thus wa^ne his land, with all might again
And riegned well there after full three year,
And died so, buried at Kairleir men sayn
In Ianus temple, in which time for age clear
The king of France, Aganype infere
Dyed, wherefore Cordell his air was so
To rule Brytaine alone with outen moo
The.xxviii. Chapter.
How Cordell queen of France and daughter of king Leyr, reigned after the
death of her father.

COrdell queen of France, and daughter to Cordell queen of France
king Leyr,
Queen of England after her fathers day
Five years reigned, as for her fathers heir,
And governed well the realm, all men to pay
His sister soonne, then Morgan of Albanie
And Condage also of Cambre and Cornewaile
In battaill great, her took and put in baill
For sorrow then, she sleugh her self for tene
And buried was, by side her father right
In Ianus temple, which king Leyr made I went
At Kairleyr, so that now Laicester hight
Thus died this queen, that was of much might
Her soul went to Ianus, whom she served
And to Mynerue, whose love she had deserved
The.xxix. Chapter.
Morgan king of Albanie, that cla^nyd all Briteyne, but this Isle of Britayne
was departed, for this king had but Albany.

MOrgan yt eldest soo^ne of Dame Gonorell, Morgan.

Clamed Brytein, as for his heritage
Warred sone of Condage as I spell
That king was of Cambre, in young age
Duke of Cornewaile also for his homage
But this king Morgan was king of Albany
Soonne and heir of the eldest soonne varelie
Co^dage was king of Ca^bre, yt Walis is now
And duke of Cornewaile his patrimonye, Co^dage is that which we now call Walis

Claymed Logres as soonne and heir to Regawe
The myddill sister for his mothers proprete
As she that aught to have her partourye
At Glomorgane, with Morgan did he meet
In bataill sleugh him, there casten under fete
The.xxx. Chapter.
Condage king of Logres Cambre, and duke of Cornewaile, gatte all Bryteine
again, and made a temple with a Flamyne at Bangor,

COndage was king of all great Britain Condage reigned xxxiii. years.

And in his hand, he seized all Albanie
For his eschete, that ought to him again
Resort of right, and return verelye
He made a Flamyne, a temple also in hye,
Of Mars at Perch, yt now his. s. John's town
In Albany that now is Scotland region
He made another temple of Mynerue
In Cambre, which now is named bangour
The third he made in Cornwayle for to serve
Of Mercury, in place where he was bore
For his people to serve the gods there
Whereby he reigned.xxx. year and three
In rest and peace and all tranquilitee.
Ryueall his son that was pacificall
Crowned was than easy of gouernaile Ryueall reigned vxii. years.

In whose time the great tempest did befall
That days three the flies did him assail
Enuenoned foul unto the death no fail
And rayned bloodde the same.iii. days also
Great people dyed, the land to mykell woo.
Gurgustyus his son so reigned then Gurgustius reigned xv. years.

In mykill joy and worldly celynesse
Keeping his lands from enemies as a man
But drunken he was echedaye express
Vnaccordynge to a prince of worthynesse
Out of drunkenness succedeth every vice
Which all men should eschew if they were wise.
Scicilius his son then did succeed
In whose time echeman did other oppress
The law and peace was exiled so in deed Scicilius reigned xiiii. years.

That civil wars and slaughter of men express
Was, in every part of the land without redress
And murderers foul through all his land daily
Without redres or any other remedy.
Iago succeeded, and king was of this land King Iago reigned x. year.

As eiuill as was the king of Scicilus
The same vices, as I understand
Orels wourse, and more malicious
Wherefore our lord, took vengeance of him thus
He smote them both, in such aletargie
That sone they dyed, for marrid with frenzy
Kymar his soonne had then the diadem King Kimar reigned.xx. and viii. year.

And king then was, with all kinds of royalte
Keeping his land, as well did so him seem
In law and peace, with great felicite
The common weal and their vtilite
He did prefer ever in universal
Which to a prince is a virtue principal
First if he keep not law nor peace certain
His people will nothing dred ne doubt
Than stand he most in parell to be slain
Orels put down right by his vnderlout
No better is he be he never so stout
Then is his subject, or another wight
That with rebel, unlawful kill him might
Gorbonyan that was his soonne and heir Gorbonia^ reigned.xi. year.

Was king, who had that time but soonnes two
The eldre hight Ferrex that was full fair
The younger hight Porrex which discordid so
That either of them was always others foo
For that the father sent Ferrex into France
To king Syward, that was of great puisaunce
But after long, when he had reigned.xi. years
Dyed away from all royalte
Leuyng his land by his good rule inclere
In sufficient and all prosperity
Ferrex heryng of his mortalite
With power strong came to this land again
And with Porrex faught sore where he was slain,
For sorrow of which there mother yt Iudo^ hight
To Ferrex came with her maidens all in ire
Slepyng in bed slew him upon the night
And smote him all on pieces set a fire
Loo this cruel mother set on fire
With such rancor that she could not ceas
Which for passing ire was mercyles
The.xxxi. Chapter.
Clotane, Pynner, Ruddan and Stater reigned with barons wars.xl. year, how
this Isle of Brytaine was departed in four parties and stood departed.xl. year
in barons wars.

CLotane that then was duke of Cornwaile Clotane with his feldes reigned. x^.
years.

Next heir then was by all succession
But Pinner the^ had Logres i^ gouernaile
And king there of was by wrong ingression
Ruddan had Cambre in his possession
And Stater was then king of Albany
Thus was this Isle then led by tirannye
Thus Brytain was to four kings divided
Echeon of them warryng on other
The barons also on war were so provided
That all the people to wast father and mother
They spared none, all were they sister or brother
And each city on other both town and tour
And each tyranne was a conqueror
And lords feign subjects then to been,
The poor men that before yt war were desolate
Of all honor and worship that was seen
Through their manhood with people congregate
Lordeship conquered and roose to high astate
Laddes and boys, the ladeis tho did wedde
Their kynne before, nether land ne house had
Forty winter thus during barons war
This Isle so stood in sorrow and in strife
In fault of might, the weaker had the were
And suffered wrong that was then their life
For who that might, aught get with spear or knife
He held it forth, as for his heritage
And waxid a lord that a fore was a page
Defaute of peace and law, set them on hight
To over run lords, and be victorious
As worthy was for of their wrongful might
The lords were cause that they were rygurous
That would not so their wrongs malicious
At first with stand and punish trespassoures
But suffer them endure in their erroures
The.xxx. Chapter.
The conseipt of the maker of this book touching barrons wars, in defaute of
peace and law.

DEfaut of law, was cause of this mischief
Wrongs sustained by mastry and by might
And peace laid down that should have been the chief,
Through which debates followed all unright
Wherefore unto a prince, accords right
The peace and law even with equite
Within his realm, to save his dignite
What is a king without law and peace
Within his realm sufficiently conserved
The porest of his, may so increase
By injury and force, of men preserved
Till he his king, so with strength have ouerthrowed
And set him self in royal majesty
As tratour Cade made such an iuoperte
O ye my lord of York and veraie heir
Of England, so this matter well impresse
Deipe in your breast, let it synke soft and feire
And such defautes, set you aye to repress
At the beginning, let your high noblenes
The trespassoures to chastes, and to restreine
And let them not, law, ne peace, disobeine
O ye lords, that been in high estate
Keep well the law, with peace and governance
Lest your hurtes you hurt, and depreciate
Which been as able with wrongful ordinance
To reign as ye, and have also great puisaunce
For law and justices, in lords vnpreserued
Causes many of them to be ouerthrowed
The.xxxi. Chapter.
Dunwallo Moluncyus king of Cornewayle conquerid Logers, Lambry, and Albanie as
right heir of Brytayne he gave fraunchises to the temple, plough, merkettes,
feyres and hie ways, so that none should disturb by law nor by wrong, he
made six temples in Logers Cambre and Albanie and also many Fla^ynes to rule
them of estate as bishops now dooen.

King Clotein died, yt reigned in Cornewaile
Wherefore his soo^ne Du^wallo Molu^cius Du^wallo reigned.xl. years.

Was king of all his realm without fail
A mannly prince in arms full cuorageous
Assembled his host, and came full vigorous
Of king Pynner in Logres intrusour
And sleugh him there as wrongful governor
King Ruddan and king Stater
Of Albanie with hoostes strong and wight
Gave him battaill with mighty power
Where Ruddan and Stater were slain down right,
With all their hoostes and their great might
And Dunwallo had the victory
With much joy and manhod mightily
Dunwallo so called Moluncius
At Troynouaunt with royal diadem
Of gold crouned most rich and precious Du^wallo was ye first king of
Bryteine that was croned with gold.

Upon his head as did him well besene
The first he was as chronicles expreme
That in this Isle of Brytein had croune of gold
For all before, copre and gilt was to behold
He granted pardon unto all trespasoures
Of which they were full glad and ioyus
Amendyng all their faults and errors
With all their hertes full beneuolous
He eked then by his wit full curious
With his law called law Moluntyne
Chargyng all men to them fully to enclyne
He granted unto the temples every one
And to the plough and all commen ways
To markettes and faires where me^ne should gonne
Fraunchesies so great and liberties alwais
That all men being in them night or days
Should not betaken ne troubled in any wise
Neither by law nor by no maistries
Six temples he made in Ca^bre and Logres als
And in the land also of Albany
Of Flamynes as feel, to serve their gods falls
A temple also in troynouaunt sothely This temple was. s Poules church in
London

Of peace and concord he made verily
In which when there fell any discord
Among his lords, there were they made accord
When he had stond so king by forty year
He dyed away, and buried was full fair
In his temple then of concord full clear
At troynouaunt with great repeir
To whom Belyn was eldest soonne and heir
And Brenny next was borne of younger age
Wherefore Belyn had all the whole heritage
The.xxxi. Chapter.
Belyne king of Brytain who gave to Brenny his brother, Albany that made him
homage for it, and sone after made him great war and was false to him and
after friends again in other lands, but not in England ne in Scotland.

BElyn was king and sat in royal trone
Crowned with all manner of royaltee Bolyn.

To Brenny his brother he gave the land anon
Of Albany, for which homage and feautee
He made forthwith as to the souerayntee
His man became and king of Albany
Confirmed was and made full honorably.
But after sone, his men him set to war
Upon Belyn, that fought in battle sore
But Brenny fled and his men discomfite were
For then he went unto Norwaye therefore
And in that he dwelled thore
Where he wedded the kings daughter fair
That taken were by sea homewarde in repair.
By the king of Denmark, yt Cuthelake hight
Who by tempest into Logres were drive
And brought unto Belyn mykell of might
Where he band him, as chronycles does brief
Denmark to hold, of Belyn to have leife
Home with his wife to pass so anon
Whom Belyn granted home again so to gone
Brenne anon great host of Belyne brought
Where in the forest that time of Colatre
In battle strong, king Brenny all forfought
Discomfite, fled in Burgoyn for fear
To duke Segwyn, to whom he began him bear
So manfully and wisely in all thing
That he him wedded unto his daughter ying.
Sone afterward this duke Segwyn dyed
So Brenny than was duke by his wife
That to his brother always full sore anoyed
Came with great host to fight with him full ryfe
Conwen their mother by her prerogatyfe
Betwyxte them treated and made there well accord
On her blissyng no more for to discord.
With words peteous, and mothers naturesse
Showing her pappes and womb with great beauty
Lo here the womb that bare you with syckenesse
As womanhode would and femynitee
Lo here the pappes, as was necessitee
That fed you often in your tender age
For my love now let be all this outrage.
The.xxxij. Chapter.
These. ^i. brethren wanne all France and all Italy to Rome and besieged
Rome, gatte it and were Emperors of it.

SO made she them at one and well accord
And made them kiss and cou^celled them to gone
To their lands lest they after discord
Which they did with hosts great anon
With manly men of arms full great won
All France, they wanne Sauoye and Lunberdy
Tuskayne also and all great Italye.
They sieged Rome, wherefore their cou^cellours
Galbo and Porcenna came it to rescue
With hosts great, where then these Emperors
Slew sir Galbo and Porcenna the true
And Rome they wanne that always was untrue
Italye throughout obeyed their dominacion
Without more strife or altercacion.
King Belyne there no longer would abide
But left Brenny alone with all that land*
And home he came with mykill joy and pride
And Albion he seized in his own hand
And so king and lord of all Brytayn land
A city fair he made that Kaire vske hight
Which me^ now calle^ Carlyo^ by name full right.
The.xxxiii. Chapter.
He made the hye ways through out Britayn, and he founded three archeflamynes,
at London one for Logres, another at York for Albany that now is Scotland
for that time fro Humbre north that was that time Scotland, and the third at
Laklion in Wales, for all Wales.

IN Brytayn then he made from Cornwel sea
Of lyme and stone through all Brytayn
That men might ride and go in all suertee
Unto the sea by north Catenes certain
Which unto all men was broad and plain
Another he made in breadth fro saint David town
Unto the sea flowynge at Southamptone.
Three archeflamynes he made through al Brytayn
As archebyshoppes now in our laws been
There temples all to govern and domayne
At Troynouaunt on Logres to over seen
Her falls gods to serve and to queme
At Ebranke another for Albany
And at Karleo^ for Cambre on soueraynly.
A town he made full hie that hight Belyn gate
At Troynouaunt his city most royal
Thyrtene flamynes of bishops high estate
And temples as many, in citees all
So that there were in his time over all
With other so before edificate
Xxviii. flamynes in temples ordynate.
And at his death, he bad his corpse to be brent
Into powder all in a barell of gold
To put, and sete upon his toure to represent
His body hole, who that seen it would
His triumphs all, that enemies might behold
Well wrought about, in ymagerie and scripture
Full royally wrought for to refigure.
He reigned had then one and forty year
When he thus died and to his God had sent
His woofull ghoost out of his corpse full clear
Among the gods, evermore to be present
For which his people of weeping could not stent
There sorrows great in tears bitter they did stepe
Which in streams ra^ne and fro their eye^ did weep.
The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
GVrgwyn his son was crowned after him
Of Britayn bare then the diadem
Who made his law, upon life and lymme Gurgwyn reigned xxx. years.

His peace also he kept, as he did deem
As his judges could it full well exprime
Into Denmark he went for his truage
Which king Cuthelake grant him in heritage
He slew yt king, and Danes great multitude
His seruise had, and made the land to enclyne
To his lord ship and to his altitude
There truage pay, forthwarde no more declyne
And as he came by sea then homewarde fine
He found ships thyrty full of mighty men
According well as many fair women
At whose request, of his special grace
He gave to them the land, that now is Irelande
Where they did wone and make their dwelling place
There gouernaunte, so then I understand
Was Partheleyn to hold it then him band
Of king Gurgwyn and all his lynage
Perpetually by feautee and homage.
Nevertheless some chronicles report
That Irelamall their capitayn had to name How Irelande was hold of this king
and his heirs.

By whom it was so bigged and supporte
That out of Spayn were exiled and thither came
And some says that Hiberus of great fame
There duke was than and there governor
That of Spain before had been the flower
This king Gurgwyn his surname was Batrus
Came home again after the voyage sore
All forbeten, so was he corageus
That from his corpse his ghost departed thore
Reigned that had.xxx. year before
In Carlion after his high degree
Was buried so with full great royaltee.
The.xxxv. Chapter.
How Guytelyn king of Britayne wedded Marcian to wife, that Mercian laws made
by her great wisdom.

GVytelyn his son began reign as heir Guytelyn reigned.x. year.

Of all Brytayn about, unto the sea
Who wedded was to Marcyan full fair
That was so wise in her femynitee
That laws made of her syngularytee
That called were the laws Marcyane
In Britayne tongue of her own wit alane.
This Guytelyn was good of his estate
Full just he was in all his judgment
Wise and manly of port erly and late
Right meke and good ever in his entente
Although of state he was right excellent,
With each poor man that came to his presence
Through which he waxed of most hie sapience.
When he had reigned full peacebly.x. year
He left the realm to his son and heir
And to his wife to be his counceller
For his son then was.vii. year old full fair
Whom at her death she sent for all repair
Of Barons all their she delivered him
To keep, in pain of loss life and lymme.
Sicilius his son reigned.xxiiii. year Sicilius reigned.xxiiii. years

And crowned was and dyed in iuuentude
That governed well the realm full well and clear
At Karlyon buried after consuetude
As kings before in all simylitude
With all repair of all his Baronage
As well accorded unto his hye parage
Rymar his son the barons did crown
With honor such as fell to his degree * Rymar king.

Who twenty year and one so bare the crown
And kept law and all tranquilytee
And peteous was ever as a king should be
In ryghtwesnesse according with his law
Having pytee and mercy where him saw
Danius king his brother did succeed * Danius king.

During.x. year in war and great pain
Withouten rest he was always in deed
The law vnkepte, was cause there of certain
As mine author it list nothing to layne
I will it now write and in this book express
That men may know his folly and lewdenesse
The.xxxvi. Chapter.
How Moruile king of Britain was slain by his own immoderate Ire, without
knowledge of any man with a fysshe bestyall of the sea.

MOruyle his son a baste gotten and bore Moruyle reigned.xvii. year.

On Tangusta his special paramour
Was crowned then after faught full sore
with the king of Morians as a conqueroure
Where he him killed and had the field yt hour
And left no man on live and burnt them all
His Ire exceded his wit and gouernall
Sone after then came fro the yrishe sea
A bestyous fyshe, a monstre sum did it call
Whereof afraid was all the comontye
For it devoured the folk both great and small
Wherefore the king his ire might not apall
Ne cesse, before he foughten with it had
All suddenly alone as a man right mad
Where both were dead or any man it knew
His ire full fell was and intemperate
His discrecyon out of his brain flewe
But he could not by reason ordynate
Proroge his will ne ire inordynate
By other means with people multitude
It to have slain by wit and fortytude.
He reigned had that time but seuentene year
When he thus dyed and fondly did expire
Vnsemingly of any prince to hear
That he with such a monstre should desire
To fight alone so preuely of ire
But sons he had full fair then five
Of manly men also substantyfe.
Gorbonian his eldest son of five Gorbony^ reigned.x. year.

Was after king and held the majesty
Ryghtwesse and true to every creature
In peace his realm and all tranquillyte
And to his people he held all equity
Tyllers of land with gold he did comfort
And soudiours all, with goods he did supporte
Arthegall his brother signed with Diadene Arthegall

The king was then with all solempnytee
By natyfe birth next brother as men deem
Who good men hated of his iniquyte
Oppressyng them by great subtylyte
And all falls folk with riches did auaunce
His Barons all deposed him for that chance
The.xxvii. Chapter.
How this king was crowned in defaute of his elder brother, and after of pure
pytee crowned his brother again.

CLydoure then the third brother generate * Eledoure king reigned v. years

Was kyne create by all succession
And bare the crown with all royal estate
By lords will and there concessyon
That ruled well without oppressyon
When he had reigned so fully five year
Arthegall he found that was his brother dear
As he was gone on huntyng for his disporte
In the forest and wood of collatre
That sought had friends and found had no comfort
But heavy was and of full simple chere
Whom Eledoure took in his arms clear
And brought him to his cytee of Alclude
That then was of great might and fortytude.
In Albany then was it the greatest city tho
Beside the wood that time of collatre
Where his Barons and many other moo
At his biddyng were come and present there
Whom syngulerly he made them for to swear
Unto Arthegall his brother to be true * Arthegall reigned. (...). year.

So purposed he, to crown him all new.
And then anon in haste so forth they rode
To Ebranke and held then his parlyament
Where of good love and tender brotherhod
The crown he set with very true entente
On Arthegalles head and thought it was well spent
By hole decree and judgment of his mouth
And made him king again by north and south
Arthegall king crowned so all new again
Full well his lords after did love all perlees
Forsook all vices and took to virtue plain
And set his land and people in all kyne and ease
Reigning.x. year, he fell in great disease
In maladye of diverse great syckenesse
Dead and buried at Carleyle as Igesse.
The.xxxvii. Chapter.
How Eledoure was yt second time crowned king of Britayne for his good rule.

THe Briteines all crowned Eledoure
That reigned after.xiii. year in dignytee Eledoure reigned xiii year

So well them paid to have him gouernoure
For his goodness and his benignyte
And for he was so full of all pytee
That in all thing mercy he did preserve
Well better ever then men could it deserve.
Iugen with force and eke sir Peredoure Iugen and Peredour reigned. vii year
together.

His brethren two on him rose traytorously
Deposed him out of his hye honor
And prisoned him full sore and wrongfullye
All in the tower of Troynouaunt for thy
And parted the realm betwixt them two
Together reignyng.vii. year and no mo
Paredour then had all the land full clear Paradour reigned by him self iiii.
years

And crouned was, reignyng after worthily
His law and peace, keeping full well four year
And dyed then, and to his gods full hye
He passed so, and buried full royally
After their rites and their old usage
With great honor by all the baronage.
The.xxxix. Chapter.
Eledour king of Brytein thrice crouned, for his good rule and good conditions.

ELedour was king all new made again Eledour reigned..x. years.

Thrice crouned yt kept his old condition
Of whom the lords and commons were full feign
And sorry for his wrongful deposicion
He reigned so fro loss and all perdicion
Reignyng after full peacebly ten year
Buried full fair, at Alclude his city clear,
Gorbonian that was Gorbonian his soonne Gorbonia^ king of Brytaine.

The croune after his uncle in all things
That ruled well fro time that he begone
Full well beloved with old and also with young
He reigned ten year of Brytein king
And dyed then with worship whole enterred
As to such a prince of right should be required
Morgan yt was the soonne of king Arthegall, Morgan reigned.xiiii. year

Was crowned then and held the royalte
Full fourten year he ruled the realm over all
The law and peace with all tranquillite
He kept full well in all prosperity
For which he was full greatly magnified
In all his realm with people landefyed
Emnan his brother so was crouned king Emnan king reigned.vii. year.

Seven year reigned in all kind ofe tyranny
For which he was deposed as an vnderlyng
When he had reigned seven year fully
That to god and manne was ever contrary
Till all his lords and commons euerione
Which were full glad away that he was gonne,
Iuall the soonne of king Ingen did reign King Iuall reigned.xx. year.

Loving always to keep all rightwesnese
Hatyng all vices, and of good men was feign
All vicious men, he held in sore distres
Helpyng poor men falling in feebleness
When he had reigned full well by twenty year
He dyed away as says the chronicler
Rymo the soonne that of king Paradour King Rymo reigned xvi. year.

Crouned was then, loving all gentilnes
All virtue ever he louid and all honor
And in his time was plenty and larges
Of his people full well belouid I gese
And dyed so in all felicite on hye
Sixten year whole reigned when he ganne dye
Gerennes then the soonne of Eledour King Gere^nes reigned, xx. year.

To reign began and ruled well this day
And sone the death him took and did devour
If I the treuth of him shall say
That twenty year he reigned all men to pay
The law and peace full well aye conserved
Of his commons the love aye deserved, King Catellus

Catellus his soonne then ganne succeed reigned, x. year.

Keeping the law and peace as he had hight
Oppressors all, that poor men did over led
He hanged ever on trees full hie to sight
That ensample of them every manne take might
Ten year reigned full of felicite
And dyed so under his unsure deite
Coile his soonue after him succeed King Coile reigned, xx year.

And crouned was, reignyng so twenty year
In law and peace as to his worthihede
According was for law and peace co^serued clear
As every manne may se both far and nere
The flowers been of royal dignyte
In which he reigned twenty year ere he did dye
Porrex his soonne was crouned in his astate King Porrex,

Esye of port to speak with every wight
Their comonnyng to him was delicate
Who reason spoke he favored as was right
Who viceous spoke or did in his sight
He chasticed them after the cause required
Reignyng five year, of no land had he fered
Cheryn his soonne norished in dronkennes King Cheryn.

Customably, to which followed all kind of vice
It exiled wit out of his brayn doubteles
And reason after that, made him full unwise
He was of all his governance so nyce
And reigned so in Brytein but one year
When he dyed laid, was on the bear
His soonne Fulgen reigned but one year Fulgen,

Eldred his brother and Androge hight the third
Kings after him echeone were synguler Fulge^ce, Eldred and Androge

A year reignyng whose good rules are hid
For why, unto no man was it kyde
They dyed sone, for long that might not dure
In such dro^kennes, full weak was their nature
Vryan the soonne of king Androge Vryan.

Three year reigned, that was full lecherous
A maiden young, where he did ride or goo
He had every day, he was so vicyous
But yet he was gentill and bounteous
All if he had maidens in such charte
Wedowes and wifes, he had in great plenty
Elynde was king, and five year bare the croune, Elynde.

Full well ruled the realm in all kind of thing
In Astronomye, full ready aye and bowne
Dedancius also reigned five year full young Dedancius.

Who the realm ruled in all manner thing
Full peseably from that Elynde was dedde,
Both two dyed in their floreshed youthede Deto^^. Gurgu^cius. Merian Bledudo
Cappe. Owen and Sicilius all these reigned each of them.ii. years. Bledud.
Gabred. cantor.

Detonus then was king reignyng two year,
Gurguncius so two year bare also the croune
And Meryan two year by writing clear
Bledudo then full ready bowne
Two year also bare the croune
Cappe and Owen and then Sicilyus
Each after other by two year reigned thus
Bledud Gabred reigned, expert in song
And in all music instruments
Far passing was all other and had been long
Such was his cunnyng and his sentementes
That for a god in all folks ententes
In mirth and joy and manner of melodye Archiuall. Eldoll. Redon Redrike,
Samuel Pirry. Penisell and Capre. each of these reigned two years.

They honored him ten year only
Archiuall, then his brother reigned so
And Eldoll after his soonne, succeeded anon
And Redon then his soonne, came next him thoo
Redrike his soonne, when his father was gonne
Croune and septer received, has anon
Samuel, Pirre, Peneysell and Capre
Severally echeone reigned two year
The.xl. Chapter.
Elynguellus king of Brytein had great will to here all me^ne when they came
to him, which is a virtue. For great cunnyng makes a man wise and to know
much, and for mischefes to find remedies, as my lord Vmfrewill commended
never a man, that puts a mischief and can find no remedy therefore.

ELynguellus which was Capre his son
Both wise and sad, and in his realm held right,
He herd all men what counsel that they conne
For oftymes a simple manne to sight
More wisdom has in his insight
And better reason can in his brains find
Then can a lord, though he may beres bind,
Who in his land did wrong or any unright,
He prisoned him in sore and great distress
He gave his men yt souldyours were full wight
Lyuelode to live upon, from all destres
Sick folk and poor cast into feblenesse
He visited aye, and reigned had seven year
When that he dyed and left his realm full clear
Hely his soonne, in all thing good and wise How Hely the soonne of
Elyngwellus made the Isle of Hely.

Succeeded then, the Isle of Hely made
His palais gaye that might right well suffice
He builded there that was both long and brade
Wherein he dwelled much, and most abaide
The law and peace he kept and conserved
Which himvpheld that he was never over terued
Three soonnes he gatte, Lud and Cassibalain King Hely reigned.xl. year.

The third was called that time sir Nemynus
When he had reigned sixty year in certain
The death cruel to men that is aye noyeous
In his coming that is always douteous
Him sleugh a way, who was at Hely buried
Before his god that there was edified
The.xli. Chapter.
Lud king of Brytain builded from London stone to Lud gate and called that
part Luds town, and after by process, was called London by turnyng of
tongues.

HIs soonne and heir was Lud of much King Lud reigned.xl. year.
might
The^ crouned by all the baronage
His citees all eke his heritage, castelles wight
He did repeire that were his heritage
And where was worthy his seruesse and homage
To him was done, in lands al about
Was none withstode so was he dred and doubt
With walls fair, and towers fresh about
His city great of Troynouaunt full fair
Full well he made and batelled throughout
And palace fair, for royalles to appear
Amendyng other defectyfe and vnfayre
From London stone to his * palace royal This palace is now the bishop of
Londo^s palace beside Poules.

That now Ludgate is known over all.
Between Londonstone and Ludgate forth right
That called was then for his name Ludstone
He made men buyld, that London so then hight
His Palace fair then made he there anon
With toures high, both of lyme and stone
Beside Ludgate, and his temple nere thereby
His God to serve and him to glorifye.
When he had reigned by forty year all out
He died so, and in his temple fair
Entoumbed was, with stories all about
Androgeus was then his son and heir
Passing of sight and July fair
Tenancius his younger son of age
Which were to young to rule the heritage.
Cassibalayn there uncle then was king
And found his neuewes full honestly and well Cassibalayn reigned.xxxiii. year.

And nourtred them while they were chylder ying
And at there age when they could reason feel
He them auaunced right worshipfully and well
Androge he made and created duke of Kent
Of Troynouaunt also by whole intent.
The.xlii. Chapter.
How Julius Caesar came to Britayn, that now is England, and arrived in
Thamis, and fled to France for new succor.

HE made also then Tenancius
Duke of Cornwail yt time of mikel might
In which time so came Caesar Julius
Into the land of France that now so hight
And on a day walkyng up and down full right
On the sea side, where he this land did see
Desyryng sore of it the souerayntee.
His nauye great with many soudyoures
To sail anon into this Britayn made
In Thamis aroue, where he had full sharp shores
And countred was with Brytons that abade
With Cassibalayn the king of Brytons brade
Where after battayll smytten and forfought
Julius fled and then prevailed naught.
To France again and there he did soiorne
The French were fayn of his discomfiture
And trowed to make him so fro them return
But the Britons full besely did there cure
In this batell as came them of nature
The dukes of kent and eke of Cornewayle
And Nemynus their Eme did most prevail.
Crudan the king that time of Albany
Gnechet the king also of Venedose
That northwales now is called specially
And king Bretayle that was full virtuous
A man in arms passyngly curious
Of Denycye, southwales that now hight
He asked help of France that failed him right.
Then sent he to all lands there about
To poor men all, he gave full great riches
And exyled men of war that were full stout
He gave liuelode and felons all douteles
He delivered quyte, fre of all distres
All outlawed men, he granted full perdon
The bondemen also of every region.
The.xliii. Chapter.
How, when Julius Caesar failed power, he gatte new power by wily polycy, to
have his purpose, and came again to Brytayn and fled the second time.

IN which mean time, when he was ready so
With his navy came to brytayn again
Into Thamis where Cassibalayn tho
Great pyles of tree and iron set him again
His ships to peryshe and so he did certain
Through which, great part of his navy was drowned
And some other in batayl were co^fou^ded
Then fled he eft with ships that he had
Into the land of France where he was ere
Him purposyng to Rome, full woe by stad
Of his rebuke with sorrow and with care,
But then the king full glad of his evil fare
A feast royal at Troynouaunt he made
Where great discord, with his neuewes he had
The.xliiii. Chapter.
How Julius Caesar came again to Britayne the third time and accorded with
the king and had truage of him.

PVrposed fully on them to be avenged
For which they sent anon to Julius
And prayed to come his right yt he had chale^ged
To claim it hole they wrote him right thus
They should him help with people plenteous
Through whose council, full gladly then he came
At Dover arrived with mykeil joy and game.
Where then the king Cassybalayn he met
And fought full sore, where that Androgeus
Out of a wood on Cassibalayn set
And to a mount him droaue, where that Julius
And he him sieged again full coragious
He fought full sore with all manly defense
All night before, by mighty resistance.
But some for dread of famyshement
He treated with the duke Androgeus
To pay his tribute to Room in good intent
And to amend all things grievous
With all his might and hertes benevolence
Androgeus to all this did assente
And made Julius to this fully consent.
This truage was.iii. M. ^i. well paid
Each year to Rome of silver good and fine
These princes thus accorded were and daied
In peace and rest and Julius went fro heyne
To war upon Pompey, yt naught would enclyne
To Romys Senate after that Julius
Him had conquered by war full fortuous.
With whom then went the duke Androgeus
And in Britayne no longer would abide
He left his brother duke Tennancius
In Britayne with Cassybalyn that tide
And so to Rome with Julius did ride
But Neminus brother of Cassybalayne
Full manly fought on Julius times tweyne.
With strokes sore, ayther on other bette
But at the last this prince sir Julius
Crosea mors, his sword in shield set
Of the manly worthy sir Neminus
Which of manly force and might vigorous
The swearde he brought away out of the field
As Julius it set fast in his shield.
Through which stroke, sir Neminus then died
And buried was at the north gate certain
Of London then, where now is Scotland edified
London cytee royal of all Britayne
Thus this worthy knight in his grave befayne
Crosea mors, his swearde laid by his side
Which he brought from Julius that tide.
After which accorded this king Cassybalayn
Reigned fully in Britayne then.vii. year
Payeng trybute to Rome always certain
Rulyng his land in law and peace full clear
And reigned had in all, full thyrtye year
And four above unto his god so yede
Buried at Ebranke with all knyghtly worthihede.
The.xlv. Chapter.
TEmancius his neuewe then full fair Temancius reigned.xvii. year.

King Luds son yt duke was of Cornewayle
With Diadem was crowned as right heir
Of all Britayne had the gouernalle
Who kept the land in his time by good gouernalle
Full.xvii. year to his god then went
Buried full fair as to such a prince appente.
Kymbalyne so was his son and heir
Noryshed at Rome instruct with cheualre
That knight was made with honor great and fayer Kymbelyne.

By Octauyan reigning then enterly
Emperor then of Romes great monerchy
In whose time was both peace and all concord
Through all yt world, and borne was christ our lord
This Kinbelyne reigned fully.x. year
And ruled this land in law and peace full well
And dyed then as says the chronycler
That ilke same year that christ was borne with zele
Of his mother a maiden fair and well
For christen folk by grace then to redeem
From pain of hell to bliss as clerks deem
From time yt world first was begoonne and made
Unto the time of Christ's natiuytee
Accounted ere through christendom full brade
Five. M. year.ix. score and.xix. be
Or gods son came man for to be
As Crosius the discyple of Austyne
In this writing so as he could determyne.
Guyder his son and heir full corageous Guyder

That crowned was and king of excellence reigned. xi iiii. year.

The trybute which the Romans had of us
Denied then and made great resystens
With great trouble and manly violence
Unto the time that he had reigned clear
In Bretayne by.iiii. and forty year.
In which year then the Emperor Claudius
At Caire peers that now porchestre hight
Arrived a land with people full corageous
He closed the gates before with mykyll might
And the cytee assauted both day and night
The cytezens to famyshe and conquer
His name in arms and honor to proffer.
But king Guider fought there with the emperor
And slew men on every side about
Rescowyd the town as very protector
And made him to fle, were he never so stout
But one Hamon rode fast into the route
Having on him the Britains sign of war
Who in the prees slew the king Guyder.
The.xlvi. Chapter.
How Aruiragus king of Britayne reigned.xliiii. year. And how in his time
Cladeus Emperor had truage of this land, and married his daughter to the king.

ARuiragus yt saw his brother slain
His brothers armis upon him self he cast Aruiragus reigned.xl.iiii. year.

And king was then of all ye great Britain
Upon Hamon pursued till at the last
He drove him into the haven full fast
And drowned him there, after hight Hamo^ town
That men now call short speech Southha^pton
To winchester king Aruiragus rode
Whether Claudius came with Romans full of pride
Where Aruiragus with Britayns him abode
But as they should have fought in that tide
By both their councelles they were drawn on side
Claudius daughter to wed they were accord
And truage to pay each year without discord.
Then Claudius sent for dame Gennyse
His daughter fair full womanly to see
She came in haste as then it might suffyse
To come out from so far land and country
And in a mede with flowers of great beauty
Wedded they were, where Claudius then made
A cytee fair Cayre glowe to name it had
Of his name it was so denominate (...) Where of Gloucester was so named.

Now Gloucester standing on seuerne side
The marriage after Christ was incarnate
Was in the year fourtye and six that tide
So in Britayne two year he did abide
Orcades ysles in the mean time he conquered
In which he enfeffid the king and him preferred.
And home to Rome he passed so again
But after again, the king truage denied
And none would pay, wherefore Vaspasyan
Hither was sent with Romans fortifyed
At Ruteporte that now Sandwiche is notifyed
The king him met and put him from the land
To Totenesse went and notwithstanding fande.
So went he forth to Exceter his way
Caire Penelgorte then hight and it assaide
Where then the king him met the seuentene day
With host full strong, but then the king prevailed
But Gennyse the queen greatly auayled
By her trety made them full well accord
That with Rome he did no more discord.
The.xlvii. Chapter.
How Joseph Aramathie came unto Britayne with Vaspasyan, and chrystened a
part of this land.

VAspasyan wintered then in Britayne
At the prayer of queen Gennyse
And had truage then fully paid again
To Vaspasyan, as before was the gyse
With whom Joseph full holy and full wise
Of Aramathie with his fellows fourtene
Into this land then came and gave contene.
For whom so then Vaspasyan praid the king
The queen also to him to be good lord Vaspasian

And good lady, which they granted in all thing
Declaring then, and fully did record
This worthy Vaspasyan by his own word
How he him took out of Cayphas prysone
Preserved by god and not by man's reasone.
For forty year and two he in prisone lay
Fro Christ's death to time that he him fande
Without meat or drink by any manner way
But only was conforted by gods sonde
And how he him brought out of Jerusalem land
All this he told, the king and eke the queen
And prayde them his supporters to been.
After the winter next in somer tied
Vaspasyan to Rome then went again
Joseph abode and fully landifyed
The law of Christ, to which he was full feign
And the king gave the sothe to said
Twelve hydes of land ye then Mewtryn hight
Which Glastenbury is now named full right
In bretayne then this Joseph did convert
Brytons ay how to know the incarnacyon
Before that Paynyms and also peruerte
He taught them of his conuersacyon
Of his passion and his resurreccyon
With other things as the chronycler says
That apperteygneth to Christ's faith
Agrestes reigned by.iiii. and syxty year
When he was dead and in caire glawe was buried Agrestes.

In a temple entoumbed fair and clear
Of his gods that there were deifyed
About which time so our lady Mary dyed
Or else assumpte in body and soul on live
Unto the bliss after her joys five.
But Vaspasyan with his host full royal
And Joseph also came into Britayne
The year of Christ was then account in all
Seventy and six the sooth for to said
When Vaspasia^ to Room returned home again
The king enduyd Joseph in meutryne
The.xlviij. Chapter.
How Joseph converted this king Aruiragus and gave him a shield of yt arms
that we call saint George his arms which arms he bare ever after, and thus
became that arms to be yt kings arms of this land, long before saint
George was gotten or borne, and as Maryan the profounde chronicler says, he
bare of silver in token of clennes, a cross of goules significacion of the
bloodde that Christ bleedde on ye cross, and for it must needs of reason by
called a cross.

Joseph converted this king Aruigarus
By his prechyng to know ye law divine
And baptized him as written has Neninus
The chronicler in Bretain tongue full fine
And to Christ law, made him enclyne
And gave him then a shield of silver white
A cross endlong and over twhart full perfect
These arms were used through all Brytain
For a common sign each ma^ne to know his nacio^
From enemies which now we call certain
Saint Georges arms by Nenyus enformacio^
And thus this arms, by Iosephes creacion
Full long before saint George was generate
Were worshipped heir of mykell elder date
The.xlix. Chapter.
Marius the king of Brytain reigned sixty year and three, how the peightes
inhabited first in Albany yt is Sotcla^de now in these days, in Catenes and
they were the North peightes, and a part of them inhabited sone after bytwyxt
the Scotts sea and tweid that were called South peightes.

MAryus his soonne was then intronizate
And set on high in trone of majesty
With croune of gold full royally coronate
As worthy was unto his royalte
Who nourished was at Rome in his inuente
With his mothers kynne the beast of the empire
With Claudius also, that was his oune grau^dsir
In whose time a peight hight Rodrike
With power great by sea came fro Sythy
As proud and bryme as lion marmerike
Arreued so up in Albanye
Distroiyng whole the land all suddenly
With whom yt king the^ faught in great battle
And sleugh him with out any fail
Where then in sign of his high victory
He set there up a stone in remembrance
Of his triumph, of his aduersatie
Titled on it, his fame for to auaunce
How the peightes, there brought to vttraunce
Where the red cross is now in Westmerlande
In Stanys more, as I can understand
Then to ye peightes left a live, he gave catenese
To dwell upon and have in heritage
Which weddid where, with Irish as I guess
Of which after Scotts came on that lineage
For Scotts be to say their langage
A colleccio^ of many into one
Of which the Scotts were called so anon
The.l. Chapter.
How Scotts came of Scota king Pharois daughter yt came after many day into
Albanye so yt of peightes Irish and of Pharois people collect togethers were
Scotts named For at the tavern or at a gatheryng of people or of money is
called a scotte and so came first ye name of Scotts which Scotts inhabited
them by twixt catnes and ye Scottishe sea.

But Mewynus the Bryton chronicler,
Says in his chronicles orther wise
That Gadelus and Scota in the year
Of Christ seventy and five, by assise
At stone inhabitte as might suffice
And of her name that country there about
Scotland she called that time with outen doubt
This Scota was, as Mewyn says the sage How Galway had first the name of
king Gadelus

Daughter and bastard of king Pharao yt day
Whom Gadele wedded, and in his old age
Unto a land he went, where he inhabited ay
Which yet of his name is call Gadelway
And with the peightes he came into Albanie
The year of Christ aforsaid openly
And at her death she left a precious stone
In Albany, on which Moses did preach
And buried there she was by her self alone
Which stone was holy, as some men then did teach
And did miracles, so was yt common speech
In honor it was had, both of great and small
And holden for a relic most special
This stone was called the regal of Scotla^de The regal of scotland

On which yt Scottish kings were brechelesse set
At their coronomente as I can understand
For holiness of it so did they of debte
All their kings upon this stone was set
Unto the time king Edward with long shankes
Brought it away again the Scotts vntha^kes,
At Westmonestery it offered to saint Edward
Where it is kept and conserved
To time that kings of England afterward The subieccion of Scotland.

Should coroned be, under their fete observed
To this intent kept and reserved
In remembrance of kings of Scotts always
Subjects should be, to kings of England ay
Also before the fifte king Henryes day
Their silver coigne was as it ought to be
The kings face looked on side all way
To his sovereign lord of England as I see
Which to been hetherwarde of egalite
Unto their lord they have of new presumed
To look even forth, which would now be consumed
King Maryus kept yt realm in law and peace
Full of riches and of prosperyte
And dyed so at Sarum buried dowteles
When he had reigned sixty year and three
His tribute paid, full well to Room city
Of Christ's faith sumwhat he was enformid
But much more he neded to have been reformid
Coylus his soonne was king then crouned so Coylus, reigned xiii. year.

Who mutryed was at Room in great virtue
Held well his laws egall to friend and foo
And in his doings full just he was and true,
His life always and rule in virtue grew
That full great name of him was notifyed
And in all lands of honor multiplied.
The lords, gentiles, yemen, and commontee
He cherished well, and in no wise oppressed
And to them gave, where was necessitee
And tribute paid to Rome vndistressed
And at his death with sickness impressed
He buried was at Norwhiche then full clear
When he reigned had fully.xiii. year.
Somewhat in faith of Christ, he was instruct
But not fully, as was necessitee
Like as he was in Rome with him inducte
So held he forth in all stabilitee
And as he hard in all symylitee
How Joseph had his graundser informed
With benyng heart and will, he him confyrmed.
The.li. Chapter.
Lucius king of Britayn reigned.liiii. year, and was the second Christened
king of Britayn by Faggan and Dubyan that baptized all this land, and for the
same cause bare the same arms after he was baptized. Also he made of.iiii.
archeflamynes in Britayn three archebyshoppes at London, York and Carlion.

AFter king Coile, his son then Lucius Lucyus king.

So crowned was with royal diadem
In all virtue followed his father Coilus
To compare him in all that might beseme
He put his will after as his wit could deem
In so far forth, that of Christentee
He continued so a Christen man to be.
And in the year of Christ's incarnacion
An.C. four score and ten
Eleuthery the first, at supplicacion
Of Lucyus, sent him two holy men
That called were Faggan and Duuyen
That baptized him, and all his realm throughoute
With hertes glad and labor devout.
They taught yt folk, ye law of Christ each day
And hallowed all the temples in Christ's name
All mawmentes and Idols cast away
Through all Britayn, of al false gods the same
The temples flamynes, the Idols for to shame
They hallowed eke and made bishops sees
Twenty and.viii. at diverse great citees.
Of.iii. archeflamynes, they made archbishoprikes
One at London, Troynouaunt that hight
For all Logres with laws full autentikes
To rule the church and christentee in right
Another at Carlyon a town of might
For all Cambre, at Ebranke the third
From Trent north, for Albany is kyde.
All these works Eugeny then confirmed
The king then gave to Faggan and Duuyen
The ysle of Analoon and by cherter affirmed
That was called otherwise Mewtryen
Also freely as Joseph and his holy men
Had it before, then forth for their dispense
Whereof they were glad, and thought it sufficience.
But when this king had reigned in cote^placio^
Fyftie and.iiii. year in all prosperitee
He departed to God, desyryng his salvation
In heaven to dwell, with all felycytee
Where the Aungelles sing incessauntely
Glory, honor and everlasting praise
Be to the lamb of God, now and always.
At Cairglowe buried, after his dignitee
For whom all men made great lamentacion
Who bare before the baptyme of propertee
His Auncestres arms, and after with consolacio^
He bare the arms, by his baptizacion
Which Joseph gave unto Aruigarus
As the Briton says, that hight Mewynus.
For cause he had none heir to keep the land
Through all Britayn the barons began discord
Unto the time that Romans took on hand
To chese a prince by there steadfast accord
But.iiii. year were gone or then they could accord
In which time then Sever the senator
Hither came to be their gouernoure.
The.lii. Chapter.
How that there was Britons war.iiii. year after the death of Lucius.

SEuerus thus the worthy senator Seuerus king.

Descended down, right heir to Androgeus
The eldest soonne of Lud that with the Emperor
Out of Britayn that went with Julius
Which Senatoure before said Seuerus
To Britayn came and was intromizate
And with a crown of gold was coronate.
He brought with him from Rome two legion
With whom great part of Britons held full sore
And other part of the northren Britons
With Fulgen stood was king of Scotland bore
Gathered great people ever more and more
With whom yt Pightes and fugitives.viii. esenable
Destroyed the land by war full violable
The.liij. Chapter.
How Sever made a dike with a wall on it, of turues and soddes to keep the
Pightes and the Scotts from the Britons, ouertwharte the land from the east
sea unto yt west sea.

But king Sever him drove with batayl sore
Far north unto the Scottishe sea
where they abode and dwelled forth evermore
Between the Scottishe sea and twede no lee
But some books sayen to Tyne in certain
And so is like, for Sever there did make
A dike, and wall for the Scotts and Pightes sake.
From Tymnouth to Alclud his fair city
With turues and soddes and were them to againstand
Where the water might not the Enemytee
Keep of war from his true Britayn land
By fyfty miles accounted I understand
To the weste sea, that was of great Brytayn
This wall with dikes, pightes and Scotts did refrein
But king Fulge^ of Pightes and Scotts again
With host full great, sieged Ebranke city
Which Sever rescowed, and was slain
And Fulgen also for beten there did dye
Received his guerdon for his tyranny
At Ebranke the king Sever was buried
With victory and honors glorified.
Getan his son, a Romayne generate Geta^ king of Britain chosen by yt Romans.

The Romans then, hastily did crown
And Britons bloodde together congregate
By hole assente, and plain eleccion
Bassyan chase without collucion
For borne he was of the feminytee
Of Britayn bloodde and consanguitee.
This Bassian with Getan then did fight
In great battle where Getan so was slain
To Bassian so descended all the right Bassian reigned vii. year.

Of which the Brytons all were full fayn
Within.iiii. wekes was all this done full plain
But Bassian then his brother buried
And Romans all on hepes mortifyed.
Bassian then was crouned king of Brytayn
Full well he held the realm.vii. year in peace
To time Caranse confedered him again
With Scotts and Pightes upon him gone increase
All fugitives, outlawes to him, came prease
For long he had a robber been by the sea
And richer was, then any king might be.
By his manhood set all on roberye
Of low bloodde came, risen by insolence
To soudyours he gave wages full greatly
For to betraye the king by diligence
He to the king so made by violence
Which promise kept, he slew the king anon^
In place where as they were with him alone.
The.liiii. Chapter.
Carense king of Britayne reigned.iiii. year by treason, borne of low bloodde
and rose up of robery by the sea.

THrough treason of Carense Scotts and the Pightes Caranse reigned liii. years.

Assented so by falls co^federacio^
Through his gifts and his subtle slightes
Between them wrought in council privately
This false Carense so gatte the monarchy
Of all Britayn within the sea about
Four year he reigned, of port that was full stout
The Barons were so with gold englaymed
By this Carense and by his language sweet
Semyng like truth in manner as he proclaimed
As nothing is more ready for to mete
Then coueteous and falshode as men let
So were they all with his gifts enfecte
The king was slain and he was elect.
But when to Rome was known yt false disceyt
Of this Caranse and his wrong intrucion
The Senate sent a letter by their conceyte
Him to distroye by dew execucion
Who for his fault gave him absolucion
In batell strong slew him and had the field
And Scotts all and pyeghtes yt with him held
The.lv. Chapter.
The words of the maker of this book unto my Lord of york touching
governance of this land, by example of this king Caranse through robbery
refen of poor blood to royal estate.

O Worthy lord and duke of York yt been
Consider well this case full lamentable
The righwes kig well governed as it was seen
Thus murdered was, of him yt was unable
And set him self in trone most honorable
Of all Britayne, yet came he up of naught
And of low blood, and it were wisely sought.
Good lord when ye be set well under crown
With treytours and misruled ryatours
Dispense right so, with all such absolucyon
And let him seek no other correctours
But maynteyne them, your laws governors
And over all thing, be ye the chief Justice
To keep the peace, that no false you suppryse
The.lvi. Chapter.
ALlecto then crowned and made king * Allectus king reigned.iii. year

Of all Britayne reigning fully years three
And well he ruled in all manner werkyng
By power of the Romans great postee
That brought with him from Rome legions three
But Britayns then did set a parlyament
And chase a king by their hole assent
Asclipiade that was duke of Cornewayle
Who with Brytons to troynouaunt came
Whylest Romans were by their hole gouernalle
At sacrifyce of their gods faynte and lame
Against whom Alecto of great fame
Full mightly then faught till he was slain
But Gallus drew all Romans in again.
And kept the wallys for which Asclepiadote
The seege about the cytee strongly laid
In which mean while Brito^s brake in, god wot
And slew Gallus and Romans sore affrayde
All out of array and sore dismayde
Beside a broke that walbroke men now call
That Galbroke then was called there over all
Of Gallus name that slain was in that place
And some said of walshemen afterward
Walbroke it called for a sudden case
That then byfell upon a day full hard
Of the Brytons that with them so miscaryed
Over that ylke brook full sore and hard distressed
By Cornyshmen slain down there, and oppressed
The.lvii. Chapter.
Asclepiadote king of Britayne reigned.x. year, in whose time was great
persecucyon in Britayne, sayncte Albons slain and many thousands slain for
Christ's sake.

ASclepiadote was crowned king again
In royal wise with all solempnyte Asclepiadote reigned.x. year.

The laws well he held and put in great pain
Over trespassours, for their peruersite
Theuys and robbers on galowis hanged to be
But in his time the Emperor Dioclesyan
Into Britayne then sent Maximian.
This Maximian to surname Hercelyus
A tyraunte false that christente anoyed
Through all Britayne of work malycious
The christoned folk felly and sore destroyed
And thus the people with him foul accloyed
Religyous men the prestes and clerks all
Women with child and bedred folks all
Children soukyng upon the mothers pappis
The mothers also withouten any pytee
And children all in their mothers lappys
The crepyls eke and all the christentee
He killed and slew with full great cruelte
The churches brent all books or ornaments
Bellys, relyquys that to the church appendes
The.lviii. Chapter.
This persecucion was in yt year of Christ's birth a C. lxxx and.iiii. year,
and the.x. year of king Asclepiadote.

HE slew that time and martyred saint Albone
And with him also Iulus and Araon
And Amphimabal yt would not dye alone
But offered him to dye with him anon
For Christ's love as fast as he might gone
For thousands sele were martered in those days
Whose souls be now in bliss and shall always
Asclepiadote reigned fully but.x. year.
Who for great fear suffered all this pain
And durst nothing again this tyrant steare
But him withdrewe to hyde him was full feign
This persecucyon as some chronyclers said
The.x. year was of Asclepiadote
For which duke Coil again him rose full hot
The duke Caire colun that hight Coylus
Which cytee now this day Colchester hight
Then crowned was that slew Asclepiadotus
For cause he came not fourth with all his might
The tyrant fell to agaynstande as he hight
Wherefore Britayns were all full glad and feign
Of king Coylus yt succured all their pain.
The.lix. Chapter.
King Coil of Briteyne reigned.xi. year, that was father to saint Elyne.

HE ruled the realm in law and peace full well King Coylus reigned.xi. year

That for his wit and vertuosyte
Able he was as chronycles could feel
To have ruled all the emperalyte
For ryghtwesnesse, manhood, and moralytee
A daughter had he and none other heir
Elyne that hight far passing good and fair.
That afterward she was and is canonyzed
In shryne at Rome that is saint Elyne
Her father Coil set her to be excercysed
In philosophye and other science clean
In which she could her self right well demean
That she was able by wit and sapience
The realm to rule and have thereof the regence
The.lx. Chapter.
How Constancius Senatoure and Emperor of Rome wedded saint Elyne, and by her
was king of this land.

THe Romans sent to Britayne Constancius
That Spain had put in hole subieccyon
Unto Rome, as chronicles have written thus
Who landed here without reieccyon
To whom king Coil by good direccyon
His message sent, offering him his truage
And he to stand king, and hold his heritage.
Of which, Constance was glad of his entente
And here abode at prayer of the king
His daughter wed by their whole assente
Elyne his heir yt was both good and young
Of hye wisdom and womanly conning
And there with all the fairest that men knew
More Angelyke then womannyshe of hew
Within five wekes after her father dyed
Buried at Care Colune his own cytee
Greatly commended, well famed and laudifyed,
Both on this side and beyond the sea
Eleven year reigned in great dignyte
And over all thing always common publyke
Of his realm wrought not many kings him like
The.lxi. Chapter.
COnstance was king crowned with Diadem Constau^ce king reigned. xv year

And Elin queen through al great britain
On whom he gate a son yt had bapteme
That Constantyne called was then in certain
But king Constau^ce of Rome was hye cheftaine
By the senate first made the Emperor
And after king of Britayne and gouernoure.
Whiles he labored for Romes publyke profete
With his fellow that hight Galerius
That Emperor of Rome by great delight
Which of maxence of port malicyous
Werryd full sore with work full cheualrous
And all the weste this constaunce had and hylde
Galerius had the Este there into bylde.
And after when this Constaunce of Britayne
Was crowned king the common well preferryd
Of all his realm not lettyng for disdain
He wrought it aye and no time it differed
As chronycles of him said and referred
And when he had reigned hole.xv. year
At Ebranke was he buried full clear.
The.lxii. Chapter.
Constantyne king of Britayne son of Constaunce and of saint Elyn, by.
xxxiiii, year, was first king of Brytayne, and afterward Emperor of Rome.

HIs son full young Constantyne his heir
Then crowned was by all the baronage Constantyne reigned.xxxiiii. year.

Who lykely was, semely and right feire
Of.xv. years, so in his tender age
Great manhood had to rule his heritage
Of great wisdom was and of sapience
By discrecyon had he intellygence.
He had also a lambishe patience
To here all pleyntes mekely with sobernes
A lions chere in field with good regence
Discrecion good, to chastysh wickedness
The welfare of his realm with business
Preserved ever and kept in regyment
And where need was, he made suppowelment
The Senators of Room by letters well endite
Prayed him to come to Room as emperor
For to destroy Maxence and disherit
Of Christen folk the cruel turmeutour
Of Christen faieth, the cursed confoundour
For of his birth they said it set him so
Maxence to stroye that was his fathers fo
For which he went to Room with great power
Of Britons strong, with flemynges and Barbayns
Henauldes, Gelders, Burgomans and French full clear
Ducheme^ne, Lu^bardes also many Almains
The year of Christ three.C. and ten with Romans
Met with Maxence and with Dioclesian
And their feloe that hight Maximian
Sumwhat afraid of their multitude
Constantyne then he held up to heaven
And saw a cross in which was enclude
This reason good in hoc vinco. full euine
His ferdnes so anon then did him leven
In sign of which, a cross of goules he bare
In his baner white, and with him faught he there
He had the field and put them to the flight
Wherefore ever after he bare two arms clear
In all likeness to every man's sight
As Englishemenne in this land bare them here
Saint Georges arms now called wtoute^ were
Thus has the king of england, to them right
Through eldres gootte^, by god his verey might
The senate whole, him met and magnified
His high tryumphe, and mighty victory
With laud and honor fully glorified
As usage was, that time of Romanye
At certain gates set up for memory
And crouned him in imperial trone
That so manly had quit them of their foone
The.lxiii. Chapter.
Thanswere of Constantyne wha^ he was a leper and should have been heled with
the bloodde of innocents, and how he sent his mother saint Elyn to seek the
holy cross. And how he gave his palis and dignite imperial of Room to
Siluester. And how he went to Besau^ce and builded it all new, and called it
Constantyne and destroyed all the Aryanes heresies and dyed there at saint
Nychomede whose day is hallowed with the Greeks in the twenty and one day of
May.

But how that he a leaper after grew
And by his leches, utterly infourmed
Many innocents which there were borne new
For his health should slain bee^ and disformed
By them into heal again returned
In whose bloodde bathed, he should have been
His leprous swames, to have weshed of clean
But how their death of imperial pitee
He then released, rather to have his pain
Then to recover by tyranne crueltee
His health and life so to get again
For who^ these innocents, should have been slain
And how he was, by Siluester made clean
With holy water that yet in Room is seen Sorcerie

Nor how he sent his mother saint Elin
To seek the holy cross, which she him brought
Ne how she brought the clerks with her again
Of Jews law, it to approve for naught
With Christen clerks, by reason well out sought
Ne when our law by Siluester for true
Was best approved, that other law untrue
How then he gave his own palais royal Constantine first granted to the. b.
of Rom^ yt primacye.

With Room all whole, and all the dignite
Through out Romany, with sea imperial
To Siluester that had the papal sea
He gave it to him all quite and free
And to his successors perpetually
Ne how he distroyed the aryans heresy
Nor how he went from Room to Besaunce
And of his name, then called it Constantyne
Now men it call, by all rememoraunce
Constantyne noble, where to dwell he did enclyne
There his laws to keep and to determyne
And there he set his throne imperial
And for his domes, his sea judicial
Nor how he dyed, after that Nichomeyd
In cathologe among the saints noumbred
Of May the twenty and one day in deed
Under shryne buried and subumbred
Among all Christian kings worthy to be remembered
Whose day and feast ye Greeks have each year
Solemply, as for a saint full clear
And when he dyed, reigned had and imperate
In Brytain, Room, and also at Constantyne
By thirty and four year end, and determinate
And in the year of Christ as men did determine
When this worthy emperor, his life should fine
Three hundred was and forty also full even
So when his soul was ravished into heaven
And these lo^gyng not to Brytons governance
But unto Room and the empire
Which me need not with my style auaunce
For Marian has the Rooman chronicler
All the whole substance and the matter
So well it may with rethorike terms fayred
Which by my simplenes I would not were appaired
But after his day came one Octauius Octauius

Duke of Westesax that crouned was for king
That sleugh the werdeins of constatynus
Which that he set for Brytain gouernyng
In his absence to keipe it in all thing
For which the senate Traherne to Brytain sent
Saint Elyns uncle that into Brytain went
With legyons three at Portesmouth did land
And to Wynchester then rode forth right
Where Octauius came, him to withstand
And with him faught and put him to flight
Went to Portesmouth again full right
Where then he shipped full fast to Albanye
Where on stanemore they faught again on hye
Where Traherne wa^ne the field with victory, King Traherne.

And into Logres came crouned with dignite
And well did rule then all his monarchy
All men him loved for his sanguynite
In his time in great nobilite
He kept it well from all tyranny
Four year complete in all thing worthily
In which time, so then the said Octauius
Procured his death by which then was he slain
By a traitor full false and odyus
So was he king of Brytain then again
And sone then after, he fell in age vnbain
A daughter he had, that was both good and fair
Who^ sum counseled, because she was his here
To Conan Meryadoke anon for to marye
And other counseled unto Maximian
King Traherne his soonne a prince of Romanye
To Constantyne next heir he was alaane
Which marriage was fulfilled and taken
Maximian her wed, then Octauius
By fourten year then reigned and dyed thus
Maximian after him ganne succed
And crouned was maugre of all his fone
For ire of which Conan departed in deed
And warred sore on Logres so anon Maximian reigned in all xxx.iiii. year.

Wherefore the king, full fast with host began gone
And countred him with bataile fell and strong
The king prevailed, that other so did among
Till on a day, their fre^des made them accord
The king ruled the land, full well in peace
Five year fully, without any discord
In which time, he gatte full great riches
Thought in him self, over the sea to pass
Having no will, in Bryton long to abide
But into France, he was so set in pride
With host full great he landed in Armorike
A duchy that was longyng unto France
The less Brytain, now of Gaul kyngrike
And conquered it by marciall governance
To Conan then, it gave him to auaunce
To hold of him, and called it less Brytain
And stuffed it then with Brytons, soth to sain
And forth he went and wan the realm of France
And so by process, Almaigny him obeyed
So did a great part of Italy, by accordaunce
He put to flight Gracyan, that him desobeyed
And Valentynyan, with him conueighed
And sleugh by battle, Fulgen mightily
And Emperor was made of Romany
Conan the king, then of little Brytayn
To Dyanote the duke of Cornewaile sent
For Vrsula his daughter, letters plain
His wife to be, in verey good enteut
With her also of maidens, that were gente The.xi. M. vyrgins.

Xi. thousand, in his land to be wed
For Frenchewemen, they would have none to bed
This Dianote, custos was of a Britayn
His daughters with those virgyns then forth sent
In Thamis shipped, and cast in Almayne
By tempest great, there ships all to rent
Many of them were dead, and many shente
In sykenes, frayde in storms, and sore tempest
That full fayn the^ there, would have had there rest.
Gwames was then king of Houndelande
And Malga king of Pightes, paynymes hatous
In whose lands they arrived, I understand
Unto them then, they were full odyous
Passing yrefull, and full malicious
And for they would not, be deuirgynate
They slew them all, through crueltee and hate.
Which now bee^ saints, and marters euerychone
In nonnes mynster, conserved in Coleyn
That noumbred been, both with friend and foone
Xi. thousand virgins, of great Britayn
Maximian the emperor of Romayn
When he had reigned.xxxiiii. year
By Gracya^s friends was buried, and laid on bear.
The.lxiiii. Chapter.
Gracian king of Britayne, in whose time king Malga and Gwaymes distroyed all
Britayne

GRacian, when Maximian was slain
To Britayn sent then, by the Senators Gracian king.

In whose time king Malga and king Gwayme
This land over road, standing in all honors
That mortal fooes, and cruel tormentours
To Christen faith were and malicious
All mercylesse and passing rigorous.
Which kings two, root of all crueltee
Full false paynemes replete of felony
The churches brent, and slew the commontee
Wives nor children, ne yet the clargye
Ne religious ne yet the prelacye
They spared not, but mercylesse them killed
Of wickedness so foul, they were fulfilled.
But Gracian that crowned was and king
In domys false, and in his judgments
Fell dispiteous great tallages taking
Both of the lords there lands and rentes
And of gentilles again all there ententes
So did he also of all the commontee
For which they sle we him without pitee
Gwames and also Malga the kings two
Destroyng Britayn without any rest
The Senate sent a legion of knights tho
Into this land, of each region the best
Chosen out of all the worthieste
The which put Gwames and Malga to flight
That shipped home unto there land full right.
The.lxv. Chapter.
The Senate of Rome sent a legion of knights into Britayn, who made the
Britons to make a wall of lyme and stone from the east sea unto the weste sea
and called it the peight wall.

THis legion and Britons hole assembled
That made a wall well wrought of lyme and stone
Where Sever made of turues and soddes sembled
With castelles strong and towers for the nones
At each miles end to agaynstande all the foonyse
From sea to sea as yet it is well seen
In diverse places, where it was wont to been.
This legion home returned then again
For Britayn then suffered great disease
The Scotts and Pightes there did them full great pain
Six year then next, of which to have some ease
To king Aldrye there sorrows to apease
Of esser Britayn, then sent them Constantyne
To be there head and also there medecyne.
This Constantyn king Aldries brothers wife
Was crowned then with royal diadem Consta^tyne reigned.x. year.

At Caircester as Brytons could deuyse
That with his host royal as did him seem
Gwayme and Malga, as chronicles do exprieme
The Scotts and Peightes he ve^ged and ouercam
That Brytayne wrought before full mykel shame.
Three sons he had full fair by his wife
Constance then was the eldest son of all
That was not wise, wherefore then in his life
He made him monk, he was so bestiall
To get the life above celestial
His secounde son that hight Aurelius
His surname was called Ambrosius.
The youngest son hight Vterpendragon
These two were wise, but young they were of age
To there uncle sent, to be at his direction
Nurture to learn, and all manner language
By which after they may have knowelage
With discrecion and all good ordinance
To rule and have the realm by governance
When Constantyne had reigned well.x. year
Upon a day, as he in his garden went
A Peight that was in his house, him full nere
Him slew anon, by treason and consent
Of Vortiger, that ever in his intent
Conspyred had, to have the regaltee
Of great Britayn, the king so to be.
The.lxvi. Chapter.
Constaunce king of Britayne reigned but one year, that was monk first and
after made king, and was not wise but an ideote, whom Vortiger crowned to that
intent to make himself king by false co^tryuyng, seeing the king full simple to
rule the land.

COnstaunce his son ye monk was in Cairgwente Constau^ce king.

Vortiger duke of westsex, was that day
In haste crowned, by barons hole assente
Knowing he should, be but a fool always
The realm to save, and keep out of disraye
He waged Peightes, on hundredth to serve yt king
Always upon his body abydyng
He made the king, full certainly believe
They should epsy among the enemytee
By their friends, yt no Peightes should him grieve
Ne Scotts of their great peruersitee
But they of it, before in certayntee
Should let him wit, there malice to understand
Such subtle mean, to fage the king he fande.
And under that, a while he paid their wage
Full well with chere, full good and all pleasaunce
Unto a day he said, to their knowlage
The king no more would have their attendaunce
But were he king, he should them well auaunce
Which thing, and ever came to preefe
About his person, they should be cherished as chief
There wages also, full well should be paid
For which behest, anon they slew the king
And brought his head to him full foul arayde
Of which he made him wroth, in all semyng
But to London, by his subtle writing
He gave charge, the Peightes all to kill
And none escape, nether for good ne ill.
This Vortiger, protector was that year
And in his hands, the kings castles all
He had, and saw he might the crown full clear
Have at his will, so dred the lords temperall
And prelates hie, that were spiritual
His heaviness and indignacion
That they assented to his coronacion.
When Co^stau^ce thus, yt king had been one year
And could nothing, of rule ne governance
The commons saw, he was an ideote clear
Their voices all gave, with all their obeisaunce
To Vortiger with their hole attendaunce
As commons would ever yet of old and new
Each year their king to change and renew.
The.lxvii. Chapter.
How Vortiger king of Britayne reigned.xviii. year through his falshed and
treason co^spired with Peightes, to slay his king. And how Engist and Horsus
paiens landed in Kent and were beloved with Vortiger, and how wednisdaye and
frydaye had name, and what gods and goddisses they honored. How and when
Engist and Horsus la^ded in Ke^te, and made Thoncastre and horn castre in the
country of Lyncolne, and how Engist sent for his daughter and married her to
king Vortiger, and brought in with her great multitude of paiens, that
accombred all the realm both of war and of Christen faith, wherefore the
Britons crowned the kings son.

THis Vortiger the^ crowned king of might Vortiger king of Britayn
reigned.xviii. years

The Peightes and Scotts for he there king so killed
They sclaundred him, that mikell good he hight
Unto Peightes, the king have slain and spilled
By such treason his will they so fulfilled
And after by his preuy ordinance
He made the same be slain, for the same chance
For which they aroose on him to been aue^ged
With full great host destroyed both corn and town
And brent his land, and felly revenged
In which time came into this region
Engist and Horsus dukes of great renoune
By sort sent out all void of Saxonye
With men of war also of Germanye.
In ships three arrived so then in Kent
When Vortyger at Caunterbury lay
Which he withhelde anon, and far him sent
To war on the Scotts and Pyeghtes aye
That brent his land and noyed day by day
Peynemis they were and trowyd of Mercury
And on Venus their gods of Payanie.
That Mercury woden, in their language
Was called so by his propre name
For whom they honored of old and age
The fourth day in every weke at hame * Wednysdaye, whereof it was named.

And so of Mercury giving it a name
And of wode^ called it wednisdaye
Of old custom as they have used always
And Venus also, was their high goddess
For whom always they hallowed the sixte day
Of every weke in prayer and holiness
Who in their tongue friday was called always
For whose honor, that named was frydaye
The Son the Moon, Iubiter and Saturn
And Mars the God of arms, they did adorn
The year after of Christ's incarnacyon
Four hundredth full forty and six also
Was when Engyst into this regyon
First came, and haven with three ships and no mo
As saint Bid says in gestis anglorum so
with scotts and Pieghtes they faught full mightily
And drove them out and had the victory.
This Engist had then none habitacyon
Desyringe so a castle in to dwell
Him and his men, to keep from all aduersacyon
Of Scotts and peyghtes yt enemies were then fell
As all old Chronyclers can you tell
Asked as much ground, as a bulleis skyn thonge
Might cyrcuyte fully of bread and long
Which the king him granted then anon
He made a thonge then of a bullys skyn
So small and long, that round about did gone
A stony ground to set his castle in
And thus by subtelte and his sleyghty gyn
Where then he made Thongcastre as men told
In Lyndesey, that now is Castre of the would.
Engyst then sent for his daughter Rowan
That came anon, with ships eyghtene
Well stuffed of men, for they were of Britayne
Again the Scotts and Peightes to opteyne
Whom Vortiger then, thought full long to seen
She proferred him a drink and said wassayle
As he was learned, he said to her drink hayle
Which words first came up so into this land
With that he set his heart her for to love
That he her wed by all kinds of lawful bond
As then the church could best him learn and move
And thus the Saxons by Vortiger set above
For which his sons, and all the Baronage
Him hated sore, right for his marriage
Of Paynimes bloodde, for to their ydolatrye
Great people were then, turned and peruerte
And great also in Pilagien heresye
Were accombred, and hole to it aduerte
Wherefore his son, the people to convert
For Lupus sent, and his fellow Germayne
Christen faith to preach, in all Britayne.
Which bishops. ii, the folk convert did again
By process so, and home again then went
This Engyst then, to please the king full feign
For his son Occa, to Germany sent
For Ebissa and Cherdryk by consent
Of Vortiger, that.iii. C. ships brought
Of men of war, the best that might be sought.
Of which his son, that then hight Vortimer
Of his first wife, and also the barons all
Of such multitude of people, affrayed were
And to the king, as then it did befall
Compleyned had, without help in general
Wherefore anon, together they did consent
This Vortymer to crown by hole assent.
The.lxviii. Chapter.
How Vortymer the son of king Vortyger, king of Brytayne to withstand the
power of Engyste, and of Saxons was twyes crowned. How this Engyst under
treaty slew all the Baronage of Brytons on yt plain of Salysburye.

THen Vortimer they crowned anon right
With royalte, that might to it appende Vortymer king of Britayne.

That was full wise ap pued, like a knight
In all courage, that to knighthode did extend
For to assail or else for to defend
Who with myscreauntes faught sore upon De^went
So did he else at all place where he went
At Abirforth he fought with them also
The better ay he had where as he yede
But Catigerne his brother was killed tho
And horn also was slain by great manhood
And thus Vortimer victorius where so he yede
An other time upon the north sea banks
He faught with them, in battle their vnthankes
They fled unto the ysle then of Tenecte
Where he them syeged fearfully and assailed
And slew them down on hepes ay as they met
That their power almost then was failed
All forefoughten and full sore batayled
Besought the king they might have his license
To Germany to make their reuertence.
So went they home, with little folk alyfe
That in his time, they came no more again
But cytees all, and churches amended full ry fe
The christentee to mainteyne was full fayn
But then anon the subtell queen Rowayne
Made him to be poisoned, of which he dyed
With her venymes thus was he mortifyed.
In a pyller of brass he laid on hight
At the gate where Saxons, had landed before
He bad his men for also far as he might
Him se, he trust they would not nerre come thore
But nevertheless, they let not therefore
But buried him at Troynouaunt cite^
As he them bade, with all solempnite
King Vortiger was crouned then again
For Engest sent and bade him come anon
For Vortimer his soonne was dead and slain
Who with three hundred shippis full of me^ne echone
In Brytain landed, and to the king ganne gone
Of whom he was full glad and well reioysed
And of his folk that were of great power noised
But Brytons all, and also the baronage
To fight with him, arose by whole consent
For which he sent to them by message
That to the realm, none eiuill he meant
But for to help the land in his intent
And if they were of his host, displeased
As they could best devise, they should been eased
And bad them set a day where they might mete
By their auise his power home to send
Or all to hold, for their common quiet
Fro their enemies, the realm for to defend
All his defaute by their auise tamende
The Brytons thought his profer reasonable
And to the realm also full profitable
They sent him word to mete the first day of May
With four hundred so on every side
Upon the plain of Sarum in meek array The craft and pollicye of Engist

That Caire Cradok was called so that tide
Byside Awmesbury full fair edefied
Again which day, this Engist bad his men
Within their hoses a long knif to have then
And when he said Nemyth, your sexes then
Each manne then slay, a Bryton with his knife
For so I shall, us marshall as I can
A fore a Bryton, a Saxon set full rife
So shall we reave them sonest of their life
And set us ay in rest and most quiet
At a day lymete, together when we mete
A day assigned, as was his ordinance
The watch word said, each panyme a Bryton slew
Four.C. lords, of Christ's holy creaunce
Betrayed were, by Engist so untrue
The death of whom, many a Bryton did rewe
Whose corpse all, were buried at Awmisbury
Which after that day, was made a Nonnorye
With the host of panymes came full fast
And took the king, held him at Troynouaunt
For marred sore and greatly was aghast
What so they asked, anon he did them grant
The citees all and castles sufficiaunt
To let him pass away without troublaunce
Which Engist granted, because of aliaunce
The.lxix. Chapter.
How Engist caused Logres to be called then Engestlande, of which the
commons put gest away in their common speech, and call^ it England for
shortenes of speech.

ENgist with his host had all thorient
The South and North, in all ye great Britain
In his keeping, except thoccident England whereof it was so named.

Which Brytons held of war and much pain
By old chronicles, as I have herd saine
And then anon, he called it Engestes land
Which after was shorted, and called England
Through the commons, yt thought it long to say
And much lighter, in tongue to say England
Then with their mouth, over long to name it aye
By long producyng, to call it Engistislande
And thus came first in, as I understand
As I conceive, thus came first Englandes name
For short speech, corrupt per sincopene
But Engist then, gave all the land about
To Saxons all, and king was so of Kent
But Vortiger in Cambre sought through out
To build upon, a castle to his intent
To hold him in, fro the panymes violent
Which in Cambre, the castle of Genoren
He made full strong, in the land of Hergigyen
Upon the river of Ewey, on Cloarte hill
But of dragons and of the water under
That Merlyn said, that castle did so spill
Ne of his birth that many men on wounder
Of that work, both above and under
That no father had, ne of his prophecye
I cannot write of such affirmably
Notwithstanding, that philophiers wise
Affirm well, that sprites such there been
Bitwene the moon and therth called Incubice
That have gotten children of women unseen
As in stories diverse I have so seen
How the philosophier, wise Magancius
Affirms it also, and Apuleyus
The.lxx. Chapter.
Aurelius Ambrose king of Brytain the second soonne of Constantyne,

AVrelius Ambrose brother of Constaunce
Into Britain with strong and great power
And segid then Vortiger by ordinance
In his castle of Genoren full clear
Which with wild fire he brent, and him in feere
And crouned was by all the baronage
To rejoice Britain that was his heritage
He sought Engist that panyme was full grym
With hoostes they faught, but Aurele had yt better
The Saxons fled, before that were full brime
For in their quarrel, it might be no better
Duke Eldoll took Engist and did him fetter
In Kent as he him met away fleyng
At Conanburgh him brought to the king
Where he was heded with swerd, and decollate
And Occa then and his soonne Ebissa
His cousins dear at York came, in full late
And with him Saxons full many one moo
Where then the king, him segid with much woo
But Occa then, and al his compaignie
Came to the king to whom he gave mercy
The king then made a worthy sepulture
With yt stone hengles, by Merlins whole advise
For all the lords Brytons hye nature
That there were slain in false and cruel wise
By false Engest and his feloes unwise
In remembrance of his forcasten treason
Without cause, or any else encheson
But Pascencius the soonne of Vortiger
With host of Irish, Cambre he destroyed
With whom the king faught with his power
And drove him out, to Irelande sore anoyed
Of his people many slain and foul acloyed
But Eopa then clad in monks clothyng
With his poysonis, then poisoned had the king
But then the king of Irelande and Pascence
In Cambre brent, the king full sick then lay
He sent Vterpendragon for defense
With host royal and mighty great array
He faught with him, for which they fled that day
With shame and hurt to Irelande home again
Vterpendragon the field so had full plain
Then Vter saw a starrye beam full bright
And asked Merlyn, what that it might mean
He said it is Stella Cometa right
It sygnifieth the king his death to been
That now is gonne to the bliss I ween
The dragon also, thy self does signifye
With beams two extendyng severally
The beam southward, to France yt does extend
Thy soonne that thou shall have does signify
That shall conquer, all France unto thend
Almaignie also and all Germany
And so to Room, throughout al Romanie
Above all princes, in his time most fained
Through Christente most dred and best named
That other beam to Irelande extendyng
Thy daughters eke does also signify
Their children also, that of them shall be coming
The realm to have with all the regalie
Thus Merlyn to him does specify
So went he forth anon to Cairgwente
Where he had word of his brothers enterreme^t
Within the Giau^tes carole that so then hight
The stone hengles, that now so named been
Where prelates and dukes, earls and lords of might
His sepulture to worship there were seen
Thus this worthy king, was buried by dene
That reigned had, that time but thirten year
When he was dedde and laid so on beer
The.lxxi. Chapter.
Vter Pendrago^ king of Brytain and of his arms that he bare.

HIs brother Vter, at Cairgwe^t was crou^d Vter Pendrago^ king of Brytain.

In trone royal the^ fully was admit
Two dragons made of gold royal that stound
That one offered of his devout wit
In the mynster there as he had promit
That other before him, ever in battle bare
Of gold in goulis, where so he began to fare
Tharmes also of Troy, that Brutus bare
Tharmes also, of good king Lucius
Which after baptyme, his arms always ware
The same arms that king Constantynus
At his battle against Maxencius
So bare always, yt saint George arms we call
Which Englyshemen now worship over all.
And for he bare, the dragon so in war
The people all, him called then Pendragor.
For his surname, in lands nere and far
Which is to say, in Britayn region
In their language, the head of the dragon
And in the north, as he a castle made
Pendragon hight, where he his dwelling had.
But Occa son then, of that false Engist
And Oysa also, the son of Occa with
That northlande brent, of which when Vter wist
He faught with them, there saved them no grith
Nor none of the people, that came them with
He took Occa and Oysa, in battle
Beside Dane hill, where they did him assail.
The Saxones also he slew, yt with him came
And had the field, with all the victory
For joy of which, he made great joy and game
Proclaimed his feast, of Pasche solemply
To hold at London, where then he made his cry
That every lord, his wife with him should bring
For worship of that feast, and of the king.
The.lxxii. Chapter.
How the king was an amoured of the duke of Gorloys wife, and how he gatte on
her king Arthure.

EMonges other, Gorloys duke of Cornewayle
His wife did bring Igrene fair of figure
Whose beautee their, all others made to fail
So well and hole auised was nature
Her womanhede exceded every creature
That though nature, her beautee would have amend
Her co^nyng might thereto in no wise exte^de.
Of which beautee, and of her goodlyhede
The king with love, so greatly was oppressed
It changed all his courage and manhede
In kalendes of eschaunge, he was so impressed
For which the duke with her then home adressed
Perceiving well, the kings fykelnesse
Was set for love, on her womanlynesse
In Tyntagell his castle strong, he her set
Himself then lay, in castle Dymyoke
Where then the king him sieged her to get
But Merlyne then, from it him did revoke
And by his council subtelly did provoke
Knowing his love; he had to dame Igrene
By coniurisons made in haste full yerne.
He made the king, unto duke Gorloys like
Himself like to Brethel in all semblaunce
That then was the dukes preuy myke
And Vlfyn like, by all kyns governance
Unto Jordan in all manner conysaunce
That most knew of the dukes preuytee
By which he brought to Igrene all three.
Thus lay the king her by, ever when he would
She trustyng then, that he had been her lord
But ever his siege he made sadly to been hold
His people assautyng the castle by one accord
But Gerloys men, then pleynly did record
Their lord was slain and Vter had the field
Of which she merueyled, and then fast him beheld.
There gatte he then, on her a son full fair
And fro her went, unto his hooste again
The duke was slain, with all his most repair
Of which the king, glad is not to layne
To Tyntagell with all his host full feign
He came anon, and had it at his will
He comforted her, and bad her hold it still
But then between them two he did discure
The priuetee in all, as it was wrought
And set his day to wed her and to cure
Of heaviness, that she was then in brought
Her lords death so much was in her thought
For her so slain, her wyfehode also defouled
Before that time, that ever was kept vnfouled.
And at the day, he wedded her and cround
And she ferforth with child was then begone
To comfort her, he set the table round
At Wynchester, of worthiest knights alone
Approved best in knighthode of their foone
Which table round Joseph of Arimathie
For brether made of the saint Grall only.
In which he made, the seege pereleous
Where none should sytte, without great mischief
But one that should be most religious
Of knights all, and of the round table chief
The saint Graal, that should recover and acheue
By adventure of his fortunitee
And at his death, a virgyne should be.
But at her time, the queen had borne a soonne
That Arthure hight, and was of statur fair
More large of lymme, and wysest under sun
Of his age then, to be his fathers heir
Of all his lymmes, right comely, strong and fair
But Occa then and Oysa, that before
Stale home, were come and warred in Britayn sore.
The king sent forth, sir Loath of Lowthian
A worthy prince, hardy and bounteous
His daughter had wedded, yt hight the^ dame Anne
A manly manne, and right cheualrous
The first knight, that was elect right fortunous
Of the table round, that often with them did fight
That often prevailed, and sometime put to flight.
For which the king, ordained a horse litter
To bear him so then, unto the verolame
Where Occa lay, and Oysa also in feer
That saint Albones, now hight of noble fame
Bet down the walls, but to him forth they came
Where in battayll, Occa and Oysa were slain
The field he had, and thereof was full feign.
There was a well, which his enemies espied
That he used the water often to alaye
His drynkes, all his sores to be medifyed
Which they venomyd, with poison on a day
Of which he dyed, and went to bliss for aye
In the carole, beside his brother dear
As to such a prince, it did right well affere.
He reigned had then. ix, and thyrtye year
And in the year of Christ's natiuyte
Five hundredth and syxtene, then was full clear
The realm he left, in good felicyte
Arthure his son, to have the royalte
To reygne and rule the realm, yt then was able
That of his age, was none so commendable.
The.lxxiii. Chapter.
Arthure king of Britayne, reigned.xxvi. year. How the king bare six banners
in his war, and how he renewed and increased the table round, and held up
royally the rule of it, and how he conquered Irelande and Denmarks with all
the ysles of them.

ARthure his son up grown, then peerlesse
Throughout yt world approved of his age
Of wit and strength, beawte and largess King Arthure.

Of person hye, above his Baronage
And other all, of Brytons vasselage
By his shoulders, exceded in longitude.
Of all members, full fair in latytude,
At Circestre then of.xv. year of age
When Dubryk archbishop of Carilyon
With all estates within his heritage
Assembled there Duke, earl, lord, and baron
And commentye of all the regyon
Upon his hedde did set the dyademe
In royal wise, as well him did beseme.
The year of Christ's birth.v. C. and syxtene
Was when he was crowned all with gold
Where than he made, a vow for to sustene.
The christen faith, the church also to uphold
The peace and laws, mawgre who so other would
The Saxons also, to war and destroy
That of long time, had done us great anoy
King Arthure sought yt Saxons in Scotland
His chief baner of goules was to see
An image of our Lady of gold enthronde
Crowned of gold, as fresh as it might be
His other banner was of the Trynite
Of gold and goulis of saint george was yt third
The.iiii. was Brutus arms known and kyd
The fyfte baner of goulis.iii. crowns of gold
The syxte of Goulis, a dragon of gold fine
With host full great, of Britons yt were hold
On Douglas water the Saxons he did untwine
Colgrim yt was their captain fled fro thine
To York anon, and it with people held
His men then slain, the king had so the field*
Cheldrik and Baldoffe, two dukes of Germany
With hosts great, then landed in Britayne
To Colgrym came, and brent that land in hye
But to Arthure king Howell came full feign
With host great, his systers son certain
Of less Britayne, that with his uncle went
Against Colgrym to fight in his intent.
Cador the duke, that time of Cornewayle
The kings brother of his mothers side
Came to the king, with people yt might avail
So did all other, of all Britayne full wide
With their enemies then met of mikell pride
And vaynqueshed them at Lyncolne then seging
For which they fled full fast yt, syege leaving
To Calidon wood nere unto the sea
Where the kings two, them seged sore about
That for famishment and fought, they swore to be
The kings men and their land throughoute
For to void their people, of all the land out and out
Colgrym, Baldolffe, and also duke Cheldryk
That chieftayns were with dughty duke Cordrik
And leyde him hostage, all this to speed
And when they were upon the sea again
They landed eft at Totnesse so in deed
And seged Bathe where Arthure was full feign
Their hostages honged in their sight full plain
And with them fought Colgrym and Baldof slew
To Cordryk gave westsex to be his man true.
Duke Cador then followed upon the chase
And slew Cheldryk, and his of Saxony
And to the king again came for this case
That king beseged was in Albanye
Wherefore they went, with host full manly
To Alclud, where Scotts and peightes lay about
Them discomfyted, and him delivered out.
The Scotts and peightes, he drove into out ysles
Of Scotland then, and there became his men
To live in peace, that ever were full of wyles.
But Gwillomare, the king of Irelande then
Over king Arthure, full hard war began
With host full great, of Iryshe and Saxonye
In Scotland brent, and also in Albanye.
But then yt king him met, and with him faught
Discomfyted him, and put him to the flygt
Unto Irelande, with battle sore vnsaught
Of Scotland, then of Lowthyan by right
The king was then, that loath of Lowthian hight
The first knight, was so of the table round
To Arthure true, and also his lyegeman found
His sister Anne, unto his wife had wed
On whom he gate the courteous knight Gawen
In Dunbar castle, his life there he led
And Aguzell was king, that time certain
Of Albanye, and Vryan, of Murref plain
The king was then, to king Arthure full true
His lyegeman aye, and changed not of new.
The king Arthure, then wedded to his wife
Gwaynore faiereste of any creature
That time accounted, for passing birth natyse
So July fair, she was of her figure
More aungelyk, then womannyshe of nature
In so ferfurth, me^ thought them selves well eased
Her to behold, so well al folk she pleased.
The table round, of knights honorable
That time were void, by great defycience
For many were, through acts marcyable
Dispended then, by wars violence
Wherefore the king, then of his sapience
The worthyest of every realm about
In the table round, then sent without doubt.
The three kings foresaid of Scotland
Two kings also of Walys, full chyualrous
Howell the king of less Briteyne land
And duke Cador, of Cornewayle corageous
And worthy Gawen, gentle and amarous
And other fell, their rule was wrongs to oppress
with their bodies, where law might not redress
The faith, yt church, Maidens, and widows clean
Children also, that were in tender age
The common profit, ever more to sustene
Again enchauntmentes, his body for to wage
Again which craft, of the deuelles rage
Them to destroy, and all kind of sorcerye
Of which were many, that time in Brytaynye.
On whitsonday, always every year
They should each one at the feast be with the king
In any place, where ever so that he were
But if he were in prysone, or hard lettyng
By deed of arms, death, or else sick lyeng
In which cases, one of the table round
Should seek him all yt year, till here were found.
Also their rule was each one should tell
His own acts of warrys adventure
Before the king at meat how him byfell
In his travail or of his misauenture
The Secretorye, should put it in scripture
For none auaunt, it should not then betake
But for his rule to hold, ye king then did it make
Also to steare and move, young knights courage
To seche arms and warrys of worthynesse
And of diverse lands, to learn the language
That else would live at home in ydylnesse
For honor and ease, abides not together doutlesse
Also it moves these poor and young knighthode
To be auaunced, by their ladies lyuelode.
For doubt it not, Ladies ne gentylwemen
No cowardes love, in manner that is abusyon
And shameful also repreuable among men
His cowardyse does him great confusyon
A man to withdraw him, by feynt collusyon
For better is, with honor for to dye
Then with life, ay ashamed for to be
The somer next, Arthure went to Ireland
With battle sore forfoughten yt conquered
And of the king had homage of that land
To hold of him, so was he of him feared
And also gate as chronycles have us lered
Denmark, Friselande, Gotelande, and Norway
Iselande, Greneland, Thisle of Man and Orkynay
He conquered these, to hold of him evermore
He made king Loath that was of Lowthian
Of Norway king, where he had fought full sore
And Lowthyan he made his soonne Gawayne
The king to hold of him by homage then
For Norway was his very heritage
Descent of bloodde of king Sechelynes lynage
King Arthure then, through Christe^tie most famed
And conqueror above all kings royal
Was the^ most doubted of ma^hode and best named
But kings and princes of Septentrionall
His to present most high imperial
Each day came new, that then more like it semid
An heavenly life, then erthely as men demid
He held his household, and the round table
Some time at Edinburgh, some time at Strive line
Of kings renomed, and most honorable
At Carleile sumwhile, at Alclud his city fine
Among all his knights and ladies full femenine
At Bamburgh also and Ebrank city
At London at Wynchester, with great royalte
At Carlion, Cardif, and Aualyne
In Cornwaile also Dover and Cairelegion
And in Scotland at Perthe and Dunbrytain
At Dunbar, Dumfrise and saint John's town
All of worthy knights, moo then a legion
At Donydoure also in Murith region
And in many other places, both city and town
But ever as next, the valey is the hill
After long rest comes sharp labor
King Arthure then had so firmly set his will
To conquer France as his progenitour
Maximian did, with full great honor
Wherefore he sent, to all his homagers
That to him came with all their powers
The.lxxiiii. Chapter.
How king Arthure conquered France, and sleugh king Frolle of france, and
wan many lands thitherward, and when he had wone France and ruled it nine
year, he came to Carlion and he and the queen were crouned there again with
great solempnite and dew service dooen by his homagers.

ANd into France anon so forth he went
And in Paris Frolle yt was governor
Bysegid then, who unto Arthure sent
Proffered him bataile, with full great honor
With hand for hand, for right of the emperor
To fight with him, to iudgen all the right
Which to fulfill, Arthure granted and hight
At a day assigned, they two together met
Within an Isle without Paris city
Where either other, with wepons sore then bette
But king Arthure, by great humanyte
That day having, of him the souereingte
Sleugh Froll yt day, with Caleburne his swerd
For which all France, of him were sore aferd
Paris they yield, and all the realm of France
The royals all, to king Arthure obeyed
Service did him, and all whole obeisaunce
As to their king, and him no more disobeyed
He sent Howell, with host and him conueighed
To Guyan then, who made Guytard obey
To king Arthure, with all that ever he may
Nauerne and Spain, Portyngale, Aragon
Province, Sauoye, and Langdok with also
Flaundres, Braban, Henauld and Burgoyn
Orliaunce, Poytiers and Lectoo
Cateloigue eke Almaignie and many mo
Holande, Selande, and Gelders within fere
His men became, as prince without pere
At Paris then he feasted all thastates
By forty days, were he and also the queen
Were crouned then and had the land subjects
In all honor and ryalte as was seen
He feasted all the commonalte full clean
The prelates whole and the university
And ladies all, with their feminite
Nine year, he held his throne riall in France
And open house, greatly magnified
Through all the world, of welthe and suffisaunce
Was never prince, so highly gloryfied
The round table, with princes multipled
That auentures then sought cotidianly
With great honor, as made is memory
And when he had, so ruled France neni year
To Brytain went, he home then again
At Cairlion his city fair and clear
At witsondaye to se, his knights feign
He set his feast royal, the sooth to said
By forty days, for all that there would been
Most for his knights, that he desired to seen
At which feast he, and the queen also
Crouned were, with royal diadem
By Dubrice, that tharchibishop was tho
At Carlion as the church did deem
With all rialtie as well did beseme
Tharchebishopes of London and Ebrank
Came to that feast, and had full much thank
At the Enoyntyng of this most noble king
Tharchebishop of London the right arm
Tharchbishop of York by all writing
The left held up, without any harm
While the people to see that sight, did swarm
This was their charge and verey dew seruise
Of anonxcion time, to do and excersise
King Agurell that was of Albanye
The king Posses of Southwalis that hight
And of Northwalis Ewayn the king manly
And duke Cader of Cornwaile by right
Before the king bare four sweordes full bright
Which was service of great antiquite
For their lands dew, to his souerente
Before yt queen Gwaynour, the queens came
Of Southwalis, Northwalis and Albanye
And the duches of Cornwaile, of great fame
Right well be seen of chere benyngly
Each of them bare on her hand on hie
A turteldoue, that was of color white
To please the queen, so was her most delight.
Sir Kay was then the duke of Aungeoy
At Paris made by Arthur and create
His steward was that had with mekell joy
A thousand knights, to serve early and late
Ententyfly not feynt, weary ne mate
During the feast, clothed all in Ermyn
For best array, that he could best ymagyn.
Sir Bedwer then at that feast was Boteler
A thousand knights with him consociate
The feast to serve, of wynes good and clear
Clad all in graye, of pelury preordinate
That was full rich, according to there estate
Thetis goddess of waters there had no might
For Bacchus god of wynes, shed his power right
Thousa^des many, of lords and knights honorable
Each day during the feast imperial
Before the king and queen incomperable
To mass and meat, went in especial
A thousand ladies of estate temporal
Beside thousands that were of less degree
Wives and wydowes with other virginitee.
The.lxxv. Chapter.
A good cause to make knights worthy and coragious, and ladies and gentilwomen
to live in great clennes.

There was no knight, accounted of honor
But if he were, in war approved thrice
Nor with ladies, beloved as paramoure
Which caused knights, arms to exercise
To be virtuous, and clean of life and wise
It comfort also ladies, and their femynitee
To live the more, in perfect chastitee.
And when this feast royal was dissolved
The king rewarded so highly, each estate
And in his mind, ymagened and inuolued
How sone and when, at time preordinate
They might again be consociate
And commanded them, at the next Pentecost
There for to be with him, both least and most.
Dubricyus, then archebyshop of Cairlyon
Mekely ceased, and hole forsook his cure
Purposyng so of good religion
An heremytes life, thence forward to endure
In whose stead, David of life full pure
Was set to rule the churches dignitee
To Gods pleasaunce with all libertee.
To Mangauero, the sea Pontifical
Of Chichester he gave withouten let
Of Wynchester with the co^moditees all
To Duuyan he gave, and him in set
To God and the church, as fell of dew debt
Thysse of alclud also Pontifical
To Eledoure, he granted, as might befall.
As then befell, the feast of Whytsondaye
That all his knights, of the table round
To his presence, were commen in good array
And every knight, his adventure that stounde
Had told the king, as his order was found
Which adventures, the king made all be written
In his register, ever to be known and weten.
The.lxxvii. Chapter.
How Galaad came to king Arthure and atheued yt seege pereleous in the round
table, and how the saint Graal apered at supper in yt hal, wherefore he made a
vow, never to abide two nights in one place, to time he knew what it was,
and that he might se it again.

GAlaad that time, was.xv. year of age
The goodlyest before, that men had seen
Who^ Lau^celot gat in very clean spousage
On Pelles daughter, yt king full long had been
Of Venedose, that northwales is now, men wene
Clean armed, came at meat and obeyed the king
The queen also, and estates there syttyng.
And sat him down, in the siege pereleous
Of the table round, where none durst sit before
But Joseph, that was full religious
That made it so, ere Galaad was bore
And king Arthure, that satte therein therefore
And never moo, that it had ought presumed
But they were brent therein, shamed and consumed.
Which Joseph said, before that time full long
In Mewyns book, the Britayn chronicler
As written is, the Britons iestes among
That Galaad the knight and virgyne clear
Should it acheue and auentures in all fere
Of the seyntgraale and of the great Briteyn
And afterward a virgyne, dye certain
But the knights all then of the round table
Conceived well and fully then believed
He was the same person incomperable
Of who^ Merlyn said ever should been well cheued
Most fortunate of all knights that then lived
For which they all anon to him attend
In all things that to knighthode appende.
At supper as he sat again at even
In the same seege with full knightly constaunce
That proved well, which made them al beleuen
That by his rule and noble governance
To all knights he should do great pleasaunce
In special to all of that order
Full great worship and all knightly honor
So suddenly, doors and wyndowes al clapped
With hydeous noyce, far passing marvelous
Opened and sperred, al by them selfs fast rapped
For which they trust of some cause marvelous
As with that noise the saint Graall precious
Flow thryse about, within the hall full often
Flytteryng full fast, above them high on lofte.
And as it came suddenly unknown
Right so it went away withouten lees
The knights all that time that had it sawen
Amerueled were, of it doutelesse
Wherefore they all with wepens began to press
To see and wete, what thing it might be
But whether it went, they could no more it see..
The.lxxvii. Chapter.
How Galaad and the knights of the round table made their auowes to seek the
saint Graal, some till they found it, and some for a year.

But on yt morrow, Galaad and other knights
Before the king by one assent compered
Where Galaad made his auowes and hightes
Never to lie, but he were presoned
In one place in no manner of ground
Two nights together, no where till he it see
Besought the king his knight that he might be.
The king him made a knight of ye table round
And arms would have give hi^, but he would none
Before that he gatte them in a strong ground
By adventure, or else upon his foone
And took his leave to pass so forth anon
The knights all, then of the round table
Grant him service a year, then perdurable.
The.lxxviii. Chapter.
The lamentacion of king Arthure for his knights upon their departing from
him, and of the rule which Galaad made among the knights in the quee^^ of the
saint Graal, and how at A^elon he found a shilde of the same arms, a spear
and a swcorde that Joseph left there for him, which arms, Aruiragus, Lucyus
and Constantyne bare of silver a cross of Goules.

FOr which the king with heavy and dulful chere
Thus said: O God what shall I do or say
That my knights al, which I had i^ quere
Thus suddenly fro me, that pass away
They my bliss, my hertes hele each day
My lands help, custodyes of my crown
And members of my corpse, to keep my region.
O God, yt death would breast mine heart on twain
Who shall maynteyne, my crown and my ryghtes
I trow no more, to see you eft again
Thus hole together, and so goodly knights
Would God, I might make mine auowe and hightes
To pass with you, in what land so ye go
And take my part with you, both in well and woe.
This Galaad then, rode forth, with his route
At every way, he made a knight for to depart
To time they were, all severally gone out
And none with him, so had echone their part
And if any met, another at any arcte
His rule was so, he should his fellow tell
His auentures, what so that him befell.
And also sone, as their way lay on su^drywise
They should depart, and mete no more again
But adventure, it made of exercise
Of diverse streets, that together layne
Of this matter, is no more to seyne.
But when he had, his fellows all conveyed
He took his way, full like a knight arrayed.
Of adventure he came to Auelon
Where that he found a shylde, that was full white
A cross therein of Gowlys, by it one
A spear also, a sweard of great delight
The which with him, he bare away full tyte
He gyrde him with the sword, anon full right
The shylde he hunge, upon his shoulder light.
The spear he took on hand, full like a knight
But there he found in books clearly written
How Joseph lost that shylde, therein forth right
When he there dyed, as then it was well weten
And also in scripture, left there written
That no man should it bear, without mischeue
But one that should, y^ doughteous siege acheue.
That same was written, right there of y^ swerd
Which Vacyan left there, when he dyed
And of the spear, he was nothing a ferde
All, if the same parell of it was notifyed
Like as to fore of it was specifyed
But when that he had, labored so four year
He found in walys, the Saintgraal full clear.
Then rode he forth, unto the holy land
Through god and holy inspiracyon
To god he gave his service, and him bond
To chastyte, and great contemplacyon
And king was made, by hole coronacyon
Of Garras then, and duke of Orboryk
Of whom the people, full well did them like.
Sir Boers with him went, and sir Percyuall
And other moo of the table round.
Whom knights he made of the saint Graall
Which order so he ordained then, and found
At Sarras, that to Egypt land does bound
To live chaste, and maynteyne christentye
Like as Joseph did of Armathye.
But long after upon the whitsondaye
Sir Boers and Percyuall came to the king
With knights all, that living were that day
At Carlyon, but Percyuall did bring
Unto that court full dolorous tidyng
Sir Galaad his heart closed all with gold
Unto the king full openly and told.
How Galaad had acheued the adventure
In king Pellis householde with great honor
That called was yt saint Graall by scripture
And King was made, by his worthy labor
As he that was of knyghthode a worthy flower
Of Sarras so and duke of Orboryk
Beside Egypt, where there was none him like
Where then he made.xii. knights of the order
Of saint Graall in full signifycacyon
Of the table, which Joseph was the founder The saint Graall what it is.

At Aualon, as Mewyn made relacyon.
In token of the table refyguracyon
Of the brotherhede of Christ's souper and maundie
Before his death of highest dignytee.
And how Galaad then at his death you prayed
His heart to bury, beside king Eualake
And duke Saraphe, in gold thus arrayed
Where they be buried, beside Joseph their make
And thus much he prayed you to do, for his sake
In the chapel of our Lady, Christ's mother
At Glastenbury, with diverse saints other
This king Arthure with Princes and barons al
And all knights of the round table
To Glastenbury then rode as might befall
And there enterred the heart of Galaad honorable
With all service for the death accordable
And over it he hanged his shylde that he bare
The which before, saint George arms were.
And when this feast, was come unto an end
The king Arthure also and queen Gwaynour
To all estates, great gifts gave and send
As they were wont each year before
For his great honor increased more and more
Of high knyghthode, household and all largess
Above all princes most famous he was doutlesse
These were knights then of the table round
Morued the Earl that time of Gloucestre
Of shrewisbury, therle Heralde that stounde
Therle Mawren also of Worcestre
Therle Ingence that was of Leycestre
Arthegall therle of Warwyke full corageous
Therle Curson of Chestre full bounteons
Kymar then Earl of Caunterbury
When the Earl of Bathe, and Ionathall
Thearle of Dorcestre, Gallus earl of Salisbury
The earl Gurgen, of Herforde known over all
Beuyse, Earl of Oxenforde, that men did call
Gwerande earl, that was of Excestre
And Paradoure, the earl of wynchester
Cador the duke, that then was of Cornewayle
The kings brother was, on the sister side
Dame Igrene was their mother, without fail
Gwytelene earl of Carlele, was that tide
Waldeue the duke, commended and landifyed
Of Northumberlande, a lord of great power
Fro Humbar north, to Twede then was full clear
King Aguzell, that was of Albany
King Vriayn, of Murref, with Ewayne
His sonue, that was corageous and manly
And the noble and courteous knight Gawayne
That king was then, of all fair Lowthyan
And sister son, unto the king Arthure
Mordred his brother, was of the same ordoure.
Loath of Lowthian, that king was of Norway
Of Lowthyan, that king before had been
Father to Gawayne, and murdered was that days
King Vryan of South walys I wene
The king Pellis, of Northwalis full clean
The king Howell also of little Britayne
Boers and Hester, Degionaunt and Ewayn.
Sir Percyuall Lancelot, Delake and kaye
Sir Colingraunt Bedewer, and sir Degarye
Geryn of Charters, ye douzepers of France gaye
The kings of man, Orkeney, Irelande all three
Of Iselande, Gotlande, and dukes of dignyte
Of Portyngale, Nauerne, and Cateloyne
Of Spain the kings, and the duke of Burgoyne
Sir Lyonell Gryffith, Kynkar Olenius
Donalde Macoyle, Cynmarke, and Gorbonian
Kymbalyn Rydran, Eualake, and Carthelius
Crade, and Cradok, Dunwallon, and Morgan
Gadwaloure, Eneas, and Ternuan
And many mo, yt were full long to write
Which with my style, I can not now endyte.
The.lxxix. Chapter.
How the embassado of the Emperor Lucius was received solemplye, and
presented the Emperors letters unto king Arthure, and also of the tenoure of
the same letters, the which Lucius sent to him.

But whiles the king sat in his trone royal
His princes all, and knights of dignite
About him there thambassade imperyall
Were fair brought unto his royal dignite
That Princes were of authoryte
Of most ripe age, and reverend chere
With Olliffe Braunchies, in their lands clear
Otokyn of message, and legacye
A stately pase, unto his hye presence
Where they offered, of Lucius Heberye
The letters then, on knees with reverence
Of which this, the words and comprehence
As follows now, when they were reed and seen
As chronyclers written, thus do contene.
Lucius of Rome, the Emperor
Procurator for all the hole senate
Of the Publyke profit, chief gouernoure
By hole Senate made and denominate
To Arthure king of Britayne procreate
Sends gretyng, like as thou haste deserved
Now in France, which was to us preserved.
Amerueled much, of wrongs that you have done
Within our land of France by great rygour
Without right, that better had been undone
But if thy wit amend, thy foul error
That sith of France, then were the governor
No trybute paid, but as thine own conquest
Haste hold it aye, under thine areste.
And for thou haste no will, it to amend
And were so proud, to do so cruel a deed
King Froyle to sle, to us that did apende.
And mekell more, for cause thou take no head
Of the gate imperyall, that we led
To which all lands obey, and pay truage
Save thou alone, gaynstandest of thine outrage
Wherefore we bid strayghtly and command
That from August now, next within a year
Thou come to Rome, and pay that we demand
The truage, which thou haste of thy power
Of Britayne long withholde, so in fear
And thy defautes, amend thou did in France
By sentence of the Senates ordinance.
And else, we shall approach to thy country
And what so thy folly has us be refte
With sweordes, we shall it make restored be
Till our senate, as first it was infefte
The liuelode, that thy father so the left
Thou art else like for thine intrusion
To lose and be brought into confusion
Written at Room in the consistorye
By whole auise, of all the wise senate
At Pasche last past, to bide in memory
Their regestred and determinate
Lest thy youthed, our letters and the date
Would cover, with feyned forgetfulness
Trustyng in us, the same defaute I guess
With that the king, went to the Giau^tes toure
With princes all that were of his counsel
By their advise, to write to the the emperor
For his honor, and for his gouernall
Of which so wise, would not for get ne faill
So well were made to Lucius and endite
Which said right thus, as in my style I write
The.lxxx. Chapter.
The letter that king Arthure sent again to Lucius the emperor of Room.

ARthure king of all the great Brytain
And Emperor of Rome, by title of right
Which deforced by Lucius Romain
Pretending him for Emperor of might
Unto the same Lucius, for thine unright
Usurper of the sea imperial
Sends gretyng, as enemy most mortal
To the senate of Room it is well known
How Iulyus Ceaser with iniurye
The truage had, Brytain was brought so low
By help of earl Androgeus, and his traytorye
That brought him in, by his false policye
Without right or title of descent
Or any right, that to the senate appent
And what so he had, then by iniurye
Leefull to us, now is it to withstand
For what ever thing, is take unjustly
May never be had, as I can understand
By any other, to hold it with strong hand
From him that had it, well and rightfully
By none other may be had lawfully
By which reason, the wrong we shall defend
And hold our realm so, in our first astate
Of seruage free, as it to Brute apende
Who held it free, before that Room bare date
Whose right to us, is now determinate
And by such right, as thou dooest now pretend
We may claim Room, and to thempire ascend
For king Belyn, that was our auncetour
And Brenny also, the king of Albanye
All Roomain did wyn, by conquest there
Of Room they had, and all great Italy
And sleugh the emperor, by their great maistrie
And crouned were in the sea empiriall
Where no prince was, that time to them egall
But yet we have, a better title of right
To thempire which now we will pretend
For Constantyne, saint Elyn soonne of right
By right of bloodde, of Constau^ce down disce^de
Emperor was, that Room did well defend
Again Maxence, and his feloes tweyn
Which there made, much Christian people to dien
Maximian king of great Brytain
By whole decre, and will of the senate
Was emperor of Room, and ruled almaigne
Whose rightes we have, and al their whole astate
And heir of bloodde, borne and generate
Wherefore we claim, the throne empirial
From hens forth, by law Judicial
As to the day, which thou have us set
To pay to Room, the tribute and truage
We shall be their, to challenge of dew debte
Truage of Room, with all their rerage
And to enioyse and hold our heritage
Of Room city, to keep the sovereign sea
With all that longs to themperalite
And if thou will me sonner have or seek
Bring Romanye with the, where so thou will
With me I shall bring, Brytain eke
And which of us, that day may other kill
Bear Room with him, and Brytain also their till
Written at our city of Cairlion
By whole advise of all our region
The.lxxxi. Chapter
He gave to thambassatours royal gifts, and sent his letters with his
ambassatis to pass to Room with them in co^paignie and he with his host
followed sone after them.

THe king then gave unto yt hie ambassate
Full rich gifts and gold enough to spend
And bad them give their lords in whole senate
His letters so, which he then to him send
And bad them say, that sooner then he wend
He should him se, before the day assigned
In trust of which, them with his seal assigned
This noble king Arthure, his princes prayed
And barons all, and knights honorable
To pass with him, at wagis to be paid
With their power, and their retenue able
For to direct, his right full reasonable
Marciall acts, thempire to obtein
To whom they all consented, whole and clean
And with the king, they passed forth anon
Into Brytain, where Howell then was king
Where then he hard, y^ country make great moan
For a Gyaunt, horrible in all thing
That ravished had, by his cruel werkyng
King Howell sister, Elein without pere
Between his arms, was slain and laid on bear
For which yt king, to mount Michell the^ went
With that Gyaunt, that faught a bataile sore
With Caliborne his sweord, or that he stint
He sleugh him there, to death for evermore
And charged Kay, for his victory thore
To smite his hedde of, then for memory
In worship of his worthy victory
In which mount, king Howell her to^be made
A chapel fair, thereon edefied
Since that time hither, upon that place abade
Where that Gyaunt, and she were homycied
But all his host, and people him magnified
And all the lands about, wholly enjoyed
Of that Gyauntes death, so felly anoyed
The kings all, of Portyngale and Spain
Of Nauerne also, and eke of Catheloyne
Unto him came, and dukes of Almaigne
The dukes of Sauoy, and of Burgoyne
Douze peers of France, and the duke of Lorain
The kings also, of Denmark and Irelande
Of Norwey, Iselande and of Gotelande
Through France, Burgoyn, Sauoye and Lumbardie
Into Italy, and so through all Tuskayn
Fro Tuskayn, then so into Romany
To Awbe river, king Arthure came so than
And loged on that water as manne
Where with Lucius, he faught, in battle strong
Either other proved, with strokes sore among
But king Arthure, and the princes all
His knights also there, of the round table
So manfully them bare, that day over all
That never their better were seen, nor more able
So were Romans, that day full commendable
Ne none might do better in any wise
So worthily they faught without feyntise
And at the last the Brytons bare the bell
And had the field, and all the victory
Where Arthure sleugh, as chronicles does tell
The Emperor Lucius Hibery
And took his feloe contributorye
But Lucyus hedde, to Room for his truage
He sent his corpse also, for their arerage
The.lxxxii. Chapter.
How the senate and the city of Room, met him in seven processions, and
crouned him and there wintred him by all the whole winter.

THe senate sent unto the king Arthure
And prayed him, thempire to admit
Which became him, and seemed him of nature
As Constantyne did in the honor sit
And al truage forthward, they would remitte
Of great Brytain, never to ask it more
But make it free, as it was ever before
To which prayer, king Arthure did consent
And came to Room, in royal high astate
Where the city, by good and whole assent
Full richely him met, and the senate
With greatest laud, that might been estimate
And every gate, his triumph and his glory
Full curyously was wrought, in great story
The seven orders in procession
Full solemplye, at Peter's church him met
The wifes whole by good discrecion
The wydowes after full devoutly set
In order came then, next as was there debt
The virgyns then, of pure virgynitee
And then thynnocentes of tender iuuentee
Thorders all of good religion
The preastes, and clerks seculer
The bishop and cardinals in union
With the sacrement, and lights clear
And Belles ryngyng, therewith in fere
Every order with laud and reverence
Reioysed greatly of his magnificence.
At the Capytole, in the sea imperial
They crowned him, with crowns three of gold
As Emperor, most principal
And conqueror, that day most worthy hold
Where then he fested, the city manyfolde
Of Rome the bishop, and all his cardinals
The senators, with other estates als.
The.lxxxiii. Chapter.
How that tidings came to the king at Room, that Mordred had wedded his
wife, and usurped the crown of England, for the which he came home again,
and gave Mordred battle at Dover, where Arthure prevailed, and after again at
Wynchester, where the round table began and fell for ever.

ALl that winter, at Rome he did soiourne
In palace of Mayns palacium
The somer ca^, yt home he might return
At which somer, so when it was come
Tidings came to Arthure, hole and some
That duke Mordred, was king of all Britayn
And wedded Gwaynour, to his wife certain
For which at Rome, he made his ordenaunce
To rule that land, and all the hole Empire
And home in have, with full great purueyaunce
To Britayne came, to venge him on that sire
That traitorously, again him did conspire
To rauyshe his wife, by strong and mighty hand
And also for vsurpyng the crown of his land.
At port Rupyn, which now Dover hight
He landed then, where duke Mordred him met
And fought full sore, by all a day to night
Where sir Gawen and Anguzell, were sore bet
And slain both two, so sore they were over set
But Arthure had the field, and Mordred fled
To Wynchester that night, full fast him sped.
The king followed fast, upon the chase
And there he fought again, with him full sore
Where many princes and lords in that case
Were slain on both sides, for evermore
Of the round table, that long had been before
Many worthy knights, there were spended
For Arthures love, that might not been amended.
The round table, at Wynchester began
And there it ended, and there it hangs yet
For there were slain, at this ylke battayl than
The knights all, that ever did at it sit
Of Britayne borne, save Lancelot yode quyte
And with the king, followed on the chase
When Mordred fled to Cornwayle, for. yt case.
The.lxxxiiii. Chapter.
The battayll of Camblayn, where Arthure prevailed and s^ewe Mordred, and
Arthure had his deaths wound, and how Arthure died and was buried in the
Black chapel of Glastenbury.

Where on the water, yt called was Camblayne
Mordred abode, with mighty host and strong
With Arthur fought, yt day of hie disdain
Full often alone, ever as they met among
But Arthure slew Mordred, with his knyfe long
That Calibourne was called, of such virtue
That whomsoever he smote therewith he slew.
But this Mordred, gave Arthure deaths wou^d
For which he yode, his wounds to medifie
Into thysle of Aualon, that stound
And gave Britayne, that was full solitary
To Constantyne, duke Cader son on hye
His neuewe was, for Cader was his brother
As well was known, they had but one mother.
King Arthure then, in Aualon so died
Where he was buried, in a chapel fair
Which now is made, and fully edified The death of king Arthure.

The mynster church, this day of great repair
Of Glastenbury, where now he has his leyre
But then it was called the black chapel
Of our Lady, as chronycles can tell.
Where Geryn earl of Charters then abode
Beside his toumbe, for whole devotion
Whether Lancelot delake, came as he rode
Upon the chase, with trompette and clarion
And Geryn told him, there all up and down
How Arthure was, there laid in sepulture
For which with him to bide, he hight full sure
And so they abode, together in contemplacion
And preastes were, about his toumbe always
In prayers great, and holy meditacion
With hear, the flesh repressyng night and day
Three days each weke, at bread and water aye
They fasted and lived in great sorrow and penance
To souls health and Gods hye pleasaunce.
But when the queen Gwaynour had perceived
How Mordred was fled away then thryse
From York then yode, lest she were deceived
On foot by night, with a maiden full wise
To Carlion to live, in Gods service
In the mynster of saint July, with Nonnes
In prayers whole, and great deuocions.
This king Arthure, to who^ none was co^digne
Through all the world, so was he then perelesse
His life and soul, to God he did resign
The year of Christ, as chronicles express
Five hudreth and two, in sothefastnesse
And fourtye also, accounted hole and clear
At his endyng, without any were.
The.lxxxv. Chapter.
The commendacion of Arthure, after the conceipte of the maker of this book in
few words, and also the compleynte and lamentacion of the said maker for
the death of Arthure

REigned he had then, six and twenty year
Most redoubted in earth and most famous
The worthiest, and wysest without pere
The hardyest man, and most coragious
In acts marciall, most victorious
In him was never, a drope of cowardice
Nor in his heart a point of couetyse.
There was never prince, of gifts more liberal
Of lands geuyng, ne of meat so plenteous
Again his fooen, was most imperial
And with his own subjects most bounteous
As a Lion in field, was most douteous
In house a lamb, of mercy ever replete
And in judgment ever eguall was and discrete.
O good lord God, such treason and vnrightes
Why suffered thy deuyne omnipotente
That of them had precience and forsightes
That might have let, that cursed violence
Of Mordredes pride, and all his insolence
That noble king forpassyng conqueroure
So to destroy, by treason and error.
Fortune false, executryse of weerdes
That evermore, so with thy subtilitee
To all debates, thou strongly so enherdes
That where men ever, would live in charitee
Thou do perturbe, with mutabilitee
Why stretchest thou so thy whele upon Mordred
Again his eme, to do so cruel deed
Wherthrough that high, and noble conqueroure
Without cause, should algates peryshed be
With so many kings, and princes of honor
In all the world, might none there better be
O falls Fallas, of Mordredes propertee
How might you so, in Gwynoure have such might
That she the death caused of so many knights
O false beauty, of Gwaynour predestinate
What unhappy made the, false to thy lord
So good a prince, and so fortunate
Was never yet seen, as all men can record
The which between you made so great discord
That he and all his princes, were there slain
Thy chaungeable heart, to venge he was so feign
But O Mordred tofore, so good a knight
In great manhood, proudly aye approved
In whom thine eme, the noblest prince of might
Put all his trust, so greatly he the loved
What unhappy, thy manly ghost has moved
Unto so foul, and cruel hardynesse
So many to be slain, through thyn unhappiness
The highness of thine honor, had a fall
When thou began, to do that injury
That great falshode, thy prowess did appall
As soon as in the entered perjury
By consequens, treason and traitourie
Thy lord and eme, and also thy king souerayn
So to betraye thy fellows eke certain.
The.lxxxvi. Chapter.
Constantyne, king of Britayne, son of duke Cador of Cornewayle reigned
four year.

COnstantine his brother son was crowned
Duke Cador, son of Cornwaile bou^teous
Before had been, one of the table round
In Arthures time, a knight was full auenturous
In trone royal was set, full precious
With Diadem on his head sygnifyed
At Troynouaunt, where no wight it replied.
Who then anon, with Saxons sore did fight
And also with Mordred sons two
Their capitaynes were, and put them to the flight
That one fled to wynchester, and hyd him so
That other to London, with mykyll woo
Where Consta^tyne them both in churches slew
At the autres, where they were hyd in mewe.
This constantyne set all his land in peace
And reigned well four year, in great noblesse
And dyed then, buried at Caroll no less
Beside Vterpendragon full express
Arthures father, of great worthynesse
Which called is the stone, Hengles certain
Beside Salysbury upon the plain.
Aurelius Conan, his cosyn fair * Aurelius Conan, king of Britayne, reigned
three year.

The sea royal then held, and ganne succeed
To him, as next then of blood and heir
His uncle, and his sons two in deed
In prysone slew, to crown him self I read
That should have been, kings of all Britayne
Before him so, if they had not be slain.
He maynteyned aye ciuyle war and debate
Between Cytees, Castelles, and countees
Through al his realm, with mysruled me^ associate
Which was greatly against his royaltees
And but three year, he reigned in dignitees
As God so would, of his hye ordinance
For wrong laws, makes short governance.
Then Vortyper, succeeded after him
Crowned was then, with all the royalte * Vortiper king of Britayne reigned.
vii year

Against whom, the Saxons strong and grym
Made full great war, destroyed the comente
But in battle, by great humanyte
He them overcame, and set his land in peace
Unto the time, that death made him decease.
Seven year he reigned, and his people pleased
And tender was he, of his comynalte
Above all thing, he saw that they were eased
The publyke cause, before the syngulerte
Preserved also, as it of right should be
For commons first, for princes supportacion
Were set, and naught been waste by dominacion
Malgo next him, to the crown attained
Feyrest of other, that ever was in his day Malgo king of Britayn
reigned.xxii. year.

All tyranny, fully he restreyned
And conquered holy, thryse of Orkenay
Irelonde, Denmark, Iselonde, and eke Norway
And Gotlande also, obeyed his royalte
He was so wise, full of fortunyte.
Within his realm, was none so large ne strong
Ne none that was, in feacte of war so wise
With sword or axe, to fight in the thronge
Nor with his spear, that had such exercise
For to assail his fooes, and them suppryse
And defense also, he had great keenyng
As any prince ever had, or any king.
But one defaute he had, of great offense
Of Sodom sin, he would it not amend
He haunted it ever, without any defense
Which grieved god, and brought him to an end
Two and twenty year, as did appende
His land he held, in peace and unity
Without suppryse of any enmytee.
Carreys was then crowned king anon
That loved well in all cytees debate * Carreys, king of Britayne, reigned three
year.

Between towns and citees every chone
And in such wise, maynteyned early and late
Imagened of his will preordinate
So much in war, that cytees and countrees
Full comen were, of his malicyousnesse.
For which Britons, made him full mykel war
And Saxons also, unto king Gurmound sent
Of affrycans, that then in Irelande were
Who with his fleet to perform his intent
To Britayne came, by all their hole assent
But Saxons then, and he were full accord
And Britons also, that had ciuyle discord
The.lxxxvii. Chapter.
How Gurmounde king of Affrycans, conquered Brytayne, and departed it in
seven kingdoms, to Saxons, (...) English, and went to win moo lands, and
made Gurmonde Chester.

GVrmou^de, yt then was mighty co^querour
King of Affrica^s, most dred in every land
with help of Brito^s and their great socour
And of English and Saxons had made the^ bond
That dwelled that time in Northumberlande
And other places in Britayne, under truage
Rose with him whole, again yt kings outrage
And fought with him, and put him to yt flight
To Circestre went, and strongly held the town
But king Gurmound, yt town then seeged right
And gate it so, with might and great renown
Wherefore he fled to wales, for his proteccyon
what came of him, mine author naught exp^ssed
But with the death, I trow he was oppressed
But Gurmound then, Britain hole destroyed
Both church and town, and eke the christen faith
For he a Paynym was, and sore anoyded
The chrystentye, as Gyldas wrote and seyth
Through Logres yt whole was lost, with payni^ leyeth
The prelates, all curates, and religyous
With relics all fled away, full dolorous.
And hid them then in hills, woods and caves
Tharchbishops, the one of London then
And Tadyok of York, that fled fro Knauis
With saints bones, to wilderness fast ran
And hid him there, and Gurmond sore did banne
With cross and bell, and with great candill light Cursyng

They cursed him, as far as the churches might
This king Gurmo^d gave all Northumberland
From Trent North, yt then hight Berun and deyre
Northfolke, Southfolke and Ca^brydge shire at hand
Which Esta^gle, Bid calls in his story
And all fro Trent to Themis, for memory
Mers he called, all to English gave
That dwelled there, for ever to rejoice and have
He gave all these, to English men in deed
Which came out of a land, hight angulo
In Germany that was, and with woods I read
Replenished of wild bestes, buck and do
Since that time hither, has been and yet is so
Wherefore they were, of it called Englishemenne
All Logres and Northumberlande, Anglande then
He gave Sussex then to the Saxons
Essex, Midelsed, with Surry whole and Kent
But then Hamshire, Barkeshire, toures and towns
And Shropshire whole, and Gloucester as the^ ape^t
All these were called, Westsex as Bede meant
Thus dalt he the land, to them therein dwelling
Which long before, paid truage to the king
The^ went he home, through France and it distroied
And many other lands and regions
But Brytons then, to yt West parties sore anoyed
Drove them of Logres, with all religions
To live in peace, for dred of rebelions
For after Carreis was fled, they had no king
To time Cadwan, was made by their chosyng
So stood they then, kyngles by twenty year How yt Britons were kyn glesse xx.
year.

Fro the year of Christ, five hundred and four score
And thereto three, as clerly does apere
Unto the year after that Christ was bore
Six hundredth and three, without any more
When Cadwan was of Brytons, king elect
And crouned was, to rule them and protect
O king Carreis, unhappiest creature A lamen tacion of yt maker of this book
to yt lords.

That in Brytain reigned ever before
What infortune made the flee from thy cure
What caused the to maintene so evermore
Eyuile discord within thy realm so sore
That might have reigned, over many a land
Through which, thine own is lost I understand
Thou understand full litill theuangilye
That every realm, within it self divide
Shall desolate be made, as clerks tell Mat* xii.

And every house on other, shall fall and slide
Thy wicked will, that now is known wide
That suffered so debate, bytwyne lord and lord
Bytwyne citees and lands, cyuyle discord
The cause was of thy disheriteson
And of thy realms desolacion
That with law and peaceble constitucion
Might have been saved, with great consolacion
And the church preserved, in great prosperacion
The Christen faith, in thy land distroyed
That with the peace, should have be kept vnnoyed
O woeful Carreis, thine heirs and thy Brytons
Their children all, the widows and their wifes
The commonalte in citees and in towns
The church also may ba^ne, full sore those strives
By thy supporte, that rest so many their lives
Where law and peace, if thou had well conserved
All had been saved, with thank of god deserved
Defaute of law, was cause of this mischiefs
Wrongs sustened, by maistry and by might
And peace laid down, that should have been the chief
For which debate followed and unright
Wherefore unto a prince accords right
To keep the peace, with all tranquillite
Within his realm, to save his royalte
What is a king, without law and peace
Within his realm sufficiently conserved
The poorest of his realm, may so increase
By injury and force, to be preferred
Till he his king, with strength have ouerterued
And set him self in royal majesty
If that he be, in such a ieopardie
O ye lords and princes of high astate The counsel of the maker to duke
Richard of York.

Keep well the law and peace in governance
Lest your subjects defoule you and depreciate
Which been as able, with wrongful governance
To reign as ye, and have as great puysaunce
If peace and law been voyed, and vnytee
The flowers are lost, of all your souerentee
O worthy prince, O duke of York I mean
Discendid down of highest bloodde royal
Se to such ryotes, that none sustene
And specially, that alyens none at all
Inhabit not with power, great ne small
That may this land, ought trouble or over ride
For twies it was so won, with much pride
Through Vortiger, by Engist and Horsus
Whom he received, which after him distroyed
And with his help full false and noyous
The worthy bloodde of Brytain, sore anoyed
At the Caroll murdered, and all accloyed
And now again, when Carreis was exiled
The king Gurmo^d, and the Saxons him beguiled
For Saxons, Peightes, and Englishemenne
Reigned then through all the Logres land
Divided in seven realms fully then
Westser Sussex, and Kente I understand
Estser and Mers, Estangle, and Northumberlande
That drove Brytons, into the West country
To Walis and Cornwaile, fro town and city
The.lxxxviii. Chapter.
Ethelbert king of Saxons.

Hills Ethelberte was reignyng king of Ke^t
W Saint Austin sent by Gregory of R. bishop
Landed in Tenet, with clerks of his asse^t
And many monks, to teach the faith I hope
That clothed were, echeone under ablacke cope
Which in procession, with cross and belles came
The latinies syngyng in Jesus his name
In the year of Christ his incarnacion
Five hundredth four score and sixtene
King Ethelbert, had in his dominacion
All Kent throughout, with great joy as was seen
Were baptized then, in holy water clean
To whom Gregory sent Mellito and Iusto
With other clerks, and doctors many mo
Gregory him made, archbishop of Canterbury
Of all England, hiest then primate
And had the paul with highest legacye
By Gregorye, sent to him and ordinate
Fro London then, thus was that time translate
To Caunterbury, the sea Metropolitan
And London set, as for his suffrigan.
Saint Augustyne then, with help of Ethelbert
Saint Augustyns made, and Christ's church also
That Christ's church hight, as it was aduerte
And sacred so by him, and hallowed tho
For the chief sea, Metropolitan so
Of all England, by Gregory ordinate
And saint Augustyne, of all England primate.
Then Augustyne made Peter a clerk devout
Of saint Augustynes thabbot religious
And made Mellito, as Bede clerly has note
Of London then bishop full virtuous
A clarke that was then beneuolus
Who then converted, of Essex the king Sebert
And all his land, baptized with holy heart
King Ethelbert, saint Poules edefied
And king Sebert Westminster founded
Mellito them both hallowed and edefied
Austyn then, made clerk full well grounded
Just o that hight, of Rochester full well bounded
The bishop then to preach, and help Austyn
And to baptize the folk by his doctrine
Saint Austyn set full nere to Walis his seant
That prelates all, bishops and doctors wise
Of Brytons bloodde, thither might well atteine
To make all rest and love in humble wise
Through all yt church and land, by good auice
To which sean came, tharchbishop of Brytain
And bishops five, with doctors wise certain
In which Austyn syttyng as president
Archbishop and also the high primate
Required and prayed, with all his whole intent
As he that was of England high prelate
By Gregory sacred and ordinate
Of fraterne love and due obedience
To help him forth, with all their diligence
To convert and to teach the Saxons all
The English also, in Christen feith and true
And baptize them, through Brytain over all
The pasche to keep, as Room did then full dew
To which Brytons answered, yt they not knew
That he had such estate, in all Britayn
For they had three archebyshops to obeyn.
Of Cairlyon, London and York city
By bishops of Rome granted to us and ordinate
Full long before ye had such dignitee
Wherefore we will obey, no new primate
And specially none English new prelate
For Englyshemen, and Saxons have us noyed
And have our land, and all our kyn destroyed
And Pasche we will hold forth as we before
And holy fathers, unto this day have used
We will not change, for your doctrine ne lore
There shall no new, among us been abused
As saint John did, we have it not refused
That on Christ's bozome, saw his great priuetees
So will we use, and none other solempnitees.
S. Austyne said, since ye now thus forsake
The seed of God, to sow by your doctrine
The Christen faith, for to increase and make
By ryghtfull dome of God, ye must enclyne
Under their hands, that fro the faith declyne
The cruel death to suffer, for hie vengeance
Since ye refuse Christ's will and ordinance
This time, each king warred on others land
Of seven kings, of Saxones nation
And of English with Peightes I understand
And Britons also, did great aduersacion
But Ethelfryde of English gouernacion
Of Northumberlande king, and Panyme cruel
Fought with Aydan, the king of Scotts fell.
The.lxxxix. Chapter.
How king Ethelfryde of Northumberlande had service of Aydan king of Scotts,
the year of Christ.vi. hundredth and three, after saint Bid.

AT Degfastan, where Ethelfryde prevailed
And set Aydan, in his subjection
To Bedes days, ye Scotts no more assailed Homage of the Scotts.

England, but aye obeyed his ediccion
And was his man, without contradiccion
And held of him, his land as was accord
By many years, thens forth no more discord.
This battayl was, of Christ's incarnacion
Six hundredth year and three, as says saint Bid
And of his reygne, by Bedes computacion
The eleventh year it was then, as I read
That twenty year and.iiii. reigned there in deed
In all his time, to whom the Peightes obeyed
And Iryshe also, and no more him disobeyed.
In that same year, of Christ's incarnacion
The Britons all, did set their parliamente
At Cairlion, by good informacion
Cairlegeocestre hight, as some men meant
That Westchester is become of entente
Where they did chose, Cadwan unto there king
Them to defend, fro their fooes warryng.
The.xc. Chapter.
Cadwan king of Britayne, that first was prince of Northwales. This Cadwan
was crowned in the year of Christ six hundredth and three, and after Bid by.
xiii year reigned over the Britons, in the west parties of all Wales and
Cornwayll.

THis king Cadwan, at wynchester crowned
Was made ye king, of Britayne and Bryto^s
Again whom king Ethelfrede, yt stound
Warred full sore, all the regions
Where Brytons were, so did he all religions
Who westchester sieged, with violence
Where Brochewall therle, made great defense.
But there he slew, Brochewall in battle
And gatte the town of westchester, in that tide
Where.xii. C. monks, without fail A murder of Monks.

He slew down, right a little there beside
That came to pray for peace, without pride
Fro Banger there, in hole procession
That marters were there, by his oppression.
Who^ king Cadwan, with mighty host and strong
Met in field, full ready for to fight
But both their friends treated, so them among
That good accord between the^, was made right
During their lives, well kept as they hight
With all frendshippe, great love and vnytee
That both their realms, stood in great dignitee
But Ethelfrides wife, with child far gone
Violently exiled and repudiate
And wedded another, full wrongfully anon
Wherefore she went, to recover his estate
To king Cadwan, full sick and desolate
Whom he received, with noble reverence
And sorry was, for her woeful offense.
But the^ his wife, as great was gone with child
For which he kept her in house to abide
To time he might, him have reconsyled
Her to receive, and set the other on side
But in the mean time, they might no le^ger abide
Both queens delivered, were of sons two
That one Edwyn, that other hight Cadwallo.
The chylder two, together noryshed were
In tender age, to time that they were men
At which time, there rose full cruel war
Between Redwald, king of Estangle then
And Ethelfride, that fought as folk did kenne
Where Ethelfryde on Idell, was down slain
And Redwald the feld, there had with pain.
King Cadwan then, out of this world so died
The Same year, so did Austyne also
And Laurens made fully, and glorified
Archebyshop of Caunterbury tho
And Ethelbert of Kent, to heaven did go
Thus changed they their habitacion
Some to pain, and some to salvation.
Cadwall then, the son of king Cadwan Cadwall lxi. years. reigned

After his father had reigned.xiii. year
Was crowned at Westchester as a man
Of Britons all, as clearly did appear
The year of Christ.vi. C. and.xvi. clear
That reigned well, full syxtye year and one
Above all kings, as sovereign of echeone.
But king Edwyn then, of Northumberlande
The son and heir, unto king Ethelfryde
Was crowned king at York, I understand
For which, the king Cadwall him defied
And made him war, with Britons fortifyed
And sent him word, no crown for to were
And else he should under it, his head of shere
Which Edwyn then accounted, at right naught
But kept estate full royal, and condign
with crown of gold, at york full freshly wrought
Elfrydes sons, of his wrong wife vndigne
Gotten and borne, he felly did repugne
Him did exyle, in Scotland did abide
For his mother was exyled, by Ethelfryde.
And Ethelfryde him gate, on his wrong wife
And had exyled, his own wife truly wed
Edwyns mother, as known was full ryfe
Full great with child, with him, as Bede has red
Then made he wells, in diverse countrees spread
By the hye ways, in cups of copper clean
For trauelyng folk, fast chayned as it was seen
And every day, he rode withouten rest
With trompettes loud, before him where he rode
That every wight, might suerly in him trust
That he would then, of his ryghtwyshode
Do every man right, without more abode
All complayntes here, and as law would reform
So all his life to rule, he did confirm.
He sent unto Ethilbalde, king of kent
His sister for to have, and wed her to wife
Dame Ethelburge, that was full fair and gent
But Ethelbalde, then sent him word by life
It was not good, but lykely to make strife
That a christian woman, to a Paynim should be wed
And else he said, his message had be sped.
Edwyne then sent his message so again
He would well, she kept her own creaunce
And bade him send, with her a chapelayne
And clerks wise, without any varyaunce
To keep her in her faith, and in all suraunce
And if her faith be better then is mine
When it is known, I will thereto enclyne.
King Ethelbald, her sent with Paulyne
That sacred was bishop of York that time
By Iusto archbishop, that was full fine
Of Caunterbury to keep her true Bapteme
And her believe, that none her feathers lyme
With heresye, to foul his own creaunce
Thus wedded he her, at York in all suraunce.
The year of our Lord.vi. hundredth and.xx. tho
And five thereto, as Bede has clearly written
And in the year.vi. hundredth and twenty so
And six thereto, king Edwyn as is weten
To westsex went, where battle sore was smyten
Between him, and bishop Quychelyne
King Kinigils son, of westsex then so fine.
Where then he slew, this manly Quichelyne
For cause he had, compassyd his death before
By pryuey wise, as he could ymagyne
He put the land then under trybute sore
And Kynygell, the king of westsex thore
Became his man, and held of him his land
At his byddyng to ride with him, and stand.
The.xci. Chapter.
How Cadwall fled, and was driven from his realm by king Edwyn, and held it
in subieccion, and was baptized by saint Pawlyn archbishop of York.

King Cadwallo then, of all Brytons
The year of Christ.vi. C. and eyghtene
By wrong council, on Edwyns regions
Great wars made, but Edwyn then full kene
Faught with him there, full sore as it was seen
And to the flight him drove, out of the field
All Britayne land he conquered so, and held
Cadwallo fled, unto little Britayne
And dwelled there, in heaviness and in pain
By diverse years, and durst not come again The subie^cion of the Scotts.

For power none he might, not yet obtain
The Britaynes durst him not obeyne
For king Edwyn, had hole dominacyon
Of them and Saxons, and of the Scottyshe nacio^
And in the year of Christ.vi. C.xx. and.vi.
Edwyns daughter that named was Eufled
At York was borne, to whom men did complex
Maidens twelve, to take the chrystenhede
That lords daughters were, of great worthihed^
Which saint Paulyn archbishop did baptyse
In York mynster, in full holy wise.
And in the year of Christ.vi. C.xx. and seven
The christen law, disputed among his lords
Was found best, to win the bliss of heaven
Wherefore Edwyn, by good and hole concordes
Both of his commons, and also of his lords
With all his realm, baptime took as gods me^
Of saint Paulin, that archbishop was then
In that same year, bishop Honorius
To Paulyn sent, the palle of dignyte
The king Edwin, and this ylke Paulins
York mynster made new, of great beauty
And commons all, full well so baptized he
In Northumberlande, in Swale, Owse, and Trent
And other ryuers in countrees, where he went.
By thyrty days, and six labored he thus
And then he came, to Lyncolne with Edwyn
Where he converted Blecca, as Bede says to us
The Mayre, and all the commons by his doctrine
And Lyndsey hole, unto the faith deuyne
And made the mynstre of Lincoln, at his costage
Of king Edwyn, and also the colage.
And in the year.vi. hundredth and thyrty moo
Iusto dyed, to whom Honor did succeed
Of Caunterbury, archbishop made was tho
Whom saint Paulin, as written has sent Bid
Did sacre then at Lyncolne, so in deed
In the mynster that he and Edwyn found
The kings colage, named that ylke stounde.
And in the year.vi. hundredth thyrty and two
King Edwyne, by holy doctrine,
Of saint Felyx, an holy priest that was tho
And preaching of the holy archbishop Paulyn
Of Christ's word, and verteous discyplyne
Converted Edordwolde, of Estangle the king
And all the realm, where Felyx was dwelling
At Do^mok then, was Felyx first bishop
Of Estangle, and taught the christen faith
That is full hye, in heaven I hope
But then the king Edwyn, as Bede says
Had made the people stable in the christen layth
To York went home, with him also Paulyn
To rule the land, after the law deuyne.
The.xcii. Chapter.
How Cadwall and Penda slew king Edwyn, and reigned over Brytons again.

But in the year.vi. hundredth thyrty and three
King Cadwall, of Britain that had been
With king Penda, of Merces great country
Assembled strong, with hosts fell and kene
And Northumberlande brent, as then was seen
And slew both wife, and child old and yinge
Prestes and clerks, they spared there no thing.
The churches all, they burnt and foul destroyed
Whom Edwyn met, with power that he might
At Hatfelde town, in heart full sore anoyed
All ready so, in battle for to fight
within yorkeshyre, where Edwin was slain right
And all his realm, was wasted and subuerte
By king Penda, that a Paynym was peruerte.
The same year then, for cause of war and strife
Saint Paulyn went to Kent there to dwell
With Ethelburge, that was king Edwyns wife
That welcome were, as Bede surely does tell
At Rochester, as that time befell
Saint Paulyn was, unto the sea translate
And bishop thereof, then denominate.
King Cadwall reigned full hole again
In Britayne land, as prince without pere
Above English, as lord sovereign
Over Saxons, Scotts, and peightes, clear Subieccto^ of Scotts

And English also, as clear did appear
And Eufryde then, and Osdryk paynimes fell
Northumberlande then held, as Bede does tell
Whom Cadwall and Penda, felly slew
From time they two, had reigned but a year
Oswolde their cosyn, as known was full true
That in Scotland noryshed was full clear
To England came, with mighty great power
And gate his right, and all his heritage
With help and socoure, of his Baronage
The.xciii. Chapter.
How Oswolde king of England reigned over Brytons, Scotts, and Peightes,
Iryshe, and over all Logres and Cambre.

THis king Oswolde, in England began succeed Oswold.

The year of Christ, vi.c. was the^ clear
Thirty and five, replete of all manhed
And afterward, full clearly did apere
As to such a prince, of nature should affere
That York minster, repaired then all new
Of lyme and stone as Christen prince and true
Who for aid then, into Scotland sent
An holy monk he was and religious
And bishop sacred, after Christ's intent
In Christ's doctrine, he was full laborous
Whom for teaching and preaching virtuous
He made him bishop of all Northumberlande
Whose sea was chief then, at the holy Isse land
In that same year, Oswold to Westsex rode
For Christ his love, at prayer of saint Biryne
Where they the king Kynygill, of paynymhode
Baptized, and made a Christen manne full fine
And set Westsex under tribute syne
For to be paid to him and his heirs
Perpetually by year, at certain feires
Saint Biryne bishop, they made forth right
Of all Westsex, at Dorchester was his sea
From Oxenforde, but litill way to sight
King Oswold wedded Beblam his wife to be
King Kynygilles daughter, full fair to see
And on her he gatte, a soonne hight Cidilwold
In Deyre reigned, under his father Oswold
And in the year six hundrith thyrty and six
King Penda sleugh Ordewold of Estanglande
In bataile strong, and mighty began to vex
That wastid sore about him every land
As tyrant fell, where he the Christen fond
He sleugh them down, and cruelly over ran
Sparyng another wife, child, ne manne
The king Oswold, so mighty was in deed
That over Scotts, Peightes, and Brytaines
Irish, Westsex, and English I read
And over Logres and all the Saxons
None so mighty above all regions
As Flores and Bid has written thus
Whose wrytynges are full virtuous
As he at meat, did sit upon a day
At Bamburgh, a palmer came to his gate
Asked some good, for Christ his love always
To whom he sent his dishe of silver plate
For cause he had not else for his astate
The poor manne to refresh and comfort
Saint Bid of him, thus clearly does report
An holy manne, within his hermitage
Desired sore in his meditacion
If any better, of any manner age
Were in the land of any nation
To whom was said by reuelacion
That king Oswold, more holy was of life
Notwithstanding, he had weddid a wife
The.xciiii. Chapter.
How an hermit proved saint Oswold his wife at his desire by biddyng of
saint Oswold

Wherefore he came, unto the king Oswold
And prayed him, he might know his life
And of his reuelacion then him told
Wherefore he took to him, his ryng by life
And bade him say, the queen that was his wife
To do with him, on nights two or three
As she was wont, at home to do with me
This token had he, he satte with her at meat
His meat and drink, when he would have the best
But water and bread, he might none other get
And then at night, she leide him for to rest
Right with her self, so well her self she trest
And when he was, ought set to do amiss
In water he was cast, his flesh to keele and lisse
But when the day came, he was full fain
And of the queen, full soon he took his leave
Unto the king, he went anon again
And prayed him fast, he might pass home at eve
For of his life, he would no more preue
Which more holy, was one day and night
Then all his life, he ever been might
But Cadwall the king of Brytons sent
The king Penda, to war on king Oswold
Whom Oswold met, with great assembleme^d
In battle strong, at Heuenfeld as God would
Where people fled, with people manyfold
To king Cadwall, who with Penda anon
Assembled an host, on Oswold for to gone
Oswold they met, on Marfeld that tide
Where he was slain the year of Christ was than
Six hundred whole, and forty and two beside
His hedde and arms, as Bede the holy manne
In his chronicle has write, who so read it can
Upon a tree was hong many a day
That rotted not, nor in this world never may
Oswy then in all Northumberlande
The croune had, and all the royalte Oswy king of Northu^berlande

With Cadwallo he hight, allwaye to stand
As sovereign lord of Bryton, then was he
And over all other, had then the mageste
But this Oswy made Humwald for to kill
The king Oswyn, that feloe was him till
For cause he rose, on him with multitude
And naught for thy, when they together met
All his people of full great fortitude
He withdrewe then, and with Humwald set
In pryue wise, without any let
But false Humwald, privily him slew
On whom he trusted, and trowed had be true
Queen Eufled that was king Oswys wife
King Edwyn his daughter full of goodness
For Oswyns soul, a minster in her life
Made at Tynmouth, and for Oswy causeles
That him so be slain, and killed helpeles
For she was kyn to Oswy and Oswyn
As Bede in chronicle does determyn
This Oswyn now is canonized in shryne
Saint Oswyn called, at Tynmouth gloriously
But king Oswy, to Cadwall did enclyne
And Oswalde his head, and arm had leave to burye
Which he betoke to queen Bebla in hye
Who closed them in silver, fair and clean
And them betook, to saint Aydan I wene.
This king Cadwall, his feast at London made
To him all kings, as sovereign lord obeyed King Cadwal

Save king Oswy, at home that time abade
For which he trowed, that he him disobeyed
Wherefore he sent to Penda, and him prayed
To war on Oswy, without delay
And make him, to his sovereign lord obey.
In which mean time, this Penda slew Anne
Of Estangle, that long had been king
A Christen prince, and a full manly manne
And so came on king Oswy fast rydyng
Where on the field, they met sore fighting
Whom Oswy slew, and.xxx. dukes also
That with him came, and.xxx. M. moo.
The.xcv. Chapter.
In the year of our lord God.vi. hundredth and. ^v. Penda slew the king of
Escangles, and the year of our Lord God.vi. hundredth and.vi. Oswyne slew Penda
king of Marchelande, and the foresaid king Oswyne condiscended to hold and
keep his Easter according to the use of Room and Caunterburye, the year of
our Lord vi. hundredth and.lxiii. which before was celebrated according to
the Iudeicall custom.

THose battayls two, after thincarnacion
Six hundredth year, fyfty were and also five
In the year after, by computacion,
That king Oswy, made Penda king belyue
Of Marces land, and to convert his live
By teaching of Dwyma, made bishop their
And all his land, by virtue of his lare.
King Oswy made houses.xii. of religion
Six in Deyry, and six in Beru^ to be
With his daughter Elflede for devotion
Whom he auowed, in clean virginitee
To sacre so, and live in chastitee
For his triumph, and for his victory
Of king Penda, and his panymerye.
The king Oswy, of Christ's incarnacion
The year.vi. C.lx. and also three
Had all the clerks, of his dominacion
With many other clerks, of far country
For to dispute the Pasche, when it should be
The which before, was held diversely
One use at York, another at Caunterbury
But this saint Oswy, then held it at Whitby
Where then saint Hilde, in all deuinitee
Was hole instruct, among all the clergy
Where Wilfride, with Egilbert and she
Concluded all the clerks of the country
And fro thens forth, they held it in certain
As Caunterbury used, and did obeyne
This king Oswyn, then died in the year
Six hundredth hole, sixti and also ten
At Whytby then, where Hild was abbas clear
At Streyneshalgh, named was so then
Emonge the couente, of this holy woman
And in Hildes schole.vi. bishops were enfourmed
In holy write, as she them had confourmed.
These were the names of the bishops right
Bosa, Oskford, Etla and also Tatfryde
John of Beuerley the fyfte, that then so hight
The sixte then, was the holy man Wilfryde
All in the law of Christ enfourmed that tide
With this virgyne clean, of royal descent
Of king Edwyn and Oswalde blood full gent.
Which virgyne clean, died so in the year
Of Christ.vi. C. and four score also
About which time, saint Awdry y^ virgyne clear
At Hely died, emonge her flowers tho
Of holy virgyns, and wydowes also
Which she had gathered, and kept in cloister clean
While she there was thabbasse, as was seen.
Who wife was twyse, in westsex first espoused
The secounde time, unto the king Egfryde
Of Northu^berlande, her maydenhed ever housed
I dar well say, it was never set aside
There might no man, her heart from Christ divide
So hole it was set unto chastitee
Inuiolate she kept her virginitee.
For good ne gold nor any great richesse
With her housebandes to been deuirginate
Hitherto might never eschaunge her sekirnesse
So sad it was, it was never violate
But ever clean, as in her first estate
By her housba^des, for ought they could her hight
But virgyne died, through grace of God almight
Thus Awdry then, from Egfride was deuorced
For cause, she would not lose her maydenhede
To time her soul, were lowsed and vncursed
In hely abode, where then she made in deed
An house of Nuns, as written has saint Bid
To serve the God, above celestial
In prayers good, and matens nocturnall.
Wylfride from York, exiled and expelled
The king of Sussex, and all his land
Convert all hole, and mawmetrye down felled
Where, so three year before, I understand
Such vengeance reigned, in that kings land
That there grew no grass, nor no manner of corn
The people died, for hunger all for lorne.
And that same day, when they were convert
The grass and corn, that welked were before
By three year passed, waxed grene and began reuert
Through prayer of Wylfryde, yt prayed therefore
For which the king, made him bishop thore
That five year hole, there so occupied
The byshopyes cure, and Christ's faith edefied.
And in the year.vi. hundredth.lxxx. and five
King Egfride rode with host into Scotland
And warred on pightes and Scotts with mekel strive
Who^ then they s^ewe, as Bede could understand
With many worthy knights, of Northumberland
At Nettansmore, in an hye mynstre buried
A worthy place, in Scotland edified.
Each king of seven, on other warred sore
But king Cadwas, that then was souerayn lord
Accorded them, as myster was ay where
By his good rule, he made ever good accord
Where any strife or war was, and discord
And all the realines, in Britayn hole baptized
And bishops in them set, and autorised.
King Ethelride of Mors, and queen Ostride
His wife, daughter of Oswy Berdnaye
Buried Oswalde, with miracles glorified
Where many year, full still there after he lay
Unto the time the suster, as books say
Of king Edward thelder, him translate
To Gloucester abbey, to his estate.
Cadwallo king of Britons, in the year
Of Christ gods son.vi. C. sixty and sixtene
So died away, who reigned had full clear
Full sixty year and one, as well was seen
That sovereign lord, of all Britayn had been
After the decease, of the good king Edwyn
And made all seven kings, to him enclyne.
He made his image, of laton full clean
In which he put his body balsomate
Upon an horse of laton, fair to seen
With a sweorde in hand, crowned like his estate
Full hye set up, to sight on Ludgate
His battayles all, and his great victory
About him wrought, was made for memory
The.xcvi. Chapter.
Cadwalader king of Brytayn, and lord of all.vii. kings in Britayne.

CAdwaladrus, after him began succeed Cadwalader king.

Both young and fair, in florishyng iuue^t
That Cadwalader was called as I read
Who of Britayn, had all the souerayntee
Of English and Saxons, in each country
Of Pyghtes, Iryshe and Scotts his under rege^ce Subiercio^ of yt Scotts.

As sovereign lord, and most of excellence.
Kentwyne the king, of westsexe then died
The year of Christ six hundredth.lxxx. and six
The mekill war, had made and fortifyed
Upon Britons, and felly did him wexe
So combrous he was and cruel began to wexe
Whose realm the king Cadwalader conquered
And Sussex also, and slew y^ king with his sword
In which year then, Gatta by shop died
Whose sea was then, at Hexham upon tyne
That bishop was, of York notified
For Wilfryde was, hold out with mekyll pyne
And exiled from his benefice that time
From York that time, by the king Alfride
Of Northumberland, whose cure Gatta occupied
After whose decease then John of Beuerlay
Was made bishop of York, and had the sea
Then the Cathedral at Hexham so always
For wylfryde was in Sussex far country
But then certain Alfryde of cruelte
Commanded John, to vex and noye wylfryde
But tender love, they held on either side
The.xcvii. Chapter.
How Cadwalader fell in great impotencye, that he might not govern the land,
wherefore in defaute of law and peace fell Barons war and ciuyle discord in
all the realms.

THe king Cadwaladre being impotent
So every day, and held no governance
Nether law ne peace wtin his regiment
Wherefore Britons, dred none ordinance
But each one took on other great vengeance
Fro that time forth, each country on other warred
And every cytee against other marred.
Thus in defauee of law and peace conserved
Common profit, was wasted and devoured
Percyall profit, was sped and observed
And Venus also, was commonly honored
For lechery and aduoutry, was most adoured
Among them was common, as the carte way
Riot, robbery, oppressyon, night and day
Of which came then, manslaughter, and homicide
And cyuyle strife, with sore contencyons
Through Britons land, every where, on each side
With batayles great, and fell discencions
As Bede writes among his mencyons
They dred another the king, ne god almyght
Wherefore he sent vengeance on them full right
That through the war, ye tylth was all destroyed * A great plage.

Churches all, and husbandrye unoccupied
That with hunger, the people were sore anoyed
That people great, in streets and feldes dyed
And much folk, as Bede has specifyed
The faith of Christ, for hunger then forsook
And drowned the^ selves, so sore ye pain the^ took.
Their catell dyed, for fault of fode each day
Without meat, or any sustenaunce
In towns and feldes, and the common way
Through which their enfecte, was with that chance
That multitude of folk, in great substance
On hepys lay, full like unto mountains
That horrible was of sight, above the playns.
Unburied hole, without Sacrament
By pestylence also, many one dyed
Some wood, some raynage went
And some were in lytargie employed
An other some, with battle mortifyed
With murder also, among themselves dispent
Full many were, that none an other lament.
Through which defautes, not amended nor correct
The bishops fled, the prestees and clerks anoyed
To Walys went, there to be protecte
In cauys hyd, accombred and accloyed
Full heuely deseased, and full greatly anoyed
With saynctes bones, and relyques many one
Morning full sore, and making there their moan
Then fell a year of pardone, and of grace
At Rome, where the king Cadwaladrus
All desolate, and sorry for that case
In pilgrimage thither, purposed thus
With heart devout, and will beneuelous
With his Brytons together consociate
Of worthy blood so borne and generate.
To have pardone, and plain remissyon
Of their trespass, sins, and negligence
That they put naught, reddour ne punissyon
By law, pain, and discrete providence
On trespassours, that did violence
Through which their land, and they were so mischeued
That with law kept, might well have been acheued
To Rome they came, of whom ye bishop was glad
Sergio that hight, who them grant remissyon
Of all their sins, with heart and will glad
Save only then, of their omissyon
And negligence, of hole punissyon
That they put naught upon the trespassoures
Of common people, that were destroyours
Which was not in his power to relese
Without amends made, and restitucyon
To common weal, and their due eucrease
As they were hurt, in fault of due punissyon
He charged them, for their plain remissyon
The co^monte to supporte and amend
Of as (...)te good, as they were so offend.
In ye mean while, whyls they at Rome so were
The Saxons hole, and English consociate
Took all their land, liuelod, and other gere
To Saxon they sent ambassyate
To Angulo, to be assocyate
With many mo of their country men
For Britons all, at Rome were bidyng then
And bad them come in haste, and tarry naught
For their own help, and for their waryson
The which they did, and hither fast they sought
The Brytons land, they took in possessyon
And kept it forth, with many a garyson
For Brytons came no more thereto again
For king Cadwallader, the^ dyed at Rome certain
His Brytous also dyed homewarde by the way
In diverse places, and some went to Britayne
Other some to France, there to abide for aye
And some also to Normandy, and to Spain
That to their own, they came no more again
But Saxons hole, and English it occupied
Ever more after, and strongly edifyed.
Some chroniclers say, he had by visyon
No more to come into Britayne the more
But to the bishop of Rome with great contricion
Confess him, and take his penance thore
And absolucyon for his sins sore
And how ye bishop of Rome buried him royally
And on his tomb, set his Epitaphye
In laten letters, in marble stone well grave
Declared hole his conuersacyon
Forsakyng all the world, heaven to have
And how ye bishop of Rome, by his confyrmacio^
Called him Peter, whom Bid by relacyon
Calls a saint in bliss, hole disposed
Fro which he may in no wise be deposed.
This Cadwalader of Britons was ye king
That reigned full, as souereygne lord.xii. year
And in the year.vi. hundredth and nynte being
And dyed so, as says the chronyclere
That of westsex, then had be king two year
Of whom walshemen holden opinyon
Of England yet to have the reuercyon
When yt his bones be brought fro rome again
Among them all, have such a prophecye
And England then, efte since called Britayne
Thus stand they yet, in such fond matesye
In trust of which vain fantasye
They have full often, England sore anoyed
And yet they will prove, if it may be destroyed.
The.xcviii. Chapter.
The lamentacyon of the maker of this book, and his counsel to my Lord of
York, for good rule in the realm of England.

O Gracyous lord, O very heir in right
Of great Britayne, enclosed with a sea
O very heir of Logres, ye now England hight
Of wales also, of scotland, which all three
Britayne so hight, of old antiquyte
O very heir of Portyngale and Spain
Which castle is, and Lions soth to said.
O very heir, of France and Normandye
Of Guyan, Peytowe, Bayen, Man, and Angeoy
Membrys of France, of old war openly
O very heir of Jerusalem, and Surry
All this mean, I by you that should enjoy
Ye or your heirs, my lord of York certain
That wrongefully have been hold out to seyne
But O good lord, take heed of this mischieue
How Cadwaladore, not keeping law ne peace
Sufferyng debates, and common warrys acheue
And fully reygne, and put him naught in preace
By law nor might, to make it for to cease
For which there fell so great diuisyon
That he was put unto deheryteson.
Not he alone, but all his nacyon
Deuolued were, and from their right expelled
Full feign to flee, with great lamentacyon
From great Britayne, in which they had excelled
In which their au^cetour, before long time had dwelled
And knew their foes mortal, should it occupy
For evermore without remedy.
Which is the pain, most fell above all pain
A man to have been in hye felycite
And to fall down, by infortune again
In myserye and fell aduersyte
How may a man have a thing more contraye Mat.xii.

Then to have been well, and after woo begone
Incomperable to it, be pains echone.
Wherefore good lord, the peace evermore maintain
And ryottes all, chastyce by prouisyon
And law uphold ryghtfully, and sustene
And over all thing, se there be no deuisyon
But rest and peace, without discencyon
For where a realm, or a cytee is divided
It may not stand, as late was verified
In France as fell, full great division
Through which, yt first Henry king of England
Over rode their land, by great provision
And conquered them, they might not him with stand
All their citees, were yield into his hand
For cause of their cruel descencion
Among them sustened by contencion
Room, Carthage, and many other citees
And many realms, as clerks have specified
Have been subvert, and also many countrees
By division, among them fortified
Where unite and love, had been edified
Might them have saved in all prosperity
From all hurt, and all aduersite
Whexfore good lord, think on this lesson now
And teach it to my lord of March your heir
While he is young, it may be for his prowe
To think on it, when that the wether waxes fair
And his people, unto him does repair
And litill has, them to releue and pease
Then may it hap, with it his people case
For what savor a new shell is taken with
When it is old, it tastes of the same
Or what kind of ympe, in gardein or in frith
Ymped is in stock, fro whence it came
It sauourith ever, and it nothing to blame
For of his rote, from which he does out spryng
He must ever taste, and savor in eating
While he is young, in wisdom him endowe
Which is full hard to get, without labor
Which labor may not be, with ease now
For of labor came king and emperor
Let him not be idill, that shall be your successor
For honor and ease, together may not been
Wherefore writh now the wand, while it is grene
Endowe him now, with noble sapience
By which he may the wolf, werre from the gate
For wisdom is more worth in all defense
Then any gold, or riches congregate
For who wants wit, is always desolate
Of all good rule and manly governance
And ever enfect, by his contrariaunce
Endowe him also in humilitee
And wrath defer, by humble patience
Through which he shall, increace in dignitee
And catch always, full great intelligence
Of all good rule and noble regymence
And to conclude, wrath will ever set a side
All manner of thing, which wisdom would provide
Behold Bochas, what prices have through pride
Be cast down from all their dignitee
Where sapience and meekenes had be guide
Full suerly might have saved be
And have stand always in might and great suertee
If in their hearts, meekenes had be ground
And wisdom also, they had not be confound
Now follows of the English kings and Saxones.
The.xcix. Chapter.
THis Cadwalader, now laid in sepulture
That some time was yt king of great Brytain
And of Westsex also there with full sure
To whom succedid Iuore his soonne certain
Reignyng over Brytons that did remain
In Wales then, without any socour
But only he became their governor
With whom Iue, his cousin was at need
That warred sore the English and Saxonye
Many winters, and naught prevailed in deed
Saving they reigned, upon the Vasselry
That were out castes, of all Brytany
But Ingils and Iue his brother dear
In westsex reigned, which Co^rede his sons were
Whom English then, and all the Saxonye
Them chose and made, to be their protectours
Again Iuor and his cousin Iuy
That were that time, the Brytons governors
To Wales fled, for help and great socours
But Ingils and Iue of English bloodde descent
Then kept England, full well by one assent
A year all whole, and then this Ingils dyed
And Iue was king, of Westsex fully cround
That reigned then, full greatly magnified
Eight and thyrty winter, full well and sound
With his brother, and what alloen that stou^de
In whose time, Theodore then dyed
Of Cauntorbury archbishop signified
Which Ingile and Iue, did call this land England
After Inglis, as they had hard before
After Engest, it called was Engestes land
By corrupt speech, England it hight therefore
And afterward, so that name it has ever bore
As Gurmound also, before it had so named
Which since yt time, has been full hougely famed
King Iue and Ingils, in Westsex first began
The year six hundred four score, and thereto nine
So did Iuo and Iue in Wales then
Over the Walshe, that were of Brytons line
In much trouble and woo as fill that time
King Alfride in all Northumberlande
Wittred and Welbard, in Kent I understand
In England yet, were kings seven
Under king Iue, that twenty battles smote
Upon Iuor and Iue, accounted even
But in the year, as Bede has said and write
That every manne his debte, to kind pay mote
King Iue dyed at Room, then was the year
Seven hundred and seven and twenty clear
And at his death, he gave to Room each year
The Room pence through Westsex all about Room pence,

Perpetually to be well paid and clear
For unto Room he went without doubt
And with them, lords and gentiles a great route
In pilgrymage, for Eld and impotence
When he might not the land well defense
The.C. Chapter.
Etheldred king of Westsex protector of England that reigned thyrty year.

ETheldred in Westsex, to him began succeed
And king was then, and held the royalte Etheldred.

Protector was of England their in deed
And held his time, ever forth the souereingtee
In heritage and perpetualitee
That thyrten year reigned in good astate
Which cherished peace, and chastised all debate
Where any wrath was, growyng in his land
Among prelates or lords temporal
In citees or in cuntrees where he fande
Accordid them, in every place over all
And in his time the kings inspeciall
Under his rule and sure proteccion
He kept in peace, by lawful direccion
Who dyed so, of Christ his incarnacion
The year six hundredth and forty accounted tho
Entombed at Bathe, with sore lamentacion
Of all England, as well of friend as foo
Which Bathe city, some time was called so
Achamany, in Brytain language
By Achaman that had it in heritage
In his time was Oswyk in Northumberla^d
And dyed then, to whom Colwolphe did succed
Edbertpren in Kent I understand
And Ethelbald in Mers was the^ I read
In Essex also, was then reignyng Selrede
And Ethelrede in Estangle that day
All these were kings, and under him always
So fro that time forth, and fro the Scottish sea
To Sulwath ^loud, and to the water of Tyne
The Peightes had and kept without lee
Where king Edwin, their king was by right line
Rulyng that land in peace and law full fine
That changed then maiden castle name
To Edenbrough a town of great fame
The.C.j. Chapter.
Cuthred king of Westsex protectonr of England and reigned sixtene year,

CVthred was king, crouned of al Westser King Cuthred.

And protector of all England that day
His kings under him, yt then were full six
Did him homage anon withouten delay
Save Ethelbald of Mers, that said him nay
For which he warred on him then full sore
That both their lands, troubled were therefore
Full often they met, and faught with great power
Some that one, some time that other had
Victory in field, with strokes bought full dear
But when that king Ethelbald was most glad
This king Cuthred, that was nothing a drad
At Berford with him met in strong battaill
And slew him then, as Bede makes rehersall
Which Ethelbald in Mers, one and fourtye year
Had reigned hole, and diverse abbeys founded
In Mers land, at Crouland one full clear
Of Monks black, within the fennes grounded
To which Turketyll his chaunceler founded
Gave six maniers, to their foundation
And abbot there was made by installacion
This Battayl was, of Christ's natiuitee
Seven hundredth and five and fyftye year
Where Ethelbalde of Mers, the king did dye
To whom Borrede, there was the king full clear
But this Cuthrede of Westsex laid on here
Was in the year of Christ's birth to weten
Seven hundredth hole, and six and fyfty written.
To whom Segbert, in all regalites
His cousyn next of blood by all record Segbert. king.

Was king crowned, and had the dignitee
But full he was, of malice and discord
That with his kings, could no time well accord
Wherefore they would, no longer of him hold
But droaue him out, of all his land full bold
For law ne peace, he did not well conserve
But changed law, ever after his devise
From good to evil, each other to ouerterue
To spoil and rob, his commons to supprise
Thus in the land, he made full great parties
Wherefore the kings, and lords did him expel
That but one year, he did in it excel.
And afterward exiled, as he him hyd
Within a wood, a swynherd made his end
Then with his staff, he slew him so betyd
For all his hye estate, thus was he spend
A proverb is of old, was wysemen kend
That wrong laws, make ever short lords
Which wysemen yet remember, and records.
The.C.ii. Chapter.
Kynulphe king of Westsex protectoure of England, the which reigned.xxvi.
year.

KYnulphe succeeded and had the governance Kynulph king.

Of Westsex then, with all to it appente
Protector was by all thordinaunce
Of kings all, and the lords assent
As his elders before had regimente
The year of Christ.vii. hundredth fyfty and seven
As Bede has written, and accounted full even.
Of all the kings, and lords of England
He took feautee and royal hole homage
As souerayn lord, honored in all the land
And mightly mayntened his heritage
His kings all, and all his baronage
The peace and law, he kept by diligence
Was none that would displease his excellence.
He reigned hole, in all kinds suffisaunce
Six and twentye year fully accoumpted
In great honor and mighty great puysaunce
Was none him like, nor none him surmounted
But death alone, to his corpse amounted
Dryuyng his soul, out fro the worldly nest
To heavens bliss, eternally there to rest.
At wynchester he was full fair buried
The year.vii. hundredth four score and also three
Among the people, highly magnifyed
As to such a prince, longs of royaltee
Right well beloved, of his lords and co^montee
In whose time Offa of Mers king
Unto the B. of Room, sent his letters prayeng.
To deprive Lambert of Cauntorbury
Of primacy, and also of the palle
Which the bishop Adrian, anon hastily
Granted him then, by bulls written papal
Lambert depriuyng, of his sea primall
By which Aldulphe, bishop then of Lychfelde
Hye primate was, and thestate there held.
The pall he had, and all the dignitee
Lambert depryued, without any delay
Of primacie, and of all souerayntee
Of all the church of England hole that day
From Humber south, to Aldulphe did obey
And Lychfeld then for metropolitan sea
Was set above, and had the dignitee.
But Egfryde then, the son of Offa king
Of Mers, the pall and all the primacie
Did well restore, to Christ's hye pleasyng
To Award then bishop of Caunterburye
Where it abode, ever after worthyly
Unto this day, with all the dignitee
As of old right, it should have souerayntee
This time Kynot, of Pyghtes was the king
Fro forth to Carleile, and from the Scottishe sea
To Tyne that time his lordshyp was and dwelling
The which he held, by homage and feautee
Of the king then of Northumberlande in fee
And was his man also, in war and peace
As his elders had done, without leace.
In whose days, tharchbyshop Egbert
Of York, brother was as I can understand
To the king of Northumberlande Edbert
The primacye and pall, brought to Yorkes land
By the B. of Rome granted, without gaynstand
Which from the death, of the good king Edwyn
Had ceased long, from the time of saint Paulyn
About this time, as well is expressed
Vnguste the king of Pyghtes, rode in England
On war, where then he was full sore distressed
By the manly king of Northumberlande
Where he auoiwed, if he came to his land
A church to make of full great dignitee
In worship of saint Andrewe should it be
And at his home coming one Regalo
Fro Constantyne by reuelacion
Brought certain bones of saint Andrewe tho Ignorance in those days.

To king Vngust, where by his relacion
He founded then, a mynster of his fundacion
Of saint Andrewe, where his bones shryned been
As there in deed I was, and have it seen.
The.C.iii. Chapter.
Brightryke king of Westsex protector of England reigned.xvi. year, that
began to reign in the year of our Lord vii. hundredth.iiii. score and three,
and died in the year.vii. C. four score and nynetene.

BRightrike cousyn, yt was next of blood
To king Kenulphe, by hole intelligence
Of Westsex, was king full wise and good
And protector of England in regence
Which governed right well, with great sapience
The year of Christ.vii. hundredth.iiii. score and three
When that he took on him the dignitee
He wedded Edburge king Offa his daughter fair
Of Mers, for love and peace and good accord
Between their lands, with all their hole repair
The king Albert, also of good accord
Only of purpose, to make concord
Of Eastlande came, to Offa for peace
Between their land, the wars for to cease
And his daughter to wed, unto his wife
For more suertee of love, and good accord
Whom queen Eburge, of Mers because of strife
Before had be, between him and her lord
And for she would not unto the marriage accord
Made him to be slain, in full prive wise
Within his bed, before that he might rise.
For which Offa, greatly was agreued
And buried him, at Harforde his city
And Offa then and Humbert, as is breued
Bishop of Lychefelde, where then was his see
Which king and bishop, with great royaltee
Translate that time, saint Albone in shryne
Of silver gylt, with stones fair and fine.
Which Offa died, the year of Christ full clear
Seven hundredth.iiii. score and thereto seuentene
When he had reigned so, ix. and thyrty year
At Offa aye buried, that time as well is seen
With all honor, as to such a king beseme
To whom Egfride his son, then began succeed
And after him, Kynuphe reigned in deed.
Which Offa gave through Mers, the Rome penny
Unto the church of Rome, full long before
Tharchebyshoprych from Cauntorburye
Unto Lychefeld, translated for evermore
By his will, ever to abide thore
So stood it then, for certain all his live
As Flores says, and does it so subscriue.
This Azdulphe, king of Northumberlande
Slew Wade his duke, that again him was rebel
Beside Mulgreue, where as men understand
His grave is yet men say, upon the fell
For his falshed and treason, as books tell
Between Gysburgh and Whitby, sothe to say
Where for treason, he was laid in the hie way.
In his fourth year, with duke Kylrike he fought
And droaue him to his ships then again
In Humbar, so that he had not to his fraught
But few persons, were left alive vnslayne
And in his year eleven, with mykell pain
With Danes he fought, again yorkeshyre right
where many thousa^des he slew, yt were full wight
And on a day, as he from huntyng came
All hot chased, his men bottelles found
In his chaumber, in which was wine of name
Men called yt time, Vernage of strange land
Which wine was poisoned, as I understand
Of which he drank, and poisoned was anon
Unto the death, and might no ferther gone.
He dyed the year.vii. C.lxxx. and nyntene
At Tewkisbury, buried in sepulture
Of whose death, Edburge that was queen
Was blamed then, for that mysauenture
For she did make that drink, men said full sure
Certain persons by venym to have slain
That loved her naught, and was her ever again
But what for fear, and what for speech she fled
With great richesse, of passing great measure
In France unto the king, full fast she sped
But of her rule, thence forth I set no cure
It was so lewd to report in scripture
I will not break my brain, it to report
For wemens well, the which I would comfort
The.C.iiii. Chapter.
Egbert king of Westsex, protector of England that reigned.xxxv. year, and
dyed in the year of Christ, viii. hundredth thyrtye and three, as after shall
appear.

EGberte, cosyn to the said Segberte
King of Westsex, was royally accept King Egberte.

with all honor, yt the lords could aduert
And each man glad, no creature except
So graciously fortune, then had him kept
That all people ioyed, his coronacyon
For cause he was, of Britons generacyon.
For down he was, from Asserake descent
King Ebrank, son of consanguinytee
Sith Cadwalader dyed, and was dispent
Was none right heir, of Brytons blood but he
As Chronycles tell, like as a man may se
For systers son, he was to king Sygbert
Of Westsex hole, as Flores could aduerte.
Also men said, he came of Ingils blood
And very heir he was, to him and Iue
For which Englysh and Saxons, with him stood
And held with him, as for their blood natyfe
Protector was he made, there so belyue
Of all England and Wales, hole conquered
And Cornewayle asso, as it is chronicled.
Then took he, of all kings leege homage
Except Bernulphe, yt king of Mers was tho
Would do him none then, for his heritage
Wherefore he brent his land, and did him mikyl woe
And so they gathred great host, on both sides tho
Where Bernulphe, then at Glenden him met
In Mers land, trowyng him to ouerset.
But king Egberte had then the victory
And slew Bernulphe, for all his boste and pride
To Ludican, he gave that land in hye
To hold of him, as other did on every side
Through all England, yt was both long and wide
Then drove he king Balrede, out from all Kent
And all his realm destroyed sore and brent
But Ludican was false, by foul treason
Whom king Egbert then slew in battle sore
For his falshode, and his rebellyon
And to Wylaffe, he gave that land right thore
Was Bernulphs son, to have for evermore
To hold of him, of right and heritage
By service dew, of feaute and homage.
Then in his time, the Danes sore destroyed
The ysles of shepey, and Tenet also
And to the sea, they went again vnanoyed
And after sone, in Northumberlande tho
They did aryue, and wrought full mekell woo
With whom Egbert, there faught with small meny
That out of the field, they made him to fly.
King Egbert drew south, then into the land
And held the field, to time his sons two
Athylwolfe and Ethylbert, I understand
With host full great, came ridyng to him tho
Where then he bare, the cross of gold ay so
In his left hand, and in his right a swerd
With which he made, his fooes therewith al aferd
For there he had the field and victory
And slew Dardan, a knight full chyualrus
The kings son, of Denmark sekerly
And all his hos^e, that was full malicyous
By virtue of the cross, patyfe precious
For which always after, in his banner
Of azuer whole, the cross of gold he bear
Which arms so full, after this day
King Kinigyll of Westsex, had them bore
Fro his bapteme, then afterward always
And all the kings after, so did evermore
Of Westsex, so in mind of Christ's lore
His cross, his death, and his holy passion
Which Jews him wrought, without compassion
When king Egbert had five and thyrty year
Reigned in land, and felt full great syckenesse
Of which he dyed, of Christ's birth full clear
The year so then.viii. C. was express
Four and thyrty, another more ne less
At Wynchester, then royally buried
As Flores says, and well has notifyed.
The.C.v. Chapter.
Athelwolfe king of Westsex, reigned.xix. year, and dyed the year.viii.
hundredth.liii. after Christ's birth,

AThelwolfe was king crowned at his city (...) Tithes first granted to the
clergy in England.

Of Westchester, in all royal estate
To whom the kings, and lords made feaute
And homage leege as was preordynate
That reigned after.xix. year fortunate
And granted the church, tithes of corn and hay
Of bestiall also, through Westsex for aye
In the year eight hundred thirty and eight
The Danes arrived with shippis fourscore and three
Where Athelstane his son did with them feight
And duke Wolfward, by great fortunitee
Them took and sleugh with all felicitee
But Athelstane, in that battle was slain
Of his wars, that was the capitain
And in the year eight hundred thirty and nine
The king faught sore with Danes at Mersyngton
Where earl Harbart was slain a prince full fine
But Danes all were take and slain their a down
Without mercy, cracked upon the croune
The king came home, with honor and victory
As Flores says, right in his memory
And in the year eight hundred forty and one
The Danes watched thest sea cost throughout
With diverse hosts, for which yt king made great moan
All helples the^, the Danes yt were so stout
In many places, with many diverse rout
All harmles went, without hurt or pain
By diverse time, that year home again
In the year eight hundred four and fourtye
At Carham then, the king full sore did fight
With Danes fell, and had the victory
And at Alnewik he faught, again forth right
With Danes also, where king Redwolf yt hight
Of Northumberla^de, and earl Alffride was slain
And full great part, of their host certain
King Athilwolf came to the South contree
Where Danes then in battle with him faught
In Somersetshire, where he made many dye
And gate the feld, and sleugh all that he caught
Where great people yt day the death has raught
Tharchbishop with his full wise clergy
Bysyde Sandwiche, of Danes had victory
And in the year eight hundred fifty and one
The Danishe host, in Thamis did arrive
Kent, and Southray, Sussex, and Ha^shire anon
Distroyed sore and through yt South began drive
Where much folk they sleugh, both ma^ne and wife
Which host ye king, with battle slew down sore
That home again returned they no more
And in the year eight hundred fifty and three
The king Edmond of Estangle began
To reign after Albert of great beautee
That holy was, as his legend tell can
But Athilwolf the king buried then
The king of Mers, that had his daughter wed
All Wales wan, them thought they had well sped
This Athilwolf to Room took his way
In pilgremage with him, his soonne Alurede
Cardinal was of Wynchester that day
Where then he had, the bishoprike, in deed
A perfect clerk, he was as says saint Bid
A philosophier wise, and well approved
And by the bishop of Rome, co^me^did well, and loved
And there they were abydyng full two year
And home they came, unto the king of France
And his daughter Indith there weddid clear
By assent of him, and all his hole puysaunce
And so with worship, and noble governance
Fro thens he came, sone into England
With her and with his soonne as I understand
And in the year eight hundred fifty and three
The death his soul, began from his body drive
Unto the bliss eternal, there to be
In heaven above, where is everlasting life
To Peter and Pole he granted infenitife
The Room pence then of all England
As Flores says, as I can understand
He was then buried, at Winchester in royal wise
As to such a prince, of reason should affere
And with his wife, as did full well suffice
Four soonnes he had, worthy without pere
Sir Athilwold, Ethelbert, Elfride the dear
And Alrude the youngest of echone
Before them all, one bast had Athelston
Athelbold was king after him and heir
And protector, with all the prerogatif
His stepdame wed, men said it was not fair
The church him began punish and chastiue
For cause he wed, her so unto his wife
Again the law and christen conciense
Vnaccordant, with his magnificence
That reigned whole, two year and no more
In great sikenes and pain inmorderate
Greatly vexed, and punisshed was right sore
Men said it was, for sin inordinate
With his stepdame, that was so consociate
But then he had, as God would repentance
For his trespass and misgouernaunce
Before he dyed, he did full sore repent
And for his sin, stood to correccion
Of holy church, for his amendment
Submitted whole, without obieccion
And for to live, in clean perfeccion
Departed were by law and deuorced
Before his soul was passed and vncorced
The.C.vi. Chapter.
Ethelbert king of Westsex protector of England that reigned five year.

SIr Ethelbert his brother began succeed King Ethel bert.

In whose days, the Danes destroyed sore
The east parties of England then in deed
And home again, they went harmeles therefore
Destroyed the people, and the land right sore
But sone there after, king Ethelbert them met
And sleugh them down, in bataile sore and bet
An other host, then new spoiled all Kent
And by treaty, wyntred within the Isle
Of Tenet, then by Kentishe men's assent
But at last, they with a subtell wyle
Despoyled all Kent, and falsely did beguyle
And to their shipis went without delay
Into Denmark, with much rich array
This Ethelbert reigned whole five year
And dyed the year of verey Christ his date
Eight hundred whole and thereto sixty clear
As Flores says, and has it approbate
But with sykenesse he was so alterate
He dyed then, and at Shirborne buried
With great worship and honor laudified
The.C.vii. Chapter.
Elfride king of Westsex protector of England reigned six year, and dyed in
the year of Christ eight hundred lxvi.

ELfride was king, after his brother then King Elfride.

That reigned so, with all the dignitee
In Westsex whole, and mightily began
Protector was as was necessitee
For Danes then of great iniquite
His land foul brent, wasted and destroyed
That all England, was combred and anoyed
In the east cost of England specially
In Estangle, where Edmond then was king
There did great hurt full cruelly
In Northumberlande full felly warryng
The people destroiyng, and the land brennyng
Where Danes then, sleugh the king of that land
Byside York, so as Flores does understand
Also they sleugh, in Northfolke all about
The people down, and in Suffolk also
The king Edmond they sleugh without doubt
Of Estangland, with arowes sharp tho
Was shot to death, with much other woo
That is a saint honored this day in bliss
At Edmondes bury canonyzed I wisse
Hungar and Vbba sleugh hyw full cruelly
And brent abbeis throut all England that time
By North and South, and prestes full cursedly
All holy folk fled out of that realm
They sleugh all people that had take bapteme
At Colyngham saint Ebb, that was abbess
Their nonnes put from them in sore distress
For dred of the tyrauntes two, full cruel
And their people cursed and full of malice
That ravished no^nes, ever where their herd tell
In her chaptre, ordained again their enemies
Should not deffoule, their clean virginitees
She cut her nose of, and her over lip
To make her loathe that she might from him slipe
And counseled all her susters to do the same
To make their fooes to hoge so with the sight
And so they did, before thenimies came
Echon their nose and over lipe full right
Cut of anon which was an hogly sight
For which tho fooes thabbey and nonnes brent
For they them self disfigured had shent
From Twede to Thamys, abbais then they bre^t
And churches hole and people sleugh right down
Wives maidens widows and nonnes shent
Through all the land and the est region
People sleyng in every borough and town
The women ever they diuiciate
In every place and foully defflorate
And in the year.viii. hundredth fyftie and six
He died so, and from this world expired
Whom all his time, the Danes full sore did vex
Again him ever, full sore they had conspired
Their hertes in malice, always sore affcerd
Sometime the worse they had, sometime yt better
As Flores says, and written has in letter
The.C.viii. Chapter.
Alurede king of Westsex protector of England reigned xxi. year and died the
year.viii. C.xcv.

ALurede, king was of this region Alurede king.

That brother was to this noble Elfryde
A perfect clerk, proved in opinion
As clerks could discern, and proved
In knighthode also approved and notified
So plenerly, that no man knew his peer
So good a knight, he was and singular.
In battayles many, in his fathers days
And also in his brethren time all three
He fought full often, and bare him well always
That for his deeds and singularitee
He was commended among thenemytee
Within the land and out, as well was know
His fame among the people hye was blow.
Whiles he was king, he had aduersitee
With Danes often, that on him did ryue
Destroyed his land, with great iniquitee
The which full often, with might he did out drive
And slew thousands, that lost their live
Through the wars, begone of their outrage
That meruayll was to seen, of one lynage.
And in the year. viii, hundredth sixty and eight
The Danes came to York, and took the town
Hunger and Vbba, with many a wyle slight
Wasted the land about, both up and down
And so came forth to Mars, with hosts boune
And to Westsex, whom then the king Alurede
Discomfited there, with the host that he did led.
The Danyshe host, to Redyng came again
Another host at London, was with pride
Of Danes also, that wrought him mekyll pain
But whiles these hoostes, were parted and divide
With his power, Alurede began to ride
And at Anglefeld he fought, in Barkeshyre right
Where victory he had, maugre of their might
At Redyng in Barkeshire, then he met
An host full great, where he had then again
The victory, and his fooes down bette
At Basyng also, he slew them down certain
At Asshenden, he drove them out all pleyne
And got the field, with all the victories
As Flores says right in his memories
And in the year.viii. C. syxty and fourtene
The Danishe host, rode Lyndsey and Mars country
And home again, as then was well seen
In Northumberlande, with great prosperitee
The Danes rode, doing great aduersitee
Where the bishop then of holy Isselande
And all his monks were, full fast fleand
With s. Cuthberts bones, bare about.vii. year Supersticion.

Now here, now there, in diverse places about
For dread of Danes, and enemies that there were
In Northumberlande dwelling, yt time full stout
But then the king, the sea sailed throughout*
And ships gatte, with much great riches
For to defend his land, fro great distress.
In Westsex then, with fooes again he met
Where they fro him, to Exeter that night
Fled full fast, where Alurede them over set
And slew them down, in battle and in fight
And then in Mers, anon he fought forth right
With Danes tho, and also with Norwayes
That wasted had all Mers, in many ways.
Then fought he also, at Chipna^ in Wilshire
And Hunger and Vbba and duke Haldene
Tyrauntes cruel, hot as any fire
The Christen folk did brenne, wast and slene
With cruel tourmentes, did them care and tene
Where Alurede had the victory
And slew that day, all the Danyshyre
The.C.ix. Chapter.
How king Alurede fled, to Ethelyngay in Hidils, for dread of Danes, and
served an oxherde of the country.

GVtron the king of Denmark yt was tho
In Westser werred full sore, and brent y^ land
With which the king so marryd was with woe
He wist not well whether to ride or stond.
But to Ethelyngay anon he took on hand
To ride, where then he hyd him in a place
For dread of Danes, such was his hap and grace.
In Denwolfes house, thoxerd of the town
So was he then, in poor and simple array
Where Denwolf, cladde him in his own gown
And tender was to him there always
But his wife made him to labor aye
With bakynge and with bruynge wonder sore
In water beryng, she made him work ever more
Where then his lords and knights in good array
Came to him then, with hooste and great power
Where than the king upon Gutron that day
In battle strong, with courage fresh and clear
Fought sore, and took Gutron prysonere
And thyrtye dukes with him in company.
Vnchrysten were, they all of panymrye
And had the field with all the vyctorye.
And of Danes many thousand slew
He baptized than as made is memory
This king Gutron, that after was full true
And named was Athylstan all new.
To whom the king, gave than all Estenglande
As Edmonde had, to hold of him that land.
And all his dukes were also there baptized,
And christen men, bycame for gods love
The year of Christ.viii. C. then compeysed
Seuente and.viii. as Flores does approve
The king was then, again at his above
Remembered him of Denwolfe, that him hyd
And sent for him to Ethelingay, he did.
His wife was deed, and somewhat was he letred
At his desire, the king set him to learn
To time that he was wise, and mekell betred
In holy wryt that he could well discern
And then the king made him bishop as yerne
Of Winchester, when Dunbert there so dyed
That bishop was before him sacrafyed.
In the year.viii. C. and four score
The Danes in Thamis, and wintred at Foulham
The king came in somer after thore
And slew them all, that they went never hame
The deed, the quycke, the maimed, and the lam^
All buried were, where the battle was smyten
As Flores says, and clerly has it written.
At Rochester the Danes were efte on land
With whom the king, there faught, and many slew
Many drowned, and lyeng on the sonde
As they unto their ships, agaynwarde flewe
He drove them there, unto a warmly stowe
After their labor, to have recreacyon
Upon the sondes, to make their habitacyon.
The.C.x. Chapter.
How Marine bishop of Rome, granted to king Alurede to found an vniuersytee
and study for clerks, which he made at Dxenforde, where the clerks be sworn,
they shall not read for their form at Stamforde.

ANd in the year.viii. C.lxxx. and tweyne
Marine bishop of Rome, granted to king A lurede
To found and make a study the^ again
And an vniuersyte for clerks in to read
The which he made, at Oxenforde in deed
To that intent, that clerks by sapyence
Again heretykes, should make resystence.
And christen faith maintain, by their doctrine
The king also, to comfort and counsel
By their teaching, and wytty disciplyne
As Philosophers of old, did great avail
To kings, princes, and cytees, gouernayle
Gave all their wit, in study and dilygence
Again mischeues, to find and make defense
And in the year.viii. C.lxxx. and eight
All his riches, in five parts he ganne deuyde
One part to men of war, to keep his right
An other part, to land tyllers in that tide
The husbandry to maintain and to guide
The third part, all churches wasted to restore
The.iiii. unto the study for their lore
And to the Judges, and men of law well learned
The fyfte part, full wisely he dispende
To hold the law in peace truly governed
Disposed thus, he was the realm tamende
This was a king, full greatly to commend
That thus could keep his land from all vexacio^
And not to hurt, his commons by taxacyon.
For trust it well, as god is now in heaven
Who hurt the poor people, and the co^montee
By taxes sore, and their goods fro them reuen
For any cause, but necessytee
The dysmes to pay, compel of royaltee
Though they speak fast and mumble with the mouth
They pray full evil with heart, both north and south
The year of Christ.viii. C. lxxx and thyrtene
The duke Hastyne of Danes, ever untrue
Destroyed the land, with hosts proud and kene
By East and Weste, that all the land did rewe
Whom the king in battle, felly slew
After diverse batayles, among them smyten
In sundry places, there as it was well weten
In every shyre, the king made capitaynes
To keep the land, with folk of their country
And ships many, and galaies long with Chieftai^s
And Balyngers, with bargys in the sea
With which he gate riches, great quantyte
And at a flud, was called Vthermare
He slew an host of Danes, with battle sare
The.C.xi. Chapter.
How duke Rollo a panyme, gate Normandye, of whom all the dukes of Normandye,
be lynally descended.

ANd in the year.viii. C.lxxx. and senentene
The duke Rollo, of Denmark nacyon
A Painim stout, with mighty host and kene
In England brent without any delacyon
Whom Alurede by good supportacyon
Drove then again: unto his navy right
And of his men, a thousand he slew in fight
Which Rollo then, landed in Normandye
Of whom all dukes, of that prouynce descent
And wan that land, with sword full manfully
And duke there was made, of hole intent
By process after, and by the kings assent
Of France, whose daughter he wed unto his wife
And christen man became so all his life.
At charters first, he seged so the town Superset, cyonsnesse with da^pnable
ydolatrye.

Where they wtin, our ladies smock then showed
For their banner, and their salvation
For fear of which, full sore in heart he rewed
All suddenly, and unto Roan removed
Where then his wife, dame Gylle was deed and buried
Without child between them notifyed.
But then he wedded Pepam, the sister fair
Of duke Robert, of Normandye and Roone
On whom he gate William his son and heir
That after him was duke thereof anon
When years many were passed and ouergone
But now at this to cease, I will enclyne
Till afterward, I shall tell forth their line
King Alurede, the laws of Troy and Brute
Laws Moluntynes, and Marcians congregate
With Danyshe laws, that were well constytute
And Grekyshe also, well made and approbate
In english tongue, he did then all translate
Which yet be called, the laws of Alurede
At Westmynster, remembered it in deed
And in the year.viii. C.lxxx. and eyghtene
Then Alurede, this noble king so dyed
When he had reigned.xxix. year clean
And with the Danes, in batayls multiplied
He faught often, as Colman notifyed
In his chronycle, and in his cathologe
Entytled well, as in his dyaloge
That fyftye batayls, and syx he smote
Sometime the worse, and sometime had the better
Sometime the field, he had at his note
Sometime he fled away, as says the letter
Like as fortune, his cause left vnfeter
But nevertheless, as often when so they came
He contred them, and kept the land fro shame.
The.C.xii. Chapter.
Edward the first king of England reigned, xxiiii. year and dyed the year of
Christ.ix. C. and, xix.

Edward his son, so crowned was anon
Of Westsex, then by all the parlyament
Protector was made, again the fone
Which warred sore, in England by assent
The year.viii. C.lxxx. and fyftene spent
Earl Athylwolde he exyled, into France
For he a nonne had rauyshed, to his vsaunce.
But after that, this same earl Athylwolde
With Danyshe host, Mers and Estanglande
Destroyed sore both, king Edward full bold
Slew Ethalwode, and his host I understand
Discomfet hole, and drove them out of land
And made all kings of England, his subjects
For so he thought, it was his very dettes
He sommoned then at London, his parliament
Where he deposed, the kings euerychone
Of all England, and made them by assent
Dukes and earls, thence forward so anon
In every kingdom, then he ordained one.
And in some three, he made by ordinance
And all kingdoms, foringed by governance
And he to be the king, of all england
Proclaimed hole, to void all varyaunce
Discord and war, that many years had stand
Whiles seven kings, had the governance
There might no law, ne peace have perseuerau^ce
Wherefore he took, of every Duke homage
Of Earls also, and of the Baronage.
Scotland and Wales, he warred sore in deed Homage of the Scotts

Till they became his men, and made homage
For sovereign Lord of Britayne, as I read
The kings then did for their heritage
For all their men, and for their vasselage
To ride with him, where that ever he gooe
In war and peace, again friend and fooe.
Duke Ethelrede of Mers, and also his wife
Elfled that hight Westchester, then repaired
That wasted was, by Danes war and strife
Which Roomaynes first builded, had and feired
In time when, they to this land repeired
Of Roomayne work, whiles they here occupied
That city first, full freshly edified
The^ faught the king, with Danes at Wodefeld sore
In Mers and also at Herford with great pain
Where victory he had, of them evermore
Again he faught with Danes soth to sain
At Towcester, and laid them on the plain
In Yorkshire also, he slew the Danes down
And voided them all out of his region
The.C.xiii. Chapter.
This king made an union of all the realms, and called it England, and after
it failed never of that name.

THis noble king thus made an union
Of seven realms, yt stood three hundred year
Six and thyrty also in great division
And wars many, as Colman says full clear
Fro Gurmond had driven out Carreis here
Which was the year five.C.iiii. score and thirtene
Unto the year of Christ nine hundred and nientene
These earls all, and dukes then held the law
As shryues now in shires dooen and maintene
That the commons ouerlaied, full sore with awe
And sore oppressed their states to sustene
Wherefore he voided them out of office clean
And shryues made through all his region
Which have not forgete extorcion
This noble king, Edward thelder hight
When he had reigned full twenty and four year
Buried he was at Winchester full right
As in Flores, full clearly does apere
Who in his time surely had no peer
Of wisdom nor manhood as was seen
The law and peace that could so well sustene
The.C.xiiij. Chapter.
Athelstane king of England reigned fiftene year and dyed in the year of Christ
nine hundred thirty and five. How Constantyne king of Scotts warred again
Athelstane but he recovered his homage by miracle of saint John of Beuerley as
shows here afterward.

SIr Athilstane his eldest soonne of age
In wisdom ever full sadly and well auised
At Kyngsto^ was crouned and took homage
Of all the lords right as he had devised
Against whom all Wales as they suffised
Then he warred, but he made them obey
And made homage, his meune to be for aye
In wohse time so, y^ year of Christ nine hundred
And thyrty more and five full accounted
Robert Rollo his soul and corpse asondred
His corpse to the earth, his soul amounted
Which in knighthod, his Danes surmounted
That reigned had then duke of Normandy
By thirty year accounted full clerly
To whom succedid his soo^ne Wyllya^ lo^gspee
That after him was duke of Normandy
But then the king of Scotts by cruelte Rebellyo^ of the Scotts.

Hight Constantyne, him warred cruelly
For which, king Athilstane mightily
Stroyed all Scotland till his people dyed
For cold and hunger dyed and mortified
But he was so comforted even by miracle
That he faught a none, with this king Consta^tyne
And had the feld and his habitacle
Them drove through all the la^d with much pain
To time he was, full fain to enclyne
To Athilstane, for to make his homage Homage of the Scotts.

For all Scotland that was his heritage
Anlaaf the king of Denmark, full of pride
Cousyn to king Constantyne of Scotland
With shippis many arrived on Humberside
At Burnesburgh and claymed of England
For to have of the king as I understand
The truage, which his eldres had before
And with him brought Colbro^d to fight therefore
And Athilstane at the day assigned
Made him ready the battaill to have smitten
Again Colbrond, armed with heart benyngned
But then sir Guy of Warwike as was weten Guy of Warwick.

In palmer wise as Colman has it written
The battaill took on him for Englandis right
With Colbrond in arms for to fight
Where then he sleugh, this Danyshe champion
By which battaill, the truage was relesed
By covenant made and composicion
Between the kings before and wars cesed
Thus king Anlaaf, home to Denmark presid
Without more war or conturbacion
And sir Guy went to his contemplacion
King Athelston then, fraunchesid Beuerley
In the worship of God and saint John
Where in his life, is written for ever and aye
The miracle of his stroke so in the stone
That never manne might do but Athilston
Through grace of God and his direccion
Through prayer of saint John and affeccion
This noble king was ever more just and true
To God his faith, and to churches devotion
To poor men grace, on subjects ever did rewe
To priests and age reverence in feld and town
In dome sadness, troth and discrecion
And in the year nene hundred thyrty and five
When he had reigned sixtene year with life
His brother Edmond for king the^ was crouned King E^mo^d reigned ^i. year.

Of England whole by concent of all estate
To whom Dothowe king of Scotla^de yt stou^de
And Howell of Walis the king then create
As was before used and determinate Homage of the scotts.

Feaute to him made and leege homage
For Wales and Scotland yt was their heritage
He set saint Dunstan then at Glastenbury
Under thabbot of monks and religion
That abbot was with him at Canturbury
This king Edmond was slain by a felone
Which of malice, and his false treason
That forfet had, and dampened was to dye
For his forfet, and for his felonye.
At Cauntorbury, as y^ king him saw on a day
For ire on him, he ran and sore him wound
For which he stroke, the king for aye
So they dyed both two, there in that stounde
Each of them, of his mortal wound
Which to a prince, accorded in no wise
To put him self in dread, where law may chastise
He reigned but.vi. year then all out
And died the year.ix. hundredth fourtye and one
At Glastenbury buried without doubt
For whom the people, made then full great moan
For law and peace, he kept to euerychone
And his commons, never his time supprissed
And oppressors of him always were chastised
His brother Edrede, after him had the crown Edrede king of England

At London then, and took royal feautee
Of all estates, within his region
Except Scotland, that through their vnlewtee Rebellion, of ye Scotts.

Crowned Gilryke, a Dane of great beautee
Of royal bloodde borne and generate
And for their king, him fully had create.
King Edrede went to Scotland we his power
And all the land, wasted sore and brent
Wherefore the Scotts, by hole consent for feer
Put down Gilryke, from all the regyment
And droaue him to Denmark or they stent
And to Edrede came all the Baronage Homage of ye Scotts.

And to him made feautee and homage
And in the year.ix. hundredth forty and nine
He died, buried at Wynchester his cytee
When that he had, his soul made to enclyne
Out of his corpse, to pass away and flee
Where God of heaven, would that it should be
But.viii. year full, he reigned and no more
When death him took, with sikenes great and sore.
Edwyn his brother, resceyued then the crown Edwyn king.

Folyshe and proud, and of his will malign
And in his wit, was full little reason
Whom his barons, for cause he was vndigne
Made him his crown, for to resign
Deposed him then, out fro his regiment
At the parliament, by their commen assent.
Whom saint Dunstane, for aduoutre blamed
But it amend, he would in no kyn wise
Of which he was, full openly defamed
Through all the realm, he was the more unwise
For which the lords, and commons all did rise
And droaue him out, away where no man knew
Thus sins old, make shames come full new.
He reigned had, but.iiii. year and no more
When he was deprived of his estate
Without thank of God or man therefore
And well worse, was of all men most behate
Of his reygne having no longer date
Who dyed the year.ix. hundredth fyfty and three
Foringed hole from all his magestee
The.C.xv. Chapter.
Edgare king of England, reigned.xviii. year and died in yt year of Christ.ix.
hundredth three score and eleven.

HIs brother Edgare by a comme^ assente Edgare.

Was chosen king, as chronicles record
With diadem crowned, at his parliament
And homage took royal of every lord
So merciful and full of misericorde
Was he, that saint Dunstan reconciled
Whom king Edwyn, wrongfully had exiled.
Whom archebyshop of Cauntorbury he made
With all estate and primates dignitee
Of Monks and nonnes, mynsters fair and glad
Fourtye founded of religioustee
Within his realm, of his own royaltee
Endewed them all in land and tenemente
Sufficiently with all establyshemente
He wedded Elfbede yt dukes daughter Ozmere
On whom he gate a son, both good and fair
That after was saint Edward the marter
Who was his eldest son and his heir
A lykely prince toward, both comely and fair
Elflede died, he wedded Elfrith to wife
That daughter was to duke Orgare be life
On whom he gate Ethelbert so anon
The kings of Wales, he had in subieccion
The Scotts king Kynowth withouten moon Homage of yt Scotts.

Made him homage, without obieccion
Thus all were under his proteccion
And rode with him, always in war and peace
In all his time, withouten leas.
So true he was, and in his dome wise
That for no mede, nor favor would he false
The true leuers, his law did not despise
He socoured ever, and felons hanged hy the halse
Conspiratours, murderers and traitors als
The common weal, above all thing preferred
Which every prince, should se were well observed
He taxed not his commons, ne supprysed
Ne holy church, nor yet the clergy
But lived on his own, as it was assised
Upon his rentes, and lands morallye
His officers him ruled, full no tably
In every shire he went in priuetee
To spy and know, who hurtes the commontee.
He was a king, full worthy and condign
That let not, for his ease nor his labor
To search and see defautes, that were malign
And them correct, he was a gouernoure
God set never king, to be a ryotoure Thoffice of a king

To trippe on tapettes, and live in ydelnesse
But for to rule, with all kinds of business
He died the year.ix. hundredth sixty and eleven
When he had reigned full eyghtene year
Buried he was, at Glastenbury to neuen
His corpse to the earth, his soul to heaven clear
When he had been dead, four and twenty year
Bishop Oswald, of that same diocise
By counsel of thabbot, that was wise
Abbot Edward of that place that hight
Who laid him in a toumbe, made of new
For it was short, he brake his legs wight
Of which the bloodde, as read and fresh of hew
As ever it was sprent out, all hot and new
Into his eyes, by which he lost his sight
Men said it was, for he had so him dight
Edward his son, that eldest was and heir
Saint Dunstan then, as made is mention Edward marter king of England.

Tharchbyshop of Cauntorbury fair
So crowned him, king of this region
Whom dame Alfrith of false presumpcion
His stepmother, to crown sir Ethelrede
At Cornisgate, so cut his throat in deed
As he with her did drink, of good intent
And buried was, at Warham then anon
But afterward the B. of Rome, to England sent
To take him up, and lay him hye anon
In a toumbe made of silver gold and stone
As a marter, then him canonized
At Shaftesbury, where he is autorized.
And dyed in the year of Christ.ix. hundredth clear
Sixty also accoumpted and fyftene
That reigned had in England, but.iiii. year
His soul to bliss, went then as is well seen
Where now he must, ever dwell and been
In joy eterne, emonge the saints of heaven
And there with Christ gods son beleuen
The.C.xvi. Chapter.
King Ethelrede, king of England reigned.xxxviii. year and dyed in the year of
Christ, a thousand and thirtene

THen Ethilrede, withouten tariyng
At King stone tho, by all the baronage
Crowned was, fair and royally as king Ethilrede king.

His brother was, and heir of heritage
But saint Dunstan then, by his true language
Prophesied and said, withouten leas
In all his time, he should not reign in peace.
For to this realm he said he had no right
But by murder and cruel homycede
Of your brother, that for you was dight
Which murder ever asks vengau^ce on every side
Wherefore he said, serve God what so betyde
And then it is the fairest chastisement
To be put out, fro that same regyment.
Saint Dunstan died, and went to heaven
The king rode forth, to London his city
And as he rode, he saw a cloud full even A wonderful token.

As read as bloodde, as all the people did see
Which England hole ouerspred in quantitee
Fro which the bloodde, reyned upon the ground
That men trouwed to have been peryshed yt stound
The next year after, the Danes at Southha^pton
Arrived, and brent the country there about
Also they spoiled, and sore burnt the town
And so they did all Cornewayle throughout
And Deuenshire also, and somerset no doubt
With Dorsetshire, and Wylshyre, and Barkeshrye brent
And to London came, or ever yt they stent
The suburbs there, they spoiled sore and brent
Two dukes then, of Denmark and Norwaye
Northfolke, Southfolke, and Essex, or they stent
Brent and spoiled, and so forth held the way
To London then, where their fellows lay
So assembled they, and passed into Kente
Where that country, they spoiled sore and brent
The land of kent to them granted truage
To live in peace, and home again they went
But in Northfolke an other host their passage
Made then, and so to Lyncolne or they stent
All Lyncolneshyre throughout, then they brent
And Yorkeshyre also, and home they went again
With pylage great, of which they were full feign
The king might get, no help with them to fight
For which he treated, with king Anlaaf of Norway
And with king Swaan, of Denmark for his right
That destroyed had the land, in fell array
And truage hight, them furthwarde to pay
For they had no power, amongst the^ to praise
And was full feign, the wars for to cease
But yet king Swayne, would nothing rest for this
He came again, and crowned was for king
Great tallage, of all this land a mysse
He took always, and specially all other thing
Saint Edmu^des lands, he hurt by great taski^g
And tallage, which of it that he raised
Vnegally, he pondred then and peysed.
For which warrys, queen Emme to Normandy
To her brother, duke Richard the third
With her sons, Alurede and Edward her by
And Edmunde Ironesyde, then it so betyde
All these the took, and in a ship she did
And with king Ethelrede by the sea led pryuely
For help to have got his land there by
In which time, whyls he in Normandye
Was so^ournyng, king Swayn full loud then cried
And said unto his men, and fast began cry
I am but deed, saint Edmunde has me spyed
And with a spear, has me here mortifyed
Woe worth yt day, I noied S. Edmundes ground
For with his spear, my heart he has sore wound
He dyed right so, without confession
And whyther he went, I ne wot ne whare
But well I wot, in good and true professyon
Saint Edmonde king dyed, and made his fare
To bliss eterne, without any care
But then the Barons, and lords of England
Sent word to Ethylrede, with him for to stand
And wrote to him, how yt king Swayn was deed
And bade him come, to his land again
And so he did, by council and their read
He exyled all the Danes, with great disoayne
And slew them down in battle, with great pain
For which therle Edryk, sent to king Knowte
To England to come, with host great and stout
This ylke king knowte, yt son was to king Swain
To England came with host and great power
Whom Ethylrede then met, and faught again
In battle strong, and drove him home full clear
With whom Edryk, then fled as did apere
Into Denmark, as a false traytoure untrue
Purposyng so to come again all new
But king Ethelred in the mean time, then dyed
The year of Christ, a thousand and thyrtene
And reigned had, as Colman notifyed
Thyrtie and eight, in war and intene
Ever ne we and new vexed as was seen
His own land fled, for dread of en myte
Without socoure, fro it he was feign to flee.
Thus was he chastysed, for his mothers gylt
According well, to holy true scripture
For cause that she, his brother had slain and spylt
And like the words of saint Dunstane, full sure
That said it was, a punishyng full pure
Out of the realm, to be driven and expelled
In which by syn, he had so hye excelled.
The.C.xvii. Chapter.
EDmond Ironeside gote^ and generate
Of his first wife, a dukes daughter of England Edmonde Ironesyde reigned king
of England three year.

After Ethelrede his father was prorogate
Unto the crown, of all this royal land
Men called him so, as I can understand
Where ever he rode, armed was he ay
Oppressors all, to chastyce in his way.
Knowt of Denmark, assailed often this land
So in this time, that ever he armed went
To use the feate of arms, I understand
As to knyghthode, full well it did appent
Thus Colman says, and Flores that he meant
But six batayles, again king Knowt he smote
With victory, as Flores has it note.
But then to void, the great effusyon
Of christen blood, they two together accord
To fight them self, for full conclusyon
Within an yke of Seuerne, by concord
Withouten war, or any more discord
And who so then, might get the victory
Rejoice the realm, and all the monarchye
And at their day, and place so assygned
They armed, met with strokes knyghly set
With spear and swerd, either other so repugned
With axe and dagger, either on other bette
Either of them tryste, the ouerhande to get
But at last king Knowt, to him alayde
These words there, and thus to him he said.
Would god Edmonde, thou were so couetouse
As I am now, and as mine heart now would
And in this case, as glad and desirous
We should not long, this battle thus hold
And to our men, great gladness manifold
If thou the half, of Denmark had with me
And I the half of England, had with the.
With which they both the wepons fro the^ cast
And either other, in arms began them embrace
That both their hosts, amarueled were full fast
What it did mean to cease, in so little space
But when they knew, betwne them the case
They kneled all, and Christ they laudifyed
With heart devout, ye each of them so victoryed.
Their realms both, they parted then in two
By hole accord, between them so concorded
And loved ever, as brethren after so
As chronycles, have well hole recorded
Fro that time forth, no more then they discorded
This ysle where they faught, hight Clyues
Of common langage, as then it did them please
But Edryk of Lyncolne, ever untrue
Reconsyled home, by Edmonde was again
By subtle mean, this good king Edmond slew
In pride wise without wound or main
But in what form, I can not write nor said
When he had reigned, yt time fully.iii. year
Buried he was, but where no man durst spear
But in the year of Christ, a thousand so
He dyed away account, and syxtene
Unknown to his people, and Lords tho
For whom they made great dole, as the^ was seen
But nevertheless, it might no better been
This false Edryk, so falsely it covered
That openly it was, not then discovered.
The.C.xviii. Chapter. * Knowt king of England and of De^marke.

King Knowt, reigned in England the^ anon
And wedded had queen Eme of England
Ethelrede wife, which gate him love anon
In England, of all the estates of the land
Of commons also, that were both fre and bond
On her he gate a son, that hard Knowt hight
On his first wife, had Swayne and Herold right
He sent Edmonde and Edward, yt sons two
Of Edmond Ironeside, to Swithen to king Knowt
To slay or lowse, to keep in pouerte so
That they should never have power in nor out
To claim England, neither with host ne route
Whom he sent forth, then into Hungry
To the emperor, with letters worthily
Besechyng him, to noryshe them and save
Declaryng him, whose sons that they were
The which he did, full worthy and gave
Unto Edmonde, his own daughter dear
Which Edmonde then dyed, and she in fere
Without child, wherefore Agas his coosyn
Daughter of Herry, he gave to Edward fine
Of which Edward, called Edward thexyl^
Came Edgare, then called Edgar Athelyng
But Knowt it let, him self then crounyng
That to London to hold his Christmas
With his household, went then with great solas
Where earl Edrik, to king Knowt him confessed
That he had slain, king Edmond Ironeside
His own leege lord with cruel death impressed
To get his love, and with him dwell and bide
For unlikely it was to goo or ride
Two kings together in England
He said was not according in the land
The king his words well herd and conceived
And how he asked a reward for his mede
There made him tell, how he his lord disceiued
Before the lords, as he had dooen in deed
The which boldly he did without dreed
Having no shame, to ask a great reward
For which the king and lords gave whole award
To hang him on the toure during his live
To he were dedde, that all folk might him se
And his treson there, openly to shriue
And after that, to hang there till he dye
For whom then was among the commons truily
A great biworde, as many one yt woundre and ro^ne
As did on therle Edryke of Strettoun
The king went to Norway and it conquered
And drove the king O(...)f out of that land
And held it so by conquest of his swerd
Full worthily he governed every land
To peace and law, he kept them as he faund
And in his domes, was rightwyse and stable
And to the poor always merciable
King Malcom of Scotland, the^ did homage
To him and forth became, for ever his manne Homage of yt Scotts,

So did the kings of Wales of hye parage
And all the North West Occian
For their kyngdonies, and for their lands than
And in his time most he was redoubted
Of all princes and in all lands loaued
To Room he rode, in royal goodly wise
And there was with the bishop greatly commed
As Christen prince, by papal whole advise
The cardynalles four, which the bishop had sed
At Malburgate, four mile fro Room extend
With great meyne him met, and great honor
As if he had been of Room the emperor
At his coming again into England
He gave Norway unto his soonne sir Swayne
And to Herold his soonne as I understand
England he gave, of which he was full fain
And to Harknowt, Denmark he gave certain
And so dyed in Christen whole creaunce
At Shaftisbury buried by his ordinance
The year of Christ a thousand so was than
And thirty four also truly written
When he had reigned, fro the time that he began
Eightene year whole, as well it was written
With the darte of death, when that he was smitten
In whose days the land was inquiet
Full of riches and of welfare whole replete
The.C.xviij. Chapter.
Herold king of England the soonne of king Knowt reigned five year, and dyed in
the year a thousand and.xxxix.

HErolde his soonne; was crouned then in deed Herold,

By Loofrike yt duke of Leiscestre
By Londoners, in Flores as I reed
By Danyshyr also, as says the letter
That strong werre then, and of power greater
Then other lords of English nation
At London made was this coronacion
Alurede the soonne, of king Ethelrede
With fifty sails, landed at Southampton
Where king Herold with host him met in deed
Ready to fight with him for the croune
But certain lords of Englondes region
Between them treated, that Alurede went again
To Normandy, to duke Robert full plain
But afterward, as Alurede so rode
Fro his mother unto the king Herold
The duke Goodwyn on Gyldismore him bode
With people great, of nombre manyfold
And slew his men down there as he would
And led him forth to Ely and him slew
As traitor false, that ever had be untrue
Some chronicle says, he put out both his eyes
Fro which he dyed sone for pain and woo
Some other sayin, he slette his womb full keen
The lengest gut to a stacke he nailed tho
Led him about the stack there with much woe
Till all came out that was his womb within
Thus sleugh they him, with sobteltie and gyn
His mother queen Eme, Edward then sent
To Normandy to duke Wyllyam anon
That her cousyn was, to keep he were not shent
By king Herold, of his cruelty alone
Warnyng him of the treason yt Herold had dooen
For which cause Herold her exild
Out of England, and Edward also her child
To Flaundres she fled, then full sore amoued
To earl Badwyn her cousyn nie of bloodde
Declaryng to him, how Herold had distroyed
Her soonne Alurede that heir of England stood
And exiled her, without socour or good
And Edward also her soonne, heir of England
His brother children also, away in uncouth land
Wherefore therle, to king Hardknowt then wrote
All her compleynt and of his socour prayed
And he should help, with all his might God wot
It were amendid of that she was affrayed
He came anon, in war full well aryed
Into Flaundres, his mother for to please
Her for to socour, and set her heart in ease
In which mean while, the king Herold dyed
At Westminster, and buried was full feire
After he had reigned, as it is notified
Five year reigned without any heir
Of his body gotten, after him to repeire
England to govern, wherefore the lords by asse^t
To king Hardknowte then into Flaundres sent
To be their king, since Herold was a gone
To please him with, and his mother to comfort
Who came to England forth with anon
And crouned was with all the whole disport
That lords conde, as Flores does report
Thus king Hardknowt was king of England than
Who worthily yt time to reign tho began
This king began his brothers death to venge King Hard knowt*

On earl Gowyn, that earl was then of Kent
That peased was, for he should not revenge
With rich gifts, which that he on him spent
With meekness low, and swore that he was sent
To do that thing, on pein of high treson
By king Herold, charged without reason
Through good and gifts, and mighty hie riches
And of his kyn, that meekely him obeyed
And by acquaintau^ce, that they made then express
Upon the holy euangelis sworn vndelayed
The king granted him his grace and was well paid
To make him of his counsel, and of governance
Without more wrath or any discordaunce
He married then his sister Gunylde to Henry
The Emperor, that falsely was accused
Of sin and crime used in auoutry
With a young manne the which her excused
After the law of the land that was there used
By battaill of his hand that then their flewe
His accusour approuyng him untrue
For the which she would, no more come in his bed
But lived sole ever after, so her life
For good ne gold for aught that he her beed
For love ne threte, for betyng ne for strife
With him dwelling, forthwarde as his wife
In all things else, ever at his governance
Both day and night in womanly pleasaunce
King Hardknowt then, his daughter married
Unto a duke of the Danishrie
At Lambirgh dyed at his feast magnified
Among his lords and all his prelacie
And put him whole in God his high mercy
And charged them, his brother Edward to crou^e
To rejoice the land of Englandes region
This was the year of Christ then inscriued
A thousand whole forty also and one
When that he had reigned, as was subscribed
The two year whole, when he was thus wise gone
For whom was made that time full much moan
At Wynchester, byside his father buried
With lords all, thither full well accompaignied
The.C.xix. Chapter.
King Edward the confessor king of England reigned twenty and four years, yt
began the year of Christ a thousand forty and one and dyed the year a thousand
sixty and five.

EDward his brother, son of king Ethelrede King Edward yt (...) co^fessou

was crowned then, king of England
The year of Christ, a M. then in deed
Fourtye and one, as Flores could understand
To whom the king Swayn, of Denmark land
The tribute which he had, fully relesed
And wars all between them ceased.
To send him then, the hole English navy
Again Magnus, that king was of Norwaye
That held it so, by wrong and tirannie
Which Edward sent anon in great array
With lords, knights and squiers fresh and gaye
With archers many, by which he gate his land
Of Norwaye hole, and seized it in his hand.
Earl Eustace of Boleyn, that had wed
Edwardes suster, on his mother side
To Edward came, at Dover sore bested
Where then his men, a burges slew that tide
Wherefore therle Goodwyn, set full of pride Therle Goodwyn.

Asked the king, to have delyueraunce
Of therls men, to bide his ordinance.
Notwithstanding, yt Burges slew his knight
For that same cause, wherefore he it denied
But made peace then, as he therle had hight
Of Boleyne, so his brother in law alied
For which therle Goodwyn sore replied
And warred sore, upon the king each day
With his sons five, in full great array
Not co^sideryng, yt king his daughter had wed
And his treason perdoned had and hyd
Of his brothers death, when yt he murdered had
Whom then the king, Somond command and bid
Upon his legeaunce, whatsoever betid
For to answer in his court, and amend
Defautes all, between them might be kende.
At whose summons, he would not then apeare
But warred sore, both he and his sons five
For which the king, them exiled out all clear
But after they landed and did aryue
At Sandwiche, so the king them met belyue
Where lords then, them treated and accorded
And afterward no more they discorded.
The.C.xx. Chapter.
How Sywarde duke of Northumberlande, slew in battle Maclom king of
Scotland, and crowned Malclome king at Scome, according to saint Edward the
confessoures commandment which Malclome did homage to saint Edward, as
apeareth by his letters patent.

DVke Siwarde then, was of Northu^berla^d
In battle slew king Maclom so in deed
Of Scotland then, yt false was of his ba^d
Which to the king he made, who takes head
Wherefore the king, in Marian as I read
By his letters charged, duke Siward take on hand
To croune Malcolin yt was of Comberland
The which he did full myghtely anon
At Skone abbey, where kings were all crouned
Upon his head he set the crown anon
And took homage of him, upon the ground Homage of yt Scotts.

In Edwardes name, as he of right was bound
For that ylke realm, and as his elders did
Such fortune then, to England was betid.
The king Gryffyn of Wales, then was slain
That Herford shire spoiled had and brent
His head set up, at Gloucester full plain
For his untruth, and falshed, that he meant
And sone thereafter, his brothers head was sent
Unto the king for his rebellion
So were they both foringed for treason
And as king Edward, in his palayce of pride
Duke Goodwyne, then sittyng at his table
Saw the butler on his one foot slide
And like to fall, that other foot full stable
As he was seruyng the king at his table
Then held him up, that he fell not to ground
King Edward said, to Gudwyn in that stounde
As his one foot, ye se help that other
Full well and true, I find it daily now
Had ye ne been, thus had help me my brother
Therle then to the king on side began bow
And said, if I were cause, I pray God now
This bread pass not my throat, but dead I be
And straungled here anon, that ye may see.
At his prayer anon, with that he died
For with that bread, straungled was he yt stound
It might not pass his throat, as men espied
Wherefore the king then, bad draw out yt hounde
Under the boorde, as he that false was found
On whom God showed an hasty judgment
Approved well, by good experiment.
Where Herolde had, therle Algare exiled
Fro Leycestre, where earl he was so then
The king Eward, again him reconsiled
And perdoned him, and took him for his man
Of Couentre, as Flores tell it can
The lord he was, and there thabbey found
And buried there is, with his wife that stound
This Algare was, the son of earl Leofryke
Which Leofrike was, the duke Lofwynes son
That earls had been there, none before them like
But duke Siwarde, as he did won
Syckenesse him took, and sore upon him run
In which he did, him arm in all degree
And had his axe in hand, full like to dye.
He said unto the lords, then him about
Thus seems well, in arms a knight to dye
And not in bed to lie, loure and loute
Till death him kill, with pains cruelly
As would God, here were my most enemy
That I might dye upon him, now in right
In arms thus arrayed like a knight.
With that he died, for pains that he felt
Upon his fete standing in that arays
And shoke his axe, while yt his heart began swelt
And to the ground he fell in that afraye
Who buried was, at saint Marie abbeye
At York city, with worship and honor
As likely was, for such a gouernoure.
The king Edward, the duke of Northu^berla^d
To Tosty gave the son of duke Goodwyn
Under the name of earl, as Flores does understand
After which time, all have been earls syne
With lands and rentes, both fair and fine
Which estate suffice, for princes ben both two
In every land accounted, where they go.
He disherited earl Waldyue, his own son
Who earl was then, create of Huntyngdon
Of Northampton also, as chronicles tell can
A worthy prince, of all this region
That rule a realm could, well then by reason
Another prince, was Loafrike that day
Earl of Leycestre and Couentry no nay
Which Loefrike had a wife, yt Godiue hight
That naked, throughout all Couentree
The tolles sore, and seruage again right
To redeem hole of her femynitee
She in her hear, hangyng beneth her knee
Upon a day, rode so through all the town
To bye it free, by her redemption.
For otherwise, therle would not it free
But if that she, rode naked through all the town
Upon the day, that all men might her see
Trustyng she would not for no waryson
Have done it so, by such redemption
But thus by wit, she kept her self vnshamed
And freed the town, worthy was he blamed
King Edward sent then into Hungary
For his cousyn, the son of Emond Ironesyde
Themperoure sent him, Edward gladly
His brother son, and folk with him to ride
His son Edward Athelyng by his side
Margarete and eke Christine his daughter dear
Which king Edward, received with good chere
He married Margarete, mighty with great riches
To king Malcolyne, of Scotland was that day
That on her gatte, five sons of great noblinesse
Edward, Dunkan, Edgare, Alixander the gaye
And David also that kings were all no nay
Each after other, of Scotland throughout
Whose mother is now S. Margrete without doubt
At Dumfermlyn shryned and canonized
On whom Malcolyne a daughter gate also
King Henryes wife, the first full well auised
Queen Mawd yt hight, yt well loved England tho
These crosses fair and royal as men goo
Through all England, she made at hic expense
And diverse good orders throw his providence
Another sustre, this same saint Margarete had
That Christine hight, king Edward the^ professed
In religion to live, she was full glad
To holy life, disposed and adressed
An holy woman of life, and of god blessed
Who at her death her soul then uncovered
And to our lord, full mekely so it offered.
In his forest, as he pursued a dear
In Essex, a palmer with him met
Askyng him good, whom gladly he did here
He claue his ryng, and in sonder it bette
The half of which, he gave without let
To the Palmer, that went away anon
That other good to give him, there had he none
But after that, full long and many a day
Two pylgrames came, unto that noble king
And said, saint John thappostell in pore array
Us prayed, and bad straytly above all thing Ignorance and supersticyon.

To you present, and take this half gold ring
Which ye gave him of alms and charity
And bade us say, that right sone ye should him se
Which ryng he set together there anon
And that ylke place he called, ay after hauerynge
And that same place, where they it braste alone
He called ay after that time, Claueryng
In Essex be both fair standing
Where that he made two churches of saint John
Theuangelyst, and hallowed were anon
Sone after that, he dyed and went to bliss
But first he made duke Herold protectoure
Of his cousyne, to govern and to wysse
Edgar Athelyng, full young a gouernoure
Whom he ordained to be his successoure
As very heir to Edmonde Ironesyde
But thus Herolde, then set all that aside
When he had be king.xxiiii. year
He dyed the year, a thousand syxtye and five * Herolde king of England duke
Good wins son.

At Westminster canonyzed is full clear
All new he made, the church there in his live
All were he not right heir, as men in strive
A confessoure he is, full hye in heaven
With God to dwell, evermore and beleuen.
Herolde by strength, then crowned was for king
Forsworn that was, upon the euangelystes
For to crown Edgar Athelynge
And him protecte, and defend in all wise
Unto his age, that none the realm suppryse
This was his oath, of which he was forswore
All if he made Edgar an Earl therefore.
The earl Tosty, then of Northumberlande
That brother was, unto the king Herolde
By king exyled, out of the land
To England came, with king Herold full bold
Of Norwaye then, in Chronycle as is told
But king Herolde of England, with them met
At Stau^ford bridge, to death they both were bet.
Beside york, was this batayl full sore smyten
Where king Herolde of England, had the field
And slew Herolde Harngrey, as was written
King of Norwaye, and earl Tosty under shield
That never after, might arms welde
And thousands fell, of Danes and Norwayes
He killed there that day, as Flores says.
A year he reigned, whom Willyam Conquerou^.
That duke was then, of all fair Normandye
Him slew in battle, for his ymagyned error
Again him, that he did so cruelly
And not would mende, ne yet satisfye
The duke Willyan, so the field then conquered
With strokes sore, for which the land was ferd
This king Herolde at Waltam, which he found
Of four score chanons, full fayer was buried
At the hye altar, and as a king was crownde
All if he were intrusor notifyed
And in batayl slain, and victoryed
Of gentylnesse, the Conqueror bad so
All if he were before his mortal fo
Willyam Conqueror, king of England, and Duke of Nor mandye, began to
reygne, the year of Christ, a thousand.lxvi. and reigned.xxiiii. year, and
dyed, the year, a thousand.lxxxx. and the said Conqueroure founded the Abbaye
of Battle, for the souls of the people slain there, the fourenene day of
October, in the year of Christ a thousand, three score and six.
The.C.xxi. Chapter.
THe.xiiii. day of October accounted
The duke Wyllyam yt was of Normandye Duke Willya^ of Normandye.

At London was crowned, and anointed
In trone royal, to hauethe Monarchye
By his conquest, and his victory
Without title of right to him discente
But only of his tryumphall entente
The year of Christ, was when Alurede him crowned
Tharchbyshop of York, and hye primate
A thousand hole.lxvi. well found
Queen Mawde his wife, to him assocyate
He crowned also, that time in her estate
The abbay of battle, that then he bounded
And for the souls there slain, he founded.
He called it so then for a memory
Of his battle, by which England he gate
In token of his mighty victory
That England there he had, so well ouerset
To pray for the souls slain, as was his det
Which abbaye is in Sussex, in that stead
Where the battle was, and the people deed.
The South part of England then he rode
And dalt it largely unto his men
The North again him rebelled then abode
With help of Danes, in that country were then
And Scotts also, that false were, when and when
But king Wyllyam, that worthy conqueror
Discomfite them, with long and sore labor
To Normandy he went, then right anon
And with him had Edgar called Athelyng
Edwyn and Morkar before that were his fooen
For cause they should not, then make more risyng
In his absence, while he were there abidyng
But at his home coming with him again
He brough them all, of which the folk were fain
Gospatrik that then was earl of Cumberland
That not again stood king Malcolin in his werre
When he distroyed therldome and his land
But him withdrewe out of way full far
Wherefore the king, as says the chronicler
Him disherited, and gave to Rauf Mesthyne
His erldo, meto whom men did enclyne
The.C.xxii. Chapter.
Homage of Scotland dooen to king Willyam conqueror, at Birmithi in
Scotland, and also how the king of France scorned the king Wyllyam and he
quit it him after

THen rode the king into Scotland anon
And brent the land unto Abirnythy
Where king Malcolyne submitted him with great moan
And homage leege him did full humbly Homage of the Scotts.

And amended there all his injury
Then went he forth, to Duram where he offered
And to the church, he gave great good vncoffred
He the^ his law and peace always proclaimed
Officers made in every shire about
And so held on, to London vnreclaymed
Where his justice he set yt land throughout
The king of France, thus scorned him out of doubt
That king Wyllyam in Gesine had lain long
And time him were been kyrked, with good song
When he this hard, to France he went anon
There to be kirked, he offrid his candill bright
A thousand towns he brent, as he did gone
At them he prayed, the king of France to light
His candill then, if that he goodly might
Which at his kirkehale and puryficacion
To Mars he thought, yt time to make his oblacio^
Edwyn therle proclaimed of Leicester
After decesse of Algary his father dear
And earl Morcare his brother that after
Dyed both two, Lucy their suster clear
Of Leicester then, and Lyncolne both in fere
The countess was, whom king William married
To Iue Tailboys earl of Angeou magnified
To king Wylliam then came full glad again
At Wynchester he held his parliament
Where he then slew, for wrath and great disdain
The duke Waldiue, that no harm to him meant
But only for he counseled and consent
To earl Edgar, to get his heritage
Of England whole, and made to him homage
Who duke was then of Northumberland
And earl create was, also of Huntyngton
By chronicles old as men can understand
Entitled whole, as of all Northampton
Beheded was at Wynchester town
Whose hedde together, grew to the neck again
Buried at Crowland, for saint the soth to sain
The king then made, as I understand
The bishop then, of Duresme that Walter hight
Earl proclaimed of Northumberland
Whom at Catteshede, yt country slew down right
The king then made, a lord that Awbryke hight
Earl of yt country, yt durst not Scotts withstand
Wherefore he gave, Robert Mowbray that land
And made him earl of Northumberland
The king then sent unto every shire
Justices to sit, throughout all the land
Of all lordshipis, and knights fees enquere
What temporales he had, to know he had desire
And what perteined unto his royal croune
And what the church had of devotion
Unto his soonne, eldest then generate
All Normandy he gave in heritage
And England whole, to Wyllyam nominate
His second soonne gave with all thauauntage
And to Henry his third soonne young of age
Therldome gave then of Gloucester sea
With the honor of slede, for ever in certente
He dyed the year a thousand four score and ten
And of his reign twenty year and four tho
At Cane buried, in thabbey that hight then
Saint Stephe^s abbey, by Cane that stands so
His daughter Ade, before had married tho
Unto therle Stephen of Bloyes, a prince of might
Of wars wise, and a full manly knight
The.C.xxiij. Chapter.
Wyllyam Rufus king of England reigned thirtene year, and began to reign in
the year of our lord a thousand four score and ten, and dyed yt year a
thousand one hundred and three.

HIs soo^ne Wylliam Rufus as he devised King W^lliam Rufus

Was crouned then with great solempnitee
But after soon, duke Robert was auised
To claim England by his priorite
And Normandy also, as for his proprete
As he that was his eldest soon and heir
With host full great, in England game repeire
And made great war upon his brother so
Three year all out, between them so continued
Till at last they both, between them two
Did condiscende, as well to them perteined
With whole heart and will, nothing feined
The judgment of king Philip of France
To undergo and bide his ordinance
In which mean while, his brother earl Henry
The castles all belongyng to the croune
As high constable of England properly
Then seized had in his possession
As his office by good dereccion
Asked of right and of good consuetude
To keep them sure to the crounes excelsitude
The king Philip, by his auised parliament
Gave judgment, between the brethren two
As king Wyllyam their father full meant
All Normandy, Robert should have ever moo
And Wyllyam England, and friends should be so
And live in peace, without any claim
And either other releace, and whole disclayme
Therle Henry of England then constable
Delivered all the castles and citees right
To king Wyllyam his brother enheritable
As he was bound, and fully so had hight
Duke Robert then, his brother a worthy knight
To England came, to sport him with his brother
At which time, either was glad of other
The.C.xxiiij. Chapter.
How king Malcolyn of Scotland warred in England for his wifes right,
pretending yt she was right heir of England, and afterward he did homage to
king wyllyam Rufus for the realm of Scotland.

His Malcolin of Scotland greatly claimed
T To have England then by his wifes right
Margarete suster of Edgar, heir proclaimed
Of England whole, that expelled was by might
Of king Wyllyam conqueror by unright
So for his right, the Northland he destroyed
And home he went again, nothing annoyed
But then the king and his brethren two
To Scotland rode and wasted sore the land
Till Malcolyne came, and did his homage Homage of the Scotts.

By letter written and sealed I understand
Which Hardyng gave, in to king Henryes hand
Without reward or any recompense
Of main labor, his costagis and expense
The duke Robert went home to Normandy
And king Malcolyne and his soonne, then Edward
Warred again Northumberland in hie
But earl Robert that keeping had and ward
Of Northumberland, with him then faught full hard
Byside Alnwike at Malcolyne well were slain
There Malcolyne and Edward his soo^ne certain
When queen Margret, so of yt tidings knew
She eat never meat, for sorrow dyed anon
At Dunfermelyn, buried as then was dew
But now she is there shryned in flesh and bone
Workyng miracles, as says many one
Entombed fair, and in the firetree translate
Of which abbey now is she advocate
The Scotts then made, Dunwalde so their king
Malcolynes brother, that to it had no right
But Dunka^, son of Malcolyne that knowing
With help of king Wyllyam, and royal might
Of Scotland, so droaue him away to flight
And crouned was, as chronicles understand Homage of yt Scotts.

And homage made to wyllyam for his land
Sone after, king Dunkan of Scotland slain
By treason was, and Dunwall restitute
Unto the croune of Scotland then again
Whom Edgare then, by succoure and refute
Of king Wyllyam drove out, all destitute
Of any help, and crouned was in Scotland
To king Willyam did homage for his land Homage of yt Scotts.

Of whose homage, John Hardyng gave yt letter
Full clearly made, written well and sealed
The which also, with other letters better
That by reason may not be repeled
The which, if he would have enbeseled
The king James unto his waryson
A M. mark, him hight of his discrecion.
And in his time, Roes that Richard hight
The king of Wales, in battayl strong was slain
Beside the castle of Brekenham, then full right
Fro which time forth, their kings seized full plain
And princes called they were, soth to sayn
The king with host, on Robert Monbraye rode
Who with the king, faught of his traytourhode.
And discomfite, held Bamburgh castle then
And the king enduryng, full.vii. year
Consentyng with the lords, that so began
For to depose the king, of his croune clear
And duke Robert his brother, with great power
To croune and make, the king of all England
With Normandy to ioyse, I understand.
The king exiled Anselme of Cauntorbury
Tharchebyshop, that withstode his wrongs
Done to the church, and to the prelacie
To the commons also, that them belonges
Seue^tene tounes, with also many churches among
And abbeys four, he wasted and confound
The new forest in Hamshire for to found
He builded the Newcastell upon Tyne
The Scotts to gaynstande, and to defend
And dwell therein, the people to enclyne
The town to build, and wall as did append
He gave them ground, and gold full great to spend
To build it well, and wall it all about
And fraunchised them, to pay a free rent out
The rentes and fruits, to tharchbishop perteinyng
And to the bishops of Wynchester and Sarum
And also.ix. abbeys lyuelod conteynyng
In his hands leazed, and held all and some
But for his works and buylynges held each crome
With which he made then, westmynster hall
And the castle, of Newecastell withal.
That stands on Tyne, therein to dwell in war
Again the Scotts, the country to defend
Which as men said, was to him mekill deer
And more pleasyng, then otherwise dispende
And much people for it, did him commend
For cause he did the commen wealth sustene
Of marchers innumerable to mayntene.
The.C.xxv. Chapter.
This king Willyam Rufus taxed so sore the commons, yt they'might not mayntene
tilthe, for which fell great derth and great myschiefe and moren of catel for
defaute of food, for which the commons were glad of his death.

GReat tallage of England, then was raised
In so ferforth, that tilthe of land was leyd
Of which sued mischief, nothing praised
For fault of food, morayn of bestiall frayed
And death of people, for hunger sore arrayed
A king woteth not what harmeth housbandrye
Housbande to pill, and tax outragiously.
To Godis dome, have no consyderacion
How that this king, on huntyng as he stood
Under a tree, and as writings makes mention
Walter Tyrel at his game in that wood
Shotyng at a dear, of which he drew no blood
But stroke the king, unto the dethes wound
That there anon he died, upon the ground
At Wynchester then, buried anon
The date was then, of his reygne.xiii. year
For whom the folk, no sorrow made nor moon
He hurt them so, with tax and tallage here
Of Christ a thousand an.C. and three year clear
Whose death the folk, in no wise did complayn
Were they all thereof, both glad and fayn.
The.C.xxvi. Chapter.
Henry the first king of England and duke of Normandy^ reigned.xxxvi. year,
and died in the year of Christ a thousand.C. and.xxxix.

HEnry his brother, yt first was of that name
was crouned the^, with al yt honor might be King Henry the first

He reco^siled saint Anselne that came hame
Who crouned Maude his wife full fair and free
That daughter was, full of benignitee
To king Malcolyne, and saint Margarete yt queen
Of Scotland, which before that time had been.
On whom he gate Willyam, Richard and Mold
Whose goodness, is yet spoken of full wide
If she were fair, her virtuous manyfolde
Exceaded far and vices she set aside
Debates all, that engendered were of pride
She staunched hole, with all benevolence
And visited sick and poor with diligence.
The presoners also and women eke with child
And in gesene living ay where about
Clothes and meat, and beddyng new vnfiled
Wine also and ale, she gave without doubt
Where she saw need, in countrees al throughout
These crosses all, that yet be most royal
In the hye ways, with gold she made them all
King Edgare the^, her brother was of Scotland
That to king Henry then made homage
The bishop of Duresme, then took on hand Homaeg of yt Scotts.

The duke Robert, to gone in message
To make him claim England his heritage
The which he did, anon without delay
As they accorded upon a certain day.
But Anselne, bishop of Caunturbury
And also queen Maude, then made them well accord
The king to pay, three. M. mark yearly
To duke Robert, without more discord
And counsayled then the king, as was record
To love the lords, that made the discencyon
Betwyxte his brother, and him by conuencyon
The king Henry, warred Robert Estenuyle
The eldest son of Roger Mountgomery
And his brother, that was so called that while
And create Earl of Shrewysbury
Who his castle of Arundell held for thy
And Shrewysbury also, and the cytee
With other mo castles, in his country
Which to the king, he yield by conuencyon
He and his brother, to pass to Normandye
With all their men, without discencyon
To their father, Roger Mountgomerye
That earl was there, of Bolesmo manly
The king went then, to Cave and to Baxhous
Held them with force, and heart full covetous
Which towers Robert the duke of Normandy
Asked of him, to have delyueraunce
And his money, of three thousand mark yearly
Which he ought him, by the hole concordaunce
Which he again said, and stood at variaunce
Wherefore they fell on war, and took the field
With hosts great, full sore faught under shield
At Tenarthbray, that is in Normandye
Where Nigell then, of Albany that hight
Took duke Robert, in battle manfully
And brought him bound, unto the king with might
For which yt king anon there made him knight
And gave him lands, that were forfet before
By Robert Stutuyle, in England for evermore
He gate also a castle, besyeged long
Which he scalyd, with noble polycie
And to the king it gave, though it were wrong
For which, the king gave him anon in hye
The lands, all that forfet were only
By Robert Monbray, earl of Northumberland
In his brothers time, as I understand.
The same Nygell, that hight Albanye
A son had then, whom the king Henry
Roger Monbray, did call ever after ay
Thus Albany was changed morally
Unto Monbray, for the lyuelod only
Which Monbray had before of heritage
These Monbrayes now, rose first of hye courage
This king Henry then seized Normandye
And made his son Willyam duke of yt land
And home came to England then in hye
And in the year of Christ, to understand
A thousand hole, an.C. and ten on hand
His daughter Maude, he married to Henry
That Emperor was then of Romanye.
He put his brother duke Robert in strait ward
And many other, that were of his cognisaunce
Where he released couenauntes and forward
Before written of his enherytaunce
That between them, might make any dystaunce
And found him ever, in all royal estate
By good auyse, and council ordynate
Which duke ordered was so, for he forsook
The realm, of all the land of Jerusalem
When he was chose thereto, and naught it took
For couetyse, to have this English realm
For he forsook that fortune, as men did deem
Again gods will, and his hye ordinance
For chosen he was, by all christen creaunce.
For at winning of Jerusalem
Where princes many, kings and dukes were
He was the worthyest of any realm
And bare him best, in knyghtly deed of war
At all assautes, most knyghtly did him bear
The honor all, and fame he had evermore
And chosen was there, to be king therefore,
Men said, yt God gave him such punyshme^t
His brother, to put him in great myserye
Unto his death, again his own entente
For he forsake Christ's own monarchye
In which he was borne, and for man list to dye
The christen faith, to maintain and increase
For couetyse his brother, to discreace.
The year of Christ, a thousand was full cle^
And an hundredth also, and therwithall eyghtene
When good queen Maude was deed, and laid on be^
At Westminster buried, as well was seen
For heaviness of which, the king I wene
To Normandy, then went unto his son
The duke William, and there with him did wonn^
The third year after, to England came agay^
The duke his son, Willyam of Normandye
His brother Richard also, the sothe to said
And earl Richard, of Chester in company
With many other lords, in ships them bye
Upon the sea were dreynt in great distress
Of the which the king, had then great heuinesse
Which duke William had wed y^ daughter then
Of Fowke Tailboys, Earl of Angeou had been
With whom a.C.lx. knights with many men
And ladies many, were drowned as was seen
And then the king wed Hadelyse the queen
The duke Godfrey daughter, yt was of Loreyne
Of his mournyng, to comfort him again.
And in the year, a thousand fully account
And an.C. twenty, and also five
The Emperor Henry, the death surmounte
And passed to God fro Maude that was his wife
Who to her father, king Henry came belyfe
Abode with him in England, then* two year
Maude Empryce, was called then full clear
And in the year of Christ's incarnacyon
A thousand was, an.C. twenty and seven
When king Henry, in great prosperacyon
His daughter Maude, thempryce to neuen
The earl Geffrey Plantagenet even
Earl of Angeou, the sone of Fowke Tailboys
So married had of fame, that had the voice.
On whom he gate a son, yt Henry hight
By surname called Henry fitz Empryce
Then dyed his eme Alexaunder forth right * Homage of yt Scotts.

The king of Scotts, a prince of great enterpryce
That homage did for Scotland, as suffyce
So dyed, then to whom Dauyd succeed
His brother was, saint Margarete son in deed.
That to king Henry, made his homage
And then to Maude, the foresaid Empryce * Homage of yt Scotts

By hole assent, of all his Baronage
By letter written and sealed, as may suffyce
which John Hardi^g, in Scotland brought of p^ce
with many mo, for four.C. mark and fyftye
At biddi^g and commandment of the with king Henry
Cadwalan, prince of Wales at Wadeyet
In battle faught, where king Henry him slew
And great people of Wales, that there forset
Were slain that day, to him yt were untrue
Of which batayl, Wales may always rewe
The year a thousand, an.C. and thyrtye
And there till two, as made is memory.
Then went the king to Normandye again
And there abode, and kept all Normandy
To time he dyed, of whom that land was feign
But England then of it, was full heavy
When he had reigned so full worthy
He dyed in the six and thyrtye year
At Boys Leon, of his reygne then full clear.
Of Christ's date, was then a thousand year
An hundredth also, and. ix, and thyrtye moo
Buried at Redynge, as well it does appear
In the abbaye, which there he founded so
Of monks blake, where ever they ride or goo
That pray for him, and for queen Maude his wife
Who either other loved withouten strife
The.C.xxvii. Chapter.
Stephan of Bloys, king of England reigned.xix. year, and began the year of
Christ, a thousand.C. and. xxxix, and dyed in the year a thousand.C.lviii.

STepha^ of Blois, his sister son was crou^d
A manly man, was the^ of great power King Stephan.

And king was made of England yt stound
Without strife, or any manner war
To Normandy he went, and seized all there
and gave it to his son, sir Eustace
And made him duke thereof, with great solace
Thus Eustace, then duke of Normandy
To Paris went, to king lewys of France
His homage made for his land so in hye
And put out then, with great contraryaunce
The officers, that did to Maude pleasaunce
And wed the suster of king Jews to wife
For supowaill of it without strife
The king Stepha^ to England the^ home came
And tidings had, how king David had distroied
The North parties, and dooen full much harm
Wherefore he brent Edinburgh then and noyed
And the country about, he sore accloyed
For wiche David his soonne to Henry then sent
To be his manne, thens forth at his intent
To whom king Stephan therldo^ of Hu^tyngton
Then gave, and earl thereof him so create
Who then for it, by verey due reason
His homage did as it was ordinate Homage of the Scotts.

Which Henry dyed, and never had kings estate
For which the Scotts, seyn they owe no service
To English kings, but only of this wise
King Stephan then bet the castle down
In England, so that stood him to defense
His men they gave to their enheritesoun
And all foon, for cause of their offense
He disherite with might violence
Diverse earls and lords he disherite
And many other of his friends enherite
The year of Christ a thousand was then gone
An hundred thirty and eight also
King Stephan brake all his oaths a none
That he had made unto the barons tho
For which they rose full sore again him so
And warred him felly on every side
And he on them also with mikyl pride.
The year a thousand, an.C. thyrty and nine
Maude Empryce, in England claymed her right
With earl Robert, of Gloucestre her brother fine
And earl Randolf of Chester, with all his might
Sir Bygot earl of Northfolke then hight
Awbrey Ver then earl of Oxenforde
And Willyam Bawne, yt then was earl of Herforde
Willyam Legroos, earl of Almarle tho
Robert Louell, and Willyam lord Percy
King Dauyd her eine, and many other mo
Of earls and barons, that were full hardy
The castle then Lyncolne gate on hye
The cytee held of Lyncolne with also
With host full great, lyggyng with them so
Where then the king, y^ castle seged long
Till he it had, by treaty and conuencyon
And bode therein, with power great and strong
Till Maude and he, as made is mencyon
With strong batayles, and great discencyon
Beside Lyncolne, where then she had the field
And Stepha^ taken, and hurt sore through his sheld
To Brystowe then, earl Roberte Clare him led
And in the tower, there kept in strong prison
The Empryce Mawde, with power that she had
To Wynchester then, she rode segyng the town
Where the queen Maude, as made is mencyon
King Stepha^ his wife it rescowed with batayl sore
And took the earl Clare his eme thore
The.C.xxviij. Chapter.
Thenterchaunge of king Stephan and of tht duke Robert Clare duke of Gloucester.

FOr which cause the^, to have her eme again
Themperesse and queen Maude accordid
To enterchaunge, yt king so then full fain
For earl Robert without more, concordid
This enterchaunge, thus made and recordid
The king her sued unto Oxenford
Fro whens she went, by night to Walyngford
Upon the frost, in the winter season
In her smock alone, with her uncle dear
That none her knew, of them without the town
So like her smock and the snow was in feer
The king knew not in what place that she were
For Oxenford he gate, and Awbray slew
Of Oxenford, that was an earl full true
The king Stephan, a castle then began
At Wilton, where king David with power
And earl Robert, of Gloucester that was then
Him drove away, out of that place full clear
And bet it down, to the ground full nere
To Walyngford, the king with power went
Themperesse to sech was his intent
Her party then, drove him then away
With great slaughter of men and occ^sion
And every lord on other, made great affraye
And spoiled other through all this region
By great impression and cruel sore raunson
The king treated with earl Randolf full true
But false then was his treaty, as men knew
For when he came unto his presence
Anon he put him in sore prisone
To time he had by his magnificence
The castle of Lyncolne unto his croune
And put him then to fine and great raunsom
So variaunt he was always of hight
Fro eue^ to morrow, that no man trust him might
The fiftene year of the same king Stephen
Therle Geffrey of Angeou decessid
A noble prince as all men did beleuen
Henry his soonne, of person well encressed
Of childishe wit also full relesed
And of age he was then fiftene year
To Scotland came, king David to require
Of his socour, and of his supportacion
England to get, that was his heritage
Who made him then, full great consolacion
And with him came without fee or wage
With full assent of all his baronage
Under baners, king David made him knight
Upon the field, again king Stephen to fight
But such treaty was made and good accord
That king Stephen, to Henry should return
As very heir, without more discord
At his decesse, to Henry whole return
The croune of England, without more soiourne
Who died then, after in his.xix. year
At Feuersham buried, he was full clear.
Of Christ's date, was then a thousand year
And an hundredth fyftye and eight also
His wife and he, there buried both in feer
The which he found, whiles he was living so
And reigned here, in much trouble and woe
And had this realm, without any right
For themprise Maude, that fair lady bright
The.C.xxix. Chapter.
Henry fitz Empress king of England and earl of Angeou, duke of Normandye and
Guyen, by.xxxvi. year and began to reygne the year of our Lord a thousand
a hundredth.lviii. and dyed the year a thousand an hundredth and.xciiii.

HEnry therle of Angeou was tho king He^rye the second.

In this mean time, had be^ in Normandy
And set his rule therein, for friend or foo
And crouned was at London worthily
With all the lords of his hye monarchy
And made him then, their feautee and homage
The prince of Wales also for his heritage.
He wedded then a lady, fair and bright
Dame Alianor, the dukes daughter of Guyen
And heir thereof, and lady by all right
Possession had with all, the profytes then
And well-beloved was she with her men
Deuorced fro the king Jews of France.
That her had wed to wife, of his puysaunce.
And on her gatte two daughters, fair and gente
But for sibrede and consanguinitee
They were departed, by papal judgment
On whom king Henry, by Christ's decree
Gatte sons four, of great humanitee
Henry, Richard, Geffrey, and John also
Elianor and Ihone, his daughters two.
The.C.xxx. Chapter.
How Malcolyne the second king of Scotts made homage for Scotland and for
therldome of huntyngdon.

IN this mean while, king David then so dyed
To who^ Malcolyn, He^ryes son was heir
Which Henry was earl notified
Of Huntyngdon, without any despair
Of that erldome, both good and fair
And son was, to this noble king Dauy
That wedded had, earl Waldens daughter only.
To enjoy therldome, by her enheritaunce
That gat on her, this Malcolyne that was king
Of Scotland now, of mighty hye puysaunce
That homage made, for his enherityng Homage of yt Scotts.

Unto Henry, that then was of England king
For all Scotland, and also for Huntyngdon
Which services both, were due unto the croune.
The.C.xxxi. Chapter.
This king Henrye exiled Thomas becket bishop of Cauntorburye.

HE married then, his son the young Henry
To the daughter of the king of France
He exiled then, Thomas of Cauntorbury
Out of England, and many of his aliaunce
For cause of his rebellious governance
And as he came fro Rome, by France away
With language fell, he prayed the king that day
The points to mende, and so to England went
For which the king, was with him sore displeased
That then he said, had I had men that meant
Mine honest, I were not thus diseased
With such a clerk, thus grieved and vneased
Therefore three knights, Raynold le Fitz Vrsy Raynold fitz Vrsy Hughe Maruile
Robert Tracy.

Hughe Moruyle him slew with Robert Tracy.
But king Malcolyne died, that was full true
Of his homage, at Westchester ensealed
To king Henry dooen, so as it was due
For it should not be gaynsayd ne counseled Homage of yt Scotts.

Nor afterward of Scotts be repeled
To which Malcolyne, Willya^ his son and heir
Was crouned king of Scotland then full fair.
The.C.xxxii. Chapter.
How king Wyllyam of Scotland went in to Normandye, with king Henry of
England the second, as his liegeman.

THis king Wyllyam then rode with host full strong Subieccion of yt Scotts.

The Northre^ la^d he brent and sore distroyed
By east and west, of both Merches of England
The lord Vesty, with it was anoyed
The lord Vnfreuyle with syckenesse so accloyed
With power great at Alnwike with him faught
Where he was taken, in battle sore and caught
Who^ to the king, to London then they brought
Unto king Henry, with great honor
Then had the king, tidings he liked naught
His son Henry, by king Lewys socoure
Besieged Roan, with host great and rygoure
For when the king, to Normandy then went
The king Wyllyam, with him his labor spent.
And David also, his brother with all his might
That earl was then, create of Huntyngdon,
And Robert ferers earl of Leycester so hight
And Roger clare, with them of great renoume
Of Gloucester, that earl was in possession
With other lords, and the siege sone remeued
And his cytee of Roan, full well rescued.
The siege and saute, perdoned and forgeuen
At the prayer of king Lewys of France
Within few years, in peace and rest to liuen
He crowned his son without distaunce
King of England, and gave him governance
And at the feast of his coronacion.
He sewed before him, for his consolacion,
The.C.xxxiii. Chapter.
This younger Henry reigned but.iiii. years, and died before his father,
wherefore he is not accounted as king because his father outlyued him and
reigned after his death.

ANd to hi^ said, son think I do you honor
A king to serve you thus, now at your meat
He answered him full unthankfully that hour
And said, it was no reprove ne forfete
An erls son to serve the kings son at meat
For which the father Henry, to Irelande went
Till young Henry the king was dead and spent
Then came Henry, and had the government
The father and king, was then admytte again
And reigned then, and had the regiment
And but.iiii. year his son reigned soth to sayen
Wherefore he is among kings certain
Not accoumpted, by no chronicler
For his father was king before and after clear.
The.C.xxxiiii. Chapter.
How king Wyllyam of Scotland made his homage to king Henry the second.

THe king Wyllyam, at his day assigned
To York came, to do there his homage Homage of yt Scotts.

That made it then, and nothing it repugned
But for his due debt, then for his heritage
Of Scotland whole, by veraye due knowlage
Of his barons, and by his euydence
Again it found he then, no true defense.
The king Henry then, conquered all Irelande
By papal dome, there of his royaltee
The profytes and revenues of the land
The dominacion, and the souerayntee
For error which again the spiritualtee
They held full long, and would not been correct
Of heresies, with which they were infecte.
He founded then, the priory of Newstede
Within Shirwod, and Waltham founded new
Before were secular without head
Which regular he made, in order due
And other two houses of order true
He founded there, for his soul to pray
Where was holy service kept every day.
Geffreye his son, the third gotten and bore
That duke of Britayne was hole create
By his wives right, to enjoy for evermore
Which was a prince, of royal great estate
At Paris dyed, that Arthure create
To son and heir, and Isabell the fair
His daughter was, without any despair
In the year of Christ, a thousand clear
An hundredth and sixty also and one
Baudewyn the third, died taken priesoner
By the Sarysens, that were his mortal foone
Of his body, that issue then had none
To whom his brother Almarike did succeed
To Jerusalem, and there was king in deed
By treason of therle Triples then
The Christen host, that had foul betrayed
When Bawdewyn was so taken, through yt false man
That great people of Christian had the^ reised
And on the field, nothing to be praised
To the Sarysyns went, with all his power
And discomfyt the christen host full clear.
The.C.xxxv. Chapter.
How Geffrey Plantagenet, otherwise called Plantageneth Earl of Angeou, elder
brother of Bawdewyne and Almaryk, should have been king of Jerusalem before, and
so by consequens this king Henrye should have be king of it.

But if right, had lynally proceed
Geffray Plantagenet, Earl of Angeou
The elder brother of Bawdwyn so in deed
And of Almaryk, with mykell bliss and joy
Which Geffray, so Earl of Angeou
Should have be king before of all that realm
Both of Surry, and also Jerusalem
When duke Robert, Jerusalem forsook
For couetyse to have, and ioyse England
Godfray Boleyne, the realm of Surry took
And of Jerusalem eke, I understand
And erowned was, to be king of that land
That duke had been before, of all Loueyne
A noble prince, and a worthy Chyefteyne
A thousand was, an hundredth sixty and syxtene
Without issue, of his body coming
Dyed, to whom his brother as was seen
Bawdwin succeeded, and of that realm was king
That ruled the land, as was full well semyng
Full worthy accounted, among all estates
That christen faith sustained, without debates
To whom his son, king Bawdewin did succeed
The second was, that had so borne that name
A noble Prince, of all marcyall deed
And in that land, great honor had and fame
Which on his wife, gate without blame
A daughter then had unto his heir
That land to have enheryte, and repair.
Whom then earl Fowke of Angeou, wed to wife
And king was of that land then by her right
On whom he gate three sons in his life
Worthy knights, and men of great might
The eldest Geffray Plantagenet hight
That gate this same Henry fytz Empryse
King of England, of noble and hye enterprise.
The.ii. son, of Fowke, was Bawdewin yt third
Dyed prisoner, as it is expressed before
Without issue of his body betyd
The third son then, of Fowke and last was bore
Hight Almaryk, which two were kings thore
Where earl Geffrey their elder brother had right
That suffered them, to joy that land by might
Which Almaryk dyed king so of that realm
After whom then reigned, his son Bawdwyn
That fourth was of that name of Yerlam
That impotent was, without medecyn
To maintain war, he might no more enclyne
Who called was Bawdewyn Paraliticus
For with the palsye, stryken was he full hydeous
The.C.xxxvi. Chapter.
How that king Henry the second was very heir of Jerusalem, and by
consequens, Richard of York should be the same.

Wherefore he sent to king Henry his crown
His banner also, of his arms full fair
Of Jerusalem, that were of great renown
As to him that was then the very heir
Of earl Geffray eldest son full fair
Was to king Fowke, and to his wife the queen
Daughter and heir, to Baudewin the.ii. clean.
This fourth Bawdewyn called Paraliticus
This message sent, the year of Christ a thousand
An hundredth full, four score and three, right thus
When Henry was required, to have that land
Which he proroged, and sent again his sound
He should be there, if that the king of France
And he might well accord of governance
He went so forth anon to Normandye
With host full great, with king Philyp to treat
Of that voyage and war, accorded on hye
But then the death, him felly ganne reherte
Wherefore anon, he satte up in his seat
And to his son Richard, great so^me he gave
Thither to go, that holy land to save.
And then he dyed, at Pount Euerard buried
The sorrow of heart, and great contricyon
A prince christen, fully notifyed
Withouten pere in all comparyson
Of worthy knygthode, and manly renown
A thousand year, an. C, lxxx. and fourtene
And of his reygne, was six and thirty clean
The.C.xxxvii. Chapter.
How Richard king of England, duke of Normandy, and earl of Angeou,
reigned.x. year, and began the year of Christ a. M. an.C.lxxxxiiii. and dyed
the year. M.CC. and.iiii.

RYchard his son, to king the^ was crowned King Richard the first, called
Cure de L^(...).

By Bawdewyn archbishop and primate
Of Cauntorbury, and of England yt stound
That ruled the church, then by law ordynate
His brother Geffray, of baste so procreate
Archbishop was of York, then new elect
The Northren church, under him to be protecte.
The lord Lueye, that Godfray Lucye hight
Before him bare a royal pyllyon
And John Marshal, his spores of gold full bright
Willyam Maundeuile, his mighty hye crown
That earl was then of Almarle up and down
Of his wives right, and willyam Marshal bold
Earl of Strigeyll, the scepter bare of gold.
Willyam Patryk, that was then Longspee
That Earl was, then create of Salysbury
A staff of gold, for constable then was he
Of England hole, to have the regeny
By right of his office of constablery
For if the land were void, and none heir know
To keep the realm, by his office him owe.
This ylke Willyam, was earl also create
Of Gloucestre, by which that office grew
To him of right, for he was generate
Of Roberte Clare earl of Gloucestre true
Four Barons bare, by their service full dew
Above his head, then in processyon
A cloth of gold, by good direccyon.
Earl Dauyd then, that time of Huntyngdon
Brother, of the king Willyam of Scotland
And John the earl of Morten of renown
King Rychardes brother, as I vnderstone
Right worthy lords, that time of this land
And Robert Ferrers, earl of Leycester tho
Three swords bare, before the king there so
Six Earls then, and Barons of estate
A cheker bare, with Iueles full royal
And clothes rich, that were well ordynate
For that ylke feste, and state imperyall
Fro South, unto the Septentrionall
Where then, none such accounted of richesse
As there were then, as written is express
The.C.xxxviii. Chapter.
How king William of Scotland, made homage for Scotland, and then after his
coronacyon at Westmynster, he went to France, and so to Jerusalem, by the
assent of the King Phylippe.

THe bishop of Duresme on his right hand
The bishop also of Bathe on his left side Homage o the Scotts

The king of Scotts Willya^ for Scotland
Made him homage and feaute leege that tide
King Rychard then, to France with much pride
Anon so yode tharchebishop Bawdewyne
With him then went, worthy clerks and fine
Sir Rauf Fulgence earl of Perch then also
Robert Ferrers earl of Lecester then
With earls fell and barons many moo
Of all this land, went many a worthy then
Of England and Scotland many a man
Of Ireland Wales, Guyan and Normandy
Then with him went, in that voyage on hie
The king Philip, shippid his host at Iene
The king Rychard took the sea at Marsile
With all his host, without other meene
Within short time, arrived up in Cisile
Where he full fair, received was that while
By king Tancred soonne of Wyllyam
Which Wyllya^ wed his suster, Johan by name
The king Rychard, two Isles there conquered
Byside Cisile, to his suster them gave
To her living, and bade her not be fered
For he should se her dower, she should have
Longyng to the right that she should crave
And at Meschyne, king Rychard then did make
A Bastell strong, the Sarsyns for to wake
And sailed forth, to Cipres then hy sea
Where his mother him mete with dame Barnage
The king his daughter of Nauerne fair and free
Whom there he wed, in lawful marriage
At Lymosyn in his pilgremage
A city great full of all habundaunce
Which by assaute, he gate of his puysaunce
The king Rychard rode then to Nichosie
And gate the city, with force and might
The city also of Cheryn mightily
Where his daughter and heir, he took full right
To Buffenet and Baffe that were full wight
To Dendamour and Candor his citees
He went anon with great felicitees
He gate them all, and all the realm throughout
And took the king Isaak and him slew
And wed his daughter, unto the king full stout
Of Jerusalem, whose wife was dedde then new
That Sibill hight, yt daughter was me^ne knew
Of Almarike, king of Jerusalem
The brother of Geffrey, of Angeou her eme
This king Rychard, yt realm of Cipris wa^ne
To whom the lords, echeone did their homage
And anon by sea, with many a man
To Acres where in that ilke voyage
He took a ship of high and great auantage
Of ablementes for war, and ordinance
The which he had, with him in governance
But fiftene Sarsyns there he dreyncte
And two hundred he kept, that ship to gnie
To Acres then, where king Philip full feyn^
Had sieged long without remedy
But king Rychard, of Acres took in hie
The stronger side, and gave it great affraies
Late and erly, both by nights and days
He gate it sone, with his great ordinance
And on the walls his baners full hie he set
The kings arms, he set up also of France
And king Guyes arms of, Jerusalem well bette
The duke of Oistrich Lympold without let
Set up his arms after above them all
Which king Rychard, did cast dou^e over yt wall
With wages great, and riches manifold
He ryched his me^ne, and rode throughoute all Surry
The citees all and castelles that he would
He gate with force, and came again in hie
To castle Pilgrym, which king Philip pleinly
Beseged had full long, and went his way
Which Rychard beseged in great array
To the which there was, no way but one full strait
On a cawsey with dikes deep and wide
Strongly walled, with towers on to wait
With many draw bridges, where none might go ne ride
Strongly cheined, with barris on each side
Which castle then he gate in days ten
With battaill sore, where he sleugh many men
The cheynes of yrone, he stroke up with his axe
Both at Acres and at castle Pilgrym
And brent them all, as they had been of wax
Cheynes and bars, with much might that time
The Sarasyns also, he slew with much gryme
The king Philip fell sick and home would gone
To France anon, and took his men echeone
Unto the duke of Burgoyn them to lead
To bide for him, upon the wars there
And home so went to France without dread
Where then he made great war and much dear
In Normandy and Guyan, foully him bear
Against his oath, and his great assurau^ce
At their passage, by covenant and concordaunce
The.C.xxxix. Chapter.
How king Rychard sold the realm of Cipres to Statyn once, and an other time
to the king Guy^ Lezinaunt to resort to him and to his heirs, in de fault of
issue of them.

HE sold Cipresse to king Statyn of might
An other time to Guy Lizenau^t full bold
For great riches, the resort again of right
And for great sommes of innumerable of gold
His prisoners he raunsomed, sore and sold
But with his host, full well he distribute
All that he gate, unto their great refute
Ioppen he gate and it repaired new
He and the duke of Burgoyn full sore sought
On the Soudan and felly did pursue
To castle Assure, fro whens he fled unfought
But king Rychard, that of no peril rought
Was hurt right there, with darts venomous
Five wounds sore, mortal and perelous
The drove him then, into Jerusalem
And laid a sege, about the city round
And king Rychard hard, how fro Egypt realm
Came strong vitail, and riches in that stounde
With full great host, the Christen to confound
By night he came, and there them discomfete
With worship great, and farpassyng profit
Gase he builded full fair, and Ascaloyn
To the templers, to whom before they longid
He delivered, and made him ready boun
For to assail the city, and have fongid
With might of men, and laddirs full well hongid
Engynes and gonnes, great stones for to cast
Which to have won, they were full like at last
The Soudan out by night, then stale away
And Christen men, the city gate anon
And king Rychard, with all the host his way
Took to the Flum of Cedar on his foon
He followed fast, with host as he might goon
With the Soudan faught, and put him fro yt feld
And mightily fro him, he rest his sheeld
The.C.xl. Chapter.
How the Souda^ took a trewce with king Rychard, after he had put him to
flight and won his city and castles in Surry. King Rychard gave Jerusalem
and yt realm of Surry, to his susters soonne Henry earl of Campanya, with the
heir Sibill to his wife, and homewardwas taken prisoner in Oistrich, but in
his gift of Surrry (...) Jerusalem, he reserved the resort to him and to his
heirs

THe Souda^ took a trewce with king Richard
For three year whole to bye all merchandise
And sell and pass saufly thitherward
To the sepulcre, in all manner wise
With entercomen, as then it did suffice
And home he went, for cause his brother John
Then purposed had, for to be crouned anon
He sent his mother, and wife to Cisile
And of Acres he made then capitain
The baron bold, sir Rychard Vmfreuile
Jerusalem to Henry earl of Champein
With all Surry to have and to demain
And made him king thereof without delay
For his susters soonne, he was without nay
For the marquis Wyllyam Mountferrate
That king thereof was, by his wife enherite
Was slain in Tire, his city by debate
All sodeinly for cause of great dispite
Vetulo de Mount, his brothers death to quite
His brethren two to Tire, with power has sent
That slew him there, by Vetulo his assent
Whose wife he gave, to Henry his cousyn
For she was heir of Jerusalem
He made kepers, in every place full fine
And homeward came, then by the sea stream
Hoostyng by diverse countres and realm
To Romany Tuskan and Lumberdy
In to Oistrich, and there was take in hye
The Emperor led home, the^ to Me^ske he brought
In strong ward brought, to time that his finau^ce
Was fully paid, among his commons and sought
Of holy church, unto full great greuaunce
The merchants also, the^ made great cheuisau^ce
Of all the shryues, was take full great riches
Through all England, to rau^som with, his highness
And home he came, and John his brother chastised
And his fautours, emprisoned all full sore
To Normandy then went, and there supprised
The king Philip, and werred him ever thore
That stroyed his land of Normandy before
Against his oath, and his hie assurance
Whilst he labored upon the miscreaunce
He then appeled the king Philip to fight
They two alone, hand for hand in feld
That he was false of his promise and hight
Which king Philip granted, but not it held
But cowardly, with royal host him beld
Upon him came, all sodeinly to fight
Within three days then, for their brothers right
Beside Gysours they faught with hosts sore
Where king Rychard had the victory
King Philip fled fro his baner thore
With much shame, reproffe and vilanie
King Rychard segid a castle then in hie
That Caluce hight, not far fro Lymosyne
Where hurt he was, full sore and dyed fine
An arblaster with a quarrel him smot
As he about the castle went to spy
But then he made thereto a saute full hot
On every side, about full cruelly
And gatte the place so then full myghtely
And slew them all, without any grace
Again him so that holden had, that strong place.
He shroue him then, unto abbots three
With great sobbyng, and hye contricion
And weeping tears, that pitee was to see
Mekely askyng penance and absolucion
That it might please God, at his peticion
To forgive his offenses till domysday
So afterward in bliss, he might been ay.
He quethed his corpse, then to be buried
Al Fount Euerard, there at his fathers feet
To whom he granted, and made it notifyed
Traitor he was, and false of his behete
His heart inuyncyble, to Roan he sent full mete
For their great truth and steadfast great constaunce
His bowelles lose to Poytou, for deceyuaunce
Whose soul, from the body did depart
And into heaven went, where is eternal joy
Because from sin, he did convert
Longyng for that blessed day
To see Christ, that for his sin did pay
That crucyfied was upon the roode
Redemyng his sin, by the shedyng of his blood.
And of his reign, he died the.x. year
And in the year of Christ's incarnacion
A thousand hole, two hundredth and.iiii. clear
As written is, by clear computacion
Who in his life had hole dominacion
In Normandy, Guyen, Cypers and Surry
Whose honor shone, above all other clearly
The.C.xli. Chapter.
John king of England, duke of Normandy and Guyan (...) earl of Angeou, began
to reygne the year. M.CC. and.iiii. and reigned.xvii. year and died the year.
M.CC.xxi.

HIs brother John, was king then of England Iho^kyng of England.

And crouned was, at westminster full fair
By all estates and lords of his land
And sone thereafter deuorced, full vnfayre
From his wife wedded, that there before was heir
Unto therle of Gloucestre full wise
That sons had, that time of great enterprise
For cause of which, and of consanguinitye
Deuorce was made, and took another wife
Dame Isabell, therles daughter fair and free
Of England, and his heir known ryfe
Which after made him full great war and strife
For she was wife, of Hugh Brune of Toreyn
The Viscount then, took fro him a virgyne.
Wherefore Hugh Brune, no more of him would hold
But warred him, on every side about
Till he him took, with other many fold
And slew them all, were they never so stout
In his first year, a tax he took full out
Of each plough land three shyllynges fully paid
For which the people bitterly for him prayed
The.C.lxii. Chapter.
How king Wyllyam of Scotland did homage leege to king John at Lyncolne, the
duke Arthure of Britayne and all the lords of Irelande did the same

IN his first year, king Wyllia^ of Scotland
Made his homage, in Lyncolne his city
And Arthure duke of Britayne, I understand
Sone after, made his homage and feautee
At London then, with great humilitee
The prince of Wales, there made his homage
For Wales then, that was his heritage.
The great a Neele, and Makmurre also
And all the lords, and kings of Irelande
Therles also of Vlster, did right so
Of Ormond and Desmond, for there land
And all estates there, as I understand
Were sworn to him, and to him did homage
For their lyuelodes, and their heritage
The king Philip confedered with Arthure
To rebel sore, again his eme king John
And grant him men, and power strong and sure
To get Guyan Poytou and Angeou anon
Wherefore king John to Normandy began gone
And there he took Arthure duke of Britayn
In castle Mirable dyed, in mykell pain
Dame Isabell the suster also of Arthure.
In the castle of Bristowe, was then hold
And died there in prison, then full sure
As king John her uncle, so it would
A lady of great beautee, she was hold
Beshet in prison, in pains strong
So ends her life, for sorrow lived not long
Thus slew he both, Athure and Isabell
The children of his brother, duke Geffrey
To joy the croune of England, as men tell
Wherefore most part, of all his lands that day
Beyond the sea, forsook him then for ay
Retournyng to the king of France in hye
To hold of him and his perpetually
Bishop Hubert of Cauntorbury tho died
Wherefore king John, unto the covent sent
To chose his clarke, which they refused and denied
Wherefore the king, was wroth in his entente
For they disobeyed the lettre, which he sent
For they had chosen master Stephan Langton The piteous and lame^ table storye
of king Iho^ who by the Roomyshe bishop and his adhere^tes was most sham fully
and vylanously abused, as by this hystory does appear.

An worthy clarke, of all disposicion.
Whom king John, then would not admytte
For Romayn bull, ne for the prelates prayer
But prisoned some, and some to death commytte
Some he exiled and their eyes clear
And all persons and prelates in fere
He then put out and seized their benefice
Through all the land, as his mortal enemies
The Romyshe bishop curssed him openly
And all the realm fully did enterdite
That sacraments none, therein should occupy
And to the king of France, without respite
He wrote his letters so full fair endite
To take England hole in governance
For king John his great misgouernaunce.
Many earls also, and many great barons
Unto the king of France, wrote openly
To send his son Jews, the rebellions
To help, to whom they promised sikerly
To croune him king of England worthily
If that king John, would not his trespass amend
Unto the church, in which he had offend.
Wherefore yt king of France, to England sent
His son Jews, with host and power strong
With whom many lords sustained his intent
And other some, maynteyned king John in wrong
Thus stood this land, England and Wales long
Hole enterdite, from all holy sacraments
That none was done, without priuelegementes
Jews the son, of king Philip of France
Had castelles, fees, and citees many one
At his good rule, and full wise governance
In England then, well mo, then had king John
Till on a day, to lords he made his moon
By whose counsel, unto yt Romish bishop he wrote
His letters meke, as best he could them note
Besekyng him of mercy, and of grace
Of forgiveness and absolucion
His defautes all to mend, and his trespass
And vndirguage all his punysion
For to release thenterdiccion
For which the Romish bishop as he yt letters see
Wept fore, having full great pitee
Thenterdiccion fully he releassed
And to the king of France, anon sent
To cease the war, the peace to be encreassed
Between him, and king John bayssent
To which he would, put so all his intent
To Jews then, he sent the same message
And of England, to have his hole costage
And for Jews, with Lords of England
Obeyde not the bishops commandment
He sent Gwalo his legate I understand
To curse Jews, and all of his assent
Then died king John, in Christen hole intent
At Croxton abbey, and buried was full fair
At Worcester, with lords and great repair
Some books sayen, he poisoned was to dead
Of plummes so syttyng at his meat
In thabbey of Cistews at Swynsheade
With which a monk, there him did rehete
Wenyng of God great thank to get
At Newerke died, at Worcester sepultured
In chronicles, as is plainly scriptured.
He gate a son, that Henry of Wynchester hight
And other after, and Richard was his name
That earl was of Cornwayle, of great might
A Worthy knight, and of right noble fame
These sons on his wife, that noble dame
And gate Isabell, the wife of Frederyk
Emperor of Rome, a lord full poletyk.
In his times were these earls in England
Geffry Maundeuile, earl of Essex than
Sir Quincy, as I can understand
Earl of Winchester, that was a manly man
And the earl of Cornewayle that was than
Roger of Clare, then earl of Gloucester
That in England was, none his better.
Roger Bygot, earl of Northfolke then
That Marshall was, that time of England
Henry Bowne, then earl of Herforde, as I can
Conceive was then, Constable of the land
Aryght worthy knight, of his hand
And Dauyd, then was of Huntyngdon
Willyam Marshall, earl of Penbroke full boon
Randolfe of Chester, the earl of good estate
Robert Veer of Oxenforde full wise
Willyam Groos, of Almaryk generate
Willyam Lo^gspee, earl then, of great enterprise
In acts marcyall, a man knyghtly and wise
Of Salysbury, a mighty lord that day
Through all England, known of great array.
Willyam, the earl of Arundell that hight
Awbeny by his surname, full well then know
At Wimondham, in Northfolke buried right
Father was of Philyp, full young unknow
That full courteous was, both to hye and low
That after him was earl of Arundell
As chronycles written, can clearly tell
This king John dyed in hole creaunce
The year of Christ, a. M, was then knawe
Two hundredth.xxi. by remembrance
In chronycles, as I have red and saw
And full cumbreous, both to hye and law
At Worcester, buried in good array
As a prince royal of reason, ought that day.
The.C.xliii. Chapter.
Henry the third, king of England, duke of Normandye and Guyen, and Earl of
Angeou, that began to reygne the year of Christ, a thousand.CC. xxi, and
dyed in the year, a thousand.CC.lxxiii. and of his reygne the.lvi. year

In his time was a batayl at Lincoln, where Earl Raudolfe of Chester
discomfyted Lewys, yt son of king Philyppe of France.

HEnry his son, then was of.ix. year age King Henry yt third

At Gloucester, crowned with the dyademe
By the Legate Gwalo, and the Baronage
Stephan of Langton, helpyng as did well seem
Archbishop then, as the bishop could deem
The same year then, the king with Lewys faught
Beside Lincoln, where Lewys was nere caught
Four.C. knights, of Lewis there was slain
Therle of Perch, was slain on Lewis side
And many fled, with Lewys soth again
Therle Randolf, of Chester known wide
The field there gate, yt day with mikell pride
And Lewys then, all his right relesed
And home he went, with money well appesed.
In the second year, he wedded Alyanor
Therls daughter of Prouynce, good and fair
Whose elder sister, king Lewys wed before
This earl was then, famed among repair
The noblest prince, without any dispeyre
That time alive, through all chrystente
Of all honor, and great nobilyte
And John, the son of Dauyd of Huntingdon
That of Huntyngdon, and Chester earl had been
Without child dyed, his erldome to the crown
Then sezed were, to time yt it was seen
How his systers might them depart between
The parliament granted, yt wards to the king
That held of him, by knights service doing
To make statutes, at Oxenforde and ordinance
By which, there should none alyence enheryte
And put the kyngvnder the governance
Of certain lords, wysest and most parfyte
Which after made among them great dispyte
And batayles strong, and great contrariaunce
Through all the land, by long continuance
The.C.xliiii. Chapter.
Of the birth of Edward his eldest son, and heir was in the.xxix. year of
his father, and in the year of Christ a thousand.CC.xxxix. How Symonde
Mountforte Earl of Leycester was create.

HIs eldest son, and heir yt Edward high
At Westmynster, of Christ's incarnacyon
The year a thousand.CC.ix. and.xxx. right
Whom the legate Otho by informacyon
Baptized in funt, saint Edmondes confirmacy(...)
To him then made, as the church devised
In his baptime holy, then autoryzed.
Symond ye son, of earl Symond Mou^tfort
Came out of France, for ferdnesse of yt queen
To king Henry, whom he gave great comfort
He gave him then, his man for ay to been
Of Leycester, the earldome fair and clean
With the Steward of England, in heritage
Which is an office, of great priuelage.
And wed his daughter, dame Elyanore
To Willyam Marshall, earl of Penbroke
After whose death, she auowed chastyte for evermore
But he her married, and her betoke
For all her vow, as says the book
To Earl Symond Mountfort to be his wife
Notwithstanding, yt she vowed chastyte her life.
Tho dyed Lewelyn, the prince of Wales then
Between his sons Gryffyth, and David grew
Great discencyon and strife ay, when and when
And dame Beatryce, the kings daughter true
To earl Symonde, of Britayne wedded new
The year of Christ, a thousand was accounted
Two hundredth moo, forty and one amounted
The.C.xlv. Chapter.
The (...) of (...) of Lancaster and of Leicester, long after in the year of
his father one and thirty, and in the year of Christ M. iiC xli.

THe same year then, Edmond his soo^ne was
At Lancaster yt year of Christ the^ written
A thousand whole, two. C, and forty mo bore
And one thereto, in Flores as is written
And in the year next after then ouersetten
The king his daughter, Margaret then married.
To Alexaunder king of Scotland notified
At York city, where he then did homage Homage of the Scotts.

For Scotland whole, and Isles apperteinyng
Then dyed ^hemperour full sage
Wherefore the lords of Almaignie variyng
Some chose Rychard king, Henryes brother being
And some yt king of Castile would have algate
But earl Rychard of Menske had all the state
Then rose discord, between the king Henry Battle of Jews

And certain lords of mighty great power
Symond Mountfort, upon him took boldly
To be cheftein, to hold the feld full clear
At Lewis faught, of christ then was the year
A thousand two, hundred and sixty accounted
And four also, so much more amounted
This earl Symond, had then the king Henry
And his brother, Rychard the emperor
In his keeping and ward, were hold strongly
But prince Edward, was set in Herford toure
And earl Henry of Herford that was flower
Themperours soonne, at Herford with him lay
A mile about, disported them every ^aye
Fro whens at last, with horse they brake awa(...)
And to Wigmour castle they came in hie The battaill of Euesh(...).

To sir Roger Mortymer where he lay
That them received, then full gladly
And so they assembled with great host manfully
And held the feld, the lords fast to them drew
And at Euesham, they stroke a battaill new
In the year of Christ, a thousand was tho
Two hundred mo, sirty also and five
When prince Edward faught with his foo
Symond Mou^tfort, and raught him fro his live
The feld discomfited, there anon as bliue
With help of earl Gilbert, then called Clare
And other lords with him that were their
He slew many, and some away exiled
And some he held in prisone and distres
He took out then his father, as is compiled
His eme Rychard, holden in great dures
And all his friends, of his hie worthynes
He socoured ever, and with his gold supported
And where it want, with his word them comforted
The.C.xlvi. Chapter.
How Robert Ferrers earl of Darby was dishe rite and many other of their
compaignie.

RObert Ferrers, that earl was of Darby
Disherite then, for his insurreccion
With many other at Chesterfeld in hie
Faught with Edward, of their presumpcion
And fled away, with great confusion
Unto the Isle of Axholme, and fro thens
Unto Lyncolne, and spoiled the citezens
Fro thens to Ely they went anon
Where prince Edward, thisle proudely assailed
They fled fro it soon, to Yorkshire began gone
In freres clothis, that were full long tailed
Robbyng their fooes, when they of good failed
And other some to Kilyngworth then fled
To Henry Hastynges, who then the castle had
Where then yt king, great siege laid all about
But naught auailed, so strongly they defend
And for there was, in every shire throughout
So great robbery, and nothing amend
The king was fain, for lords then to send
By whose advise, he ordained for that case
That all disherite and exiled, should have grace
All disherite, should buy their lands again
To pay for them gold, as they might accord
With theowners, so that no man should payen
More then the land were worth, by great record
In seven year whole, and if they might concord
For less money, so it exceade a year
The value of the yerly rent full clear
Robet Ferrers earl of Derby then
The soonnes also, of earl Symond exclude
That perpetual judgment fully then
Never to redeem their lands, but been exclude
So that theowners, be not with them delude
Unto a day, that fifty thousand pound
Be paid of nobles whole and round
Edmond the soonne, of the same king Henry
Was weddid first unto dame Auelyn
Earl Willyam his daughter, of Almarle woma^ly
None issue had, neither male ne feminine
Then was he wed to Blaunche yt queen full fine
Of Nauerne, and so of Lancaster create
With Leicestre also therle denominate
The.C.xlvii. Chapter.
How Edward theldest soo^ne and heir of king Henry the third, and his brother
earl Edmond of Lancaster and of Leicestre went to Jerusalem with great power
which two princes were counted the semeliest of all the host of Christendom.

HIs brother Edward, and he associate
To Jerusalem, their voyage the^ auowed
Two semely princes, together adioynate
In all the world, was none them like allowed
So large and fair they were, each manne he bowed
Edward above his men, was largely seen
By his shulders more hie and made full clean
Edmond next him, the comeliest prince alive
Not croke backed, ne in no wise disfugured
As some men wrote, the right line to depryue
Through great falsehed, made it to be scriptured
For cause it should always be refigured
And mentioned well, his issue to prevail
Unto the croune, by such a gouernaile
But prince Edward and he held fourth their way
To Jerusalem, so did the emperor
Rychard his eme, and Henry his soonne full gay
To Cisile came by sea, through many a shoure
Edward with him, then had his wife that hour
Elianour daughter of the king of Aragon
A princess fair at his eleccion
The king Jews also then thither went
And in his way dyed and expired
Saint Jews now is named by all assent
Of holy church, as it is well enquired
Approved true as reason well required
But Edward prince, and Edmond abode two year
With werres great, and mighty strong power
For nations all, unto prince Edward drew
And to Edmond his brother, for their semelines
And great ma^hode, which in them yt they knew
Sir Charles, yt brother of king Jews doubteles
King of Cisile of noble worthynes
By the Soudan was chasid without beld
Whom prince Edward socoured, and had the feld
And with the Soudan faught in bataill sore
Discomfit him, and put him to the flight
Where Edward then was hurt and wounded thore
Of wounds five, that mortal werre to sight
His brother Edmond also wounded in that fight
But as Edward in his bed, sick then lay
A Sarasyne came, to him upon a day
To leche his hurtes, with salues many one
But false he was, for with a knife full sore
He struck him foul, as they were then alone
But yet that prince, the knife fro him gate thore
And slew him then, with it for evermore
At Acres lay he then, with wounds feel
With medicyns, to lech and to hele
The lech so false, was by the Soudan sent
Him to have slain, in any manner wise
For cause he had, discomfite him and shent
And when he was all whole, that he might rise
Message he had, fro all the lords wise
Of England then, of his father dedde
That prayed him home to come, and been their head
King Henry had then made, the minster fair
Of Westminster, as it is now at this day
The remnaunt he left unto his heir
To edify and make in like array
Or else a some of money for to pay
The which he granted to the edificacion
At his death, then bequeth and assignacion
Edward then, took a trewce for ten year
With the Soudan, and to Cisile saylid
And landed at Rome, where the^ he had good chere
Both of the bishop and cardinals not failed
That sore had mourned, and greatly bewailed
That curssed sore, sir Guy Mountforte each day
For the slaughter of Henry his cousyn gaye.
The son that was of Richard themperoure
Earl of Cornwayle, whom at Veterbe he slew
Right in the church, for old wrath and rancoure
In England dooen, his fathers death to renew
At mass knelyng horrybly him all to hew
Fro Acres as he came, as gods knight
Without cause of reason or of right
But price Edward and Edmou^d his brother dear
To Sauoye ca^, where iustes were made and tourname^t
And there desired they, and their knights in fere
With the duke of Sauoye, and his there present
To just, and prove each other in good entente
Their knights young, to learn as did suffice
In marcyall fete, knighthode to exercise
Where he foriust, the duke full manly
His brother also, the dukes neuewe
And bare him down, both horse and man egerly
And every knight, with other ever iusted new
Day by day, whiles echeone other knew
By.xiiii. days enduryng and contained
With feast solemn, by the duke sustained.
An hundredth ladies, of worthy good estate
Were set on hye, above within a tente
By the duke of Sauoye, well ordinate
To give the gree, and thank by judgment
Which then awarde, plainly by hole assent
To prince Edward, and earl Edmound his brother
That had foriust the duke and many other.
The duke him gave, gifts of great honor
And to his brother, gifts of hye pleasaunce
And to his knights, gifts of great valor
And conveyed him, into the land of France
Where of the king with worthy governance
Received he was, as prince full excellent
And homage made to him, in good entente.
For his lands, lyeng beyond the sea
The which was true, as chronicles witness
And home he came, with great felicitee
Of whose coming, the people had great gladness
Him to receive, in all kind of worthynesse
And of his brother Edmound also in feer
They were full glad, at all their hole power
But king Henry was gone to God before
The year of Christ, a thousand hole accounted
Two hundredth hole, syxty and thirtene more
On saint Edmondes day, when he amounted
This world leuyng, full of trouble accounted
Unto the bliss of heaven, for ever to rest
Among good souls, where Christ so liked best.
The.C.xlviii. Chapter.
How king Edward of England, the first after the conqueste, called Edward
with the long shankes, began to reign on the morrow after saint Edmondes
day yt king in the year a. M.CC. and.lxxiii. and died the year. M.CCC.
and.vii. the eight day of Iulye, and the.xxxiiii. year of his reygne.

Edward his son and heir, first generate King Edward the first after yt
conquest.

With all honor by all the baronage
Crouned was, in all royal estate
And of thestates, received hole homage
King Alexander for his heritage The homage of yt king of Scotland to king
Edward.

Of Scotland hole, and ysles apperteynyng
His homage did, right then unto the king.
The duke also of Britayne made homage
For Britayn hole, and there became his man
Which princes two, had wed in marriage
His susters two, Margarete and Beatrice then
Margarete to Scotland, and Beatrice to Britayne
Both two married, and wed in hye estate
By their father full wisely ordinate
A merchant took the wife of prince Lewlyn
Earl Symonds daughter, of Leycester yt had been
And to the king her brought full femenyn
Wherefore the prince, by heste as then was seen
To be his man, and homage did full clear
And led his wife to Wales in good intent
By the kings grace, and by hole assent
The king then, did great right and justice
Upon clippers and peirers of the coin
And new money made, that then might suffice
Of silver plate, made out of Boloyne
The grote, half grote, all in new coin
He coined fast, penny, halfpeny, and ferthyng
For porayll to bye with, their leuyng.
That same time he made a new statute
That no man should grant land ne tenement A restraint of lands to be given
to the clergy.

To the church, ne give nor constitute
No manner ground, nor no manner rent
Without license, of the lord and his assent
Of whom it is holden, above in chief
And else yt church, this realm had put in mischief
The prince Lewlyn, and of David his brother
Made war upon the king in great array
The March brent and many harms other
In England did, wherefore the king his way
To Wales held, in all the haste he may
The lord Mortimer, took then the prince Lewlyn
And to the king him brought, for to enclyne
The king him headed, and to the toure it sent
The Walshemen made, David his brother then
Prince of Wales, by their commen assent
Wherefore the king, to war on them began
And of the Walshemen, slew full many a man
And had David unto his presence brought
Hanged and drawn, as then he had it sought.
Then seized he Wales, for ever into his hand
And ordained, that no prince therein should be
But he or else his heir I understand
And that no man, of Wales hole country
One night should lie, in castle nor cytee
But void out fro sun to sun, the^ every night
Thus kept he Wales, his time by royal might.
The.C.xlix. Chapter.
How Gladowys Dewy, the daughter of Dauyd, prince of Wales, was wedded to sir
Raufe Mortymer, of whom came the Earls of March.

GWenlyan, yt daughter was of Lewlyne
Without child dyed, a vyrgyne aye
In a ^onnery, of the order of Gylbertyne
And Gladowys Dewy, Dauyds daughter gaye
Young, fresh and lusty, as the rose in May
To Raufe was wed, that was lord Mortymer
Of whom yt earls of March, become full clear
Then went the king, and queen to Gasc^yne
And Gwyan, to set that land in pees
And so forth then, he went to Aragon
To sport them with their father there no lees
To Gwyan then, again for his encrees
He came anon, and set in peace that land
And so came again to England.
The.C.l. Chapter.
How the king did atteynt his Justices, and set enquery of peace breakers,
ryouters, oppressors, extorcyoners, and of the vsurye of Jews.

HIs Justices all, by law he did attaynt
For wrong domes, and false judgment
For couetyse, yt false were then and faint
To help the poor commons, to their intent
He set Justices in heir by all assent
That called was, that time Troilebaston
For to enquere, of all extorcyon
Of Ryouters, fyghters, and baratours
Of market beters, that raised great debates
Of peace breakers, and all the susteynours
That were with them of preuy assocyates
Of oppressors, of all the pore estates
And all that were then found culpable
Emprysoned were, or by their pursse excusable
Of Jews within this land, yt was abidyng
Great plaintes were made, of Okoure and usury
How they did waste, the folk by such winning
And preuy bonds, made without measure
In pain of double, or else forfeture
The king the^ voided, for which yt church a disme
Him granted, so did the commons a quindecyme.
Rys Ap Madoke, a war in Wales began take
Again the king, that great wars had sustened
And prince him called, of Wales without make
Who then at York, by law full well mainteyned
On galous hye, as to him well apperteyned
Was drawn and hanged, his head upon ye tower
was set anon, as rebel and traytoure.
The.C.li. Chapter.
How Edmonde Earl of Lancaster, and of Leycester, kept Gwyan, and wed queen
Blaunche of Nauerne the kings sister of France, and therefore he bare the
labell in his arms for dyfference fro the kings of England ever after.

King Edward sent, his brother the^ full dear
To keep Guya^, and with him strong chiualry
Who governed there, yt land without pere
To hye honor, as made is memory
In France sore dred, among the aduersarye
And other lands, lyeng there all about
Above all men, he was there most bedoute
For ever he put them, to the worse in field
In arms ay, he had the victory
And in Paris, at Iustes under shield
Far passing was, and did ay notably
That for his manhood, and famous chyualrye
In so ferforth, that all lands him commend
For his manhood, which so in him they kende.
He wed dame Blaunche, of Nauerne yt was queen
King Philip sister, yt was full good and fair
Of whom he gate, Thomas of La^caster I wene
And Henry his brother, yt afterward was heir
And earls both, they were without despair
Of Lancaster, and also of Leycestre
As Flores has expressed well, by lettre.
For which weddyng, and noble alyance
He and his heirs, bare for a difference
England arms, with labell hole of France
By which all men, may have intellygence
That Edmonde was younger in existence
Then king Edward, though some say yt contrary
And from the truth, yet have they will to vary
The.C.lii. Chapter.
How the five ports, took the navy of France on the se^ in batell.

THe king of France, a navy great then se^^
Upon England, to war in great array
Which yt.v. ports took on the sea and shent
And people great, there slew and dreynt yt day
Their ships all, by batayl and affraye
Were take, and brought then into England
With capitaynes many, and lords of yt land
King Philyp then, at Paris in parlyament
Somonde Edward, before him to appear
Surmittyng him, of robbery felonoment
Upon his flete, so done by times sere
For fault of answer, foreiuged him there
Destroyed his land, in each place where he might
But king Edward, then went to France right
And gate again, his lands euerychone
And sought ay where, upon the king of France
But he fled ever, and battle would give none
Sone after, so Philyp by ordinance
A trewce took, by good ordinance
For all his lands beyond the sea
To set in peace, with all tranquilyte
The.C.liii. Chapter.
How Morgan and Madoke his brother, were set in the tower for rebellyon in
Wales made by comfort of king Phylip of France.

IN Wales, Morgan made war and great distaunce
And Madoke also, his brother full untrue
For which the king, with all his ordenau^ce
To Wales went, and faught with them all new
At straytes great, which tho traitors knew
Yet were they take, and put in sore prison
Within the tower, for their rebellyon.
The king Philyp had sent then gold to wa^
On England then, with sir Thomas Turbiruile
Who was espied, by sotell means afferre
And heded was anon, for all his guyle
His wit not help him then, ne yet his wyle
He dyed with shame, repreef and vilany
Engendered all of mede and surquedrye.
The.C.liiii. Chapter.
How Earl Edmonde was Leuetenaunt of Guyan, and warred upon the king of
France, and defied him by letter, for he brake the promise made to Edward his
brother king of England.

SIr Edmond earl of Lancaster the^ full true
Leuetenau^t then of Guian, all throughout
On whom yt king Philip, then rode al new
And brake the trewce, with hosts great and stout
Wherefore he went to him without doubt
To se how that, it might be well defend
He bade him thus, set to his knee and amend.
Wherefore in ire, he gave him up homage
The which he ought for his land that he held
And answered him again, of great courage
From hens forward, I shall you hold the field
And at my power, each day under shield
Prove how ye do unto my lord great wrong
The which I shall amend, or it be long.
And so departed, without more langage
And into Guyan came, with all his might
And to his brother wrote, and made him knowlage
And bade him come with power for to fight
With spear and bow, for other writ of right
May not be got, within the court of France
For to recover, his hye enherytaunce.
Each day thence forth, with ba^ners hole displeyed
He held the field, and king Philyp warred
And leters sent him defyals and vmbrayde
Of his suraunce, and oath that he had erred
And castelles gate, f^ll many and not differred
King Edward sent, his brother then suppowaile
The French party, to war and assail.
The.C.lv. Chapter.
How sir Roger Mortymer was made Earl of March at Kyllyngworthe, and set the
round table of a thousand knights, and as many ladies.

ANd in the year, a. M. was full then
Two hundredth also syxty and nyntene
When sir Roger Mortymer so began
At Kelyngworth, the round table as was seen
Of a thousand knights, for disciplyne
Of young men after he could deuyse
Of turnementes, and iustes to exercise.
A thousand ladies, excellynge in beauty
He had there also, in tents hye above
The iustes, that they might well and clearly se
Who iusted best, there for their lady love
For whose beauty, it should the knights move
In arms so etchone other to reuie
To geate a fame in play of chivalry
This Mortimer, was then lord Mortimer
But in these iustes, he held great feasts each day
By forty days contained whole and clear
At which one part of ladies fair and gaye
Gave him the price of fame, of all that play
Wherefore the king, to encrese his estate
Proclaimed him earl of March there create
The.C.lvi. Chapter.
How Edmond earl of Lancaster and of Leicester faught at Bayon with the power
of France and was slain there and sir Wyllyam Valence earl of Pe^ broke was
dedde there and many other lords, in the year a thousand two hundred four
score and sixtene.

But earl Edmond the kings brother dear
With twenty and six baners, proud and stout
The fifth day of June, was accounted clear
Of Christ his date a thousand year all out
Four score and sixtene with out doubt
At Bayon faught, with the Fre^chemenne certain
Where he in yt feld yt day, like a knight was slain
Sir William Valence, earl of Pe^broke was the^
Sir John Rychmond and many other baron
Sir John saynct John, right a full manly ma^ne
Thenglishe host felly, there was bore down
By a busshement, laid by colucion
That brake on them, sore fighting in the feld
Out of a wode, in which that day were beld
The.C.lvii. Chapter.
WHen John of Gaunt, yt sone of king Edward How a chronicle was feygned to
make Edmond the elder brother.

For cause his brother yt duke was of Clare^ce
None issue male had then, that men of herd
But female by all intelligence
When king Rychard in his great excellence
None issue had, he would have been his heir
Apparaunt then, by act in perlyament feire
The which Thomas Wodstok, duke of Gloucester
And all nobles of England there present
Proclaimed then, by writing and by letter
How that therle of March, then in perlyament
Unto the king, was then heir apparaunt
Where duke John in diverse places made
Feined chronicles, that showed were full brade
How this Edmond thelder soonne of king Henry
Broke backed and bowbacked bore
Was unabled to have the monarche
And Edward so the younger king therefore
Shuche chronicles then, he feined full sore
And put in place, of diverse religion
To make his soonne, right heir of this region
But when king Henry, this chronicle showed
It was defect, and clearly set at naught
And underfoot cast down and eke stroyed
The contrary by chronicles truly wrought
Was proved true, and then his title he sought
By resignement and renunciacion
By depoisale and plain coronacion
It is not true, that croke backed he hight
For valiant he was, in all his doings
And personable with all, to every man's sight
Although false chronicles, have other sayings
King Alexander of Scotland, then dyed
That wedded had, the kings suster Margarete
And Alexander his son, being in the same stead
Who with Margatete his wife, on ye sea perished.
The.C.lviii. Chapter.
How Florence earl of Hola^d and his persuers bound him to vide the judgment
of the king Edward, if he should be king of Scotland.

FLorence therle of Holand and his compeers
That claimed then, the croune of Scotland
After the death of Margaret as pursuers
Came to king Edward, then of England
Requeryng him in God his name all weldand
As he that was, of Scotland sovereign lord
To try the right, and set them in accord
For which he set, at Norham a parliament
After Easter then next following
In the kirk of Norham, to that intent
That all Scotts, and other that were pursuyng
Might there appear, their titles claymyng
At which parliament, the pursuantes them bond
At his decree and judgment to stond
By one letter, with all their seals ensealed
Which doublid was, they gave unto the king
The other part, for it should not be repeled
They kept with them selfs, always abydyng
Which lettre, John Hardyng maker of this book This was to Henry the fyfth.

To king Henry delivered, yt gave him in reco^pe^ce
The manoure of Gedyngto^, we all yt appurtene^ce.
For which manoure, then the cardinal
Of Wynchester unto the queen disposid
In her dower and fro him took it all
When that the king, by death was deposid
Him recompense, he promised and composid
But naught he had, but might yt prince have lived
He durst full eiuill, his excellence have grieved
An other letter, duble in like wise
The said heirs delivered to the king
That other part as should of right suffice
Semblably with them, was remainyng
By which they bound, them self by their sealyng
Him to deliver, the king his castles all
To keep, to time his judgment were byfall
Of which judgment without possession
Of castle strong throughout there all the land
He might not well dooen execucion
Wherefore the heirs to him, so their them bound
Which letter also, John Hardyng took on hand
And did deliver, so then at Boys Vincent
For the said reward, together by one intent
The.C.lix. Chapter.
How king Edward made sir John Balyoll king of Scotland.

AND in the year of Christ his incarnacion
A thousand whole two hundred and four scour
And thereto three by very computacion
At the feast of saint Michael set before
The king Edward to Scotland came therefore
Where twenty then, chosen were of England
And other twenty persons, also of Scotland
By whose advise, all other rightes excl ude
The king judged, to John Bailyol the croune
That was descent, as clearly was conclude
Of theldest daughter, of David of Huntyngdon
As chronicles make, thereof good mention
Margarete wedded to Aleyne of Galawaye
Whose daughter was king John's mother yt day
That Dernegull hight, and was John Bailiols wife.
Whose son and heir, king John was the^ cround
That Bailioll hight, that known was full ryfe
In yt mynster of Skone, within Scotland ground
Syttyng upon the regal stone full sound
As all the kings, there used had before
On saint Andrews day, with all joy therefore
At Christmas next after, the same king John
To Newcastell, to king Edward came
His homage made, and feautee leege anon Homage of ye Scotts.

Of his free will, without any blame
And with great joy, again returned hame
But then yt Scotts, chose them.xii. lords by asse^t
To rule the king John, by their intent.
The.C.lx. Chapter.
How king John of Scotland, made confederacye with France again England.

Which made him then, to make confederacy
With king Philip of France and aliau^ce
Perpetually to be contributorie
Either with other, by strong and great assurance
England to war, with all their hole puyssaunce
The king Edward, seeing this hye falshede
To Barwike came, with host and great ma^hede
At the nonnes of Barwyke, then he lay
And laid a siege, about on every side
At after Easter, but flemynges then that day
The Leden hall, there held full strong that tide
Which with wild fire, was brent and might not bide
That same night, then sir Wyllym Duglas yald
Barwyke castle, to king Edward and salde.
The.C.lxi. Chapter.
How king John of Scotland surrendered his homage to king Edward, and
disclaymed to hold of him.

IN this same time.vii. earls of Scotland
Sieged Carleile, and so to Hexham brent
And home again, harmeles out of England
They went anon, and none harms hent
Worse to have dooen, was there intent
But then king John, surrendered up his homage
To king Edward, for him and his lineage
By letters which the king, Edward then sent
To abbeys great, in England of record
To be remembered, of his false entente
Renou^cyng king Edward, for his souerayn lord
The seven earls, at Dunbarre by concord
Then sieged it, fro which earl Patrike went
And granted to hold of him, at his intent.
The.C.lxii. Chapter.
Of the battle of Dunbarre, where that king Edward prevailed.

Which castle so, then the king rescowed
And droaue therles, there out of the field
And much people unto the death there bowed
Without help, there slain under shield
To Ronkesburgh, the king Edward so held
That sone was yield, to him without strife
Their good saufe also, and their life.
So he forth to Edinburgh went anon
That yelden was, on the same condition
Then was Stryuelyn void and left alone
Without defense, or any garyson
That Edward took, in his possession
Which king Edward, took into his power
And saved the people, both far and nere.
Then came therle of Vlster with great power
Of Iryshemen, and so to saint John's town
The king the^ went, with host through Fyfe full cher
And brent yt shire, throughout both upon and down Submission of ye Scottish
king and al his lords unto king Edward the first.

When then king John, by good direccion
To Edward sent, and prayed him then of peace
And to his grace, submytte him or he would cease
The^ king Edward took his submission
At Brighyn then, upon the water of Taye
And gave him there, his realm without condition
Of Scotland so, to him and his for ay
The lords all, made him homage that day
The.x. day was of July, and in the year
Of king John then the.iiii. was counpted clear
And thereupon, he sent him to the toure
Of London then, with certain rebels moo
King John he kept, in worship and honor
Like his estate, where he would ride or god
Ten mile about, for his disport there so
Then king Edward, on the mountains went
That months there be called in their intent
And as he came homewarde, by Skone away
The regal there, of Scotland then he brought
And sent it forth, to Westmynster for ay
To be there in a cheire clenely wrought
For a mass preaste to sytte in, when he ought
Which there was standing, beside the shryne
In a cheire, of old time made full fine
The^ made the king, John Wareyn his rege^t
That earl was then, of Sussex and Surray
And treasorer he made, at his intent
^ugh Cressyngham, and Wyllyam Ormesby
The chief justice, through Scotland generally
His chaunceler at Skone, and tresorer
Abydyng were, to rule the land full clear.
The^ went king John, to Flanders for socoure
Of the dukes of Geldre and Brabant
And also of the noble Emperor
That him had hight, great help and socoure then
But none he had, and home again he want
For in yt mean time, while he in Flanders abode
Wyllyam Valoys, all Scotland over rode
He slew the judge, and the chaunceler
Thofficers also, and the chaumberleyn
The Capitaynes and the treasorer
And gatte the land, fro Englyshmen again
And slew them all, with cruel death and pain
Wherefore the king, upon the Maudeleyn day
At Fowkirke fought, with Scotts in great array
Where Scotts fled, and forty. M. slain
And into Fiffes he went, and brent it clean
And Andrewstoune, he wasted then full plain
And Blakmanshire and Menteth as men mean
And on the ford of Trippour, with host I ween
To Bothbile, Glascowe, and to the town of Are
And so to Lanarke, Longhmaban and Anand their
Which all he had, ever where he came
And then he wed king Philippes suster Margarete
A fair lady, and full of noble fame
Her son and heir, Edward Carnauan hete
A maiden wed, king Philippes daughter sweet
Whom his father, then prince of Wales create
Duke of Cornewayle, and earl of Chester nominate
Then went the king to Scotland again
And wan the land, and had there all obeysaunce
Saving Wales, that would not him obeyn
But fled him ever, for dread of mischaunce
He ordained then by statute ordinance
That none should be, the prince of Wales more
Except of the king, his eldest son first bore
The.C.lxiii. Chapter.
How the bishop of Rome, at the suggestion of the Scotts wrote to king Edward
under this form.

ANd in the year, a thousand.CCC. and one
Bishop Boniface, at yt Scotts suggestio^
To king Edward, by lettre wrote anon
Chargyng him, then upon his beneson
For to deliver the Scotts out of prison
Which in England, he had holden with wrong
And his officers, call home yt there had be long.
Alleged all, how Scotland hole was hold
Of Peter's church of Rome, and naught of him
But by great wrong, and oppression bold
He them ouerled, with wars sore and brym
And them compelled, in pain of life and lymme
To become his men, and the realm of him to hold
By homage leege, whether they would or nolde
And bad him also, before him then appear
At the court of Rome, his right there for to show
And if it might beknowe, his right were clear
Without delay, by judgment just and true
He should it have by execucion due
By sensours of their church and hole sentence
For to obey his hie magnificence.
The.C.lxiiii. Chapter.
How king Edward wrote again an answer of his lettre.

THe^ king Edward, wrote unto him again
An answer, by his letters meke and due
All his tytles and duties full plain
Naught in form, never in effect to sue
Nor in his court, no judgment to pursue
Remembryng well, his fatherhede
Now Brutus had Albian, and did it possede
In Hely time, which to his sons he deuyde
Unto his son Locryne, first propogate
He gave Logres, that has this tide
To Albanacte, the second procreate
He gave Albanye, Scotland now denomynate
And to Cambre, his youngest son he gave
Cambre, that now is Wales, to joy and have
To king Locrine, of Logres and to his heirs
The soueraynte, and homage ay reserved
Of Albanacte and Cambre, and all theyrs
Perpetually Troyan law observed
By which laws, Bryton has been conserved
Since hitherwarde, without interrupcyon
Before the time, that Rome had prescrypcion.
Before the time also, that Christ was bore
By many years, the kings of Logres had
Scotland by eschete, for fault of heirs thore
And remeued kings, yt were there known bad
And other kings there made, with hertes glad
Which yt land couth, there govern mikel better
And service did to Logres, often by letter.
Also, the same John Baylioll I made
King of Scotland as law and reason would
Who made homage, to me with heart full glad
And afterward, was false manyfolde
He stroyed my land, with hosts stout and bold
Wherefore I made him war, till he were feign
To my presence to come, and him obeyne
Where then for trespass, and rebellyon
He surrendered to me, and to my heirs
The realm of Scotland, and also the crown
The lords of all Scotland, for them and theyrs
Made me homage, for their proper lands
By their letter written, and their bands
Wherefore then, having thereof possessyon
The pride of my subjects, and insolence How the Scottyshe king and all the
lords of Scotland made homage unto dyng Edward.

Where I did find, their false rebellyon
As right and law, would be my regence
I chastysed ay, at mine intellygence
Wherefore, please it to your fatherhede
Mine aunciente rightes, to have commend in deed
The.C.lxv. Chapter.
How the lords wrote to the bishop of Rome for the same cause.

THe date was of this letter, a. M. year
Three hundredth also and one, the. viii day of Mayr
And of his reygne.xxix. clear
With that the lords in England were yt day
By their letter, and the bishop did pray
The kings right, not to put in questyon
Of eldest time, longyng to his crown.
For in their letter, the bishop they did remember
They would not suffer his disherityson
His crown so foul to hurt, and dismembre
His royalty to put in questyon
For desire of his rebels false suggestyon
The which ryghtes, for death or life mayntaine
They were so bound, they could none other mean
So seized the bishop, and the matter let
And king Edward then, in to Scotland went
Through all Catnesse, destroyed it in great hete
The months hye, and out ysles strayte he shent
Till they obeyed all, hole his regiment
And wyntred then, at Dunfermlin abbey
Where saint Margarete, is worshpped ever and ay
The.C.lxvi. Chapter.
Of the battle of Argyle, where Vmfreuyle took Wyllyam Waleys, and John
Waleys.

ANd then therle of Angos Robert Vmfreuile
That rege^t was, of Scotland co^stitute
Took william Wales, then at Argyle
His brother John also without resute
With rebels mo, that were all destytute
By batell sore, there smyten full cruelly
Where Vmfreuile then had the victory
And to London them brought, to judgment
Where they were drawn, and hanged on galowe tree
And quartred then, their quarters home were sent
At certain towns, hanged up there to be
Their traytourhede, and falshede for to se
Their heddes also, full hye upon the tower
At London bridge, were set to great terroure
The.C.lxvii. Chapter.
How Peirs of Gauerstone, earl of Cornwaile was exyled

ANd in the year a thousand.iii. C. and five
He exyled out Peyrs Gauerston of Cornewayle
That Earl was then, for treason known ryue
And in the year after, without any fail
Earl Robert Bruis, of Carrike ganne assail
Earl John Comen of Bongham, at Dunfryse
And slew him there, in feueryere when it did fryse
Because he would not, to him there assent
To be crowned then, king of Scotland
And forth he fled, to se who would consent
And many one drew to him in that land
Became his men, and made syker bond
To whom Walter Wareyne, the younger son
Of therle of Surrey, yt then did won
With the lord Vesty, that had his sister wed
That fro her went, unto this Robert Bruys
Either of other were feign, for they were fled
Out of England, their living had such Guris
For their ryotous living, and male auentures
Thus went they about, harkening every where
Who were foes, and who their friends were.
All Scotland through, this Robert went about
On foot to spy, who would with him hold
And who would not, he warred them all out
And killed them down, in places manifold
And much harm did, in chronycle as is told
And with him was, always Walter Wareyne
That with him went, through mountains wood and plain
On nights they lay, in woods and in mountain
At morrow, on their foes came down and kill
On day they were thousa^des, at even but twain
There knews no moo at eue^, where they drew till
So were they ever at night of lodgyng will
For dread of guyle and of great traytourye
They lodged them on nyghtes full privily
But on the feast of the Annuncyacion
Of our lady, saint Mary the virgyne
Robert Bruys, with great supportacyon
Was crowned at Skone, as he could ymagyne
To whom great folk, with good will did enclyne
Full glad of his welfare, and his coronacyon
With great host came, to Perch with prosperacion
The.C.lxviii. Chapter.
How sir Robert Vmfreuile, Earl of Angeou, and sir Aymer Valence Earl of
Pe^broke discomfyted king Robert Bruys, beside saint John's town, and put him
unto the flyghte.

ON the morrow, sir Robert earl Vmfreuile
Of Angeous then, yt regent was by north
The Scotts sea, and Aymer Valence yt while
Earl of Pe^broke, by south ye water of Forth
Wardayne was, of Scotland forsooth
That day faught, with king Robert Bruis
Beside Iohnstoune, where he fled without rescowes
Unto the Kentir, and many Scotts there slain
Where then they took, the wife of king Robert
And his brother Nygell, the sothe to said
And the earl of Athels, might not a sterte
And sent them to the king, with full glad heart
Whom the king kept, after their estate
At London, well together conso^yate
Henry Percy, took the brethren two
Of king Robert Alexaunder, and Thomas yt hight
To the Iustes them sent, yt hanged were tho
His other brother, at London hanged right
King Roberte then, sieged the Percy full wight
But Vmfreuyle, him anon rescowed.
And the syege, from him anon removed
King Robert Bruys, faught with Aimer Vale^ce
Earl of Penbroke, and put him to the flight
At Methfen so, and slew with violence
All Englyshemen, in batell there down right
Therle of Gloucester, Gylbert Clare yt hight
Three days after, he syeged him in Are
But king Edward therle, then rescowed their
The king Edward with host him sought full sore
But ay he fled, into woods and strayte forest
And slew his men at straytes and dangers thore
And at marreys and mires was ay full pressed.
Englyshmen to kill without any rest
In the mountains and cragges, he slew ay where
And in the night, his foes he frayde full sere
The king Edward with horns, and hou^des him soght
With me^ne on foot, through marris moss and mire
Through wodes also, and mou^te^s where they fought
And ever yt king Edward, hight men great hyre
Him for to take, and by might conquer
But they might him not get, by force ne by train
He satte by the fire, when they in the rain
The king Edward for anger, fell in access
And homeward came, full sick and sore annoyed
And bade his soonne, he should for no distress
No trewce take with Scotts, that sore him noyed
But werre them aye, to time they were distroyed
For he said thus, you shall never find them true
But whiles they be, in thy subieccion dew
At Burgh upon the sand he died anon The death of Edward the first.

And to London, carried then day by day
At Westminster buried, with much moan
With queen (...)garete, he had the^ soo^nes tway
Thomas Bro(...)ton earl of Northfolke gay
And marshall of England, the other of Kent
Edmond Wodstok, was earl in all intent
This noble king died in July the third day
And toward heaven he then took his way
The year of Christ a thousand south to say
Three hundred whole, and seven by calculacion
And of his (...)ne and coronacion
Five and thirty, not fully whole complete
When he so went, unto the bliss so sweet
The.C.lxix. Chapter.
Edward the second king of England began to reign the year a thousand three
hundred and seven, the eight day of July and was deposed the year a thousand
three hundred twenty and six, and of his reign nyntene year.

EDward his soo^ne, prince of Wales and lord King Edward the second

At Carnaruan, of his mother bore
Was crou^ed king, by good and whole concord
Of all the lords that were assembled thore
At Westminster, as was his father before
And at the feast of thassumpcion
Of our lady, he sent for Peers Gauerston
Whom then he made therle of Cornwaile
Again the will, of all the baronage
Whom his father exiled, for misgouernaile
The third year after, for his misused outrage
The lords rose, of ire and great courage
And heddid him as for an hie traitor
That wasted had, and spent the king his tresour
And in yt mean while, king Robert Bruys had ge^
All Scotland nere, wherefore yt king Edward The battaille of Ba^nokesburne.

To Scotland went, at Bannokesburne they me^
And faught full sore, till slain was the vaward
And discomfited was the midelward
And to the rereward king Edward him drew
For great socour, where he had battayl new
Which killed was down, sauf few that led the king
To Dunbarre then fleand with him away
There was therle of Gloucester slain fleyng
The lord Clifford, and all the lords that day
Therle of Herford to Bothuile fled his way
Therle Edmond of Arundell, and earl of Valence
Therles of Warwike and Oxenford take at defense
This battaill was the year of Christ smitten
A thousand whole three hundred and fiftene
On midsomer day, and of his reign the^ written
The seventh year, by chronicle as is seen
Then was Vmfrey earl of Herford frethed clean
And enterchaungid for king Robertes wife
That holden was in England then full ryfe,
The.C.lxx. Chapter.
Of the relesse that king Edward made to Robert Bruys at Du^barre which
relesse John Hardyng delivered in to the tresorye, in the days of king Henry
the fifth at Boys Vincent in France with other, for which he gave him
Godyngton that the queen has now.

PAtrike Du^barre earl of March that day
To king Edward was leege man long before
To his father, and true had been always
Sent king Edward to Barwik, but therefore
He took of him a relesse for evermore
Of his service, that due was to the croune
Anentes king Bruys to execute his treason
Which relesse the maker of this book
John Hardyng brought with other evidence
And to the king Henry the fifth it took
With other mo, before at Boys Vincent
Perteignyng to England royal regiment
And naught he has unto his sustenaunce
As often a fore here, in his remembrance
The.C.lxxi. Chapter:
How king Robert Bruis took all the lords of England, and sleugh many at
Stryuelin bridge and distroied the Marches and beat down castelles therein.

King Robert Bruys, took Robert Vmfreuile
Earl of Angeos Henry then lord Percy
Therle of March and also yt lord Neuile
Acton and Scropen and also the lord Lucy
At Stryuelyn bridge, fightyng mightily
In the vaward of the forsaid battaill
Taken prisoners, and raunsomed for auaill
The^ king Robert, yt Marchis whole distroied
The castelles wanne and bet them to the ground
And all Scotland before that he had noyed
Obeyed to him and were his lieges bound
And maintened well, the^ forth all Scotland ground
The bishoprike of Duresme all throughout
Northumberland, he brent with host full stout
Two cardinales yt B. of Rome to Scotland sent
To treat a trewce, a twene the kings two
And for to stall Jews Beamount present
Bishop of Duresme, that then was sacred so
Whose brother was Henry, lord Beaumont tho
Licensed and granted, by the king of France
To be liege men, to Edwardes whole plesau^ce
But sir Gilbert Midelton them met
And sir Walter Selby, misruled knights
A litell fro Duresme their way forsett Gilbert Midelto^ robbed yt cardinals.

And robbed them openly, on the lights
And to Midford castle, led them fourth rightes
And held them there, in mighty and strong hold
To time they had, their iwels and their gold
Which knights two, robbed the la^d about
That castle held, by force and rebellion
A quarter of a year, with rebels stout
But they were take within that garrison
And to the king sent, by that enchesone
That hanged were* as traitors all should been
On galowes hie, that all might them seen
Then after soon, sir Gosselyn Deynuile
His brother Robert, with two hundred in habit
As they were friars, went about in exile
Robbyng the land, in full great dispite
The bishopes places, of Duresme in circuit
They spoiled clean, leuyng nothing in them
But walls bare, which they would not claim
The.C.lxxii. Chapter.
How the lords of England with power royal dur(...)not ride into Scotland
passing fourtene mile, England was so at under that time.

THerle Edmond then of Arundell
Wardein of the Marches, then constitute
Therle Robert of Angeos Vmfreuile
Of his lands having no refute
Therle David of Athell destitute
Of his erldome, the lord Percy full hardy
The lord Neuell, the lord Beaumont manly
With all the power of the North contree
Distroyed then Scotland and brent
Upon the March unto Lyntell Lee
Whom sir Walter Wareyn, by whole assent
Of James Douglas, pursued as they went
With great power, always at their side
That they were fain, again to England ride
But sir Walter Wareyn and Douglas
With their power, brent all Northumberland
Tyndale became Scotts, and false then was
And rode with them, and brent through all the land
To Alerton, and so rode home to Scotland
Through the West March, and brent it all through out
And home they went, without any doubt
The castle then of Berwyke and the town
King Robert gatte, after strong and great defense
By treaty with peace, Spaldyng and treason
The Wendesoaye before Easters reverence
Where that traitor, without long suspense
Betrayed the town, and into Scotland went
By Scotts slain, as to a traitor appent
The.C.lxxiii. Chapter.
How king Edward laid siege to Barwyke and for sooke the siege and went
South, for Robert Bruys had destroyed mikell of Yorkshire, and discomfited yt
archbishop of York and his clergy, at Milton on swale

THe king Edward began to siege Berwyk like
And won it had, but false tales it let
And tidinges new, yt naught the king did
For Robert Bruys, the king of Scotland met
With the bishop of York, and him ouersette
Wherefore he lost the siege, and went away
But Bruys had stroyed England in fell array
To Borough bridge, by east and west he brent
And home again, with many a prisoner
Without harm or let of his intent
With mykell good, but in Myton medowe nere
To Swale water, lay then with great power
Walter Wareyn among the hay kockes bushed
Upon the bishop suddenly with Scotts issued
And.xv. hundredth English there he slew
And home he went, with king Edward full glad
With prisoners many, mo then men knew
The bishop fled fro the field full woo bestad
With his clerks, that then were full mad
For which therle Thomas, of Lancastre there
And king Edward, depatted half in werre.
The.C.lxxiiii. Chapter.
How at the next parliamente after, Thomas of Lancaster and Leycester earl
and certain lords, exiled the two Spencers out of the land, but then yt
Spencers made great persecucion with the king again the lords, and slew the
earl of Lancaster and the other lords.

AT ye parliament the^ at westminster next hold
Earl Thomas, yt then was called full true
Therle Vmfrey of Herford, that was bold
Therle of March, full manly as men knew
The Monbrey also Percy and Clyfford drew
All armed came, and two Spencers exiled
Out fro England, never to be reconsyled.
But sone, the Spencers came to yt king again
Sir Hugh the lord, and sir Hugh his son
And put therle of March, in great disdayn
Roger his son, that with him did won
Appeched him then of hye treason
Against the king, wherefore the king him sent
Into the toure, tabyde the parliament.
Then went the king, and Spencers both two
With hosts full great, to Burton upon Trent
Where the lords lay, and sparled them then so
That north they went, then ways by one assente
To raise mo men, they trust in their intent
The Spencers two, fully for to destroy
Who all the realm, full cruelly did noye.
At Borinbrig, sir Andrewe Hertlaw met
With earl Vmfrey of Herford, and him slew
And took the earl Thomas, without let
And to the king, that then to Pountfret drew
Where then were set, upon him judges new
Therle Edmound of Arondell for justice
And sir Robert Mapilthorpe, his enemies.
There he was headed, anon upon the hill
And buried was there in a chapel fair,
Henry his brother, stood at the kings will
Whom the king granted to be his heir
That wedded then Alyce, without despair
The daughter and heir, of therle Henry Lacy
Of Lyncolne, so granted by the kings mercy.
Wyllya^ fitz Wareyn, and many another knight
In diverse shyres, some hanged and some head
That hold with him, or with his compeers right
Sir Bartholomewe Badelismore, without read
Drawn and hanged, and put to foul dead
Roger Clyfford and John Monbraye barons
Headed then were, for their rebellions.
Therle of March, sir Roger Mortymer
His son Roger, foriuged were for treason
And by the king, of death pardoned were
And put were then, in perpetual prison
Into the tower, for that same encheson
Fro that time forth, the Spencers other excede
The queen was, but an hand maiden in deed
To time the king, to her brother her sent
And also his son Edward to dooen homage
For Guyen, so to have at his entente
And for they dwelled, so long in that viage
The king them had suspecte, of their message
By council of the Spencers, them exiled
As in chronicle pleynly is compiled.
The king then made, and plainly did create
Andrewe Hertlawe, earl then of Carlele
Which time, the king Robert full fortunate
Rode all the east March, full proudly and well
The byshopryke and Yorkshire every dele
Andrewe Hertlawe, earl of Carlele absent
To Lancastre him drew in false entente.
The king Robert, was passed home again
With prays great, and many prisoners
Fro Humber north, the people down were slain
Of which the king, and all his councelers
Blamed therle Andrewe, and his compeers
For he had men enough, with him arrayed
The Scotts all, that might have slain and frayed.
He hight the king, have brought to him great powers
Into yorkshyre and held nothing his hight
Therefore the king, by counsel of the Spencers
Gave charge to take him, either by day or night
Or kyl him down, where they mete with him might
To all shryues, was sent this commandment
Fro Trent northwarde by writtes and maundeme^t.
The.C.lxxv. Chapter.
How sir Roger Mortymer the younger went out of the toure of London and went
into France to the queen of England and to the prince Edward her soonne, and
also how the lord Lucye took sir Andrewe Hertlawe earl of carlele, and
headed him at Carlele for treason.

THen ^r Roger, the youngest Mortimer
Made his kepers drunk, and went away
Out of the toure by night and other in feer
And into France, anon he took his way
Unto the queen Isabell, in poor array
And bode with her, at her governance
All time that she was soiournyng in France
And then Antony Lucye lord of Cokirmouth
Sir Robert Lowther, with other many in feere
At Carlele town, as know was full couth
Took sir Andrewe Hertlawe, with mekill stee^
They put on him, he took royal power
In truce taking, with therle of Murrey
Withouten power, in traiterous array.
In wrongyng of the kings hye estate
And of his right, full great derogacion
And how he took great gold immoderate
Of king Edward, through cauelacion
To bring him power for his supportacio^
Again the king Robert, that then destroyed
His land full foul, and had him self anoyed.
And how he had the people hole withdraw
With him Westwarde, by false confederacy
Between him and therle of Marrowe
Couened fully before cast traytorie
Wherefore they drew him first all openly
And hanged after, and to London sent
Unto the king his head, for great present.
The.C.lxxvi. Chapter.
How the queen Isabell treated marriage, of one of the daughters of therle of
Henaulde for her son Edward to have to wife, by thauice of her brother king
Charles and came to England with great power, and took yt king and slew his
counsel for treason.

THere by advise, and good consyderacion
Of the king of France, her brother dear
Queen Isabell accorded for supportacion
Her son should wed, one of the daughters clear
Of therle of Henauld, that five then were
Through whose succor, she and her son Edward
Took then the sea, to England ward
Earl Edmond of Kent, then with her came
King Edwardes brother, and sir Aymer valence
Earl of Penbroke, which came with her fro hame
And Mortymer the younger, in her presence
Henauldes and French, with great sufficience
Of people strong, at Orwell with her land
Where lords many, her met I understand
To London then, she and her son tho wrote
The councillors and traitors for to take
That ruled had, in mykell mysryote
The king Edward, her lord and also her make
And in prieson, to keep them for her sake
Wherefore they voyded, out of the city then
The queen's enemies, echone ay when and when.
The king then, fled into the west country
She and the prince, full sore him then pursued
And at Bristowe, she headed, as men might see
Sir Hugh Spenser the father that was renewed
And sir Hugh his son, that was transumed
In hye estate, and earl had be create
Of Wynchester, where he stood all mate.
Sir Hugh Spe^ser, his son at Herforde take
Was headed then, and unto London sent
So was Edmond, there headed for her sake
That was earl of Arondel there present
His head smote of, for treason so was shent
Their hedes set up, in diverse sere place
In recompense, of all their great trespass
And at London, they heded the Chaunceler
With diverse other, which they found untrue
So did they also, the kings tresourer
And there set they a parlyament all new
But first they put the king, as all men knew
In Killyngworth, there to be hold in ward
To time they se, how lords would awarde.
At which parlyame^t.iii. bishops and earls three
Three Barons also, and three Banarettes elect
To Kyllyngworth, to ride with the cominalte
All homage leege, by parliament hole direct
To surrender up, without any reiecte
The which they did, for his mysgouernaunce
With heavy chere and mournyng countenance
The king full sad, with words well auysed
Thanked them all, knowing his hye trespass
And that he was, of rule not well prouysed
To the pleasure of God, whiles he had space
Ne common well to keep in-euery case
Ne to his wife, had been a true husband
But falsely had her exyled out of land
Mekely he prayed, the lords at parlyament
His son to admytte unto the regyon
Sith he unable was to the regyment
And foul had ruled, the land without reason
He them besought, for gylte of his caryon
His son were not refused, ne chastyzed
But set in rule, by council well aduyzed.
These lords twelve, with heavy countenance
Reported unto the queen, and lords all
The sorrowful chere, and words with repentance
Of king Edward, as then it was befall
His prayer meke, and his desire fynall
Of which the lords, in yt same parlyament
Reioysed were, of his noble agreement
The.C.lxxvii. Chapter.
Edward the third, king of England and of France, began to reygne, the
year a thousand three hundredth twentye and six, and dyed the year, a thousand
three hundredth three score and seuentene, and of his reygne one and fyftye year.

EDward his son, yt prince of wales was Edward ye third.

In tender age, that time of.xiii. year
Was crowned on saint Brice day and began than
The year of Christ was then accounted clear
A thousand hole, three.C. and six and.xx. were
Whose father then had reigned.xix. year out
And in his twenty year, withouten doubt.
From the third day of July by computacyon
Of the year, unto sayncte Brycez day
So much in his twenty, by relacyon
He reigned had, and then put down for aye
From Kyllingworth, to the castle of Berkeley
By night he was carried, and translate
From wife and child, forsake and repudyate
Where he was slain, with an hot brenning spyt
Through his towayle, up to his heart within
In September, his bowelles brent for hete
That deed he was, without noise or din
On saint Mathewes day, so they did him bre^
The first year was it then accounted, and won
Of king Edward the third, that was his son
At Gloucester entombed fair, and buried
Where some say, god showed for him great grace
Since that time, with miracles laudifyed
Often times, in diverse many case
As is written there, in that same place
For which king Richard, called the second
To translate him was purposed hole and sound
Sir James Douglas, in England with an host
Destroyed the land, wherefore the king Edward
With French henauldes, and Englysh for yt most
In mighty host and great then came northward
The second year of his reygne, to regard
Whom in Stanhope park, he besieged then
That compted were of Scotts, ten. M. menn^
By.xv. days, that syege there endured
He held them in, they might not pass out
But through a moss, yt all men trowed was sured
So deep of mire, and broad it was about
No siege was laid, for there they had no doubt
By which yt Scotts, cast them what so betyde
To escape away, in the nyghtes tide
But James Douglas, their flekes fell did make
Which over the moss, echeone at others end
He laid anon, with fagottes fell over the lake
There gate away, and passage to pretend
On which by night, they led their horse unkind
And home they went, to Scotland harmless
Whereof the king was heavy there doutlesse
When they were over yt quaking moss and mire
They drew the flekes ay after as they went
That English should not them sue ne conquer
This was a point of war, full sapyent
But on our side, there was by consequent
But little wit, that left the mire vnwatched
And by good watch, yt Scotts might have be cached
And in the year, a thousand ^ompted clear
Queen Isabell, her daughter married
Dame Jane of ye tower, to David Bruis her pere
King Robertes son, and heir hole notifyed
At Berwyk town, the second day signified
Of Iuill, and of king Edward then was three
By cause of which, the king in pryuite.
The.C.lxxviii. Chapter.
Of the relesse that king Edward made in his tender age to king Robert of
his service of Scotland, which John Hardinge delivered to king Edward
the.iiii. at Leycester with a patent, by which ye earl of Dunbar bound him and
his heirs, to hold his lands of yt kings of England.

BY council of his mother, and the Mortymer were
Relesed there the hole soueraynte
And service dew, that to the crown then
^t Berwike then without autorite
Or any parlyament in especialte
In tender age, and youths intelligence
In his third year, so of his hie regence
He sent (...)th then, to Henauld for a wife
A bishop (...)other lords temporal
Where in chaumbre preuy and secretife
At discouerit dischenely also in all
As semyng was to estate virginal
Among them selfs, our lords for hie prudence
Of the bishop asked counsel and sentence
Which daughter of five, should be the queen
Who counsailled thus, with sad auisement
We will have her, with good hippis I mean
For she will bear good soonnes, at mine intent
To which they all accorded by one assent
And chase Philip, that was full feminine
As the bishop most wise did determyne
But then among them selfs, they laugh fast ay
The lords then said, the bishop couth
Full mekill skyll, of a woman always
That so couth chese, a lady that was uncouth
And for yt merry words, that came of his mouth
They trowed he had, right great experience
Of womanes rule, and her conuenience
King Robert Bruys, smitten in lepry dyed
To whom his soonne David, then did succeed
And crouned was, for king and notified
His wife also, was crouned queen in deed
King Edwardes suster, she was then as I read
Sir Roger then that was lord Mortimer
With Isabell the queen was holden dear
Through hardiness of which he wasted clean
The king his tresour as was notified
For which Henry earl of Lancastre for tene
Rose with great host, as then was fortified
To have withstand, and clearly have replied
The wantonness of Roger Mortymer
That was that time the queen's playfeer
But treated he was, to sit in rest and peace
Notwithstanding, at the coronacion
Of king Edward, chose he was without lees
His custode then for good informacion
Of the king his person, and preseruacion
But queen Isabell, and the Mortimer
Would not suffer, ne while that so it were
Edmond Wodstok, that then was earl of Kent
By king Edward, of Carnaruan create
Whose brother he was, by queen Isabelles intent
And Mortimer his mighty and great estate
Arested was and stood repudiate
At Winchester foriudged in parliament
And hedid there again the common assent
A brother he had, hight Thomas of Brotherto^
Earl of Northfolk, and marshall of England
That of his death made none execucion
For lords all, the greatest of the land
Full sorry were, but naught they took on hand
Fro noone till even without the castle gate
He stood condemned as a repudiate
Whom then at even, a boy of the marshalse
Stroke of his hedde, for whom the lords than
And commons all, displeased were inwardly
At Notyngham sone after they began
Where Mortimer, therle of March then
Arested were, and his soonne sir Roger
And to the toure of London sent they were
On saint Andrews day they were draw and hong
At London, so by dome of the parlyament
At Westminster holden by process long
Sir Simond Bedford, was of their assent
Draw and hanged, therefore they went
And fro the queen his mother he resumed
His lands all, for she had so consumed
His treasour foul, and all his great riches
He put her to her dower, and no more
To live upon, at the friar minours doubtless
Where she had not been brought before
And there she dyed, and buried is therefore
At London now, full feire and reverently
Where she had dwelt long, full honorably
Edward Baylioll, to claim Scotland the^ went
And with him went, sir Gilbert Vmfreuile
Claimyng to be earl, by his whole intent
Of Angeous then, as chroniclers compile
Sir Henry Beaumont also went that while
His heritage to get and to conquer
Therledome of Boughan, should be his clear
Henry Percy, with Edward Bailioll went
Galoway to claim, as for his heritage
By ship they went, all whole by one assent
At Rauensporne and landed with great courage
At Kincorne well in Fyfe by all knowlage
David Strabolgy earl of Athellis by right
With them the^ went, for his lands there to fight
They were accounted two. M. fightyng men
And five hundred byside the mariners
At their landyng, their shipis they brent right then
And bored some, and sanke at good leysers
They thought them self, of good and strong powers
They took none head, of shippis home again
But landeway ride, for all the Scotts dain
They took none head, nor yet consideracion
Of thousands many, ne of great multitude
As lords do now of commons congregation
But put their cause to god his hie excelsitude
And in their own hands solicitude
At Kincorne, then faught with therle of Fyffe
Discomfit him and fled away with life
His men were slain, upon the feld echeone
The^ Robert Bruys, ye bastard soo^ne their Guide
The lord Seton, with power came anon
And new battaill them gave, with mekell pride
That noumbred were, ten thousand on their side
Which slain were all, for they would take none
Saufe the chiefteynes, that fled away alone
The king Edward Baylioll with his power
To Dunfermelyne abbey, then forth so went
Where in Glasinore, yt Scotts then sembled were
Forty thousand, full proud in their intent
And all were slain, without suppowelment
Therle of Mar and therle of Murray
Therle of Carryk, and Menth dyed that day
And after soon, at Deplyng More met
Sir Neel Bruys, with ten thousand in feer
That slain were there, and to therth down beet
The English had the feld that day full clear
Their ordinance was, to take no prisoner
Wherefore they slew the Scotts without mercy
Lest new bataill came on them in hie
At these battailles, before that been written
Sixty thosaund Scotts, slain and mortefied
Were more with prees, as afterward was weten
Then with man's hand, they were so feel multiplied
Echeone on other, of pride so reuied
Without rule of marcill governance
They smored were, by their contrariaunce
And but two knights, and thirty and three squiers
Which there were dedde of the English power
In four battailles faught, with axe swerd and speris
At Diplyng Moore, fro time the soo^ne rose clear
To three after noon, as says the chronicler
Within seven days they smote these.iiii. battailies
As chronicles make full clear rehersailes
The^ went they forth, unto saint John's town
That was replete, and full of all vitaile
And kept the town with manly direccion
Archebald Douglas and earl Patrik no fail
Of Dunbarre then, the town began tassaile
With thirty thousand, but there they were well bet
With cast of stones, and great defense ouerset
The citees then, and tounes to the sea side
At their costage, to Scotland sent a flete
To help our lords, and get them good that tide
And with the shippis, of Scotland for to mete
And so they did, and sore them all to beat
And brought them home, and some with wildfyre bre^t
In Taye water and some they sanke and shent
Wherefore the Scotts, the siege then forsook
Thenglish lords, at Skone the king did croune
Edward Baliol the soonne was, who will look
To John Baliol king of that region
Whom then before, Henry Beaumount brought
From Baliol, where he was lord in France
As his aunceters had been of remembrance
This king Edward Baliol his fooes sought
And at Rokisburgh, faught* with therle of Murrey
Discomfited them, in battaill sore there fought
And to Duresme sent him fro thens away
There to be kept in siker strong array
Then sir Archbald Douglas and earl Patrike
Then of Dunbar, their king thought to be swi(...)
They took with him a trewce to Candylmasse
From, October, in trust of which he sent
Thenglishe lords, to England home express
Trustyng he had been sure in his entente
All was falshede, that the two earls meant
For they vphelde David, in tender age
King Robartes son, to whom they did homage
Sir James Douglas and earl Patrike Du^bare
With all their help, at the Candilmasse
On Edward roase the Bailiol, or he were ware
And slew all that they found doutlesse
That fayn he was, to England to flee helpelesse
At March after, he entered then Scotland
With the same lords, then of the north land
On both sides they rode, and fast destroyed
And to Berwike Edward Bailol came
And sieged it, and felly was annoyed
To which Edward of England, with great fame
Came with his host, and lay there at the same
The Douglas then, and Dunbare with power
Northumberlande all through brent full clear.
The.C.lxxix. Chapter.
Of the battle of Halidon hill, and how Edward Bayliol did homage leege, to
king Edward of England.

TO Halydon hill, they came with their prays
Barwike castle and town so to rescue
Where to our host, full often they made frayes
Both day and even, and morowes or day dew
But then the king of England to him drew
The king also of Scotland with his might
Full sore that day in battle did they fight.
Where Edwardes two, had all the victory
The royaltes of all Scotland, there were slain
Thyrty thousand, with them liggand by
Of men of arms, and archers dead certain
Then in the year, next after soth to sayn
At newcastell, Edward king of Scotland
His homage did, to the king of England. Homage of yt Scotts.

For which, yt commons of Scotland on him rose
And slew his men, that he into England came
And gatte an host, and rode upon his fooes
Through Anand, through Kylay and Conyngham,
Carrike and Glascowe, slew al yt he found at hame
The king Edward of England with power
Through Lowthian, so did to Stryuelyn clear.
And both met there, with great gladness
And home they came, destroiyng all the way
Another year in Iule, for to redress
Scotland again, with hosts they began a fraye
At saint John's town they met in great array
And there they made, therle of Athelis regent
Whom the commons felly slew and shent.
King Edward sent after in another year
In May Henry Lancastre, a noble knight
To Scotland, with an host of good power
And afterward he came with mekill might
To saint John's town, and on the months right
Through Murrey to Elgyne, Giluernes and Rosse
Throughout mounteynes woddes mire and moss.
King Edward, then came home into England
And proclaimed his son, Edward nominate
The prince of Wales, thens forth I understand
Henry Lancastre, the younger he create
Earl of Derby, to bear the hole estate
Wyllyam Mountague, earl of Salisbury
Of Northampton, Wyllyam Bowne full manly.
Of Gloucester he made, Hugh of Awdely
Of Suffolk then, he made Robert Hufforth
Of Huntyngdon, Wyllyam Clinton gay
Which earls, the king took with him forth
With many a worthy knight, both of south and north
And with the queen, so unto Andwarpe
And there abode, by all the winter sharp.
With great people, and worthy chyualrye
Again the king of France, to claim his right
And wrote his title, unto yt Romish bishop on hie
The duke of Bar, and other lords of might
The queen's friends, then socoure had him hight
Where then the queen, of her son Lionell
Delivered was, as chronicles do tell
He cherished then Flaundres, that they forsook
Their natural lord, and swore feautee
To him and his, their power they betoke
To bide and dwell, under his souerayntee
Because they saw in him such humanitee
He changed his arms, in banners and penons
And in his seal, quartred of both regions.
And in the year, then of his reygne thyrtene
His arms changed, and called king of France
He rode in France on war, as then was seen
A thousand tounes he brent, by his puysaunce
The king of France, without variaunce
Sent him word, that he would with him fight
But at the point, he did not as he hight
For at that time, in sonder they were a mile
He fled away, king Edward held the field
Two days after he sued and Vmfreuile
Of him had sight, and then he found his sheld
By which he knew, his covenant he not held
Wherefore the king, to Brabant went again
The dukes three of Bar Earl and Brabayn
The parliament the^, at Westmynster was hold
Where they granted him, the.ix. la^be flees and shave
Of the commons, but the church no more would
Him grant, but one dysme of them to have
For which he granted general perdone and gave
The.ix. lamb slees and shave, grant was two year
To help the king, his right to conquer
The.C.lxxx. Chapter. (...)
How king Edward smote the battle on the sea at Sluse beside Brydges, and
how the king first rode into France, and quartred his arms with the arms
of France, and sent to king Philip, to try the right between them two.

ANd in his year next after, then fourtene
At Sluse yt king faught, with the French navy
Fro noone to eve and to the morrow, as was seen
Where all were drouned and slain myghtely
And king Edward, to France went hastily
With host full great, destroyed the land and brent
The cytee of Turnais, besieged and shente
Then wrote he to the king Philip of France
Not namyng him king of that land
But to Philip of Valoys, for greuaunce
Willing alone, they two to take on hand
To fight for the cause, and for to stand
Who has the better, for ever to hold France
Without war, or any more dystaunce
Or else, they two either with an.C. knights
And if these ways, please him not to except
Come with his host, and all his strongest wyghtes
To the cytee of Tournay, none except
At a certain day, justly to be kept
And who the field may get, brook well France
Without more strife, or any varyaunce
The king then wrote unto king Edward again
That he would not for the letters fight
Which touch not king Philyp in certain
But Philyp Valoys, as shows well to sight
To which he would set, neither day ne highte
But when he thought it were for his honor
He should him chase away without socoure
Out of his land, which wrongfully he shows
Again his faith, feautye made and homage
To his auncesters by letter, as it shows
Under his seal, of hole and good knowlage
For Guyan, and his other heritage
And fro Turnace into Brabane again
The king Edward, in winter did remain
To bide the bishops rule and disposicyon
Of good accord, for then two cardynalles
To take a trewce, by good prouisyon
During two year, between them generals
And all their friends, that were princypalles
Then came the king to Edward into England
His officers new made, I understand.
To the trewce then taken at Maltrete
The dukes two, of Burgoyne and Burbone
In the kings soul of France, swore and hete
Truly to keep, for friends or for foone
And duke Henry of Lancaster, sad as stone
Willyam Bowne Earl of Northhampton
And Willyam Mountague, full hye of renoune
Earl of Salisbury, in king Edwardes soul there
In like manner, were sworn and biheste
The.xix. day, then of Ianyuere
The year of Christ, a. M. then was seste
Three hundredth and two, and forty at leest
When these trues were taken so, and sealed
For afterward, they should not be repeled
The.C.lxxxi. Chapter.
How Henry duke of Lancaster went to Guyan, in yt year of Christ, a thousand
three hundredth.xlv. And of the battle of Cressy, in the year of Christ, a
thousand, three hundeeth fourtye and six.

ANd then Henry duke of Lancaster create
Went to Guyen, with many bold baron
Where then he gate, the cytees of estate
And castelles feel, and many a walled town
And made the land English, both up and down
And to the king Edward obeyed, as they ought
And great worship and riches there he caught
And in the year a thousand and.CCC. gone
Six and fourtye, king Edward at Cressy
Met with Philyp, of Valoyes there anon
That king of France was by intrusery
At which battle, Edward had the victory
And with honor and might, there gate yt field
And Philyp fled, and cast there down his shield
And his eldest son, with him went away
With an hundredth banners, in her company
The kings of Beme, were slain that day
And of Maliogres, there full manfully
The dukes of Alaunson, also them by
And of Loreyn slain were, in battle
And earls five, without any fail
Of Flaunders, Bloys Harcourt and Melayne
Of gentyls and other, without any Essayne
And of Guntpre, were there in battle slain
Five score thousand, the twenty day certain
And six also of Auguste, accounted plain
The king Edward had all the victory
The king Philyp, had all the vilanye.
The king David theu, of Scotland with power
To Duresme brent, where on saint Lukes day
The archbishop, with his clergy clear
And sir Gylbert Vnifreuyle, in good array
The Lord Percy the Neuyle, then lay
With all the north, a little from Duresme
Where then they faught, and on yt king David came
And take he was, yt year of Christ was then
A thousand, full three hundredth forty and six
Full sore wounded, full like he was a man
And also of his lords, mo then five or six
Brought to London privily, through Essex
For lords should not him take with great power
From John of Coupland, yt was his taker clear
And in ye tower of London, then kept in ward
To time the king were come home out of France
That then in France, mo castelles to regard
And towns walled, gotten by his hye puissaunce
Then had the king Philip in governance
And like was then, all France to have conquerde
With his alies, he made that land afferde
The.C.lxxxii. Chapter.
Of the great pestylence, in the year of Christ a thousand three hundredth
fortye and nine, and the year next after, the king went unto France, and
the prince of Wales unto Guyan.

ANd in the year of Christ clerly accounted
A thousand hole, three.C. forty and nine
The pestilence was in England amou^ted
That king Edward new war ganne ymagine
The next year after, again France fine
Thither he went, and prince Edward then went
With great power to Guien, as Regent.
The king then put his sons young of age
In France then forth, in mighty governance
Sir Lyonell, Earl of Vlster in wage
Regent of France, him made by ordinance
Sir John of Gaunt, to have hole attendaunce
Of all the host, as hye and great constable
To which he was account, yt time full able.
Sir Edmonde Langeley, full of gentylnesse
Sir Thomas Woodstok full of courage
To their banners, them put for worthynesse
To have rule in that worthy viage
Which princes five, approved in young age
There was no king christen, had such sons five
Of lyklynesse, and persons that time on live
So hye and large, they were of all stature
The least of them, was of person able
To have foughten with any creature
Singler battle in acts marcyable
The bishops wit, me thinks was commendable
So well could chese the princess yt them bare
For by practyse he knew it, or by lare
The.C.lxxxiii. Chapter.
How the king of France was taken prisoner at the battle of Poyters, the
year of Christ, a thousand, three hundredth fyftye and six.

IN the year of Christ, a M accounted right
Three hundredth and six, and fyfty mo
The prince Edward, at Poytexs sore did fight
The.xix. day of September, was tho
Where king John of France, his son also
He took and had the field, with victory
His eldst son then, fled fro him cowardly
The king Dauyd died, and let his hostage
For his ransom lygge ay forth in England
The year, a thousand.CCC. by knowlage
Eight and fyftye, as I can understand
And paid not yet, ne quyt not out his bond
Ne his hostage, he would not so displease
To deliver, ne put them fro their ease
The queen Isabell, and the queen of Scotland
Her daughter was, and king Dauyds wife
Sone after dyed, and buried I understand
At the graye Freres, in land knewen full ryfe
The which yt queen Isabell founded in their life
Full fair entombed, and wrought full rychely
Where the two Queen's rest full honorably
The.C.lxxxiiii. Chapter.
Of the second pestylence and the great wind and earthquake, the year a
thousand. CCC, lxi.

ANd in the year of Christ, a. M. written
Three hundredth also syxtye and one
The.ii. pestylence, reigned as was weten
Duke Henry dyed, for whom was mekyll moan
Dame Blaunche his daughter, full fair of flesh and bone
His heir was then, whom John of Gau^t did wed
The duchy by her had, men said he had well sped
In that same year was, on saint Maurys day
The great wind and earth quake marvelous
That greatly began the people all affraye
So dreadful was it then and perelous
Specially the wind was so boistous
The stone walls, steples houses and trees
Were blow down in diverse far countries
And in the year a thousand three hundred also
Sixty and four, king John of France dyed King John of France

In London then, in Sauoy had been sick
The dukes palice of Lancastre edified
Full royally as it is notified
His boweles buried, at Poules with royaltee
His corpse in France, with all solempnitee
In that same year, sir John Mou^tfort of new
Duke of Brytain was by heritage
As heir male, his title was act true
At Orrers faught, again the French lineage
Sir Charles de Bloys, that clauned by marriage
The duchy whole, of Brytain by the might
Of his wise, where he was slain by might
Duke John of Gaunt, was at that battle
Sir Edmond also of Langley his brother dear
Sir John Chaundos treated without faill
All day, and faught at eve through his answer
Which treaty is yet, often remembered here
For Chau^dos trewce, that treted all day to night
And made both parties at eve together fight
At which battaill, duke John of Gau^t in deed
And his brother Edmond, then faught full sore
Were never two better knights, the^ they in deed
That better faught upon a feld before
It was but grace, that they escaped thore
They put them selfs so ferfurth ay in prces
That wounded were they both, full sore no lees
The.C.lxxxv. Chapter.
How prince Edward of Wales wedded dame Ioha^ daughter of Edmond Wodstoke earl
of Kent, he of yt third degree and she of the second.

THese brethren two with their English power
Set John Mou^tfort i^ his whole ducherie
With great honor and manhood all in fere
Earl John of Kent dedde was before sothely
Earl Edmo^des soo^ne, to whom dame Ioha^ truly
His sister was heir, whom therle Mountague
Of Salisbury had wed of maiden new
And her forsook, after repudiate
Whom his styward sir Thomas Holand wed
And gate on her, Thomas earl of Kent late
And John Holand her other soonne she head
Thomas their father, dyed of sickness bested
The prince her vowid unto a knight of his
She said she would none, but him self I wis
For her beauty, all only he her took
And wed her so, and to Guyan went
The year was then a thousand who so look
Three hundred also, sixty and five extent
Rychard his soonne, whiles he was there regent
In Burdaur borne was the^ with great gladness
Supposyng then, of him great worthynes
The king Peter of Castle and Lion A battaill in Spain

To Bordeaux came, and there prince Edward beheld
To get again his worthy region
Fro which his brother bastard with full strong beeld
Had put him out, and thought it for to weeld
For which the prince with all his hole power
Rode into Spain to help him to conquer
Where the^ he faught, against the bastard strong
The third day of April accounted then
In battaill sore ferfoughten there full long
In which were slain full many a Spanish ma^ne
The basterd fled, the prince the feld there wan
And set the king Peter in his region
In peace and rest without rebellion
The.C.lxxxvi. Chapter.
How the lords of Italy sent ambassiate to king Edward for sir Leonell of
Andwarp, to make him king of Italy, who was create earl of Vister by his wife,
daughter and heir to Rychard earl of Vister of whom he gate dame Philip,
wedded to Edmond Mortimer earl of March, which earl of March gate Roger earl
of March and my lady Percy.

THe duke of Milayn yt hight sir Bernabo
The lord Ma^towe and the marquis Ferrar
The lord of Mountpollestrme then also
The lords of Iene, of Pyse that then were
The lords of Venis, and Florence there
To king Edward, sent ambassiate
By commen assent, of papal senate
For Lionell his soonne, with them to send
The duke his daughter of Melayn, for to wed
Promisyng him then, him so to recommend
That of Itale the rule should all be led
By him and his friends, of Italye bred
And in short time, to joy and bear the croune
Of all Italye the royal region
His wife was dedde, and at Clare was buried
And none heir he had, but his daughter fair
Philp that hight, as chronicles specified
Whom queen Philip Christened for his heir
Tharchbishop of York, for his compeire
Her godmother also, of Warwyk the countess
A lady was of all great worthynes
The king his soonne, sir Leonell create
Duke of Clarence, and to Melayn him sent
With chivalry of fame, well ordinate
And squyers fresh, galaunt and sufficient
With officers and yomen, as appent
And with him went, that great ambassiate
At his costage, to Melayn consociate
The.C.lxxxvii. Chapter.
How sir Leonell when his wife Elionor was dedde was create duke of Clarence,
and weddid the dukes daughter of Melayn in Lumbardy, and dyed there and had no
child with her, and some say he is buried there and some say, his boones
were brought home and buried at Clare in Essex, but in troth of Clare he had
his name, and honor of duke of Clarence, for Clare is called Clarencia in
Latyne, and also Clarence in French.

THis duke royal, of Clarence excellent
At Melayne, wedded was the^ in royal wise
With that lady fair and beneuolent
Full royally, as to such a prince should suffice
And all the rule he had, by council wise
Fro mount Godard, unto the city of Florence
And well beloved was, for his sapience.
In citees all, he held well vnitees
Great iustes ay, and ioyus tournementes
Of lords and knights, he made great assemblees
Through all the land, by his wise regimentes
They purposed hole, by their commen assentes
To croune him king, of all great Italy
Within half a year, for his good gouernaly
In all the world, was then no prince him like
Of hie stature, and of all semelynesse
Above all men, within his hole kyngrike
By the shulders, he might be seen doutlesse
As a maid in halle of gentilnesse
And in all other places, son to rethorike
And in the field, a Lion marmorike
In which mean time, his iustes and his excess
His great riot, and wynes delicacie
His ghost exiled, out of his corpse doutlesse
Before the day set of his regence
For whom was made great moan, through Italy
Some sayen he is buried at Melayn
And other some say, at Clare certain.
But children had he noone, but Philip heir
By Elizabeth his first wife, which the king
Edward married, to Emond Mortymer
Therle of March, that was his ward fulying
Who gate on her, Roger their derelyng
And Elizabeth wed to Henry Percy
Son and heir, unto therle Henry
Of Northumberland, which two both father and son
Were knightly men, in wars ay occupied
Beyond the sea great worship had they won
In many a realm, full greatly magnified
For marcyall acts by them multiplied
The which were long here to report
For in their time, they were of noble port.
But of the prince Edward, yet would I say
How he fro Spain depart then in deed
The king Peter took him, his daughters tweyn
Thelder hight dame Constaunce as I read
To duke John wedded, his life with her to lead
The younger hight dame Isabell by name
The duke Edmond of York wedded of great fame
And in the year, a thousand fully written
Three hundredth eke sixty, and also fouretene
The prince Edward died, as well was weten
At Kenyngton, which was his palice clean
And buried was, at Cauntorbury as I wene
Betook him hole to gods disposicion
After his mercy to suffer his punycion.
And in the year of Christ's incarnacion
A thousand hole, and three hundredth signified
The prince pereles, by all informacion
Sixty and seuentene clearly notified
Great syckenesse, so had him victoried
And drove him out, from all his region
That never prince might have dooe^ by persecucio^
In June the.xxii. day express
Was, when he died, and from this world expired
That was the flower of earthly worthynes
That to the height of knighthode had aspired
His own hand pereles, as was enquired
At Westmynster buried in royal wise
As to such a prince, of reason ought suffice.
Who was the first of English nation
That ever had right, unto the croune of France
By succession of blood and generation
Of his mother without variaunce
The which me thinks, should be of most substance
For Christ was king by his mother of Iudee
Which sykerer side is ay, as thinks me.
And of his pedegre unto the croune of France
With his blood, whereof he is descent
Within this book, without any varyaunce
Mention is made, only to this entente
That reders by all good auysemente
The title of his right and heritage
May well conceive, and have thereof knowlage.
The.C.lxxxviii. Chapter.
Richard the second king of England and of France, began to reign the year
a thousand three hundredth and.lxxvii. and was deposed by parliamente, in the
year a. M.CCC.cxix. and the.xxii. year of his reygne.

RIchard his heir, yt son of prince Edward King Richard the second.

Crowned was then, with all solempnitee
By all the lords and barons hole award
Obeying hole unto his maiestee
Who that time, was in tender iuuensee
Of eleven year, fully accounted of age
When he had so his croune and heritage.
And king was called, of England, and of France
In June the.xxii. day full clean
Of Christ's death, without variaunce
A thousand was, three hundredth sixty to neuen
And.xvii. year therewith to beleuen
When the two realms, fell to him by discente
As next heir, to king Edward thexellent
And in the year, a thousand three hundredth mo
Sixty adioynt, and therewith all nynetene
The third pestilence reigned in England so
So sore, that most part of the people clean
Dyed away, as through the realm was seen
And of his reigns of Eglande and of France
The third year was, by very remembrance.
And of his reign, in June then the.v. year
And of our Lord, a thousand then accounted
Three hundredth, eke.iiii. score and one full clear
The commons rose, an hundredth thousand amou^ted Insurrec

Of Kent and Essex, which that time surmounted
The kings power, and all the hie estates
For which the lords fled then as exulates.
And left the king, alone then in the toure
With tharchbyshop of Cauntorbury there so
And the priour, to been his gouernoure
Of Clerken well, which the commons heded tho
And brought the king forth, with them to go
They asked him, all bondmen to be free
And tax none, ever after paid to be.
They asked eke, Iake Straw, and Wat Tiler
To be made dukes, of Essex and Kente
To rule the king thens forth, in peace and war
For they be wise, of royal regiment
Thus told they the king all their intent
The which he grant, in all thing by and by
For he durst no point, then them deny.
Before Iake Straw, yt king the^ stood hodlesse
Of which Walworth, the Mayre of London true
Areasoned him then, of his great lewdenesse
With a dagger, in Smythfelde then him slew
The citezens, with him then strongly drew
And slew them down, and put them to flight
And brought the king, into the city right.
The commons brent the Sauoye, a place fair
For eiuill will they had unto duke John
Wherefore he fled northwarde in great despair
Into Scotland, for socoure had he none
In England then, to who^ he durst make moon
And there abode, till commons all were ceased
In England hole, and all the land well peased
The.xx. day of May next following
And one therewith, as calculers it know
The date of Christ a thousand then being
Three hundredth also four score and two on row
Thearth quake was, which that time I saw
That castelles, walls, toures and steples fill
Houses and trees and cragges fro the hill
And in the year before, king Richard wed
Queen Anne, upon saint Agnes day that flower
That daughter was, as I have seen and red
Unto the king of Beeme and Emperor
And suster also, unto his successoure
The Emperor of Rome, that Segemond hight
Who to king Henry in England came full right.
The.C.lxxxix. Chapter.
How king Richard went into Scotland, in the year a thousand three hundredth
and.lxxxvi. and in his reygne the.x. year, and how he create two dukes of
York and of Gloucestre.

ANd in the year of Christ, a thousand so
Three hundredth also, four score and.vi. there till
And of his reign, the.x. year and mo
The king Richard, with host went at his will
In to Scotland, his courage to fulfill
To Edinburgh, and brent the land also
Without lettyng there of any foo
At London so then at his parlyament
He made therle of Cambrydge his uncle dear
The duke of York, to be incontinent
And so he was proclaimed there full clear
That Edmonde hight, of Langley of good chere
Glad and merry, and of his own ay lived
Without wrong, as chronicles have breued
When all the lords, to council and parlyament
Went, he would to hunte and also to hawekyng
All gentle disporte, as to a lord appent
He used aye, and to the pore supportyng
Where ever he was, in any place bidyng
Without suppryse, or any extorcyon
Of the porayle, or any oppressyon.
He made also the earl of Bokyngham
Thomas Wodstoke, that same day and create
His other uncle duke of Gloucester by name
Proclaimed hole, and so denominate
With his brother to be consociate
The fox tail he bare ay on his spear
Where he so rode in peace, or else in war.
The king then made yt duke of york by name
Master of the mewhouse, and his hawks fair
Of his venery, and master of his game
In what country he did repeyre
Which was to him, without any dispeyre
Well more comfort and great gladness
Then been a lord, of worldly great richesse
His uncle Thomas, ye duke then of Gloucester
And wed the daughter, then of therle of Herforth
By which he had, by writing and by letter
The Constablery of England, then ay forth
Both by South, Est, West, and North
By heritage, of his wives land and right
Of ancient time, by kings grant and hight
And in the year of king Richard elleuen
The duke Thomas that was of Gloucester * The batail of Rot^ote bridge

Henry the earl of Derby did beleuen
With him by word, and also by his letter
The earl Marshall did, so then for the better
Therle Beanchampe, of Warwyk by his name
Of Arundell the earl, did the same.
These lords five together, boldly sworn
Again Robert Veer, then duke of Irelande
The kings pleasure, and one of age both like borne
Whom he loved most, as they could understand
With batayl strong, at Rotcot bryge took on hand
To fight with him, where then he fled away
Over Thamis, without return for ay.
The.C.xc. Chapter.
Of the great parlyament, where the five lords foriuged yt duke of Irelande,
and his compeers

AT Lenton next accounted in the year
At London then, ye king set his parliament
At westminster to hold it there most clear
Where these five lords came armed, by one asse^t
Appealed the duke of Irelande, of great intent
The archbishop of York, that hight Neuyle
And Michell poole, earl of Suffolk that while
Sir Nichol Bre^byr of London yt was Mayre
Tresilyan also, and sir Symonde Bourley
Which they exyled, and some they honge vnfeyre
Some they heded that time, that was full gaye
Holt and Belknap, exyled were away
In to Irelande, for hye contryued treasone
Again the king, and his royal crown.
The earl Douglas, and the earl of March also * The batayl of Otturborne

Northumberlande, by west the new castle
Unto Morpath norwarde, did mikyll woe
At Otturborne, as chronycles did tell
Henry Percy, with small host on him fell
And slew Douglas, and many put to the flight
And gate the field upon his enemies right
He sent the lord, sir Thomas Vmfreuyle
His brother Robert, and also sir Thomas Gray
And sir Mawe Redmayn, beyond yt Scotts that while
To hold them in, yt they fled not away
Wherefore the Scotts releued again always
Through which, Henry was take there anon
To Du^bar led, for whom was made great moan
The field was his, all if yt he were take
The Vmfreuyle Gray, Ogle and Redmayne
Held the field hole, yt might so for his sake
And knew nothing whetherwarde he was gayn
The Earl of March, with preuy men alane
Full privily to Dunbarre, with him rode
And kept him there, for he was greatly ferde.
The Douglas all yt many were that day
Labored full sore, with wyles and great wit
Him to have slain, for ever and ay
For Douglas death, so sore they rewed it
This batail was on saint Oswoldes day commit
The.xii. year of the king, and of Christ's date
Thirtene.C. four score, and eight socyate
The.C.xci. Chapter.
How the queen Anne dyed, and how king Rychard went first to Irelande with
his hooste.

ANd in the year, a thousand.iii. C. and mo
Four score and fourtene, queen Anne died
The.xviii. year, was of the king then so
And buried was, as well is notifyed
Of all virtue, she was well laudefyed
To womanhede, that might in ought appende
At Westminster, she is full well commend
At Michelmasse next after following
In that same year, the king to Irelande went
With great power, and host therein warrynge
Upon Makmur, with all his hole entente
And on the great Aneell, by one ascent
Of his lords, where Makmurre and great Aneel
To him obeyed, and made him homage leel.
The earl of March, sir Roger Mortymer
The king made then Leuetenau^t of Irelande
That young was then, and home he came yt year
And great hoshoulde held, as I can understand
Far passing kings, of any other land
For which, the voice on him rose and name
Through christendom, he bare then forth yt fame
And in the year a thousand, as was then
Three hundredth eke four score, and also syxtene
Of his reygne, the.xviii. year was then
At Alhalowmasse king Rychard as was seen
At Calys wed, dame Isabell the queen
King Charles daughter, yt then was king of France
At Christmasse crowned by governance
And in Smithfelde great, iustes and tornement
Of all realms and diverse nacyon
Of English, Iryshe and Walshe present
Of Scotts also, were at the coronacyon
And iusted there with great co^mendacy on
By.xiiii. days iusted who so would
Henry of Derby, bare him then full bold
Henry Percy, and Raufe his brother gaye
Robert Morley, and sir John Grene Cornewell
Here Nichol Hauberke, and eke sir Mawburney
Walter Bytterley, sir Thomas Blankeueile
Sir Hugh Spencer, and Iamco saunz fail
Here Hans, here John, and the lord fitz Walter
Blaket Dynmoke, and also the lord Spencer.
Vmfreuyle, and his brother Roberte
Vmfrey Stafforde, and sir Rychard Arundell
These.xx. held the field within full sinert
Again all other, that would with Iustes mell
Of what nacyon he were, that man can tell
Of in any land, the knights iusted their
And squyers also without, yt well them bare
The.C.xcii. Chapter.
How the king arest the duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Warwyk, and
Aroundell, and foreiuged them for treason, and made five Dukes, a Marquis, and
four Earls, and watched day and night with Cheshyre men, for dread of
insurreccyon.

THe year of Christ, a. M. was so then
Three.C. eke four score and also seuentene
At mydsomer, the king with many a man
At Plashe took Thomas, of Wodstoke full kene
Of Gloucester, the duke that was full clean
That smyten was, in fell and great syknesse
And in the tower him put in great distress
Whom sone he sent, to Calyce secretly
And murdered him, in the princes inn
By hole advice, of his council privily
And in each shyre, of which he did great sin
His confession of treason, more and mynne
Of.ix. points feigned, he then proclaimed
To staunche the folk, yt for him cried and claymed.
He then arest Thomas, earl of Warwyke
And Earl Richard, of Arundell no lees
The lord Cobham full true, and also manlyke
Foringed them, by strength of men and prees
The earl of Warwyk, his name for to distress
Unto this^e of Man in sore prison
Of Arundell therle hedded for treson
The lord Cobham in to prisone perpetual
In the tower to abide for ever more
At Mighelmasse next so then did bifall
The king then held his great parlyament thore
At Westminster, where the king mustred sore
At the Blakeheth, an hundred thousand men
To make the commons, for to dred him then
At which parlyame^t, he made therle of Derby
Duke of Herford, therle of Rutland also
Of Almarle duke, therle of Kent duke of Surry
Therle of Huntyngton, duke of Excester tho
Therle Marshall he made and no mo
Duke of Northfolke, thus were there dukes five
Of new create, and none was substantive
He made therle of Somerset marquis
Of Dorset then, sir John Beaufort that hight
Of poor liuelode that was that time doubtless
Four earls next he made, in mantiles full right
With swerdes girt, the lord Spencer on hight
That create was then earl of Gloucester
Thomas Percy also earl of Worcester
The lord Neuell then earl of Westmerland
Wyllyam Scrope earl of Wiltshire create
That Chamberleyn was then, I understand
And tresourer of England ordinate
These four earls were thus consociate
Then all these dukes, and earls with many mo
Of lords young he had aye with him
Bishopes thirtyne, he held then forth each day
Barons many, and many a worthy knight
To great nombre, and squiers fresh and gaye
And officers, well mo then nedid right
In each office, by tenfold mo to sight
Then were before, for then he had each day
Two hundred men, of Cheshire where he lay
To watch him aye, where so ever he lay
He dred him aye, so of insurreccion
Of the commons and of the people aye
He trusted none of all his region
But Chesshire men for his proteccion
Where ever he rode, with arowes and bows bent
They were with him, aye ready at his intent
The.C.xciii. Chapter.
How in the time of king Rychard reigned over passing pride, aduoutree, and
lechery as well in men of the spirituality as in other of his house.

TRuly I herd Robert Ireleffe say
Clerk of the grenecloth, yt to the household
Came every day, for most party always
Ten thousand folk, by his messis told
That followed the house, aye as they would
And in the kechin three hundred seruitours
And in each office many occupiours
And ladies fair with their gentilwomen
Chamberers also and lauenders
Three hundred of them were occupied then
There was great pride among th^rfficers
And of all men farpassyng their compeers
Of rich array, and much more costious
Then was before, or since, and more precious
Yemenne and gromes, in cloth of silk arrayed
Sattyn and damask, in dublettes and gounes
In cloth of grene, and scarlet for unpaid
Cut work was great, both in court and tounes
Both in me^nes hoddis, and also in their gounes
Broudur and furs, and goldsmith work aye new
In many awise, each day they did renew
In his chapel, were bishops then of Beam
Some of Ireland, and some also of France
Some of England, and clerks of many a realm
That litill connyng had or conisaunce
In music honorably, God his service to auaunce
In the chapel, or in holy scripture
On matter of Goddis to refigure
Lewed men, they were in clerks clothyng
Disguysed fair, in form of clerks wise
Their peryshyns full litill enfourmyng
In law divine, orels in God his seruise
But right practyfe they were in couetyse
Each year to make full great colleccion
At home, instead of souls correccion
Great lechery and fornicacion
Was in that house, and also great aduoutree
Of paramoures was great consolacion
Of each degree, well more of prelacie
Then of the temporal, or of the chivalry
Great tax ay the king took through all the la^d
For which commons him hated both free and bo^d
The.C.xciiii. Chapter.
How the duke of Herford and the duke of Northfolke were exiled out of England.

ANd in the year. M. and three hundred clear
Four score and therwithall eightene
And of his reign the twenty and two year
The duke Henry of Herford as was seen
At Couentree, in bars armed clean
Again the duke of Northforke, for treson
Which both, the king exiled fro his region
The duke Henry, exiled was for ten year
The other was also for term of life
That died duke, at Venys leide on bear
But duke Henry exiled was beliue
Like as the chronicle can openly discriue
For ten year whole, for to abide in France
And to avoid the realm without variaunce
Upon the pain of decollacion
And hiyng sone before saint Edwardes day
In Octobre called the translacion
Upon which day, he shipid fourth his way
At Calice londed, and so rode on always
Unto Paris, where he was fair recepte
With lords many, and worshipfully was met
In lenton next, duke John his father dyed
Of Lancaster, of weakness and of age
Entombed fair, at saint Poules buried
His heir in france should have his heritage
In May then next, the king with baronage
To Ireland went, with host and great power
The wild Irishe to win, and to conquer
For then Roger therle of March was slain
With wild Irishe, in bushment for him lay
His soonnes then, full young were both twein
In ward were take, unto the king that day
And then the king made full fell array
In every shire, blanke charters to be sealid Blancke chartres.

For cause his acts should not be repeiled
In the year of Christ a. M. was then clear King Richard his voyage in to
Irela^o

Three.C. also four score and eke ninetene
And of his reign the two and twenty year
Beginning at Midsomer, then as I mean
Which afterward turned him to mikell tene
He was then landed, in Ireland with his host
Of chivalry and power with the most
The.C.xcv. Chapter.
How duke Henry of Herford and of Leicestre landed in Holdernesse in the same
year, and Thomas Arundell archbishop of Cantorbury that before was exiled, and
how duke Henry swore to therle of Northumberland and to sir Henry Percy
wardeyns of the Marches and to therle of Westmerland and to other lords of yt
North.

AT which time so yt duke Henry took land
At Reue^sporn i Yorkshire as was know
Tharchbishop Thomas I understand
Of Cauntorbury Arondell that was low
Both of riches and gold as men saw
For the king had him out of the land exiled
Fro Cauntorbury, never more to be reconsiled
In Holdernesse, he landed with forty men
Where the lords of Lyncolneshire him met
Both Wyloughby Roos, and Darcy then
And Beaumou^t also, with Penouns proudly bette
By ordinance of Henry Percy set
Earl of Northumberland, and sir Henry
His soonne, wardeyns of the March severally
To Dancaster he rode full manfully
Where both the wardeyns of the March met
Then with the duke, with hosts great and chiualry
Therle also of Westmerland was set
With his power, as then it was his debt
For he had wed the dukes suster dear
A full good lady without any were
There swore the duke upon the sacrament
To claim no more, but his mothers heritage
His fathers lands, and his wifes in good intent
And to lay down, both tax and tallage
Whiles he might live, but of the baronage
And all the states somouned in parlyament
Thought it needful and thereto whole assent
He swore also, the king in governance
To be put by good and hole provision
And Chesshyre men, for their misgouernaunce
To void out of his house of eiuill condition
And officers of good disposicion
To rule his house, like his estate royal
Thus was his oath there made in special.
Then rode they forth to Bristowe, were the^ lay
Scrop and Busshe, and also sir Henry Grene
And headed them, but Baget fled away
And then the king, at Flynt as was seen
Great monstres made, of people that was kene
Which took his wage, and came to duke Henry
And rode ay forth, with him full redely
In this mean while, therle of Northu^berla^de
Treated with the king, that time in Conwaye
To mete with duke Henry, then in England
And brought him then, to him in meke array
With litell speech to Chester then the way
They rode anon and put him there in ward
And so to London, from thens came southwarde.
The.C.xcvi. Chapter
How duke Henry of Lancaster was made king, by resignacion, renunciacion and
deposayle and election of the parliamente and crouned at Westmynster on saint
Edwardes day in Octobre.

ANd set him in the toure, where he resigned
His right, his realm, and his royal croune
To duke Henry, which no man the^ repugned
And there he made a plain renunciacion
Of all his right, for which by provision
The parliament then, for his misgouernaunce
Deposed him so then, by great ordinance.
Then went they to a free election
Seeing the youth then of the Mortimer
That earl of the March, by true direccion
Was then, and heir of England then most ner^
To king Richard, as well then did appear
Consydred also the might of duke Henry
They chose him king, there durst none it deny.
Therle of Northumberlande, then had sent
His power home, by council of duke Henry
So did his son Henry, that truly meant
Supposyng well the duke would not vary
From his oath, ne in no wise contrary
And he and his, kept all their power
Till he was crouned king, as it did appear.
Therles two, then of Northumberlande
Of Worcester, and sir Henry Percy
And the^^e also of Westmerlande
Councelled him then, fro his oath not to varye
And though at eve he did to them apply
On the morrow, by a pryue counsayl
He would be crouned king without fail.
The.C.xcvii. Chapter.
Henry the fourth king of England and of France, was elect by yt hole
parliament, the morrow after Michelmasse day, the year of our Lord, a
thousand three hundredth four score and nynetene, and reigned.xiiii. year, and
died at Westmynster the.xix. day of March in the year of Christ a thousand
four hundredth and.xiii. and of his own reygne the.xiiii. year.

THis duke Henry, by great love of the land King Henry yt fourth

Of many lords, and of the commontee
Tharchebyshop Arondell took on hand
To croune him then, in royal maiestee
On saint Edwardes day, with great solempnitee
But king he was the morrow after Mighelmesse
His reygne beginning that day without distress
Therle of Warwike, and therle of Arondell
That exiled were, and the Lord Cobham eke
With all their friends, yt king Richard did expel
The dukes friends of Gloucester, naught to seek
Which then began for to increase and eke
Through all the realm, with king Henry to stand
To croune him king, that time of all England.
An hundredth thousand cried all at ones
At Westmynster, to croune him for king
So hated they king Rychard, for the nones
For his mysrule, and wrong gouernyng
For taxes and for blanke charters sealyng
For murder of duke Thomas of Woodstoke
That loved was well, more then all the floke
The great parliament, then he made rehearsed
The dukes of Almarle, Excestre and Surry
He depryued and the judgment reuersed
That then was made, and gave full wylfully
Again Woodstoke and Warwyke for envy
Arondell and the lord Cobham full true
Which was reuersed and revoked new.
The duke of Almarle, was then earl Rutlande
The duke of Surry, earl of kent was again
And eke the duke of Excester I understand
Of Hungtyngdon therle was to be fayn
The marquis eke of Dorset was full bayn
Of Somerset earl again to been
He chastised them, no feller as was seen
Therle of Gloucester, was lord Spencer
Then set again, to his first estate
The king then made his eldest son full clear
The prince of Wales, in parliament hole create
Duke of Cornewayle and earl denominate
Of Chester also, that then was young of age
But yet he was that time of hye courage
The.C.xcviii. Chapter.
How the king gave the Constablerie and the Marshalsee to therles of
Northumberlande and Westmerlande with certain lands, and how sir Robert
Vmfreuile was made knight of the Garter and capitayn of Rokesburgh, and faught
on foot on Fulhoplewe and wan the feld with victory and was made lord
Vmfreuile.

AT this time yt king granted by parliament
The Constablery certain of England
In heritage so at his coronoment
To therle then of Northumberlande
Also of Man thifle I understand
To hold of him and of his heirs always
By service royal, as written was that day
And to therle of Westmerlande also
The Marshalsee of England then he gave
All Richemond fee, that was in England tho
By patent also, for term of life to have
The lords all he pleased, so God me save
With office ay, orels with land or rent
With liberal heart, as to a prince appent.
And whiles that parliament so did endure
The Scotts rode by North, and sore had stroyed
In Cokedale then, where Vmfreuyle had cure
That with them faught, and had them sore anoyed
At Fulhaplowe, on foot he them acloyed
For there he took sir Richard Rotherforde
His sons five, full fell of deed and word.
Sir Wyllyam Stiwarde, also he took
The lord of Gordowne, he put to flight
And Willibarde, the field there then forsook
And prisoners brought home, well mo at night
Then he had men with him the field to fight
For which the king, him had ay after in cherte
Consyderyng well his knightly aperte.
The.C.xcix. Chapter.
How the king Henry remeued king Richard from place to place, by night in
preuey wise, in which time theries of Kent, Salisbury and Huntyngdon, the
lord Spencer and sir Raulfe Lomley were headed.

THe king the^ sent, king Richard to Ledis
There to be kept surely in preuitee
Fro the^s after, to Pykeryng went he needs
And to Knauesburgh, after led was he
But to Pountfrete last, where he did die
Both therles, of Kent and Salisbury
Therle of Huntyngdon, and Spe^cers sothelye.
And sir Raulfe Lomley with mo in company
After Christmasse, thought to have slain the king
They were distured, and fled away in hye
But they were slain at Circester fleyng
By the commons, with them there fyghtyng
Therles of Kent and of Salysbury
And sir Raulfe Lomley in their company.
The lord Spencer, take was upon the sea
At Bristowe was headed and decollate
Therle also of Huntyngdon did flee
And brought unto the countess of estate
Of Herforde then, who had him forth algate
To Plasshe, where she made men him head
Without counsayll of any lord or read.
Sir Thomas shelly, set full hye in pride
And Mawbleyn with Ferebye draw and honge
Sir Barnard Brockeys, was heded them beside
The bishop also of Carleile them among
In Westmynster, his life there to prolonge
Perpetually by judgment was commytte
Among his brethren in order for to sytte.
The.CC. Chapter.
How king Richard was brought dead from Pountfret to Powles, and after buried
at Langley, for men should have no remembrance of him. And how sir Robert
Vmfreuyle faught with yt Scotts at Redeswere and had the field and the
victory.

IN march next after, kig Rychard the^ was deed
Fro Poumfret brought with great solempnyte
Men said forhungered he was and lapped in led
At Poules his mass was done and diryge
In hers royal, semely to royalte
The king and lords, clothes of gold there offerde
Some.viii. some.ix. upon his hers were proferde.
At Westminster then did they so the same
When trust he should there have buried been
In that mynster like to a prince of name
In his own tomb, together with the queen
Anne, that before his first wife had been
But then the king, him fast to Langley sent
There in the freres to be buried secretement
On Michelmasse day, next after his coronacio^
Sir Robert then my master Vmfreuyle
At Redeswyres, without excusacyon
With Richard Rotherforde fought that while
And took the steward, as I can compyle
And James Douglas, with the lord Seton
And prisoners many, for to give raunson
Two hundredth men, upon yt field were slain
Three hundredth fled, some hole, some maimed sore
That dyed at home, with sorrow and with pain
Some died homeward, ye home they came no more
Where so he fought unto his men right thore
A merry word he would say or they met
To glad their hearts, enemies to ouerset.
The.ii. year of his reygne, then he went The kings voyage into Scotland.

In harvest time, so into Scotland
And Edinburgh, with the country burnt
In which time the Scotts brent our land
All Bamburgh shyre in Northumberlande
For both wardeyns, with the king were gone
No wardeyne there, but husbands by their own
The.CC.i. Chapter.
How Owen of Glendoure rose in Wales again the king and made war on the
lord Gray Ruthin, and took the lord Graye and sir Edmonde Mortymer.

THe king came home, and to London went
At Michelmasse, where the^ he had message
That Owen Glendoure, then felly blent
In England sore, and did full great damage
For cause the lord Graye held his heritage
And to the king of it, full sore had playned
No remedy gate, so was he then demeaned
The lord Gray Ruthin did him great wrong
Destroyed his land, and he did him the same
So both Marches, destroyed were full long
But Owen wanne him self, each day great name
Of vasselrie, of gentyls and of fame
That he them did, for which to him they drew
And became his men, and to him were full true
So on a day, the lord Graye, and he met
With great power upon either side
Where then they faught in battle sore bet
And took him then his prisoner that tide
And there the field, he had with mikyll pride
Great people took and slew, and home he went
The lord Graye he raunsomed at his intent
Sir Edmonde then Mortimer warred sore
Upon Owen, and did him mekyll tene
But at last, Owen lay him before
Where in batell they faught, as well was seen
Where Owen took him prisoner, as then full kene
With mekell folk, on either side slain
And set Edmonde in prysone, and great pain
He wrote unto the king, for great socoure
For he had made with Owen his fynaunce
To whom yt king would grant then no favor
Ne naught he would the^ make him cheuesaunce
For to comfort his foes disobeysaunce
Wherefore he lay, in feters and sore prysone
For none payment of his great raunsone
The.CC.iii. Chapter.
The Earl of Northumberlande, and his son Henry Percy stroke the battle of
Hamildon with the Scotts, and took six Earls, and discomfyte.xl. thousand
Scotts.

IN the.iii. year Therle of Fyffe and Murrey
Of Athell and Angos, and Douglas also
And of Menteth, with barons fell yt day
The number was.xl. thousand and mo
Had brent the land, by south Northward tho
To Homildon, where on holy rode day
The earl them met in good and strong array
His son also, Henry Percy was there
George of Dunbar, was in their company
And with the Scotts yt day fought full sere
Discomfyted them, and had the victory
Six earls taken and.xl. thousand plainly
Some fled, some died, some maimed there for ever
That to Scotland, again came they never
The king Henry, thryce to wales went
In the hay time, and harvest diverse year The kings voyages into Wales.

In every time were mystes and tempests sent
Of wethers foul, that he had never power
Glendour to noye, but ever his caryage clear
Owen had at certain straites and passage
And to our host did full great damage
The king had never, but tempest foul and rain
As long as he was ay in Wales ground
Rocks and mystes, winds and storms ever certain
All men trowed, yt witches it made that stounde
The co^mens all, then of all England ground
Warred his gate, to Wales every year
For hay and corn were lost both two in fere
Which made great derth, and of catell morayne
And even ay in hills and in mountains
Kept him full strong, yt king ay wrought in vain
The king might not, but ever more held yt pleines
And waste his own lord ships, and his demaines
And full great part Owen had and occupied
By process so in Wales, and victoryed
Therle Henry, then of Northumberland
Brought to the king, his own prisoner
Therle of Fyffe, was then I understand
Heir unto the duke of Albany clear
Regent that was of Scotland without pere
But sir Henry his soonne, then would not bring
His prisoners in no wise to the king
But the king he prayed for Mortimer
That raunsomed might he been with his friends so
He said him nay, for he was taken prisoner
By his consent and treson to his foo
Whom he would not comfort for to ouergoo
The prince his lands, ne his own to destroy
For ay he had great trust, yt he should him noye
The king him blamed, for he took not Owen
When he came to him on his assurance
And he answered then to the king again
He might not so keep his affiaunce
To shame him self with such a variaunce
The king blamed him for his prisoner
Therle Douglas, for cause he was not there
And said he should him fette, but he him se^de
Sir Henry saw no grace for Mortimer
His wifes brother, he went away vnkende
To Berwyk so, and after came no nere
Before they met, at Shrowesbury in fere
Where then they faught, for cause of his intent
He purposed had, Mortimer his coronoment
The lords all of England had him hight
And Owayn also on seuerne him to mete
Except therle of Stafford young to fight
By their letters, under their seals mete
But in the poinct, they brake all their behete
And he was slain, and all the cause conselid
Why he the feld took and the king appelid
The.CC.iii. Chapter.
How for therle of March his right, sir Henry Percy and sir Thomas Percy his
uncle earl of Worcester, faught with the king and were slain at the battaill of
Shrewesbury where all ye lords deceived them the year of Christ a thousand
four hundred and three and of his reign the fourth year, that were bound to
them by their seals except therle of Stafford, which letters I saw in the
castle of Werkeworth when I was constable of it under my lord sir Robert Vmfre
uile who had that castle of king Henry his gift by forfeture of therle of
Northumberland.

ON Madleyn even was on the Saterdaye
After long trete, the prince began to fight
The year of Christ a thousand was no nay
Four hundred also and three, thereto full right
When the battaill was streken of mikell might
And of the king then was the fourth year
Of his reign, accounted well and clear
His uncle dear, was with him there dedde
His father came not out of Northumberland
But failed him foul, without wit or read
But to the king he came I understand
Holy submittyng him unto his royal hand
Whom then he put to hold in sore prisone
With two men of his own in Bagyngton
His castelles, all his me^ne held then full strong
To time the king had, grant him plener grace
But the lords, in counsel then among
Hight him to help, the sixte year at the Pasche
But none durst come that time, so fell the case
But bishop Scrop and therle marshall
The lord Bardolfe, then of our lords all
The.CC.iiii. Chapter.
How in yt year of his reign and in yt year of Christ a thousand four
hundred and five, master Rychard Scorpe archbishop of York, Thomas Mombray^
^rle marshall sir John Lamplewe and sir Wyllyam Plompton were hedded byside
York.

IN lenton after he came home to his land
By perliame^t, whole delivered and acquit
And two year after, in peace I understand
With king Henry, full peasebly did sit
Then in the year as men remember it
Of his reign the sixte, the bishop Scorp went
Therle marshall with him of one intent
To Yorkes More, and there assembled power
Of their own, and their friends also
Of therles men of Northumberland that were
To the nombre of twenty thousand tho
Before the day, assigned that was so
By therle then of Northumberland
That there Cheften with them should have stand
With other lords that were to them assent
But the bishop and therle marshall
Where slain before the day of assignement
Between them made before in special
Hedded were then, nere York as then did fall
Sir John Lamplewe and sir Wyllyam Plomto^
With the bishop were hedded there for treson
The.CC.v. Chapter.
How the lord Hastynges, the lord Fauconbridge and sir John Coluile of ye Dale
and his make, and sir John Ruthyn were hedded at Duresme by ye king for therles
of Northumberland and then he gate therles castelles and stroke of seven heddes
at Berwyke.

THe lord Hastynges at Duresme was then take
The lord Fauco^brige together in company
Sir John Coluile of ye Dale and his make
Sir John Ruthyn that knights were full ma^ly
To therle of Northumberland openly
Were hedded there all four upon a day
And to Werkworth remeuid in great array
Where the castle with in a weke was yolde
Unto the king, after assautes fell and sore
The casteleyns to pass free where they would
With horse and harnes, without challenge more
Then to Alnwike, the king remeued thore
Where the capitains unto the king then sent
Wyn Berwyke ones, he should have his intent
So went he then to Berwyke without delay
With assaut and shot, of gonnis strong yt were
He had it then, and there hedded on a day
The barons son of Graistoke taken there
Sir Henry Bowton and Blenkensop therefore
And Prendirgest ran on the sea also
And Tuwile with other squiers two
To Alnwike then, the king laid siege again
Without assaute, by whole conuencion
Henry Percy of Athel, with heart fain
And Wyllyam Clifford, without discencion
The castle yield at the kings entencion
With horse and harnes, without enpechement
Or forfeture or else impediment
Prodhow Langley and also Cokirmouth
Alnham Newsted, delivered were anon
They removed then forth in to the south
Therle of Northumberland was then gone
Before Northward, to Scotland with great moan
The lord Bardolf with him thither went
And there abode, with their suppowelment
The summer next, by sea to Wales they went
Unto Glendour, and after then to Brytain
And so by sea, to Flaunders or they stent
The other summer, to Scotland came again
By thest sea, and there they did remain
To the winter then, of snow full deep
That they were slain, for whom yt folk sore weep
The nynth year was then of the king Henry
In Feueryer before the fastyngange
Of Christ his date a thousand certainly
Four hundred and eight, counted among
At Bramham more with speres sharp and long
In Yorkshire, so the Rokeby with them met
Shrief of the shire, with power that he get
The.C. C.vi. Chapter
How the king his soonne of Scotland and heir James was taken on the sea and
brought unto the king and then dyed Owayn and the king of Scotland.

THe same year also, yt prince the^ of Scotland
Upon the sea sailyng, then in to France
Was taken and brought to yt king of England
Eleven year old was he then, by remembrance
Whom the king then put in governance
For like a prince, as to a king appent
In all honor as was convenient
The tenth year then of the king his date
The king of Scotland, and Owayn of Glendor
His soonne also, the world forsook then algate
And dyed away, of them then was no more
The prince of Scotland then was king therefore
And Wales all became the king his men
In rest and peace without rebellion then
In that same year Gilbert Vmfreuile
Lord was then of Riddisdale in keyme
That passid not seuentene year that while
And ward was to the king that time
But seuentene year of age was that time
At Arrays then faught full worthily
With George Turnuile, in lyestes syngulerly
With axe and sword, and dagger upon foot
Twenty strokes with every wepen smyten
Vndeparted without any mote
And on the morrow, there they syten
Twenty coursses, with speres together hitten
A quarter bare unarmed and vnarayed
Save there serkes slew with speres vnasayed.
The.CC.vii. Chapter.
How Robert Vmfreuile went into Scotland and lay in the Scottishe sea.xiiii.
days, and every day faught with yt Scotts, somedaye on the northsyde, and
some day on the southsyde, and gatte.xiiii. great ships, and brent there
Galiot with ordinance and sore battayll in the Scottishe sea before Edynburghe
and at the Blakenesse.

THe year eleventh, of this same king Henry
Sir Robert Vmfreuile took the sea
With.x. sails, to keep it notably
When trewce was taken in specialtee
Between Scotland and us in ce^tentee
To the Scottishe sea, both by sea and land
And to Monshole on our side I understand
In the Scottishe sea, with his ships he lay
Where.xiiii. ships he took with his manhede
And faught full sore, at full sea every day
Sometime upon the northside so in deed
And some time on the southsyde out of dread
With the duke of Albany and of Fyffe
And his proud scotts, yt faught then full ryffe.
With therle of Douglas, and them of Lothia^
And brought his fires, brennyng upon the sea
In botes and cogges ordened by them than
With other botes, with me^ of arms in propertee
And archers good, well pauy^shed in specialitee
That brent their ships and their galiot
A ship of auantage was then God wot
When he had been, there.xiiii. days to the end
With his prises, he came to England
Full of cloth, woollen and lynnen, that land to amend
Pytche and tar, both for fre and bond
For to amend the shepes of our land
Flower and mele of whete and rye he sold
The market he so amended manyfolde
And wood he had, and other marchaundise
Woll and hide, and iron great quantitee
Woll skynnes, cloth of gold and spyceries
Iewelles in chestes and stones of precioustee
And other merchants in specioustee
And prisoners also, and mykell flax
Wynes sweet, and mykell poleyn wax.
The.CC.viii. Chapter.
How sir Robert Vmfreuile brent Pebles on there market day, and made his men
to mete their clothe with speres and bows, and after the Scotts called him
Robyne Mendmarket, and his neuewe burnt Iedworth and Teuidale sone after.

AT Pebles long, before that time.iiii. year
He brent the town, upon their market day
And met their cloth, with speres and bows sere
By his biddyng without any nay
Wherefore the Scotts from thence forthward ay
Called him, Robyn mendmarket in certain
For his measures were so large and plain. Robyn me^dmarket.

His neuewe Gilbert, and he the.xi. year
Of king Henry, upon the water of Calm than
And also on Roll and Iedworth forest clear
Forrayed full sore, with many a manly man
His banner first, there was displayed then
When he was clearly but.xiiii. year no more
When his uncle had battled him so sore.
The.CC.ix. Chapter.
How the prince Henry of Wales sent power to the duke of Burgoyn to help him,
the two Vmfreuiles, sir John Graye with other, where Vmfreuile with the
English men held the field for he would not kill the prisoners, as the duke
of Burgoyn had ordained

THe prince Henry, to duke Philip then sent
That of Burgoyn was so both sir and lord
Sir Gilbert Vmfreuile, and his uncle verame^t
His cousyn also sir Iho^ Gray, as me^ record
With many other worthy, with spear and sweorde
Willyam Porter again the duke of Orleaunce
And his armynakes with men of great defense
At S(...)ncle then, again ye duke of Orleau^ce
And the duke of Burbon by all a day
Thenglyshe faught with great sufficience
And wanne the bridge, with battayll bet away
Tharmynakes, with many sore affraye
Where Vmfreuile proclaimed was earl of Kyme
Cheiften was of all English that time.
At Durdan also, and at Etham again
They faught all new, where then they had yt feld
And prisoners many they did opteyne
The which the duke of Burgoyn would have weld
Because to him they were so vnbelde
Them to have slain he commanded then, each capitayn
His prisoners to kill then in certain
To which Gilbert Vmfreuile earl of Kyme
Answered for all his fellows and there men
They should all die together at a time
Or their prisoners, so should be slain then
And with that took the field as folk did ken
With all their men, and all their prisoners
To die with them, as worship it requyers
He said they were not come thither as bouchers
To kill the folk in market or in feire
Ne them to sell, but as arms requiers
Them to govern without any dispeyre
As prisoners owe home again repeire
For fine paying, as law of arms will
And not on stocks nor in market them to sell
With who^ sir John Graye, as his cousyn dear
And all English with many other of France
With their prisoners full familier
Batayled in field, with full strong ordinance
More like to fight, then to make obeysaunce
And held therle of kyme for their cheiftayn
To live and dye under his baner certain
The duke Philyppe, full of sapyence
Saw his manhood, and his knightly courage
Loathe was to lose his noble adventure
By treaty, and by other tender message
Of prisoners, grant them to do advantage
And him withhelde with all his feloship
As Earl of Kyme, proclaimed of great worship.
Then after sone, our Englishemen anon
Came home again, with great and hye reward
Whom then the duke, by letter commend alone
In writing specifyed, with heart inward
Unto the prince, that sent them to hymwarde
And thanked them greatly of his service
In his wars showed again his enemies
The king discharged yt prince fro his counsel
And set my lord sir Thomas in his stead
Chief of counsel, for the kings more avail
For which the prince of wrath and wilful head
Again him made debate and frowardhede
With whom the king took part, and held the field
To time the prince, unto the king him yield
The king then made his son duke of Clare^ce
My lord Thomas, and sent him into France
To help the duke Lewys of Orlyaunce
Again the duke of Burgoyne at instaunce
Of my lord Thomas, again yt prince suraunce
Which was the cause also of their heaviness
So to refuse duke Philyppes love causelles
But then the duke of Clarence with power
Came to the duke Lowes of Orlyaunce
King Charles brother, who made him noble chere
And him received, with full hye reverence
They two warryed, with mighty suffycience
Upon the duke of Burgoyne, and him outrayed
That he went into Burgoyne, all formayed
Then rode the duke of Clarence into Guien
Through France, with host then full royal
And kept that land, with help of duke Lewis the^
In which mean while, king Henry began fall
In great syknesse, that his strength did pall
With contryte heart, and humble yelden chere
He said, O lord, thy me(...) I require.
The.CC.x. Chapter.
The words that the King said at his death of high complaynt, but naught
of repentance of vsurpement of the realm, ne of the restorement of right
heirs to the crown

O Lord he said, O God omnipotent
Now se I well, thy godhede loves me
That suffered never my foes to have their intent
Of mine person in mine aduersrte
Ne in mine sycknesse, ne in mine infyrmyte
But ay haste kept it fro their maleuolence
And chastysed me, by thy benevolence
Lord I thank the, with all my heart
With all my soul, and my spirytes clear
This worms mete, this caryon full vnquerte
That some time thought in world it had no pere
This face so foul, that leprous does apere
That here before, I have had such a pride
To purtraye often, in many place full wide.
Of which right, now yt porest of this land
Except only, of their benignyte
Would loath to look upon, I understand
Of which good lord, that thou so visyte me
A thousand times the lord in trinyte
With all my heart, I thank the and commend
Into thine hands, my soul withouten end.
And dyed so in faith, and hole creaunce
At Cauntorbury buried, with great reverence
As a king should be, with all kind of circumstau^ce
According unto his hye magnifycence
Beside the prince Edward, with great expense
Of Christ was then, a. M. year full out
Four hundredth eke, and thirtene out of doubt.
O very God, what torment had this king The conceyte of the maker.

To remember in bryef, and short intent
Some in his sherte, put often time venemyng
And some in meat and drink great poysonment
Some in his hose, by great ymagenement
Some in bedstraw, yro^s sharp ground well and whet
Enuenemed sore, to slay him, if he had on them set
Some made for him, diverse enchauntmentes
To waste him out, and utterly destroy
And some gave him battle, full felonoment
In field within his realm, him for to noye
And on them selfs, the hurt and all the anoye
Ay fell at end that honged were and heded
As traitors ought to been in every stead
This king dyed, of his reygne in the year
Fourtene accounted, of March yt.xix. day
The sunday was then by Kalendre
Of whom the realm, great joy at first had ay
But afterward they loved not his array
At his beginning, full hye he was commend
With commons then, and also little at the end.
The.CC.xi. Chapter.
Henry the fyfth, king of England and of France, began to reygne the twenty
day of March yt was saint Cuthbertes day, and was crowned the ninth day of
Apryl, the year of Christ, a thousand four hundredth twenty and two, after he
had reigned.ix. year and an half. And in the hour that he was crowned and
anointed he was changed from all vices unto virtuous life, and lycensed the
folk to offer unto Richard Scrop, and buried king Rychard at West mynster,
and granted to Henry Percy his lands.

HEnry his son, yt prince of wales was tha^
On saint Cuthbertes day in March following
King was so, as I remember can
On passion sunday, after was this king
Anointed and crowned, without taryeng
The ninth day, it was of Apryll so
With storms fell, and haylestones great also
In his first year, the lord Cobham heretic
Confedered with lollers insapient Lord Co^ham.

Again the church arose, and was full like
It to have destroyed by their entendment
Had not the king then made suppowelment
And put him fro the field, by good direccyon
That sembled were, by great insurreccyon.
Then fled the lord Cobham herrorious
To Wales, so with lollers many one
Musyng in his opinyon venomous
How that he might destroy the church anon
But God that sit in heaven above alone
Knowing his heart, naked of all good intent
Let him betake, to have his judgment
And put he was to prisone in the tower
Of which he did escape away by night
And take was again within an hour
And after sone dampened, by law and right
For heresye, by the clergy in sight
And brent he was to ashes deed and pale
Through cursed life, thus came he in great bale
The hour he was crowned and anoint
He changed was, of all his old condicyon
Full virtuous he was, fro point to point
Grounded all new, in good opinyon
For passyngly without comparyson
Then set upon all right and conscience
A new man made, by all good regimence
He gave leave then of good devotion
All men to offer to bishop Scrop express
Without lettynge, or any questyon
He granted also, of his hye worthynesse
To lay the king Richard, and Anne doutlesse
His wife that was, at Westmynster buried
As king Richard him self had sygnifyed
And fro the freres of Langley where he lay
He carried him to Westmynster anon
And buried him of royal great array
With the queen Anne, in tomb of marbel stone
Full royally arrayed, as royals by them sone
And to Henry Percy, he granted his lands clear
That to the duke of Bedforde, then given were
My lord of Clarence, fro Guya^ home again
Came to the king, with joy and great pleasaunce
The second year, of whom the king was feign
At Leycester then, as made is remembrance
In his parlyament, without varyaunce
His brother John, duke of Bedforde create
His brother vinfrey, duke of Gloucester of estate
Thomas Beauford, yt was earl of Dorcet
He made duke then, of Excester that while
He gave in charge, that time withouten let
Unto sir Robert there Vinfreuyle
By his wisdom, and manhood that while
To treat with the Scotts, to get Henry Percy
Laid in hostage, by his grauntsirez folly.
The.CC.xii. Chapter.
How sir Robert Vmfreuile faught at Geteryng the third year with the Scotts,
that had but seven score speres and three hundredth howes, on Mad^lyn day and
discomfited of them.iiii. M. men and made chase twelfe mile on them in to
their own land, and went with the king to Harflite to the siege with whom I
went thither.

THen was it war between us and Scotland
That sir Robert Vmfreuile might it speed
But at Geteryng with Scotts hand for hand
He faught on foot, on Maudelyn day in deed
Where eightene score Scotts were take I read
Three score s^ain, a thousand put to flight
With four.C. me^ne, disco^fited them fourth right
Twelfe mile the^, he made on them great chase
In to their land, and home he came again
To his castle of Rokesburgh in that case
Which he had then in keeping soth to sain
Of his great labor, in heart being full fain
With prisoners, many one hurt full sore
Him self and his, that then had wounded thore
At Lammasse next, the king then as he lay
At Southampton, therle of Cambridge took
The lord Scorp also, and eke sir Thomas Graye
And hedded them, the cause was who so look
Among them selfs, for they this counsel took
And purposed therle of March to croune
King of England, by their provision
The.CC.xiii. Chapter.
How the king went in to Normandy and steged Hareflete and gate it with great
peyn and loss of men But who may cas^ of rennyng hou^dis and many racches
but he must lose some of them.

THE king held forth by sea to Normandy
With all his host, at Kydcans landed the^
And laid a siege to Hareflete myghtely
On every side, by land and water wanne
With bulwerkes stout, and bastell he began
In which he put therle of Huntyngton
Therle of Kent also of great renoune
Which earls two, with other to them assigned
Cornwaile and Gray, Steward also and Porter
Full great assautes, made each day and repugned
Whiles at last, they bette the town toures their
And what the king, with fagottes that there were
And his connyng werching under the wall
With his gu^nes castyng, they made yt toure to fall
And their bulwerke brent with shot of wildfyre
At which place then, therles two up set
Their baners both, without any hyre
The king therewith, his gonnes the walls bette
The duke did so, of Clarence without let
On the ferreside, where as he then lay
Therle Mountague, did well there always
The lord Gawcort that the^ was their capitain
Of Hare^lete tho with other of the town
Offered then the town to the king full fain
And he with other, to stand at the kings direccio^
Then made he there, his uncle of great renoune
Capitain of it duke of Excester than
And homeward went, through France like a man
The.CC.xiiii. Chapter.
How the king came homewarde through Normandy and Picardie, and s(...)ote the
battaill of Agyncor^ where I was with my master.

AN hundred mile to Calais had he then
At Agyncourt, so homeward in his way
The nobles there, of France before him we^
Proudly battailled, with an hundred thousand in araie
He saw he must needs with them make afraye
He set on them, and with them faught full sore
With nine thousand, no more with him thore
The feld he had, and held it all that night
But then came word, of host and enemies
For which they slew all prisoners down right
Sauf dukes and earls, in fell and cruel wise
And then the prees of enemies did supprise
Their own people, yt mo were deed through pres
Then our men might have slain, yt time no lose
On our side, was the duke of York there slain
Therle also of Suffolk worshipfully
And knights two, with other then soth to sain
And at the siege, therle of Suffolk sothely
The father dyed of the flixe contynually
But mikell folk, at that siege yet dyed
Of fruit and flixe, and cold were mortified
On yt French party, yt dukes of Bar and Lorein
And of Alaunson, in battaill there were dedde
And take were of Christeans in certain
The duke Jews of Orliaunce their hedde
The duke of Burbone in that stead
Therle of Vendom and Arthure also of Brytain
And sir Bursigalo^ marshall of France certain
And therle of Ewe was taken there also
Five barons also that were at their baner
And fiftene hundred knights and squyers mo
Were s^ain that day in full knightely manner
With wounds, so as then did apere
As werres would upon Chrispyn day
And Chrispynian that saints in bliss been aye
The.CC.xv. Chapter.
How the emperor and the duke of Holand came to the king, the Count palatine
the duke of Melayn the marquys Farrar, the lord Mantowe and the marquis Mount
Ferrete the lord Mount Palestrine came with the emperor the same time, and the
duke Bauers and Embeir and the prince of Orange also

AND in the year of Christ a thousand clear
Four hundred also and therwithall fiftene
When this battaill was smiten as does apere
In the third year of his reign as was seen
To Caleice so he came, and home be dene
With the emperor of Room sir Sigemond
Unto him came then, in to England ground
With a thousand me^ne yt were full clean araied
The duke of Melayn, the count Palatyne
The marquis Ferrer, yt lord Mantowe well apayed
The count Carmeler, the count Palestryne
With many lords of the water of the Ryne
And of the Garter was made the secondarye
And in it stalled, for he would not varye
The duke of Holand, then by sea came
With.lx. ships, in Thamis that did aryue
And to the king, he went unto lamb
To Themperoure after he went belyue
As chronycles then did discryue
Then was he made knight of the Garter
At his desire, as says the chronicler.
The.CC.xvi. Chapter.
Of the battle of Said, and of the carykes there taken in the sea before the
mouth of Said.

THe king sent then, yt duke unto the sea
Of Bedforde, yt with four hundredth sails
To vitayl Hare^lete, with therle of March no lee
Therle Marshall, without any fayles
With therles armed in plate and mayles
Of Orenforde, Warrewike and Huntyngdon
Of Salisbury, Devonshire, and many a baron.
Of Arondell also, these earls all
Were in that flote, unto the noumbre of men
Twenty thousand Herouldes did them call
On our Lady day thassumpcion then
All these lords with many worthy men
The fyfth year of the king was then express
When there enemies them met at Sayn doutelesse
They faught full sore, before the water of Sayn
With carrikes many, well stuffed and arrayed
And many other ships great of Hispayne
Barges Balyngers and galeys vnfrayed
Which proudly came upon our ships vnprayed
And by theuen there sails aualed were set
Their enemies slain in battayll, and sore bet
And many dryent, were that day in the sea
That as our flete rode there then always
Unto the feast, next of his natiuitee
The bodies flete among our ships echeday^
Full piteous was, and to see them ay
That thousa^des were.xx. as they then told
That taken were, in that same battle bold.
In which mean while, whiles our ships there lay
It was so calm, without any wind
We might not sail, ne fro thens pass away
Wherefore their galeys, each day there ga^ us find
With ores many, about us did they wind
With wildfyre often assailed us day and night
To bre^^e our ships in that they could or might
The flete came home, than at our Lady day
From Sayn, which time yt king then had co^ueied
Themperoure then to Caleys on his way
And home again was come right well apayed
Of the welfare of that worthy flete assayed
So well in arms, unto his hie pleasaunce
Upon his foes, and kept them self by governance.
The.CC.xvii. Chapter.
How the king went into France, in the.v. year of his reign the second
time, and landed at Towke in Constantyne in Normandy.

THe king the^ in his.v. year went into France
And landed at Towke and gatte the castle than
And so came with all his ordinance
And laid his siege about, with many a man
Which by process, at the last he wan
Which to Vmfreuile, that the^ was earl of Kyme
He gave to keep, for great manhood that time
Bayons, Falace, Cees, and Argenton
Doumfront, Mortyne and Iuory also
Musterdeuilers, Euerons and Alaunson
Caldebeke and Deep, Arkes, Vnycort tho
With other towns and castles many mo
Gurnaye, Newcastell, Gysours, Estoutuile
Roan, Lovers and also Vmfreuile
Pountlarge, Pountoyes and also Pount Dorso^,
Maunte, Vire Balom and also Aueraunce
Castle Galiard, with many other town
Bolham in Perch, saint Ioilian in Maunce
Merteyn in Perch, Chirbroke and eke Co^stau^ce
Vernell in Perch, Seintlowe and Alauayle
Vernon on Sayn, without any battle
All Normandy he gate, within two year
And after then, he trauayled in France
For marriage and conuencion clear
Between king Charles and him at instaunce
Of duke Philip of Burgoyn, of aliaunce
In which time, so they were by appointment
Accorded well, and clearly condiscent.
That then he wed, his daughter Katheryne
And proclaimed was, then of France regent
And heritour of France, by right line
Of his own right, fro king Edwardes descent
And Normendy and Guyan as appent
Remayn should to him, and to his heirs
Kings of England evermore, and to theyrs.
Then laid he siege to Melon anon right
Above Paris. ^v. legs upon Sayn
Which by process and labor of his might
And full sore siege, full long with passing pain
He had at last, of which he was full fayn
And took it, to Vmfreuile earl of Kyme
To have for ever, ay forwards fro that time
Sauncer in Burgoyn then gate he mightily
And Motreux also, where the duke was buried
Of Burgoyn then, whom he took up in hie
And at Dugyon, as it is notified
Him buried so, in Burgoyn vndenyed
With high honor and great solempnitee
As to such a prince, of reason ought to be
And Motreux took he then to sir John Gray
That then was made earl of Tano^iruile
A manly knight in arms proved aye
And lord Powes was, by his wife that while
And emes son, unto therle Vmfreuile
Two better knights I trow, there were not tha^
Of their estate, since time that they began.
At siege of Meloyn, and of all other citees
After following, the king of Scotland lay
The prince of Orange withouten lees
The duke Embarre his son and heir always
That suster son then was, full fresh and gay
To king Henry at Meloyn, full well arrayed
The king of France, with banner hole displayed
The siege held, fro Midsomer to Christmasse
When king Henry at his palayce royal
Of Turnels fair, beside the bastell pereles
Of Saint Antonye held his hole imperial
Where then he feasted, these kings and princes all
Where then therles of Suffolk and of Kyme
With ten men held the iustes by all that time
But whiles the king Henry was so in France
The duke Robert, that was of Albany
Laid about Barwike of great puissaunce
Sixty thousand of Scotts cruelly
Assailed the town echedaye by and by
The capitayn was sir Robert Vmfreuyle
A knight of the garter, had been long while.
The.CC.xviii. Chapter.
How the duke of Albany besieged Barwske, and therle Douglas Rokesburgh in
heru^ste, in the seventh year of the king, and how Henry Percy earl of
Northumberland rescowed Barwike and Roliesburgh, with.vii. score. M. me^, for
trust it true, there is no lord in England, that may de fend you again
Scotland so well as he, for they have the hertes of the people by North and
ever have had, and doubt it not, the North part be your true legemen.

THey shot their gonnes, and with their ladders scaled
But naught auailed, they were so well of bet
When they our host saw, anon they vnscaled
That stale away by night without let
For fear our host, upon them should set
At Baremore then, with.vii. score thousand men
For which the Scotts, fled fro yt duke home then
Upon the night, and let him there alone
With his own men and no mo of weike power
Yet rode he to Norham nere them anon
And brent the town, our host and he then were
But two mile of, and durst not come no nere
Wherefore he rode, home then into Scotland
Our host more sone returned to England
Then sir Robert Vmfreuile, with the garyson
Of Barwike, with his countremen
Followed after the Scotts, with his penoun
On the hinder ryders, and many of them then
He took homewarde, and slew squyers ten
Within Scotland, beside Cherneside town
And to Berwike came with his garyson.
Therle Douglas, then hight sir Archebalde
Which his one eye had lost at Hamyldon
That seemed him well, ay after manyfolde
At Shrowysbury, for his correccyon
He lost one of his stones, for his raunson
His syege then left at Rokesburgh where he lay
And with the duke of Albany rode away
The Earls two, of Douglas and Dunbarre
For trewce sent, to Roberte Vmfreuyle
Wardeine of the este march, full wise and war
He would none take with them, then for no while
Sith they the trewce had broken, and did fyle
He should them hold the war, to they were feign
To seek peace then, at the king again.
The king was then, in France hole regent
And Paris had, and all the land about
Troies in Champaine, and Mews in Bry had hent
With all citees, towns and castelles stout
In all that land and country there throughout
Of Mewis he made sir John Graye captain
That was lord Powes, by his wife certain
That time sir Raufe Cro^wel was governor
Of king Charles, and Isabell the queen
By king Henry ordained their protectoure
Who kept them at Boys vincent, as was seen
In royal wise, as to them did parteigne
The king busy, that time in his conqueste
For to set rule in France, could have no rest
In this mean while, sir Robert Vinfreuyle
Wardeine of the March, thought then full great shame
The king in France, doing so well yt while
He made the war on Scotts to have a name
Two year complete he wrought the^ mekell shame
Thest March hole of Scotland then he brent
And market towns echeone, or that he stente
Howyk Selkirke Ied worth, and all Dunbarre
Laudre also, with all Laudre dale
The forestes also, fro Berwyk that were far
Of Eteryke Ied worth, and eke all Teuidale
And all the villages in them, both great and small
And none help had, but of his country men
Of the bishopryke, and of Northumberlande then
In this mean time, yt Scotts had great pain
Wherefore therls of Douglas and Dunbarre
To London came, and took a trewce full feign
As Vmfreuyle them hight before the war
That to the king they should it seek of far
Of which he kept his host then full two year
For with his war, he waste the march full clear
The.CC.xix. Chapter.
How the King and the Queen came into Englaude, in the eight year of his
reign.

THe.viii. year of his reygne, at Ca^delmasse
The king came home, and brought with him the queen
That he had wed at Troys, in Cha^pein doutlesse
Before the lords of France, as then was well seen
The duke of Clarence, as men well it mean
He made regent of France in his absence
To occupye right, as his own presence
The earl of Salisbury, the Mountague
He made gouernoure then of Normandaye
Therle of Kyme, a knight of his full true
Marshall of France, he made full openly
The lords all, he ordained there to lie
Him to comfort, and to been attendaunt
To him, in all that might him be pleasant
This prince of princes, in England the^ abode
To somer after, each day in business
To ordeyne for his passage, and his rode
To France again, in which time then doutlesse
I saw two knights before him then express
That none might them accord, or treat to peace
Ne justice none, of fyghting might them cease
The lords then greatly counsayled the king
To make them find suretye to keep the peace
The king answered anon without tarying
I shall be your borowe now or I cease
For of this thing, I may not long you prease
But what case fall that slain is one of you
That other shall dye, to god I make a vow
They heryng this, anon they were accord
By friends that treated, yt time between them two
And after that, they were no more at discord
This was a Justice of peace, that could do so
His office kept, without borowes moo
For when he dyed, Justice of peace bode none
But baratours, their office kept anon.
And at the Easter, then in his xv. year
The duke of Clarence, thenemies had espied
At Bangy then for which his men in fere
He sembled, and thither fast he hyed
On Easter even, he would not been replied
With whom were then therle of Huntyngdon
And Somerset the earl, his wives son
The.CC.xx. Chapter.
How on Easter even, the duke of Clarence smote yt batell of Bawgy, in the
year of Christ, a thousand.iiii. hundredth and twenty, and in the nynth year of
king Henry for that year the feast of the Annuncyacyon of our Lady fell on
Ester twysdaye, and the date changed after that battle in the Easter weke.

ANd nere at Bawge came Gylberte Vmfreuyle
Marshal of France, with.v. horse and no mo
And of good wit, counsayled him that while
To keep the church and gods service tho
And after the feast, to seek upon his foo
And he answered him, if thou be aferd
Go home thy way, and keep the church yerde
For thou haste been with the king to long
To make me lose my worship and my name
Thou haste ay got the worship ever among
And I have none, thus would thou lose my fame
With such words chidyng he did him blame
To whom he said, if that thou be afraid
And keep the church, as thou me now have said
With yt he said, my lord ye have no men
With the enemies, thus hastily to fight
Your men wot not of this, ne how ne whenne
To semble to you of power, ne of might
For trewly now my cosen Graye now right
And I have here but ten men and no mo
But yet ye shall never say we leave you so
So rode they forth, ay chidyng by the way
Till they to Bawgy, over the bridge were gone
Where the enemies were batayled in array
Where then they light, and faught with them anon
The duke was slain yt day there with his foone
With him were slain, then therle Vmfreuyle
And sir John Graye the Earl of Tankeruyle
The lord Roos, and sir John Lumley
With many other were with him slain yt day
Whose names I can not write nor say
The Earls two, of Huntingdon no nay
Of Somerset also, were taken there I say
For prisoners, and put to great raunson
And lay full long in France then in prison
Thenglishe power came, when all was done
And rescowed then, the deed men where they lay
And brought yt lords home, fro thens the^ full sone
That were there upon the field that day
And buried them in England, in good array
Echeone in his own abbaye or colage
Before founded within his heritage
At Cauntorbury, the duke was of Clarence
Beside his father king Henry buried
With such honor, costage and expense
As the duches his wife could have signified
Which neded not to been modifyed
She was so well, within her self auysed
Of great sadness, and womanhede preuised.
The.CC.xxi. Chapter.
How the queen went again to France, and left the queen in England with
child, and wanne diverse cytees towns and castelles in somer, in the nyngth
year of his reign

THe king then let ye queen in England bide
In somer then, the. ix year of his date
And into France, again he went yt tide
With heavy heart, to Paris went algate
The castle of Perfount, soon he gate
A royal place of all that men have seen
The great cytee of Compyne also I wene.
The cytees also of Cassons Bray and Crayle
Of Owsare also, with many cytees moo
And to Paris again without fail
In his castle of Lowre abidynge tho
Tidings then came, to him full glad and mo
That of a prince delivered was the queen
Of which all men reioysed as was seen
Saint Dionis then, and castle Boys Vynccent
Corbell Pount Melanke, and full great part of France
Burgoyne Artoys, and Pycardy to him sent
To been his men, without contraryaunce
And each cytee, to him sworn in substance
Walled towns and castelles euerychone
As hye regent of France by him one
Then rode he forth to Bawgy and Orleaunce
Wynnyng the tounes, and citees in his way
And castelles all, that were of great defense
Crepy, Lawnesse, and Milly with great affraye
Nongentle Roy, he gatte with great array
Pount Caranton, with many other obeyed
To his highness, and were his men conueghed
The duke of Brytain, then was his manne
For fee belaste, without rebellion
The count saint Paul, his manne was then
The duke of Burgoyn, without suspicion
With many other, his men without collucion
Were sworn the^ whole, ye countries in y^ same wise
Castelles and tounes, eke as he couth devise
In August so of his reign the tenth year
He took sickness, and lay at Boy Vincent
In pain strong, as then it did appear
Full like to pass, wherefore in his intent
The duke of Bedford, he made h^e regent
Of France, and of his other lands all
Beyond the sea as chief in general
And of his soonne Henry, he made custode
Thomas Beauford, his uncle dear and true
Duke of Excester, full of all worthy hode
To time his soonne, to perfect age grew
He to keep him, chaungyng for no n(...)
With help of his other eme, then fu(...)
The bishop of Wynchester of good a(...)
Therle then of Salisbury manly
That Mountague then hight by surname
He set to keep, then all Normandy
Under the regent, as knight of full great fame
With other lords, full sage and worthy of name
Therle of Oxenford, and of Suffolk also
Of his counsel to been with many mo
The.CC.xxii. Chapter.
How the king dyed the last day of August the year of Christ a thousand four
hundred two and twenty and of his reign the tenth year, for all his
rightwisnes and justice that he did, he had no conscience of vsurpement of the
croune.

THe last day of August then full clear
Of Christ his date, a thousand signified
Four hundred and two and twenty year
When that this prince of princes so dyed
At Boys Vincent, with death then victoried
That never prince in earth might the^ have dooen
But he alone that rules son and moonne
With whose bones, the queen came to England
The king of Scotts James with her also
The duke of Excester, as I can understand
Therle of March, Edmond Mortimer tho
Rychard Beauchampe, then earl of Warwike so
Humfrey then earl of Stafford, young of age
And earl Edmond, of Morten wise and sage
O good lord God, that art omnipotent
Why streched not thy power and thy might
To keep this prince, that set was and consent
With the emperor, to convert Surrey right
And with Christen inhabit, it had hight
Why favored so thine high omnipotence
Miscreaunce more, then his benevolence
Above all thing, he keped the law and peace
Through all England, that none insurreccion
Ne no riotes were then withouten lose
Nor neighbor werre, in fault of correccion
But peasebly under his proteccion
Compleyntes all, of wrongs in general
Reformed were, well under his yerd egall
The.CC.xxiii. Chapter.
How through (...)we and peace, conserved was the encreaso of his conquest,
and else had he been of no power to have conquered in out lands.

WHen he in France, was daily co^uersaunt
His shadow so obumbred all England
That peace and law kept continuaunt
In his absence throughout all this land
And else as I can seyne and understand
His power had been lite, to conquer France
Nor other realms, that well were less perchance
The peace at home, and law so well conserved
Were croppe and rote of all his hie conquest
Through which ye love, of God he well deserved
And of his people, by North, South, Est and West
Who might have slain y^ prince, or down him kest
That stood so sure, in rightful governance
For common weal, to God his hie plesaunce
The.CC.xxiiii. Capiter.
Henry the sixte king of England and of France that fled in to Scotland
without cause, on Palmesondaye the thirty and nine year of his reign, and of
Christ a thousand four hundred three score and one, began to reign the year
of Christ a thousand four hundred twenty and two.

HEnry his soo^ne, the^ not.iii. quarters old King Henry yt sixte

That borne was at. s Nicholas day before
At Windesore, so as yt realm the^ would
Unto the croune, succeed as he was bore
All England hole, by might of lords thore
The duke of Gloucester then disired
To have the keeping of the king enspired
The bishop of Wynchester it withstode
With all the lords there, hole of his assent
Then would he have been, as for yt next of blood
Leuetenaunt then of England and regent
The bishop aye, withstode all his intent
That chau^celer was, by yt fifth king Henry made
And so forth stood, and in thoffice bade
For cause he was so noyous with to dele
And office would he have and governance
Wherefore they made him, for the common well
Protector of the realm by ordinance The duke of Gloucester protector of
England.

To keep the land, fro mischief and varyaunce
The king of France, for sorrow then dyed
The queen his wife also, as was notified
The lord Cromwell, lost thereof nothing
For he had both them in his governance
And home then came, when buried was the king
Charles of France, with worthy ordenaunce
Queen Isabell also with purueaunce
Accordaunt well to their royal estate
With costages great, as was preordinate
The first day of the month of Septembre
He began to reign, then was a thousand year
Four hundred as I can remember
Twenty and two accounted then full clear
As I find write in the chronicler
But not crouned for tenderness of age
Nor yet anoynte, for dred of youths outrage
The duke of Bedford, stood so forth ay regent The duke of Bedfordrege^t of
france.

The duke of Gloucester, here was so protector
The bishop of Wynchester by perlyament
Was chaunceller and hiest governor
Of the king his person and his great socour
His godfather and his fatheres eme
And supportour was, most of all this realm
The rege^t then, of France wed Anne his wife
The duke his suster of Burgoyn, good and fair
The duke of Brytain, her suster known rife
Had wed before without any dispeire
Which was lady of great repeire*
Which dukes two were sworn and aliede
With the regent to stand strongly fortified
The.CC.xxv. Chapter.
How the regent with lords of England smote the vattaill of Vernoyle in Perch,
in ye third year of king Henry yt.vi.

Therle of Boughan and therle Douglas
Therle of Wigton with power of Scotland
And lords of France, to gether assembled was
Where the regent with lords of England
At Vernoyle in Perch, as I can understand
Faught with them sore, and slew the Scotts cruelly
And bade them think among on Bawgy
The regent had the field and victory
With great honor and laud full comfortable
Therles were there, with him of Salisbury
Of Suffolk also, that were full honorable
The lord Wiloughby, full fortunable
The lord Scales of great and hie courage
With many other of the baronage
Therle of Ewe, and his brother manly
Faught in that feld, and gate aworthy name
And many mo, did tho full doughtely
I dare well say, was none therefore to blame
All other also, which that were worthy of fame
I would have wryte^, if I had known their mede
But to heraldes, I will commit their deed
They sleugh therles, of Boughan and Douglas
And of Wigton, of Scotland that were there
The lord of Enermeth, of Scotland then was
With great people, that dedde then there were
Our Englishmenne, full manly them bear
The regent was there, that day a lion
And faught in arms, like any champion
The.CC.xxvi. Chapter.
How Mountague earl of Salisbury laid siege to Orle aunce and was slain
there.

THerle of Salisbury, then Mountague
With great power, laid siege to Orliau^ce
Where slain he was, for who^ men sore began rewe
So manly was his knightly diligence
He labored ever in marciall excellence
Unto the time as would the end of fate
With a quarrel was slain unfortunate
And buried was, in England that year
With great worship and hie solempnitee
Richard Neuell had wed, his daughter clear
And earl was made, that time by her in fee
The regent then, of great nobilitee
By counsel of the duke then of Burgoyn
Kept France full well, without any essoyn
Then died his wife, and wed then sone again
The countee saint Paul's, sister of France
That leegeman was to king Henry certain
To the regent sworn, as by full great assurau^ce
With true service, and all true aliaunce
He kept both France, and eke all Normandy
In peace and rest, full well and worthily
Therle Richard of Warwike, kept the king
By all this time, since the duke was dead
Of Excester, that first him had in keeping
Therle Richard, in mykell worthyhead
Enfourmed him, but of his symplehead
He could little, within his breast conceive
The good from eiuill, he could uneath perceive.
The.CC.xxvii. Chapter.
How the king was enoynted and crouned in England in the year of Christ a
thousand.CCCC. and.xxix. and of his reign the.viii. year. And afterward he
was crouned in France, the year a thousand.CCCC. and.xxxi. and of his reign
the.x. year, in whose presence the regent ceased of his office, for which he
was wroth with the cardinal is uncle for as much as the king was there
present, therefore there should be no regente.

THe king then in his.viii. year in England
At Westmynster upon saint Leonardes day
The sunday then, as I can understand
And of Christ was then, a thousand full I say
Four hundredth and.xx. and.ix. no nay
He crouned was, with all solempnitee
By whole assent of lords and commontee.
Then of his reign, account the.x. year
To France he went, where then at saint Denis
His fathers eme, the cardinal full clear
Him crouned fair, with bishops there full wise
The regent was there, with such service
As was due of reason, and to him appent
The duke of Burgoyne, also obedient.
The duke also, was there of Britayne
The count saint Paul, and the duke Embarre
Therle of Foys, with other lords of Guyan
The prouoste of Paris, with other great repair
Of lords, knights, and many ladies fair
The governors of all the great citees
And prelates feel and Barons for there fees.
The.CC.xxviii. Chapter.
How the lord Cromwell was chamberleyne in France at his coronacion, and
discharged at his coming home in to England, and the duke of Bedforde regent
of France died, and then yt duke of Burgoyne was made regent a year and then
therle of Warwike was made regent a year and died at Roan in the castle.

THe lord Cromwell was his chamberlayn
Who was so wise, he was of great record
His homagers, as to him did perteyne
In France that time, by good and true accord
For his fees, as they and he concord
Of Christ's date, was then a thousand year
Four hundredth also and one and thyrty clear,
The rege^t died, for who^ was made great moan
Then both councels of England and of France
Chose the duke of Burgoyn then anon
To regent of that land, for great affiaunce
That kept it well a year in all assurance
But sone thereafter, with the dolphyn accord
And was his man, as then was well record
Therle Richard of Warwike then conceived
Of the symplesse and great innocense
Of king Henry, as he it well perceived
Desired to be discharged of his diligence
About the king, and by his sapience
Was sent to France and so was regent
And kept it well in all establishement.
Till that he dyed, out of this world away
For whom great moan was made and lamentacio^
For his wisdom, and for his manhood ay
For his norture and communicacion
He stood in grace of hie commendacion
Emonge all folk unto the day he died
Regent of France, full greatly laudified.
The.CC.xxix. Chapter.
How the duke of Burgoyn besieged Calys and set up his bastell there, and how
the duke of Gloucester rescowed it.

THe duke of Burgoyn, then to Calis came
And set a bastell then before the town
The which therle of Morteyn, by his name
Edmond Beaufort, as made is mention
With soudyours it gatte and bet it down
The duke went home, and left the siege with shame
When he our flete saw, saylyng on the same
The protector with his flete, at Calys then
Did land, and rode into Flaunders a little way
And little did, to count a manly man
But that the siege, for him then fled away
The duke distracte, sore sick was many a day
For sorrow and shame, he held him out of sight
Many a year, he went not out to fight.
The.CC.xxx. Chapter.
How king James of Scotland besieged sir Raulfe Gray in Renkesburgh, and how
Henry Percy earl of Northumberlande rescowed it with seven score thousand men.

IN yt same time also, of Scotland king James
To Re^kesburgh ca^, and laid his siege about
Sir Raulfe Graye, the^ kept it from all shames
Again his sautes, yt then were full stout
Therle then of Northumberlande throughout
Raised up the land, and when he came it nere
The king trumped up and went away full clear
Who saw ever before, two hosts royal
So easily without stroke discomfite
Of diverse lands, and neither had a fall
And on no part, smote no stroke perfect The co^ce^^ of yt maker touching
king James.

But for the shadows, that were imperfite
Of our hosts so fled and saw nothing
But vmbres two, of our host then coming
But thus I deem, tho princes were forswore
The king of Scotts, the duke of Burgoyn eke
That they not durst on no ground abide therefore
Their untruths, made there hertes feynt and seek
Trust never their manhood after worth a leeke
That uncompelled forsworn or wilfully
Shall never after have honor ne victory
Take heed ye lords, of these great princes two
What came of them, in short time after this
The king murdered, at home in Scotland tho
The duke was wod, and frantike for his miss
Thus vengeance fell upon them both I wysse
Alas a prince should have such cowardice
To be untrue or false in any wise
Since he need naught, so strecheth ay his power
To keep his truth, and make his ^o the same
To keep to him with strength of sword full clear
Or else destroy his land, and all his fame
And put him so to foul and open shame
For perjury occupied, and law vnpreserued
Caused many a man, for to be ouerterued.
The.CC.xxxi. Chapter.
How therle of Stafforde was.ii. year regent of Normandy and how therle of
Huntyngdon was other two year, and how Richard duke of York was regent of
Normandy. vii year with holden, and afterward was made liuetenaunte of
Irelande.

But after then therle of Stafforde went
With power strong, to keep all Normandy
Two year with hold, with all lords assent
Which well he keped, and full honorably
With little loss, of places few suddenly
By enemies won, that might not long ben hold
And home he came, when spended was his gold
Then went therle thither of Huntyngdon
That kept that lad, with sad and true service
With great power, truly unto the croune
For all the foes, and eke the kings enemies
And few places lost, ne had no great supprise
And home he came again, at two years end
When his wages were gone and all hole spend
And after him the duke of York full ying
Thither was sent, with great power royal
And regent was, of all that longed to the king
And kept full well Normandye in especyall
But France was gone, before ingenerall
And home he came, at seven year end again
With mekell love of the land certain
The duke of York, sent was then to Irelande
Leuetenaunt then he was there many a day
And great thank there, and love of all the land
He had among the Iryshe always
And all the Iryshe, began him to obey
He ruled that land full well and worthily
As did before, his noble auncetrye
The.CC.xxxii. Chapter.
How Edmonde Duke of Somerset, was made keeper of Normandy.

THe king then made yt marquis of Dorset
Edmond Beauford, at ye cardinals request
Without delay, then duke of Somerset
And sent him fourth anon without rest
To Normandye, to keep it for his best
But in his time Fastolfe and Kyriell
Discomfyte were, in battle sore and fell
Where.vii. M. English were overthrow
Wherefore the French, assembled new each day
And gate the land ay, by and by on row
For which the duke wrote his letters ay
Unto the king and his council always
For more power, and else he might not bide
To keep the land, ye French were of such pride
He could none get, this land was the^ so pylde
Through war of France, they would not hi^ releue
So was the land with Frenchmen won and welde
With siege each day, and sautes fell and breue
The French naught rest yt time a day to eve
We lost more then, certain within two year
Then king Henry gate in seven clear
Then was the king come unto man's age
Wherefore the lords, would no protector
Wherefore the duke lost his great advantage
And was no more then after defensour
But then he fell in a great error
Moved by his wife Elianor Cobham
To trust her so, men thought he was to blame
He waxed then strange, each day unto yt king
For cause she was foriudged for sossery
For enchaunmentees, yt she was in workyng
Again the church, and the king cursedly
By help of one master Roger Donly
And into Wales he went of frowardness
And to the king had great heaviness
Wherefore ye lords then of the kings counsel
Made the king to set his hye parlyament
At Burye then, whether he came without fail
Where in parlesey he dyed incontinent
For heaviness, and loss of regyment
And often before, he was in that sykenesse
In point of death, and stood in sore destresse
When of the king was.vii. and twenty year
Then he so dyed in full and h(...) creaunce
As a christen prince of royal blood full clear
Contryte in heart with full great repentance
With mouth confessed, to Gods hye pleasaunce
Unto the earth, that is all flesh his neste
His body went, his soul to heavens rest
And of the king, the.xxix. year
In May* the duke of Suffolk took the sea
On pilgramage to pass, as did apere
With Brigauntes then with compassed enmyte
Him slew and heded with full great cruelte
Again assurance of the kings proteccyon
That worthy were the death for insurreccyon
That same year then at the hye parlyament
Was made a plain, and a hole resumpcyon
Of all the lands by sad and hole aduysement
Which the king had given of his affection
To any wight by patent, or conccssyon
Then tax ceased, and dymes eke also
In all England then raised were no mo.
The.CC.xxxiii. Chapter.
The duke of york, was made protector and chyef of council, the thyrty year
of king Henry the sixte, and the Earl of Salisbury was chaunceller of England.

THe duke of York then made was protector
And governed well but.ii. year not endured
Discharged he was, with passing great mur mour
Of commons hole, among them the^ ensured
To help him so, with power auentured
For he was set, the common well to avail
By his labor, and his hole counsel.
But ay the better, that he to God was set
The more were other, by word and deed
The contrary to labor, and to let
His good purpose, to pursue and to speed
So that he had no hap for to proceed
For sotell men him let ay at the end
The common well to mayntene and amend.
The Earl Richard also of Salisbury
So was disposed, in all things to the same
Which was the cause of their death finally
For which of right, ne must follow blame
Their lives well kept, had been without shame
For tho princes two, died in their kings right
For the public well, of each English wight
The.xxx. year this was then of the king
When they the king, then had in governance
And ruled him well, in all manner thing
And made good rule, and noble ordinance
Avoiding all misrule, and misusaunce
For worship of the king, and of his realm
Without doubt, or any other problem.
The.CC.xxxiiii. Chapter.
How the Earl of Northumberlande, the duke of Somerset and the lord
Clyfforde were slain at saint Albones the thyrty and.iiii. year of his
reign, where yt duke of york the Earl of Salisbury, and the earl of Warwike
took the king, (...) kept him in good rule, the twenty and two days of May,
that was then the Thursdaye next of Pen teco^t the year of Christ a thousand
four hundred and lv.

They were put by from all their good intent
And strange were hold, after many a day
To the thirty year and three by hole consent
At saint Albones, then upon the thursdaye
Accounted then next before Witsondaye
They slew the duke Edmond, then of Somerset
For cause he had the realms well so let
Therle then of Northumberland was there
Of sodein chance, drawn forth with the king
And slain unknown, by any manne there were
The lord Clifford over busy in werkyng
At the bars them met sore fightyng
Was slain that day upon his own assaut
As each manne said, it was his own defaute
Therle of Wiltshire with five hundred men
Fled fro the king full fast that time a way
The duke of Buckyngham, was hurt there then
The king they took, and saved in good array
To Wistminster with him they took the way
And ruled him well, in all prerogatife
As king of right, without any strife
The.CC.xxxv. Chapter.
How yt lord Audely faught with therle of Salisbury at Bloreheth at Mighelmas
term, in the thirty and eight year of his reign.

Yet were these lords, void fro yt king again
The duke of York, and therle of Salisbury
Therle also of Warwike, naught to layn
Without cause, I can not remember why
But at Bloreheth, the lord Audely in hie
With therle of Salisbury faught full sore
Therle prevailed, and Audely slain was thore
The thirty year and eight of the king
And so he went to Ludlowe on his way
The duke of York, in Wales had shippyng
To Ireland then he went, full well away
Therles of March, and Salisbury that day
And of Warwike, as God it had purueighed
To Calais went, their way no thing denied
The.CC.xxxvi. Chapter.
Of the battaill of Northampton, where the Earl of March, and therle of Warwike
prevailed and led the king to Westminster and kept him there, the year of his
reign right and thirty, and the year of Christ a thousand four hundred nine
and fifty, and slew the duke of Bokyngham, therle of Shrowisbury tresorer of
England, the lord Beaumont, sir Thomas Percy, lord Egremond, and led the king
with them to London and governed him full well and worthily, the tenth day of
July.

AT Couentree, the king in his parlyament
Proclaimed them all three for rebellours
But afterward, all three of one assent
At Northampton came, as worthy warriors
In somer after, to been the king his socours
Where then the duke of Buckyngham, them met
With power great, and trust have them ouerset
Therle of Shrewesbury was with him thore
The lord Baumount, with him was also
The lord Egremount, full stout in feate of war
Which four were slain, with mikell people mo
Beside Northampton, on the Thursdaye tho
The third day of the month of July
And in the reign of the king, eight and thirty
They saved the king, and kept him sauf and sound
With great honor, therle of March Edward
Therle also of Warwike, in that stound
And with him rode, so forth to London ward
Full worshipfully, they kept him thens forward
In all state royal as did append
And as his men unto him did attend
The.CC.xxxvii. Chapter.
How the battaill of Wakefeld where the North party prevailed, was the fifth
day of Christmasse, and of the king his reign the nine and thirty.

THen in the winter, before the Christemas
The duke of York, therle of Salisbury
Therle of Rutland, with them I guess
With power great, for their adversary
To save them selfs, as then was necessary
At their own weld at Yool, so then had been
The robberies there, to have staunchid clean
Where the^ yt lords, of ye North were assembled
And faught with them at Wakefeld the^ full sore
And slew them down, whiles they were disse^bled
And gate the feld that day upon them thore
And Southward came they, then therefore
To saint Albones upon the fastyngange eve
Where then they slew, the lord Bonuile I leave
The.CC.xxxviii. Chapter,
How therle of Northumberland, the lord Neuell and the North party, faught at
saint Albones yt seue^tene day of Feueryere, and slew the lord Bo^nuile
(...) six Thomas Kiryell and many other, the thirty and nine year of the king,
and the year of Christ a thousand four hundred and sixty, and led the king to
York.

AND sir Thomas Kyriell also of Kent
With mekell folk, that pitee was to se
And spoiled fast, ay homeward as they went
Without rule, into their country
They set them naught, on rule and equitee
Ne to keep law nor peace, in nokynd wise
How might they dure long, in such a guyse
But then the king, alone left on the feld
Came to the queen, and went to York his way
With the North party, that the^ so with him held
The duke of Excester with him went a way
The duke of Somerset, it is no nay
Therle also then of Deuenshire
And sir James Drmond earl of Wiltshire
The lord Moleyns, the lord Roos also
The chief Judge, and sir Rychard Tunstall
The lord Ryuers, the lord Scales his soonne also
The lord Wells, and Wiloughby with all
Sir Wyllyam Tailboys, so did befall
And many other, went to the North party
For to maintein then the sixte king Henry
The.CC.xxxix. Chapter.
How Edward duke of York and earl of March took on him yt royal charge for
the well of the realm the fourth day of March, the year of Christ a thousand
four hundred and sixty, followed king Henry that refused tho the rule of the
land and gave up Berwike to the Scotts, and fled in to Scotland and gave
battaill to the North party at Feribrig on Palmesondaye, where king Edward the
fourth prevailed, the year of Christ a thousand four hundred sixty and one
which was then the twenty and nine day of March, four days after our lady
day that time.

THe duke Edward, of March the^ ye.iiii. day
Of York full young, therle of March was then,
By counsel of the lords, by south men say
Both spiritual and temporal, as me^ne say then
Upon him took, estate royal and began
To reign as king, and with him reised the land
With lords feel, by south I understand
At Towton feld, he faught on Palmesondaye
Where then therle Henry of Northumberland
The lord Neuell, the lord Clifford that day
The lord Dacres were dedde I understand
The king Henry, then out of the land
To Berwike town, yt stounte in Scotland ground
With certain lords, and with the queen yt stound
And gave the town and castle to the Scotts
By whole assent of his simple counsel
Which might well be accounted then for sottes
As fowls that were then, of no gouernaill
In to Scotland, with foul misgouernaill
The queen Margarete, and the dukes both two
Of Excester, and Somerset fled also
The lord Roos, and eke the lord Moleyns
And the chief Judge, that called was Forscue
And Tailboys also, with other eiuill capitains
That after shall, full sore repent and rewe
If they also well as I, now Scotland knew
They would not so, have hasted thitherward
From the presence and grace, of king Edward
King Edward thus had then the victory
With his lords and men that were full true
That halpe him so, and were contributorie
To win his right, which then the people knew
To York he went, and found it not untrue
To Duresme also, and to the Newcastell
That to him were, as true as any stele
At York was hedded, that time and decollate
Therle that then was of Deuenshire
And at the Newcastell, so destinate
Hedded then was therle of Wiltshire
The king then set, the land at his desire
Save castelles few, with force that then were hold
By North and West, with rebel manyfold
And South he went, for his disporte and pla^e
At Leycestre held he then his great counsayl
In the month that then was called May
And ordained there for good gouernayl
Of al his realm, that enemies naught it assail
Then in winter, Margarete that had been queen
Fro France so came by ship, as then was seen
Into Scotland, with.iiii. thousand Fre^chme^
Of soudyours, for which the king anon
With host royal, to Durisme came he then
And sent therle of Warwike again his fooen
Therle of Kent also, with good men many one
They laid a siege, to the castle of Bamburgh
And to the castle also of Dunstanburgh
Sir Raulfe Percy, and the duke of Somerset
Delivered them to the king by poyntment
By which the king, without any let
Gave the keeping of them incontinent
Unto sir Raulfe Percy of good intent
And Alnewike castle was kept many a day
To rescouse came, and fet them thens a way
Which stood in stale, not far from the castle
But.viii. thousand, to whom the castelleyns
Came anon out, as men were there to tell
With horse and harnes, and home rode through yt playnes
Into Scotland, as good and wise chieftayns
I can well think, it was a manly deed
To noye their foes, and help theimselfes at need
My lord Vmfreuile, whom that I did serve
Said to me, it was the best thing might befall
Any chiefteyne to grieve his fo and ouerterue
And keep himself harmless therwithall
He that may hurt his fo without fall
And pass away, to his socoure harmless
He is a fool to abide any distress.
But when that they, were gone so home again
And their friends with them, from thens away
Two hundredth men of commons, came full feign
Out of Alnewike castle, in simple array
Our men bet them in again, there always
Till they were glad, to yield them and have grace
The which they had, without longer space
The queen's power, yt she so brought fro France
Was so little, the wardeyns naught it dread
They hight the king, for all her ordinance
To keep the land, for any help she had
How may she ought of great power besped
When Charles daughter of France void of dower
Despoyled was, of France failed all power
Queen Isabel that was king Rychardes wife King Richardes wife sent home again
into ^raunce

Deposed was, by king Henry of Derby
Of her ^wels, as it is known full ryfe
And home was sent, without remedy
What auayled her kynne and progenye
Of naught else, but great vexacion
That Frenchemen made to their own dampnacion.
The.CC.xl. Chapter.
The mocion and conceypte of the maker of this book touching king Henrye the
syxte, his wife and his son, to be gotten home and put in governance with
all that fled with him, co^syderyng their troth that forsook their lyuelodes
and welfare for his sake, and fro they so gotten home, that after they will be
as true to you, and else to give sore judgment upon them.

O Gracious lord king Edward fourth account
Consydre how king Henrye was admytte
Unto the croune of England, that did amounte
Not for desert, nor yet for any wit
Or might of him self, in otherwise yet
But only for the castigacion
Of king Richardes wicked peruersacion
Of which the realm then yrked euerychone
And full glad were, of his deposicion
And glad to croune king Henry so anon
With all their hertes, and whole affeccion
For hatred more of king Richardes defection
Then for the love of king Henry that day
So changed then the people on him aye.
Yet kept he aye therle of March full ying
In earls estate, as he that was his ward
And brought him up, in all manner thing
As his estate asked and could awarde
And cheryshed him, in norture to regard
As his own sons, during all his life
To make him love him, without any strife
Thus by wisdom his son Henry right so
Him cherished by good and wise counsayl
Which he assigned unto him tho
Of good rule, that would not let him fail
For cause he should again him not prevail
And into France, in his hole estate
Had him with his brother associate
All this he did, of full good policy
To win his love, and kept him in direccion
From entisement of all eiuill and folly
To his pleasaunce, without all suspection
This was great wit and circumspeccion
To rule him thus, his heighnes to obaye
Without strife, to sit in peace his day
O gracious lord, now of your sapience
Consydre well this sixtye year and three
Your kyn and ye by all intelligence
Have been deuorced of all the royaltee
To now that God of his specialitee
Has granted you grace, your rightes to recover
And your enemies all to rule at over.
Considre well the benign innocence
Of king Henry that now is in Scotland
By Gods dome of small intelligence
For your prevail, as men can understand
Get him now home, again into England
With all the means, ye may of sapyence
His wife and son, with all your dilygence.
For trust it well, if they may pass to France
Or power get to them in any wise
Each year they will you trouble, and do greuau^ce
By Scotts assent, and their exercise
To brag and boste, as they would on you rise
To make your people and commons for to yrke
Iackes and salades ay new and new to wirke
For trust it well, as God is now in heaven
The Scotts will ay do you the harm they may
And so they have full often, with odd and even
Before that Christ was borne so of a may
As yet they do at their power every day
Wherefore good lord, bring home these persons three
With all their men, and give them grace all fre
And love them better, for their great lewte
That they forsook their lands and heritage
And fled with him, in aduersyte
To bide in pain sorrow and seruage
Good heart should rewe, well more their true courage
Then them yt would have gone, and durst naught
Consider how they showed, as they thought
If ye might get them all for any good
To be your men, and have their heritage
And your enemies, that against you stood
Ye should make true men to your advantage
To pass with you, in wars and hostage
As true as they have been to king Henry
And mekell trewce for your right auncetry
For if ye might them get now every chone
Your wars were done, the^ might you sit in rest
Without trouble of any land alone
For all your land throughout, the^ might ye trest
If it were hole that ye need not mistryst
No prince christen, might do you any dear
But in his land, ye might make him were.
Grant Henry grace, with all his own liuelode
The duchye hole of Lancaster, that is his right
Not as it is, but of worthyhede
First duke Henry, had the noble knight
At his last day, that was of mikyll might
His wife and son, get home by ordinance
And give them council, for their governance
Such as you trust, will rule them worthily
To your plesaunce, in all tranquillyte
In peace and rest, with all good polyce
For better were, to have them in suretye
Than let them been, with your aduersyte
With Scotts or French, yt would se your destresse
And help to it with all their business
And if ye may by no mean nor treat
Get them home, ordeine then fast your flete
On the east sea, into Scotland in hye
At Edinburgh, so may it with you mete
With all vitayle and ordinance full mete
And set upon the castle, they been in
Escape they may not, but ye shall them wyn.
For I have seen their castelles strong echone
That strongest been, and worste to get and wyn
Among them all, for certain is there none
That may been hold out long, when ye begin
Save Dunbretayne, the sea about does ryn
Each day and night, twyce withouten doubt The caste^ of Dunbretayne.

Which may be won, by famyshyng about
With ships by sea, and siege upon the land
Ye may not fail, to have it at the last
All other will been yield into your hand
So that ye have by workmen well fore cast
Your ordinance and gonnes for to cast
With abylementes of war, such as ye need
No castle else may withstand in deed
Therefore in what castell^that they been in The time to begin war in
Scotland

Go to the same without impedyment
Not in winter, but in somer ye begin
When Iuyll month, or Auguste is present
That forage may begot, as does appent
Of corn and grass, for horses sustenaunce
And fair wether to men's hye pleasaunce.
O righteous prince, bring home ye scatred men
To their pasture forsaken and forlore
For of your breast, should great foyson ren
To nedy men, of grace and help evermore
Consider how God has you set therefore
And over the flock, to seek the scatered sheep
And lay them in your fold surely to sleep
Consider now, most gracious sovereign lord
How long now that your noble auncetrye
In wealth and health, has reigned of hye record
That kept law and peace continually
And think they been of all your monarchye
The fairest flowers and highest of enterpryce
And sonest may your foreyne foes supprice
Consider also in this simple tretyse
How kings kept neither law ne peace
Went sone away, in many diverse wise
Without thank of God at their decese
And naught were dred wtin, ne without doutlesse
But in defaute of peace, and law conserved
Destroyed were, right as they had deserved.
Consider also, most erthly sovereign lord
Of French nor Scotts ye get never to your pay
Any treaty or trewce, or good concord
But if it be under your banner aye
Which may never be, by reason any way
But if your realm stand well in unity
Conserved well, in peace and equity
Your marchis kept, and also your sea full clear
To France or Spain, ye may ride for your right
To Portyngale and Scotland with your banner
Whils your rerewarde in England stands wight
Under your banner, your enemies well you hight
A better treaty, within a little date
Then in four year, to your ambassate
Remembered been, unto your excellence
The tytles all, that long to your regiment
Of Scotland hole, with all my dilygence
That third part, is of Britayne by extent
And owe to been, at your commandment
And membre of your royal monarchye
As Chroniclers have made thereof memory
England and Wales, as to their soueraygne
To you obey, which should think shame of right
To se Scotland thus proudly disobeyne
Again them two, that been of great might
It is a shame to every man's sight
Since John Baylioll, his right of it resygned
To king Edward, why is it thus repugned
Within three year, their great rebellyon
Ye might repress, and utterly restrain
And keep them ever in your possessyon
For to obey your might, make them full feign
As king Edward did with hunger and with pain
Them conquered hole, to his subieccyon
To bide evermore under his proteccyon
Wherefore good lord, now girde you with your sword
And set upon the froward heretykes
That erren fro the two parts of the herd
And strayen out, as they were litargykes
Which have forget their lord as cronnatykes
Having no shame of their peruersyte
Nor change hew for their falsyte.
And trust it well, as God is now in heaven
Ye shall never find the Scotts unto you true
Where they may with your enemies ay beleuen
They will to you then, always be vnttewe
Yet through your manhede, it may them rewe
For longer then ye have them in subieccyon
Trust never truth, in them ne perfeccyon
The.CC.xli. Chapter.
The kings title to all his lands, briefly reported, with a mocyon to union
Scotland and England.

TO England have ye right, as ye may se
By Brutus chronycle Saro^s and Norma^s
To Wales yt same, and Scotland also perde
Who that the gift and right well understands
Of John Bayloll, how he into the hands
Of king Edward, it gave and resygned
Why should it now be void and repygned
To France your title, is written well and know
For saint Lowis, to you by hole discente
And Normandye all hole, both hye and low
Fro Willyam Conqueroure, by hole intent
Guyen and Poytowe, withal to them appent
For Elianour the mother of king John
Daughter and heir, to duke Willyam anon
To Angeou also, by Geffrey Plantagenet
Father of Henry le fytz Empryce
That of Angeou was Earl withouten let
And of Main also, a prince of great empryce
To Irelande also, by king Henry le fytz
Of Maude, daughter of first king Henry
That conquered it, for their great heresye
To Casteil and to Lion also ye been
Thenhe ritour also and very heir
By right of bloodde descended clear and clean
Of Portyngale, where Lusshborne is full fair
Fro king Petro without any dispeir
For tho two, be the very regions
That named be Castile and Legions
Your graunsirez mother duchess Isabell
Full lady like fair and femenine
To king Petro as I have heard tell
Was very heir of them, by rightful line
To whom ye been heir as men determyne
By small hackeneys, great coursers men chastise
As Arthure did by Scotts, wanne all fraunchese
Though scripture says, of North all eiuill is showed
Me thinks I can, auau^te it as properly
That they be as manly learned and lewed
As any folk and as much pain may dry
Better men of war are not under the sky
And of living, David says in his book
Of Scotland well, who so that will it look
If Scotland were youres, to Wales and England
Who has power, to make you resistance
In any wise, in any uncouth land
Your rereward then scant in all sufficience
To keep England surely in your absence
Make them Albion, and pass forth where ye list
To other lands ye need none other trist
The.CC.xlii.
Thexcusacion of the maker, touching defautes of this book and of the
simplenes of it.

OF all matters I have said mine intent
So as I couth epsy, and in all wise enquere
Which if it may, your highness well content
My heart reioyseth, to comfort your desire
And of your grace, evermore I you require
For to consider, my loss and my mayme in fere
For Englandes right, as well as I couth spear
Besechyng ay unto your royaltee
If ought be said in this simple treatise
Displeasyng to your hie nobilitee
For to resume it, in a better wise
Having my wit excused, that never was wise
And think I would have me^t unto your plesau^ce
To which I lack nothing, but suffisaunce
Please it also unto your royaltee
The queen may have a vereie intellecte
Of your eldres of great antiquitee
And of England, of which she is elect
Sovereign lady, full worthily protecte
Under your rule and noble governance
Which God ay keep without variaunce
The which should please her good femenite
To read upon, for her comfort and disporte
To se and know, the great nobilite
Of your eldres regalie and port
Which may her glad always and recomforte
And if it may please her souereingtie
Of my labor I would reioysed be
For women have femenine condition
To know all things longyng to their housband
His high worship and his disposicion
His hertes counsel also to understand
As at weddyng, to her he made his bound
And most of all his hertes priuetie
And thestate of his good auncetrie
O sovereign lord yt queen has all fufficie^ce
As touching you, but of your auncetrie
In this treatise of all their excellence
The queen may se the worthy regence
Of this your realm and noble monarchy
Which has been kept in great nobilitee
By your eldres of great antiquitee
This book I call after my name Hardyng
Since God lent me that disposicion
To inform him that labored the writing
By plain language of small provision
Through Gods grace and his supposicion
All destitute of language and science
And desolate of rethoryke eloquence
Most cause was why I drew this ilke treatise
To make your father have had perfect knowlage
And you also of Scotland in all wise
That percell was of your eldest heritage
And of all lands most nere your advantage
To have it whole, no more to be dismembered
Which might be got, as it is before remembered
I had it lever then France and Normandy
And all your rightes that are beyond the sea
For ye may keep it evermore full sikirly
Within your self and dread none enmytee
And other lands, without gold, men and fee
Ye may not long rejoice, as has been told
For lightter be they for to win, then hold
Your auncestres have had beyond the sea
Diverse lands, and lost them all again
Sore gotten sone lost, what avails such roialte
But labor and cost, great loss of men and pain
For ay before, with treason or with train
And want of gold, was lost within a year
That we had got in ten, as does appear
How the maker of this book reports the distaunce and miles of the tounes in
Scotland and ye way how to conueigh an army as well by land as water into the
chefest parts thereof.
NOW to express, unto your noble grace
The very way, both by sea and land
With the distaunce of tounes, and every miles space
Through the chefest part of all Scotland
To conueigh an army, that ye may take in hand
Herafter shall follow, in as good order as I may
The true description, and distaunce of the way
From Berwike to Do^barre, twenty miles it is
And twelfe miles forward unto Haddyngtoune From Barwyke to Do^barre.xx.
Haddingtosie xii. Ede^burgh xii Lythko xii. Sterlyng.xii. From Ede^burgh to
Leith. i to Blaknesse.ix. to Sterling. xiiii

And twelfe miles from the^se to Edinburgh I wisse
To Lithko twelfe, and so Northwest to Bowne
Twelfe miles it is, unto Sterlyng town
Besouth Forth, that river principal
Of right fair way, and plentiful atall.
Where yt your navy at Leith may rest saufly
With all your vitayles, a mile from Edinburgh
And after at the blaknesse, whiles as ye ly
At Sterlyng town, which is the kings burgh
And win that shire, all whole out through
So shall your navy at your necessitee
Be at your hand still, your army to supply
From Sterlyng then over the river of Forth From Sterlyng to ye down of of
Monteth.iiii.

Pass alongest the bridge to Camskinelle
And if it be broken toward the North
Unto the foorde of Tirps under the fell
The^ speed you Westward, three miles as me^ne tell
Where ye may pass to the down of Menteth
Which passes from yt Forth three miles uneath
Then from the down, a way ye have right fair From Sterlynge to Falkla^d.xxx.

Through out Monteth, and eke Clakmannam shire
And so through Fiffe, to Falke land to repair
Thirty long miles, without moss or mire
For so it is compted, with horse and carte to hyre
From Sterlyng Eastward, and the high oyghylles
Which some me^ne call mo^taignes, and some felles
From falkland tha^ to Disert town, south east
Twelfe miles it is, of fair ready way
And from Falkland to saint Andrews, east
But other.xii. miles, wythouten any uaye
Where the bishops see is, and castle as they say
And at Kyngorne, and Disert may ye meet
You for to vytayle, al your Englysh fleet.
Than ride northwest, from s. Andrews town
Alongest the south side, of the water of Taye
Up to the burgh of saint Ihons town
Right north from Fyfe, a country fresh and gay
And from saint Androws.xxiiii. miles they say
A pleasant ground and fruitful country
Of corn and cattle, with prosperity.
Which country of Fyfe along the scottish sea
And from saint Androws, to the oyghles they say
Is.xliiii. my les long of good country
And sometime in breadth.vi. miles of fair way
But from Logh leven eastward, without uay
Of right good way, briefly to conclude
Xii. miles conteyne it does in latitude.
At Ennerkethen and saint Margarete I hope
Your navy may receive vytayle in that country
A longest the water of Forth, as I can grope
With hulke, and barge, of no small quantite
You to supporte, in your necessytee
So that ye may not, in those countries fail
To have for your army, redye vytayle.
The^ to s. Ihons town, upon the water of Tap
Within Steathren, that stands fair and strong
Dytched about, syxtene foot deep I say
And.xx. foot on breadthe ouerwhart to fonge
Yt is northest.xx. miles full long
And nere to Scone abbay, within miles three
Where always they crown their kings majesty
Which water of Tay, is so nauygable
From the east sea, to saint Ihons town
For all such ships, as be able
Forty tun of wine, to carry up and down
For vitallyng, and keeping of the town
Unto the which, so flows the water of Taye
That all the dytches it fylleth night and day
At the which town, pass over the brygde ye shall
With all your army, hostyng through that land
Where in Angus, that country pryncypall
The Kerfe of gowry does lie I understand
A plentiful country, I you warrande
Of corn and catell, and all commoditees
You to supporte, in your necessytees
Betwyxt the mounthes and the water of Tay
Which some do call mountains in our language
Pass eastwarde, with your army day by day
From place to place with small carriage
For your navy shall you mete in that viage
At Portincragge, short way from Dunde
With bitailes to refreshe your whole army
Beside the stuff and vitaile of that land
Which ye shall find, in the country as ye go
And market made always to your hand
Of all their vytayles, although they be your fo
Now from s. Ihons town, the soothe to say is so
Xviii. miles it is, to the town of Dundye
The pryncypall bugh, by north the Scoty she see
Than ride northeast all alongest the sea
Right from Dumber to Arbroith as I mean
Than to Monrosse, and to Baruye
And so through the Meernes to Cowy as I wene
Then.xii. miles of moore pass to Aberdyne
Betwyxt Dee and Donea goodly cytee
A merchant town and vniuersytee
Of the which way.xxx. miles there is
Of good corn land, and.xx. large extenre
Full of catell and other goods I wysse
As to Moore land, and heth does well appente
From Brichan cytee to the orient
Where doothe stand upon the sea
A goodly port and haven for your nauye
Where that the same, may easily you mete
To vitayle your army, whersoeuer ye go
Over all the mountains, dry mosses and wete
Where the wild Scotts do dwell than pass unto
That is in Mare and Garioth also
In Athill, Rosse, Sutherland and Chatnesse
Mureffe, Lenox, and out ysles I guess.
And when ye have that land hole conquered
Return again unto Striuelyne
And from thence to Glasco homewarde
Twenty and four miles to s. Mongos shrine
Where with your offering ye shall from thence decline
And pass on forthwarde to Dumbertayne
A castle strong and hard for to obtain
In which castle s. Patryke was borne
That afterward in Irelande did win
About the which flows even and morn
The western seas without noise or dynne
When forth of the same the streams do rynne
Twyse in.xxiiii. hours, without any fail
That no man may that strong castle assail.
Upon a rock so hye, the same does stand
That if the walls were beaten to the roche
Yet were it full hard to clymbe with foot or hand
And so to win, if any to them approach
So strong it is to get without reproach
That without honger, and cruel famyshemente
Yt cannot be taken to my judgment
Than from Glasgo to the town of Air
Are twenty miles and four well accounted
A good country for your army every where
And plenteous also, by many one recounted
For there I was, and at the same I mounted
Toward Lamarke town.xxiiii. miles
Homeward trudging, for fear of Scottish giles
From the town of Air in kyle, to Galloway
Through Carryct pass unto Nithysdayle
Where Dumfryse is a pretye town always
And plentiful also of all good vytayle
For all your army, without any fail
So that keeping this journey, by my instruccion
That realm ye shall bring in subieccion.
Then from Domfrise to Carlill, ye shall ride
xxiiii. miles of very ready way
So may ye win the land on every side
Within a year, withouten more delay
For castelles there is none, yt withstand you may
Nor abide your seage, against your ordinance
So simple, and weak, is their purueiaunce.
And if ye like good Lord, at home to abide
With litell cost, your Wardens ye may send
Charging them all, with hosts for to ride
In proper person, through winter to the end
With morrow forraies, they may them sore offend
And burn Iedburgh, Hawike Melrose, and La^der
Codinghm^, Donglasse, and the town of Dombarre
Then send an host of footmen in
At Lammesse next, through all Lawde: ^ayle
And La^mermore woddes, and mossis over rynne
And eke therewith the Stowe of Weddale
Melrose land, Etryke forest, and Tyuydale
Lyddisdale, Ewysdale, and the Ryngwod selde
To the Creke Cross, that ryden is full selde
The wardens then of both the marches two
To be their stayle, and eke their castelles strong
Then to reskewe from enemies where ever they go
With fleyng stayles, to follow them ay among
Les nor then foes them suppress and fong
And every night to releue to the host
And lodge together all upon a coast
And also than at the next Myghelmesse
The west warden to Domfryse ride he may
Four and twenty miles from Carelyl as I guess
And than pass forthwarde, through galowaye
To Carricke after, into good array
And then from thence, to the town of Air
In Kile that country, plentiful, and fair
Next than from Air, unto Glasgew go
A goodly cytee and vniuersitee
Where plentiful is the country also
Replenished well with all, commoditee
There may the warden of the east march be
And mete the other twain as I wene
Within ten days, or at the most fyftene
The third army from Barwyke pass it shall
Through Dumbarre, Edinburgh, and Lythk^
And then to Sterlyng, with their power al
And next from that unto Glasgo
Standing upon Clyde, and where also
Of corn and cattle is abundance
Your army to vittayle at al suffysaunce
Thus these three armies at Glasgew shall mete
Well arrayed in their armor clean
Which ho^ward from thence, they shall return co^plete
Four and twenty miles to Lamarke so shene
To Pebles on Twede, is syxtene miles I wene
To Soltray as much, tha^ twenty miles with speed
From thence return, they shall to Wark on twede
Within a month, this land may be destroyed
All a south forth if wardens will assent
So that our enemies shall be sore annoied
And wasted be, and eke for ever shent
If Wardens thus work, after mine intent
They may well quench, the cruel enmitee
This day by south all the Scottishe see.
Now of this matter, I have said mine intent
Like as I could espy and diligently inquire
Which if it may your highness well content
It is the thing that I heartily desire
And of your grace no more I do require
But that your grace, will take in good part
Not only my peines, but also my true heart.
EX FRVCTIBVS EORVM COGNOSCETIS EOS

printer's or publisher's device

: LONDINI.: In officina Richardi Graftoni.

1543.

A continuacion of the chronicle of England, beginning where John Hardyng left,
yt is to say, from the beginning of Edward the fourth unto this present
thirty and four year, of our most redoubted sovereign lord king Henry ye
eight, gathered out of the most credible and aute^tique writers.

RG

printer's or publisher's device

To the reader.
Forasmuch most benyng reader, as this former autour Iho^ Hardyng, wrote no
ferther then to king Edward the fourth: in whose days it should apere yt he
departed out of this world: and also considering the length of y^ time sense,
and the manifold goodly historyes, battailles, decres and statutes with the
disce^t and line of the kings of England sense that time, I thought it not
only my duty to labor yt knowledge of the same historyes to the^tent to
adioyne and annexe the same herunto, but also it should be a great offense in
me to suffer you to be deprived of so many fruitful and necessary things.
Wherefore I have here to the uttermost of my poor wit gathered and set forth
unto you thesaid histories not in meter, like as John Hardyng has dooen
before, partly because I would thereby declare a dyfference between the former
writing of John Hardyng and this my addicion, but specially, that these
excellent stories should nether in sense ner words be defaced of the
eloquence and great grace that the autoures of the same have all ready given
them, and therefore have I written them unto you in prose and at length, yt
which things how much ye more that they shall delight and please you, so
much the more glad shall I be of my peynes taken.

Edward the fourth.
AFTER TAHT EDWARD had vanquished and put to flight Henry the sixte, being
then very ioious and proud (partly through yt victory that he had gotten
and partly for that the commons began to cleave un to him and to take his
part, and likewise did the states of the realm) then departed he with all
conuenyent speed to London, and there assemblyng his counsel together, was
shortly after proclaimed king at Westminster yt nine and twenty day of June
and was called Edward the fourth of that name after Wyllyam the conqueror, and
this was in the year of Christ his incarnacion a thousand four hundred three
score and one. And the self same year king Edward held The first year.
his parliament again, in the which, first the realm was set in good order,
and all things wholly redressed, which was very good and expedient for the
commen weal, for yt it had not been looked to all y^ time that civil battaill
did continue. And also through his decree and will, all ye statutes that king
Henry yt sixth had made, was utterly abrogated and of no virtue or strength,
finally his two brethren yt were younger then he, George was made duke of
Clarence, and Rychard duke of Gloucestre, and John the brother of Rychard Earl
of Warwike, was made marquis Montacute, and Henry Burchire the brother of
Thomas bishop of Caunturbury earl of Essex, and Wyllyam Faucounbridge earl of
Kent, and this Henry Burchire being a noble manne and most puissaunte in
feactes of war had given him to marriage the suster of Rychard duke of York,
called Elizabeth. And for this cause chiefly, that the said Rychard might have
his assistau^ce and help of him in all manner of adversity that should
chance, either by battaill or other wise and that he did, after that king
Edward the soonne of the same Rychard had made him earl of Esser, tothend yt
both the father and the soo^ne might at all times be a sure fortress and
defense for him And he had begotten of this Elizabeth in laufull marriage four
men children, yt is to say, Wyllyam, Thomas, John, and Henry, and one
daughter called Isabell, the which lived but a short space, the which
soonnes used great diligence in bryngyng matters to pass, and in weighty
affairs and busynes very laborious, in adventures and ieoperdies manly and
bold, and in forseyng things very circumspect, but specially Wyllyam the
eldest had all these qualities. This Wylliam married Anne a maiden disce^dyng of
high parentage and of most pure virginity, the daughter of James Lussheburne
earl of saint Paul, by whom he had Henry now earl of Essex, also Cicile and
Isabell daughters, the which Isabell died before she was ripe to marriage, and
yt other was married to Walter Ferryse. But to come to that I spoke in the
beginning.

When all things chaunsed thus luckely to Edward, and that all was as he would
have it, Henry the duke of Somerset fearyng that king How Henry yt duke of
Somersette left king Henry the.vi. and fled to king Edward and after repented
and fled again to Henry the.vi.
Henry should goo to wrack, and take the worse, fled to king Edward, of whom
he was after the most gentle sort intertayned, but sone after it repented him
of his deed, for in the mean season king Henry had got a great power of
Scottish men, and unwitting to Edward gat Duresme, the which thing after
heard, the duke of Somerset fled privily to him, with a great compaign^e of
yt king his fre^des following after, and so many for desire of lucre and
vau^tage did turn to him, that Henry was thought to have as great an army as
his enemy had. The which army he made men think to be the greater for yt
he did spoil and destroy towns and feldes where soever he came, and so by
long burning and wastyng he came to a village called Exham, where as he
buckeled The discomfitur of Henry the sixth.
with John marquis Montacute whom he met there, and there fightyng very
sharply, as often times it had chaunsed before, was put to flight, losyng
the greatest nou^bre of his host, and he himself with a few ino, went in all
the have to Scotland, and the residue fled, some one way and some an other to
save their lives. There was taken there prisoners, Henry duke of Somerset,
Robert duke of Hungerforde, and Thomas Rosse, the which duke of Somerset was
put to death by and by The duke of Somerset taken and beheded
for that he had changed his mind so sone and went to ye other party, the
other were had to New castle, and there being for a season were put to death
in like manner, whereby other should have no trust of any victory, when their
capitaines were dedde and gone. Albeit king Edward now might think all
things to be well, and him self strong enough against the power of his enemy
for that he had got such a vyctorye, yet did he with all dylygence provide
that Margarete king Henrye the.vi. his wife, should at no hand be let into
England for fear of winning men's hearts to her. Wherefore, he made
bulwarks and sure for tresses on every part and coasts of his realm that
there might be no landynge, and did write to all them of the southe parts,
that they should in nowyse take in any woman, or help any, for if any so
did, he should be taken as an enemy and an high traytoure to the crown, as
they were against whom he did fight.

And of that part that is nygh to the Scottish bancke, he laid watches, that
none should goo out of the realm to king Henrye. But king The taking of
Henry the xyxte*
Henrye him self was never in any great fear whatsoever chanced, in so
much that he came in to England in a dysguysed apparel, and then being known
and taken of certain spies sone after he had come in, was carried to London to
king Edward, and there laid in hold. After whose attachynge and
imprysonmente, the realm was set in more quyetnes. Wherefore, Edward now
being out of all fear and danger of his enemies, did wholly set him self
the four years after ensuynge to the reformatyon and redressynge of his
publyke weal, and to the recompensynge of his souldyers for their pains: did
deuyde and give the lands of them that were with king Henrye to his own,
and so with geuynge large and ample rewards, did get the favor of all his
people as well the lay as the nobles, and using such vrbanyte and clemencye
to all kind of men, that he had throughlye won the hearts of all men: the
which gentylnes and fryndely famyliaritee he did ever after use. Also as for
the laws of the realm he did alter and mend some, and some he made new,
besides that he coined monye as well gold as silver, the which at this The
coynynge of royalles and nobles.
day is currante. The which gold was royals, and nobles, and the silver, was
grotes, so that in his time this kind of coin came up.

And after that his realm was in this state he made a proclamation, that if
any manne being a traytoure or rebellyon hertofore to his grace, and wyllyng
to submyt him self wholly to him should have his pardon, and other that would
not, should die, and suffer according to the laws. The which kyndnes and natyue
love did cause him to have the good will and heart of his commons, so much that
it is euydent, he was all the days of his life a conqueroure, through the help
and aid of the^ in so much, that his enemies were ever shamefully put to
wrack, as it shall be showed more plainly hereafter. And also not contented with
the frendshyppe of his own country men, did win and procure the love of
foren and strange princes, and made them to be of kynred with him, whereby
that they might, (if need should so require) aid and socour him, or at the
least, not be injurious or noisome to him. So that he married his sister lady
Margarete, to Charles the son of Phylyppe duke of Burgoyne, through which
marriage he had great help at the insurrection that chaunsed in this his
native country, and after that sent Richard the earl of Warwyke embassadoure
into France, the which should desire for him to wife, a maiden called Bona,
the sister of Carlotta the queen of France, and the daughter of Jews duke of
Sauoye, which after did marye John Galeot duke of Mylayne, the which busynes
did cause cyuile battle to be. For in the mean time that the earl went in
to France, and had spoken with Jews the king, with whom the lady Bona was,
and waited upon the queen her sister, Edward chaungynge his mind, married
lady Elyzabeth the daughter of Richard the earl of Ryuers, which was married
before to sir John Gray knight, by whom she had two children, Thomas and
Richard, of the which marriage, for the humylytie or baseness of stock that
the lady was of, he would no prince or kings to have known of it, no not so
much as her own father Richard the earl, for the which cause, when it was
blased abroad, every man did marvel greatelye, kings and princes were
dyspleased and grudged at it, and said playnelye, that it was not for his
honor so to do, and began to reprove the foresaid marriage shamefullye,
and for that he was led rather by blind Cupyde, than by any reason, they did
incessau^tlye reprove the same. And either this was the cause of the sedycion
which afterward did rise betwyxte king Edward and the earl of Warwycke, or
else the pryuie envy and malice which was in both their hertes now brastynge
out, whereby, an occasion or quarrel might be picked For Edward after that he had
got his kingdom (as it was openly known) by the earl of Warwykes mean and
help, begone to suspect him for that he was in such authoritee, so that he
would have plucked somewhat from him and diminished his power, whereby he
might have ruled all things at his own pleasure both in his own country,
and in other nations. So that a man may see, it often chances yt friends will
give very seldom condygne reward to a man's deseruinges, yea, and eftsoon
when a great benefit is bestowed or co^ferred upon them, they will like
ingrate persons nothing consider it. Of this ye earl of Warwycke was not
unknowing, ye which although he looked for better thanks and a more ample
benefit at his hands, yet nevertheless, he thought best to disse^ble and cloak
y^ matter, until such opportunity might be had; whereby he might, considering
the wylfulnes of the king exprobrate unto him the pleasures yt he had done for
him. And it is very true and evident that king Edward did make search in his
house for a thing that touched much his honesty, where the earl in deed was a
man that loved women well, and had great fantesie to their company. But what
soever it was, either evil will, or desire of the empire that their league
should be infringed or broken, after that the earl had sure knowledge by the
letters of his friends that the king had got him a wife privily and yt al yt he
had done with king Lewis in his embassad for the joining of this new affinitee
was but frustrate and in vain, he was so ernestly moved with it, that he
thought best that the king should be deposed from the crown, and as one not
worthy of such a kingly office. But to our purpose. The earl of Warwyke being
then sore vexed, and moved with the king, least yt in this his furoure his
intent being rashely gone about, should be brought to no good end, he
determined so long to suffer and bear such injuries, until such time that
he might bring his matters to pass as he would have the^ which shortly
after came into England, and salutyng the king, did his message unto him,
making him self to be ignoraunte of that marriage. And after that, the earl
through the license of the king went into his shyre of Warwike, partly to take
his pleasure, and partly for the preservation of his safety and health, which
was the year The sixth year.
of our lord God a. M.CCCC.lxvii. and the. vi year of the reygne of king
Edward. In the which year, George Neuell brother to the earl was made
archebyshoppe of York, after the dyscease of Wyllyam late archebyshoppe before
him being the.lii. bishop that had possessed that rome, and Phylyppe duke
of Burgoyne dyed the same year, and Charles his soonne was made duke, a man
both for manhood and valyantenes in war most exellente. This Richard as we
said before, was in his shyre of Warwycke, and there calling to him George
the archebysshope of york, and John Montacure Marquis his brethren both, and
after long communycation had of many things, the space of.ii. or.iii. days,
at length getting meet occasion to speak of the king and his doings, did
show his mind to them, desiring them, by all the ways that he could
possible, to take king Henry his part and to help him to the crown, saiynge
after this wise and manner. Brethren, it is not of any lyghtenes of mind, but
of plain judgment that I am moved to speak of king Edward and king Henrye.
This Henrye is a very godly manne, and loves them that be his faithful
subjects and does consider also who takes pains for him which has a
soonne borne by nature to be of great worthynes, praise and free lyberalitee,
by whom every manne may perceive much god lines, which helps his father
now being in thraldom and captiuitee as much as in him lies. And as for
king Edward, he is a man full of contumelye, and ingratytude, given all to
pleasure, evil willing to take any pains, and promotynge rather them that
come of naught, than noble and ancient men. Wherefore I thyncke it will come
to pass shortly, that either he will destroy all nobilitee, or else
nobilitee destroy him But before al other, we should first enterprise to
revenge our cause which have first taken hurt at his hands. For he (as I am
sure you know it both) after that he was king did first pryuelye gooe
about to defyle our dygnitee, and then after did openly intend our confusyon
and loss of honor, as though he was not brought to that dygnitee by us,
and not we by him, and therefore even now of late when I went ambassador to
France I was had in no regard, whereby the estimation which all kings have
conceived of us, partly gotten by our auncetours, and partly by our own
travails and peines, shall now be extynguished utterly, and nothing set by.
And by these persuacions he won his brother ye archebishoppe his heart, and
brought him to be of his mind, but he could not so sone nor easelye persuade
the Lord Marquis, for at yt first he would by no means be moved to work
treason at any hand against king Edward, but at the last when the earl had
promised him the help and power of many noble princes he was contented to keep
war. The which Marquis as he was unwilling to consent to this at yt first, so
did he at the time of war hold more of king Edwardes side the^ king Henryes,
as it shall appear more plain hereafter, the which was both destruction to him,
and his.ii. brethren. After this ye earl of Warwike a man of great wit
perceauing George the duke of Clare^ce, brother to king Edward, to bear no
great good will toward his brother yt king, what so ever the matter was, first
to prove him and to know his mind, began to complain a little of the king
his doings, then after that the duke was in the same tale with him again, and
showed him also what injuries he had taken at his brothers hand: he being
somewhat bolder to speak, brake his mind more at large desiring him to follow
his counsel, and that he should not think this to be done of any rashness,
showed him how warely through his policy all his matters were wroughte, and
desired him, yt he would cast with him self how to bring such a weyghtie matter
to pass, whereby al things may be provided before hand, to whom after many
great promises, he offered his daughter then of ripe age, to be married to him,
The duke through the council and great desieryng of therle of Warwike was
contented to do all things as he would have him. After yt therle had this
communicacion with the duke, he purposed to goo to Caleis, of the which town
he was then chief capitain, and where his wife and daughters were then
inhabityng, but to thend that this sedicion might be the sooner begone, where
with all England was sore troubled a great time, he had apoin^ted that sone
after he was gone to Caleis his brother tharchebishop, and the lord marquis
should make an insurreccion in York, whereby the battaill might be begone
while he was so far from them.

When all these things were prepared for, and his counsel well allowed and
taken, he went straight with yt duke of Clarence to Caleys. And there after that
the duke had promised by an oath that he would ever be true, he married lady
Isabell the earls eldest daughter, yt which when it was dooen, they both
consulted together yt more spedily, for yt yt insurreccion was made in York as
it was commanded and appoincted. The which co^paignie bego^ne first to spoil
with out all mercy or respect of any thing. For there was at York an old and a
rich hospital of saint Leonard, where the poor and impotent persons were
harbored, and the sick men comforted, and this house was found of yt
charitee of the country, which did give yearly certain of wheat, as yt first
fruits of all their corn to the sustenaunce and mainteynyng of them, to the
which noumbre of grain certain housband men of the country did refuse to
give any part through the counsel of therle of Warwikes compaignie, saying
plainly that the poor and sickely people had it not, but they that had yt rule
and governance of the house, and after that the procters of the hospital
claimyng it as dew unto them, sought for their right. And for that cause
great tumulte was and much conspiracy made, so that within few days, there
was gathered about a fiftene thousand, which compaignie came toward York.
But after yt it was known in the city that such a compaignie of men had
risen, the citizens watchyng ever for fear, was in doubt whether they should
mete them and try it in open field, or tarry in the city and keep them from
the walls. But the lord Marquis chief of that country did put them straight
out of all fear and doubt, the which taking good deliberacion and
aduisement, meter them cu^myng at the gates of yt city where after a sharp
co^flicte, he took Robert Hulderne duke, and by and by chopped of his hedde,
the which when he had dooen, he received into the city at ye midde night all
his soldiers that were there. The people being nothing abashed at the death of
their capitain, but rather the more eger and fearce, considering that they
could not overcome York, without ordinance which they lacked, went straight
forth to London. And as for that the lord marquis put to death yt duke and
capitain of yt commons, being also one of his co^spiracie, did it for this
intent, that either he would not be aknowen faulty of this co^mocion, or else
that he had utterly determined to hold with king Edward, of whom as it does
after appear, he did get perfect amity but after the king knew the mind and
purpose both of therle of Warwike and the duke of Clarence his own brother,
and also certefied by diverse me^nes letters that the army was drawyng nigh to
London, he sent by and by Wyllyam Harberte whom he made two years before
duke, with a great power of Walshe men, commaundyng him if he could
conveniently, bydde battaill to his enemies. The earl making have toward
Northampton, hard say that the Northrenmenne had got it, where also he set
his tents, and the next day following fought with them, in the which battaill
he was put to flight in a moment and clean discomfited. The Yorkshire men
being glad of this victory, were straight couled and went no ferder, but having
their hands full of spoils and prays went back ward again, lookyng when the
earl of Warwike would come, the which shortly after came from Calais with the
duke of Clarence his soonne in law to the host, and comme^dyng highly the
capitaines, and reioisyng gladly that they had ye victory, did spedyly prepare
an other army. Yet king Edward being nothing abashed yt therle of Pe^bruch
had so eiuill sped, sent him forth again with a greater army, which he had
ready at all times what so ever should chance, and he him self he did follow
with a small co^paignie, and that he might be readier for all things, in his
iourneye did increase his army with many that came to him of his sect, saying
that his intent was to destroy yt route of misliuers and flagicious persons,
and then therle of Warwike perceauyng that his adversaries came upon him, sent
in all the have to ye duke of Clarence which was nigh by him with an host
that he would bring his army in all the have to him, meaning yt bataill was at
hand. The duke when he hard it, came straight to ther^e. So they both coming
together went to Banberie, where they perceived their enemies te^tes were
pitched, and there buckelyng together, took the earl o^ Penbruch prisoner, and
killed and discomfited all his men, and emonges other of his nobles the^ was
killed Rychard the earl of Ryuers the father of Elizabeth the queen, and his
soonne John Woduile. And toward euenyng king Edward drew nigh, and heryng of
the death and soden betyng down of his men, tarried at a town five mile
from that place. Therle of Warwike went to his chief town with all his host,
and there within two days caused therle of Pe^bruch with certain other states
taken at yt time, to be behedded. In the mean season there begone away to
be found for peace, for the which, letters were written too and fro, and
herauldes sent from the king to therle, and from the earl to the king again,
whereby the king trustyng verily that all was pacified, was less ware of him
self, and feared less his adversaries, the which thing when it was known,
and showed to the earl by certain spies: he went forth in a night as privily as
he could with a strong power to the king his tents, and there killyng them yt
kept watch, took the king unware, and brought him to Warwike, and to the
intent the king his friends might not know where he was, conueighed him privily
from thens in the night to a town in Yorkshire called Middelame, and there to
be kept fast in hold. But yet the king could be in no place nor prisone but
that shortly it was known, the which caused many men to be sorry, and
lament his chance. But he him self after that he was in prisone, spoke fair
to the kepers of the castle, and with much intreatyng and great promises
made, did so tempte and corrupt them, that he was dimissed, although the
rumor was that the earl was willing to it, the which might be of likelihood,
if therle had given over fightyng, but such was yt eiuill fortune of king
Henry, whereby a man may perceive that he could never have his purpose, seeing
man's strength nor policy is not able to overcome, for therle with all his
fre^des did ventre their bodies, and spent their substance to have brought
Henry to the royal dignitee, for because he knew suerly, that as long as
Edward reigned, neither could he nor yet king Henry bear any rule. And yet
nevertheless they let him goo when he was in hold, and when king Edward was
delivered, he went straight to York, and there being honorably received of his
citezens, tarried for the space of two days to get him an host of men,
but when he could not have a worthy compaignie, considering yt he should goo to
London among the midst of his host, went from York to Lancastre, and there
found Wyllyam Hastynges lord chamberlain, of who^ he having great help came
safe to London. But therle of Warwike and the duke, after they had perceived
king Edward to be delivered through the means of false trai tours, and that
all things that they had appoincted was to none effect, was greatly moved
with anger and sorrow, and by and by calling together all their chief friends,
consulted how they might begin battaill again, the which when the king was
taken and in hold, was ended and dooen. And thus dooyng, there was certain that
for very anger and for the love that they had to war, offered them selfs to
fight of fresh for nothing, yt which moved ye chief capitaines to be ye more
earnest. Also king Edward was as wyllyng to fight as they were, whereby he might
either bring them by force of arms to quietness and peace, or else destroy and
kylle them every mother soonne, that the realm might be in (...)tter state.
For through their sedicious rebellyng, the people were greatly impouerished,
seeing that the churche^ and houses of men were spoiled and ^obbed, and men
s^ain in every place, ye corn and grass also destroyed that was of the
ground, and many other mischiefs dooen the which do chance eftsons in
battaill The consideracion whereof, it piti^d many men to see the common weal
in that case, the which went daily and hourly as well to therle as to the king
for atoneme^t, desieryng and counselyng them both that they would rather keep
peace and have the love of all men for their quiet living, then to live in
anger and envy, fightyng one with an other to yt vndooyng of all the realm,
where as it were a wicked deed to kylle the father, but yet a great dele more
wicked to destroy the whole body of the commen weal, which is the father of
all men, and by the which every manne is maynteyned and kept. By this great
entreatyng of noble men therle and the king gyuyng feyth one to an other
peace was had for a time, wherein the earl and the duke went both to London
with a small compaignie of men in comparison to the danger that they were in,
and at Westminster was with the king for the reformacion and stablishyng of all
things and for peace to be had, where the king and they being at great
words, nothing was determined or ended. Therefore the king for the vow that
he had made, departed and said little, and the earl with the duke also went to
Warwike, and in Lyncolne shire got up a new host, and made sir Robert
Wells the soonne of Rychard Wells grau^de capitain, a noble manne of war.
These tidings coming to London, moved the king very sore, whom he thought
would rather have kept peace the^ war, but the more yt it was showed to him
vnlokyng for it, yt battaill was at hand, with so much yt sooner and more speed
he gathered an army, and at the same time sent diverse messe^gers and haroldes
for Rychard Wells, and the same Rychard ^eeyng often so sent for, made his
excuse that he was sick and diseased, but afterward when his excuse was not
admitted, he thynkyng to purge himself sufficiently before the king, came to
London, bringyng with him sir Thomas Democke his brother in law, and when he was
there, certain of his friends certified him that ye king was sore moved with
him, which for fear of the king did take sentuarie at Westminster and his
brother also, mindyng to tarry there unto such time as yt king his anger were
couled and apeaced. But king Edward trustyng to pacify all this tumulte
without bloddeshede, promisyng those me^ne his feith yt he would not harm
the^, caused them both to come out of sentuarie. Then the king calling
Rychard to him, warned him to bid his brother Robert that he should leave of
war, and goo from the earl, and in the mean season the king went foreward
with his host against his enemies, bryngyng with him this foresaid Rychard and
Thomas, and being but from Stamforde where his enemies did lie the space of
two days journey, was informed yt Robert kept yt army still, nothing moved
with yt letters of his fathers writing, for the which the king being sore
grieved, caused both Rychard and Thomas even there contrary to his promise,
most shamefully to have their heddes chopped of. Robert, when he saw the king
draw nigh, and hard that his father and sir Thomas Democke was put to death,
stood first in a doubt whether he should fight or no, for because it was
ieoperdeous to ventre upon such a great power before yt earl came, yet at the
last for the stout courage and manly boldenes that was in him, they went
together, and fought sore, long, and many men killed on both sides, and at
the last when the fore named Robert encouraged his men that were ready to give
over, was coumpassed about of his enemies and taken, and also sir Thomas
Delala^t with many (...)o, the which capitaines being taken all ye host was
put to flight and driven away. The king being glad of this victory,
commanded Robert and sir Thomas Delalant with many other to be put to death
at yt same time and place. And in this battaill there was killed as me^ne
reported ten thousand men. The earl at this time being at his own town
of Warwike, and coming shortly to his army at Stamforde with his power, was
informed that the battle was fought quickelyer then he looked for, and that
his men had the worse part, although he might now be discouraged, yet he made
as though he passed not and would not believe, to the entente that he might
the more enboulde^ certain of his compaigny then despayryng and geuyng
theimselfe to flight, began to make a new host, and with many fair
promyses did wowe his brother in law Thomas Stanley, to take his part, but
when yt said Thomas would by no means fight or rebel against king Edward,
then seeing it was time to gooe one way, and he mistrustyng that he was not
able to resist the power of his enemies, fled with the duke of Clarence (his
soonne in law) to Excetre, and when he had tarried there two or three days,
seeing that he lacked al things necessary for war, purposed to gooe to Jews
the king of France, with whom at his ambassate into France, was veraye well
acquaynted and beloved, trustyng either to have some help of the king, or else
to incense him wholly to fight against him, and so took ship at Dartmouth,
both he and the duke with a great nombre of their family, and sailed with ye
wind to Normandy, where the chief lord of that town entreteyned him most
royally, and in all ye have certified yt king Jews of his coming thither. And
yt king meruailyng greatly at yt noble acts that yt earl had done, was minded
thoroughly to help him in all yt he could, and when he knew yt he was la^ded in
France, was glad of it, and sent to him certain of his nobles, to show him
that he did wish to have an occasion, whereby he might help him, and at this
time would gladly do for him, desieryng him to come to Ambassy where the king
lay, which Ambassy is a manor place of yt kings set upon the river side of
Loire, and the duke also his son in law and that it should not be for his
loss or harm.

This was yt.ix. year of king Edwardes reign The.ix. year.
when the earl fled to France, and of our Lord a M.CCCC. and.lxxx. But this
grieved king Edward that they were fled, for because many of ye people and
co^munaltee was desirous to see him, and thought that the son had been goone
from them and out of this world, when he was absent. And in such estimacio^
and honor was he had of the people, yt they worshipped and honored none but
him, or at the least none more then him. In so much yt his only name was every
man's song and voice, especially of the co^me^ people when they made triumph
abroad in yt streets. Whereby, the most part held of the earl his side, and
bare him more favor in their hearts then king Edward. Whereby ye king was in
fear and danger both of his own countremen yt were in his realm, and of
them that were abroad in France, but before all other he did provide for yt
earl his coming. And first he sent to Charles the duke of Burgom his brother
in law desiryng him yt he would manashe Jews the king, with whom he had made a
league of peace, not to aid the earl of Warkwike or yt duke his son in law,
neither with money nor with me^. The which Charles wrote to yt king of France,
and thretened him many things, if so that he mainteyned or helped them. And
when the king of France had red his letter, au^swered again and said yt he
might lawfully and would saving his league and truce, help his friends yt were
valiau^t and noble men as the earl was, and setting nothing by all his
thretenyng and braggyng words, said it should be neither great pain nor
cost to him. When these tidings came into England, yt king was veraye sorry,
and for that cause searched privily in his realm, who were fre^des to his
enemies. And for fear by yt reason of the examinacio^ of them yt were
prisoners and in his hand, some did take sentuarie, and some came to ye kings
side. And emonges them the lord Marquis Montacute offered himself to the king
again, to help him in his wars, whom the king gladly received, for because
that by him mo would lean to his side. In this mean season ye earl of Warwike
and the duke went to Ambassy, where the king of France was, and by the way the
people came veraye thick to see him, because they hard so much speaking of
his nobleness, and when he came there, the king received him most gently, to
who^ shortly after the earl did break his mind, and showed the cause of his
coming. To whom the king promised all that he could do for him to the
vttermoste extente of his power. Sone after queen Margarete the wife of Henrye
yt.vi. came to them, with her son prince Edward and the earl of Penbruck,
and also of Oxe^forde the which a little before sailed over to her. After they
co^muned together, as concerning yt safeguard of their bodies, a league was made
through the king of France his counsel. And first lady Anne the daughter of
the earl was married and despoused to prince Edward the queen's soonne. Also
the earl and the duke promised faithfullye yt they would not give over, unto
such time that king Henrye the.vi. or Edward his soonne were proclaimed king
of England, and after king Henry, that the earl and the duke should ouersee
and govern the realm by the will and apoyntmente of the queen Margarete and
her son prince Edward, unto such time that the forenamed prince were of
lawful age and habilitee, the which they promised faithfully to observe and
do as they were appointed. And besides these, many other conditions were made,
as well for that reason did so require, as the busynes yt was at that time. When
this league of truth and faithfulness was thus made the king Jews help the
earl with me^ne, harnes and navy, that he might the surer go to England. And
Rhenate also the father of y^ queen Margarete, gave him me^ne and harnyse to
his power. So that he having no small nombre of men, did take ship at Said
mouth and there tariyng, hard word from England by letters, that he should come
over in all the haste, and that there were so many yt would take his part, yt
he should have no need to bring any with him, for they were ready in harneyse at
the water side, willing to help him in all yt they could and not they only,
but many noble men and princes would help him both with money, men and harneyse,
and with all yt they could do. When he had received these letters, he
purposed to go forth, and take the oportunitee of the time. And because that ye
queen was not ready to set forth, he and the duke of Oxe^ford and ye duke of
Penbruch, went before with part of yt host and nauye, to try what chance they
should have, that if all things should chance well, the queen and the prince
should follow and come unto England. Therefore the Earl and the Duke thanking
the king as highly as they could for that he had done so much for them, did
take their leave and sailed unto England with all their army. Then the Duke
of Burgoyne not contented that the earl should be helped of the king of
France against king Edward, prepared a great nauye of ships about the
costs of Normandye, that he might take him coming toward England, yet
nevertheless the Earl escaped all dangers, and landed safe he and all his
men at Dartmouth, from the which place he sailed to France half a year
before.

After that the Earl came to land, he made a proclamacion in king Henry
the.vi. name, that all they that were of lawful age should make battle
against Edward duke of York which against all right and law at that time
had the crown. The which when it was done, it cannot be spoken how soon it
went about all ye realm that he was come and had made this proclamacy on, at
the which also is not to be expressed how many thousands of men came to
him. The Earl having all this power and great army went straight to London,
whom when Edward perceived to draw nighe, he fled for the time, trustyng
to have him at some vauntage, but at the last he was driven to that end, that
he had no mind to get any host to resyst his enemies, but being in great
danger of his own life, fled with the duke of Gloucestre his brother, unto a
town night the sea called Lie, and there taking ship, sailed into Flaunders,
to Charles the Duke of Burgoyne with great danger and parell of his life by
the reason of the boisterouse and cruel wind Elizabeth his wife being then
great ^^th child did take sentuarye at Westmynster, where she was brought in
bed with a m^n child, whose name was Edward. After that the earl(...) new
of the going away of king Edward, he made haste to London and hearing of the
tumulte and business that was in Kente, and that all the villages and suburbs
there were spoiled piteously, a little before the going away of yt king,
pacified them and set all things in good order again: by the doing of the
which benefyte, he was the more lovingly accepted of them all, and that done,
came to the tower and there delivered king Henry the.vi. out of prisone, and
giving him his robe of maies^ye brought him to Poules, the people rejoicing on
every side, and there thanked God for that it had chaunsed as they would, and
desired. And this was the year of our Lord a. M.iiii. C. four score and one,
that king Henry began to reign. So that king Henry so often vanquyshed began
to reign now, likely shortly after to faule again. The which fortune
chaunsed to him by many men's opinions, because he was a very simple and
innocent man, and yt he had rather in godliness and virtue excel other, then
in honor and rule, so yt for the love yt he had to religion, he looked for no
dignitee or honor, which chaunseth to few that will not seek for it or
regard and keep it when they have it. But his enemies said he was a coward,
and had not the heart or manlynesse to be a king or meet for that office. So
that who soever despises that the common people allows and maruaileth at,
is accounted for a mad man, contrariwyse, he yt does agree to them and in
their tale, he is a wise man, where in deed such wisdom (as it is come^ly
said) is foolishness before God. Also some said, it was the will of God yt
it should so be, for his graundfather Henry the fourth got it by violencye
and force of arms, so yt it could not be long enjoyed of him, but that
fault of the graundesire did redounde on the nephews. But now to yt matter.

After this king Henry held his parlyament at Westmynster, the.xxvi. day of
Nouembre, in the which Edward is declared openly tray toure to his country,
because he had taken yt crown to him and all his goods given away, and in
like manner al theirs yt did take his part, and so judgment was given on them
to dye. Furthermore, all yt decrees statutes and acts of yt forenamed Edward
were broken and of none effect. And then yt earl of Warwike, as a man yt had
deserved much of his country was made gouernoure over all yt realm, to who^ he
did take ye duke of Clarence as fellow to him. So by yt means yt realm was
brought to a new state, clean transformed and altered. To this parliament came
the lord Marquis Mountacute, the which excusing his treason yt he did take
king Edward his part, and saing it was for fear of death, had his pardone*
Truly if this man had taken king Edwardes part, and had stand to his side
manly, he had not been so sore an enemy, and hurted so much his friends, as he
was being a false fained and colored friend, for those things that we be ware
of, and knew before to be pernicious, do less hurt us. But now queen
Margarete being in France prayed every day from that time the Earl went into
England, for the victory, the which when she knew was obtained by the king
his letters that came to her, shortly after did take ship, toward England,
but through yt sharpness of the wether and great tempests she was
constrained to land, and to differ her journey to an other time. At the same
time Gaspar the earl of Penbruch went to Wales to his Earldom, where he
found lord Henry the Earl of Richemonde his brothers son, a child of ten
year old, and there kept prisoner, but like a noble man of ye earl willyam
Harberte his wife, whom we spoke of before, that Edward had made him earl,
and then after taken in batayl was behedded at the commandment of the earl
of Warwike.

This is that Henry the which when Richard King (...) ^y (...) vii.
the third brother to Edward was overcome and vanquished, had the governance
of the realm, of whom this is to be believed, that after that he came to his
kingdom sent as one by god, to quench and put away the great sedicion and
strife that was betwixt Henry and Edward, seeing that he minded nothing so
much as that, whom lady Margarete the only daughter of John the first Duke
of Somerset did bring for the being but fourtene years of age, the which
although she was married after to Henry the duke of Bucking ham his son, and
after that to the earl of Derby, yet she never brought for the child after,
as thought she had done her part when she had borne a man child, and the
same a king of a realm. Gasper the earl of Penbruch took this child Henrye
from the earl Harberte his wife and brought him soon after to London to king
Henry the syxte, whom when the king had beeholded long holding his peace,
and maruailing at the goodlye wit of the child, said in this wise to the
nobles that were at that time present Loo, this is he, this is he I say, to
whom both we, and our adversaries shall give place to, in The prophecye of
Henrye the vi. of king Henry the vii.
possession. And by this he prophesied that the self same Henry should in time
to come, as it chaunsed in deed, have the kyngedome and rule of all the realm.
And now Edward although he was out of his country, yet did he not dyspayre
but that he should have mattre and ready occasion to recover his kingdom, for
the duke of Burgoyne partlye had promised him both great aid and socoure, and
partly the privy friends that he had in England did council him by letters
sent from time to time, yt he would hasten his iournay homward, and
incontin^tly after, very many fled to him out of England, either for fear of
the laws, that they had offended, or else for sorrow that the world was so
turned, that they could not have their will, as they had before, in
accomplyshynge their couetouse minds and desires, and caused him to make the
more haste homewarde. And king Edward being ravished with their golden
promises, thought nothing more payneful or wretched, then to tarry one day
longer, and nothing more pleasant the^ to go of his journey, and so taking no
moo with them then two thou sand harnesed men, at the spring of the year
sailed into England, landynge in the coasts of Yorkeshyre at an haven town
called Rauinsport And there setting for the all his men, did reason with his
captains and consulte, to what place they should first goo. For it was
ieoperdious consydering the small company that he had, to take any way for
the. But after long delyberation, they were all agryed that some certain
knights and horsemen of that small compaignie should be sent one to every
quarter to the towns that were nyghe, to the intent that they might draw the
hearts and minds of the people to king Edwardes side. But it is not lykelye
that king Edward being a wise manne durst be bold, or would in any wise come
into England, with such a small power, except he had known surely that he
should have had great help at his coming the which is a plain token, that the
duke of Clarence, and the lord Marquis, had procured his favor, promysinge
him all their help that they could make, for the trial of the which, there
was manifest tokens, that dysclosed and bewrayed all their falshed. For they
privily went about to know men's minds and to what part they would declyne
and the next day after came to king Edward, and showed him that the common
people did stand stiflye of king Henrye his side, and would defend his
quarrel as right and just at al times, and that they had no more need now to
make any tumulte, in so much, that no man would (although eftsons desired
and prayed,) go to king Edward, yea, and that noman would for fear of the
earl of Warwike, hear any thing spoken of that matter, whose minds after
that king Edward had throughlye serched and known, he changed his mind and
purpose, and where as before he claymed the crown, then he publyrshed abroad
that he would have but his right that was his lands, and heritage of York
shyre. And ^t that word, it cannot be well spoken, how redily me^ were
willinge to help him, consideringe that he claymed nothing but his right, in
so much, y^ very pytie did move many, although they would not help him, yet
at no hand to resyste him. And king Edward reconsilyng him self to the
common people by these means, took his iournye toward York, and went to
Beuer lay. The earl then being at Warwik, after that he knew yt king Edward
was landed about York straight sent a post to his brother lord Mo^tacute then
liyng that winter at Pomfreit with a great army, to show him what danger might
ensue, if king Edward got yt town of york, and bed them if his enemies drew
nigh, either to mete with the^ in plain field, or else to beat them from the
town, unto such time, that he came with a greater host which he prepared then,
in all the have he could. And because he knew not surely which way his enemies
would come, he first sent to every town in york shyre, and to york it self
certain posts, to bid every man be in his harness ready, and that yt
citezins should shut the gates surely that king Edward might have no access.
In the mean time king Edward came peaceably, and without the resistaunce of
any man toward the town of York, of whose coming when the citezens were
certified, they made sure the gates, and standing in harness, for the defense
of it, did send two of the aldermen, to warn the king the coming nyghe,
that he do not enterprise to far, or put him self in ieopardie, for they
were minded to drive him and all his away, with all the power they might.
When Edward had heard their minds, he was in so great fear and agony that
he could not tell what to do, for if he should have goone back, he feared that
the common people as men gredye of a pray, would pursue him and if he should
goo forth, he was in danger of the York shyre men, least they should
suddenly faull upon him, and take him: and therefore, seeing that he was not
able to match them in battle, thought to mollyfie them with fair words,
and so began to entreat after the most lowlye and gentle manner the
messaungers, that they would in his name show the cytezyns, that he came not
to claim the crown, but his heritage and right of York shyre, and therefore
that they would help their lord and duke of York, and if that he might be
received through their means, he would requyte their kindenes, and remember
their benifyte as long as he lived. And by such fair speaking and flattery,
he dimissed the^ and followed straighte after to the gates with his company.
The citezins being somewhat moved with this answer, for that he intended no
harm against king Henry, they spoke with him from the wall, and badde him to
go from thence, and if he would go quickly, he should take no harm. But he
speaking veraye gentely to every one of them, and calling some by name, most
gentely did desire them yt he might come into his own town And so passing
all the day in that co^municacion, at yt length the citezens partly over come
with his most gentle speaking, and large promises made, fell to this poincte, yt
if Edward would swear to handle his citezens after a gentle sort, and
hereafter be obedient to king Henry his commandment, they would receive him
in to yt city, and help him with all yt power that they might. Edward being
glad to here this, the next day after early, a mass was said at ye gates,
where he receiuyng the sacrament, promised feithfully upon his oath yt he would
observe both the thynge^s before named, and so was received in to the city.
Nevertheless, it was so far unlike that he would observe one of them, that
he minded none other thing then yt he might deprive the king of his croune, as
here after shall appear more evident. So yt often times we se noble men, as well
as the lay people through ambicion and filthy covetousness, they forgettyng god
and all godlynes do swear great oaths in promisyng things, ye which
entendyng before they make their oath, to break it shortly after. Yet such
persons oftymes have their rewards of God at one or other time as this Edward
had, so that some time the punishment falls on the nephews, for the offense
that the uncle had committed. But of this thing I will speak more in Rychard
the third, in a place where a man may see that ye progeny of Edward were
punished for this offense, when Edward had thus framed his matters, he
forgettyng ye oath yt he had made, did se yt the city was strongly kept, and
gettyng him an army together thought he would not linger his business because he
hard his enemies made no great preparau^ce or haste, but took his journey
toward London, and in his going did purposely goo out of his way yt led him
to Pomfret where ye lord marquis was, and took on yt right hand within less
the^.iiii. miles of his enemies. And when he perceived yt they made no
skyrmishe nor mocion came in to the right way again when he was past them,
and went to Notynghame. But this grieved the York shire me^ne that he should
deceive them so unhonestly and otherwise then did become a king, or noble
manne. After that it was known that king Edward came with out all danger of his
enemies, to Notyngham, then came there to him many noble me^ne, upon this
consideracion yt the lord Mou^tacute either would not enter upon his enemies as
though he had agreed with them, or else durst not come out of his tents, for
that he was not able to match with them. Therefore men thought better to take
Edwardes part, considering yt his power was so great, then to hold with king
Henry and he in danger of their lives, and loss of all their goods and
lands. Edward reioysyng at this, went to Lecestre, and hearing that therle was
at his town of Warwick and therle of Oxenford with him, having a great
army, and that they both intended to bring him to them, preuentyng their
purpose wet away with his host, either wyllyng to fight, or else join in
frendeship and love with his brother duke of Clarence, with whom then coming
from London with an host of me^ne he thought to speak before yt he came to
therle and his co^paignie, fearyng lest yt he would not stand to yt promise yt
he made, for yt he was variable and inco^sta^t. In ye mean time therle of
Warwike was very heuie and sore moved with ye lord marquis because he would
neither keep the king from York as he was bed, nor yet when they came before
his nose, would not proffer them ones to fight, and therefore co^sideryng yt
his enemies multiplied more and more, in his gooyng toward him made an host,
and sent for yt duke of Clarence to come to him, then having an host at
London. Who^ when he perceived to linger, and as a man doubtyng whether he
should keep battaill or peace, to have no mind of setting forth his me^,
mistrusting also yt he was by some train allured to follow his brethren and
take their parts, took his way to Coue^trie, to the end that there he might
meet his enemies. Then Edward came to Warwike, and from thens to the earl,
and pitched his tents by him, and the next day after bad battaill to therle,
the which earl durst not come out, for fear that the duke of Clarence whom
he thought had deceived him, which duke in deed came, as it was showed after
with a great power of men. The which when Edward perceived, he made
toward him, and that it should not be thought to be a made guyle, set his
host in array as though he would fight, and so did the duke. But when they
came in sight, Richard duke of Gloucestre as one that should take up this
matter, first spoke with the duke privily in his ear, and then came to Edward
and did the same to him, and at the last peace was proclaimed, whereby every
manne puttyng down their weapons, Edward and his brethren enbraced louyngly
one an other. After this Edward made it be proclaimed that yt duke with all
them that came with him, should be perpetual friends, and that they three
should love like three brethren as they were in brotherly love for ever. Never
thelesse God does not seem to have forgiven this Edward his offense of
perjury, although eue^ now fortune favored him, for yer it were long he was
again vexed with werre, beside yt plage and distrucio^ of his children after his
death. When they were thus come together, they minded to prove if yt earl would
come to them also and hold with them, to who^ ye duke of Clare^ce sent certain
of his friends, yt which first should excuse yt he had done, and the^ desire
him if yt he would to be at one with king Edward. Whose mind when therle
heard, he utterly detested him, and with much cursyng cried out of him yt he
had contrary to his feith and oath made, fled to king Edward. And to his
commandment and biddyng yt he sent, he made none other answer but this that
he had rather be like him self, the^ like a false and perjured duke. So yt he
appoincted utterly never to leave battaill, before that either he were killed
and ded or his enemies ouercomed. After this, Edward having such a strong
power of me^ne went boldly to London, where after that it was known that the
duke of Clarence had taken his part, and that all the brethren were come in to
one knot, the citezens were in such a fear, that they could not tell what to
do, but at the length they were driven for fear to take king Edward his
part At the same time there came letters from the earl to king Henry, to yt
duke of Somerset, to yt archbishop of York, and other of the king his counsel,
yt they should keep the city from their enemies hands for the space of.ij.
or.iij. days, and he would come straight with a great army of me^ne. They
defended the city as strongely as they could, but it was to no purpose, for
the citezens co^syderyng ye king Henry was no great warryer, and yt he had but
small policy in the feats of the same, and contrary wise, that king Edward
was a man that of him self could rule a realm marvelous well, and such a
man that would not only preserve him self and all his, but also defend
them from all manner of iniuryes and harms that should chance, thought best
to lean on his side. And at his coming to London, the people could by no
thretenyng or strayt commandment, be otherwise kept back, but that they
would mete him then coming, and salute him altogether as king and ruler of the
realm. At whose coming in, the duke of Somerset and certain other fled away,
and made the best shifte every manne for him self that he could, to escape
his hands, saving that king Henry tarried post alone in the bishops paleyce
beside Powles, where standing like a desperate manne, and not knowing what to
do was taken of king Edward, and cast into prison again in the tower.

This Edward came into London the.xi. day of Apryll, half a year after that he
had sailed into Flaunders, and calling his council together, did highly
commend the citezens, for yt faythfulnesse that they bare to him, and in
especial the Aldermen, yt they caused the people to do their obeysau^ce to
him, and also sharpelye rebuked other of the city whom he knew to have lent
monye to king Henry. And for yt cause would have made them pay money to the
preparyng of an host for him, but at the last he bad, them be without all
fear, promysyng them their pardon and safety of life, through the which
gentleness, he gatte the favor of the common people wonderfully. The earl
considering that battayll should be shortelye, followed his enemies in great
haste, to the entente that if his enemies had any stop or let by yt way,
he might fight and buckel with them, before they came to London. But now after
that he had pursued them long and came a good way of his journey, word was
brought yt Edward had gotten London and imprisoned the king. The earl then
perceauyng that the victory and end of fightyng should be tried in this one
battle, rested at saint Albones, partly to refreshe his men, and partly to
take some counsayl. In this host there was the duke of Excester, the earl of
Oxenforde, the duke of Somerset and the lord Mountacute Marquis, brother to
the earl whom the earl perceived to be very unwilling to fight, and that
against king Edward, and therefore he had no trust to him, yet the love yt
betwixt brother and brother diminished the suspicion, but whatsoever he
thought either of him or of other, he himself was ever out of fear and
danger. And so came from saint Albones, to a town that is half way betwyxte
London and that, about a ten mile from London, called Barnet, and this
town stands on a hill, where there is a goodlye plain, and here the earl
intended to pitche his battle. And Edward hearing of this prepared his army,
and adjoined a great power of young men to them, and so with bows, bylles,
spears and arowes, and all manner instruments apperteynyng to war, he had so
furnysshed his men, that he thought to make riddau^ce of them at that time
for all, and fynishe battle that was so long holden. And so came with this
his army to mete his enemies, and that he might be the redier to fight with
them wheresoever he met them, he had four wings, that they could escape
him at no hand. And he brought with him to battle also Henry then prisoner,
to the entente that his adversaries might be the more discouraged at the sight
of him, or else, if fortune favored him not, he might nevertheless be saved
by him. After the noone, he pytched his tents at the fore named Barnet nighe
to his enemies, but that he might not fight that day, he defended his tents
veraye strongelye, for the longer he tarried the better it was, by reason of the
daily concourse of noble men and commen people to him, and the worse for the
earl, for that he was far from his friends.

There they lodged that night, and by break of day ye earl of Warwike began
to array his army of this sort. First the lord Marquis and the earl of
Oxenforde was set on the left side with certain horssemen, and he himself
with the duke of Exceter on the right side. In the myddeste betwixt them
both he sets the duke of Somerset with all the archers. And thus araiyng
them to this battayl, began to exhort them, that they would fight lustely
and like hardye meune, reuengyng the quarrel of their country, for that he had
most falsely possessed yt croune. In like manner did king Edward, which after
that he had set them in order, encouraged them to fight likewise, and to
remember that they invaded rebels, traitors and sedicious persons, which
intended nothing but the utter destruction and loss of their country. When
day came, the trompettes began to blow on both sides, as the tokens and
lignes of the battle. And first the bow men shot, and then drawing nere
tried it with sweorde. Edward trustyng through the multitude of his me^ to
have the better hand did stand stiffely to them, enbouldenyng his soldiers
in all that he could. Whose power the earl most manfully resisted. And so by
long co^tinuaunce of battle, many men were slain in whose places succeeded ever
fresher and fresher. At the length the earl perceauyng his me^ to be
overthrown by the king his great power, drew nigh with his foreward, and
constreyned the king to give back a little. Then Edward seeing that, brought
fresh men to aid ye other, so that the other me^ were beten down very sore to
ye ground. And Edward being werye of this long fighting (for they fought
from morning to none) caused them that were without the battayl, then standing
for the defense of Edward, if such need should be, to fall upon their enemies,
and bear them down with their great power. The earl then seeing fresh me^ to
come upon them, was nothing afeard, but trusting and loking surely for the
victory, did comfort and encourage his men then almost discomfited, most
manfully, desiring them to bear out this last brunt lustely, and the
victory should redounde to them but they being weryed with long
continuance, were nothing moved at his words. Then he him self most
valiauntly came among the myddest of his enemies, and there killed and slew
many of them, where he him self at the last was stricken down and his
brother lord Marquis then following him, after whose death all the other fled,
and so were taken most part of them. And this was the end of the earl,
whose stoutness of stomach made him be in like peril and leopardye at many
other times at diverse and sundry such conflictes and wars. There was
killed of both parts more then ten thousand men, and so many taken
prisoners that they could not be noumbred. The duke of Somerset, and the earl
of Oxforde entendyng to take their way to Scotland, did change their minds,
because it was so far from them, and fled straight to Wales to the earl
of Penbrucke, and so every man to save their lives, fled, some one way and
some an other. The earl of Exeter skaping very hardely, took the sentuarye at
Westminster, and there remained. When Edward had got this victory, he went
to London after the most triumphyng fassion, having Henry with him as
prisoner. The deed corpse also of the earl and the lord Marquis were brought
to Poules, and there lay for the space of.ii. days that every manne might see
them to be deed, and that no man after fainyng yt he was alive, might sow
sedicion again in revenging his quarrel. Yet the king was not so glad at ye
death of therle, but he was as sorry for the loss and destruction of yt lord
Marquis, whom he did esteem and take for his great friend. After this, queen
Margaret hearing yt Edward was come into England, and had done much hurt in
yt realm, purposed to come into England and her soonne also prince Edward with a
great army of chosen and picked Frenchmen, and so to land at Waimouth. But for
yt great tempest yt was on the sea, she could not come so soon as she would.
But after she had landed, and heard that king Edward had conquered all, and her
husband to be taken prisoner as destitute of all his friends, and that ye earl
with his brother lord Marquis was slain in field, and all their army
discomfyted and slain and put to f^ight, she began like a piteful and
desperate lady, to mourn and lament the fate and calamitee of her husband, ye
which she did now see to have chau^sed, and sowith this great fear and
agony she was in that case that she had rather dye then live The queen might
have thought yt this evil had chaunsed to her for the putting to death of ye
duke of Gloucestre, of whose death although peradventure she was not guilty,
yet she offended, in that she did not save such a good man. For if he had
lived and had the dominion of the public weal, king Henry had never been in
such trouble. But now (to leave of this) yt queen despering both of her own
life and her sons also, went thereby to a monastery of the charterhouse monks
at a place called Bewe lieu, in english called fair place, and there taking
sentuarie, remained with her soonne. And when it was known, that she was there
in sentuarie, there came to her the duke of Somerset, and his brother the earl
of Devonshire, which man even from the beginning had taken the other part,
whose returning after redounded to his evil and destruction, also the earl of
Penbroke Ihon Wen lock, and Ihon Longstrother Capytaines and rulers of the
Rhodes. The queen being in sorrow and miserye, was somewhat comforted at the
sight of her friends, with whom she talked and showed the cause yt she came no
rather, desiryng them to provide for the safeguard of her soonne and to help
her now, and ye she would if the wether served goo to France again and bring
with her, god willing at a more better and mature time a greater power of me^ The
duke began to put her in good comfort and would in any wise ye she should
set her mind whole upon batail, and now to fight against Edward when he was
both unprepared and also not furnyshed of men yt were hable to fight,
considering ye great batell that he had with therle of Warwike, in yt which his
men were sore hurted and weryed all together, and yt it might be their chance
now to have yt better of him, although he disco^fyted therle and his host, for
because yt victory turns oftentimes from one to an other in a moment and
short space. Furthermore he showed her ye the most part of yt nobilyte bare
their good minds and hertes to king Henry, and if so be yt she would be a
captain as she had been in time passed, he promised her a great army of his
own costs and charges, and that he would make other noble men to take her
part, and defend her at all times. The Queen mistrusting and fearing yet
much of her own soonne, answered and said that she allowed his counsel
well, if so that she only might be in danger, and not her son And therefore
fearing that when they fought most earnestly for their country, her soonne
might be destroyed or cast away, she thought best either to put of and
differ the battayl to an other time, or else to send her soonne into
France, and there to be kept unto such time ye they had some better
success in their wars. And truly the mother was not without a cause so
loving to her child; for that her own husband was a prisoner and a captive
person, and therefore as one cast away, so that next after him, she loved
most tenderly this her soonne. Also that they might goo yt more wisely about
their entente, the queen counsayled them all to lay their heedes together,
and cast all the ways how to convey their business, and then if they would
fight, she promised them both her help, and good council. Then the Earl
said it was no need to waste any more words, for he and all they would fight
stoutely against their enemies, and therefore they would do that with all
their might and power, that they had determined and appointed upon. So they all
gathered their army, every manne for his part, out of his own country and
shire. The queen brought now in good hope of war, said well be it, and
straight went by yt council of yt duke to Bathe, looking and tarieng there for
the army, but to what place so ever she went, she would be aknowen to none, to
thentent yt her adversaries might not know, unto such time that she came where
she would be. Edward hearing that the queen was come, and that the duke of
Somerset, had prepared an host to aid her, sent certain spies to view of
what number the army was. And when they had showed him the number (but yet not
knowing whether they would goo) the king appointed to mete them before they came
to London. And gathering his army went to Oxforde shyre, and there pytched his
tents at Abyngton, encreasinge his number and army as much as he could. But
perceauyng, that they were at Bathe, and there tarried purposely to multyply and
enlarge their company, came to Malebrydge xv. miles from Bathe, and so hasted
to come to the^ before they did go to Wales, as he suspected, whether in deed
they intended, to the earl of Penbruck having their a great bond of men. From
which town of Bathe the queen fled, and from thence to Brystowe, and wyllinge
to goo by Glouceter, sent spies before to know, if she might have passage, to
whom answer was brought that she could not, nor that they of the town
would by any means give her place, she hearing of that went from Bristowe to
Teukisbury. And there the duke pytched his battle, against the will and advise
of many other captains, which counsayled him to tarry the earl of Penbruches
coming. Where Edward did take the queen, and killed or at the least imprisoned
every one almoost that came with her. And of the nobilitee, there was killed
the earl of Deuonshyre, John Wenlock captayn of the Rhodes, and the brother of
the duke of Somerset, with many other moo. And taken prisoners, the queen
Margaret, and her so^nne prince Edward, yt duke of Somerset, yt lord of s.
Ihons, and more then.xx. knights beside the^. And all these were behedded.ii.
days after in yt self same town saving only the queen Margaret and her
soonne Edward. Shortelye after prince Edward was brought before the king, and
there asked wherefore he did invade his realm, which answered boldly and said,
to recover my kyngedome as heritage by my forefathers and progeny dew to me.
At the which words, Edward said nothing, but thrustyng him from his sight
with his hand, who^ the duke of Clarence and Glouceter, and yt lord Hastynges
did kill most cruelly at his departing. His mother the queen, was carried to
London prisoner, and from thence raunsomed was had to France, where she lived
in perpetual sorrow and care, not so much for her self, or her husband as for
her only son Edward, whom both she and Henry her husband trusted should
live, and possess ye croune. When king Edward had thus overcome them, he
went to London, and there for iii. days caused procession to be through every
place after the most solemn and devout fassy on. And here was the last
civil battle that this king kept, which was the year of our lord. M.iiii.
C.lxxx. and.xi.

After that king Edward was returned back after the subduynge of his
rebels, one Fauconbrydge the Earl of Kente his basterde, a stout hearted
manne, being admyrall of the sea, that none should pass betwixt Calysse and
Dover, to aid or socoure king Edward, by the appoyntemente of the earl of
Warwyke, then after driven to need and pouertee, began to be a pyrate and
rouer in the seea. In so much that he had through his robberye and shameful
spoylynge got unto him a great nauye of ships, and at the last, landed in
Kente, and there getting to him a great multitude of Kentyshemenne, with the
assistence of them and his ryotouse compaignye of shyppemenne, came to London,
and said with a loud voice, they would defend king Henrye, and restore him
to his crown. But the people and cytezyns of London perceauyng that queen
Margarete was overcome in battle, would give them no passage, but with
great might and vyolence enforsed Fawconbrydge to give back, and to take
ship, and killed and took prisoners the better part of his men.

Shortly after, the same Fauconbridge landing unware at Southampton, was taken
and behedded. But to speak of the earl of Penbrucke, when he had known that
the queen was taken at Tewkesburye, where she had waged battle, then going
of his way to her, turned back again to Chepstey. And there lamentyng
greatly both his own chance, and also the evil fortune yt king Henry had,
did breath alitle and deliberate with him self, what were best to be done. In the
mean time king Edward sent one Roger Vaugha^ to take yt earl by some train or
guile. But the earl certified of it, did take y^ self same man and hedded hi^,
so yt he was killed yt intended to kill. From that place yt earl went to his
town Pe^brucke, where he was besiged of Thomas Morgan then sent from the king,
that he could get out by no means, but on the eight day one David the
brother of the forsayde Morgane his most assured friend conveyed him away,
which then went to a town by the sea side called Tinby and there taking
ship into France with the lord Henrye his nephewe, by the earl of
Rychemonde his brother, by chance came to Britain, and there showing the duke
the cause of his coming, committed him self wholly into his hands. The duke
entertained the earl and all his company, after yt most best manner that he
could, and made of them as though they had been his brethren, promysing to
them sure passeporte and saueconduite, over any place that he had rule or
governance of. Now king Edward, after that his realm was pacified, and
these great tumultes apeaced, he took his iourny into Rence, and there setting
his justices, caused inquisicion and search to be made of this business and
insurrection, by y^ basterd and his adherentes, for the which offense many
were put to death, and suffered execution most sharply, according to their
merits. And not longafter, to thentent yt king Edward might be out of al
dangers and assaults of his enemies Henry yt was deprived not long before of
his crown, was also spoiled of his life, yt is, was killed. And as the report
and fame went, the duke of Glouceter was suspected to have done yt deed, which
sticked him with a dagger. And when he was dead, his corpse was brought
irreverently from the tower, through yt streets of yt city unto Poules, and
there lay all yt day and on the morrow following conveyed and carried to ye abbey
or blak freres at Chertessey, and there was buried And shortly after had to
Wi^desore castle, and laid in ye new chapel of. s. George in a sole^pne
toumbe This Henry reigned.xxviii. year, and after he had repossessed his
kingdom, but half a year. He lived unto he was.lii. years of age, and had by
his wife queen Margaret one soo^ne called Edward.

Now to the intent yt Edward the king might live in quiet after this manne his
death, he went a boute to search all the rebels that they might be weeded
out of the compaignie of men as pernicious and unprofitable to the public
weal. At what time he took tharchebishop of York brother to therle of
Warwike and sent him prisoner to Guynes, where he long remained in hold, but
after dimissed, dyed shortly for thought and pensifulnes of mind, also he
attached the earl of Oxenford the which from the ceason of Barnet field had
holden saint Michaelles Mount, and by his commandment was had to a castle
beyond yt sea called Hant, where he remained prisoner yt space of xii. years.
Furthermore upon co^sideracio^ yt no rebels or traitors might have any
refuge to strange cou^tres, he had made a league with the king of scotts of
peace and amitee to be observed and kept for yt (...) of.xx. years. Yet he
was not out of all fear, for y^ (...)e of Pe^bruck and of Richemond were with
ye duke of Britain, where they had most honorable intretainme^t, co^sideryng
also yt the young earl of Richemo^d would claim ye croune i^ time to come he
was in ye more fear for ye which matter, he sent privy ambassadors to ye
duke, promisyng him yt if he would restore and deliver unto their hand both
therles he should have an ample and large porcio^ of monye for so dooyng. But
yt duke, to make a short tale, would by no means deliver them out of his
hands, but so kept them, that they never might be in any danger of their
enemies through him. Edward therefore in this his thirtene year of his reign,
which was the year of our lord a thousand four hundred three score and
thirteen, held his parlyament at Westminster, where first he caused all the
statutes and acts of his which were abrogated by Henry the sixth, to stand and
be of good effect, then the goods of these traitors to be bestowed and
given abroad, also the banished men yt fled as rebels and false to their
country, to be brought in, and that if any grudge or eiuill will were betwixt
any one or other of the nobilite, that there it should be forgotten, and turned
to love, and lastly that certain money should be paid to the king toward yt
great charges of his werre. When he had thus studied and determined to live
quietly and set his realm in good order, Charles ye duke of Burgoin sent for
aid to him against Jews ye French king so yt he could never be at rest, but
one thing or other should disquiet him, for he could not deny him help
considering ye benefits yt he had received of him at diverse and sundry times
before yt, and yt he now fought against his dedly enemy which aided the earl
of Warwike both with men and money to come against him. Wherefore he asse^blyng
his cou^saill together, and showing them the matter, sent word to the duke yt
he would keep one piece or part of a battle against ye king. For in deed at
yt same time there was mortal battaill betwixt the duke and Jews yt king, and
because that the same Jews was a very hard manne and churlishe and also
hurtefull as well to his fre^des as to his foes, many Frenchmen abhorryng his
co^dicions, did consent to hold with yt duke. And among many other, one Jews
of Luce^burge did apoinct with the duke to do mischief to him one way or
other, so yt the king was both in danger of his own country men, and also
of the duke being a stranger. The duke showed this to king Edward, yt he might
the sooner allu^e and entise him to battaill. And upon this, king Edward took
his voyage to France, taking besides his tribute yt he had, certain money of ye
lords and commons of the realm, which they of their own ge^tlenes gave un to
him, to ye sustenau^ce and maintenyng of his army And for yt, the king called
that tribute and leuiyng of money, beneuole^ce, which nevertheless was given
with an eiuill will of many one. But he vsyng such gentle fassions toward
them, and praiyng them so heartily of their assistaunce yt they could none
other wise do but give it him. Which when he had, he gathered his army
which was.xx. M. and went to Caleys ye.iiii. day of July. Who^ Charles yt
duke did met, and reioysyng gretely at his victory did instantly desire him
that he would stick stoutely to this battaill, yt he might have of yt French
king yt he had lost by him. But when Jews yt king hard that Edward came with his
army, he increased the nombre of his people as much as he could and the more
nigher the danger that he was, the sooner and hastily he came upon them. And
with this army he sent forth Robert of Stoteuill a noble capitain to the
coostes Atrebatium to resyst the power of the English men. And the king him
self tarried at Siluanect, castyng with himself what way he might make a league
of peace betwixt yt duke and yt king of England and him. Heryng therefore that
yt king was gone to Atrebates, he sent ambassodours to him for peace: whose
minds when yt king had known, although he had found but little friendship at
his hands in times past, yet considering yt all his substance and treasure
was wasted in civil battle, and that he was not hable to maintein a new
host if need should be, nor yet uneath sustein them whom he had under his
ba^ner, thought best eue^ for pure necessite to leave to peace and grow to
atoneme^t with Jews yt king. The which thing he might do also saving his
honor, co^sideryng yt both ye duke and Robert of Luce^burge aforenamed had
not dooe^ according to their promise. So yt, at the desire of ye ambassadors
he went to speak with the king at Pinquinake a town in Ambia^ shire where
noble me^ne do assemble together, and there found y^ king. The^ both yt
kings after due salutacio^, either to other had long communicacio^, and at the
last a peace was confirmed and stablished for many years, for ye a^^eme^t
whereof ye French king gave unto Edward toward his charge and cost.lxcv. M.
crounes, and from the^s forth yearly l. M. crounes. After yt truce made and
money paid, king Edward went to Caleis, and from the^s to England. In this
battaill none was slain saving only yt duke of Exceter, ye which ma^ne was in
se^tuary before, and commanded to follow y^ king was put to death contrary to
yt promise made. This was the year of our lord. M.CCCC.lxxv. from that time
forth Jews yt king paid duly his ransom to Edward, unto the last year
before he dyed, at what time he denied the paymente, as though he knew before
his last days. But the duke of Burgoyne and Roberte of Lucenburgh, after they
had known that Edward had made a league with Jews the king, they freted
sore with him, and wrote sharp letters of thretenyng and tauntyng him, saying:
that he was the cause that they revenged not theimselfes of the king. Whose
fyrye and thundryng words the king no more passed upon, then of the turnyng of
his hand And as for Lucenburgh he was taken prisoner, and for his proud and
malicious writing, behedded at Lutece.

Thus king Edward being in quietness both in his country and abroad also,
although he might well think himself to live so perpetually, for yt he had
been so great a conqueror, yet considering yt the earl of Richemo^de was of
nigh affinitee to Henry the.vi. he was not out of fear and danger. Therefore
he thought ones to attempt the duke of Britayn again, with gifts, promyses
and fair words that he might have y^ earl, who^ he thought to rule as he
would, after that his auncestrie was given. The ambassadors came to the duke
with a great substance of money, and that their request might be the
honestier, they showed the duke that they came to desire the earl of him, that
he might marye the kings daughter, so that by affinite, al evil will and
grudge might be forgotten, and sedicion utterly rejected, although they
intended not so to cause al such things to be forgotten, but by the death
and kyllyng of him. The duke after long and much deniyng them, at the last
through much entreatyng, and also great rewards that was brought gave the
earl to them, sendynge a letter to the king, in praise and commendation of
him, not thinking that he committed the lamb to the woulfe, but the soonne to
the father. The ambassadors was very glad, that they had got him, and sailed
into England, in all the haste they could. But the earl knowing well that
he went to his death, for sorrow and care that he conceived in his mind, was
cast in an agewe. When he was goone, one Ihon Chenlet, such a man as could
not be found again in all the country, and in great favor with the duke,
hearing of yt deed, being very sore moved therewith, went to the dukes place and
coming before his grace, stood like a man stryke^ with some sodeyn disease,
very pale and holding his head down, the duke maruayling at him, inquired what
the matter was. To whom he said. O most noble duke, my time is at hand, and
this palenes betokens death without remidy. That I would God yt had come
before this day, and then it should not have grieved me so much. And this all
comes to me through a deed yt you have done of late, which will either cause me
to lose my life, or else to live in most misery and wretchedness as one weary of
this present life. The noble acts yt you have done, (most noble prince) have
enhaunsed your fame and glory to the fardest part of the world but this one
thing me think (I pray you pardo^me what I say) is a great blemyshe to your
dygnitee, that forgetting the promise that you made so faithfully have given
the innocent earl of Richmounte to be destroyed, and pitefully killed emonge
wretched knau es and hangmen. Wherefore, they yt love you, of whom I am one,
cannot but lamente ^o see you dyshonored by this great fault of perjury. When
he had said, the duke answered, hold thy peace man I pray the, there is no such
harm shall chance to him, Edward the king would have him to mary his
daughter. Then said John, Believe me (most excellent and redoubted prince)
this Henry is now almost famyshed and lost, and if he once goo out of your
country, he is but cast away and paste all recouerye. At these words ye duke
was persuaded, through the which he commanded one Peter La^doson his receauer,
to take the same Henry from the ambassadors. The said receauer pursued the
English ambassadors to Maclonium, and there holdyng them with long
communication, made him to be conveyed into a se^tuary, which was then almost
ded through that fever and thought which he was cast in. And so after that he
was emended brought him to the duke. The ambassadors then being spoiled and
deceived, both of their pread and money that they brought, desired yt same
receauer that they might not goo home in that wise, which receauer promised,
that he would either keep him in sentuary, or eles cause him to be imprisoned
at the duke his place, so that they should never need to fear him.

In all this time Edward being desyreous to know what became of the Earl,
was enfourmed, that he was taken prisoner, but after that escaped their
hands, where at the king was very angrye: but when he knew that he should
be kept in hold, was well pleased and then did take no thought. And lived
after, and that most welthy, sparing no expe^ses nor cost in keeping his house,
nevertheless, he did fall into one great offense in this time. For suddenly, he
commanded his brother the duke of Clarence to be killed and drowned in an
hogshhed of malmesey. And the cause of his death was, as men report, through a
certain prophecy, which said ye after king Edward, one should reign, whose
name began with a. G. which prophecye some said, was completed and fulfilled
when the duke of Glouceter, ye after him had the kingdom, did reign. Some
holds another opinion of this his death, saying: yt at what time ye old
malice did break out bewixt the^ both, ye duke through his sisters council,
would have married lady Mary yt duke of Burgoyn his only daughter, which
marriage ye king did infringe and stop, as one enuiyng of his brothers
felicitee, or good chance. After that they both beryng in their minds mortal
hatred, one of the said duke his servants, was accused of wichcraft and
charming for which offense, he was put to death. The duke (...)g yt, could not
but speak and resist against the (...)g his commandment, and therefore, was
com(...)ted to prison, and there being was killed, and procla(...)d after as a
traitor to the king for whose (...) yt, the king was very sorry, and when
any(...) kneled to him, and asked pardon (...)der, he would say. O unfortunate
bro(...) that noman would ask thy pardon.

And this duke had.ii. children, one lady Margarete, that was after married to
Richard Pole, and an other Edward, whom the king made earl of Warwyke, but
this child following the fate and destenie of his father, was after put in
prisone, and there privily put to death. And these things were done in the
year of our Lord a thousand four The.xix. year.
hundredth and four score, and the.xix. year of the reign of king Edward. And
two years then after following, the king died, before ye which years he began
to be very hard and couetouse in getting monye, and also very diligent in
marking and attaching his lords that did offend. In this time the king of
Scotts willed his soo^ne Iamy to be married to the kings daughter lady Cicile,
which was the younger, that should have been married to Charles the king his
soonne of France. But it chanced not, through Jews the king that brake his
promise, both in giving his service, and payeng his ransom the last year of
his reign.

Likewise the king of Scotts seeing that Jews the king was false of his
promise, he thought he might be so bold too, and so breaking league of
amite, set upon the English men. At the which Edward was sore vexed, and
intended batayl against him, yet after that he knew ye it was not by his will,
but through the council and evil disposed minds of his lords, would have
borne it in good worth, had not king James own brother straight upon that,
provoked him to fight. Furthermore, such was the nature of the Scottishe king
that when he had set his mind upon a thing, no man could turn him, and
because that no man might reprove him in any thing, he promoted lay people,
and men of basse blood to his counsel, putting to death, or banishyng
evermore the nobilitee Among whom this duke of Albanie his brother, consydering
the condicyons of the king, fled to ye king of England at what time he was sent
into France, and there counseled ye king to fight against him. The king
willing to revenge his old injuries, upon many consideracio^s gathered,
ente^ded no less by ye help of the said duke of Albany, then to keep open
war. So yt he did send the duke of Gloucestre, ye earl of Northumberla^d, sir
Thomas Stanley, and this duke of Albany with a great power of men against ye
Scotts. The king knowing of their coming, went to Barwyke with his army to
keep them from the borders, but perceiving that he was not hable so resist
their great power, fled back in ye night to Edinbrough and there tarried for his
enemies. And ye duke of Gloucestre following, burned and spoiled all the way,
and when he was somewhat nighe his enemies, perceiving also that none of the
Scottishe lords came to the duke of Albanye, mistrusted that some deceyte or
craft was wrought, and so labored to have peace, which gotten, he went back
to the castle of Barwike, that sir Thomas Stanley had won a little before.
And the duke of Albany ye authoure of this war, for yt he had but little
thanks of England for his so doing, fled into France, and there was killed
running at the tylte in Paris. After this business Edward assembled his
counsel together, and willed them to prepare battle against the French
king, for that he had neither paid nor would pay his ransom, nor yet give
his soonne in marriage to his daughter (as he promised) to the setting forth of
ye which batayl, certain money was exacted of the prestes and religiouse men to
be paid. At the which time ye king was suddenly sickened, and shortly after
died at Westminster ye.ix. day of April then being.l. years of age, and
reigning xxiii. after the date of our Lord a. M.iiii. C.lxxx. and three, whose
corpse was after conueyghed and had with great pomp and solempnitee to Wind
sore, and there buried in saint George his chapel Which king had by his wife
the queen ten children, and of them left alive behind him Edward prince of
Wales, and Richard duke of york, and one bastard called Arthure and five
daughters, Elisabeth, Cicilie, Anne, Catherine, and Brigyde, which after were
married all, saving that lady Brigide was a nonne. This Edward was a goodly *
The descripcion of Edward the fourth.
man of personage, of stature high, of countenance and beautee comely, of
sight quick, broad brested, and well set in every other part conformable to
his body, of a pregnant wit, stomach stout, and haulte courage, of perfect
memori of such things as he conceived in his brain, diligent in his affairs
and weighti business, in auentures bold and hardy, again his adversaries fearce
and terryble, to his friends liberal and bounteous, having in all his wars
most prosperous and lucky success, and escheuing all pleasure and sensualitee,
to ye which he was by nature most prove unto, for ye which cause and for the
lowlines and humanite yt is in him in gendred by nature most ple^tifully, he
bare him self honestly among his private persons, otherwise the^ the degree or
dignite of his majesty required, wherefore the fame ran, that he was poysened.
A little before his death, it was said that he gave him self to avarice,
which before, as you see, used great liberalytee. Yet the realm which
through civil sedicyon was greatly impoueryshed, he made rich and plenteouse
at his death day.

Also he gave spiritual promocions to the most excellent and famous clerks,
and made them of his council, other of the lay sort, whom he loved, he did
not enriche with possessions but with monye and other like goods, the which
many princes, having no respect of the honor, do not always observe. By
the which such gifts and rewards he had so far won the hearts of the
people, that after his death many men did lamente the loss of his grace.

Edward the fyfth.
WHEN ALMIGHTY GOD had called to his mercy the noble prince king Edward the
fourth of that name, Edward his eldest son (prince of Wales) began his reygne
the.ix. day of April, in yt year of our Lord a. M.CCCC.lxxxiij. and in
the.xxij. year of Jews the.xi. then French king. Which young prince reigned
a small space and little season over this realm, other in pleasure or libertee,
for his uncle Richard duke of Gloceter, within.iij. months deprived him, not
only of his croune and regalytie, but also unnaturally bereft him his natural
life, and for the declaracion by what crafty engine he first attempted his
ungracious purpose, and by what false colorable and untrue allegacio^s he set
forth openly his pretensed enterprise, and finally by what shameful cruel and
detestable act he performed the same: Ye must first consider of whom he and
his brother descended, there natures conditions and inclynacions, and the^ you
shall easily perceive, that there could not be a more crueller tyrant
appointed to acheue a more abomynable enterprise.

There father was Richard Plantagenet duke of York, which began not by war
but by law to challenge the croune of England, puttyng his claim in the
parliament, holden yt.xxx. year of king Henry the.vi. where either for right or
for favor his cause was so set forth and auaunced that the bloodde of the
said king Henry, although he had a goodly son was clearly abiected, and yt
croune of the realm (by autorytee of parliamente) entayled to the duke of
York and his heirs after the discease of the said king Henrye the.vi. But the
duke not entendyng so long to tarry, but myndyng under the preterte of
discencion grown and arysen within the realm, and of couenauntes made in the
parliament, not kept but broken, to preue^te the time and to take upon him the
governance in king Henryes life, was by to much hardynes slain at the
battle of Wakefylde, leuynge behind him three sons, Edward, George and
Richard. Al these three as they were great estates of birth, so were they
great and statelye of stomach, gredy of autoritee and impacie^t parteners of
rule and autoritee. This Edward reue^ged his fathers death and deposed king
Henry the.vi. and atteyned the croune and scepter of this realm. George duke
of Clarence was a goodlye and well feautured prince, in all things fortunate,
if either his own ambicio^ had not set him against his brother or thenuie of
his enemies had not set his brother against him, for were it by the queen or ye
nobles of her blood, which highly maligned the kings kynred (as women
co^menlye, not of malice but of nature, hate such as their husbands love) or
were it aproude appetite of the duke him self, entendyng to be king, at the
least wise heinous treason was laid to his charge, and finally were he in
fault or were he fautelesse, attaynted was he by parliament and judged to
death, and thereupon hastily drouned in a butte of malmesey, within ye tower
of London. Whose death king Edward (although he commanded it) when he wyste it
was done, pyteouslye he bewailed and sorowfullye he repented it. Richard duke
of Gloucestre the.iij. son (of which I must most entreat) was in The
descripcio^ of Richard the third.
wit and courage eguall with the other, but in beautee and lyniamentes of
nature far underneath both, for he was little of stature, evil feautered of
lymmes, croke backed, the lift shulder much higher then the right, hard
favored of vysage such as in estates is called a warlike vysage, and among
commen persons a crabbed face. He was malycious, wrothfull and enuyous, and as
it is reported, his mother the duches had much a do in her travail, yt she
could not be delivered of him vncutte, and that he came into the world the
fete forward, as men be borne outward, and as the fame ran, not vntothed,
whether that men of hatred reported above the truth, or yt nature changed his
course in his beginning, which in his life many things unnaturally committed,
this I leave to Gods judgment. He was none evil capitayn in war, as to
which, his disposicion was more enclyned to then to peace. So^dry victories he
had and some overthrows, but never for defaute in his own person, either for
lack of hardynes or polytike order. Fre he was of his dispences and somewhat
above his power lyberall, with large gifts he gatte him unsteadfast friendship,
for which cause he was fayn to borowe, pil and extorte in other places, which
gat him steadfast hatred. He was close and secret, a deep dyssymuler, lowly of
cou^tenau^ce, arroga^te of heart, outwardly famylyer, where he inwardly hated,
not lettyng to kiss whom he thought to kill dispiteous and cruel, not always
for eiuyll will, but after for ambycion and to serve his purpose, friend and
fooe were all indifferent, where his auau^tage grew, he spared no man's death
whose life withstode his purpose. He slew in the tower king Henry the.vi.
(saying: now is there no heir male of king Edward the third, but we of the
house of York) which murder was done without king Edwardes assent, which
would have appointed that bocherlye office to some other, rather then to his
own brother. Some wise me^ also wene, yt his drift lacked not in helpyng forth
his own brother of Clarence to his death, which thing in all apparaunce he
resisted, although he inwardly minded it. And the cause thereof was, as men
notynge his doings and procedynges did mark (because that he long in king
Edwardes time thought to opteyne the croune, in case that the king his brother
whose life he looked that evil diet would sone shorten) should happen to disease
(as he did in deed) his children being young. And then yt if duke of Clarence
had lived his pretensed purpose had been far hyndered. For if the duke of
Clarence had kept him self true to his nephewe the young king, or would have
taken upon him to be king, every one of these castes had been a troumpe in the
duke of Gloucesters way: but when he was sure that his brother of Clarence was
dead, then he knew that he might work without ieopardye. But of these
points there is certentie, and whosoever deuyneth or co^iectureth may as well
shote to far as to short, but this conjecture afterward took place (as few
do) as you shall perceive here after. But before I declare to you how this
Rychard duke of Gloucestre began his mischeuous imagened and pretenced
enterprise as apperantly shall be opened. I must a little put you in
remembrance of a loving and charitable act no less profitable the^ amiable
to yt whole co^mynaltie (if it had been so inwardely thought as it was
outwardly dissimuled) which king Edward did liyng on his death bed not long
before he dyed, for in his life although that the division amongst his
friends somewhat grieved and yrked him, yet in his health he less regarded and
took head to it, by reason yt he thought yt he was hable in all things to
rule both perties, were they never so obstinate. But in his last sickness
(which continued longer then false and fantastical tales have untruly and
falsely surmised as I my self that wrote this pamphlet truly knew) when he
perceived his natural strength was gone, and hoped little of recovery by the
arts of al his phicysyans which he perceived only to prolong his life. The^
he began to consider the youth of his children, how be it, he nothing less
mistrusted then that that happened, yet he wisely forseyng and considering that
many harms might ensue by yt debate of his nobles while ye youth of his
children should lack discrecion and good counsel of their friends, for he
knew well that every part would work for their own co^moditee, and rather by
plesaunt advise to win them selfs favor, the^ by profitable aduertisme^t
to do yt children good, wherefore, liyng on his death bed at Westminster he
called to him such lords as the^ were about him who^ he knew to be at
variaunce in especial the lord marquis Dorset soonne to the queen, and the
lord Hastynges against who^ ye queen especially grudged for yt favor yt the
king bare him, and also she thought him familier with the king in wa^ton
co^paignie, her kynne bare him sore, as well for yt ye king made him capitain of
Caleys which office ye lord Rivers brother to ye queen claimed of yt kings
former promise, as of diverse other gifts which he received yt they looked
for. and when these lords with diverse other of both parties were come unto yt
kings presens, he caused himself to be raised up with pillous, and as I ca^
guess said The exhortacyo^ (...) king Edward (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
thus or much like in se^te^ce to them. My lords and my dear kynsme^ and
alies, in what plight I now lie you se and I perfectly feel, by yt which I
look yt less while to live with you, therefore yt more depely I am moved to care
in what case I leave you, for such as I leave you, such are my children like to
find you, which if they should find at variau^ce (as god forbid) they them
felfes might hap to fall at werre or their discresio^ wuld serve to set you at
peace, you s^ their youth, of which I reke^ the only suerty to rest in your
concord. For it suffiseth not all you to love them, if each of you hate other,
if they were me^ your feithfullnes might hap to suffice, but childhod must be
maintained by me^nes autorite and slipper youth vnderpro^pted with elder
cou^saill, which they can never have except you give it, nor you give it
except you agree, for where each labors to break that other makes, and for
hatred each impugneth others cou^sail: there must needs be a long tract or any
good co^clusio^ can forward. And ferther, while each pertie laboreth to be
chief flaterer, adulacio^ shall the^ have more place, the^ plain and feithful
advise, of which must needs ensue yt evil bringyng up of y^ prince whose mind
i^ tender youth infecte shall redily fall to mischief and riot and draw down
this noble realm to ruin. But if grace turn him to wisdom (which god se^d
him) the^ they which by eiuill means pleased him best, shall after fall
farthest out of favor so yt at ye length evil driftes drive to naught, and
good plain ways prosper and florishe. Great variau^ce has ever bee^ between
you, not alwais for great causes Some time a thing right well ente^did and
misco^strued has been turned to yt worse, or a small displeasure dooe^ to you
either by your own affecio^ either by instigacio^ of eiuill too^ges has been
sore agrauate. But this I wot well, you had never so great cause of hatred as
you have of love, because we be men and yt we be all christian me^. This I will
leave to prechers to tell you, and yet I wot not whether any p^chers words
ought more to move you, the^ yt his gooyng by and by to y^ place yt they all
preche of. But this shall I desire you to remember yt the one part of you being
of my blod yt other of my alies, and each of you with other either of kynred or
affinite, which is yt very spiritual affinity and kynred in christ as all
pertakers of yt sacamentes of christ's church. The weight of which
co^sanguynite if we did bear as would to god we did, then should we more be
moved to spiritual charity then to fleshly co^sanguinyte. Our lord forbid yt
you love yt worse together for y^ self same cause yt you ought to love y^
better and yet yt often happens, for no where find we so dedly as emo^gest
them which by nature and law most ought to agree together. Such a serpent
is ambicio^ and desire of vanyne glory and souere ingtie, which emo^gest
estates when he is once entered he crepith forth so far, till with division
and varyaunce he turns all to mischief. First longyng to be next to yt best,
afterward egall with the beast, and at the last chief and above yt be. Of
which immoderate appetite of woorship and the debate and discencion yt grew
there by, what loss, what sorrow, what trouble has win these few years
grown with in this realm, I pray God as well to forget as we well remember,
which thing if I could as well have forsene as I have with my more pane the^
pleasure proved, by god des blessed lady (yt was his common oath) I would never
have won the curtesyes of men's knees with the loss of so many heddes. But
since things passed can not be called again, much more ought we to be ware,
by what occasion we have taken so great hurt before, that we eftsoon fall not
into yt occasion again. Now be these greues passed and all is quiet thanked
be God, and likely well to prosper in welthfull peace, under your cousins my
children, if God send them life, and you love and concord. Of which.ii.
things yt less loss were they by who^ all though God did his pleasure, yet
should this realm always find kings, and peradue^tur as good kings as they.
But if you emo^gest your selfs in a childs reign fall at debate, many a good
manne shall innocently perish, and happily he and you also, or it is long find
peace and quiet again, wherefore in these last words yt ever I look to speak
to you, I exhort and require you all, for the love that you have borne to me,
and for yt love that I have borne to you and for the love yt our lord bears to
us all. From this time forward all greues forgotten, each of you love other,
which I verily trust you will, if you any thing regard God or your kings
affinitee or kynred, this realm your own country or your own surety and
wealth. And there with all, the king for fayntnes no longer endurynge to sit
up, laid him down on his right side his face toward them. And there was none
present yt could forbear weeping, but yt lords co^fortynge him with as good
words as they could, and answeryng for yt time, as they thought should stand
with his pleasure. And there in his presence (as by their words appeared) each
forgave other, and joined their hands together, when as it after appeared by
their deeds there hearts were far aso^der. And so with in a few days this
noble prince dysceased at Westmynster the.ix. day of Apryll, in the year of
our Lord a. M.CCCC.lxxxiii. after that he had reigned.xxii. years one month
and.viii. days, and was with great funeral pomp conveyed to Wyndsore, leuyng
behynd him.ii. soonnes, Edward the prince (of whom this story entreats) a
child of xiii. years of age, Richard duke of York.ii. years younger then the
prince, and five daughters, Elizabeth, which by gods grace was married to king
Henry the.vii. and mother to king Henry ye eight, Cycile not so fortunate as
fair, first wedded to ye vycou^t Wells, after to one Kyne and lived not in
great wealth, Brydget professed her self a close nonne of Syon, Anne was
married to lord Thomas Hauwarde after earl of Surrey and duke of Norffolke,
Katheryne yt yo^gest daughter was married to lord Willya^ Courtney, son to yt
earl of Deuo^shire, which lo^gtyme tossed in other fortune sometime in wealth
after in aduersitee, till yt benignitee of her nephewe king He^rye ye.viii.
brought he^ into a sure estate according to her degree and progeny. This king
Edward was such a prince of governance and behaueour in the time of peace
(for in The desc^ipcio^ of Edward (...) fourth.
time of war, each must be others enemy) yt there was never any king in this
realm, in attaynyng the croune by war and battle so heartily beloved with
the more substance of his people, nor he him self so specially favored in
any part of his life, as at yt time of his death, which favor and affeccion
yet after his death, by the cruelty, myschiefe and trouble of the tempesteous
world that followed, highlye toward him more increased. At such time as he
died, the displeasure of those that bare him grudge for king Henry yt.vi. sake
(who^ he deposed) was well assuaged and in effect quenched within yt space
of.xxii. years (which is a great part of a man's life) and some were reconsiled
and grown into his favor (of y^ which he was never strange) when it was with
true heart demanded. He was goodly of personage and princely to behold, of
heart courageous, politic in council, and in aduersitee nothing abashed, in
prosperitee rather joyful then proud, in peace just and merciful, in war
sharp and fearce, in the field bold and hardy, and yet never thelesse no
farther then reason and policy would adventure, whose wars whosoever
circumspectly (...) advisedly considers, he shall no less commend his wisdom
and policy where he avoided them. then his manhood where he vanquished them.
He was of visage full faced and lovely, of body mighty, strong and clean
made, with over lyberall and wa^to^ diet, he waxed somewhat corpule^t and
bourly, but nevertheless not uncomely. He was of youth greatly given to
fleshely wanto^nes, from yt which health of body in great prosperitee and
fortune with out an especial grace hardlye refrayneth. This fault little
grieved his people, for neither could any one man's pleasure stretche or
extend to the displeasure of veraye many, nor a multitude be grieved by a
private man's fantesie or volupteousnesse, when it was doe^ without violence.
And in his latter days he left al wild daliau^ce and fell to grauitee, so yt he
brought his realm into a wealthy and prosperous estate, al fear of outward
enemies were clearly extinguished, and no war was in hand nor none toward,
but such as no man looked for. The people were toward their prince not in a
constrained fear, but in a true loving and wylfull obedience amongst
theimselfe, and ye commons were in good peace. The lords whom he knew at
variaunce, he in his death bed (as he thought) he brought to good concord, love
and amytee. And a little before his death, he left gatheryng of money of his
subjects, which is the only thing that draws yt hearts of Englyshme^ from
their kings and princes, nor nothing he either entreprysed ndr took in hand, by
yt which he should be dryue^ thereunto. For his tribute out of France he had a
little before recovered and obtained. And yt year before he dyed he recovered
the town of Berwike against yt king of Scotts. And albeit yt all yt time of
his reign he was so benign courteous and famylyer, that no part of his
virtues was esteemed more the^ those high humilitees. Yet that condycion in
the end of his last days decayed not, in the which many princes by a long
continued souereingtie, declyne to a proud port and behaueoure from their
conditions accustomed at their beginning. Yet lowlynes and gentleness so far
forth in him increased that the so^mer before died, he being at the haueryng at
the bower, sent for the mayre and aldermenne of London thither only to hunte
and make pastyme, where he made them not so hearty but so famylyer and
frendlye chere, and sent also to their wives such plenty of venyson, that no
one thing in many days before gatte him either mo hearts or more hearty
favor amongst the commen people, which often times more esteem and take for
great kyndnes a little courtesye, then a great profit or benefyte. And so
this noble prince deceassed, as you have heard in that time when his life was
most desired, and when his people most desired to keep him. Which love of
his people and their entiere affeccio^ toward him, had been to his noble
children, (having in them selfs also as many gifts of nature, as many
princely virtues, as much good towardness as their age could receive) a
marvelous fortress and a sure armoure, if the deuysion and dissencion of their
friends had not unarmed them and left them destitute, and the execrable desire
of souereingtie provoked him to their destruccio^, which if either kind or
kyndnesse had holde^ place must needs have bee^ their chiese defense. For
Richard duke of Glouceter, by nature their uncle, by office their protectoure,
to their father greatly beholden and to them by oath and allegeaunce bounden
all the bands broken and violated, that bind manne and manne together,
without any respect of God or the world, unnaturally contryued to bereave
them not only of their dignytee and pre-eminence, but also of their natural
lives and worldely felicytee.

And first to show you that by conjecture he pretended this thing in his
brothers life, ye shall understand for a truth that the same night that king
Edward died, one called Mistelbrooke, long ere the day sprange came to the
house of one Potier dwelling in Redcrosse street without Creple gate of
London, and when he was with hasty rapping, quickly let in, y^ said
Mistelbrooke showed unto Potier that king Edward was yt night deceased: by my
truth quod Potier, then will my master the duke of Gloucetre be king and that I
warrant the. What cause he had so to think, hard it is to say, whether he
being his servant knew any such thing prepensed or otherwise had any
inklingther of, but of all likelihode he spoke it not of naught.

But now to return to the true history, were it that the duke of Gloucetre
had of old sore practiced this conclusyon, or was before time moved thereunto
and put in hope by the tender age of the young princes his nephews, as
oportunitee and likely of speed puts a man in courage of that that he
never intended. Certain it is, that he being in the North parties for the good
governance of the country, being advertised of his brothers death contrived
the destruction of his nephews with yt usurpation of the royal dignitee and
croune And for as much as he well wyste, and had help to maynteine, a long
continued grudge and heart burning between the Queen's kynred and the kings
bloodde (either part enuiyng others authorytee) he now thought (as it was in
deed) a fertherly beginning to the pursuit of his intent and a sure ground and
situacion of his unnatural building, if he might under the pretense of
remembering of old dyspleasures abuse the ignorance and anger of the one
party to the destruction of yt other, and then to win to his purpose as many
as he could, and such as could not be won, might be lost or they looked
therefore. But of one thing he was certain, that if his intent were once
perceived, he should have made peace between both parties with his own
bloodde, but all his intent he kept secret till he knew his friends, of ye
which Henry the duke of Buckingham was the first yt sent to him after his
brothers death a trusty servant of his called Persall to the cytee of York,
where the Duke of Gloucetre kept the king his brothers funeralles. This
Persall came to John Ward a secret chaumberer to the duke of Gloucetre,
desiryng that he in close and couerte manier might speak with the duke his
master: whereupon in the deed of the night the duke sent for Persall (all
other being aduoyded) which showed to the duke of Gloucetre that the duke of
Buckingham his master in this new world would take such part as he would
and would farther wait upon him with a. M. good fellows if need were. The
duke sent back yt messanger with great thanks and diverse preuey instruccions
by mouth, which Persall did somuche by his travail that he came to the duke
of Buckyngham his master into the marches of Wales, and eftsoon with new
instruccions met with the duke of Gloucetre at Notingham, which was come out
of the Northcou^trey with many knights and gentylmenne to the noumbre of.vi.
C. horse and more, in his journey toward London. And after secret meting and
co^municacion had between him and the duke of Gloucetre he returned with such
speed yt he brought the duke of Buckingham his master to mete with the duke of
Gloucetre not far from Northampton with.iii. C. horses, and so they two
came together to Northampton where they first began their unhappy enterprice,
and so the duke of Buckingham continued still with the duke of Gloucetre till he
was crouned king, as ye shall plainly perceive hereafter.

The young king at the death of his father kept household at Ludlowe, for
his father had sent him thither for Justice to be done in the marches of
Wales, to the end that by the authoritee of his presence, the wild
Welshemenne and evil dysposed persons should refrain from their
accustomed murders and outerages. The governance of this young Prince was
committed to Lord Anthony Wooduile, Earl Rivers and Lord Scales, brother to
the Queen, a wise, hardye and honorable personage, as valyaunte of hand as
pollitick of counsel, and with him were assocyate other of the same party,
and in effect every one as he was nere of kin unto the queen so was he
planted next about the Prince. That dryfte by the Queen seemed to be devised,
whereby her bloodde might of right in tender youth be so planted in the
princes favor, that afterward it should hardely be eradicated out of the
same.

The duke of Gloucetre turned all this to their distruccion, and upon that
ground set the foundation of his unhappy building. For whom soever he
perceived to be at varyaunce with them, or to bear toward him self any
favor, he brake unto them, some by mouth, some by writing and secret
messengers, that it was neither reason nor yet to be suffered that the young
king their master and kinsmanne should be in the hands and custody of his
mothers kinrede, sequestered in manner from their company and attendaunce, of
which every one ought him as faithful service as they, and many of them of
far more honorable part of kynne then his mothers side, whose bloodde quod
the Duke of Gloucetre saving the Kings pleasure, was far unmeet to be
matched with his, which now to be removed from the king and the least noble
to be left about him is, quod he neither honorable to his majesty nor to
us, and also to him less suretye, to have the noblest and mightiest of his
friends from him, and to us all no little ieopardye to suffer, and specially
our well proved euel willers to grow in too too great authorytee with the king
in youth, namely which is light of belefe and soon persuaded. Ye remember
that king Edward him self, albeit he was both of age and discrecion, yet was he
ruled in many things by yt bend more then stood either with his honor or
our profit, or with the commoditee of any manne else, except only the
immoderate aduau^cemente of them selves, which whether they thristed sore
after their own well or no, it were hard I think to guess. And if some
folks frendshype had not holden better place with the king then any respect
of kynred, they might (paraduenture) easily have trapped and brought to
confusyon some of us or this, and why not as easly as they have done some other
or this as nere of the blood royal, but our lord has wroughte his will,
and thanked be his grace that perell is past, how beit, as great is growing if
we suffer this young king in his enemies hands, which without his wyttinge
might abuse the name of his commandment to any af our undoing, which
things God and good prouysion forbid, of which good prouysion none of us has
any thing the less need for the late attonemente made, in which the kings
pleasure had more place then the parties hearts or wills, nor none of us is
so unwise ouersone to trust a new friend made of an old fooe, or to think
that any only kyndenes so suddenly contracted in an hour, continued scantlye
yet a fortnyght, should be deper set in our stomachs then a long accustomed
malice many years rooted.

With these persuasions and wrytinges, yt duke of Glouceter set a fire them
which were easy to kindle, and in especyall twain, Henry duke of Buckyngham
and Wyllyam Lord Hastynges and Lord Chamberlayn, both men of honor and of
great power, the one by long sucecessio^ from his aunceters, the other by his
offices and the kings favor. These two not bearing each to other so much
love as hatred, both to the queen's bloodde accorded together with the duke of
Glouceter that they would remove from the king all his mothers fre^des, under
the name of their enemies.

Whereupon the duke of Glouceter being aduertysed that the lords about the
king intended to bring him to London to his coronation, acco^panyed with such
a number of their friends that it should be hard for him to bring his purpose
to pass without the assemblinge and gathering of people and in manner of open
war, whereof the end he wist was doubtefull, and in the which, the king
being on the other side, he should have the name and face of rebellion.

He secretelye therefore by diverse means, caused the queen to be persuaded
that it was nether need and should also be ieopardeous the king to come up
so strong, for as now, every lord loved other and none other thing studied
for, but the tryumphe of his coronation and honor of yt king. And the lords
about the king, should assemble in the kings name much people, they should
give the lords betwyxte whom and them there had been some time debate, to
fear and suspecte least they should gather this people, not for the kings
sauegarde, whom no man impugned, but for their destruccyon, having more
regard to their old varyaunce then to their new attonemente, for the which
cause they on the other part might assemble men also for their defense, whose
powers she wyste well far stretched, and thus should all the realm fall in a
roar, and of the mischief that thereof should ensue (which was lykly to be
not a little) the most harm was like to fall where she least would, and then
all the world would put her and her kynred in the blame, saiynge that they
had vnwselye and untruly broken the amytie and peace which the king her
husband had so prudently made between her kindred and his, which amytee his
kin had always observed.

The queen being thus persuaded sent word to the king and to her brother,
that there was no cause ner need to assemble any people, and also the duke of
Glouceter and other lords of his be^d wrote unto the king so reverently and to
the queen's friends there so louyngely, that they nothing earthlye mystrustyng,
brought the young king toward London with a sober compaignie in great have (but
not in good speed) til he came to Northa^pton, and from thence he removed to
Stony stratford On which day, the two dukes and their bend came to
Northampton, faynynge that Stonye stratforde could not lodge them all, where
they found the Earl Ryuers, entendynge the next moruynge to have followed the
king, and to be with him early in the morning. So that night the dukes made
to the earl Rivers friendly chere but as soon as they were departed very
famylier with great courtesy in open syghte and the earl Rivers lodged,
the.ii. dukes with a few of their pryuye friends fell to council wherein they
spente a great part of the night, and in the dawning of the day they sent
about pryuely to there servants in their lodgings to haste to horseback for
their lords were in manner ready to ride, wheruppon all their servants were
ready or the Lord Ryuers servants were awake. Now had the dukes taken the
keys of the ynne in to their possession, so that none should issue out
without their concente. And over this in the high way toward Stony stratforde
they set certain of their folks that should cause and compel to return
again all persons that were passinge from No^rthampton to Stony stratforde,
saying that the dukes them selfs would be the first that should come to the
king from Northampton, thus they bare folks in hand. But when the earl
Ryuers understood the gates closed and the ways on every side beset, nether
his servants, nether him self suffered to goo out, perceauinge so great a
thing without his knowledge, not begone for naught, comparyng this preasent
dooynge with the last nyghtes cherein so few hours, so great a chance
marueleously myslyked it. Howbeit, sith, he could not get away, he determined
not to keep him self close, least he should seem to hyde him self for some
secret fear of his own fault, whereof he saw no such cause in him self,
wherefore, on the surety of his own consience he determined to go to the^ and
to inquire what this matter might mean. Whom as soon as they saw, they
began to quarrel with him, affyrmyng that he pretended to set dystaunce
between the king and them to bring them to confucyon, which should not lie
in his power and when he began as he was an el oeque^t manne) in godly wise to
excuse him self they would not here his answer but took him by force and
put him to ward. And then he mounted on horsback and came in Stony stratford
where the king was going to horsbacke, because he would leave y^ lodgyng for
them, for it was to strayte for both the compaignies. And when they came to
his presence they alighted and their compaignie about them, and on their
knees saluted him, and he them ge^tely received, nothing erthely knowing ner
mistrustyng as yet. The duke of Buckyngham said aloude, on before gentlemenne
and yomenne keep your roumes, and therewith in yt king his presence they picked
a quarrel to the lord Rychard Gray the queen's soonne and brother to the lord
marquis and half brother to the king, saying that he and the marquis his
brother and the lord Ryuers his uncle had compassed to rule the king and the
realm and set varyau^ce between thestates, and to subdewe and destroy the
noble bloodde of the realm. And toward thaccomplishment of the same, they said
y^ lord marquis had entered into the toure of London, and thence had taken out
treasure and sent me^ne to the sea, which things these dukes knew well were
dooen for a good purpose and as very necessary, appoincted by yt whole counsel
at London, but somewhat they must have said, unto the which words the king
answered: what my brother Marquis has dooen I cannot say, but in good faith
I dare well answer for mine uncle Ryuers and my brother here, that they be
innocent of such mattiers, ye my leege quod the duke of Buckyngham, they have
kept ye dealyng of these matters far from the knowledge of your good grace,
and forthwith they arrested the lord Rychard and sir Thomas Vaugham and sir
Rychard Hawte in the king his presence and brought the king and all to
Northa^pton, where they took ferther counsel in their affairs. And there
they sent from the king whom it pleased them, and set about him such
servants as better pleased them then him. At which dealyng he wept, but it
booted not. And at dynner the duke of Gloucester sent a dyshe from his own
table to the lord Ryuers, praiyng him to be of good chere and all should be
well, he thanked him and prayed the messenger to bear it to his nephiewe the
lord Rychard with like words, whom he knew to have need of conforte, as one
to whom such aduersite was strange, but he him self had been all his days
ennured therewith and therefore could bear it. But for all this message, the
duke of Gloucester sent the lord Ryuers, ye lord Rychard and sir Thomas Vaughm^
and sir Rychard Hawte into the Northparties into diverse prisones, but at last
all came to Poumfrette where they all four were behedded without iudge^et.

In this manner as you have heard, the duke of Gloucester took on him the
governance of the young king, whom with much reverence he conueighed
toward London. These tidings came hastily to the queen before mydnight by a
very sore report, that the king her soonne was taken and that her brother and
her other soonne and other her friends were arested and sent, no man wist
whither. With this heuye tidings the queen bewailed her childs ruyn, her
friends mischaunce and her own infortune, curssyng the time that ever she was
persuaded to leave the gatheryng of people to bring up the king with a great
power, but that was passed, and therefore now she took her younger soonne the
duke of York and her daughters and went out of the palais at Westminster into
the sanctuary and there lodged in the abbotes place, and she and all her
children and compaignie were regystred for sanctuary persons. The same night
there came to docter Rotheram archebysshop of York and lord chauceloure a
messenger from the lord chambrelayne to York place beside Westminster, the
messenger was brought to the bysshoppes bed side and declared to him that yt
dukes were gone back with the young king to Northampto^, and declared
ferther, that the lord Hastynges his master sent him word that he should
fear nothing for all should be well. (Well quod the bishop,) be it as well
as it will, it will never be so well as we have seen it, and then the
messenger depar^ted. Whereupon the bishop called up his servants before day
light, and took with him the great seal and came before day to the queen
about whom he found much heaviness, rumble, haste, business, conuerghaunce
and caryage of her stuff into sanctuary, every manne was busye to carye, bear
and conueigh stuff, chestes and ferdelles, no man was unoccupied, and some
carried more then they were commanded to another place. The queen sat alone
below on the russhes all desolate and dysmaied, whom the archebisshop
conforted in the best manner that he could, showing her that the matter was
nothing so sore as she took it for, and that he was put in good hope and out
of fear by the message sent to him from the lord Hastinges. A woe worth him
quod the queen for it is he that goes about to destroy me and my bloodde.
Madame quod he, be of good comfort and I assure you, if they crown any other
king then your soonne whom they now have, we shall on the morrow croune his
brother who^ you have here with you. And here is the great seal, which in
likewise as your noble husband delivered it to me, so I deliver it to you to
the use of your son and therewyth delivered her the great seal, and
departed home in the dawning of the day, and when he opened his windows and
looked on the Themys, he might see the river full of boats of the duke of
Glouceter his servants watchyng that no person should goo to sanctuary ner
none should pass vnserched.

Then was there great rumoure and commocion in the city and in other places,
the people diversely deuined upon this dealyng. And diverse lords knights and
gentylmen, either for favor of the queen or for fear of them selves, assembled
compaignies together and went flockyng together in harneyes And many also, for
that they recompted this demeanor attempted, not so especyallye against other
lords as against the king him self in the dysturbaunce of his coronat ion,
therefore they assembled by and by together to common of this matter at London.
The archebyshoppe of York fearing that it would be ascrybed (as it was in
deed) to ouermuche lightness that he so suddenly had yielded up the great seal
to the queen, to whom the custody thereof nothing apperteigned without
especial commandment of yt king secretly sent for the seal again and
brought it with him after the accustomed manner to mete with the lords.

At this metyng was the lord Hastynges, whose truth toward the king no man
doubted nor neded not to doubt, persuaded the lords to believe, that the duke
of Glouceter was faithful and sure toward his prince, and that yt lord
Ryuers, the lord Richard and other knights apprehended, were for matters
attempted by them against the dukes of Gloucetre and Buckyngham put under
arest, for their surety, and not for the kings icopardye, and that they were
also in sauegarde there to remain, till the matter were (not by the dukes
only) but also by all the other lords of the kings council indifferentlye
examyned, and by their discrecions ordered and either judged or appesed. And one
thing he aduysed them to beware of, that they judged not the matter to
farreforth or they knew the truth, nor turnyng their pryuate grudges into the
commen hurt, irrityng and prouokyng men unto anger, and disturbyng the kings
coronacion, toward which the dukes were coming, for that then might
paraduenture bring yt matter so far out of ioynte, that it should never be
brought in frame again, which if it should hap as it were lykely to come to
a field, though all parties were in all other things eguall, yet should the
autoryte be on that side, where the king is him self, with these persuasyons
of the lord Hastynges, whereof part he him self belcued, and of part he
wyste well the contrary, these commocyons were somewhat appeased. But in
especial, because the dukes of Buckyngham and Glouceter were so nere and came
on so shortly with the king, in none other manner, nor none other voice or
sembleaunce then to his coronacion, causyng the fame to be blown about that
such persons as were apprehended had contryued the distruccion of the dukes
of Gloucetre and of Buekyngham and other of the noble bloodde of this realm,
to thentent that they alone would rule and govern the king. And for the
color thereof, such of the dukes servants as rode with the carts of their
stuff which were taken, among the which stuff no maruayle though some were
harneyes which at the brekynge up of such an household must be brought away
or cast away, they showed to the people, and as they went said: lo, here be
the barrelles of harneyes that these traytoures had preuely conueighed in
their caryages to destroy the noble lords withal. This diverse, (although it
made the matter to wise men more unlikely) well perceauyng that thentendoures
of such a purpose would rather have had their harness on their backs, then
to have bound them up in barrelles, yet much part of the commen people were
therewith right well satisfied.

When the king approached nere the city, Edmonde Shawe Goldesmythe then Mayre
of the city with the aldremenne and shreues in skarlet, and five hundredth
commoners in murraye received his grace reverently at Harnesaye park, and so
conueighed him to the cytee, where he entered the fourth day of May, in the
first and last year of his reign, and was lodged in the bisshoppes palayce,
but the duke of Goucetre bare him in open sight so reverently, saying to all
men as he rode, behold your prince and souereygne lord, and made such
sembleaunce of lowlynes to his prince, that from the great obloquy that he
was in so late before, he was suddenly fallen in so great trust, that at the
council next assembled he was made the only chief ruler and thought most
mete to be protectoure of the king and his realm, so that, were it desteny
or were it folly, the lamb was betaken to the wolf to keep. At which
council the archebyshoppe of york was sore blamed for delyueryng the great
seal to the queen, and the seal taken from him and delyueto docter John
Russell bishop of Lyncolne, a wise manne and a good and of much experyence,
and diverse lords and knights were appointed to diverse roumes, the lord
chamberlayn and some other kept the roumes yt they were in before, but not
many.

Now were it so that the protector (which always you must take for the
duke of Gloucetre) sore thristed for the acheuyng of his pretensed entrepryse
and thought every day a year till it were performed, yet durst he no
ferther attempt aslong as he had but half his pray in his hand, well
wyttynge that if he deposed the one brother, all the realm would fall to the
other, if he remained in sanctuary or should happily be shortelie co^ueyghed to
his farther libertee. Wherefore in contine^t at the next metyng of the lords in
council, he purposed to them that it was an heinous thing of the queen, and
procedyng of great ma lyce toward the kings councelers yt she should keep the
kings brother in sanctuarye from him whose special pleasure and conforte were
to have his brother with him, and that to be done by her to none other intent but
to bring all ye lords in an obloquy and murmoure of the people, as though they
were not to be trusted with the kings brother, which lords were by yt whole ass^t
of the nobles of yt realm appointed as yt kings nere friends to ye tuycion of
his royal person, the prosperitee whereof (quod he) stands not alonely from
the keeping of enemies and evil dyate, but partly also in recreacion and
moderate pleasure, which he cannot take in his tender youth in the company of
old and ancient persons, but in the famylyer conversation of those that be not
far under nor far above his age, and nevertheless of estate convenient to
accompany his majesty wherefore with whom rather then with his own brothere and
if any man think this co^syderacio^ light (I think no man so thinks that
loves ye king) let him consider yt sometime that with out small things, greater
cannot stand, and verelye it redoundeth greatly to ye dyshonoure of the kings
highness and of all us that be about his grace to have it come in any man's
mouth, not in this realm only, but also in other lands (as evil words
walk far) yt the kings brother should be feign to keep sa^ctuary. For every
man will judge that no man will so do for naught, and such opinions fastened in
men's hertes be hard to be wrested out, and many grow to more grefe then
any manne here can divine. Wherefore me thinks it were not the worste to send
to the queen some honorable and trustye personage, such as tendereth the
kings weal and the honor of his counsel, and is also in credit and
favor with her, for which consideracions none seems more meately to me then
the reverend father my Lord Cardinal archbishop of Cauntourbury, who may in
this matter do most good of all men if it please him to take the pain,
which I doubt not of his goodness he will not refuse for the kings sake and
ours and wealth of the young duke him self the kyn ges most honorable
brother and for the comfort of my sovereign Lord him self my most derest
Nephiewe, considering that thereby shall be ceased the sclaunderous rumor and
obloquy now going abroad, and the hurtes avoided yt thereof might ensue, then
must rest and quietness grow to all the realm. And if she percase be
obstinate and so precisely set in her own will and opynion, that neither his
wise and feithfull aduertysement can move her, nor any man's reason satisfye
her, the^ shall we by mine advice by the kings authoritee fetch him out of
that prysone and bring him to his noble presence, in whose continual company
he shall be so well cheryshed and so honorablye entreated that all the world
shall to our bonoure and her reproach perceive that it was only malice,
frowardness and folly, that causes her to keep him there. This is my mind for
this time, except that any of you my Lords any thing per ceaue to the
contrary, for never shall I by Gods grace so wedde my self unto mine own
will but I shall be redye to change it upon your better advice.

When the Protectoure had said, all the coun cell affirmed that the mocion was
good and reasonable, and to the king and the duke his brother honorable, and a
thing that should cease great murmoure in the realm if the mother might by
good means be induced to deliver him, which thing the Archbishop of
Cauntourburye, whom they all agreed also to be most convenient thereunto,
took upon him to move her, and thereto to do his vttermoste endeavor. How be
it if she could in no wise be entreated with her good will to deliver him,
then thought he and such of the spirytualtye as were present, that it were
not in any wise to be attempted to take him out against her will, for it
would be a thing that should turn to the grudge of all men and high
displeasure of God, if the pryuiledge of that place should be broken which had
so many years been kept, which both kings and bishops had granted and
confyrmed, which ground was sanctified by saint Peter him self more then. v
hundredth years agone, and sith that time was never so undevout a king that
ever enterprysed that sacred priuyledge to vyolate, nor so holy a bishop that
durst presume the church of the same to consecrate, and therefore quod the
Archbysshoppe, God forbid that any manne should for any erthely enterprise
break the immunyte and libertee of that sacred Sanctuary that has been the
sauegard of so many a good man's life, but I trust quod he, we shall not need
it, but for any manner of need I would we should not do it, I trust that she
with reason shall be contented and all thing in good manner obteigned. And if it
hap that I bring it not to pass, yet shall I further it to my best power so
that you all shall perceive my good will diligence and endeavor. But the
mothers dread and womannishe fear shall be the let if any be.

Nay womannish, frowardness quod the duke of Buckingham, for I dare take it
on my soul yt she well knows yt she needs no such thing to fear either for
her son or for her self. For as for her, here is no man that will be at
war with womenne, would God some men of her kynne were womenne to, and then
should all be sone in rest. How be it, here is none of her kynne the less
loved for that they be of her kynne, but for their own evil deserving. And
put the case that we nether loved her nor her kin, yet there were no cause
why we should hate the kings noble brother to whose grace we our selves be
kynne, whose honor if she desired as our dyshonoure, and as much regard
took to his wealth as to her own will, she could be as loathe to suffer him
to be absente from the king as any of us, if she had any wit as would God
she had as good will as she has froward wit. For she thinks her self no
wiser then some yt are here, of whose feithful minds she nothing doubts, but
verily believes and know legeth that they would be as sorye of his harm as
her own self, and yet they would have him from her, if she abide there.

And we all I think be content that both her children be with her if she
came from thence and be in such place where they may be with their
honor. Now if she refuse in the deliverance of him to follow the wisdom of
them, whose wisdom she knows, whose approbate fidelitee she trusts: it is
easy to perceive that frowardness lets her, and not fear. But goo to,
suppose that she fears as who may let her to fear her own shadow, the
more she fears to deliver him, the more we ought to fear to leave him in
her hands, for if she cast such fond doubts that she fear his hurt, then
will she fear that he shall be fette thence, for she will soon think that if
men were set (which God forbydde) on so great a mischief, the Sanctuarye
will little let them which sanctuary good men as me thinks might
without sin: somewhat less regard then they do. Now then if she doubt
least he might be fetched from her, is it not licklye that she will send him
some where out of the realm? verily I look for none other. And I doubt not
but she now as sore minds it, as we mind the let thereof. And if she might
hap to bring that purpose to pass (as it were no great mastery to do we
letting her alone) all yt world would say that we were a sort of wise
councelers about a king to let his brother to be cast away under our noses.
And therefore I ensure you feithfully for my mind, I will rather maugre her
stomach fetch him away, then leave him there till her fear or fond
froward fear convey him away, and yet will I break no sanctuarye, for
verily sith the privilege of that place and other of yt sort have so long
continued I would not go about to break yt, but if they were now to begin
I would not be he that should make them, yet will not I say nay, but it is a
deed of pity, that such men as the chance of y^ sea or their evil debtors
have brought into pouertee, should have some place of refuge to keep in their
bodies out of the danger of their cruel credytoures. And if it fortune the
croune to come in question as it has done before this time while eatch part
takes other for traytoures, I thyncke it necessary to have a place of refuge
for both. But as for thieves and murderers, whereof these places be full, and
which never fall from their craft after they once fall thereunto, yt is pytee
that ever sanctuarye should save them, and in especyall wylfull murderers,
whom God commands to be taken from the altar and to be put to death. And
where it is other wise then in these cases, there is no need of sayntuaryes,
appointed by God in the old law. For if necessite of his own defense or
mysfortune dryued him to yt deed then a pardon serves him, which either is
granted of course, or the king of pytee and compassyon gives. Now look
how few sanctuary me^ there be whom necessyte or mysfortune compelled
together? And then see on the other side, what a sort there be commonly
therein of such, whom wylfull vnthryftines has brought to naught what a
rabble of thieves, murderers and malycyous heinous traitors be, and that in
two places specyallye, the one at the elbowe of the cytee, and the other in the
very bowels, I dare well a vow it if you way the good that they do with the
hurt that comes of them ye shall find it much better to lose both, then to
have both. And this I say although they were not abused (as they now be and
so long have been) that I fear me ever they wylbe while men be a feared to set
to their hands to the a me^dement, as though God and saint Peter were the
patrons of ungracious living. Now unthriftiness riot, and run in debte upon
boldness of these places, yea, and rytch men run thither with poor men's
goods, there they build, there they spend and bid their creditours go
whystel. Men's wives run thither with their husbands plate, and say they dare
not abide with their husbands for beting, thieves bring thither stolle^ goods
and live thereon. There devise they new robberies nightly and stele out and
rob, reave, and kyl men and come again into those places, as though those
places gave the^ not only a sauegard for the harm yt they have done, but a
license also to do more myschiefe, howbeit, much of this great abusion, (if
wise me^ would set their hands thereunto) might be a mended, with great
thanks of god and no breche of the privilege. The conclusion is, sithe it is
so long a go I wot not what pope and what prince more piteous then polityke,
has granted it, and other men sense of a relygious fear have not broken yt,
let us take a pain with it, and let it stand a Gods name in his force, as
ferforth as reason will, which is not so ferfourth as may serve to let us of
the fetching forth of this noble manne to his honor and wealth out of that
place in the which nether is nether can be a sanctuary or priueledged man. A
sanctuarye ever serves to defend the body of that man that stands in
dangers abroad, not of great hurt only, but of lawful hurt. For against
unlawful hurtes and harms no pope ner king intended to privilege any one
place wherein it is lawful for one man to do another man wrong. That no man
unlawfully take hurt, that lybertye the king, the law and very nature for
bids in every place and makes to that regard for every man every place a
sanctuarye: but where a man is by lawful means in parel, there needs he the
tuycion of some special privilege, which is the only ground of al
sanctuaries, from which necessitee this noble prince is far, whose love to
his king, nature and kynred proves, whose innocentie to all the world, his
tender youth affyrmeth and so sa^ctuary as for him is not necessary ner none he
ca^ have. Men com not to sa^ctuary as they com to baptim to require it by his
godfathers, he must ask it him self yt must have it, and reason since no man
has cause to have it, but whose consyence of his own faut makes him hauened
to require it, what will the has yo^der babe, which if he had discretion to
require it if need were, I dare say would be right angry with them yt keep him
there. And I would think without any scruple of conscience, without any brech of
privilege to be so^what more homly with them yt be there sa^ctuary me^ in ded yt
if one go to sa^ctuary with another ma^s goods, why should not ye king leui^g his
body at liberty satisfye y^ party of his goods eue^ win ye sa^ctuary, for
nether king nor pope can give any place such a privilege that it shall
discharge a man of his debtes being hable to pay.

And with that diverse of the clergy that were there p^se^t, whether they
said it for his pleasure or as they thought, agreed plainly by yt law of God
and of ye church yt the goods of a sanctuary manne should be delivered in
payment of his debtes, and stolen goods to the owner and only liberty
reserved to him to get his living with the labor of his hands. Verily quod
the duke I think ye say very truth. And what if a man's wife take sanctuary
because she list to run from her husband? I would think if she ca^ allege
none other cause he may laufully without any dyspleasure dooen to saint
Peter, take her out of saint Peter's church by the arm. And if no body may
be taken out of sanctuary because he says he will abide there, then if a
child will take sanctuary because he fears to goo to school, his master
must let him alone, and as simple as that example is, yet is there less
reason in our case then in it, for there though it be a chyldyshe fear, yet
is there at the least some fear, and herein is no fear at all And verily I
have heard of sanctuary men, but I never hard before of sanctuary children,
and there fore as for the conclusion of my mind, whosoever ever may deserve to
have need of it, if they think it for their suretye let them keep it, but he
can be no sa^ctuary manne that has another discresion to desire it, ner malice
to deserve it, whose life ner liberty can by no laufull process stand in
ieoperdie, and he that takes one out of sanctuarye to do him good, I say
plainlye he breaks no sanctuarye.

When the duke had dooen, the temporal me^ne wholly, and the most part of
the spiritual me^ne also think no hurt earthely mente toward the baby,
condiscended in effect, that if he were not delivered he should be fetched
out. Howbeit they thought it best in aduoydyng of all manner of rumoure, that
the cardynall should first assaye to get him with her good will. And thereupon
all the counsel came to the star chamber at Westmynster, and the cardinal
leauyng the protector and other lords in the sterre chaumber departed into
the sanctuary to the queen accompaignied with certain lords, were it for yt
respect of his honor or that she should by the persons of so many perceive
that his arrande was not only one man's mind, or were it for that the
protectoure intended not in this matter to trust one manne alone, or else if she
finally were determined to keep him, some of the compaignie had paraduenture
some secret instruccio^ incontine^t maugre her will to take him and to leave
her no respyte to conueigh him.

When the queen and the lords were come together in presence, the Cardynall
showed unto her that it was thought to the lord protector and the whole
caunsaill yt her keeping of yt kings brother in that place highly sou^ded, not
only to yt grudge of the people and their obloquy, but also to the unportable
grief and displeasure of yt king his royal majesty, to whose grace it were a
synguler comfort to have his natural brother in compaignie, and it was their
bothes dishonoures and theirs and hirs also to suffer him in sanctuarye, as
though the one brother stood in daungier and perell of the other. And he
showed her ferther that the whole counsel had sent him to require of her the
delyuerye of him that he might be brought to yt king his presence at his
liberty out of yt place which meune reconed as a prisone, and there should
he be demeaned according to his estate and degree, and she in this doing
should both do great good to the realm, pleasure to the cou^saill, profit
to her self, succoure to her friends that were in destresse, and over yt,
which he wist well she specially tendered, not only great conforte and
honor to the king but also to the young duke him self, whose both great
wealth it were to be together, as well for many greater causes as also for
their both dysporte and recreacyon, which things the lords esteemed not
slight, though it seemed light, well po^de ryng yt their youth without
recreacion and play cannot endure, ner any estraunger for the conuenie^cie of
both their estates so metely in yt poinct for any of them as the either of
them for theother.

My lord (quod the queen,) I say not nay but that it were very conueniente
yt this gentlemanne whom you require were in the compaignie of the king his
brother, and in good faith me thinks it were as great commodite to them
both, as for yet a while to be in the custody of their mother the tender age
considered of the elder of them both, but in especial the younger, which
besides his infancye that also needs good lookyng too, has awhyle been so
sore deseased with syckenesse and is so newlye rather a little amended then well
recovered, that I dare put no person earthely in trust with his keeping, but my
self only, consyderyng there is as phisicians say, and as we also find)
double yt perell in the resylynacion yt was in the first syckenesse, with
which desease nature being sore labored, forweried and weaked, waxes the
less hable to bear out a new surfett(...) And albeit there might be fou^den
other that would happily do their best unto him, yet is there none yt either
knows better how to order him then I yt so long have kept him, or is more
tendrely like to cherishe him then his own mother yt bare him. No ma^ne
denies good madame (quod y^ cardinal) but yt your grace of all folk were
most necessary about your children, and so would all yt cou^saill not only
be content but also glad y^ it were if it might stand with your pleasure to be i
such place as might stand with their honor. But if you apoinct your self to
tarry here, the^ think they it more convenient the Duke of York were with yt
king honorably at his liberty to the comfort of them both, then here as a
sanctuary ma^ne to their both dishonor and obloquy, since there is not alwaie
so great necessite to have yt child with the mother, but that occacio^
sometime may be such that it should be more expedient to keep him else
where, which in this well apereth, yt at such time yt your most derest
soonne the^ prince and now king should for his honor and good order of the
country keep household in Wales far out of your keeping, your grace was well
content therwt your self. Not very well content (quod the queen) and pet the
case is not like, for theone was then in health and theother is now sick, in
which case I meruell greatly why my lord protector is so desierous to have
him in his keeping, where if the child in his sickness miscarried by nature,
yet might he ro^ne into slander and suspicion of fraud. And they call it a
thing so sore against my childs honor and theirs also that he abides in
this place, it is all their honors there to suffer him abide where no man
doubts he shall be best kept, and that is here while I am here, which as yet
entend not to come forth and ieopard my self after other of my fre^des,
which would God were rather here in suertie with me, then I were there in
ieoperdie with them. Why Madame (quod ye lord Hawarde) know you any thing why
they should be in ieopardie? Nay verily (quod she,) nor why they should be
in prisone neither as they now be, but I trow, it is no great marvel
though I fear least those yt have not let to put them in duraunce with out
color, will let as little to procure their distrucion without cause. The
cardinal made a countenance to the lord Haward that he should harp no more
upon yt stryng, and the^ said he to the queen, yt he nothing doubted but those
lords of her kynne the which remeyned under a rest should upon the matter
^ramined do well enough, and as toward her noble person, was, neither could
be any manner of ieopardie. Whereby should I trust that (quod yt queen) in yt I
am guyltlesse, as though they were guyltie, in yt I am with their enemies
better beloved then they, when they hate them for my sake, in that I am so
nere to the king, and how far be they of that would help, as God se^de
grace they hurt not. And therefore as yet I purpose not to depart hence, as for
this gentlemanne my soonne, I mind he shall be where I am till I se further,
for I se some me^ne so gredy whthout any substanciall cause to have him, which
makes me much more afraid and scrupulous to deliver him. Truly madame (quod
the cardynall) the more afraid that ye be to deliver him, the more other
men fears to suffer you to keep him, least your causeless fear, might
cause you farther to conueye him, and many think he can here have no
pryuiledge which can have neither will to ask it, nor yet malice or offense
to need it. And therefore, they recon no privilege broken, although they fetch
him out of sanctuarye, which if you fynallye refuse to deliver him, I think
verily ye council will enfraunchese him, so much dread has my lord his
uncle, for the te^dre love he bears him, least your grace should send him
away. Ah (quod the queen) has he so tender a zele to him that he fears
nothing, but least he should escape him? Thinks he that I would send him
hence, which is neither in the plight to send out? and in what place could
I recone him sure, if he be not sure in sanctuarye? whereof was there never
tyraunte yet so deuelyshe, that durst attempt to break the privilege, and I
trust God is now as strong to wythstande his adversaries as ever he was. But
my soonne can deserve no sanctuarye (you say) and therefore he cannot have it,
forsothe the lord protectoure has sent a goodly gloss, by the which that
place that may defend a these may not save an innocent: but he is in no
ieopardye nor has no need thereof, I would God he had not. Troweth the
protectoure I pray God he may prove a protector, rather then a destroyer,
whereunto his peynted process draws. Is it not honorable that the duke bide
here? it were confortable to them both that he were with his brother, because
the king lacks a play feloe, yea be you sure, I pray God send him better
playefelowes then him that makes so high a matter upon such a tryfleynge
pretexte, as though there could none be found to play with the king, but
if his brother which has no lu(...) to play for syckenesse, must come out
of Sanctuarye, out of his sauegarde to play with him, as though that princes
so young as they be^, could not play without their peers, or children could
not play without their kynred, with whom for the more part they agree much
woorsse then with straungiers. But the child you say cannot require the
privilege, who told the protectoure so? Ask him and you shall here him ask
it and so shall he if ye will. Howebeit this is a strange matter, suppose he
could not ask it and think he would not ask it, and ymagene he would ask
to go out, if I say he shall not. Note if I ask the privilege, but for my
self, I say that he that against my will takes out him, breaks Sanctuarye.
Serves this lyberty for my person only or for my goods too? you may not
from hence take my horse from me, if I stale him not nor owe you nothing,
then follows it, that you may not take my child from me, he is also my ward,
for as far as my learned council shows me, he has nothing by dyssente
holden by knights seruage, but by socage, then the law makes me his garden,
then may no man lawfully (I suppose) take my ward from me out of this
place, without the breche of Sanctuarye, and if my pryuyledge could not serve
him, nor he ask it for him self, yet sithe the law commytteth to me the
custodye of him, I may require it for him, except the law give the infaunte
a garden only for his gooddes, dyschargynge him of the cure and sauekepynge
of his body, for which only, both goods and lands serve. Wherefore here
entende I to keep him, sith man's law serves the garden to keep the
infaunte, and the law of nature wylleth the mother to keep yt child, and
Gods law priuiledgeth the Sanctuarye, and the Sanctuarye pryuyledgeth my
soonne, sithe I fear to put him to the protectoures hands, that has his
brother already, which is (if both failed) inheritoure to the croune as heir
male, as he says. The cause of my fear no man has to do to examen, and yet
fear I no further then the law fears, which as learned men tell me,
forbyddeth every manne the custody of them, by whose death he may enheryte
less land then a kingdom, I can say no more, but whosoever he be that
breaks this holy sanctuary, I pray God send him shortelye need of
Sanctuary, when he may not come to it, for I would not that my mortal enemy
should be taken out of Sanctuary.

The Cardynal perceived that the queen ever yt longer the farther of, and also
that she began to kyndle and chafe and spoke sore bytynge words against the
protectoure, and such as he neither believed and also was loathe to here, he
said to her, for a final conclusion, that he would no more dispute the matter,
and if she were content to deliver the duke to him and to the other lords
there present, he durst lay his own body and soul both in pledge, not
only for his surety, but also for his estate, and surely he knew nor
suspected no cause but he might so do (but he knew not all.) And further he
said, if she would give him a resolute answer to the contrary he would
therewith depart incontinent, and shifte who so would with this business
afterward, for he never intended further to move her in the matter, in the
which he thought that he and all other also, save her self, lacked either
wit or truth. Wit if they were so dull, if they nothing could perceive
what the protectoure intended, and if they should procure her soonne to be
delivered into his hands, in whom they should perceive toward the child
any evil will intended, then she might think all the council both euel
aduysed and of little fydelyte to their prince.

The queen with these words stood in a great study, and forasmuch as she
saw the lord Cardynall more redyer to depart then the remanau^t, and the
protectoure him self redye at hand, so that she verelye thought that she
could not keep him there, but he should be incontynente taken thence, and to
conueye him else where, neither had she time to serve her, nor place
determined, nor persons appointed to conueygh him, and so all thing was
vnreadye, when this message came so suddenly on her, nothing less lookyng for
then to have him out of sanctuarye, which she knew now men to be set in
all places about that he could not be conueyghed out untaken, and partly as
she thought, it might fortune her fear to be false: so well she wist it was
either need less or botelesse. Wherefore, if she should needs go from him, she
demed best to deliver him, and specially of yt Cardinals faith she nothing
doubted nor of some other lords whom she saw there, which as she feared
least, they might be deceived, so well was she assured yt they would not be
corrupted, then thought she that it would make them the more warely to look
to him, and the more circum spectly to see his surety, if she with her own
hands betook him them by trust, and at the last she took the young duke
by the hand and said unto the Lords, my Lord quod she and all my lords,
nether am I so unwise to mistruste your wits nor so suspicyous to mistruste
your truths: of which thing I purpose to make such a proof that if either of
both lacked in you, might turn both me to great sorrow, the realm to much
harm and you to great reproach. For lo, here is quod she this gentilman,
whom I doubt not but I could keep salfe if I would, whatsoever any manne say
and I doubt not also but there be some abroad so deedly enemies unto my
bloodde, that if they wiste where any of it lay in their own body they would
let it out, we have also experience that the desire of a kingdom knows no
kynred, the brother has been the brothers bane, and may the nephews be sure
of the uncle? each of these children are others defense while they be a
sunder, and each of their lives lies in others body, keep one salfe and both
be sure, and nothing to both more perylous, then both to be in one place,
for a wise merchant never auentureth all his good des in one ship, all this
notwithstanding, here I deliver him and his brother in him to keep, to your
hands, of whom I shall ask them both before God and the world. Feithfull
you be and that I wot well, and I know you be wise and of power and strength
if you list to keep him, for you lack no help of your selves, nor need to
lack no help in this case, and if you cannot else where, then may you leave
him here. But only one thing I beseech you, for the trust that his father put
you in ever and for the trust that I put you in now, that as far as you
think that I fear to much, ye be well ware that you fear not to little.
And therewith all she said to yt child, fare well mine own sweet soonne, God
send you good keeping, let me once kiss you or you gooe, for God knows when
we shall kiss together again, and therewith she kyssed him and blessed him and
turned her back and wept, gooing her way, leauyng the poor innocent child
weeping as fast as the mother.

When the Cardinal and the other lords had received the young duke, they
brought him into the star chaumbre, where yt protectoure took him in his
arms and kyssed him with these words, now welcome my lord with all my very
heart and he said in yt of likelihode even as he inwardly thought, and
thereupon, forthwith brought him to the king his brother into the bishops
palaice at Powles, and from thence through the city honorably into the tower,
out of which after that day they never came abroad. Whenne the Protectoure
had both the children in his possessyon, ye and that they were in a sure
place, he then began to thryste to see the end of his enterprise and to
avoid all suspicion, he caused all the Lords which he knew to be feythfull
to the king to assemble at Baynardes castle to common of the order of the
coronacyon while he and other of his complyces and of his affinitee at Erosbyes
place contrived the contrary and to make the Protectours king, to which
counsel there were adhibite very few, and they very secret. Then began here
and there some manner of muttering amongst the people as though all thing
should not long be well though they wyste not what they feared nor wherefore:
were it, that before such great things men's hertes (of a secret instyncte
of nature) misgeueth them, as yt southwinde sometime swells of him self
before a tempeste, or were it that some one manne happily perceauing, filled
many men with suspicyon, though he showed few men what he knew, howbeit,
the dealing it self made to much on the matter, though the counsel were
close, for little and little all folk drew from the tower where the king was,
and drew to Cross byes place, so that the Protectoure had all the resort, and
the king in manner desolate, while some made suyte unto them that had the
doing, some of them were by their friends secetely warned, that it might
happily turn them to no good to be to much attendaunte on the King
without the Protectoures apoyntmente, which removed diverse of the kings
old servants from him, and set new in their romes about him.

Thus many things coming together, partly by chance and partly by purpose,
caused at length, not common people only which waver with the wind, but wise
men also and some Lords to mark the matter and muse thereupon, in so much as
the lord Stanley which afterward was earl of Derby wisely mistrusted it and
said to yt lord Hastinges, that he much misiyked these two several
cou^selles, for while we quod he talk of one matter at yt one place, little wot
we whereof they talk in the other place. Well quod the Lord Hastynges, on my
life never doubt you, for while one man is there which is never thence,
neither can there be any thing once minded that should sound amiss toward
me, but it should be in mine ears or it were well out of their mouths.
This meant he by Catesby which was nere of his secret council, and whom he
familyerly used in his most weightye matters, putting no man in so special
trust as him, since he wiste well there was no man to him so much beholding
as was this Catesbye, which was a man well learned in the laws of this
land, and by the special favor of the lord Hastynges in good authorytee
and much rule bare in the countrees of Leicestre and Northampton where yt
lord Hastinges power lay. But surely great pity was it that he had not had
either more truth or less wit, for his dissimulacyon only, kept all that
myschiefe up, in whom if the lord Hastinges had not put so special trust, yt
lord Stanley and he with diverse other lords had departed into their countries
and broken al ye dance for many euel signs yt he saw, which he now construed
al for the best, so surely thought he that there could be no harm toward him
in that counsel intended where Catesbye was.

And of truth the protector and the duke of Buckyngham made very good
sembleaunce unto the lord Hastynges and kept him much in their compaignie.
And undoubtedly the protector loved him well, and loathe was to have lost him
saving for fear least his life should have quayled their purpose, for the
which cause he moved Catesby to prove with some words cast out a far of,
whether he could thyncke it possible to win the lord Hastynges to their
part. But Catesby, whether he assayed him or assayed him not reported unto him
that he found him so fast, and heard him speak so terrible words that he
durst no farther break, and of a truth the lord Hastinges of very trust
showed unto Catesby the mystrust that other began to have in the matter. And
therefore, he fearyng least their mocyons might with the lord Hastynges have
mynished his credence, whereunto only all the matter leaned, procured the
protector hastly to ryd him, and much the rather, for he trusted by his death
to obtain much of yt rule which the lord Hastynges bare in his country, the
only desire whereof, was the thing that enduced him to be procurer and one
of the speciallest contriuers of al this treason. Whereupon the lord
protectoure caused a counsel to be set at the tower on the frydaye the.xiii.
day of June, were was much commonyng for the honorable solempnytee of the
coronation, of the which the time appointed aproched so nere that the
pageau^tes were a making day and night at Westminster and vytayle killed which
afterward was cast away

These lords thus sittyng commoning of this matter, the protectoure came in
among the^ about ix. of the clock salutynge them courteously excusing him
self that he had been from them so long, saiynge merely that he had been a
sseper yt day. And after a little talking with them he said to the bishop of
Ely, my lord you have very good strawberies in your garden at Holborne, I
require you let us have a mess of them. Gladly, my lord quod he, I would I
had some better thing as ready to your pleasure as that, and with that he sent
his servant in all the haste for a dysh of strawberyes. The protectoure set
the lords fast in commonynge and thereupon prayed them to spare him a little,
and so he departed and came in again between. x, and.xi. of the clock into the
chamber al changed with a sour angry countenance knyttynge the brows,
frowning and frettynge and gnawynge on his lyppes and so set him down in his
place. All the lords were dysmayed and sore marueyled of this manner and
sudden change and what thing should him ayle. When he had sytten a while
thus he began. What were they worthy to have that compass and ymagyne the
dystruccyon of me being so near of bloodde to the king and protectoure of
this his royal realm? At which questyon all the lords sat sore astonned,
musing much by whom this questyon should be meant, of which every man knew
himself clear.

Then the lord Hastynges as he that for the familiaritee that was between them,
thought he might be boldest with him, answered and said that they were worthy
to be punyshed as heyneous traitors what so ever they were, and all the other
affyrmed the same, that is quod he yonder sorceces my brothers wife and other
with her, meaning the queen, at these words many of the lords were sore
abashed which favored her, but the lord Hastynges was better content in his
mind that it was moved by her then by any other that he loved better, albeit
his heart grudged that he was not before made of council in this matter as well
as he was of the taking of her kynred and of their putting to death, which
were by his assente before devised to be behedded at Pomfrete, this self same
day, in the which he was not ware ye it was by other devised that he him
self should the same day be behedded at London: then said the protectoure
in what wise that ye sorceresse and other of his counsel, as Shores wife with
her affynitee have by their sorcerye and wychcrafte this wasted my body, and
therewyth plucked up his doublet clean to his elbowe on his lift arm, where
he showed a weryshe wythered arm and small as it was never other. And
thereupon every man's mind mysgaue them, well perceiving that this matter
was but a quarrel, for well they wyste that the queen was boothe to wise to goo
about any such folly, and if she would, yet would she of al folk make
Shores wife least of council whom of all womenne she most hated as that
concubin^ whom the king her husband most loved Also, there was no man there
but knew that his arm was ever such sith the day of his birth Nevertheless
the lord Hastynges which from the death of king Edward kept Shores wife, on
whom he somewhat doted in the kings, life, saving it is said that he forbear
her for reverence toward his king, or else of a certain kind of fydelitee
toward his friend. Yet now his heart somewhat grudged to have her whom he
loved so hyghly accused, and that as he knew well untruly, therefore he
answered and said, certaynlye my lord, if they have so done, they be worthy
of heinous ponyshemente, what quod the protectoure, thou seruest me I wene with
if, and with and, I tell the they have done it, and that I will make good on
thy body traytoure. And therewith (in a great anger) he clapped his fyste on
the boorde a great rappe, at which token given one cried treason without the
chamber, and therewyth a door claped, and in came rushing men in harneyes as
many as the chamber could hold. And anon yt protectoure said to the lord
Hastynges, I arrest the traytoure, what me lord quod he? yea the traitor quod
the protector. And one let fly at the lord Sta^ley, which shroncke at the
stroke and fell under the table, or else his head had been cleft to the teth
for as shortly as he shrancke, yet ran the blood about his ears. Then was
the archebyshoppe of York and doctoure Morton bishop of Ely and the lord
Stanleye taken and diverse other which were bestowed in diverse chambers, save
the lord Hastynges (whom the protectoure commanded to speed and shryue him
apace) for by saint Poull (quod he) I will not dyne till I se thy head of, it
booted him not to ask why, but heuilie he took a preeste at adventure and made
a short shrift, for a longer would not be suffered, the protectoure made so
much haste to his dinner, which might not goo to it till this murder were
dooen for saving of his ungracious oath. So was he brought forth into the
grene beside the chapel within the tower, and his head laid dowe on a logge of
timber that lay there for buyldyng of ye chapel, and there tyrannously
stryken of, and after his body and head were enterred at Wyndesore by his
master king Edward the fourth, whose souls Jesus pardon, Amen.

A merueleous case it is to here, either the warnynges that he should have
voyded or the tokens of that he could not void. For the next night before his
death, the lord Stanley sent to him a trusty messenger at mydnight in all the
have, requiryng him to rise and ride away with him, for he was disposed
utterly no longer for to abide, for he had a fearful dream in the which he
thought that a bore with his tuskes so rased them both by the heddes that the
bloodde ran about both their shoulders, and for as much as the protector
gave the bore for his cognisaunce, he ymagened that it should be he. This
dreme made such a fearful impressio^ in his heart, yt he was thoroughly
determined no le^ger to tarry but had his horsso ready, if the lord Hastynges
would goo with him So that they would ride so far that night, that they
should be out of daungere by the next day. A good lord (quod the lord
Hastynges) to the messenger, leans my lord thy master so much to such
trifles and has such faith in dreams, which either his own fear
fa^tesieth, or do rise in yt nights rest by reason of the days thought. Tell
him it is plain witchcraft to believe in such dreams, which if they were
tokens of things to come, why thinks he not yt we might as likely make them
true by our going if we were caught and brought back (as friends fail flyers)
for then had the bore a cause lykely to race us with his tuskes, as folks that
fled for some falshed, wherefore either is their perell, nor none there is
deed, or if any be, it is rather in going then abydyng. And if we should
needs fall in perell one way or other yet had I lever that men should se it
were by other men's falshed, then think it were either our own fault or
faynte and feeble heart, and therefore goo to thy master and commend me to him
and I pray him to be merry and have no fear, for I assure him, I am assured
of yt ma^ne he wotteth of as I am of mine own hand. God send grace (quod the
messenger,) and so departed. Certain it is also that in rydyng toward the tower
the same morning in which he was behedded, his horse that he accustomed to
ride on stombled with him twice or thrice almost to the falling, which thing
although it happens to them daily to whom no myschaunce is toward, yet
has it been as an old eiuill token observed as a gooyng toward myschief. Now
this yt follows was no warnyng but an enuyous scorn, the same morning ere he
were up from his bed where Shores wife lay with him all night, there came to him
sir Thomas Hawarde soonne to the lord Hawarde (the which sturryng that
morning very earlye) as it were of courtesy to accompaignie him to the
counsel, but forasmuch as the lord Hastynges was not ready, he tarried
awhile for him and hasted him away.

This sir Thomas, while the lord Hastynges stayed awhile commonyng with a
priest whom he met in the tower street, brake the lords tale, saying to him
merely, what my lord I pray you come on, wherefore talk you so long with that
priest, you have no need of a priest yet, and laughed upon him, as though he
would say, you shall have need of one sone. But little wist the other what he
meant (but or night these words were well remembered by them that heard
them) so the true lord Hastynges little mistrusted, and was never merier, ner
thought his life in more suretye in all his days, which thing is often a
sign of change, but I shall rather let any thing pass me then the vain
suretye of man's mind so nere his death: for upon the tower wharffe, so nere
the place where his hedde was of so sone after, as a man might well cast a
balle, a pursyuan^t of his own called Hastynges met with him, and of their
metyng in ye place he was put in remembrance of another time, in which it had
happened them to mete before together in ye same place, at which time ye lord
Hastynges had bee^ accused to king Edward by yt lord Ryuers the queen's brother,
in somuche yt he was for awhile which lasted not long highly in yt kings
indignacion and stood in great fear of himself, and forasmuch as he now met
the same pursyuaunt in the same place the ieopardy so well passed, it gave him
great pleasure to talk with him thereof, with who^ he had talked in the same
place of that matter, and therefore he said Ah Hastynges, art thou remembered
when I met the here once with an heavy heart? Ye my lord (quod he) that I
remember well, and thanked be God they gatte no good ner you no harm thereby,
thou would say so (quod he) if thou knew so much as I do which few
know yet, and mo shall shortly, that meant he that the earl Ryuers and yt lord
Richard and sir Thomas Vaughm^ should yt day be behedded at Pomfrette, as
they were in deed, which act he wist well should be dooen, but nothing ware
that yt axe honge so nere his own head. In feith manne (quod he) I was never so
sorye ner never stood in so great daungier of my life as I did when thou and
I met here, and lo the world is turned now, now stand mine enemies in
the daungier as thou may hap to hear more hereafter, and I never in my
life meryer nor never in so great suertie, I pray God it prove so (quod
Hastynges prove quod he? dowtest thou that,) nay nay I warraunt the, and so
in manner dyspleased he entered into the tower, where he was not long on live as
you have heard. O lord God the blyndenesse of our mortal nature, when he
most feared, he was in most surety, and when he reconed him self most
surest, he lost his life and yt within.ii. hours after. Thus ended this
honorable manne a good knight and a gentle, of great autorite with his prince, of
living somewhat dissolute plain and open to his enemy, and sure and secret to
his friend, easy to beguyle, as he that of good heart and courage foresawe no
perelles, a loving manne and passing well-beloved, very faithful and trusty
enough, but trustyng to much was his destruction as you may perceive.

Now flewe the fame of this lords death thorough the city and farther about
like a wind in every man's ear, but the protectoure immediately after dynner
(entendynge to set some color upon the matter) sent in all the have for many
substanciall men out of the city into the tower, and at their coming, him
self with the duke of Buckyngham stood harnessed in old evil favored
bryganders* such as no man would wene that they would have vouchesalued to
have put on their backs, except some sodeyne necessitee had constreigned
them. Then the lord protectoure showed them, that the lord Hastynges and
other of his conspyracye had contryued to have suddenly destroyed him and the
duke of Buckyngham there the same day in council, and what they intended
farther, was as yet not well known of which their treason he had never
knowledge before ten of the clock the same fornoone, which sodeyne fear drove
them to put on such harness as came next to their hands for their defense,
and so God help them, that the mischief turned upon them that would have
done it, and thus he required them to report. Every manne answered fair,
as though no man mystrusted the matter, which of truth no man believed.
Yet for the farther appeasyng of the peoples minds, he sent immedyatlye after
dynner an Heralde of arms with a proclamacion through the city of London
which was proclaimed in the kings name, that the lord Hastynges with diverse
other of his treyterous purpose had before co^spired, the same day to have
slain the protectoure and the duke of Buckyngham sittyng in counsel, and
after to have taken upon them the rule of the king and the realm at their
pleasure, and thereby to pill and spoil whom they list vncomtrolled, and much
matter was devised in the same proclamacion to the sclaunder of the lord
Hastynges, as that he was an eiuill counsaillour to the kings father, entisyng
him to many things highly redoundyng to the minisshyng of his honor and to
the universal hurt of his realm, by his eiuill compaignie and synister
procuryng and ungracious exsample, as well in many other things as in vycious
living and inordynate abusyon of his body, both with many other and in
especial with Shores wife which was one of his secret counsel of this
heinous treason, with whom he lay nyghtlye, and namely the night passed next
before his death, so that it was the less marvel if ungracious living
brought him to an unhappy end, which he was now put to by the
commandment of the king his highness and of his honorable and faithful
cou^saill, both for his demerytes being so openly taken in his false contrived
treason, and also least the delaiyng of his execucion might have encoraged
other myscheuous persons parteners of his conspiracye, to gather and assemble
them selves together in making so great commocyon for his delyucraunce, whose
hope now being by his well deserved death pollytickelye repressed, all the
realm shall by Gods grace rest in good quiet and peace. Now was this
proclamacion made within two hours after he was behedded, and it was so
curyously endited and so fair written in parchement in a fair set hand,
and therewith of it self so long aprocesse, that every child might perceive
that it was prepared and studied before (and as some men thought, by Catesby)
for all the time between his death and the proclamacyon proclaymynge, could
skante have suffysed unto the bare writing alone, albeit that it had been in
paper and scrybeled forth in haste at adventure. So that upon the
proclaymynge thereof, one that was schoolmaster at Paul's standing by and
comparyng the shortenesse of the time with the length of the matter said to
them that stood about him, here is gaye goodlye cast, foul cast away for
have. And amarchaunte that stood by him said that it was written by
inspyracyon and prophesye. Now then by and by as yt were for anger and not for
coueteous, the protectoure sent sir Thomas Hawarde to the house of Shores wife
(for her husband dwelt not with her) which spoiled her of all yt ever she
had, above the valor of two or three thousand marks, and sent her body to
prison. And the protectoure had laid to her for the manner sake yt she intended
to witch him, and yt she was a cou^saill with the lord Hastynges to destroy him
In conclucion, when no color could fasten upon these matters, the he leyed
heinously to her charge that thing that she could not deny, for all the
world knew that it was true, and that not wythstandyng every manne laughed to
here it then so suddenly, so highly taken, that she was naught of her body.
And for this cause as a Godly continent prince clean and faultlesse of him
self, sent out of heaven into this vicious world, for the amendment of
men's manners, he caused the bishop of London to put her to open penance,
going before a cross on sunday at procession with a taper in her hand. In
the which she went in cou^tenau^ce and pace so womanly, and albeit she was out
of al her array saving her kyrtell only, yet went she so fair and lovely,
and namelye when the wondryng of the people cast a comelye rud in her chekes of
the which she before had most mysse, that her great shame wanne her much
praise amongst them that were more amorous of her body then curyous of her
soul, and many good folk that hated her living and were glad to see sin
corrected, yet petied they more her penance then reioysed it, when they
consydred yt the protector did it more of a corrupt mind then any verteous
affeccion.

This woman was borne in London, well frended, (...) (...)ion (...)h^^^s wife.
honestly brought up, and very well married, saving somewhat to sone, her
husband an honest and a young citezen, godly and of good substance, but
forasmuch as they were coupled or she were well ripe, she not very ferue^tly
loved for who^ she never longed, which was the thing (by chance) that yt more
easily made her to incline to yt kings appetite, when he required her. Howbeit
the respect of his royaltee, yt hope of gaye apparel, ease, pleasure and other
wantonne wealth was hable soon to perce a soft tender heart, but when the
king had abused her, anon her husband being an honest manne and one that
could his good, not presuming to touch a kings concubyne left her up to him
all together. When the king dyed, yt lord Hastynges took her, which in the
kings days albeit that he was sore enamoured with her, yet he forbear, either
for a pryncelye reverence or for a certain frendely faythfulnesse. Propre she
was and fair, nothing in her body that you could have changed, but if you
would have wished her somewhat higher. This say they that knew her in her
youth, some said and judged yt she had been well favored, and some judged
the contrary, whose judgment seems like as men guess the bewtye of one
long before departed, by a scalpe taken out of a channel house, and this
judgment was in the time of king Henry the eyghte, in the xviii. year of
whose reygne she dyed, when she had nothing but a reveled skin and bone. Her
beautye pleased not men so much as her pleasant behaueoure, for she had a
propre wit and could both read and write, merry in compaignye, ready and
quick of answer, nether mute nor full of babble, sometime taunting without
displeasure, but not without disporte. King Edward would say that he had three
concubines, which in diverse properties diversely excelled, one, the meriest,
yt other the wiliest, the third the holiest harlot in y^ realm as one, whom no
man could get out of y^ church to any place lightlye, but if it were to his
bed, the other two were somewhat greater personages the^ mastres Shore, and
nevertheless of their humilyte were content to be namelesse and to forbear
the praise of these properties. But the meryest was Shores wife in whom the
king therefore took great pleasure, for many he had, but her he loved whose
favor to say the truth (for it were sin to lie on the deuel) she never
abused to any man's hurt but to many men's comfort and relief For where
the king took displeasure she would mitigate and apeace his mind, where men
were out of favor, she would bring them into his grace, for many that had
highly offended, she opteygned pardone, and of great forfeatures she gat
remissyon, and finally, in many weightye suits she stood many me^ne in great
stead, either for none or for very small rewards and those rather gaye then
rich, either for that she was content with the deed well done, or for that
she delyghted to be sued unto, and to show what she was hable to do with the
king, or for that that wanton wemenne and welthye be not always covetous. I
doubt not but some manne will think this womanne to be to slyghte to be
written of, among grave and weighty matters, which they shall specially
think yt happily saw her in her age and aduersite, but me seems yt chance
so much more worthy to be remembered, in how much after wealth she f^ll to
pouerte, and from richesse to beggerie, vnfre^ded out of aquayntaunce, after
great substance after so great favor with her prince, after so great suite and
seking to, as many other men were in their times, which be now famous only
by the infamye of their evil deeds, her doings were not much less remembered
because they were not so evil, for none use to write an evil turn in marble
stone, but a good turn they write in the duste, which is not worste proved by
her, for after her welthe she went begginge of many that had begged them
selfs if she had not helped them, such was her chance.

Now was it devised by the protectoure and his counsel, that the same day
that the lord chaumberlayne was behedded in the tower of London and about the
same hour should be behedded at Poumfret the earl Rivers and the lord
Richard the queen's soonne, sir Thomas Vaugham and sir Richard Haute, which as
you have hard were taken at Northampton and Stonye Stratforde by the consent
of the lord Hastinges, which execucion was done by the order and in the
presence of sir Richard Ratcliff knight, whose service y^ protectoure specially
used in the council and in the execucion of such lawless enterprises, as a man yt had been long secret with him, having experyence of the world and
shrewed wit, short and rude in speech, rough and boysterours of behave our,
bold in myshiefe, as far from pity as from fear of God.

This knight brought these four persoonnes to the scaffolde at the day
appointed, and showed to all the people that they were traytoures,
notsufferynge the lords to speak, and to declare their innocencye, least
their words might have inclyned men to pytie them and to hate the
protector and his part, and so with out judgment and process of the law
caused them to be behedded without other erthly gylt but only that they
were good men and true to the king and to nigh to the queen, insomuche as Sir
Thomas Vaughan going to his death said, A woe worth them that took the
prophecy that. (...) should destroy king Edwardes children, mea(...) that by
the duke of Clarence lord George which for that suspicion is now dead, but
now remains Richard. G. duke of Gloucetre, which now I see is he that
shall and will accomplish the prophecye and destroy king Edwardes children
and all their alyes and friends, as it appears by us this day, whom I appele
to the high tribunal of God for his wrongful murder and our true innocencye,
and then Ratclyffe said, you have well apeled, lay down your head, ye quod
Sir Thomas, I dye in right, beware you dye not in wrong, and so that good
knight was beheded and yt other.iii. and buried naked in the monastery at
Pomfret.

When the lord Hastinges and these other lords and knights were thus
behedded and ryd out of the way, then the Protectoure caused it to be
proclaimed that the coronacyon for diverse great and urgent causes should be
deferred till the second day of Nouembre, for then thought he, that while men
mused what the matter meant, and while the lords of the realm were about him,
out of their own strengthes, and while no man wyste what to think nor
whom to trust, or ever they should have time and space to digest the matter,
and make parts, it were best hastily to pursue his purpose and put him self
in possessyon of the croune, or men could have time to devise any wise to
resyst. But now was all the study, this matter being of it self so heinous
might be first broken to the people in such wise as it might be well taken.
To this counsel they took diverse such as they thought metely to be
trusted and lykelye to be enduced to that part and hable to stand them instead, either by power or by pollycy. Among who^e, they made a counsel
Edmounde Shaa then mayre of London, which upon trust of his own auauncement,
where he was of a proud heart, hyghly desyreous, took on him to frame the cite
to their appetite. Of spiritual me^ they took such as had wit and were in
auctorytee amongst the people for opynion of their learning and had no
scrupulous conscience. Amongst these, had they took Raffe Shaa clerk brother
to the Mayre, and Freer Pynkie prouyncyall of the Augustyne Freers, both
doctoures in diuinitee, both great preachers, both of more learning then
virtue, of more fame then learning, and yet of more lernyng then truth. For
they were before greatelye esteemed emonge the people, but after that, never none
of these two were regarded Shaa made a sermonde in praise of the protector
before the coronacion, and Pynky made one after the coronation, both so full
of tedious flatterye, that no good man's ears could abide the^ Pynkye in his
sermonde so lost his voice that he was feign to leave of and come down in the
myddest. Doctoure Shaa by his sermonde lost his honestye, and soon after his
life, for very shame of the world, into the which he durst never after much
come abroad, but the Freer forced for no shame, and so yt harmed him the less.
How beit, some doubt and many thyncke that Pinkey was not of counsayl before
the coronation but after the common manner fell to flattery after, namely,
because his sermounde was not incontinente upon it, but at Saint Mary Spittle
the Eastre after. But certain it is that Doctoure Shaa was of counsel in the
beginning, in so much that they determined that he should first break the
matter in a sermo^d at Paul's cross, in which he should by the authorytee of
his preaching induce the people to enclyne to the protectoures ghoostly
purpose. But now was all the labor and study in the deuyse of some
conuenyent pretexte, for which the people should be content to depose the
prince and accept the protectoure for king. In which diverse things they
devised, but the chief thing and the weyghte of all that invention rested in
this, that they should allege bastardy in king Edward him self, or in his
children, or both, so that he should seem disabled to enherite the crown by
the duke of york and the prince by him. To lay basterdy in king Edward
sounded openly to the rebuke of the protectoures own mother, which was mother
to the both. For in that point could be none other color, but to pretend
that his own mother was an auoutresse, but nevertheless he would that point
should be less and more fynely and closely handled, not even fully plain and
dyrectlye, but touched a slope craftily, as though men spared in that point
to speak all the truth for fear of his displeasure. But that other point
concerning the basterdy that they devised to surmise in king Edwardes children,
that would he should be openly declared and enforced to the uttermost. The
color and pretexte whereof cannot be well perceived except we report some
things long before done about king Edwardes maryages.

After king Edward the.iiii. had deposed king Henry the.vi. and was in
peasyable possession of the realm, determyning him self to mary (as was
requisite) both for him self and for the realm, he set the earl of Warwike
and diverse other noble me^ in ambassade to the French king to entreat a
marriage between yt king and Bona sister to the French king. In which the Earl
of Warwike found the parties so toward and wyllinge that he spedely without
any dyfficultie according to his instruccyons brought the matter to a good
conclusion. Now happened yt in the mean season, there came to make a suit to
the king by petycyon dame Elyzabeth Greye (which after was his queen) then a
wyddowe, borne of noble blood specyallye by her mother, which was Duchess of
Bedforde, and she was married to sir Rychard Wooduyle, Lord Ryuers her father.

Howebeit, this Elyzabeth being in service with queen Margarete wife to king
Henrye the syxt, was married to one Ihon Greye Esquyre whom king Henrye made
knight at the last hattayle of Saint Albons, but little while he enjoyed his
knyghtehoode for at that feelde he was slain.

Afterward that king Edward was king and the Earl of Warwyke being on his
ambassad this poor lady made suit to the king to be restored to such small
lands as her husband had given her in ioyntour, whom when the king beheld and
heard her speak, as she was both fair and of a good favor, moderate of
nature, well made and very wise, he not alonlye pytied her, but also wexed
enamored on her, and taking her secretly a side began to enter into talking
more famylyerly, whose apetite when she perceived, she vertuoslye denied him,
but that did she so wyselye and that with so good manner and words so well set,
that she rather kyndled his desire then quenched it. And finally, after many a
metynge and much wowynge and many great promyses she well espied the kings
affection toward her so greatelye increased that she durstesomewhat the more
boldly say her mind, as to him whose heart she perceived more fervently set
then to fall of for a word. And in co^clusio^ she showed him plain yt as she
wist her self to si^ple to be his wife, so thought she her self to good to be
his concubyne. The king much maruelyng of her constancy, as he yt had not been
wont else where so styfly said nay, so much esteemed her continencye and
chastitee, that he set her virtue in stead of possession and richesse. And this
taking council of his own desire determined in have to mary her. And after
that he was thus apoi^ted and had between the^ twayn e^sured her the^ asked he
the counsel of his secret fre^des, and that in such manner yt they might easly
perseaue yt it boted not to say nay, Notwythstandi^g, the duches of york his
mother was so sore moved there with yt she diswaded yt marriage as much as she
possible might Alledgyng that it was his honor, profit and surety to marye
in some noble progeny out of the realm, whereupon depended great strength to
his estate by that affinitee and great possibilite of encreace of his
dominions. And yt he could not well otherwise do, considering the earl of
Warwike had so ferfoorth entered into the matter all ready, which was not
like to take it well if all his voyage were in such wise frustrate and his
apointment deluded. And she said ferther that it was not princely to marye his
own subject, no greater occacio^ ledyng thereunto, no possessions nor other
commodyte dependyng thereupon, but only as a rich man would mary his mayde^
only for a little wa^ton dotage upon her person. In which marriage many men
commend more the maidens fortune then the man's wisdom, and yet she said
that there was more honestye then honor in this marriage forasmuch as there
is not between a merchant and his maid so great a dyfference as between a
king and his subject, a great prince and a poor wydowe. In whose person,
although there were nothing to be mislyked, yet was there said she, nothing
so excellent but that it might be found in diverse other that were more
metely (quod she) for your estate, ye and maidens also, the only wydowhead of
dame Elizabeth Gray (although she were in all other points and things
convenient for you) should suffice as me thinks to refrain you from her
marriage, since it is an vnsittyng thing and a great blemishe to the sacred
majesty of a prince that ought as nere to approach prestehoode in clennesse,
as he does in dignitee, to be defiled with bigamy i^ his first marriage. The
king made his mother an answer part in earnest and part in plaiemerely, as
he yt wist him self out of rule, and albeit he would gladly yt she should take
it well, yet was he at apoynct in his own mind, took she it well or
otherwise. Howbeit, somewhat to satisfy her he said, yt albeit marriage being
a spiritual thing ought rather to be made for the respect of God where his
grace enclineth the parties to love together (as he trusted it was in his case)
rather then for yt regard of any te^porall aduau^tage, yet never thelesse him
seemed this marriage well considered not to be unprofitable, for he reconed the
amytee of no earthely nation to be so necessary for him as yt friendship of his
own, which he thought lykely to bear him somuche yt more hearty favor in
yt he disdayned not to mary with one of his own land, and yet if outward
aliaunce were thought so requisite, he would find ye means to enter thereunto
much better by other of his kin where all yt parties could be contented,
then to marye him self wherein he should never happily love, and for ye
possibilite of possessions lose yt fruit and pleasure of this that he had
already. For small pleasure takes a ma^ne of all yt ever he has beside, if
he be wiued against his appetite, and I doubt not (quod he,) but there be as
you say other yt be in every poinct comparable with her, and therefore I let
not them yt like them to mary them, no more is it reason yt it mislike any
manne that I marye where it likes me. And I am sure that my cousyn of Warwike,
neither loves me so little, to grudge at yt that I love, ner is so unreasonable
to look yt I should in choice of a wife rather be ruled by his yie then by
mine own, as though I were a ward yt were bou^de^ to mary by a garden. I
would not be a king with yt condition to forbear mine own liberty in choice
of mine own marriage, as for possibylyte of more inheritance by new affinite
in strange lands, is often yt occasion of more trouble the^ proffite. And we
have already title by yt means, as lustiseth to get and keep well in one
man's day. That she is a widow and has already children. By gods blessed
lady, I am a bacheler and have some too, and so each of us has a proof yt
nether of us is like to be barren. And therefore madame I pray you be co^te^t,
I trust to God she shall bring forth a you^ge prince yt shall please you. And
as for the bigamy, let the bishop hardely lay it to my charge when I come to
take ordres, for I understand it is forbidden a priest but I never wist yt it
was forbidden a prince. The duches with these words nothing apeased and seeing
yt king so set on yt she could not pluck him back, so highly she disdeined
it, that under pretext of her duty to Godwarde she devised to dysturbe this
marriage, and rather to help that he should mary one dame Elizabeth Lucye, whom
the king not long before had gotten with child, wherefore the king his mother
objected openly against this marriage (as it were in dyscharge of her
conscience) that the king was sure to dame Elizabeth Lucye and her housbande
before God, by reason of which words such obstacle was made in that matter,
that either the bishop durst not or the king would not proceade to the
solempnisacion of the marriage, till this fame were clerly purged, and the truth
well and openly testified) whereupon dame Elizabeth Lucye was sent for, and
albeit she was by the kings mother and many other put in good comfort to
affirm that she was assured to the king, yet when she was solemply sworn to
say the truth, she confessed that they were never ensured. Howbeit she said
his grace spoke such loving words to her, that she verily hoped that he
would have married her, and yt if such kind words had not been, she would
never have showed such kyndenesse to him, to let him so kyndely to get her
with child. This examynacion solemply taken, it was clearly proved that there
was no impedyment to let the king to marye, wherefore he shortly after at
Grafton beside Stonye stratforde married the lady Elizabeth Gray verey
priuelye, which was his enemies wife and had prayed heartily for his loss, in
the which God loved her better then to grant her bone, for then had she not
been his wife. And alter that she was crouned queen, and her father was created
Earl Rivers and her soonne created Marquis Dorset. But when the Earl of
(...)arwike understood of this marriage, he took it so highly, that thereof
ensued much trouble and (...)ate blooddshed as is declared before in the
storye of Edward the fourth.

I have rehearsed this marriage somewhat the (...) at length, because it might
thereby the better (...) upon how fleight aground the protectoure (...)
color, by which he pretended king (...)ldren to be bastardes, but the
in(...)le as it was lyked them to whom it suffyseth to have somewhat to say,
while they were sure to be compelled to no larger proffe then them selves
list to make.

Now to return where I left, as I began to show you, it was by the
protectoure and his council concluded that this doctor Shaa should in a
sermond at Paul's cross signify to the people that neither king Edward him
self ner the duke of Clarence were lawfullye begotten, nor were the very
children of the duke of York, but begotten unlawfully by other persons by
aduoutrye of the duches their mother. And dame Elizabeth Lucye was the very
wife of king Edward, and so prince Edward and all the children begotten on the
queen were bastardes. And according to this deuyce, doctor Shaa ye so^day after
at Paul's cross in a great audience (as always a great nombre assembled to
his preaching) came into the pulpet taking for his Theme. Spuria Vitulamina non
dabunt radices altos. Sapiencie quarto. that is to say: Bastard slyppes shall
never take deep roots, whereupon when he had showed the great grace that God
gives and secretlye infoundeth in right generation after the laws of
matrymony: Then declared he that those children commenlye lacked that grace
(and for the punyshement of their parents) were for the most part unhappy
which were gotten in baste, and specially in aduoutrye, of which (though
some by the ignorauncye of the world and the truth hid from knowledge) have
enheryted for a season other men's lands, yet God always so prouydeth that it
contynueth not in their bloodde long, but the truth coming to light the
rightful enheritoures be restored, and the bastard slyppes plucked up or it
can be rooted deep. And when he had laid for the proof and confirmacion of
this sentence, examples taken out of the old testamente and other ancient
historyes, then began he to discende to the praise of lord Richard duke of
York, calling him father of the protectoure: and declared his title to the
croune by inherytaunce, and also by an entayle autorysed by parliament after
the death of king Henry the syxte. Then showed he that the lord protectoure
was only the right heir of his body lawfullye begotten, then declared he that
king Edward was never lawfully married to the queen but his wife before God was
dame Elizabeth Lucye, and so his children were bastardes. And besides that,
that neither king Edward him self nor the duke of Clarence (amongst them yt
were secret in the duke of Yorkes household) were never reconed surely to be
the children of the noble duke, as those that by their favors more resembled
other known men then him, from whose verteous conditions he said also that
king Edward was far of. But the lord pretectoure (quod he) that very noble
prince, the special patron of knightly prowes, as well in all princely
behaueour as in the lyniamentes and favor of his vysage represents the
veraye face of the noble duke his father. This is (quod he) the fathers own
figure, this is his own countenance, yt very print of his vysage, the sure
undoubted image, yt plain express likeness of yt nobble duke. Now was it
before devised yt in the speaking of these words, the protector should have
come in amongst ye people to the sermond ward, to the end yt these words so
metyng with his presence, might have been taken amongst the herers, as though
the holy ghost had put them in the preachers mouth, and should have moved
the people even there to have cried king Richard, that it might have been after
said that he was specially chosen by God, and in manner by miracle, but this
deuyce quayled either by the protectoures negligence or the preachers over
hasty dilygence. For while the protectoure found by the way tariynge least
he should have prevented these words, the doctoure fearing that he should
come or his sermon could come to those words hastyng his matter thereto, he
was come to them and paste them, and entered into other matters or the
protectoure came, whom when he beheld coming, he suddenly left the matter
which he had in hand, and without any deduccion thereunto, out of al order and
out of all frame began to repete those words again. This is the very noble
prince, the especyall patron of knyghtlye prowes, which as well in all
pryncely behaueoure as in the lyniamentes and favor of his vysage
represents the veraye face of the noble duke of York his father. This is the
fathers own figure, this is his own countenance, the veraye prynte of his
visage, the sure undoubted image, the plain express likeness of that noble
duke, whose remembrance can never dye while he lives. While these words were
in speaking the protector accompanied with the duke of Buckyngham, went
through the people up into the place where the doctors stand and there heard
they out the sermond: but the people were so far from cryenge king Richard
that they stood as they had been turned into stones for wonder of this
shameful sermond, after which once ended the preacher gate him home and never
after durst look out, and when he asked any of his old friends, what the
people talked of him, although that his own conscience well showed him that
they talked no good, yet when the other answered him, that there was in every
man's mouth of him much shame spoken, it so struck him to his heart that in
few days after he wythered away.

Then on the tuysdaye after next following this sermonde, being the. ^vii.
day of June there came to the Guylde hal of London the duke of Buckyngham and
diverse lords and knights mo then happily knew the message that they
brought. And at the east end of the hall where the hoystynges be kept, yt
duke and the mayre and ye other lords sat down, and the aldermen also, all
the commons of the cytee being assembled and standing before them. After
silence commanded upon a great pain, in the protectoures name. The duke
stood up, and as he was well learned and of nature meruel cously well spoken,
he said The oration of yt duke of Buckyngha^* made ^o the cy(...) of London.
to the people with a clear and a lowede voice. Friends, for the zeal and
hertie favor that we bear you, we be come to break of a matter right great
and weighty, and no less weyghtye then pleasyng to God and profitable to all
the realm, nor to no part of ye realm more proffitable the^ to you the
cytezens of this noble cytee. For why, the thing that you have long lacked
and as we welknowe sore longed for, that you would have given great good for,
that you would have gone far to fetch, that thing be we come hither to
bring you, without your labor, pain, cost, aduentnre or ieopardy. What
thing is that? Certes the surety of your own bodies, the quiet of your
wives and daughters and the sauegard of your goods. Of all which things in
times passed you stood in doubt, for who was he of you all that could recone
him self Lord of his own good amongst so many gynnes and trappes as were
set therefore, among so much pilling and polling, amongst so many taxes and
talliages, of ye which there was never end, and oftimes no need and if any
were, it grew either of riot or of unreasonable waste then any necessary
honorable charge, so that there was daily plucked and pylled from good and
honest men great substance of goods, to be lashed out among unthriftiness,
so farforth that fiftenes suffised not nor any usual terms of known taxes,
but under an easy name of benevolence and good will, the commisioners so much
of every manne took, as no man would with his goo will have given. As though
yt name of benevolence had signified, yt every man should pay, not what he of
him self of his good will lust to grant, but what yt King of his good will lust
to take, who never asked little, but every thing was haunsed above the measure,
amercyamentes turned into fines, fines into raunsomes, small trespaces into
misprision, misprision into treason, where of I think that no man looks
that we shall remember of examples by name, as though Burder were forgotten
that was for a word spoken, in have cruelly behedded by the misconstruing of
the laws of the realm for the princes pleasure, with no less honor to
Merkam chief Justice then (which lost his office rather then he would asse^t
to that judgment) to the dishonestie of those that other for fear or
flattery gave that judgment: what need I to speak of Thomas Cook
Aldremanne and maire of this noble cytee, who is of you either for negligence
that wotteth not, or so forget full that he reme^breth not, or so heard hearted
that he petieth not that worshipful man's loss? what speak I of loss, his
wounderfull spoil and undeserved distruccion, only because it happed them to
favor him whom the Prince favored not. We need not rehearse of these any mo
by name, since I doubt not yt here be many present that either in them selfs
or their nyghe friends, as well their goods as persons were greatly
endaungered other by fained quarrels or small matters aggreued with heinous
names, and also there was no crime so great of which there could lack a
pretexte. For since the king preventing ye time of his inheritance atteined the
croune by battle, it suffised in a rich manne for a pretext of treason, to
have been of kindred or aliaunce, nor of familiarite or longer of acquaintance
with any of those, yt were at any time the kings enemies, which was at one time
or another more then half ye realm. Thus were nether your goods, nether
lands, in suerte, and yet they brought your bodies in ieopardie, beside yt
comen adventure of open war, which albeit, yt it is ever yt well and occasion
of much mischief, yet is it never so mischeuous as where any people fall in
deuisio^, and at al distau^ce among them selves, and in no realm erthly so
deadly and so pestyle^t as when it happens amongst us. And among us never
continued so long disce^cion nor so many batailes in any season, nor so cruel
nor so deadly foughte^, as were in yt kings days yt dead is, god forgive it
his soul. In whose time and by whose occasion, what about yt getting of the
garland, keeping it, lesing and winning again, it has cost more English blood
then has the twice winning of France. In which inward war amongst our selves
has been so great effusion of y^ ancient noble blood of this realm, yt
scacely the half remains, to ye great enfebling of this nobleland, beside
many a good town ransaked and spoiled by the^ that have been going to yt feld
or retourning from thence, and peace after not much surer then war. So that no
time was there in the which rich men for their money, and great men for their
lands or some other, for some fear or for so^e displeasure were out of perell.
For whom mistrusted he yt mistrusted his own brother? Whom spared he yt killed
his own brother? Could not such manner of folk yt he most favored do
somewhat (we shall for his honor spare to speak) howbeit, this ye wot well
all, yt who so was best bare ever the least rule, and more suite in his days
was to Shores wife, a vile and abominable strompet then to all the lords in
England, except unto those that made her their Protectoure, which simple woman
was yet well named and honest till the King for his lust and sinful affeceyon
berefte her from her husband, a right honest man and substanciall amongst you.
And in that point which in good faith I am sorye to speak of, saving that it
is vain to keep in council yt thing that all men knows, the kings gredy
appetite was insaciable, and every where over all the realm intolerable. For
no womanne was there any where, young or old, poor or rich, whom he set
his iye upon, whom he any thing liked either for person or beauty, speech,
pace or countenance, but without any fear of God, or respect of his honor,
murmoure, or grudgyng of the world, he would importunately pursue his appe
tite and have her, to the great distruccion of many a good womanne, and great
doloure to their husbands and friends, which being honest people of them
selves, so much regarded the clennesse of their houses, the chastitee of their
wives and children, that them were lever to loose all yt they have beside,
then to have such a vilame done to them. And albeit that with this and other
importable dealing, ye realm was in every place anoyed, yet specially you the
citezens of this noble city, as for yt amongst you is most plenty of such
things as minister matter to such injuries, as for yt you were nerest hand,
since yt nere here about was his most common abidyng. And yet be ye people
whom he had as synguler a cause well and trewelye to intrete, as any part of
his realm, not only for that the Prince by this noble city, as of his
special chaumbre and renoumed city of this realm, much honorable fame
receaueth amongst all other nacyons, but also for that, you now without
your great cost and sondrye favors and ieopardyes in all his wars bare
ever your especyall favor to his part, which your kind minds borne to yt
house of York, since he has no thi^gworthely requited you, there is of yt house
now which by Goods grace shall make you full recompense, which thing to show
you, is the whole sum and effect of our errande. It shall not, I wot well
need, that I rehearsed unto you again that you all ready have heard of him that
can bet ter tell it, and of whom I am sure ye will better believe it (and reason
it is that it so be) I am not so proud to look therefore, that you should
receive my words of so great authorytee as the preachers of the word of God,
namely a man so connyng and so wise, that no man wotteth better what he should
do and say, and thereto so good and virtuous that he would not say the thing,
which he wist he should not say in the pulpyt, namely, in to the which no
honest manne comes to lie: which honorable preacher ye well remember,
substancyally declared to you at Poules cross on so^ day last past, the
right and title of the most excellent prince Rychard Duke of Glouceter now
protectoure of this his realm which he has un to the croune of the kingdom
of the same. For ye worshipful man made yt perfytely and groundly open unto
you. The children of king Edward the.iiii. were never laufully begotten, for
as much as the king (living his very wife dame Elizabeth Lucy) was never
laufully married to ye queen their mother, whose blood saving he set his
volupteous pleasure before his honor, was full un metely to be matched with his
(the mynglyng of which two bloodes together has been the effusio^ of a great
part of ye noble blod of this realm where by it may well be seen, that marriage
was not well made, of which there is so much myschiefe grown For lack of which
laweful copulatio^ and also of other things which ye said worshipful doctor,
rather signified the^ utterly explaned, and which thing shall not be spoke for
me, as the thing yt every man forbeareth to say yt he knows, in aduoiding ye
die spleasour yt my noble lord protector bearing as nature requires a filial
reverence to the duches his mother. For these causes before remembered I say yt
for lack of issue lawfully coming of ye late noble prince Richard duke of
york, to whose roial blod ye crowns of England and of France ar by high
aucthoritee of parliament entayled, ye right and title of the same is by just
course of enheritau^ce according to ye common law of this land, deuoluted and
come unto the most excellent prince ye lord protector, as to the very lawful
begotten soonne of the fore remembered noble duke of york, which thing well
considered and ye knightly prowess with many virtues which in his noble person
singulerly do habound: The nobles and commons of this realm, and specially of
yt north parts, not willi^g any bastard blood to have the rule of the la^d,
nor the abusions in the same before used and exercised any le^ger to continue,
have fully condiscended and utterly determined to make high peticio^ unto y^
puisaunt prince the lord protector, yt it may like his grace at our humble
request to take upon him the guiding and go uernau^ce of this realm, to ye
wealth and increase of ye same according to his very right and just title, which
thing I wot well he wylbe loath to take upon him as he whose wisdom well
perceueth, ye labor and study both of mind and body yt shall come there with to
hi^, whosoever shall occupy ye rome. I dare say he will if he take it (for I
warra^te you yt that room is no childs office) and yt the great wise man well
perceived when he said Ve regno cuius rex puer est, woe to that realm whose
king is a child wherefore, so much more cause have we to thank god yt this
noble personage, which is so righteously e^titled thereto is of so sad age, and
thereto of so great wisdom joined with so great experience, which albeit, he wylbe
loath to take upon hi^, yet shall he to our peticio^ in ye behalf ye more
graciously incline, if ye the worshipful cytezins of this cite being the chief
cite of the realm join with us the nobles in our said request, which for your
own weal we doubt not but yt ye will. And yet nevertheless, we pray you so
to do, whereby ye shall do great profit to all this his realm. Beside that, in
chosinge then so good a king, yt shall be to your self a special commodite to
whom his majesty shall ever after, bear so much the more tender favor, in how
much he shall perceive you the more prone and beneuolentlye minded toward his
eleccion, wherein dear friends, what mind you have, we require you playnelye to
show us? When ye duke had said and looked yt the people whom he hoped yt the
maire had framed before, should after this flatering p^posicion made have cried
king Richard, king Richard, all was still and mute and not one word answered to:
where with the duke was meruelously abashed and taking the Mayre nere to him with
other that were about him preuy to the matter said unto them softelye. What
means this that the people be so still? Sir quod the Mayre percase they
perceive you not well, ye shall we amend quod he if that will help, and therewith
somewhat louder rehearsed the same matter again, in other order and other words
so well and ordinately, and nevertheless so euydently and plain, with voice
gesture and countenance so comely and so convenient, that every man much
marueiled yt heard him, and thought that they never heard in their lives so
evil a tale so well told. But were it for wonder or for other, ye each looked
that other should speak first, not one word was there answered of all the
people that stood before, but all were as still as the midnight not so much as
rounyng among them, by which they might seem once to commen what was best to
do. When the Mayre saw this, he with other parteners of ye council, drew
about the duke and said yt the people had not been accustomed there to be
spoken to but by the recorder, which is the mouth of the city, and happly to
him they will answer. With that the recorder called Thomas Fize William a sad
man and an honest, which was but newly come to the office and never had spoken
to ye people before, and loath was with that matter to begin, notwithstanding,
thereunto commanded by the Mayre, made rehersall to the commons of that which
the Duke had twyse purposed his self but the recorder so tempered his tale,
that he showed every thing as the Dukes words were, and no part of his own,
but all this no change made in the people, which always after one stood as
they had been amassed. Whereupon the Duke rouned with the mayre and said, this
is a marueleous obstynate scylence, and therewith turned to the people again with
these words. Dear friends, we come to move you to that thing which
paraduenture we so greatly neded not, but that the lords of this realm and
commo^s of other parties might have sufficed saving such love we bear you,
and so much set by you that we would not gladly do with out you, that thing
in which to be parteners is your weal and honor which as to us seems you
se not or way not. Wherefore we require you to give us an au^swer one or other,
whether ye be minded as all the nobles of the realm be, to have this noble
prince now protectoure to be your king? And at these words the people
began to whisper among them selfs secretlye, that the voice was nether
loud nor base, but like a swarm of bees, till at the last at the nether end
of the halle a bushement of the dukes servants and one Nashfeelde and other
belongyng to the protectoure with some prentices and laddes that thrusted into
the halle amongst the preace, began suddenly at men's backs to cry, king
Rychard, king Rychard, and there threw up their cappes in token of joy, and
they that stood before cast their heddes maruelyng thereat, but nothing they
said. And when the duke and the mayre saw this manner they wisely turned it to
their purpose, and said it was a goodly cry and a ioifull to here every manne
with one voice and no ma^ne saying nay. Wherefore friends (quod the duke,) since
we perceive that it is all your whole minds to have this noble manne for your
king, whereof we shall make his grace effectual report yt we doubt not but yt
it shall redounde to your great wealth and co^modite. We therefore requier you
yt to morrow ye go with us and we with you to his noble grace to make humble
peticio^ and request to him in manner before remembered. And therewith the lords
came down and ye co^paignie dissolved and departed the more part all sad,
some with glad sembleaunce ye were not very merry, and some of them yt came
with the duke, not hable to dissemble their sorrow, were feign even at his
back to turn their face to the wall, while the doloure of their hearts brast
out of their y^es.

Then on the morrow the mayre and aldremen and chief commoners of ye city in
their best manner appareled, asse^blyng them together at Paul's, resorted to
Baynardes castle where ye protector lay, to which place also according to ye
apointement repaired ye duke of Buckynghm^ and diverse nobles with him, besides
many knights and ge^tlemen. And thereupon yt duke sent word to ye lord
protectoure of ye being there of a great honorable co^paignie to move a great
matter to his grace. Whereupon y^ protectoure made great difficulty to come
down to them, except he knew some part of their erra^d as though he doubted
and partly mistrusted the coming of such a noumbre to him so suddenly, without
any warning or knowledge, whether they came for good or harm The^ when ye duke
had showed this to ye mayre and other, that they might thereby se how little the
protectoure looked for this matter, they sent again by yt messenger such
loving message, and there with so humbly besought him to vouchesalue yt they
might resort to his presence to purpose their intent of which they would to
none other person disclose, at the last he came out of his chau^bre, and yet
not down to them, but in a galary over them with a bishop on every hand of
him, where they beneth might se him and speak to him, as though he would not
yet come nere them till he wist what they meant. And thereupon the duke of
Buckynghm^ first made humble peticio^ to him on ye behalf of them all, yt his
grace would pardone them and license them to purpose unto his grace the^tent
of their coming without his displeasure, without which perdone obtained, they
durst not be so bold to move him of yt matter. In which, albeit they meant
as much honor to his grace as wealth to al ye realm beside, yet were they
not sure how his grace would take it, whom they would in no wise offend. Then
ye protector, as he was very gentle of him self and also lo^ged sore
apparau^tly to know what they mea^t, gave him leave to purpose what him liked
trustyng for ye good mind yt he bare them all none of them any thing would
entend to hymward wherwt he thought to be grieved. When ye duke had this leave
and pardon to speak the^ wexed he bold to show him their intent and purpose,
with all ye causes mouyng them thereto as ye before have heard. And finally to
beseech his grace ye it would like him of his accustomed goodnes^e and zeal
unto ye realm now with his yie of pite to behold ye long continued distress
and decaie of yesame, and to set his gracious hand to redress and ame^deme^t
thereof by taking upon him ye croune and governance of ye realm according to
his right and title laufully disce^ded unto him, and to ye laud of God,
profit and surete of ye la^d and unto his grace so much ye more honor and
less pain, in that that never prince reigned upon any people that were so glad
to live under his obeysaunce as the people of this realm under his.

When the protectoure had heard the preposicion, he looked very strangely
thereat and made answer that albeit he knew partly the things by them
alleged to be true, yet such entiere love he bare to king Edward and his
children, and so much more regarded his honor in other realms about, then
the croune of any one, of which he was never desirous, so that he could not
find in his heart in this poincte to incline to their desire, for in all
other nations were ye truth not well known, it should paraduenture be thought
that it were his own ambicious mind and device to depose the prince and to
take him self ye croune, with which infamye he would in no wise have his
honor steyned for any croune, in which he had never perchance perceived
much more labor and pain then pleasure to him that so would use it, as he
that would not and were not worthy to have it. Notwithstandyg, he not only
perdoned them the mocion that they made him, but also thanked them for ye
love and hearty favor they bare him, praiyng them for his sake to bear the
same to ye prince under whom he was and would be content to live and with
his labor and cou^saill as far as it should like the king to use it, he
would do his uttermost deuoyre to set ye realm in good estate which was
all ready in the time of his protectourship (lauded be God,) well begone, in
that ye malice of such as were before the occasion of the contrary and of
new intended to be, were now partly by good policy, partly more by Gods
special prouydence, then man's prouysion repressed and put under.

Upon this answer given, the duke of Buckyngham by the protectoures license a
little rounded, as well with other noble men about him as with the mayre and
recorder of London. And after that (upon like perdon desired and opteyned) he
showed alowde unto the protector, for a fynall conclusion that the realm was
appointed that king Edwardes line should no longer reygne upon them, both
that they had so far gone that it was now no surety to retreat (as for
that they thought it for the weal universal to take that way, although they
had not yet begone it.) Wherefore if it would like his grace to take the croune
upon him, they would humbly beseech him thereunto, and if he would give them a
resolute answer to the contrary (which they would be loathe to here) then
must they seek and should not fail to find some other noble man that would.
These words much moved the protectoure, which as every manne of small
intelligence may wit would never have enclyned thereto, but when he saw there
was none other way but that he must take it, or else he and his both to go
from it, he said to the lords and commo^s, since it is we perceive well that
all the realm is so set (whereof we be very sorry) that they will not suffer in
any wise king Edwardes line to govern them, whom no man earthly can
govern against their own wylles: And we also perceive that no man is
there, to whom the croune can by so just title apperteyne as to our self, as
very right heir lawfully begotten of the body of our most dread and dear
father Rychard late duke of York, to which title is now joined your eleccion,
the nobles and commo^s of the realm, which we of all tytles possible take
most effectual, we be content and agree favorably to enclyne to your
peticion and request, and according to the same, here we take upon us the
royal estate of prehemynence and kingdom of the two noble realms, England
and France, the one from this day forward by us and our heirs to rule,
govern and defend, the other by Gods grace and your good help to get
again, subdewe and establyshe for ever in due obedience unto this realm of
England, thaduauncement whereof we never as^e of God longer to live then we
entende to procure and set forth. With this there was a great cry and
showte, criyng king Richard, and so the lords went up to the king, and so he
was after ye day called. But the people departed talkyng dyuersly of the
matter, every manne as his fantasy gave him, but much they merueled of this
manner of dealyng, that the matter was on both parts made so strange as
though never the one part communed with the other part thereof before, when
they wist that there was no man so dull that heard them, but he perceived well
enough that all the matter was made between them: Howbeit, some excused that
again, saying: all thing must be done in good order, and men must sometime
for ye manner sake not be acknowe^ what they know. For at the consecracion of a
bishop, every manne perceaueth by payment of his bulls that he ente^deth to
be one, yet when he is twice asked whyther he will be a bishop, he must say
nay, and at the third time take it upon him as compelled thereto by his own
will. And in a stage play, the people know right well that he that plays
the sowdane is per case a sowter, yet if one of acquayntaunce perchance of
little nurture should call him by his name while he stands in his majesty,
one of his tourmentours might fortune break his head for marryng ye play. And
so they said, these matters be kings games, as it were staige plays, and for
the most part played upon scaffoldes, in which poor men be but lookers on,
and they that wise be will meddle no ferther, for they ye step up with them
when they can not play their parts they disorder the play and do them
selves no good.

Rychard the third.
RYCHARD THE THIRD of that name, usurped the croune of England, and openly
took upon him to be king the.xix. day of June, in the year of our Lord, a
thousand four hundredth and. lxxxiii, and in the.xxv. year of Jews the xi.
then being French king, and with great solempnitee rode to Westmynster, and
there sat in the seat royal, and called before him the judges of the realm,
streyghtly commaundynge them to execute the law without favor or delay,
with many good exhortacions (of the which he followed not one) and then he
departed toward the abbaye and at the church door he was met with
procession, and by the abbot to him was delivered the scepter of saint Edward,
and so went and offered to sant Edwardes shryne, while ye monks sange Te deum
with a faint courage, and from the church he returned to the palayce, where
he lodged till the coronacion. And to be sure of all enemies (as he thought)
he sent for.v. thousand men of ye north against his coronacion, which came
up evil apparelled and worsse harneyssed, in rustie harneys, neither
defensable nor scoured to the sale, which mustered in fynesoury field, to the
great disdain of all the lokers on.

The fourth day of July he came to ye tower by water with his wife, and the
fyfte day he created Thomas Lord Haward, duke of Norffolke and sir Thomas
Haward his soonne he created Earl of Surrey, and Willyam lord Barkeley was
then created earl of Notyngham, and Fraunces lord Louell was then made Vicount
Louell and the kings chaumberlayne, and the lord Stanley was delivered out of
ward for fear of his son the lord Strange, which was then in Lancasshyre
gatheryng men (as men said) and the said lord was made Stuard of the
kings hou should, like wise the archbyshoppe of York was delivered, but
Morton bishop of Ely was delivered to the duke of Buckingham to keep in ward
which sent him to his manoure of Brecknoke in Wales, from whence he escaped to
king Richardes confusyon. The same night the king made.xvii. knights of the
bathe. The next day he rode through London with great pomp, and in especial
the duke of Buckingha^ was richely appareled and his horse trapped in blewe
velvet enbroudered with ye naues of carts burning of gold, which trapper was
borne by footeme^ from ye ground, with such asole^pne fassyon yt all men
much regarded it.

On ye morrow being the.vi. day of July ye king came toward his coronacio^ into
Westminster hal where his chapel and all the prelates mytred received him. And
so they in order of processyon passed forward. After ye procession followed
therle of Nor thumberla^d with a pointlesse sweard naked, and the lord Stanley
bare the Mace of ye constableship, The earl of Kent bare the second swerd on ye
right hand of the king naked. The lord Louell bare an other swerd on ye left
hand. Then followed ye duke of Suffolk with the Scepter, and therle of Lincoln
with ye balle and cross. After them followed the new Earl of. Surrey with the
swerd of estate in a rich skabard. On the right side of him went the duke of
Norffolke bearing ye croune, then followed king Richard in a Circot and robe of
purple velvet under a canable borne by the barons of yt five ports, going
between ye bishops of Bathe and Duresme. The duke of Buckingham with ye rod
of the high stuard of England bare the kings train. After him followed the
earl of Hunting don, bearing the queen's scepter, and the Vicount Li^^e, bearing
the rod with the dove. And the earl of Wilshere bare the queen's croune. Then
followed queen Anne daughter to Richard earl of War wike in robes like to the
king, between two bysshoppes, and a canabie over her head, borne by the Barons
of the ports. On her head a rich coronal set with stones and pearl. After her
followed the countess of Richmond heir to ye duke of Somerset, which bare up
ye queen's train. After followed the duchess of Suffolk and Norffolke with
cou^tesses baronesses, ladies, and many fair gentilweme^ in this order they
passed thorough the palaice and entered ye abbay at the west end, and so came to
their seats of estate. And after diverse so^ges sol^ply song they both
descended to the high altar and were shifted from their robes, and had diverse
places open from the middle upward, in which places they were anointed. Then
both the king and the queen changed them into cloth of gold and ascended to
their seats, where the cardinal of Cauntourburie and other bishops them
crouned according to ye custom of the realm, giving him ye scepter in the
left hand and the balle with the cross in the right hand, and the queen had ye
scepter in her right hand, and the rod with the dove in the left hand. On every
side of ye king stood a duke, and before him stood therle of Surrey with the
swerd in his hands. And on every side of the queen standing a bishop and a
lady kneling. The Cardinal song mass, and after paxe, the king and the queen
descended, and before the high altar they were both houseled with one host,
divided between the^ After mass finished, they both offered at saint Edwardes
shrine, and there the king left the croune of saint Edward, and put on his
own crown. And so in order as they came, they departed to westminster hal,
and so to their chambres for a ceaso^, during which time the duke of Norffolke
came into ye hal his horse traped to the ground in cloth of gold as high
mershall, and voided the hall.

About.iiii. of ye clock the king and queen entered the halle, and the king
sat in the middle, and the queen on the left hand of the table, and on every
side of her stood a countess holding a clothe of pleasaunce, when she list to
drink. And on ye right hand of the king sat the bishop of Cauntourbury, the
ladies sat all on one side in the middle of the hall. And at the table against
them sat the Chauncelloure and all the lords. At the table next the cupborde
sat the Maire of London. And at the table behind the lords, sat the Barons
of the ports And at the other bordes sat noble and worshypfull personages.
When all persons were set, the the duke of Norffolke, earl Mershal, the
earl of Surrey constale for that day, the lord Stanley lord Steward, Sir
willyam Hopton treasourer, and sir Thomas Percie comptroller came in and served
the king solemplye with one dishe of gold and another of silver. And the queen
all in gylte vessel, and the bishop all in silver. At the second course came
into yt hall, sir Robert Democke the kings champion, making a proclamacion,
that whosoever would say that king Richard was not lawfullye king, he would
fight with him at the vtteraunce, and threw down his gauntlet, and the^ all
the hall cried king Richard. And so he did in three parts of the halle, and
then one brought him a cup of wine covered, and when he had drunk he cast
out the drink, and departed with the cup After that the herauldes cried
alargesse thryse in the halle, and so went up to their staige. At the end of
diner, the Mayre of London served the king and queen with sweet wine, and had
of each of them a cup of gold with a cover of gold. And by that time that
all was done, it was darkenight. And so the king returned to his chaumbre, and
every man to his lodging. When this feast was thus fyneshed, the king sent
home all the lords into their countrees that would depart, except the lord
Stanley, whom he retained till he heard what his soonne the lord strange
went about And to such as went home, he gave streyghte charge and
commandment to see their countries well ordered, and yt no wrong nor
extorcion should be done to his subjects. And thus he taught other to execute
justice and equite, the contrary whereof he daily exercysed, he also with
great rewards given to the Northrenmenne which he sent for to his
coronation, sent them home to their country with great thanckes. Whereof
diverse of them, (as they all be of nature very gredye of authoryte, and
specially when they think to have any conforte or favor,) took on them so
hyghly and wroughte such mastreis, that ye king was feign to ride thither in
his first year, and to put some in execution, and stay the country, or else
no small myschechefe had ensued.

Now after this tryumphante coronation, there fell myschiefes thycke and
thick, as the thing evil gotten is never well kept, so through all the time
of his usurped reygne, never ceased their quel, murder, death and slaughter
till his own destruction ended it. But as he fynished with the best death and
most ryghtwyse, that is to say his own, so began he with the most
pyteous and wicked, I mean the lamentable murder of his innocente nephews,
the young king and his tender brother, whose death and fortune has
nevertheless so far come in questyon that some remained long in doubt
whether they were in his days destroyed or not. For yt Parkin Warbek by many
folks malice, and mo folks folly so long space abusing the world, was
as well with prnceis as with poor people reputed and taken for the younger of these
two. But for that also that all things were so covertly demeaned, one thing
prete^ted and another mente, that there was nothing so plain and openly
proved, but that yet for the common custom of close and covert dealyng, me^
had it ever inwardly suspect, as many well countrefet iewelles make the true
mistrusted. Howbeit concerning that opinion men may see the conueighaunce
thereof in the life of the noble prince king Henry the seventh, in the process
of Parkyn. But in the mean ceason, for this present matter I shall rehearse to
you the dolorous end of these two babes, not after every way that I have heard
but after that way that I have so heard by such men and such means as me
thinks it to be heard but it should be true.

King Rychard after his coranacion, taking How and after what manner the two
sons of king Edward were destroyed.
his way to Gloucestre, to visyte in his new honor the town, of which he
bare the name of old, devised as he road to fulfill that thing which he
before had intended. And forasmuch as his mind gave him that his nephews
living, men would not recon that he could have right to the realm, he
thought therefore without delay to ryd them, as though the kyllyng of his
kynsmen might end his cause, and make him kyndely king. Whereupon he sent John
Grene, whom he specially trusted, to sir Roberte Brakenburye constable of the
tower, with a lettre and credence also, that the same Sir Robert in any wise
should put the two children to death. This John Grene did his errand to Sir
Robert Brakenbury knelyng before our lady in the tower, who playnelye
au^swered that he would never put them to death to dye therefore. With the
which answer Grene returned, recountyng the same to king Richard at Warwike
yet on his iourneye, wherewith he took such displeasure and thought, yt the
same night he said to a secret page of his. Ah, whom shall a man trust?
they that I have brought up my self, they that I went would have most surely
served me, even those fail me, and at my commandment will do nothing for
me. Sir quod the page, there lies one in ye palet chaumbre without, that I
dare well say, to do your grace pleasure, the thing were right heard that
he would refuse, meaning this by James Tirell, which was a man of goodly
personage, and for the gifts of nature worthy to have served a much better
prince, if he had well served God, and by grace obtained to have as much
treweth and good will, as he had strength and will.

The manne had an high heart and sore longed upward, not risyng yet so fast
as he had hoped, being hyndred and kept under by sir Richard Ratcliffe and
sir willyam Catesbye, which longing for no^ more parteners of the Princes
favor, namely not for him, whose pride they knew would bear no pere, kept
him by secret driftes out of all secret trust, which thing this page had
well marked and known, wherefore, this occasion offered, of very special
frendshippe se his time to set him forward, and by such wise to do him
good, that all the enemies that he had (except the deuell) could never have
dooen him so much hurt and shame, for upon the pages words king Richard
aroose, for this communicacyon had he sytting on a drafte, a conuenyente carpet
for such a counsel, and came out into the palette chaumbre, where he did
find in bed the said James Tyrell and sir Thomas Tyrell of person like and
brethren of blood, but nothing of kynne in conditions. Then said ye king
merely to them, what syrs, be you in bed so sone? and called up James Tyrrell,
and brake to him secretly his mind in this myscheuous matter, in ye which he
found him nothing strange. Wherefore on the morrow he sent him to Brakenburye
with a lettre by the which he was commanded to deliver to the said James all
the keys of the tower for a night, to the end that he might there accomplish
the kings pleasure in such things as he there had given him in
commandment. After which lettre delivered and the keys received, James
appointed the next night ensuynge to destroy them, deuysyng before and
preparyng the means.

The prince as soon as the protectoure took upon him to be king, and left the
name of protectoure, was thereof advertised and showed, that he should not
reygne but his uncle should have the croune At which word the prince sore
abashed began to sighe and said: Alas I would mine uncle would let my
have me life although I lose my kingdom. Then he that told him the tale used
him with good words and put him in the best conforte that he could, but
forthwith he and his brother were both shut up, and all other removed from
them, one called black Will, and wyllyam slaughter only except, which were
set to serve them, and.iiii. other to see them sure. After which time, the
prince never tied his points nor any thing rought of him self, but with that
young babe his brother lyngered in thought and heueuysse, till these traiterous
death delivered them of that wretchedness.

For James Tirrell devised that they should be murdered in their beds, and
no blood shed, to thexecucio^ whereof he apoincted Miles Forest one of the
four that before kept them, a feloe flesh bred in murder before time: and
to him he joined one Ihon Dighton his own horskeper, a bygge broad square and
strong knave. Then all the other being removed from them, this Miles Forest
and Ihon Dighton about mydnight the children being in their beds, came into
the chaumbre and The murtherynge of king Edward his children.
suddenly lapped them up amongst the clothes and so bewrapped them and
entangled them, keeping down by force the fetherbed and pyllowes heard unto
their mouths, yt within awhile they smored and styfled them, and their
brethes faylyng they gave up to God their innocent souls into ye joys of
heaven, leauyng to the tourme^toures their bodies dedde in the bed, which
after ye wretches perceived, first by yt strugglyng, with ye panges of dea the,
and after long liyng still to be thoroughly dedde, they laid the bodies out
upon ye bed, and fetched James Tirrell to se them, which when he saw them
perfightly ded, he caused the murderers to bury them at the stayre foot
metely deep in the ground under a great heap of stones.

The^ rode James Tirrell in great have to king Rychard and showed him all the
manner of ye murder, who gave him great thanks, and as me^ne say, there made
him knight, but he allowed not their burial in so vile a corner, saying yt he
would have them buried in a better place, because they were a kings soonnes.
Lo the honorable courage of a king, for he would recompense a detestable
murder with a solemn obsequy. Whereupon a priest of sir Robert Brakenburyes
took them up and buried them in such a place secretly as by the occasion of
his death (which was very shortly after) which only knew it, the very
truth could never yet be very well and perfighly known For some say that
king Rychard caused yt priest to take them up and close them in lead and put
them in a coffine full of holes hoked at ye ends with.ii. hokes of iron, and
so to cast them into a place called ye Black depes at ye thamis mouth, so yt
they should never rise up nor be seen again. This was ye very truth unknown by
reason that ye said priest dyed so shortly and disclosed it never to any
person ye would utter it. And for a truth, when sir James Tirrell was in the
tower for treason committed to king Henry the seventh: both he and Dighton
were examined together of this point, and both they confessed the murder to
be dooen in the same manner as you have heard, whether ye bodies were removed
they both affirmed they never knew. And thus as I have learned of them yt
much knew and little cause had to lie, were these.ii. noble princes, these
innocent te^dre children, borne of ye most royal blood and brought up i^
great wealth, likely long to live, to reign and rule in yt realm, by
treyterous tira^ny taken and deprived of their estate, shortly shut up in
prison and privily slain and murderd by ye cruel ambicion of their unnatural
uncle and dispiteous tourme^tours which things on every part well po^dered,
God gave this world never a more notable exsample, either i^ what vnsurety
stands this worlds weal or what mischief works ye proud entreprise of an
high heart, or finally what wretched end ensues such dispiteous cruelty?
For first to begin with ye ministres, Miles Forest, at s. Martines le grau^d by
peace meal miserablye rotted away, Ihon Dighto^ lived at Caleys long after,
no less disdeined and hated then poynted at, and there dyed in great misery.
But sir James Tirrell was behedded at the tower hill for treason. And king
Richard himself was slain in ye feelde hacked and hewed of his enemies hands,
haried on a horsbacke naked being ded, his hear in dispite torn and tugged
like a curre dog. And the mischief yt he took with in less then three years, of
the mischief yt he did in three months be not comperable, and yet all ye mean
time spent in much trouble and pein outward, and much fear dread and anguish
with in. For I have heard by credible persons of such as were secret with his
chau^berers yt after this abominable deed dooe^ he never was quiet in his
mind, he never thought himself sure where he went abroad, his body preuely
feinted, his eyes wherled about, his hand ever on his dagger his countenance
and manner like always to stryke again, he took eiuill rest on nights, lay
long wakyng and musyng, forweried with care and watch, rather slo^bred the^
slept, troubled with fearful dreams sodeinly some time stert up, leapt out of
his bed and and looked about the chambres, so was his restless heart
contynually tossed and tou(...)bled with the tedious inpression and stormy
remembrance of his abhomynable murder and exreable tirannie.

And shortly after he was unquieted by a conspiracy, or rather a confederacy
between the duke of Buckynghm^ and many other gentlemen against him, as ye
shall here the next year. But the occasion why the duke and the king fell out,
is of diverse folk diverse wise pretended. This duke as you have heard
before, as soon as the duke of Gloucester after the death of king Edward was
come to York, and there had solemn funeral service dooen for king Edward,
sent to him a secret servant of his called Persall, with such messages as
you have heard before. And after ye duke of Buckyngham came with three hundred
horse to Northampton and still continued with him, as partener and chief
organe of all his devices till after his coronacion, they departed to all
semyng very friends at Gloucestre. From whence as soon as the duke came home,
he so highly turned from him and so highly conspired against him, that a ma^ne
would meruell whereof ye change grew in so short space. Some say this
occasyon was, yt a little before yt coronacion, ye duke required the king
emo^gest other thrnges to be restored to the Earl of Herffordes la^oes. And
forasmuch as the title which he claymed by inherytaunce, was somewhat
interlaced with the title of Lancaster, which house made a title to the
croune, and enjoyed the same three dyscentes, as all men knew, till the house
of York depryued the third king, which was Henry the sixte. King Rychard
somewhat mistrusted and conceived such an indignacion that he rejected the
dukes request, with many spiteful and minotary words, which so wounded the
dukes heart with hatred and mistrust, that he could never after endure to look
right on king Rychard, but ever feared his own life, so farrefoorth that when
the protectoure should ride to his coronacion, feigned himself sick, because
he would do him no honor. And the other taking it in evil part sent him
word to rise and ride or he would make him to be carried. Whereupon gorgeously
apparelled and sumpteously trapped with burning carte naues of gold
embrodered, he road before the king through London with an evil will and
woorsse heart. And yt notwithstanding, he roase ye day of the coronacion from
the feast, feignyng him self sick, which king Richard said was dooe^ in
hate and spite of him. And therefore men said that each of them ever after
lived co^tynually in such hatred and dystrust of other, that the duke looked
verelye to have been murdered at Gloucestre, from which he in fair manner
departed but surely such as were right secret with both, affirm all this to
be untrue, and other wise me^ne think it unlikely, the deep dyssymulyng nature
of both these men well considered. And what need in that grene world the
protectoure had of the duke, and in what perell the duke stood if he fell
once in suspycion of that tyraunte, that other ye protectoure would give the
duke occasyon of dyspleasure, or the duke the protectoure occasyon of mystrust.
And surely men think, that if king Rychard had any such opinion conceived
in him, he would never have suffered him to aduoyd his hands or escape his
power, but very true it is, that the duke of Buckyngham was an high minded
man, and evil could bear the glory of another, so that I have heard of some
that saw it yt he at such time that the croune was set upon the protectoures
hedde, his yie could never abide the sight thereof, but wryed his head another
way, but men said he was not well at ease, and that was both to king Richard
well known and well taken nor any demand of the dukes request discourteously
rejected, but gentelye deferred, but both he with great gifts and high
behestes in most loving and trusty manner departed from the king to
Gloucester. But sone after his coming home to Brecknocke, having there by king
Richardes commandment doctor Moorton bishop of Ely who before as you have
heard was taken at the council at the tower, waxed with him very famylyer,
whose only wisdom abused his pride to his own delyueraunce and the dukes
dystruccion. The bishop was a man of great natural wit, very well learned and
of honorable behaueoure, lackyng no wise ways to win favor. He was first
upon the part of king Henry, while yt part was in wealth, and neither left it
nor forsook it in no woo, but fled the realm with the queen and the prince.
And while king Edward had king Henry in prison, he never returned but to the
field at Barner. After which field lost and utterly subdued and al part
takynges extynguished, king Edward for his fast faith and wisdom, was not
only content to receive him but also wooed him to come and had him from
thensforth both in secret trust and special favor, whom he nothing
deceived. For he being after king Edwardes death first taken by the tyrant for
his truth to the king, found mean to set the duke in his top, and
joined gentlemen together in aid of the earl of Richemounde, which after was
named king Henrye the seventh. First deuysyng the marriage between the lady
Elizabeth daughter to king Edward the fourth, by the which, his faithful
and true service declared to both his masters at once, was, with infinite
benefit to ye realm, by the coniunccion of the bloddes of Lancastre and
York, whose funeral tytles had long inquyeted the realm. This manne
afterward escaped from the duke and (...)d the realm, and went to Rome, never
myndyng to meddle with the world, till king henry the seventh sent for him, and
after made him archebyshop of Cauntorbury and chauncelour of England and after
was made cardinal, and lived well to all men's judgments and dyed well. But
to return to ye former purpose, he by the long and often alternate proffe,
as well of prosperytee as adverse of fortune, had gotten by great experience the
verey mother and mastresse of wisdom, a deep insight in pollytike worldly
driftes, whereby perceiving now ye duke to common with him, fed him with fair
words and many pleasant praises, and perceauyng by the grefe of their
communicacions the dukes pride now and then to balke out a little brayde of
envy toward the glory of the king, and thereby feelynge him easy to fall
out if the matter were well handled, he craftily sought the ways to prycke
him forward, taking always the occasyon of his coming, and also keepynge
himself cloose within his bands, that he rather seemed to follow him then to
lead him. For when the duke began first to praise and boaste the king and
show how much profit the realm should take by his reign. Bishop Morton
answered, surely my lord, folly it were for me to lie, for I am sure if I
would swear the contrary ye would not once believe me, but if the world would
have begone as I would have wyshed, that king Henryes soonne had had the croune
and not king Edward, then would I have been his true and faithful subject,
but after that God had ordained him to lose it, and king Edward to reign, I
was never so mad with a dead manne to strive against the quycke, so was I
ever to king Edward a faithful and true chapeleyn, and glad would have
been that his children should have succeeded him, howbeit if the secret
judgment of God have otherwise provided, I purpose not to spurn against the
prycke, nor labor to set up that God pulls down. And as for the late
protectoure and now king, and with that word he left, saving that he said
that he had already meddled to much with the world, and would from that
day meddle with his book and bedes, and no ferther. Then longed the duke sore
to hear what he would have said, because he ended with the king, and there
so sodeynlye stopped, and exhorted him famylyerly, between them both to be
bold and to say whatsoever he thought, whereof he faythfullye promised there
should never come hurt, and paraduenture more good then he would were. And
that he him self intended to use his faithful secret aduyce and counsel,
which he said was the only cause for the which he procured of the king to
have him in his custodye, where he might recon him self at home, or else he
had been put in the hands of them with whom he should not have found
like favor. The bishop right humblye thanked him and said, in good faith
my lord, I love not much to talk of princes as of a thing not all out of
perell, although the word be without fault, but as it pleases the prince
to construe it. And ever I think on Isopes tale, that when the Lion had
proclaimed that on pain of death there should no horned beasts come into
the wood, one beast that had a bonche of flesh growing out of his hedde,
fled a great pace: ye Fox that saw him fly with all the haste, asked him
whether he fled? In faith quod he, I neither wot ne recke so I were once
hence, because of the proclamacyon made against horned beasts.

What fool quod the fox, the Lion never meant it by the, for that which thou
haste is no horn in thy hedde. No mary quod he, I wot that well enough, but
if he say it is a horn, where am I then? The duke laughed merely at the tale
and said, my lord I warraunte you, neither the Lion nor the bore shall pycke
any matter at any thing here spoken, for it shall never come nere their cares.
In good faith sir said the Bishop, if it did, the thing that I was about
to say taken as well as before God I mente, it could deserve but thank, and
yet taken as I wene it would, might happen to turn me to little good and you
to less.

Then longed the duke much more to were what it was, whereupon the bishop
said. In good faith my lord, as for the late protectoure, ^ith he is now king
in possessyon I purpose not to dispute his title, but for the welthe of this
realm, whereof his grace has now the governance, and whereof I my self am
a poor membre, I was about to wysh that to those good habilitees whereof he
has already right many, little nedyng my praise, yet might it have pleased
God for the better store to have given him some of such other excellent
virtues mete for the rule of the realm, as our Lord has planted in the
person of your grace, and there left of again. Of which words the duke
perceauyng that the bishop bare unto him his good heart and favor,
mystrusted not to enter more plain co^municacion with him, so far, that at
ye last the bishop declared him self to be one of them that would gladly
help that Richard who then usurped the croune might be deposed, if he had
known how it might conuenientely be brought to pass ye such a person as
had true title of inheritance unto the same, might be restored thereunto. Upon
this the said duke, knowing the bishop to be a man of prudence and
fidelitee opened to him all his whole heart and intent saying, my lord I have
devised ye way how the bloodde both of king Edward and of king Henry the
syxte, that is left, being coupled by marriage and affinitee may be restored
unto ye croune being by just and true title due unto them both, (for king
Richard he called not ye brother of king Edward the fourth, but his enemy and
mortal fooe). The way that the Duke had devised was this, that they should
with all speed and celerytee find means to send for Henry earl of Rich
mount (whom the rumoure went immediatlye upon knowledge of king Edwardes
death to have been delivered out of prysone with Fraunces Duke of Brytaine)
and the same Henry to help with all their power and strength, so that the
said Henry would first by his feithfull oath, promise that ymmediatly upon
obteigning the croune, he would mary and take to wife Elyzabeth the elder
daughter of Edward the fourth. The bishop of Ely right well allowed both the
deuyce and purpose of the duke, and also the manner and way how the matter
should be brought to effect, and found means that Reynold Breye seruau^r
with Margarete mother of the said Henry, then married to Thomas Stanley, came
to the duke in to Wales, and the dukes mind throughlye perceived and known,
with great speed returned to the said Margarete, aduertisyng the same of all
things which between the duke and him concerning as well the common weal of
the realm, as also the aduauncemente of her and her bloodde had been debated.

Now it came so to pass that the duke of Buckyngham and the lady Margaret
mother to the said Henrye, had been in communicacyon of the same matter
before, and that the said lady Margarete had devised the same mean and way
for the deposycion of king Richard and bringyng in of Henry her son, the
which the Duke now brake unto the bishop of Ely, whereupon the^e rested no
more, forasmuch as she perceived ye duke now willing to prosecute and further
the said device, but that she should find the means that this matter might
be broken unto Queen Elizabeth the wife of king Edwade the fourth then being
in the Sanctuarye. And hereupon she caused one Jews that was her physicyan in
his own name, and as though it came of him self to break this matter unto
the queen, saying, that if she would consent and agree thereunto, a mean might
be found how to restore again ye blood of king Edward and king Henrye the
syxte unto the croune, and to be aduenged of king Richard for the murder of
king Edwardes children, and then declared that there was beyond yt see Henry
Earl of Richemounte, which was of the blood of Henry the sixte, whom if she
would be content yt he marye Elizabeth her eldest daughter, there should of
his side be made right many friends, and she for her part might help in
like manner, whereby no doubt it should come to pass that he should possess
the croune by most rightful inheritance. Which matter when she heard it, it
liked her excedingly well, in so much as she counceled the said phisicyan to
break ye same unto his maistresse the lady Margaret and know her mind
therein, promisyng upon her word that she would make all the friends of king
Edward to take part with the said Henrye if he would be sworn that when he
came to the possessyon of the croune, he would immediately take in marriage
Elyzabeth her eldest daughter, or else if she lived not that time, that then
he would take Cicile her youngest daughter

Whereupon the said Jews returned unto the lady Margarete his maystresse
declarynge unto her the whole mind and intent of the queen So that the^ it was
shortly agreed between these two women, that with al speed this matter should be
set forward, in so much that the lady Margarete brake this matter unto
Reynolde Bray willing him to move and set forward the same with all such as he
should perceive either hable to do good or willing thereunto. Then had the
queen devised, that one Chrystopher (whom the foresaid Jews the Physicyan
had promoted into her service) should be sent into Brytayne to Henrye to
give him knowledge of their minds here, and that he should prepare and apoynt
him self redye and to come into Wales, where he should find aid and help
ynonghe ready to receive him.

But then shortly after yt came unto her knowledge that the Duke of Buckingham
had of himself before intended the same matter, whereupon she thought yt
should be mete to send some messenger of more reputacyon and credyte then was
this Chrystopher, and so kept him at home, and then sent Hughe Conewaye with
a great some of monye, willing him to declare unto Henrye all things, and
that he should have him to come and to land in Wales as is aforesaid. And
after him one Richard Guilforde out of Kente sent one Thomas Ramey with the
same message, the which two messengers came in manner both at one time into
Brytayn to the Earl Henrye, and declared unto him all their commyssio^s The
which message when Henry had perceived and thoroughly heard, it reioysed his
heart, and he gave thanks unto God fully purposyng with all conuenyente speed
to take his journey toward England, desiryng the aid and help of the duke
of Brytayne, with promise of thanckfull recompense when God should send him to
come to his right. The duke of Britayne notwithstanding that he had not long
after been required by Thomas Hutton purposely sent to him from king Richard in
message with monye efte sons to imprisone the said Henry earl of Richemou^t,
and there continually to keep and hold the same from coming into England,
yet with all gladness and favor inclined to the desire of Henry and aided
him as he might with men, monye, shypes and other necessaryes. But Henry
while he might accordynglye appoynte and furnyshe him self, remained in
Brytayne sendyng before the foresaid Hughe Coneway and Thomas Ramney, which
two were to him very true and faithful to bear tidings into England unto
his friends of his coming, to the end that they might prouydentlye order
all things as well for the commodyous receauynge of him at his coming, as
also foreseynge such dangers as might befalle, and aduoydinge such trappes
and snares as by Richard the third and his complyces might be set for him
and for all his other company that he should bring with him.

In the mean time, the friends of Henrye with all care, study, and dilygence
wroughte all things unto their purpose belonging. And though all this were
as secretlye wrought and conveyed as emonge so great a nombre was possible to
be, yet pryuye knowledge thereof came to the ears of king Rychard, who
although he were at the first hearing much abashed, yet thought best to
dyssemble the matter as though he had no knowledge thereof, while he might
secretly gather unto him power and strength, and by secret spyall emonge the
people get more perfyght knowledge of the whole matters and chief autoures and
contryuers of the same. And because he knew be chief and princypal of them,
as unto who^ his own conscience knew that he had given most just causes of
enemytee, he thought it necessary first of all to dyspatche the same duke out
of the way. Wherefore, unto the duke he addressed letters enfarced and
replenyshed with all humanytee, frendshippe, famylyaritee and sweetness of
words, wyllyng and desyryng the same to come unto him with all conuenyent
speed. And ferther gave in commandment to the messenger that carried the
letters that he should in his behalf make many high and gaye promyses unto ye
duke and by all gentle means persuade the same to come unto him. But ye duke
mystrustyng ye fair words and promyses so suddenly offered of him, of whose
wylye crafts and means he knew sondrye exsamples before practiced, desired ye
kings perdon, excusing him self that he was deseased and sick, and that he
might be asserteined ye if it possible were for him to come, he would not absent
him self from his grace. This excuse the king would not admit, but eftsoon
directed unto ye duke other letters of a more roughe sort, not without
manacynge and threatenynge unless he would according to his duty repayer
unto him at his calling whereunto the duke plainly made answer that he
would not come unto him whom he knew to be his enemy. And immedyatelye the
duke prepared him self to make war against him, and persuaded all his
complyces and partakers of his intent with all possible expedycion some in one
place and some in another to stir against king Richard. And by this means
in manner at one time and hour, Thomas Marquis of Dorcester raised an army
within the country of York, being him self late come forth of sa^ctuarye and
by the means and help of Thomas Rowell preserved and saved from perel of
death Also in Deuonshyre, Edward Courtenay with his brother Peter bishop of
Excetter raised in like manner an army, and in Kent Rychard Guyl ford
accompanied with certain other gentylmen caysed up the people as is a
foresaid, and all this was done in manner in one moment. But the king who had
in ye mean time gathered together great power and strength thynkyng yt not to
be best by pursuyng every one of his enemies to dysparkle his co^paygnie in
small flokes, determined to let pass all the others, and withal his whole
puisaunce to set upon the chief head, that is to say the Duke of Buckynghm^,
so taking his iourneye from London he went toward Salisbury to thentent that
he might set upon ye said duke in case he might have perfight knowledge that
ye same lay in any field embatailed. And now was the king within two days
journey of Salisbury when ye duke attempted to mete him, being accompaignied
with great strength of Welshmen, whom he had thereunto en forced and coherted,
more by lordly commandment then by lyberall wages and hyre, which thing in
deed was ye cause that they fell from him and forsook him. Wherefore being
suddenly forsaken of his men, he was of necessite constrained to flee in
which dooyng, as a man cast in sodeine, and therefore great fear, of this
the sodeine change of fortune, and by reason of the same fear, not knowing
where to become, nor where to hyde his head nor what in such case best to do,
he secretly conueighed him self into the house of Homffraye Banastar, in whom he
had conceived a sure hope and confidence to find faithful and trusty unto
him because the same had been and the^ was his servant, entendyng there to
remain in secret, until he might either reise a new army or else by some
means co^ueigh him self into Brytein to Henry earl of Rychemount. But as soon
as theothers which had attempted the same entrepryse against ye king had
knowledge that the duke was forsaken of his compaignie and fled and could not
be found, they being stryken with sodein fear, made every ma^ne for him self
such shift as he might, and being in utter despair of their health and life,
either got them to sa^ctuaryes or deserte places or else assaied to escape
over sea, and many of them in deed arrived sauely in Britain, among whom were
these whose names ensue. Peter Curteney bishop of Exceter with his brother
Edward earl of Devonshire, Thomas marquis of Dorcestre with his soonne Thomas
being a very young child, Iho^ Bourshere, Ihon Welshe, Edward Wooduyle a
stout manne of arms and brother to Elizabeth the queen, Robert Willoughby,
Gyles Dawbeneye, Thomas Harondell, Ihon Cheiny with his two brethren, Wyllyam
Berkeley, Wyllyam Brando^ with Thomas his brother, Rychard Edgecome, and all
these for the most part knights Also Ihon Halwell, Edward Poyntz an
excellent good capitain and Christopher Vrswicke, but Ihon Moorton bishop of
Ely at theself same time together with sondrye of the nobles and gentlemen
sailed into Flaundres.

But Richard the king, who was now come to Salisbury and had gotten perfight
knowledge that all these parties sought to sly the realm, with all dyligence
and have that might be, sent to all ye port tounes theraboute to make sure
steye that none of them might pass untaken, and made proclamacion yt
whosoever would bring him knowledge where the duke of Buckynghm were to be
had, should have for his reward, if he were a bo^deman, his frebome, and if he
were fre, his pardon and besides that, a thousand pound of money.

Furthermore because he understood by Thomas Hutton newely returned out of
Britein, of whom before is mentioned, that Fraunces duke of Brytain, would not
only hold Henry Earl of Rychmount in prisone for his sake, but also was
ready to help the same Henry with men, money and ships in all that he
might against him, he set diverse and sundry ships in places conuenyent by
all the seacostes to Brytain ward, that if Henry should come that way, he
might either be taken before his arrival or else might be kept from landyng
in any coaste of England. And furthermore in every coaste and corner of ye
realm, laid wondrefull wait and watch to take partly any other of his
enemies, and specially thesaid duke of Buckynghm^. Whereupon thesaid Homffrey
Banaster (were it for mede or for losyng his life and goods,) disclosed. him
unto the kings inquysy^ours, who ymediatly took him and forthwith all,
brought him to Salisbury where king Rychard was. The duke being dylygently
examined vttred without any manner refusal or styckyng all such things as he
knew, trustyng that for his plain confession he should have lybertee to speak
with the king, which he made most instau^t and humble peticion that he might
do. But as soon as he had confessed his offense toward king Rychard, he was
out of hand behedded. And this death ye duke received at the hands of king
Rychard whom he had before helped in his affayrs and purposes beyond all Gods
forbode.

While these things were in hand in England Henry Earl of Richmount made ready
his host and strength to the nombre of five thousand Brytones and fiftene
ships, ye day appointed of his departure being now come, which was ye
twelfe day of the month of Octobre in the year of our lord God a thousand
four hundred.lxxxiiii. and the second year of ye reign of king Richard and
having a fair wind, hoysed up the sails and setforwarde, but toward the
night came such a tempest that they were dispersed one from another some into
Britain and some into Normandy. But the ship in which Henry was with one other
ship; tossed all the night with the waves of the sea and tempest, when the
morning came, it waxed somewhat calm and fair weder, and they were come
toward the South part of England by a haven or port called Poole, where
thesaid Henry saw all the shores or banks set full of harnessedmen which
were souldyours appointed there to wait, by king Rychard as we have said
before, for the coming and landyng of the earl. While Henry there abode he gave
commandment, that no man should land before yt coming of the other ships.
And in the mean time that he waited for them, he sent a little bote with a
few in it a la^d to know what they were that stood on the shore, his fre^des
or enemies. To whom those souldyours being before taught what they should
say, answered that they were the friends of Henry and were appointed by ye
duke of Buckynghm^ there to abide his coming and to conducte him to those
castelles and holds where his tents, pauylyons and ar^^llary for the war
lay, and where remained for him a great power that intended now with all
speed to set upon king Rychard while he was now sle^ for fear and clean
without provision, and therefore besought him to come alande.

Henry suspectyng this to be but fraud, after that he saw none of his ships
apered, hoysed up the satles, having a marvelous good wind even appointed him
of God to deliver him from that great ieopardy, and sailed back again into Nor
mandy. And after his landyng there, he and his compaignie after their labors,
arested them for the space of.iii. days, determynyng to go from thence afoote
into Brytayne, and in the mean while sent messengers unto Charles the French
king the son of Jews that a little before departed, be sechyng him of
lybertee and license to pass thorough Normandy into Brytayn. The young king
Charles being sorry for his fortune, was not only ready and well pleased to
grant his passage, but also sent him money to help him forth in his
iourneye. But Henry before that he knew the kings mind (not doubtyng of his
great humanytee and gentleness) had sent away his ships toward Britayne and
had set him self forwards in his iourneye, but made no great haste till the
messengers returned, which great gentleness when he received from the king,
reioysed his heart and with a lustye stomach and good hope set forward into
Brytayne, there to take ferther counsel of his affairs.

And when he was in Brytayn, he received from his friends out of England
knowledge that the duke of Buckyngham was behedded, and that the Marquis of
Dorcestre with a great nombre of ye noble men of England had been there a
little before to seek him, and that they were now in Veneti a city in Brytayne.
The which things being known to the earl, he on the one part did greatly
lament the death and euel chance of his chief and princypall friend, but yet
on the other part he greatly reioysed in that he had so many and noble men
to take his part in the battayll. And therefore conceauynge a good hope and
opinion that his purpose should well frame and come to pass, determined with
him self with all expedycion to set forth ward, and thereupon went to a
place in Brytayn called Rhedon, and from thence sent to the Marquis with all
the other noble men that they should come unto him. Then when they heard that
Henrye was safe returned into Brytayne reioysed not a little, for they had
thought he had landed in England, and so fallen into the hands of king
Richard, and they made not a little haste till they were come unto him. The
which when they met, after greatloye and gladness as well of their part as of
his, they began to talk of their prepensed matters, and now was Christmasse
come, on the which day they altogether assembled in the church and there
swear faith and truth one to another. And Henry swear first, promysyng that
as soon as he should possess ye croune of England, that he would marye
Elyzabeth the daughter of Edward the.iiii. and after ward they swear feaultie
and homage unto him eue^ as though he had already been king, and so from that
time forth did take him, promysyng him that they would spend both their
lyfes and goods with him, and that Richard should no le^ger reign over them.
When this was dooen, Henry declared all these things to the duke of Britayne,
praiynge and desyryng him now of help, and that he would aid him with a
greater nombre of men, and also to lend him a friendly and honest sum of
money that he might now recover his right and enheritaunce of the croune of
England, unto yt which he was called and desired by all the lords and nobilitee
of the realm, and which (God wyllyng) he was most assured to possess, and
after his possession he would most faithfully restore the same again. The duke
promised him aid, upon the trust whereof, he began to make redye his ships
that they might with all expedicion be ready to sail that no time should be
lost. In the which time king Richard was again returned to London, and had
taken diverse of them yt were of this conspyracy, yt is to say George Brown,
Roger Clyfforde, Thomas Selenger, knights. Also Thomas Ram, Robert Clyfford
and diverse other whom he caused to be put to death.

After this he called a parliament wherein was deereed, that all those that were
fled out of the land should be reputed and taken as enemies to the realm,
and all their lands and goods to be forfayte and confiscate. And not content
with that preade which was no small thing, he caused also a great tax and some
of monye to be leuyed of the people. For ye large gifts and lyberalytee that
he first used to buy the favors and frendshippes of many, had now brought
him in need. But nothing was more like then yt Thomas Stanley should have been
reputed and taken for one of those enemies because of the woorkyng of Margarete
his wife which was mother unto Henry earl of Richemou^t the which was noted for
ye chief head and worker of this co^spyracy. But for as much as it was thought
that it was to small purpose that women could do: Thomas being nothing
fauty was dely^ed and commanded that he should not suffer Margarete his wife
to have any servants about her, neither yt she should not go abroad but be
shut up and yt from thence forth she should send no message neither to her
soonne nor to any of her other friends, whereby any hurt might be wrought
against the king, the which commandment was accomplyshed. And by the
authoryte of the same perliament, a peace was concluded with the Scotts,
which a little before had skyrmyshed with the borderers. Which thing brought to
pass, ye king supposed all conspiracye to be clean avoided, for as much as
the duke with other of his compaignie were put to death, and also certain other
bannyshed. Yet for all this, king Richard was daily vexed and troubled,
partelye mystrustynge his own strength, and partly fearyng the coming of
Henrye with his compaignye, so that he lived but in a miserable case. And
because that he would not so continue any longer, he determined with him self
to put away the cause of this his fear and business, either by pollecye or
else by strength. And after that he had thus purposed with him self, he
thought nothing better then to tempte the duke of Britayn yet once again either
with money, prayer or some other special reward because yt he had in keeping
the earl Henry, and most chiefly, because he knew yt it was only he yt might
deliver him from all his trouble by delyueryng or imprisoning the said Henry.
Wherefore incontmentlye he sent unto the duke certain Ambassadoures, the which
should promise unto him beside other great rewards that they brought with
them, to give him yearly all the revenues of all the lands of Henry and of
all the other lords there being with him, if he would after the receyte of
the ambassadoures put them in prysone. The Ambassadoures being departed and
come where the duke lay could not have communicacion with him, for as much as
by extreme sickness his wits were feeble and weak. Wherefore one Peter
Landose his Treasourer a man both of pregnaunte wit and of great
authoritee, took this matter in hand. For which cause he was afterward hated
of all the lords of Britain. With this Peter the English ambassadoures had
communicacion, and declaring to him the kings message desired him instantlye,
for as much as they knew that he might bring their purpose to pass that he
would grant unto king Richardes request, and he should have the yearly
revenues of all the lands of the said lords. Peter considering that he was
greatly hated of ye lords of his own nation, thought that if he might bring
to pass thoroughe king Richard to have all these great possessions and
yearly revenues, he should then be hable to match with them well enough and
not to care a rushe for them, whereupon he answered the ambassadoures that he
would do that Richard did desire, if he brake not promise with him. And this
did he not for any hatred that he bare unto Henry, for he hated him not, for
not long before he saved his life where the earl Henry was in great
^eoperdye. But such was the good fortune of England, that this craftye
compacte took no place, for while the letters and messengers ran between
Peter and king Kichard, John Bishop of Ely being then in Flaundres was
certifyed by a priest which came out of England whose name was Christopher
Vrswicke of all the whole circumstaunce of this deuyce and purpose. Whereupon
with all speed the said bishop caused the said priest the same day to carry
know ledge thereof into Britayn to Henry earl of Richemounte willing him with
all the other noble men to dyspatche them selves with all possible haste into
France, Henry was then in Veneti when he heard of this fraud, without
tariaunce sent Christopher unto Charles the French king desiring license that
Henry with the other noble men might safely come into France, the which thing
being sone obteigned, the messenger returned with speed to his lord and
Prince.

Then the earl Henry setting all his business in as good stay and order as
he might, talked little and made few a counsel hereof, and for the more
expedicyon hereof, he caused therle of Penbrucke secretly to cause all the
noble men to take their horses, dissembling to ride unto the duke of Bretain,
but when they came to the uttermost parts thereof, they should forsake the way
that led them toward the duke, and to make into France with all that ever
they might. Then they doing in every thing as they were bidde^ lost no time
but so sped them that shortly they obteygned and gate into the cou^tie of
Angeou. Henry then within.ii. days following, being then still at Veneti
took.iiii. or five of his servants with him, and feigned as though he
would have ryden thereby to visyte a friend of his, and forasmuch as there
were many Englishmenne left there in the town, no man suspected any thing,
but after that he had kept the right way for the space of five miles, he
forsook that and turned streyghte into a wood that was thereby, and took
upon him his servants apparel, and put his apparel upon his servant,
and so took but one of them with him, on whom he waited as though he had
been the servant and the other the master. And with all conuenyente and
spedy haste so set forth on their journey that no time was lost, and made
no more tariaunce by the way then only the baitynge of their horses, so that
shortly he recovered the coasts of Angeou where all his other company was.

But within four days after that the Earl was thus escaped. Peter received
from king Richard the confirmacion of the grant and promises made for the
betreiyng of Henry and the other nobles. Wherefore the said Peter sent out
after him horses and men with such expedicion and speed to have taken him,
that scacely the earl was entered France one hour but they were at his heles.
The English men then being above the noumbre of three hundredth at Veneti,
hearing that the Earl and all the nobles were fled so sodeinly and without
any of their knowledge, were astonyed and in manner despaired of their lives.

But it happened contrary to their exspectacyon for the duke of Britain taking
the matter so unkindly that Henry should be so used with him that for fear
he should be compelled to flee his land, was not a little vexed with Peter,
to whom (although that he was ignoraunte of the fraud and craft that had
been wrought by him) yet he laid the whole fault in him, and therefore called
unto him Edward Poyninges and Edward Wood vile, delivering unto them the
foresaid monye ye Henrye before had desired the Duke to lend him toward the
charge of his journey, and commanded them to convey and conducte all the
English men his servants unto him paying their expenses, and to deliver the
said some of monye un to the earl. When the earl saw his men come and
heard this comfortable news, he not a little reioysed, desiring the messengers
that returned to show unto the duke, that he trusted ere long time to show
him self not to be unthankful for this great kyndnesse that he now showed
unto him. And within few days after, the earl went unto Charles the French
king, to whom after he had rendered thanks for the great benefits and kind
nesse that he had received of him, the cause of his coming first declared,
then he besought him of his help and aid, which should be an immor tall
benefit to him and his lords, of whom generallye he was called unto the
kingdom, forasmuch as they so abhorred the tyranny of king Rychard. Charles
promised him help and bade him to be of good chere and to take no care, for he
would gladly declare unto him his benevolence. And the same time Charles
removed and took with him Henry and all the other noble men.

While Henry remained there, John Earl of Oxenford (of whom is before spoken)
which was put in prisone by Edward the fourth in the castle of Hammes with
also James Blounte Captain of that castle, and John Forskewe knight Porter
of the town of Caleies, came unto him. But James the capitain, because he
left his wife in ye castle, did furnyshe the same with a good garrison of men
before his departure.

Henry when he saw therle, was out of measure glad ye so noble a man and of
great experience in battayl, and so valiant and hardy a knight, whom he
thought to be most feithfull and sure, for somuche as he had in the time of
Edward ye fourth, continual battle with him in defending of Henry the syxte,
thought that now he was so well appointed that he could not desire to be
better, and therefore communicated unto him all his whole affairs, to be
ordered and ruled only by him. Not long after Charles the French king removed
again to Paris, whom Henry followed, and there again moved and besoughte the
king as he had most favorably and kindly entreteigned him all this time, not
only in words, but also in deeds yt it would likewise please him yet so much
further to extend his favor and benevolence unto him that now he would aid
and help him forward in his journey, yt not only he, but also all the lords
and nobilytee of England might justly have cause to knowlage and confess
that by the mean of his favor and goodness they were restored again to the
possessyon of their enherytaunces, which without him they could not well
bring to pass.

In the mean while, his fortune was such, ye many English men came
ouerdaylye out of England unto him, and many which then were in Paris,
among whom were diuerfe studente^s that fell unto his part both more and
less, and specially there was one, whose name was Richard Fox a Priest, being
a man of a synguler good wit and learning, whom Henry straight way
reteigned and committed all his secrets unto him and whom also afterward he
promoted to many high promocyons, and at the last he made him bishop of
Winchester.

Richard then hearing of all this conspiracye and of the great aid that
daily went over unto Henry, thought yet for all this, that if he might bring
to pass that Henry should not couple in marriage with the blood of king
Edward, that then he should do well enough with him and kept him from the
possessyon of the croune. Then devised he with him self all the ways and
means that might be how to bring this to pass. And first he thought it
to be best with fair words and large promesses to attempt the queen whose
favor obteygned, he doubted not but shortelye to find the means to have
both her daughters out of her hands into his own, and then rested nothing
but if he him self might find the means after ward to marye one of the
same daughters, whereby he thought he should make all sure and safe to the
utter disapoyntinge of Henrye. Whereupon he sent unto the Queen then being in
the Sanctuarye diverse and sondrye messengers that should excuse and pourge
him of his fact before dooen toward her, setting forth the matter with
plesaunte words and hye promyses both to her and also her son Thomas lord
Marquis of Dorset, of all things that could be desired. These messengers
being men of grauitee, handled the queen so e^^ftly that anon she began to
be alured and to harken unto them favorably, so that in conclusion she
promised to be obedient to the king in his request (forgettyng the injuries he
had dooen to her before, and on the other part not remembryng ye promise that
she made to Maigarete Henryes mother.) And first she delivered both her
daughters into the hands of king Rychard, then after she sent preuely for the
Lord Marquis her son being then at Paris with Henry (as ye have heard) wyllyng
him to forsake Henrye with whom he was, and spedely to return into England
for all things was perdoned and forgeuen, and she again in favor and
friendship of ye king, and it should be highly for his advancement and honor.

King Richard (when queen Elizabeth was thus brought into a fools paradyce)
after he had received al his brothers daughters from the sanctuary into his
palayce, thought there now remained nothing to be dooen, but only the castyng
away and destroiyng of his own wife, which thing he had wholly purposed and
decreed within him self. And there was nothing that feared him so much from
this most cruel and detestable murder as the losyng of the good opynion ye
he thought the people had conceived of him, for as ye have heard before, he
feigned him self to be a good man and thought the people had esteemed him even
so. Notwithstanding shortly after, his foresaid ungracious purpose, overcame
all this honest fear. And first of all, he absteyned from beddyng or lyyng with
her: and also found him self grieved with the barre^nesse of his wife, that she
was unfruitful and brought him forth no children, complamyng thereof very
grievously unto ye nobles of his realm and chieflye above other unto Thomas
Rotherame then archebishoppe of York (whom he had delivered a little before
out of prison) the which bishop did gather of this, that the queen should be
rid out of the way, ere it were long after (such experience had he of king
Richardes complexcio^ who had practiced many like things not long before) and
the same time also he made diverse of his secret friends preuy of the same his
conjecture.

After this, he caused a rumoure to run among the commen people (but he
would not have ye autoure known) yt the queen was dead, to thentent yt she
hearing this marvelous rumor, should take so greueous a conceyt that anon
after she should fall into some great disease, so that he would assay that
way, in case it should chance her afterward to be sick, dead or otherwise
murdered, that then ye people might impute her death unto ye thought she took
or else to ye sickness. But when the queen heard of so horrible a rumor of
her death spro^ge abroad among the commen people, she suspected the matter and
supposed the world to be at an end with her, and incontinently, she went to
the king with a lamentable countenance, and with weeping tears asked him,
whether she had dooen any thing whereby he might judge her worthy to suffer
death. The king made answer with a smilyng and dissimulyng countenance and
with flatteryng words, byddyng her to be of good comfort and to pluck up
her heart for there was no such thing toward her that he knew. But how so
ever it fortuned, either by sorrow or else by poysonyng, within few days
after, the queen was dedde and afterward was buried in the abbay of
Westminster. This is the same Anne, one of Rychard the earl of Warwikes
daughters which once was co^tracted to prince Edward king Henry the sixth his
soonne.

The king being thus delivered of his wife fantasied a pace lady Elizabeth his
nice, desiryng in any wise to mary with her: but because that all men, ye
and the maiden her self abhorred this unlawful desire, as a thing most
detestable, he determined with him self to make no great have in the matter,
chiefly for that he was in a pecke of troubles, fearyng least yt of the noble
men some would forsake him and run unto Henry his part, the other at the least would favor the secret conspiracy made again him, so that of his end
there was almoost no doubt. Also the more part of the commen people were in
so great dispeare, that many of them had rather to be accounted in the
noumbre of his enemies, then to put them selfs in ieopardy both of loss of
body and goods in taking of his part.

And amongst those noble men whom he feared, first was Thomas Standley and
Wyllyam his brother, Gylbert Talbote, and of other a great nou^bre, of whose
purpose* though king Rychard was ignorant, nevertheless he trusted not one of
them, and lest of all Thomas Standley, because he had married Henryesanother,
as it may well appear by this that fol owes. For when the said Thomas would
have departed from the court unto his own mansion for his recreacion (as he
said) but ye truth was, because he would be in a readynesse to receive
Henry and aid him at his coming into the realm. But the king did let him,
and would not suffer him to depart, until such time he had left in the
court behind him George Strange his soonne and heir for a pledge. And while
king Richard was thus wrapped in fear and care of ye tumulte that was to
come, lo, even then tidings came that Henrye was entered into the land, and
that the castle of Hammes was prepared to receive Henry, by the means of the
earl of Oxenforde which then was fled with James Blunte keeper of the castle
unto Henry.

Then king Rychard, thynkyng at the beginning to stey all this matter, sent
forth with all have ^he greater part that were then at Calyce to recover the
said castle again. Those that were in the castle, when they saw their
adversaries make toward them, spedely they armed them selfs to defense and
in all have sent messengers to Henry, desyryng him of aid. Henry forthwith sent
the earl of Oxenforde with a chosen sort of men to assist them, and at
their first coming they laid siege not far from the castle. And while king
Rychardes men turned back having an yie toward them: Thomas Brandon with
thirty valeaunt men of the otherside gate over a water in to the castle, to
strength them that were within. Then they that were within laid heard to their
charge that were without, on ye otherside, the earl of Oxenford so valiantly
assailed them of the backeside that they were glad to make proclamacio^ to
them that were within, that if they would be content to give over the castle,
they should have free liberte to depart with all that ever they had. The earl
of Oxenforde hearing this, which came only to save his friends from hurt,
and namely James Bluntes wife, was contented with this condition and departed
in saufgarde with all his friends returning back to Henry, which was at
Paris. After this, king Rychard was informed yt the French king was weary of
Henry and his compaignie, and would do nothing for him, whereby Henry was now
not hable in manner to help him self, so that it was not possible yt he should
prevail or goo forward in thenterprise that he thought to have taken in
hand against king Richard.

King Richard being brought thus into a false paradise, thought him self to
be out of all fear, and that there was no cause why he should being so sure,
ones to wake out of his sleep or trouble him self any further, and therefore
called back his nauye of ships that then was ready upon the sea, which was
fullye furnyshed to have scoured the seas. But yet for the more surety least
he should be suddenly oppressed, he gave commandment to the greatte men
dwelling by the sea side (and specially the Welshemen) to watch night and
day, least his adversaries should have any oportunitee to enter into the
land. As the fashyon is in time of war that those that dwell by the sees
side should make bekyns in the highest places there about, which might be
seen afar of, so that when it should chance their enemies to aryue toward
the land, by and by they should fire their bekyns and raise the countreye, to
thentent that quickly from place to place they might be ascerteyned of all the
whole matter and also to arm them selfs spedelye against their enemies.

And so to come to our purpose again, king Richard thorough the aforesaid
tidings, began to be more careless and rechelesse, as who say, he had no
power to withstand the desteny that honge over his hedde. Such is the
prouydent justice of God, that a man does lest know, provide and beware
when the vengeance of God is even at hand for his offenses. And to go forth,
at ye time when Henry the earl of Richemounte remained in France entretyng
and suyng for aid and help of the French men, many of the chief noble men,
which had the realm in governance (because of the young age of Charles the
king) fell somewhat at dissencion, of the which variaunce, Jews the prince of
Orlyaunce was the chief and hedde, which because he had married Iohanne the
kings sister looked to have been chief gouernoure of all the realm. By the
which means it came to pass, that no one man had the princypall governance
of the realm. And therefore Henry the earl was constraigned to sue unto all
the nobles seuerallye one after another desiring and praiynge them of aid
and help in his purpose, and thus the matter was prolonged. In the mean time
Thomas the Marquis of Dorcet (of whom we spoke before) was preuely sent for to
come home by his mother, partly mystrustynge that Henrye should not prevail,
and partly for the great and large promesses that king Richard had made to her
for him before. Which letters when the said Marquis had received, he beleuyng
all things that his mother wrote unto him, and also thynkyng that Henry should
never prevail, and that the Frenchemen did but mock and daily with him: he
suddenly in the night time conveyed him self out of Paris and with great speed
made toward Flanders. The which thing when ye earl and other of the
English lords heard of, they were sore astonned and amassed, and with all speed
purchased of Charles the king a license and commandment that the Marquis
might by steyed whersoeuer he were found with in the dominion of France chiefly
for that he was secret of their council and knew all there purpose. The
commandment was quickly obtained and posts made forth every way, emo^gest
whom one Humfrey Cheyncy plaiyng ye part of a good blooddehounde so truly,
smelled out and followed the trace, that by and by he found out and took the
Marquis: and so handled and persuaded him with gentle and good words, that
shortly after he was content to return.

Then Henry being delivered of this chance, thought it best to prolonge the
matter no farther least he should loose both the present oportunytee and also
weary his friends that looked for him in England. Wherefore he made haste and
set forewarde with a small army obtained of the French king, of whom he also
borrowed some money, and some of other of his friends, for the which he left
the Marquis and Ihon Burchere behind for a pledge. And so setting forward came
to Roan, and while he tarried there and prepared shippyng at ye haven of Seyne,
tidings came to him ye king: Richardes wife was dead, and purposed to mary
with the lady Elysabeth, king Edwardes eldest daughter being his nice, and that
he had married Cycile her sister to a man's son of the land far underneath
her degree. At the which thing, Henry was sore amassed and troubled, thynkyng
that by this means al his purpose was dashed, for that there was no other way
for him to come to the kingdom but only by the marriage of one of king Edwardes
daughters. And by this menes also, he feared least his friends in England
would shrynke from him for lack of an honest title. But after they had
consulted upon the matter, they thought it best to carry a little to prove if
they might get more help and make mo friends. And among all other, they
thought it best to adioyne the lord Harbarte unto them, which was a man of
great power in Wales and yt should be brought to pass by this means, for that
the lord Harbarte had a sister maryable, who^ Henry would be content to mary,
if he would take their part. And to bring all this matter to pass messengers
were sent to Henry the earl of Northhumberlande, which had married the other
sister so that he should bring this matter about, but the ways were so beset
that the messengers could not come to him.

And in the mean season, came very good tidings from Ihon ap Morgan a
temporal lawyer, which signified unto them that sir Ryce ap Thomas a noble
and valiant man and Ihon Savage, favored his part earnestlye and also sir
Reynolde Braye had prepared a great sum of money to wage battayl on his part
and to help him, and therefore he would they should make have with all that
ever they could, and make toward Wales.

Then Henry spedely prepared him self because he would linger his friends no
longer. And after that he had made his prayer unto almightye God that he might
have good success in his journey, only with two thousand men and a few
ships in the calendes of August he sailed from the haven of Seyne, and the
seventh day after which was the.xxii. day of August, he aryued in Wales
about son set and la^ded at Wilforde haven, and in ye part which is called
the Dale, where he heard yt there was diverse laid in wait for him, to keep
him back. From thence, in the morning betymes he removed toward a town
called Harford with in te^ne mile of the Dale, where he was very joyfully
received. Here he had contrary tidings brought to that he heard in Normandy
before, that sir Ryce ap Thomas and Ihon Savage wythal that ever they could
make, were of king Richardes part.

Notwithstanding, they had such tidings sent them from the men of
Pembruche by a valiau^t gentleman, whose name was Arnold Butteler, that it
reioysed all their hearts, which was, that if all former offenses might be
remitted, they woold be in a redynesse to stick unto there own Gespare the
earl. Then Henryes company by this means being increased, departed from
Harforde five mile toward Cardygane, and then while he refreshed his men,
suddenly came a rumoure unto him that the lord Harbarte which dwelled at
Carmerdyne was nigh at hand with a great army of men. At the which rumoure
there was a great stir amongeste them, every manne took him self to his
weapon and made them selfs redye if need were, to fight, and a little while
they were all afraid, till such time as Henrye had sent out horsemen to try ye
truth, which when they came again, declared that all things was quiet and
that there was no such thing. But most of all master Gryffythes a very noble
man did conforte them and gladden their hearts, which although before he had
joined him self to the lord Harberte, at that very time he cleued to Henry
with such company as he had, although they were but few, and the same time
came Ihon ap Morga^ unto him. Henry went still forward and carried almost in no
place, because he would make suer work and the better speed, he invaded such
places before that they were armed against him, ye which places he bette down
with very little strength But afterward having knowlage by his spies ye the lord
Harbert and sir Ryce were in a redynes to give him battle he determined to set
upon them, and either to put them to flight orels to make them swear homage
and feaultee unto him, and to take them with him in his host against king
Richard. And because he would ascertayne his friends in England how all the
matter went forwad with him, he sent of his most trustye friends to lady
Margarete his mother, to Standely, to Talbot, and to other of his most especial
friends with certain commandments. The effect of the commandments were,
that he intended with the help of his friends to pass over Seuerne and by
Shrewesbury to make toward London. There fore he desired them with those that
were of their council in time and place convenient to mete him. So the
messaungers going forth with these commissyons: Henry went forward toward
Shrewesbury, and in the way met with sir Rice ap Thomas with a great noumber
of men which came unto him and was of his part. For two days before Henry
promised him to be chief ruler of all Wales as soon as he came to the croune
(if he would come unto him) which afterward he gave to him in deed. In the
mean time the messengers executing the message, diligently returned back
again with large rewards of them, to whom they were sent and came to Henry
the same day he entered into Shrewesburye and showed how all his friends were
in a redynesse to do the vttermoste that lay in them. This tidings put
Henry in such great hope, that he went forth with a courage and came to the
town of Newporte and there set up his tents upon a little hill, and there lay
all night. That night came to him sir Gylberte Talbot with above two hundredth
men.

After that they went forth to Stafforde and while they were there, Willyam
Standley came to him with a few after him, and when he had talked a little with
him, returned back again to his host which he had prepared. From thence he
went to Lichfelde, and that night lay without the town, but in ye morning
betime he entered into ye city and was received honorably. A day or.ii.
before, Thomas Standley was there with five. M. men armed, which when he knew
of Henry's coming, forthwith went before to a village called Aderstone there to
tarry till Henrye came. This he did to avoid suspicion, being afraid least
king Richard knowing his intent would have put his soonne to death, which as
I telled you before was left with him as a pledge for his father. But king
Rychard in the mean time, which then was at Nottingham, hearing that Henry
with a few more of banished men was entered into Wales, so lightly regarded the
matter, that he thought it was not much to be paste upon, for that he came
in with so few in noumbre, and that the lord Harbart and sir Rice, which were
rulers of all Wales, would other kill him, or else take him and bring him
alive. But afterward, when he remembered him self that oftentimes a small matter
in batel if it be not looked unto betymes, would make at the last a great
stir: he thought it best to remedy the matter betimes and commanded Henrye
the earl of Northumberlande with other of the nobles of the realm (whom he
thought had set more by him then by their own goods) to raise up an army and
to come to him with speed. Also he sent diverse messengers with letters to
Robert Brakenburye keeper of the Tower of London, commaundynge him to come unto
him in all haste, and to bring with him as fellows in battle, Thomas
Burschere, Walter Hungerforde and diverse other knights, whom he did not a
litell suspecte.

In this time it was showed that Henrye was come to Shrewisburye without any
hurt. With the which tidinges, ye king began to rage and made exclamacion
against them, that contrary to their faithes they had utterly deceived him,
and then he began to mistrust all men, and wiste not whom he might
trust, so that he thought it best to set forth him self against his
adversaries. And forthwith he sent out spies to know which way Henry did
take. They when they had dooen their diligence returned back again and showed
him how that Henry was come to Lichfeld. The which thing after he knew,
because now there was a great noumbre of souldyours come together, by and by
his men set in array, he commanded them forward, and to gooe four and
four together, and by that way which they kept they heard say, their
enemies were coming. The suspecte persons he put in the mids, he him
self with those he trusted came behind, with wings of horsemen running on
every side. And thus keeping their order, about son set came unto Leicestre.

When Henrye in the mean season had removed from Lichefelde unto the next
village called Tamworth, in the mydwaye he met with Walter Hungerforde,
Thomas Burschier and many other more which had promised to aid him before And
forbecause they perceived that they were susspected of Richard, and least they
should be brought violentlye unto him being their enemy they forsook Robert
Brakenbury their captain, and in the night time stale privily away and
went to Henry. Unto whom there chanced by the way that was worthy to be
marked, which was that Henry, although he was a man of noble courage and
also his company did dailye increase, yet for all that he stood in great
fear because he was uncertain of Thomas Standly which as I telled you
before, for the fear of putting his soonne to death, inclyned as yet unto no
part, and that the matter was not so sle^der of king Richard as report was
made to him of his friends.

Wherefore, as all afraid without a cause, he took only twenty men with
him, and steyed in his journey as a man in despair and half musing with
him self what was best to be dooen, and to aggrauate the matter, tidinges
was brought him that king Richard was coming nere to mete him with a great
and houge host of men. And while he thus lyngered for fear behind, his
host came before to the town of Tham worth, and because it was then dark
night, he lost both his company and also his way, then wandryng from place
to place, at last came to a little village.iii. mile from his host being full
of fear and lest he should fall into the danger of scoute watch he durst
not ask a questyon of any man, and partly for the fear that was present,
partly for that was to come he lay there that night and took this for a
sign or a pronosticacyon of some great plage that was to come, and of the
other part his host was no less abashed seeing his absence for that time.
When in the morning Henry came to them in the light of the day he excused ye
matter that he was not absent because he had lost his way but rather of
purpose, because he would commen with his preuy friends which would not be seen
in the day. After yt he went privily to Aderstone where Thomas Standley and
Willyam his brother did dwell. Here Henry, Thomas, and Willyam met and took
other by the hand with loving salutacions and were glad one of an other. Then
after, they counceled together of their metyng with king Richard whom they
perceived then not to be far from them. That day when it drew toward
night, in the evening Ihon Savage Brytanne Sanforde, Simon Digby with many
other had forsaken, king Richard and came to Henry with a great power of men,
which thing both with power and strength sat Henry alofte again. In the
mean season king Richard which purposed to go^ through thick and thin in
this matter came to Bosworthe alitell beyond Leicestre where the place of batell
should be (as a man would say the hye justice of God, which could not be
avoided hanging over his head, had called him to a place where he should suffer
worthy punyshemente for his detestable offenees) and there he set up his
tents and rested that night. Before he went to bed he made an oration to his
company with great vehemence, persuading and exhorting manfully to fight. And
afterward, as it was said he had a terrible dream in his sleep seming that he
saw horrible deuilles appear unto him and pulling and haling of him that he
could take no rest, which visyon filled him full of fear and also of heavy
care when he waked. For by and by after, being sore grieved in his mind, he did
prognosticate of this dream the evil luke and heavy chance that after came to
him, and he came not with so cherful a countenance unto his company as he was
wont to do. Then leest they should think that he had this heaviness for
the fear of his enemies he stood up and rehearsed unto them all his dream.
But I think that this was not a dream, but rather his conscience pricked with
the sharp stynge of his mischeuous offenses, which although they do not
prick always, yet most commonly they will byte most toward the latter day,
representyng unto us not only them self, but also the terryble punyshement
that is ordained for the same, as the syghte of the devil tearyng and haling
us, so that thereby (if we have grace) we may take an occasyon to be penitent,
or else for lack of the same dye in desperacyon. Now to come to my purpose
again, the next day after, king Richard having all things in a redynesse
went for the with the army out of his tents, and began to set his men in
array: first the forward set forth with a marvelous length both of horsemen
and also of footmen, a very terrible company to them yt should see them a
far of: and in the foremost part of all he ordered the bowmen as a strong
fortress for them that came after, and over this John ye duke of Norffolke
was hedde captain. After him followed the king with a mighty sort of men.
And in this while, Henry being departed from ye communicacion of his friends
without any tariyng pytched his tents nere his enemies and lay there all
night and commanded his men to be in a readiness, in the morninge he sent
also to Thomas Standley being then in the mids, betwixt both hosts that he
should come nere with his army. He sent him word again that he should set
his men in an order till he came, with the which answer otherwise then he had
thought or then the matter did require, he was not alitel abashed and stood as
it were in doubt. Yet for all yt he tarried not but with all speed set his
men in an order, ye forward was but slender, because his nou^ber was but
few, the archers were set in the foremost part Over them John the earl of
Oxford was hedde capitain. In the right wing he set Gilbert Talbot. In ye
left he put John Savage. And he him self with ye help of Thomas Standley
followed with one company of horsemen and a few footmen, for all his whole
company were sca^t five. M besides ye both Stanleys with their company, of the
which Willyam Standley had three. M. The kings army was double to all this. And
so when both armies were all in a readiness and began for to come within the
sight of other they bragged forth them selfs of both parties, looking only
for the sign and token of striking together. Betwyxte both hosts, there was
a marresse which Henrye left on his right hand purposelye as a defense of
his men, he found the means also to have the bright sun on his back, that
it might dasyll the eyes of his enemies.

But the King when the saw Henry pass over the marras commanded his men with
all violence to set upon them. They by and by with a sodein clamor let
arrows flee at them. On the other side they paid them home manfully again
with the same. But when they came nere together they laid on valeauntly with
swerdes. The earl of Oxforde fearing least in the mean time king Richardes
multitude should have compassed in his men which were but a few, he
commanded them by fyues they should not move forward paste ten foot the
which commandment known when they knitte them selfs together and seized
not in fyghting: their adversaries being afraid suspected some craft or guyle
and began to break of and many of the same part were not much grieved therewith,
because they were as glad ye king should be lost as saved, and therefore they
fought with less courage. Then the earl of Oxford with his men thick
together stroke on more freshlyer. The other of the other part did likwyse the
same. And while the first wards of the batell had fought so manfully. Richard
perceived by his spies Henry a far of with a few company of armed men.
Afterward, coming nere, Richard knew him by signs and tokens, then being
inflamed with anger, furiouslye stroke the horse with the spurs and ran out
of the one side of the host, and like a Lion ran at him. On the other side,
Henry perceiving him coming, was very desyrouse to mete him. Richard at the
first setting forth, killed diverse that stood, again he threw down Henry his
banner and Willyam Brandon the bearer also, he ran at Cheyny a man of great
might which came for to mete him, and with great violence ouerthrewe him to
the ground, and this he made himself away through them, for to come to
Henry. But Henry kept better tacke with him the^ his men would have thought,
which the^ was allmoste in despair of the victory. And eue^ at ye time lo
there came Wyllyam Stanley to aid them with.iii. M. me^ne, and even at the
very same time the residue of king Richardes men were put to flight The^
Richard fightyng alone in the midst of all his enemies was overthrown and
slain. In ye mean time therle of Oxe^ford in ye foreward after he had fought
ma^fully a little while, put ye residue to flight of who^ he slew a great
no^bre. But agreate nombre more which followed Richard more for fear then for
love, held their hands from fightyng and went away without hurt, for that
they looked not for his safeguard, but rather for his destruction. There were
slain at this conflicte not many more then one thousand, of the which these
were noble men. Ihon duke of Norffolke Walter Feris Robert Brachyngbury,
Richard Radcliffe and many other more. And within two days after Wyllyam
Catisby lawyer with certain other of his fellows was put to death at Leicestre,
and emonges those ye ran away, was Fraunces Louell, Humfray Stafford, with
Thomas his brother and other more that ran into sanctuary at Colchestre in
Essex. There was of the captives a great nombre, because that when Richard was
slain, every manne cast down his wepon and yield himself to Henry, of ye which
ye more part would have dooen so at the beginning, if it had not been for
fear of king Richardes spies, which the^ wa^dered in every place. And
amongst these the nobles, were the earl of Northumberlande the earl of Surrey
of the which therle of Surrey was put in prisone, this other as a friend was
received in to favor. Henry at that field lost not above an hundred men,
amongst whom the chief was Wyllyam Bra^done which bare Henryes ba^ner. This
battaill was fought in the.xxii. day of the month of Auguste, inthe year of
our Lord a thousand cccc.lxxxvi. ye conflict endured more then.ii. hours
Richard might (as the fame went) asaued himself if he would afled away, for
those that were about him when they saw his men from the beginning fight but
faintly and that some were run away unto the other part, suspected treason
and willed him to fly and when the matter was manifest that all hope of victory
was past, they brought him a swi^te horse. He puttyng a sied all hope and trust
that was in fleiyng, made (as it was said) this answer that this day he
would have either an end of battaill orels of his life, such was his great
audacite and manfulnes which because he did se certainly that in this day he
should ob(...) the kingdom quietely all days of his life or ^^s lose both
for ever he entered in emo^gest them as it was declared before intendyng
utterly either to lose all orels to win all. And so the wretehe dyed having
the end that all such were wont to have which in the stead of law,
honesty, and all godlynes follow their own appetite vyllanye and all
wyckednes. And plainly this is an example which cannot be expressed, to fear
them which will not suffer one hour to be otherwise spent then in cruelte
mischief and all deuillishe fasshio^s Henry when he had thus obtained the
victory he fell down on his knees and with many prayers and thanks, referred
all to the goodness of God. The^ after he stood up being wounderfully
replenished with joy, and went up upon alitle hill and there gave two great
comendacions to his souldyours commaundyng them that were hurt to be heled
and the deed to be buried, afterward he gave immortal thanks to his noble
capitains promisyng them that he would never forgette their benifite The
multitude in ye mean time with one voice and one mind proclaimed him king.
When Thomas Stanley saw ye, he took king Richardes croune which was found
amongst the spoil, and by and by put it upon his head as though he had been
then created king by the eleccion of the people as it was wont to be in the
old time, and this was the first token of his felicite. After this, king Henry
with his compaignie and carriage went to Lecestre toward night to bed, whether
after he had refresshed his compaignie well for the space of two days, that
they might the better goo toward London: King Richardes body was brought naked
over a horse back, the head and the arms ha^gyng on the one side and the
legs on ye other, and carried in to the gray freres of Lecester, and surely it
was but a miserable sight to look upon, yet it was good enough co^sideryng his
wretched leuyng, and there without any solempnite was buried two days after.
He raygned two years two months and one day, he was but of a small stature
having but a deformed body, ye one shoulder was higher then the other, he had
a short face and a cruel look which did betoken malice, guyle and deceit.
And while he did muse upon any thing standing, he would byte his under lip
continually, whereby a ma^ne might perceive his cruel nature within his
wreched body striued and chaffed alwaie with in him self, also the dagger
which he bare about him, he would always be choppyng of it in and out he
had a sharp and pregnaunt wit, subtle and to dessimule and feign very mete.
He had also a proud and cruel mind, which never went from him to the hour
of his death, which he had rather suffer by ye cruel sword, though all his
compaignie did forsake him then by shameful flight he would favor his life,
which after might fortune by sickness or other condynge ponysheme^t shortly
to perish.

Henry the seventh.
HENRY THE SEVENTH OF that name king of England.

First after yt he had obtained his kingdom and heritage by force of arms,
intended to stablishe all things and extynguish sedicio^, and before he
departed from Leycester, caused ser Robert Willoughby knight to bring ye young
earl of Warwike ye duke of Clare^ces soo^ne before his presence (whom king
Richard to that time had kept at Sheryhutto^ in York shire) fearyng much,
least that by this young earl some occasion might be taken of renuyng
battaill, which intended nothing more then to live in peace and quietness. And
so this earl was brought to him, and at his commandment conueighed to London,
and there cast in hold,

In the self same place also of York shire, was Lady Elizabeth eldest
daughter to the fornamed king Edward, whom king Rychard her uncle would have
married sore against the mind and consent of ye same lady. In so much also
that the people were sore against it, and accounted it not only as a reproach
and infamy to the king himself, but also to his counsel ye did agree to his
naughty purpose. Albeit, God of his infinite mercy preserved the lady, which
short time after was brought to London to her mother. In this time the king
drawing nighe to London, was there accepted of his citezens streyghte after his
coming most roially, and of all parties saluted after the most loving
fassion ye they could deuyse giving thanks to God with solemn procession for
yt he had sent them a king to govern ye realm which before was ruled by a
cruel and hateful Tira^t

After this gratulacion and thank esgeuing, ye king at a day appointed
assembled his counsel, to the end he might marie the Lady Elizabeth,
through the which marriage as well ye nobilitee as co^munes of ye realm were
brought in good hope yt all things should be redressed, and an end made of
all sedicion and strife for ever. And at this Parliament holden and kept at
Westmi^ster he was created king the day of October, in the year of our Lord
a. M. four C.lxxxvi. Which kingdom he enjoyed as of god enointed, for as
men doo^ report about seven hundredth four score and seuentene years paste
Cadwallader last King of England prophesied that his progenye should bear
rule and dominion again. So that by this means, men did fully persuade them
selfs that he was p^^estinate to it. And ye rather also they did believe it
because that king Henry ye sixte did foresaye the same, and in like manner
prophecy of him. Therefore he being thus proclaimed as true enheretour of the
crown, and at the same Parliament created king, did first cause to be
published, that all such should be pardoned that would submit them selfs to
his grace, and as faithful people do to him due allegiaunce, other that
absented them selfs, to be taken as rebels and traitors. After the which
proclamacion hard, many ye were in hold and sanctuaries, came for pardon and
safety of life to him, which persons so submitting them selfs ^er pardoned
and enhaunced to honor, every man after his own deserte as the king and his
counsel thought best. And first considering his chief friends and nyghe
kinsemen, made Gaspar his uncle Duke of Bedforde, sir Thomas Stanley knight
Earl of Derby, Giles Dabeney, sir Robert Willoughby, and Robert Brook Lords,
and Edward his eldest son duke of (...), (...) wholly to all that king Richard
had deprived him of at what time he with other were banished. Also acts, and
statutes stablished and confirmed by Richard as thought expedient and very
necessary at that time for the public weal, were by him aboundoned and
infringed every one. After these things done he provided with all scelerite and
expedicion to redeem the Lord Marquis Dorcet, and John Burscher, whom he had
left at Paris as a pledge and suertie for certain money yt he had borrowed
there and John, bishop of Ely for like det out of Flaunders. Furthermore, to
the end ye his realm might be in a better stay, he commanded that if any
man had injury showed at any time, the same person should put up his matter
to him, of whom he should both have and find redress. And for these matters
and causes to be heard, he made of his council the Earl of Oxford, the duke
of Bedford therle of Derby, the Lord Strange we his son and william the
lord his brother chief of the privy chaumber, the lord Broke chief steward,
and lord graund master of his house Renould Braye John Morton Bishop of Ely,
Richard Fox John Dinham, whom after he made treasourer of England, Giles
Dabeney, Richard Gildeforde, Lord Cheiny, Richard Tunstall, Richard
Edgecombe, Thomas Louell, Edward Poninges, with other wise men, as Richard ap
Thomas a Welsheman, as well circumspecte as wise, Morgane Kidnel, Lord Gray
Marquis Dorcet, Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewesbury, John Risley, lord Thomas
Earl of Ormonde, an Irisheman, Henry Warney, William Say, William Ody, Gilbert
Talbot, Willyam Vdall, Thomas Troys, Richard Naufaute Captain of Calis,
Roberte Point, James Hubert, Charles Somerset, Thomas Hawarde Earl of Surrey,
a man of wisdom, grauitee, and constantnesse most commendable, The earl of
Essex descending of an high and noble parentage, Lord William Blounte, John
Burscher, John Fineux, Peter Edgecombe, Hew Convey, Thomas Terell, Sir Henry
Wiat, Robert Throgmorton, Thomas Brandon, sir John Winkefelde, sir Edmond
Dudley, Edward Belknape, Richard Hemson. Also bishops, Henry Deney bishop
of Cauntourbury, Oliver king bishop of Bathe and Wells, William Barons
bishop of London that dyed shortly after he was bishop. Also William that
succeeded next after, Henry Archebyshop of Cauntourbury, Richard of London,
and Richard Bishop of Norwiche.

When the king had taken these men to be of his council for ye wealth of
his realm, he married Lady Elizabeth daughter to king Edward as he had
promised for the which, he had the hearts of many men. So that afterward he
had no need to fear the assaults of any persons or ye coniuracions of
rebels. Nevertheless, considering the chance he had before, and the
falshode ye is in many men from their youth, made yomen of the guard for his
body, the which he first of all English Kings caused to be, and as it is
thought he did take it of the French king. Also The guard first ordained by
ki^ge Henry the vii.
after this he caused a parliament to be had, where in was made and decreed
certain laws, acts and statutes for the wealth of his realm.

In this year a new sickness did reign, and is so sore and painful, as
never was suffered before, the which was called the burning sweat. The
sweating sickness.
And this was so intolerable, that men could not keep their beds, but as
lunatike persons and out of their wits ran about naked, so that none
almost escaped ye were infected therewith. At ye length after the great death of
many a thousand men they learned a present remedy for the same disease,
that is, if he were sick of that sweat in the day, that he should
streyghtelye down with his clothes and vestures, if in the night, yt he
should not rise for the space of.xxiiii. hours, and eat no meat at all, if
he could forbear, and drink as little as he might.

This disease reigned throughout all England whereof also ensued a plague, as a
token, and as ye people judged, a plain argument that king Henrye should
never be out of fear and dread of some mischaunce, seeing that he was in
such great vexacyon at the sedicyous tumulte that was risen all the claimynge
of the crown.

When all things were apeaced in London, and ordered after his own mind, he
rode Northward in progress to pacify all his realm, and especially those
parts where the first commocion was, and where also were privy and cloked
friends of his adversaries. But because it was nigh Easter, he took his way
to Lincoln, and there tariyng was certified that the Lord Louell and Humfre
Stafforde were gone from the sanctuary in Colchester, but to what place or
whether, no man could tell, which message the king little regardyng, went
forth as he appointed to York, and when he came The co^mocion made by the lord
Louell and the lord Stafforde.
there, it was showed him that the lord Louell was at hand with a strong power
of men, and would invade the city, also that the said lord Stafforde and
his brother were in Glocestre, and there had made an insurreccion, and set men
on every part to defend the gates and walls of the city.

At the first hearing of this, the king was but little moved, but after that he
was certified by the letters of his friends that it was true, he was in great
fear, for that he had neither an army prepared, nor harnyes for them, but
because the mattier required haste, least that by long taryeng, his adversaries
power might be increased and multiplied, he commanded the Duke of Bedforde to
mete them with three thousand me^ne, which were harnysed but barely, for
their breast plates were for the most part lether. And he him self in yt
mean time would gather up an host, where he might in every place. The duke
having his me^ nigh to ye te^tes of his enemies, co^sulted with certain of his
co^paignie, by what way he might train them to peace, without bloodde
shedyng. After the which deliberation and aduisement had, it was decreed that
certain should proclaim openly, yt all they should have their pardonne, that
would leave battle. The which proclamation auayled much,, for the Lord
Louell, either for some fear, or mystrust that he had in his people,, or
feryng him self of his own behalf, fled pryuely in a night from his
compaignie, to Lankeshire and there remained a space with sir Thomas Broghton
knight. And when his army had knowledge thereof, they also submittyng them
selfs all to the Duke, asked pardonne for their heinous offense. The Lord
Stafforde also hearing this, was in a great agony, and for fear did take
sanctuarye at Colname.ii. miles from Abindon. But because that sanetuary was
not a defense for traitors, he was taken from that place and behedded, and his
brother was perdoned because he was thought not to have done it of his own
will, but through the counsel and persuasion of his brother.

After this business was assuaged and York shyre set in peace and quietness,
the King went to London, and shortelye after that to Wynchester, where the
Queen his wife, was delivered of a Prince called Arthure, and from Wynchester
he returned again to London.

Sone after it chaunsed that one sir Richard Symond priest, borne by nature to
be a traitor and sedicious person, and yet well learned, had a child called
Lambert Symenel to be his scholar, by whom he invented this craft and
disceat that he would make the child king of England and him self
archebyshoppe, or some high potestate in the realm, for he knew verily, that
many men supposed king Edwardes children to be fled into some strange
place, and that Edward the Earl of Warwyke, son to the Duke of Clarence
either was or should be put to death shortly And to the end he might ye better
bring his purpose about, he taught the child both learning and good manners,
and also to order him self, as one linially descendyng from a high progeny.
Sone after the rumoure was, that the young Earl of Warwyke was dead in
prysonne. And when the priest heard of this, he intendyng thereby to bring his
matters about, changed the chyldes name and called him Edward, after the
young Earl of Warwyke, the which were boothe of one age, and then sailed
into Irelande, there opening his mind to certain of the nobilitee, whom he
knew to bear but little favor to King Henry, where he was promised aid of
the Lord Gerardine chancellor of all that country, and all that he could
do. Which Lord, first calling all his friends and lovers together, desired
their help in restoryng the young Earl to his heritage. And did send certain
into England to desire them that were king Rychardes friends to continue in
their love and faythfulnes toward him, and help his nephiewes child to his
right.

And that his power might be the stronger to overcome his enemies, he desired
Lady Margarete sister to king Edward, and wife to the Duke of Burgondy, to
further his purpose with her help, which lady being then in Flaunders,
promised him by the messaungers, that she would not only maintain his entente
with large money and substance, but with all the labor and peynes that she
might occasion other, to be of ye same conspiracy.

When king Henrye was certified of this, he was sore grieved, that by the
means of such a myscreaunte person, so great sedicion should be,
nevertheless, the king consideringe that it should be to the destruction of
many men, if that he should fight with his enemies in open feelde, called
his counsel together at the Charter house beside Rychemounde, and there
consulted to pacify this matter without any more dysturbaunce. Where first
it was decreed, that all they should be pardoned for their offenses and
treasons latelye committed, which has from that time, borne them selfs
vpryght toward their king, least that sir Thomas Broghton which kept the
Lord Louell from the king a great time, with other despeyring of their pardon
should have made some sudden insurrection against him. Further more, that men
should not thyncke, but that the Duke of Clarence was in England, it was
appointed that he should show him self abroad, whereby the opynion that he
was in Ireland might be frustrate, and accounted as a lie. Also it was
further determined that the Lady Elysabeth wife to king Edward the.iiii.
should lose al her lands, because she had submitted her self and her
daughters wholye to the hands of king Rychard, contrary to the promise made
to the Lords and nobles, which at her desire left all that they had in
England and fled to king Henrye in Brytayne, and there did swear him to
marye her eldeste daughter, as she wylled them to do.

But her purpose did not frame as (God would) This queen builded a Collage in
Cambrydge, and gave lands to the maynteyning of the same which at this hour
is called ye queen's Collage.

When this order and determynacion of the king was ended, he went to London,
and the next Sunday following he caused the young Earl to be brought out
of the Tower through the streets to Poules. And there to show him self to
every body, and task with the chief and noble men that were thought to
have conspyred against king Henrye, for this cause that they might perceive
the Iryshe men to move battle unadvisedly, and cause strife upon no just
occasion, howebeit, all this nothing auayled, for the Earl of Lyncolne, the
Duke of Suffolkes soonne, and nephewe to king Edward, could not suffer king
Henrye thus to reygne, but as a traytoure sailed into Flanders to the Lady
Margarete, taking with him Sir Thomas Broghton, with certain other, Where
also, the Lord Louell landed two or three days before.

And there they being all together, determined that the Earl of Lyncolne and
the Lord Louell should goo to Irelande, and there attend upon the
counterfeyte Earl, and bring him to England with all the power they might
against king Henrye.

So that if their doings had good success that then the foresaid Lambarte
(misnamed the Earl) should by the consent of the counsel be deposed, and
the true Earl to be delivered out of prison and enherite his right, and
just title of his dominion. But the king, not mistrusting any man to be so
foolysh hardy as to fight in such a cause, or any so indiscreet (especially
of his realm) as to believe it, did only mind the suppressynge of the Iryshe
men, and their enterprise to subdue. Yet hearing that the Earl of Lyncolne
with other were fled, and gooen to his adversaries, he caused the borders to
be dilygentlye kept that none other might escape or give them socoure, and
coming to the abbaye of Sayncte Edmundes Burye, it was certified that the
Lord Thomas Marquis was come to excuse and pourge him self before him, for
certain things that he was suspected, to whom the king did send the Earl
of Oxford to take him coming, and conueyghe him to the Tower of London, for
this cause, that if he were his friend, as he was in deed, that he should not
be myscontented to suffer a little imprysonmente for the safety of his king,
if he were not his friend, there to tarry that he might have no damage or
hurt by him.

And so the king went forth to Norwyche and tariynge there Christemas day,
went after to Walsingham, and from thence to Cambridge and so straight to
London. In this time the earl of Lincoln, and the lord Louell had got about
two thousand Germaynes, with Martyn Swarte to be their captain, and so
saylynge to Ireland came and made the fornamed Lambarte king of England at
Deuelynge. And so with the great multitude of Iryshe men as well naked and
unarmed persons, as other that the Lord Gerardyne had under him, they sailed
into England, and landed for a purpose within a little of Lancastre, trusting
there to be aided of Sir Thomas Broghton the chief authoure of this
conspiracy.

The king not slepynge his mattiers, but mystrustynge that such things
should chance sent certain Knights, through all the East parties to
attend the coming of his enemies, and gatherynge all his hooste together,
went him self to Couentree, where he being, it was certified him that the
Earl of Lyncolne was landed at Lancastre with the new king. Whom the king
appointed to meet after the consent and agremente of his counsel, and to
goo upon them without any farther delay least that their power by long
sufferaunce should be augmented and multiplied.

And so after such aduisemente taken, he went to Notingham, and there by a
little woodde called Boures he pytched his tents. To whom shortelye after came
the Lord Talbote Earl of Shrowesburye, the Lord Strange, the Lord Cheiney
with a great army of men, and many other noble men, whose names here
after ensue. Rauff Longforde Ihon Montigomery Henry Vernone of Pek Rauff
Shurley Godfrey Folgehan Thomas Gryfley Edward Sutton Humfrey Stanley and an
other Humfrey Sta^ley, Wyllyam Hugton Wyllyam Meryng, Edward Stanope Geruase
Clifton Brian Stapulton Henry Wylloughby Wyllyam Perpoyntes Ihon Babyngton
Wyllyam Bedyll Robert Brundell Ihon Markham^ Wyllyam Merbury Edward Aborogh
Wyllyam Tyrwite Ihon Hussy Robert Shefilde Wyllyam Newporte Roger Ormeston
Thomas Tempest Wyllyam Knyuett Henry Wyllaybet Lord Edward Hastyngges. Ihon
Dygby Simo^ Digby Haringto^ Richard Sachenerell Ihon Vyllers Edward Fyldyng
Thomas Polteney Nicholas Vaux Thomas Gryne Nicolas Griffin Edmund Lucy Edward
Belknap Robert Throgmarton George Graie of Ruthin Guide Wolstone Thomas
Fynderye David Phillips Thomas Cheiney Robert Cotton Ihon Saint Ihon Ihon
Mordant Thomas Terell Ihon Raynsford Robert Paynton Robert Danyell Henry Marney
Edmunde Aroundell


Also there came from ye ferdest parts of his realm other noble men, as
these. George Oglye Rauff Neuill Richard Latemere Wyllyam Bulmere Ihon
Langforde Wyllyam Norrys Ihon Neuill of Thortinbridge and Ihon Wyllyams.


The earl of Lyncolne in the mean season went forth softely with his
compaignie into Yorkshire without hurt or discommoditie of any ma^ne that
dwelt therabout, trustyng partly thereby, and pertely also because he was well
known and acquainted among them, that he should get great aid and socour
there. But when he perceived very few or none to follow him, and that he could
not (seeing his enemies were so nigh hand and he also so far entered) in safeguard
with his host return bacward yet he thought it best to abide and taste the
chance of battaill, and so much yt rather, because he saw Henry within two
years before accompaign^ed but with a few and small sort of soldiers
overcome king Richard which brought with him a great host of well armed
men. Wherefore he, being now in a great hope of victory, took his journey
thens toward Newarke, there to set his souldyours in array and mete the
king, whom he knew well though not to be paste.ii. days journey from him. But
before he could come thither, king Henry which was surely certified of all
things yt he did or went about, came to Newarke alitle before the even that
they should fight on yt morrow other wise then the earl looked for, and there
tariyng not long, went forth three miles ferther and set his tents and
tarried all night. Of whose coming although therle knew, yet he went forth
lustely of his tourney and came that night to a village nigh to his enemies,
which is called Stooke, and there pitched his tents.

The next day, the king so sone as he had set his souldyours in due order
and array, went forward with all speed to the place where the earl with all his
lay. To the which place, when he was come, and had appointed the field, which
was most mete for the battaill to be fought in, by and by gave place for his
enemies to come forth and provoked them to battaill. But as ready as he was
to provoke, so ready were they of their own courage to come forth: so that of
both parties they ran to battaill and fought most egerly, in which
to^flicte it did evidently appear that the Germans which were set in the
forewarde, whose capitain was Martine Swarte, were nothing worse in manlynesse
and cheualry (which they got chiefly by daily and long exercise) then the
Englishemen. And the Ireshmen although they fought very lustely, yet by the
reason that they ware not harnes (according to their fasshio^ and custom) were
discomfcited and beat down both more in no^bre, and sooner then all the
other. Yet was this battaill so earnestly, and boldly fought for a while of
both parties, that it could not be well discerned to which side the victory
would incline. But at the last, the kings forewarde which there abode all
ieoperdie, so lustely and courageously ran upon their enemies, yt they were
none hable to resist or abide their power: so yt all as well Germans as Irish
men were there slain orels made to fly, of ye which none at all could escape
away. Which battaill, when it was thus dooen, all me^ne might se of what
boldness and audacitie these rebellio^s were. For their capitaines Ihon earl of
Lincoln, Francis Louell Thomas Broghto^, Martine Swart, and Thomas Gerardine
never gave back one foot but were slain all in the same place where they
began first to fight. There were killed at that vattaill with their five
capitaines spoken of even now of that party about four thousand. Of the
kings part there were not half of them which fought in ye forewarde slain.

The^ was Lambert, the child which was falsely reported to be the Dukes soonne
of Clare^ce, and his master sir Richard Simond priest, both taken, but neither
of them put to death, because Lambert was yet but a child and did seem to
do that, more by compulsion of his master the^ of his own will, and the
other was a priest which for his defaulte was cast into perpetual prisone.
But this Lambert was taken into the Kings kechin and after was made one of the
kings faukeners and is yet a live. And thus was all yt Margarete went about at
this time, turned to naught and to none effect, which thing when she heard
tell of in Flanders, she was very lory at the heart and made great moan.
And yet could she not be content, but immediately after, inverted an other
thing to vex and trouble king Henry, as it shall be showed here after.

King Henry when he had all things brought thus to pass, and utterly
vanquisshed these his enemies, thought himself at one time delivered from two
eiuils together, that is to say, from both fear that was present, and also
that was to come. For it was not to be thought yt they which were so few in
nombre durst be so bold to enter into the realm and make battle against ye
king whom they knew well enough would bring with him a great and well armed
hooste, but that they had other fellows of the same coniuracion which would
mete and aid them all that they could in time and place convenient. Therefore
when the king saw the host of his enemies manifestly before his eyes, he
commanded that no man should kill the earl of Lincoln, but that he should
be brought to him alive, to the intent that he might show and bewraye all the
other which were of ye conspiracy. But that the sowdyers would not do, least
the saving of him, should be the destruccio^ (as it should have been in deed)
of many other. This battle was fought in the year of our Lord a thousand
four hundredth, four score, and the second year of this He^ryes reign. In ye
which year also Thomas Burscher archebyshop of Ca^terburye died, into whose
room succeeded John Morton late bishop of Ely, whom Alexander of that name the
sixte bishop of Rome made Cardinal. Now to return to my purpose.

After this, the king, when he had gathered all the prays and spoils together,
and had buried them that there were slain, went forth to Lincoln and there
tarried three days, and had every day one procession to thank God almighty
that he had the ouerhande of his enemies. And incontynently sent his banner to
Walsyngham to be consecrate to our Lady, there to be kept for a perpetual
mo^ument of victory. Then did he execucio^ of such rebellions as were there
taken, and shortly after took his iorneye forth to York, and there likewise
such as were found gyltye did he punyshe strayghtlye. When all this was
dooen, he went unto Newcastle, and from thence sent into Scotland Richard
Fox which not long before was made bishop of Exeter, and Richard Edgecombe
knight as Ambassadoures to king James for a league of peace. For this Henrye
thought it a great pleasure and co^moditee, to be in peace and concord with
kings and governors which lay about this his realm, and specially and
before all other with king James, because yt there no rebellions might trust
(which otherwise perchance would have trusted) to have aid or succoure at
his hand: so that thereby there durst none again take weapon against him.
The ambassadoures, when they were come into Scotland to the king, were of him
both gently and after the most loving fashion received and heard, and then did
he plainlye declare and open to them yt he him self loved king Henrye and
his, no man (...): but that yt most part of his Scotts and subjects could
in no case agree with the English men. Wherefore, except that he should
offend or (...)se them, he desired ye legates to be content with truce
for.vii. years in promise, but in deed, he said, that peace between them on
his part should never be broken, and or ever those seven years should be
passed, that he would give truce for seven years longer: so that king Henry and
he would ever be in peace and most assured amytie And this did king James,
because he knew that no fact of his people, should be allowed. When the
Ambassadoures heard this, they took the years that were offered them, as
concerning peace, and by and by returned home to king Henry again, and
showed him all the mattier in order. With the which tidings he was veraye
well contented.

Shortly after, the king departed thence toward London, and in the way at
Leicetre met him Abassadoures from the French king which showed him, that
their king Charles had recovered many tounes and cities, which before were
possessed of king Maximilian, and that he kept battle now with Fraunces the
duke of Brytayne, because he kept and socoured in his dominion certain that
were traitors and rebellions against him, of the which the chief was Jews
duke of Orlyance, and therefore he desired him of his friendship and
familiarity, that either he would help him orelles meddle of neither party.
But king Henrye, although he had found much friendship at the French kings
hand, yet for as much as he spyed whereof this strife began, with this
message was not well content. For the cause that the Frenchemenne took
battle, was because they saw that the Duke was an old manne and had never a
child, and thereby that they might bring that Dukedom into their subieccion.

When king Henrye perceived this, and also how loving the Brytaynes had been
ever to England, and finally remembered the tender love which was between the
duke and him, thought it best, if need were, to help the Britaynes, Yet for as
much as he had found the French king very kind in times past, and had
partly by his help recovered his kingdom, he was veraye loathe to meddle: in
so much that he could not well tell what was best in this mattier to be
dooen. But at the last he fully purposed, if necessity should require, to
help the duke in all that he might. Yet, least he should make of his high
friend his extreme enemy, his answer was to the ambassadoures, that he did
intend to make their king and the duke friends again. Wherefore as soon as the
French kings ambassadoures were dimissed, he sent on message Christopher
Vrswycke to Charles the king of France. First to certifye him, that he was
veraye glad of the victory that he had upon Maximilian, secondarely what
tumulte and insurreccion was made here in England thyrdly and especially to
desire him to be at one again with the Duke of Brytayne. And then he
commanded this Vrswycke, that if the king of France should be so content,
to go forth immediatlye to the Duke, and desire him likewise of the same.

But when the king was come again to London, there was joy and myrthe for the
victory ye he had on every side. For not only the king, but also every one
of his cytezyns reioysed veraye much. Wherefore the king showed him self both
beraye humane and courteous toward all men, and also rewarded all them that
took pains in that battle most bountefully. And not long after delivered
Lord Thomas Marquis out of the ^oure, and loved him veraye well.

In the mean season Christofer Vrswicke was come to the french king, and of
him, after the most loving fassion yt could be, received. And as soon as he
had showed his message, ye king showed him self to be there with very well
pleased. Then went ye ambassador straight thence, as it was commanded him,
into Britain, and showed the duke what king Henry would have dooen. But the
duke (because him self had been sick a great while, and thereby his memory and
wit was d^^aied) called to him to hear the message both Jews the duke of
Orleaunce and other of his council, which Jews in no wise would have any
peace to be made, but said that it was more mete that king Henrye (seeing he
had found such kyndnesse at the Dukes hand, and Britain was such a good
defense to England) to help to keep battle all yt he might against the
frenchmen. Then returned this Christofer again into France, and declared to
the king Charles what answer was made of ye Britains, and shortly after came
into England again. But still in the mean time, ye French king went about
busely to overcome the Brytains, and the more he was nigh of his purpose, so
much ye more did he exhort and desire king Henry to make peace between them,
wherefore he sent Bernarde Daubeney knighte in all the haste to king Henrye to
desire him in any wise to make some end of this co^trauersy. And thereupon the
king being desirous of the same, chose three orators, ye Abbot of Abindon, John
Lilie the bishop of Romes collectoure and Richard Tonshal a knight and a very
wise man, to gooe first to the French king, and then to the duke to make
amitee and frendshyp again between them. But or ever these ambassadoures
proceeded on their journey, John Lilye fell sick of the gout: therefore for him
was chosen Christofer Vrswycke, and they together went (as they were
commanded) First into France to the king, and thence without delay into
Britain. But Fraunces the duke in no case would take such condicyons as were
there offered, wherefore they came back again into France without their
purpose, and there tarieng, signified to king Henry by their letters all that
was dooen. But or their letters came to the kings hands, Edward Woodilile, a
bold Champion came to him and desired veraye earnestly that he might have an
host of men to help the Britains, and leasire it should cause any dissencion
between the French king and him, he said that he would gooe privily and
without a pasporte, to thentent it might be thought that he stole out of the
land. But the king, for as much as he trusted that peace should be made,
would in no wise grant his peticion. Wherefore this Edward went straight into
the ysle Veches, which was in his dominacion, and there so sone as he had
gathered his men together about four. C, sailed over to the Britains, and
joined him self with them against the Frenchmen, which thing when it was
known in France, made ye ambassadors greatly afraid of their lives. But
whiles they were in this fear, and the Fre^chemen thought it dooen maliciously
of King Henry, there came other Ambassadors from him to the French king,
certifieng him and declaring (by most evident tokens) that it was nothing in
deed as it was thought to have been. To the which message, albeit ye king had
little crede^ce yet he made as though he had not been angry at all. So ye
Ambassadors renewed peace between their king and him for.xii. months and
returned home again, and showed the king all such things yt they had either
heard or seen there, whereof he gathered that ye Frenchmen did nothing less
entend then to have peace made. Wherefore without delay he called a parliament
and there consulted of the aidyng of the Brytains: then of the exspence that
should be therein made, and after of other mattiers.

And as soon as the parliament was broken up, he caused musters to be taken in
every town thorowoute his realm. Yet least peradventure he might seem
willingly to break the amitee which was between the French king and him, he
sent Ambassadors into France to certifye the king that of late he had kept a
parliament, and there yt it pleased all the nobles that he should send help
to ye Britains, because they at all times had dooen more benefits to England
then all other nations and therefore that he should either leave of battle
orelles that he should not be grieved if he did obey ye minds of his Lords
and prelates, and yet that he would promise him this one thing, yt his should
meddle with him no le^ger then he was in Britain and kept battle upon them.
With these commandments ye ambassadors went forth and declared to ye
French king all the mind and will of their king which thing he little cared
for, and thought as it came to pass in deed, that the Englishemen there could
little avail.

In the mean season the Britains fought one field at a place called saint
Albanes and there sped beray euel. For of them Jews duke of Orleau^ce with
many mo were taken, and Edward Wooduile, James Galeot an Italian and a very
good warryer, with diverse other noble men slain. Which thing when king
Henry heard tell of, he thinking it time to make haste, sent spedely Roberte
Brook Lord, John Cheinye, John Midelton, Raufe of Helton, Richard Corbet,
Thomas Leighto^, Richard Lacon, and Edmond Cornewell, all lustye capitaines
with.viii. thousand well armed men to ye Brytains to help them in their need,
which by reason ye wind served them, came thither so sone as they could
desire. But when the French men knew of their coming (whom they knew so
long as they were fresh and lusty to be in a manner invincible) at ye first
were blanke all, and durst scarsely look out of their tents, but afterward
trusting yt they might weary them they went many of them together into diverse
places, and kept many bikeringes with the English men, but they them selfs
ever bare the worste away, howsoever the Englishmen sped, they sped naught.
Whiles they this kind of war did exercise, the Duke Fraunces died, and then
was all dasshed. For the chyefe rulers of the Brytains being some of them
corrupted with money, and some sturred up with ambicyon, fell into deuisyon
among them selves, and seemed no more to endeavor to defend their commune
weal, but rather to destroy and utterly extinguishe it Which thing the
english men perceiving, and also suffering much cold, were compelled of
necessitee within five moonethes that their went thither, to come back again
into England.

Then Charles the French king married Anne the Dukes daughter, and gat al
Britayn by that means into his hands. But of this it shall be spoken more here
after.

It was decreed here in England before there were any souldyours sent into
Brytayne, that for the expense of that war, every man should pay as they
were hable, a tribute, which the most part of them that dwelte in the
byshopryke of Durha^ and York shyre, did utterly refuse to pay, and complained
of the matter to their Lord the Earl of Northumberland. And he immediately
signified to the king by his letters that the people did greatly lament and was
sorry saying, that they were never put to so much coast, as they had been of
late days, and now that there was so much required of them, that neither they
were hable to pay so great a sum, nor would pay it. Yet for all that the king
commanded the Earl to get it on the^ and make them pay it whether they would
or not least peradventure it might be a cause, that if at any time a tribute
again should be required of the^, to make an insurreccion. Which thing when
the people heard of, by and by they ran unto the earl and as the authoure
of the tribute paiyng Themurde ryng of the earl of Northumberland
killed him out of hand. And when they had so done, they chase Ihon
Egremonknight a verey dicious person to be their captain, and so arraied
them selfs, and went against the king, making cries in every town, that they
came to fight for no another cause but to defend yt common liberty.

But when the mattier should come to blows they waxed cold all the sort of
them, and every one wished that this tumulte were retracted which was now
already begone, so that at the co^clusio^ not one scacely escaped without his
great discommodite. For the king as soon as he heard of this insurreccion,
went down with an host to York whereof these slaves and traitors being
greatly afraied, fled some hither and some thither and durst not abide and
sustain the power of ye kings army. Wherefore they were sone taken and punished
greuousely, according to their deseruyng every one of them. But Ihon Egremont
which was their captain fled into Flanders to Margarete of whom we spoke
before.

And the king so sone as this business was quenched, took his iourny back again
unto London and committed the tribute which was in York and about York to
be taken up, holy to Richard Toustal. And this was ye year of our lord a
thousand four hundred.xc. and the fourth year of the reign of this king Henry.

And in this year also the king of Scotts (...).
was sore vexed. For his subjects roase against him and made his son James
which was as yet but a child, their capitain. Wherefore, he sent to the king
of England, to the French king, and to the bishop of Room Innocentius to
desire them to make some end of this civil battle and contencion which was
between his people and him. Which afterward sent their ambassadors as they
were desired, but all in vain. For ye rude sort would needs fight unless The
king of Scotts slain of his subjects.
he would resygne his crown, wherefore shortly after, they fought, and in that
battle killed the king and gave his son James which was the fourth of that
name the crown.

But the bishop of Romes legate Hadrian came to late. For whiles he was in
England with king Henry, word came that the king of Scotts was slain in
battle and his soonne made king. And therefore, he tarried here in England for
a space, and was very much made of, and hyghly commended to the king by Ihon
Morto^ archbishop of Canterbury. Whereby he came into so high favor with king
Henry, that he made him bishop of Herforde, and shortly after, that least
gave him the bishopprike boothe of Wells and Bathe. And not long after he
returned with these honors to Room, and there of Alexander was made Cardinal.

There began also of fresh, certain business as concerning Brytaine
before this gear was appeased: which was, that Maximilian being at that time
without a wife, would have married the duke of Briteines daughter, and had one
that wowed for him, which lady promisyng him faith and truth, to the intent
that she might not go from her word, he used this way with her, when she went to
her bed the night after, as to the bed of wedlock, the wower that was hired,
put one of his fete into ye bed to the knee in ye sight and company of many
noble matro^s and ladies, for a token and testimony yt the marriage was
consu^mate, and they.ii. as man and wife. But this did nothing avail, for Char
the French king was desireous to marye her and hearing that Maximilia^ was
sure to her, did the more busely set upon the Britaynes, to thentent he might
both have the lady and the country also at his will, for he esteemed that
marriage to be of no strength or force. Nevertheless, he feared king Henry
much, least that he would stop his purpose, which king had made a league,
and Ferdinande also the king of Spain, had made ye same with the Britaynes, to
assist them in all their ieoperdies and perilles that should chance to them
by foren countrees, wherefore he sent in all post have Francese Lucemburgense,
Charles Marignane and Roberte Gaguine, to king Henry for a peace to be
confirmed and had, desiring him, that their king might order the marriage of
the Lady Anne as were thought best without any let or hynderaunce of it by him,
but king Henry would not agree to them, that the lady should be married to
him, consyderyng she was made sure to the king Maximilian, for that it was
against all right and law both of God and manne. Albeit the king would
gladly make a peace between them both, and so demissyng ye kings
Ambassadoures with a large and ample reward, sent Thomas Goldestone abbot of
Cantorbury and the lord Thomas of Ormondye ambassadors straight after them.

In this mean space, Alexander B. of Rome the sixth of that name after
Innoce^tius sent the bishop of Co^cordiense legate to the French king for
certain mattiers, and among other for a peace and unity to be confederate
betwyxt him and king Henry, the which when he had easily obtained, he came to
England and there being entretained most roially of the king, had his purpose
and desire of him. The English ambassadors then being with the French king,
purposed to have a peace concluded, which first demanded certain things of
the king ere that it should be made, albeit the king would grant them
nothing, and was sore moved with their request and askyng. So ye shortly after,
the French king sent to the noble men of Britain great gifts and rewards
to the intent they might move the lady Anne to give her troweth to him, and
also sent to herself many princely gifts and tokens, ye she would bear love
to him. And yt she might not fear but that she might lawfully marie to him,
certified her ye the promise was of none effect yt she had given to Maximilia^
for yt it was given and made without his consent which had ye governance and
dominion over all ye country And this was the cause that no concord or peace
could be kept betwixt them. And where as that the king had taken Maximilians
daughter lady Margaret to be his wife, he said that it might be lawfully
dissolved because ye lady was under age, and not ripe to be married. This
lady Anne of Britain through the persuasion of many noble men of that
country, was contented to be his wife and lady. And when the king was
certified of this, he hastened the marriage with all the expedicion and
celeritee that he could. So that the English ambassadors returned again to
their country, and nothing dooen or agreed upon in their matter. When the king
was certified of this by his ambassadors, he purposed to make battaill against
him, and to revenge the naughty intent of his, with the sword, and assemblyng
his counsel together, showed them the matter, and the just cause he had to
fight, desteryng them for the maintenance of the same wars to help him with
money, nevertheless that men should not think it to be extorte of them,
he willed every ma^ne to give as much and as little as he would, and them to
be esteemed and taken as his most best and assured friends that gave ye most
money When this sum was gatheryng and preparaunce made for battaill,
Maximilian the king warred sore with the Frenchemen, which king was taken a
little before at a certain brunt and skirmishe made, and cast in prisone, after
the which time king Henry sent to him Giles Dabeney capitain of Calais to aid
him with three thousand harnissed me^ne. At ye length Maximilian having the
better hand of the Frenchemen, ente^ded to revenge himself of the French king,
for that he had repudiate his daughter lady Margarete, and taken to him as
wife queen Anne, but because he was not fully hable of himself to sustein that
battaill, he sent James Conti^alde ambassador to king Henry for help, which
James when he had dooen his message, the king promised that he would do for
him all that he could in mainteinyng his wars.

In this time, Charles the French king married lady Anne, chalengyng by this
marriage the dominion and governance of ye Brytaines. Maximilian the king being
certified of this, was greatly moved, for that he did not only forsake and
repudiate his daughter lady Magarete, but also received in marriage ye lady
and queen Anne to his wife, and in this fury he sent to king Henry desieryng
him to prepare an army, for he would goo upon the French men, and keep open
battaill with them, which king Henry gathered an host of men, and
proclaimed battaill in all his realm, after the which proclamacion there came
to London an houge army of men, with their capitaines, which herafter
ensewe and follow. Richard Thomas with a great compaignie of Welshe men.
The earl Thomas of Derbie. George earl of Shrowesburie. Thomas earl of
Harundell. Edmunde duke of Suffolk. Edward earl of Deuenshire with his noble
young soon. Thomas earl of Ormo^dye. George earl of Kent. Lord Thomas Dorcet
Marquis. Ihon Cheyney. Gyles Dabeney Richard Gylforde Ihon Raynsforth James
Terell Ihon Savage Thomas Baro of Helto^ Wyllyam Bulmerey Edward Stanley, with
other.


After that all this army was araied, the king sent sir Christopher Vrswycke,
and sir Ihon Ryseley knights to the king Maximilian, to certifye him that they
were all in a redynesse to keep battle when he would have them. When they
had dooen their message they returned back again to their king, certifiyng
him, that Maximilia^ was so poor and nedye of monye and men, that he could
not be hable to sustain any battle nevertheless his mind and will was
good, if his power and habilitee had been correspondent to it. The king after
the receipte of these letters, was displeased much with him, albeit
consyderyng he had gooen so far in it, and had such furnyture of all things
prepared, least that men should impute it to him as cowardnesse to faint
from battle, he proceeded forth toward France, and about ye.vi. day of
Septe^bre he landed at Calise, and there rested his army. Where word was
brought to all the host (for they did not know of it before) that Maximilian
could make no preparaunce for lack of money. At ye which they maruailed
greatly, considering that he had such vilanye showed him not long before at
the king of France hand. Yet they were never discoumfeyted at it, but like
stout and valiant warryars had great confidence in their own power and
strength, with who^ the king of France (after yt he perceived it best for his
profit and ease) would gladly have been reconciled, although he had a ready
host to fight against them and withsta^de their power. And especially he
desired peace for this cause, yt he might have the love of his neighbors, to
the intent his realm might be in better sauegarde and quietness, when he
should war against Ferdina^d king of Napels, at ye desire of Ludouike Sfortia
duke of Millayn, which at that present time did inuit him to it, wherefore he
did send Philip Desquerd chief of Annonye to desire king Henrye of peace,
which Philip did send ye letters to him, before he came into the country
himself, wherein he signified that he would take such pains in bryngyng his
purpose about, that he would if it should so please his grace, reconcile both
him and their king to love each other as they have dooen heretofore, and said
that it should be for his honor to take the same condition, which condition
if he would send certain of his capitains to mete with him in any part of
France, and there to determine of it he should have it there promised and
hereafter duly to be performed. The king after he had red these letters, did
send the bishop of Exceter, and Giles Dabeney to the forenamed Philip for peace
to be agreed upon and concluded, the which after a space determined upon
certain conditions which here after shall be showed, that peace should be had
on both parties. When they were thus consultyng, ye king having his host at
Caleis, removed from that place to Bononye, and there pitchyng his te^tes
beseeged the town with all the power he might, which town because it was
strongely defended and furnished with all things necessary for war, it
could not be overcome without great labor, and before yt he either could or
did overcome any part of it, word was brought, that a peace was concluded and
made, which heard, as it was pleasure to the Frenchemen, so it was sorrow to
the English men, for they cried out of the king and said it was not for his
honor so to do, but the king as a wise manne and most prudent prince, said
it should be the death of many noble and puisaunt capitaines if he should
continue the same battaill, and therefore it might be to his sore reproach, if
it were in his power, not to tender as well the health of his commons as his
own, which saying did somewhat coule and pacifye their grief. And after this
dooen, the king returned back to Calise, for because it was informed him yt
one Richard ye named him self ye son of king Edward had made an insurreccion
in Flanders, through ye counsel of lady Margarete ye queen, to fight against
him, which thing, king Henry consyderyng did the more spedely hasten to
conclude a peace. And the condition of this peace to be made was this, yt the
French king should pay to king Henry, a certain sum of meny, the which was
leauyed by the ambassadors, for the cost and charges that the king was put to
in that battayll, and also should yearly for a certain space pay or cause to
be paid to the king of England for a full recompense. x^v. thousand crounes.
The which French king after that being in war with the Italians, paid the
said tribute to ye most noble prince and our sovereign lord king He^rye the.
v^^. son to Henry the seventh, for a full reco^(...)cion and friendship to be
had for ever. This was the year of our Lord a thousand four hundredth four
score and thirtene, and the seventh year of his reign. Also in this inuadyng
and besiegyng (...).
of Bonony (which we spoke of before) there was none killed, saving only sir
Ihon Savage, which going out of his tent with sir Iho^ Riseley, was taken
privily rydyng about the walls of ye town and there because he would not
yield was slain of the French men, albeit the other sir Ihon Rysely fled and
escaped their danger.

After this the king went from Calis to England again, and yet that he might
not be without some trouble or busynes, queen Margaret of Spain (which ever
watched to do him a displeasure) perceauyng yt the earl with his co^paignie
could not have such success in their business as she would have wished
them, she inverted a new way to work treason against him. There was a certain
young man of Tornace, very beautiful and fair in countenance, and of a
pregnaunt wit, which young man was called Peter and surnamed Warbecke, and
for his cowardnes nycknamed of the English men and called Perkyn, Perkyn
warbeck.
which young man trauaylyng many countrees could speak many la^guages and for
his baseness of stock and birth was known of none almost. Therefore ye queen
thynkyng this young man to be mete who^ she might feign to be the duke of
York, and son to her brother king Edward, kept him a certain time with her
privily, and tellyng him what he should be, yt he might the rather persuade me^
to be the kings son did send him into Irela^de, after what time she knew
that king Henry had appointed to fight against the French king, where he was
honorably received and taken of every manne as a prince, for whose right, they
promised all to fight, and help him in all yt they could. After this it came
to ye French kings ear yt such an one was in Ireland, for who^ the king did
send to see and caused him to be brought before him, and when he came into his
p^sence, ye king accepted him gladly, and after a princely fashion intreteined
him. But after ye he came in love with the king of England, the said Charles did
dimisse ye young man, and would no longer keep him, least that some
inconueniencie or cause of strife should chance thorough it. Wherefore ye young
manne went to Flaunders again to the queen Magarete, which queen did receive
him with such gladness, that she could not well rule her self, and for this
cause only she did show her self so joyful and merye, that men might
persuade them self that this was Richard the kings soonne, and upon that
cause truly, men did ye more reverence to the young manne, and yt more
firmly believe him to be the right heir and son to king Edward. Also
after this rumor blased abroad, as well in England, France, as Flaundres there
began great sedicion to spryng, and first they that were long in sanctuary
for the great offenses that they had committed, and other that were cast in
poverty, gathered a compaignie of me^ and sailed over into Flaunders to the
counterfaicte Edward, otherwise named Peter, also many of the noble men
conspired together, and to the intent they might bring their purpose well about,
they did send certain to the Queen Margarete, to know when the same Edward
might come conveniently into England, ye they being certified of the same might
ye more easily receive and bring him into ye realm. So yt by the consent and
agreement of them all, sir Robert Clyfforde knight and Wyllyam Barley were sent
to show all their minds and aduyce as concerning the new found duke, to the
Queen Margarete. Whom the Queen did accept gladlye, and persuaded them, that
it was true that was publyshed of Richard the duke, and straight upon showed
them the same Peter, which was much like Richard, praysyng his virtues and
qualitees that he had, wonderfullye.

The said Robert, when he had seen the same young manne, believed surely that he
was of the kings blood, and wrote to England to his coumpaignye and fellows
of his conspiracy, that he knew him to be the kings soonne by his face and
every proporcion of his body. And when these letters came unto England, the
chief capitaynes of this business did openly diuulgate and publyshe, that it
was true that was spoken and said abroad of the Duke, but it was dooen by
such a craft, that no man could tell who was the authoure of that rumoure.

When the king perceived that many men did give credence to his vain fable, he
thought best for his own safeguard to provide a remedy for it, and also
mystrusting that some conspiracye had been made because that sir Robert
Clifford had fled privily into Flaundres, commanded certain knights that were
chosen and piked men of war with a bond of men to keep the borders surely
ye no man might escape or sail over the sea without a pasporte or license
given by him. Also that men might not continue in the false persuasion and
belefe that they had conceived of the duke, he caused certain spies to search
in all the citees of Belgike, to know of what progeny this mysnamed Richard
was, and to give them high rewards that would show the verite and truth of
the same matter. So that they sailynge into France, every manne did gooe into
a contraye quarter, and enquired diligently for him, and at ye length, certain
of them came to a town called Tornace and there were certifyed by the
testymonye of many honest men that he came but of a low and course
parentage, and he was named Peter War beck, which thing also the kings
friends certified him by their letters and writings to him more plain and
euidentelye. Therefore when the king had known the matter wholly, as well by his
friends as by his spies sent forth purposelye for the same, he caused it to
be proclaimed openly as well in other regions and countrees as in England that
the disceate and deuelish craft might appear evident to every manne. And
first he sent ambassadors to Philyp the chief captain in Flaundres, and to
his council, because he was but of a young age, which were sir Edward
Poninges knight, and sir William Varame priest and lawyer, that they might
show evidently how falsely the young manne has usurped the name of Richard
duke of York which was killed with his brother Edward in the Tower of London,
at the commandment and will of king Richard his uncle, as every man could
testifye and affirm most surely.

Also that he was borne of a poor stock, and an obscure famulie in Tornace,
and there named Perkin Warbecke, and therefore that it would please him and his
council not to suffer them selfs to be blinded or seduced with such mere
impostures and crafty illusions, nor yet to aid him at any hand to cause
sedicion or strife, considering that he had no just title to the enheritynge
of the same. And that they would the rather be his friends now, because yt he
helped Maximilian their king the year before against the power and violencye
of the French men, where as he of him self was not hable to refyste their
might and strong power. When the Ambassadors had dooen their message, they
were gentely entretayned of him, and had their request, that he would not (for
the love that he ought unto the king) no nor any of his counsel help
the same Perkin any thing at all.

Nevertheless, if the queen Margaret would persiste and continewe in her
malice toward the king (whom the Ambassador sir William Varame had reproved
and checked sore, for bringing up of such monsters and commune plagues, to the
public weal in his oration that he made unto Philippe and his counsel) it
was not in their power to withstand it, for because that she might do in her
own heritage all things at her own will and pleasure. Which queen intended
fully to arm this Perkin with a strong compaignye of men against king Henry.

After that king Henrye did hear of this, he purposed to pacyfye all this
business that was like to chance, by wit and policye, and straight did
send forth certain spies, which should feign them selfs to have fled
unto the Duke, and by that means search forth and know the whole entente
of their coniuracion, and after what way they framed their matters.

Other also should promise a pardon and remyssyon unto sir Roberte Clyfforde,
and Willyam Barley for their offense committed to the king. And when they had
so dooen, many of them returned to England, and brought the names of
certain that were chief of the same conspiracye, Other tarried until such
time that sir Robert Clifforde came to England again. And when the king had
known the chief capitaines of this tumulte by his spies that were there with
them, he caused all them to be attached and brought to London before his
presence, whose names were sir John Ratclyffe, sir Simon Monforde, sir Thomas
Thwarte knights, William Dabeney, Roberte Ratcliffe, Richard Lesey, with many
other. Also certain priests and religious men, as sir William Richeford,
and Thomas Poynes both monks of saint Dominikes order, sir William Sutton,
sir William Vrseley Deane of Poules, and Robert Layborne. Other that were
guilty of the same crime, hearing that many of their compaignie were taken,
fled and did take sanctuarye. And the other that were taken were condemned
all of treason, of ye which there was heded sir Simon Monford, sir Robert
Ratcliffe, and William Dabeney as authors and chief capitaines of this
business. The other were pardoned, and the Priests also for their order that
they had taken. Also sir John Ratcliffe was pardoned of his life, but after
that he came to Calisse, and there cast in prisone, he was behedded, because
he corrupted the kepers with many promises to have escaped out of the same.
Shortly after, sir Robert Clifford trusting to find favor and grace at the
kings hand, came to England, of whose coming when ye king was certified he
went straight to ye tower of London, and there tarried till such time ye sir
Robert Clyfford came which thing he used under this pretense, that if sir
Robert Clifford had accused any man to him of ye treason, that then every
such person might be called thither without any suspectio^ of any euel,
and there straight to be cast in hold, but before I goo further, I will show
the opinion that many men conceived of the knights going to Flaunders. Some
men held this opinion, that king Henrye did send him as a spy to Flaunders,
and therefore he came the sooner into his favor. Nevertheless, this is not
like to be true by diverse reasons. First that it turned to ye great infamye
and hurt, both of him self and his friends. Secondarly that he was not in so
great favor with the king, as he had been in times past for because that he
was guilty in that part. Therefore the said sir Robert now coming to the king
after his return into England, kneled mekelye down at his feet, and desired
pardon of his grace and after that being enquired of the coniuration and
examined who were the authors of this mischief, he pronounced and said that
William Sta^ly whom the king made Earl, was one of the chief, when he had so
said, the king was greatly dismayed and grieved, that he should offend, who^ he
had made chief of his privy chamber, considering also that he had found great
kindenes hertofore at his hand, and that he did overcome king Rychard chiefly
by his help and means. So that the king could not be persuaded, that he was
any such offender, had not it been showed him after by manifest tokens and
appare^t arguments ye it was true as he said. Whom the king the^ caused to be
taken and examined of the matter, after the which examinacion he was proved to
be an offender. Then the king doubting what to do with him, did consult and
breath a little with him self, for he feared, that his brother lord Thomas by
whom he had showed great kyndnesse would take it grievously, also and if he
should remitte that fault, other would abuse his lemtee, and trespace more
highly. Albe it, at the last he wylled that he should suffer for his offense,
and so caused him to be behedded. The cause that their love (as me^ report)
did change into hatred was this. The lord Wyllia^ considering that he saved
the king and brought him to this realm to be governor thought he could never
be recompensed for his so doing, and where as the king also remembering this
benefyte, did make him his chief chamberlayn, and gave him the highest
promocions that he had, he little regarded them and looked for some greater
reward, wherefore, the king perceiving that, was sore grieved with him, and so
they both did fall at debate and hatred each with other.

Also at this time the king thought best to use some asperite in correcting the
offenses of his subjects, because ye some had taken such heart and audacitee
to them, ye they feared not to speak euel of his majesty with most spiteful
and contumeleous words, trusting ever that ye feigned Rychard duke of York, now
lately risen from death to life on gods name, should claim the crown, and
enheret his counterfeted fathers possessions, and when such persons had
suffered due ponishment for their offenses, other learning by their neighbors
mischaunce to beware, did from ye time bear them selfs as true and
faithful subjects, and assysted him with all their power, at what time he
required help of the^. After the death of this William Stanley, Giles Dabeney
was chosen and made chief cha^berlain. And now ye king was in a good stay for
his realm, saving yt Ireland was not well weded of the pernicious sede ye was
sowed by the young man Perkin Warbeck and his sect. Wherefore, he sent sir
Henry Deny late abbot of Lankto^ abbey thither, and made him chancellor over
all that I Will and Edward Ponyng to search all places that the forenamed Perken was
in, to punish the^ extremely in the example of other, ye were guilty of yt
crime but when they heard of this, they fled for the most part into woddes and
marysh places for the defense and safgard of them selfs, there consultyng to
keep open war against him, which Edward after that he persued them many
times, and could never try it with them because they were so disparsed as foren
and wild people, he returned back, and suspectinge that the earl of Kyldare
was the occasion of this, attached him at the counsayl of the earl his euel
willers, and brought him as prisoner to England. Where when he was arained, and
certain matters of treason laid to his charge, he aduoided the^ all, and
clerly quite him self: whom the king dimissed, and sent him to Irelande
there to be governor and captain over them as he was before. So that now
the king being out of all fear of battle, did take his progress to shyre,
there to recreate his spirits and solace him self with his mother lady
Margarete, wife and countess to the Earl of Darby. Yet when ye king was thus
delityng him self, Perken Warbecke could not moderate or rule him self,
although so many suffered and were put to execucion for his mischife but to
prove again the chance of battle gathered a great army of men as well
prisoners, slaves, sa^nctuary men as other and came into Kent, because the wind
so served, and there caused certain to land, and to enquire if ye Kentish men
would bear with him, with who^ the Kentish me^ working guiles promised ye they
would assist him, if he and his company would land there. Albeit, the same
Perke^ fearing ye they meaned falshode and craft, would not descend him self,
but caused certain of his soldiers to land, which persons being a pretye
way from their ships, were sore beaten and put to flight, and many of them
taken prisoners and after were condemned to dye. Wherefore Perke^ failing of his
purpose fled back to Flaunders, and there consulted with his friends until
such time he had been better prepared both of men and counsel. The king
herynge that his enemies had made e^trau^ce into his realm, left of his
progress and purposed to go to London, but being certified the next day
after, how well they had sped, continued and went forth of his progress,
sendyng to them Richard Gilford, to give thanks and promise of a good turn
herafter, for ye good service that they had done him in those tumultes and
assaults of his enemies. Also that they might not have any access herafter
into those parties the king commanded ye lords to be defended stro^gely with
bulwarks and other sure munime^tes and fortresses, of the which this same
Perken being certified, hastened ye more to renew battaill against the king, yt
he might not have longer space, through his delay, to do all these things
for the defense of his realm and so came to Irelande with all his army, and
there tariyng a space, sailed to Scotland for aid and succor of king James,
trustyng to find grace at his hand, to whom he spoke after this manner. I
think it is not unknown to you most noble king in what ruin the stock of
Edward the fourth of that name is now of late, which if you do not know,
and it please your grace so to take me I am his soonne, and by the power of
God, preserved a live at this hour from the mighty hand of a tiranne. For my
father when he died, appointed his brother Richard duke of Gloucestre to be our
governor and protector. Albeit he was rather a destroyer of our progeny then
a mainteiner of it, for he wyllyng to be king himself, and deprive us of our
right and title, commanded that we should both be slain, and dispatched out
of this world. Therefore he having then full power to order us at his will, did
cause my brother to be destroyed, and because yt he might be without some
part of that offense, and not show himself all a tira^ne, he caused me to be
conueighed to some strange and foren country, and there to be desolate of
all comfort and help. And so king Richard did hold his crou^e by dispatchyng
away of us two, so that I could not tell by the reason of my tender age, what I
was, until now of late that mine aunte lady Margarete being in Flanders did
show me what I was after she had seen me, and to the intent I might recover
again my fathers possessions, she has given me for her power a bond of me^ne,
wyllyng me ye I should desire the help of externe nations and countrees. And
so I am come to you for succoure, who^ as it is reported will help at all
times every manne in his right, and in case be I shall find you favorable to
me, you shall bind me and all mine, never to think ourselfes hable to make
you amends. When he had thus said, the king promised him that it should never
repent him of his coming to him, and bad him to take a good heart, and after
this the king assemblyng his counsel together, asked what they thought best
in that matter, and whether any deliberacion should be taken of it, or no. To
whom some of them that were w^sest, answered that it were folishenes to go
fur(...) in such a matter, considering that he was but a painted and feigned
duke and had no right to England. Other also said that it was for diverse
causes most profitable to the common wealth, partly that this Parkyn, if his
matters goo well forward, would reward them, as they would desire and
enriche their realm most plentefully by his liberalite, partly also that
Henry the king perceiuyng their king to assist him, would gladly pay tribute
to him for a peace and concord to be had. When this counsel was given, the
king did gladly follow it, and that his love might be more apparent to the
people, he caused lady Katherine daughter to therle of Hu^tley, his nigh
kinsema^, to be married to him. After this was dooen, the king willing yt this
Perkyn should reign in England, hastened his journey toward the borders, and
there coming, proclaimed openly ye all should be pardoned ye would bear with
the duke of York, and fight in his quarrel: and that me^ne might for fear
submit them selfs, they burned, spoiled, and killed with out all mercy as
far as they did go, but the king perceiuyng yt no Englishemen came to aid
this young duke, and that his soldiers were so laden with prays and spoils yt
they would not gladly go further he returned back to Scotland cariyng with him
infinite goods and riches. And when this duke came to Scotland again,
considering the great distruccion and loss of the Englishmen, and that none
came to aid him, to the intent that his iuglyng of his countrefeict dignite
might not be perceived, he said very craftily with a loud voice. Oh wretch
and stony heart, that I am not moved with the loss and death of so many
Englishemen of mine, and at that word he desired the king yt he would not
molestate his realm herafter with such cruel tormentyng, and fieryng. To whom
the king shaped him this answer right shortly. Truly sir me think you take
charge and thought of an other man's realm and not of your own, because that
I could se no man that would take your part, and help you with his power,
when you were now last among them. And for this cause ye king did little esteem
him after that time, countyng him inco^stant, unstable, and speaking words
not agreyng to his promise. When ye English lords and captains heard of this
business they were in great fear, and fled for safegade of their life's every
manne to his castle and hold, and gatheryng an axmie to withstand their
enemies certified the king in all post haste of the Scotts enterprise, which
hearing, prepared an army in all the have to fight against them. But the
Scotts being lode^ with their prays and spoils that they had, were gone
back to their country, ere the English men could be ready. And this was
the first commocion and business of the Scotts against the Englishemen. When
the Scotts were thus gone, and the king certified of it, he thought not to
suffer them longer, lest that by long tariyng and deferryng of ye matter,
they should take heart, and so with more fearsenes invade the realm again.

And assemblyng his counsel together, showed them that it was for the
proffite of the public weal to war against his enemies, to whom they all
agreed right gladly, and for the mainteinyng of this battaill, there was leuyed
a certain sum or tribute to be paid on every man's head, which payment
although it was but easy and small, yet many of the commen people grudged to
pay it. At this parliament also and conuocacion there was certain laws, acts
and statutes confirmed and made, as thought most expedient for the public
weal. And after this was dooen, the king prepared to fight in all the haste,
and gatheryng an army, made Giles Dabeney graund capitain over them, and in
his going to Scotland, there began suddenly civil battaill in the realm,
which was for the payment of this money, for that ye Cornishemen, (which made
this insurreccion) being but poor, could not well pay this tribute. And so
they gatheryng all together, one Michael Joseph Smyth and Thomas Fla^moke, did
take * The black Smyth.
upon them the governance of all this compainie. And seeing them grieved sore
that they should pay so much, did more and more incense their minds against
their prince. Albeit they laid this fault, and cause of exaction, to Ihon
Morto^ bishop of Ca^torbury, and Ruigenald Braye because they were chief of
the kings house.

Thus they preparyng them selves to war, when they had as well sufficient
viandrye as all other things ready, they took their journey to Wells, and
from thence intended to go to London, When the king was showed of this by his
auditors, that they were up, and that the lord Twychet, and the lord Audely
with other of the nobylitee had taken their parts, he thought first to scour
his realm of such rebels and traitors ere he would fight against the
Scotts. And therefore he caused Giles Dabeney to return back again then going
upon the Scotts, whose army he increased and multiplied with many pycked and
fresh warryers, that he might the better with less labor overcome these
rebels. Also least that the Scotts might now (having good oportunite)
invade the realm again (in this time of civil battyle) he caused lord Thomas
earl of Surrey, a puissaunt and most redoubted warryer whom he had taken
prisoner, at the overthrow of king Richard, and a little before that, had set
at liberty, and made treasourer of England, after the death of John Dynham,
to gather a bond of men at Durham, and there to keep of ye Scotts, if they
should chance to come, until such time that yt Cornyshe men being pacified
and subdued, he might send to them the forenamed Giles again with all his
power and army. When as the nobles heard of this busynes, they came to London
every man, with as many as they could make, to aid the king, if need should
be. In the which compaignie there was the earl of Essex, the lord Mongey, the
earl of Suffolk, Richard Thomas, William Say, lord Haward the earl of Surrey
his son a noble young man and of stout courage Robert Lytton Thomas Band
Robert Clyfforde, Wyllyam Dauers, George Very, Thomas Terell, Richard
Fizlewes, Ihon Baynsforth Thomas Mo^tigomery, Ihon Wyngfilde Roberte Brougthon,
James Terell, James Huberte, Ihon Wyndham, Robert Fenys Wylliam Carye Robert
Drurye, Ihon Audely, Robert Wyngfild with his brother Richard, Robert Brandon,
Thomas west de lauare Thomas Fenis Dacres David Owen, Henry Rosse, Ihon
Deuenysse, Henry Selenger, Ihon Paulet Ihon Burshere Thomas Wood Mathewe
Broune, Thomas Troys, Wylliam Sands. Edmu^de Graye of Wiltone, Ihon Verney
Thomas Brian Richard Poole, Thomas Harecourte, Ihon Hampden Edward Barkeley
Willya^ Bolongue with his son Thomas. Henry Haydon, Robert Clarence, Philip
Calthorpe, Robert Louell, Ihon Shaye Thomas Frouwike with many other of lower
degree that were most noble and cunnyng warryers.


In this mean space, Charles ye French king coming from the wars that he
had at Naples with Ferdinande, sent Ambassadors to the king for a peace and
league of amitee to be confirmed. When the king was informed of their coming,
and that they were at Caleis, he sent certain of his nobility to mete them
coming, and to keep them purposely at Dover, until such time that this
business were ended, that they might not know of it in any wise.

And now the Cornyshemenne gooynge from Wells (where they had their graunde
captain lord Audeley) went to Saulisbury and from thence to Wynchester, and
so to Kent, where they looked for help, but they were deceived, for the earl
of Kent, and the lord of Burgone Poole, the lord Cobham, Thomas Burcher,
Edward Ponyng, Richard Gilforde, Wyllyam Scotte, James Cromer, Ihon Peche,
John Darel, Henry Wyat Rychard Haulte, Ihon Fogge, and other were ready to
withstand their power, and to cause the people to bear true hearts to their
king. For the which, many of the Cornyshe men faynted and had less mind to
fight, and for fear fled privily in the night from their compaignie. But the
captains perceauyng they could have no help at their hands, trusted to
their own power, and brought them to Blackeheath feld nigh London, and there
pytched their tents in the plain to bid battle to the king, if he would mete
them, or else to invade the city, whom the king perceauyng to be there
ready to fight, he caused Henry Burschere earl of Essex, Edmunde Polam earl of
Suffolk and Richard Thomas, three noble warryers to besiege them on both
sides with two wings, and so came him self in the myddest sendyng before,
Giles Dabeney with a great power. And after his coming thus to the field,
both the earls and Richard Thomas set upon them violently, and at the first
brunt put them to flight and killed about two thousand that res^sied, and
took prisoners more then could be told and emonges them ye Captains which
shortly after were put to death. But this Michael Joseph was a man of such
stout courage and valiau^tnesse, yt he never fainted or once gave back until
such time he was stryken down, and killed openly.

When this battle was ended the king lost but three hundredth in all his
compaignye that were killed at that present. Also the prisoners that were taken
he pardoned, saving the captains and first autours of that mischief, whose
quarters he would have to be put on stakes and set in diverse places of
Cornewell, that their naughty doings and foolish entrepryses might be a
document for other hereafter to beware: but because there were many of that
country that would gladly have renewed battle, if they might have had some
Capitayn, and yt they were nothing abashed for ye overthrow of their late
insurreccion, he turned his mind, so yt they were not had thither nor their
quarters set upon any stakes there. When this business was in hand, ye king of
Scotts being certified of it by certain spies, thought best to invade England
again, and burned all the way as he did before, lest that the king should
provoke him to it of force, because he had dooen so much hurt to it before,
and thus came to Durham and there burned all about, entending also to win
Norham Castle, which the Bishop had furnished a little before with men and
vitaile sufficiently, so that he could have none access into that castle.
And this was the bishop Fox, that was bishop of Exeter, and for his godliness
and verteouse living after that, made bishop of Wells and Bathe. Which
bishop now being in this business, certified the king of it in all the haste,
and also therle of Surrey, that was then in York shyre with a great army of
men. To whom the Earl came shortly after, with his compaignye, and after him
followed other noble men of all quarters, every one bringi^g for his habilitee
as many as he could to aid the bishop, and fight in the defense and quarrel of
their king. And in this compaygnie was there many Lords therle of Westmerland,
Thomas Dacres, George Graunge, Rafe Neuel, Richard Latimer, George Lumley, John
Scroppe, George Oglie, Thomas Baron of Hilton, Henry Clifford, William Coyners,
Thomas Dercy.

Also knights. Sir william Percy, and three other of yt name as Percy.
Bulmery, Gascogne, Penington,
Sir Rauffe Bigot, Sir Rauffe Bows Sir Rauffe Elaker, Sir Thomas Appar, Sir
thomas Thwarton Sir Thomas Stranguishe, Sir Ihon Constable Sir Ihon Ratcliffe
Sir Ihon Sauell Sir Ihon Gouer Sir Musgraue Sir John Waller Sir John Aloder Sir
John Euerinham Sir Brian Stapelton Sir Thomas Vortell Sir Marduke Constable Sir
Christopher Pikeringe, Sir Christopher ward Sir Walter Stringlande, Sir Roger
Bellingha^ Sir William Heron Sir Rauffe Graye Sir Nicholas Ridley Sir Walter
Griffit Sir Ihon Heron Sir Rauffe feneuike Sir Thomas Graye Sir Christo Curwen
Sir Robert Varcoppe Sir Rouland Tempest Sir James Medcalfe


With many other Capitaynes, although not so noble in degree, yet as valiaunte
in martial feactes and prowesses of war. The Scotts hearing of the Earl of
Surrey that he was coming and at hand with a great power, then beseging this
forenamed Castle, which they could by no means overcome, they fled
streighte back to Scotland, whom the Earl followed as long as his
vyttailles served, and after that returned back to Durham, their abiding
until such time he knew further of the kings pleasure.

And in this mean space, one Henrye Hailes was sent Ambassadoure from
Ferdinand unto the king of Scotts for a general peace to be had with him and
the King of England, for he loved him well, and king Henrye also to whose
soonne the young Prince Arthure, he would have given his daughter Lady
Katheryne in marriage that by affinytee and kyndered of blood their love might
continue for ever.

So this Henrye entreated hartelye the King of Scotts for a peace, and when he
had some hope in it, he wrote unto the king of England, that it would please
him to send one of his nobles to help to conclude this matter with him and
the Scotts. The king because he had been in great trouble and then veraye
desierous of peace, he sent the bishop of Durham to him in all the haste. So
that this Henrye and the bishop reasoned with the Scottyshe ambassadors as
concerning this peace to be had, albeit they could not agree, because that king
Henrye desiered to have Perkyn Warbecke that was the cause of all this busynes,
and had so greatly disquieted his realm, whom the king would not deliver,
although he might of right, considering his falsehode and deceyte that he had
used with him.

Therefore, after that they had reasoned much of this matter, and could bring it
to no end, yet a truce was taken for certain years of this condition, that the
same Perkin Warbecke should be conueyghed out of Scotland, and not to tarry
there longer. While this was dooinge, king Henry caused the Ambassadors of ye
French king to be brought to him, which as it is showed before, were stopped
at Dover of their journey, until such time yt the insurreccion of the Eornish
men was ceased, and hearing yt they came for a peace and league to be made,
granted them it right gladly. So yt now being reconciled with.ii. kings, and
the same his neighbors, he thanked Fernand and his wife Elizabeth for ye they
caused this peace to be made betwixt him and the Scotts, and rewarded the
Ambassadoure most worthily after a princely manner.

And the time that this unity and concord was made, it was the year of our
Lord a thousand four hundredth four score and eighten, and ye.xii. year of
king Henry his reign.

And the king of Scotts kept his promise The.xii. pere of Henry the.vii.
well enough. For when he perceived manifestly that he was deluded, he called
unto him Perkin Warbeck, and first declared his benefits and pleasures that he
had dooen unto him, and then counseled him to get him unto some place where
he might bide in safegarde, and come again another time when he should have
more oportunitee But never after to look for any help at his hand, partly
because he had made peace with the king of England, and partly because he
saw that no Englishemen came to take his part, wherefore he desired him not to
be misgreued that he did thus leave him, and also counseled him to goo into
some other place or regyon, wherefore this Perkin was veraye sorye and (as the
king had counseled him) departed thence with his wife, and went into Ireland,
determining with him self if he might have no help of the men of Cornewale,
to return thence as fast as might be home to his great mailres and aunte
Margaret into Flaundres. But he was no sooner come thither, then he heard by
diverse messengers yt they of Cornewale were as ready to fight against king
Henry as ever they were before, of hoope of the which he went straight in to
Cornwall and there did stir up their hearts with gifts and promyses, that
all immediatelye called him their capitain and said that they would follow him
and in all things obey promptly his commandments. The^ was Perke^ in as
good hoope as ever he was, and (because he would do nothing rashelye and
without aduisemente) he purposed first to overcome citees and all well
defended places that lay in his way, and so to get as many as he could to
follow him and to take his part, and incontinently, to buckle with ye kings
host. When he had thus deliberate, he went straight to Exeter which was the
next city that he could come unto and besieged it, and because he had no
gunnes to break down the walls, he labored all that might be to break the
gates, but when he saw that they could not easily be betten down with any
thing, straight with he set fire on them.

Whereof, the citezins were very, sore afraied and privily in the night let
down diverse over ye walls with ropes to go certify the king of their
trouble, and in the mean time when they saw that their enemies had almost
bre^t up the gates of the one side, took great blocks and set them on fire on
the other side, for none other cause but that as well their enemies thereby might
be excluded, as they them selfs included. And they not trusting to this only,
made also wtin great ditches and other things to defend the^ from the inuasio^
of the rebels When Perke^ saw this, he got ladders, and would by that means
have come into the city, but they came not so sone up, but they were beat
down again, and by this means many were there slain thet would he not thence
depart, but trusted surely at the last that they should be glad to yield them
selfs all that were within for lack of viandrie. But as soon as the king heard
of this, he hasted with his host toward Exeter as fast as was possible and
sent diverse soldiers before to certify all men of his coming and
preparaunce, for at that time there was set forth to help them of Exeter,
Thomas Trencherd, William Corteney Walter Cortney, Edmond Carre, Ihon Halemel
Peter Eggecomb Thomas Fulford, Iho^ Crook William Saintmaur, with a great host
whose capitain was Edward Corteny earl of Denshire, and his son William,
which was a young man of most noble courage, which thing when Peter heard
tell of, he left besiegyng of Exeter and went to ye next town which is
called Tau^tun and there vieued his host and set it in array redye to fight,
howbeit,, he had but little affiaunce in the same, because many of his
soldiers were so slenderly harneissed, and no better skylled in war. When
the king saw he was gone to Tau^tun he hasted thither after him with all
speed. Thither came also Edward ye duke of Buckingham a young man very
valiant and of lusty courage, and him followed a great compaignye of noble
men as Giles Brigge, Alexander Brayha^, Moryshe Barkeley, Robert Tame, Ihon
Sapcot, Ihon Wadha^, Hugh Lutrel, and Nycholas his son, William S^orton,
Thomas Lynde, Ihon Semar, Wylliam Norris, Thomas Blunt, Ihon Guyse Roberte
point, Harry Vernon, Ihon Mortimer Ihon Speak, Rychard Beauca^p, Fraunces
Chenie, Roger Tokete, Roger Wenburg Henry Roger, Edward Darell, Ihon
Langforde, Richard Lacon, Thomas Tremaile, Edward Sutton, Amiss Paulet, Ihon
Byknell, Wyllyam Sayntemaur, Thomas Long, Nycholas Latimer, Ihon Turbaruyll,
Wylliam Martyne Walter Hungorforde, Moryshe Barons, Richard Corbet Thomas
Cornuall, and many other besides these.

But the king when he came nygh to the town sent before to begin battle,
Roberte Broke, Lord Richard Thomas, and Giles Dabeney with a great and
strong host, to the intent that he him self with his soldiers might set
upon them behynd. But this devise and purpose of the king was al superfluous.
For Perkin, so sone as he espied that the king was ready to fight, fled
privily in the night into a sanctuary at Bellylo abbey, and there lurked. But
whether this Perke^ so did for fear least his men should forsake him or for
the timeditie of him self, it is as much uncertain, as it is probable and
sure that the king took by his flight great commoditee.

For the Corneshe men were surely purposed either to win and overcome
their enemies or else not one of them to have lived any day longer. When
king Henrye knew that Perkin was gone, he sent after him many horse men
that if it might be, they should overtake him in his journey and bring him
back.

But Perkyn Warbecke made such speed, that he was not seen before he came
into the Sanctuary, but his petie capitaines could not escape so clean. For of
them, the most part were ta ken and brought back again to the king. The
residue of the soldiers when they understood ye Perkyn their chief capitain
was fled and ye other taken, gave up them selfs by and by to the king without
any more business, and of him most gently were forgeuen. When all was dooen, the
king went again to Ereter and there both gave great thanks to such as were
worthy, and punished the authoures and sturrers up of this insurrection most
straitlye. And in ye mean time many of the soldiers road to s. Mighels
mount and there (as chance was) found Katherin Perking wife, and brought her
straight like a bond woman and captive to the king. And the king sent her by
and by accompanied with a goodly sort of matrons (because she was so goodly a
young woman) to London to the queen as a true and sure token of vyctorie. And
whiles he tarried there at Exeter supposyng with him self, that he could have
no perfect victory until he had gotten Perkin him self, which was the beginner
of all this sedicion and strife, sent forth two companies of men to besiege
the sanctuarye where Perkin was, that by no means he might escape away, and sent
him word also by certain trusty messengers that if he would humbly submit
him self, he should be forgeuen of all that was committed. Wherefore, Perkin
now seeing and ponderynge the state of misery, that he was in, went
voluntarily out of the sanctuary and committed him self to the kings pleasure.

Then was the king weray glad and took his journey immediately after toward
London, not without the great metyng of people which came out of every quarter
to se this feloe as he were a monstre, because he being but an aliente durst
be so bold to come in to this so noble a realm to make battaill, and delude
noble men after such a fassion. But when the king was come to London he
appointed certain men to keep him both night and day very vigilantly, to
thentent that he might neither conueigh himself out of the land, ner goo any
whether within this realm to make any like perturbacion and disquietnes.

After this the king perceiuyng ye there were many as well in Somerset as in
Deue^shire, which were helpers of the rebels greatly, both going forth and
coming homeward, thought it good to punish them also, least peradventure
they might be ye more bold to do a like thing after. And therefore he
committed this business to Amiss Paulet knight, and Robert Sherburne deane of
Poules to be dooen. Which in serchyng out all such thoroweout both the
shires, were very exact and diligent, but they were favorable to al such as did
it for fear or compulsion. Yet were they to none so favorable but they were
thought for their defaultes indifferently to be punished. So that equity
therein was very well executed.

In the same year of a small matter befell great strife between king Henry and
James king of Scotland, which strife began of this fassion. Certain young
men of ye Scotts came armed unto Duresme castle, and beheld it wondrous
circumspectly as though they had been desierous to know what was there dooen.
But when the kepers of the castle could not perceive yt they went about any
hurt or displeasure, and seeing them go away of their own accord, they made
no words but let them alone. But when they came again the next day and
vieued it likewise, the kepers of ye said castle demanded of them what was
their intent. They au^swered them (like rude and vnmanerlie ientlemenne) as
frowardly as could be thought, in so much yt at the last through much
altercacion of both parties, they fell together by the ears, and there were
some of the Scotts slain and the residue put to flight. Which when they came
home certified their king of the same. Wherewith he being sore moved to anger,
sent word to king Henry that he would without doubt revenge his querell,
wherefore king Henry being very sorry, not so much forfeare, as for to live in
quietness and peace in his age, made him answer yt it was not doe^ through his
default or cou^saill, but rather by the rashenesse of his subjects which if
they could be proved guilty should be according to the fault punished.
Wherefore he desired him most lovingly to be co^te^ted. But this was not hable
to mitigate or swage the Scotts anger and outrageousnesse. For the which
cause Richard bishop of Duresme which was more heuie then all other, because
his seruu^ates were ye beginners of this discord, wrote many letters to king
James to desire him to keep peace and be at quiet. With the which letters the
kings rage was so quenched, yt he both sent very kind letters again to him,
and desired him heartily to come over and talk with him. Of ye which tidings
the bishop was very glad, and went straight to king Henry to show him the
matter and had leave of him incontinenly to go over to him.

When he came into Scotla^de, he was received as louyngly as could be thought
of the king himself, at an abbey called Melrose, and there after that he had
complained much of the cruelty that was used toward his men here in
England he began to commen secretly of other matters, and especially of the
amity between king Henry and him, the which to be for ever stablished and
confirmed, he desired yt kings daughter Margaret in marriage. Of the which
thing albeit the bishop was glad in his heart, yet he would make no perfect
answer or sheweforth any sure hope of ye same, but said that when he came
home, he would do the best in the matter that lay in him. Wherefore the king
shortly after dimissed him, and desired him ernestly to break ye same matter
to king Henry. And when he was come home, so he did, and ye proffer pleased ye
king very well, because he was a man which was always more delited with
peace and quietness then with the troublesomnesse, of battaill.

And now did approach ye death of Perkin Warbeck, and of Edward earl of
Warwick which had so long lain all ready in the tower. But Perke^ thought
that he would save himself, and therefore on a time he took his leggues and
ran away, but so sone as the king hard tell thereof, he made men after him
with all the speed ye might be, with whose clamours and shoutes Perkyn was so
feared, yt of necessity he was compelled to go to an abbaie which was called
Bethele^, and there intreacted ye abbot of the place to desire the king of his
pardon that he might not dye. Which thing the abbot did for him and obtained
it. Wherefore Perken was brought bound and feitered, to Westminster and there
stood an whole day in the sight of all men to the great shame and reproach
of him self. And after (partly because the king had promised him his life, and
partly because he should no more run away) he was committed to ye tower.
Where his wickedness boylong so hot within his breit, would not suffer him to
escape the ve^geau^ce and punisheme^t of God, but shortly after was most
justly and worthily put to death as herafter shall be showed. Then it chaunsed
ye a monk whose name was Patricke had a scholar, whom he promised if he would
follow his counsel, should easily come to the kingdom of England. Which
scholar when he had ones heard his masters mind, was very instaunte in the
matter and desired his master, not to forget his purpose, but rather begin
it as soon as was possible. Wherefore, when they be twene them selfs had taken
deliberacion and counsailled of the thing how it should be brought to pass,
they went both together into Kent. And there began this young feloe to tell
privily to many that he was the earl of Warwick, and had got out of the
tower by the help of this monk. To the which, when he perceived credence
given he declared it openly, and desired al men of help.

But or ever this sedicion began to goo foreward, the heddes and principalles
of the same were taken and casle into prysone. Of which the one was condemned
to death, and the other conde^pned to perpetual prison and darkness. For at
that time here in England was so much attrybuted to prestes, and al religious
me^, that though they had committed felony, murder, yea or treason, they
should not have been therefore condemned to death. Moreover, whosoever could
read, though it were never so little, what crime soever he had committed (save
treason) should by his book be saved, and therefore it was invented, that if
the default were so great, that another manne should suffer death for the same,
he should only be burnt in the hand, wherefore he ye had committed theft,
should be marked in the hand with this letter T. if he had committed murdre,
with M. and after that, if he were deprehended in like crime, then there should
no favor at all, more then to other men, be showed. Which act was made
and confyrmed, by this king Henry in the second year of his reign, and taken
of the Frenchemen, which are wont if they take any such, to cut of one of
his cares and let him go. Which privileges of books made thefes both bold,
and plenty through out all the coasts and parties of this his realm of
England.

But now to my matier again. Perkyn, of whom we spoke much before, whiles he
was in ye tower corrupted many of the kepers, partly with gifts and partly
with fair promyses, so that they were all agreed (save the leuetenaunt, whom
he fully determined to kill) that he and the earl of Warwike should gooe their
way out of the toure and afterward to make the best shyfte that they could
for them selfs. But this his purpose came not to full effect. For it was
known within short time after, for the which he and his fellows all of the
same counsel were hanged by the necks. And the earl of Warwike, because he
was foundegyltie in the same defaulte, was behedded, which was dooen in the
year of our Lord a thousand four hundredth and.xcix. and in the.xiii. year
of this king Henry his reign.

The next year after, was here in England a (...) (...)
a great plague whereof men died in many places vereye sore, but especially
and most of all in London. For there died in that year above thyrtye
thousand. Wherefore the king sailed over to Caleis and there tarried a great
while. In his being there came over to him Philippe Earl of Flaunders, and was
received of him as louyngly as could be thought, and also or ever they
departed, the league which was made between them two not long before was
renewed.

Sone after, when the plague was slaked, the king returned again into
England, and was no sooner come thither, but there met him one Gasper Pons
sent from Alexander the bishop of of Room, which brought with him
indulgences and perdo^es whereby he made the king believe that he and his should
fly straight to heaven, but those could not be granted without a great
sum of money, the which the rather that he might obtain, he promised part
of it to the king himself, so deceauyng both ye king and ye people. In this
same year was burnt a place of ye kings, which he after builded up again and
named it Richemount.

About this time died three bishops here in England, Ihon Morton bishop of
Cantourbury Thomas Langton bishop of Wynchester, and Thomas Rotherham bishop
of York.

Also in this year, there were great maryages made, for king Henry had given
his daughter lady Margarete to the king of Scotts, and his son prince
Arthur to Lady Katherine daughter to Ferdinande king of Spain, which
marriages were made specially for this cause that he might live in peace with
those kings in his old age.

After this, prince Arthure that came to London purposely to be married, went
to Wales again with his lady and wife to ouersee all things well there, and
to the entente he might not miscarye or go out of the way in rulyng his
domimon, he had with him many noble me^, as first Richard Poole his nighe
kynsman which was made chief of his privy chaumbre, and David Philippe husher
of his halle. Also he had of his counsel certain knights as Wyllyam Vdall,
Richard Croft, Peter Neuton, Henrye Varnam, Thomas Englefelde. And other
besides them, as Ihon Walestone, Henry Marine, Wyllyam Smyth priest chief of
his counsel late bishop of Lincoln, and sir Charles Booth a lawer, then
bishop of Herforde.

A little before this marriage, Edmu^d Poole earl of Suffolk son to lady
Elizabeth the sysler of king Edward, was accused for killyng of a man, and
although the king pardoned him, who^ he might justly have conde^^ed for that
offense, yet because he was rayned at the bar, which he thought a great main
and blemishe to his honor, took it heuely, and shortly after fled to
Flaunders without any passeporte or license of the king, to queen Margarete his
aunte, but he returned again, and so excused himself before the king, that he
was found fautles in any thing yt was objected unto him. Also when this
marriage was kept at London, with great pomp and sole^nitee, this Edmunde fled
again to Flaunders with his brother Richard, either for yt he had been at great
charges at the same marriage and so far cast in debte that he was not hable to
pay, either because ye queen Margarete his aunte had allured him, orels for
eiuill will and envy that the king should prosper so well. When it was known
yt he was gooen, and the king certified there of, he feared yt some busynes
should rise by his means and was sorry yt he had pardoned him for his offense
lately committed. But sone after, yt the earl came from Flaunders, sir Robert
Cursone knight and captain of Ha^mes castle, feignyng him self to be one of
that conspiracye, went purposely to espy what the queen intended against king
Henrye, which afterward for his so doing was in great favor with him. For
the king was so vigylaunte and circumspecte in all his matters, that he did
know them namelye that either bare him eiuill will, or woorked any in their
mind, whom he caused to be attached and cast in hold. And among them
Wyllyam the earl of Deuonshyres son, which married lady Catheryne daughter
to king Edward was taken, and another Wyllyam brother to Edmonde earl of
Souffolke, James Tyrell, Ihon Wyndham. But these two wylliams were taken rather
of suspection then for any offense of gyltines. Wherefore Wylliam this Earls
son of Deuonshyre after the death of king Henrye, was delivered and had in
great favor with the kings son Henrye the eight, but shortly after when he
began to exercise him self again in marciall feats of war, he sickened
of a disease called (Plureses) and died therewith, which because it was
strange and unknown to the phisicia^s, it was incurable. He left one son
behind him alive to uphold the name of that auncetree. The other Wyllyam
brother to Edmunde the earl of Suffolk had also greater favor showed him in
prison, then he had before. And as for James Terel, and Iho^ Wyndham, because
they were traitors, and manifestly accused of the same, were put to death, and
behedded. But when the earl of Suffolk heard of this, he was in great
despair with him self that he should never frame his matters well, and so
went all about Germanye and France for aid and socour, prouyng if he could
find any help at their hands, whom when he perceived to show no token of
love toward him in that behalf, he made him subject to yt prince of
Flanders, but his brother Rychard being an expert man, did so wisely order
and behave him self in that business, that he was not greatly found gyltie
in any point of that matter. The king not yet being out of all fear of his
enemies, perceauyng that many sanctuary men looked for a fair day, desired of
Alexander bishop of Room that all traitors and banished men should not be
saved by any sanctuary, and that such as were there in hold, should take them
herafter as no refuge and socoure to them, if they once gooe out, which thing,
after the bishop had granted it, was to the ease and quietness of all the
realm.

When the king had all his business so well ended, and brought in a good
stay. Prince Arthure dyed half a year or less, after that he had married
lady Katheryn, for whose death there was great lamenting. It is reported also
that lady Katherine feared such like chance evermore, for because yt after
she had taken her leave of her parents, and sailed toward England, she was
tossed long in ye sea, with the violence of the water and the wynd, ere the
ship could have any la^dyng

Not long after, the queen was brought ni bed with a daughter, and died
upon the same, which daughter also tarried but for a season after her mother.
There departed also within short space after, Reynalde Bray, a man for justice
so comme^dable, that if any thing had been done against good law or right, he
would streyghte reprove ye king for it. Of the same virtue was Ihon Morto^
bishop, and would do in all things as he did in reproving the king for the
reformation of things amiss, which bishop died.ii. years before. About ye
time also dyed Henry bishop of Canterbury whose room William Warra^ bishop of
London supplied, and in the bishop of Londons place was elected William Barons,
after whose death succeeded Rychrde Fiziames bishop of Chichester

In this year, which was the.xvi. of his reygne and of our lord. M.ccccc.
and.ii. years, the king did (...)
kept his parliament, wherein many things were dereed, and made for the
public commodytee, and among other things it was determined that thieves and
murderers duly convicted by the law to dye, should be burned in yt hand and
quit if they could read on the book any one word

Furdermore, it was decreed yt the people should pay certain money to the king,
and that the goods of them that were banished and fled, should be disparsed
and set to sale. Also the priests were commanded to pay money for the
maintenance and sustentacion of the common weal.

And now the king drawyng nigh to age, and considering the great battayles that
he had in times past, which (as it was thought) came of over much welthines,
provided a remedy right shortly for it. And to the intent that men should
not thynck yt he would oppress them or do the^ wrong for of all people he
hated oppressors, therefore he devised with him self, by what honest mean he
might do it, and thus devising called to mind yt English me^ did little pass
upon the obseruacio^ of any laws yt were made, in so much, ye if such a thing
should be called to account, he thought many men as well lords, as other of
the lay fee, would be found fautie. And so searchyng over the statutes that
he had made, punished them a little by the pursse that had transgressed them.
After that he appointed two commyssioners to receive the forfeictes, the one
Richard Hempson, and the other Edmunde Dudley booth lawers of the temporaltee,
which persons for the desire to please their king had no respect how they
got the monye so they might have it either by right or wrong. Albeit, ye king
having pitee of his people, after that he perceived they were sore punyshed and
polled unknowing to him restored to them their money, of whom it was exacted
unjustly, and depryued the^ of their office that had so unjustly executed it.

In this year, dyed queen Elisabeth of Castle wife to Ferdinand king of
Aragone without any issue of man child, so that the heritage did fall to lady
Johan her eldest daughter, by Ferdinand which after was married to the Earl of
Flaunders, the^ made by this marriage also chief gouernoure over all that
country.

Shortly after about the.xiii. day of January which was the year of our lord.
M.ccccc. and five this Earl having a nauye prepared sailed out of Flaunders
with his wife to Spain, but he had not set forth long, ere the wether began
to change, and tempests to rise so, that at the last fearsenes of the wind,
did drive them to the coasts and borders of England, where he landed at an
haue^ or port called Wynmouth, sore against the mind and consent of all his
company, which knew well that the same landyng should be the occasion of
long tariyng there. When it was kno^n that he was thus landed, there came
agreate number of harnissed men to prove if he were the kings friend or no,
which when they perseaued him to be his friend, and intended nothing but love
and frendeshippe, Thomas Trencharde the chief of that compaignie went to the
king, desyring him (if it would witesalfe) him to take a lodging at his house,
which was even nigh at hand trusting thereby to have thank of. ye kings
master whom he certifyed in all the haste of his coming

Also John Caroe desired him that he would not gooe until such time that he
had spoken with the king his loving and feithfull friend, consideringe that he
was within two or three days journey of him. So that at length although he
laid many excuses to have been gooen and departed, at their instance tarried
there with them. And when ye king was enfourmed of his coming, he rejoiced
highly and sent certain of his nobilitee to bring him where he was. Wherefore
this Earl seeing no remedy but yt he must needs tarry, he went straight to
Windesore where the king did lie. And shortly after followed his wife queen
Johan. After they two had co^moned of many things together at the last they
began to treat of a league and perpetual amitee to be had.

And first King Henrye desired to have Edmonde Poole banished man under his
captiuitee and bondage. To whom the Earl answered and said that it was not
in his power to restore him, yet after much entreating and praiyng, the king
granted at the last that he should he sent to him right shortly. After
thus for prolonginge of time yt he might have his desire, he brought Philyp the
Earl to London, and there showing him his city, returned from thence with
him.

Then Edmonde Poole, seeing that there was no more hope to be had in foren
Princes, and trusting that king Henry would put him at libertee came to
England willingly to prove his gentleness, that if upon this expectacyon and
hope, he were deceived, yet he might at the last dye and be buried in his
native country. wear, when he had received this garment, he did send
Balthesar Castillio a Mantuan borne unto king Henry, which received of ye
knights a garter, in token yt he should be a knight of the same order. When
this business was dooen, Jews the French king mistrustyng that he should
never have manchild, married his eldest daughter Lady Anne to Frances Valese
Dolphine Duke of Engosye, which was sure a little before to Charles the king of
Castle. And when king Henry knew of this, he thought best to mary his
daughter Lady Mary to this Charles king of Castle which marriage was confirmed
and made at Calise by ye bishop of Winchester and the ambassadors of
Flaunders, the Lady being but.x. years of age.

And now were the three years expired, at which time king Henry thought his
fatal day to draw nyghe. Therefore to the entente that the people might wyshe
and pray for him after his death for his kindness that he showed to them,
he caused a general pardon to be given unto all offenders, (...)all
(...)done.
sauinge only thieves and murderers, because that they did not offend him, but
another manne. For this goodness showed to the people, processyon was in
every place of the Realm for the safegarde of the king.

Nevertheless his time was come, ye God would have him, so that he died
the.xxi. day of Apryll, in his palaice of Richemou^de, the which was the year
of our Lord a thousand five hundredth and eight. His corpse was buried at
Westminster in a chapel the which he caused to be builded. He reigned three
and twentye years, and more then seven months, and lived.lii. Also he had by
his wife the queen.viii. children.iiii. menchildren, and.iiii. women children,
of ye which.iii. remained alive, Henry prince of Wales, lady Margaret, and
lady Marie. He was a man of body but lean and spare, albeit mighty and
strong therewith, of personage and stature some what higher then ye mean sort
of men be, of a wondrefull beauty and fair complexion, through al his
body, of a merry and laughyng countenance, especially in his co^municacio^,
thin tethed, and thin heared, of wit in all things like Solomon, of a
princely and redoubted stomach, and in great affairs and matters of weighty
importance very witty For such things as he went about, he did them
warely and not without great deliberacion and breathyng. Besides this, he was
sobre, moderate, buxome, and bounteouse, and without all pride and highness of
stomach, in so much, yt he was hard and rough with them ye were noted of yt
crime for no man had so great autorite with him, yt either durst or could do
any thing as his own fa^tasie did serve him, without ye consent and agreement
of other. Yea he kept this point so well, yt he would not suffer his own mother
to have her will. For this was his saying * yt a king was a ruler that should
rule and not be ruled. He was also very just, and defended The noble and wise
saying of Henry the seventh.
ye matters and causes of many poor people from the power of great men. And
so living all his time in virtue, renown, glory, and valiauntnes of merciall
prowesses, gave up his ghost at the last, which undoubtedly is in that
place, where everlasting joy and gladness remains for ever and ever.

Henry the eight.
OVRE MOST GRACIOUS sovereign lord king Henry the eight, the soonne of Henry
ye seventh, began his reign the.xxiiii. day of Appryll, in ye year of our
Lord. M.ccccc. ix and was crouned at Westminster in the feast of the natiuite
of sa^net Ihon Baptist then next following.

About the middle of the month of Iuyn the (...)nges highness was married, and
the.xxi. day of the same month he came from Grenewiche by land, and so road
through Graschurch street to the tower with whom came many noblemen and
gentlemen well apareled, but specially the duke of Buckyngham^ which road in
a goune of goldsmythes work, a thing of great richesse, and so the king
^ested there from Thursdaie till Saterdaie, in the which season he created
certain knights of the Bathe.

And upon Saturdaie about four of ye clock at after noone, the king came
ridyng through cornehill in most honorable wise, before whom road thesaid
knights of the Bathe in blewe long gounes with hoodes upon their shoulders,
spread after the manner of masters of art, and tasselles of white and blewe
silk fastened upon one of their shouldres. The duke of Buckyngham^ road next
before the king, except the mayre of London and certain sergeauntes and
herauldes. The which duke road in a long goune of nedle work right costly
and rich, and bare a little white staff of silver in his hand in sign and
token yt he was high and chief steward of ye feast of coronacion. And thesaid
duke had about his neck a broad and flat close chein of a new devise not
before used, fret with precious great rubies and other stones of great value.
And over the king was borne a rich canapie by the four barons of the four
ports, and there followed seven foloers, whereof the first was trapped in the
arms of saint Edward, the second in the arms of saint Edmond, the third in
ye arms of. S. George, the fourth in the arms of England, the fifth in the
arms of France, the sixth and the. vii in sundry trappors of rich cloth of
gold with costely devices. After the foloers came a gentleman ledyng a spare
horse most richely garnisshed. And after him sir Thomas Brandon then master
of ye kings horse, right well and goodly appointed and well horssed and
richely trapped, the which horse with the apparel was to the king belongyng.

And when ye co^paignie was thus with all honor passed, ymediatly ensued a
goodly compaignie of gentlemen and well appointed. And after them came the
queen sittyng in a horse litter alone, clothed in a rich mantell of tissue in
her hear with a circulet of silk, gold and perle about her head. But when her
grace was a little passed the sign of the cardinals hat in cornehill, such a
sodein shower there came, and fell with such force and thickness, yt the canapy
borne over her was not sufficient to defend her from wetyng of her ma^tell and
furre of powderd e^mines win ye same, but ye she was fain to be co^ueighed
under the houell of the Drapers stalles till ye shower were over passed which
was not long. And then she passed on her way, who^ followed.vii. chariotes with
ladies. In the first was two ladies, and upon ye chariot waited.vii.
gentlewome^ ridyng on palfreyes, yt is to say, four in one suyte and three in
another And upon ye second chariot waited also seven gentle women. And upon ye
other three six, which all were clothed in silk, and.iiii. of the first
chariottes were covered with cloth of gold, and all ye horses trapped in sondrie
colored veluettes to ye heard pauement. And after all theforsaid chariottes
and gentlewome^, came ridyng upon a bushement.ccc. of the guard, ye more part
of them having bows and arowes and theother hawberdes and other weapons. And
ye shall understand yt all the side of Cornehill, from saint Mighelles to the
stocks was hanged with gremed clothe of sondrie colors, as scarlettes,
crimosing sanguines, murries, light and brown, and beuties and violetes. And
upon theotherside, all with rich tapet^es and clothes of arras. And as for Chepe
was garnished with clothes of gold, of velvet and of silk in most richest
wise, whereon was dooen no little hurt with theforsaid shower.

Upon the morrow, being Midsomer day, ye king and the queen, about.viii. of ye
clock in the morning on foot, came from their palaies through ye great hail
and the palais court unto the church of Westminster. In which progress,
passed before them eight and thirty bishopes and abbottes mitered in
procession, and so were conueighed to a space between ye high altar and the
quere, where, by ye Bishop of Cauntourbury, the king and the queen were set in
honorable seats upon a scaffold in the forenamed place, made of a competent
height, and there of the archbishop was gloriouslye crouned to the great
comfort of all ye land. And after that long and honorable solempnizacio^ was
done, the king and queen were again co^ueighed unto Westmynster hall, and there
set to dynner, where was that day holden a tryumphant and plenteous feast with
all honorable service to such a feast apperteignynge. And for the order of ye
setting, the king sat in the myddle of the table, and the queen upon his lift
hand by the space of two yardes length from him. And upon the right hand, at
ye tables end sat ye archbishop of Cau^tourbury alone, and no mo at ye
table. After which three estates thus set, all their.iii. seruyces were brought
together till they came unto ye steps of the deyse, where a while rested ye
queen's and archebishoppes seruyces, till ye king was served, and then the
queen's and tharchbishoppes set forward together, but the queen was first
served and her service set down before the other.

Here I will pass over the orderyng of the hall with the offyciers and
garnyshyng of the side tables with many noble men and women, and many other
ceremonies executed there that day by lords and other head officers, as the
lord steward the duke of Buckyngham, the chief buttler the earl of Aru^dell,
the lord marshall with many other. The exceadyng richesse of the cupboorde
garnished with weighty and massy flagonnes, pottes and cups of gold, silver
and gilte, with the gift of.ii. cups of gold given by ye king and the queen
unto ye Mayre of London, as his accustomed fee at every coronacio^. Al ye which
acts with many mo I here pass over

Then upon the tuesdaye next ensuyng was begone a merciall iustes, within ye
paleys of Westmynster. Of ye which ye lord Haward and sir Edward his brother,
with sir Richard brother to ye lord Marquis and Gyles Capel and two other were
chale^gours. And sir Ihu^ Pechy, Master Carre, Master Charles Brando^ and sir
Rowland with other. ii, were defe^dours. Upon the which day, two of ye chief of
ye said chalengers enclosed in a mountain goodly and curiously garnished, were
by a lion made of glitteryng gold conueighed out of Westmynster hall into ye
paleys, and so led about the tylt, till they came right against ye king and
queen's standing. And there ye mou^tain opened, and the said two chief
chale^goures road to the, clean armed unto ye tiltes end with ye other four
following them, where they houed til the defendours were fet in. The which sone
after came in at the gate by the kings street, but sir Ihon Pechy as chief
defendour, came enclosed in a castle drawn with a lioness garnished with
glytteryng silver. And upon the forpart of this castle was set a pomegranate
tree well and curiously brought, and so cunnyngly yt it seemed to ye people to be
very pomegranades that honge on yt tree. And upon ye top of this said castle
stood a fane, with the arms of Saint George thereon painted. The which castle
was so drawn about ye tilt, and when it came right again ye kings tent, it
was opened by a vice, and out road yt said defe^dour, and after his obeysau^ce
made to the king and queen, and in like manner did all his feloes, then he road
unto yt end of the tilt next the gate where he entered before, and then ye said
sir Ihon Pechy as chief chalengour received a spear, as ye lord Hawarde
before had done, and ran together v. coursses continually, to ye great praise
and laud of them both. And then ra^ne ye other as they were called upon and
assigned sundry times by ye king, and specially ye kings highness commanded
master Gyles Capel to ro^ne, howbeit his horse yt day did hi^ not most
plesau^t service. And thus they continued their disporte.iiii. hours, to yt
great comfort of ye beholders and to yt honor of them al. Howbeit, ye most
speres were broken by ye lord Haward and sir Iho^ Pechy.

Then upon ye thursday next foloyng, ye said chalengeours and defendours made a
goodly disporte, as first ye said chalengeours coming out of Westmynster hal,
caused to be co^ueighed before them a pageau^t like to a forest, pitched full
of grene boughs, within the which sat a virgyn appareled after the Spanishe
guise, and semblau^tes of buckes and dooes about her. And when the said
chalengeours with their said pageau^t came before the kings standing, suddenly
ra^ne out of ye said forest a pryket, and after him a brase of grehou^des, ye
which courssed ye said pricket and there shortly after slew it. And after yt a
foster blewe a moote for ye death thereof, and smote of ye head quickly and
presented it unto ye queen. And ye done the said chale^geours passed over to
thend of the tilt and there houed a while. And then shortly after ye tro^pettes
and many of the said ge^tleme^ well horssed and appointed, yt before had
co^ueighed into ye place the chale^gours, co^ueighed in also ye defe^dours, the
which coming in with a like pageau^t before the^ (except that the maide^ in their
forest was atired after thenglish fassio^) and demeaned them in all things
like as before ye chale^gers had done. And when they were come to ye other end
of the tylt, anon was commanded yt the turney should begin, whereupon
swords were brought to either of them. And then first turneyed yt lord Haward
and master Pechye a good season and after them yt residue two and two till
either of them had furnyshed ye full of.xii. strokes that by sundry times ye
fire sprange out of the helmettes. And when they had finished yt fearte of
arms, not without many sore strokes and often departing by the marshalles
servants and some of the kings guard. They then were commanded to run
together all.xii. and so to Turney til either had smitten a certain nombre of
strokes, but then was pieces of harneyste hewn into the field, and swords
broken and bowed, ye wonderful it was and fearful to behold. The which
continued with such egernesse, that their no^bre of strokes passed, and that the
power of ye marshals servants suffis^d not to depart the^, til ye kings
highness called to his guard to help to disseuer them, which was not dooen
without great pam, and although ye every of them quite them full manfully,
yet Charles Brando^ yt day was greatly auaunced and furthered by his horse,
the which yt day faught with his teth and feet like a serpent, and there unto
was so pleasant and light of head, that he had his aduersarye ever at great
advantage, in so much yt he ever struck.iii. strokes before he received one.
This day also was showed diverse deuyces of armor, as some of white and grene
chekered, some of black paled with gold, some al red and some all grene. And
the harnayes the which the said Charles Brandon then turnayed in, was all
over gylte from the head piece to the sabattons. And thus with all honor
and worship to them selves and great pleasur to the beholders, they brought
this marciall play and dysporte to an end.

Shortly after this, was Hempson and Dudley committed to the tower, and Dudley
was arreigned the.xvii. day of Iulii, in the Guldehall and there before the
Mayre, and other the kings co^myssioners, was condemned and judged to be
drawn, hanged and quartered, and then commanded again to the tower, where he
lay long after And the Myghelmasse following was Hempson conueyghed into
Northampton shyre, and there a reigned, and lastly judged to be drawn hanged
and quartered, and then brought again to the tower, and there remained till
such season as shall be showed here after. In this year also, was holde^ at
Westminster the.xxi. day of Ianuarii a parlyament, wherein was made diverse and
sondrie acts and statutes.

In the second year of the king, and the.xvii. day of August was Hempson and
Dudley brought unto the scaffolde upon the tower hill, and there were
behedded. And the first day of January folowinge, Henry the kings son was
borne. And upon a wednisdaye being the.xii. day of Februarii next following was
holden atriumphant iustes within the palayes of Westminster. Of the which was
chief chalengeoure the kings maiestee with iii. other, whose names shall be
minded in the end of this declaracion.

And first for a conuenyencie of the showing of this most excellent feats of
arms. Ye shall vnvnderstande that the kings grace with the other three
chalengeours enclosed in a mountayn which was passing connyngly and curiously
wroughte with rocks, trees and dear, whereof on either side sat a foster clad
in grass grene satin, with either a bent bow in his hand, and abroad arrowe,
and a horn about either of their necks. And by the sides of either of the
said fosters, lay certain spe^es. And in the front of the said mount
between the two corner pyllers sat a fair vyrgyn, clothed in blewe and light
tawny satin, making of a garlande of rosemary and other herbs. This pageaunt
or mount was drawn upon wheles by a leoparde all of beaten gold, and an Antlop
of beaten flat silver, the which two beasts were led with.ii. myghtie and high
woodwoses by two strings of sylke, and so conueyghed out of Westminster hall
about the tylt, until such time as the same mountain came right against the
queen's tent. About the which was attendaunte many gentilmen on foot cladde
in coats of white and grene satyn.

But if I should here rehearse the strange and costly apparel which the fore
ryders were clothed in, with their rich trappers and other deuyses, I should
here make a long tariynge. Wherefore to proceed as I began. When this mount
as is a ^oue said was before the queen's tente, either of the fosters blewe a
moote, and that done the kings majesty first issued out of the mount and
another with him at one door, and at another door rode out the other two
chalengeours, all.iiii. having in their hands either of them a small
scochion, the which they offered unto the queen's grace. and al.iiii.
chalengeours had cotes beneth ye wast of blewe sylke garnished with portcolyes
of Venise gold without difference, saving the kings graces coat was of blewe
velvet, and the other were of blewe satin. And where the kings away ters were
in coats of white and grene, the other were in iackettes of blewe satyn. And
after the chalengeours had thus offered up their scochio^s and made their
obeysau^ce unto the queen. The kings grace with ye other road unto the end
of the tylt over against Westmynster hall gate, and there houed till ye
defe^dours were brought into ye place

Then the foresaid gentylmen which before had brought in the king, road for
the defendours the which anon came in at the weste gate of the palais in
sundry pageauntes and goodly devices which here I will ouerpasse, for as much
as the day following they far exceded, whereof the declaration will ask a
long leysoure. Wherefore to proceed further, when the said defendours according
to the law of arms had been conueighed about the tylte, and were come to
their standing nere unto the west end of ye tylte: Anon the kings maiestee
called for a spear, and so ran.vi. courses before he left, and brake in
those.vi. courses.iiii. spears as well and as valyantly as any man of arms
might break them, and such as were broken upon him, he received the^ as
though he had felt no dynt of any stroke. In so much, that where at ye
beginning, in ye field was many a fear full and timorous heart for him,
considering his excellency and his tenderness of age. After they had seen the
said coursses run and his manfull deliver chargynge and dischargynge, he
reioysed so the peoples hearts that a man might have seen a thousand weeping
iyen for joy And then such as were in most fear saw by his marcial feats
that by the aid of God, he was in no danger

And when the other chale^geours had ro^ne a few courses, he went to it a
fresh, and the^ ran.x. or xii. courses insta^tly or he would cease, and brake
many speaces, and gave so many teintes, yt every man maruay led at his
wonderful feats. For none ye there was chale^geour or defe^dour, might attain
to half the prowess yt he accomplished yt day, so yt the price was given to
him of all me^, as well of the^ yt were deputed judges of those feats of arms
for yt day, as of al other. And when he had thus passed his time to his great
laud and honor, he then at ye request of so^dry lords, which yt day gave
their attendaunce upon his grace, went into a pauilion which nere unto the
tiltes end at yt time was prepared for him, and there tarried while the other
chale^geours ran a certain coursses with such of the defe^dours as had not been
assaied yt day, the which demeaned them right valiantly and knightly, and made
full marciall disport. And when this had continued upon an hour or more. The
king came then out of his pauilio^ry dynge upon a graye coursser, betrapped
with a crappoure of clothe of gold, and wroughte with goldsmithes work,
which was little over an hand breadthe, and garnysshed in sondrye places with
white roses made of fine gold. And upon the pai^rell of the horse breast,
stood a rose of a great breadth, and another like upon the crupper behind
Which.ii. roses as a goldsmith reported that had ye oversight of ye making of
ye horse harneisse, said that theiweied either of the^ above.l. onces in gold

The kings maiestee was in a straight coat of most rychest clothe of gold
made close unto his body and streighte sleues, after the proportion of his
arms, and in two or three places the said sleues were cut and fastened
together again with a plunket ryband, thewhiche garment became him wonderously
well. And thus being appointed with his leg harneys being still upon his
legs he rode unto the tyltes end, and there houed while the Herauldes made
their monicion and criyng a (...)still, a lhostill, and conueyghed the
defendours out at the gate which they first came in at. And that dooen, the
gentlemen first setting forward next unto the trompettes, and then knights,
barnes, and Lords as they were of degrees following in their goodly apparelles:
lastly next unto ye king came the Lord Haward, bearing upon a tronchion the
kings helmet. After whom the king then coming, took up his horse in so
semely and lusty manner, that shortly to conclude, no man could do better nor
sytte more close nor faster, nor yet keep his stiroppes more surely. For
notwithstanding that the horse was veraye courageous and excellent in leaping
and tornyng and excedyngg flinging, he moved no more upon him, then if he had
held a plain and soft trot. And thus passing the compass of the field, when
he came over against the queen's Tent, he then began of new, and leaped and
coursed the horse up and down in wonderful manner. And finally, he turned the
feet of ye horse again the tylt, and caused him to fling and beat the
boordes with his fete, ye it redounded about the place as it had been shot
of gunnes. And when he had thus with all co^mendacion and honor performed
this lustye and courageous feacte, he turned him unto the queen and made a
lowlye obeysaunce, and so passed in a demure manner into Westminster hall.

Upon the day next foloyng, being thursdaye and the.xiii. day of February
was holden a more excellent iustes, not for the more valiant acts yt day
done of armis, but for ye inestimable richesse and costely apparel which that
day was worn whereof I entende to touch a part, for the whole passes my
conning and memory. But for a note after the capacite of my dull wit. About
the season of half an hour after one of the clock, the queen's grace being in
her tente. Immediately issued out of Westminster hall the trompettes, and after
them the Herauldes, the Trompettes being ^^ad in red cloth, and the Herauldes
in scarlet, all on horseback. Nert after them came riding gentlemen in right
proper and goodly devises of apparel, and their horses decked with sylke and
brodering work right costly. Next whom a compaignie of knights in more
costly apparel followed, among the which sir Edward Gilford then mershal, and
having the rule of thorderi^g of the field w his manifold tipped staves was
both those days right goodlye and richely appareled. And also sir Morice
Barkeley and sir Fraunces Cheiney road those.ii. days in one liuerey, both of
their own array and also of their horses, which.ii. knights upon the first day
road in cotes parted half on crimosin velvet, and ye other half of grene
velvet, ye crimosin velvet side being ouerlaid with flat beaten silver like unto
flat wire, hanging in length yt the velvet was little or nothing seen. And ye
grene velvet side was fret with plates of gold of goldsmithes work in right
sumpteous wise. And their horses were garnished in one suit, not without
clothe of gold and other costly devices.

Upon the second day, or this thursday, their cotes were half clothe of gold,
and the other half of purple velvet. The velvet garnished with skalop shelles and
pilgrims staves of massy gold, and their horse trappours of ye same. The^
came Banerettes, Barons and Lords, each of them more richely appareled then
other. For ye lords, many of them road in long gounes of cloth of gold
exceeding rich of ye new making, wherein is most substance of gold and little
silk. So ye where of old time they were used to buy of ye best and richest
tissue for.v. ^i. a yard now they pay.x. ^. and.xx. mark for ye best. And
beside this, their horses, some trapped in cloth of gold to the ground. Among
the which were specially noted the Lord of Burgeinie and the Lord Fizwater,
which were in one suyte of clothe of gold with their trappers like, and.ii.
large and massy bauderikes about their necks, which were esteemed at a. M.
mark a piece. There was also sir Henry Bolein and another Baneret, which yt
day road in purple velvet, velvet, garnyshed with plates of gold of exceeding
value. And emonge them road also sir Nicholas Vaus in a goune of goldesmithes
work to the knees, and therein a furre of right brown and fine sables of
great value.

Then among them that road next to ye king came my Lord Henry of Buckinghm^
in a goune of nedle work, which was more costly the^ some of clothe of gold
and more allowed for the curiositee of ye work thereof. And though here I make
no memory of the lustye leaping, bounsyng, mounting and flinging of the iolye
and lusty foreryders, no man think the contrary but there was as well doing
horse as any might be, and as well were they tasted and proved, to the great
comfort of many a noble manne and woman that day. Then when all this lusty
compaignie was thus passed by, Immediately ensued a pauilion or tente of blewe
and purple satine paled, and after that two other of ye same fassyon, all three
being garnished with letters of brodery work. And last of all came in the
fourth te^ made of clothe of gold and purple velvet paled, whereof the panes
of velvet were poudered with these two letters H. and K, as H. for Henry, and K
for king, and the skirtes of the said pauilion was borne up round about
with.xxxvi. or.xl. gentlemen, as esquiers for ye body, all being clad in short
Iackettes of blewe and purple sylke, the which were conueighed about the
tylte, till they came before the queen's tent. Where every chalengeour according
to their rooms rode out of their tents, and after obeisaunce made unto the
queen, road unto the tiltes end, and there tarried the coming of the
defendours. Howbeit, the kings highness road into the pauilyon, where the
day before he changed his apparel, and there tarried their coming. The
which shortly after were brought in, but or I proceed any ferther, I must of
a conueniency bring in a matter necessary to be reherced, ye which neglige^tly
I have ouerpassed, and ye is this.

When the kings pauilion was as is aforsaid come out of the hall, immediately
followed thesaid pauilion nine folowers or henchemen, all clothed in clothe of
gold and purple velvet parted, the velvet side being garnisshed with
theforsaid letters of gold as the pauilion was. Of the which folowers, the
first courser was trapped with the arms of England, the second with the arms
of France, the third with the arms of Castle, the fourth with a rich
trapper poudered with red roses and white, the fifth with cloth of gold furred
with poudered armines, ye sixte with cloth of silver and purple velvet parted,
the seventh of purple velvet garnished wtth massy plates of gold, a part where
of was an arm from the elbowe armed with an heart of gold which was of
great weight and value, thewhiche arm and heart were set upon either side
of the breast of the horse, and again in ye trapper upon both sides of the
crupper. The eight with a trappoure of chaungeable sarcenet after blewe and
white full of gold belles. The (...)nthe and last was trapped in cloth of gold
and blewe velvet paled. After which folowers, ensued the yoman of the horse
upon a fair double horse ledyng in his hand the self same horse which the
king road out of the field upon, as before I have reherced, and then as last
and hynmoost came rydyng upon a lusty courser sir Matthew Baker as master of
the kings henchemenne, right well and sadly apoincted and like a man of good
age and sadness, and thus repaired through the field with such demeanor as
before is reherced.

Then to return unto the defendoures. Troth it is that sir Charles Brando^ as
first came into the field enclosed in a tower and led by a iaylour holdyng a
great keye in his hand, the which pageaunt when it came over against the
queen's standing, the iaylour with his keye made a countenance as though he had
opened the gate of the tower, out of the which issued a man on horseback
clad in a long course and prisoners weed, with a pilgrims long staff in his
hand and a pylgremes hat upon his heed with a long and forgrowen bearde
reachyng to his sadell bow. He also had hangyng upon the hook of his staff
apayre of bedes of gold, and upon the top of yt staff was fas^ened a lettre,
the which staff with the bedes and letter were sent and delivered unto the
queen's grace, upon the which when she had awhile looked, she sent such
answer that the prisoner cast from him hastily his clothyng, beard and hat,
and showed him self in bright harneys, and soorth with smote his horse with
the spurs, and made a lusty pace unto the tiltes end, and from thence took
his course and ran about the tilt all most lusty wise.

And after the said Charles was thus come in, there ensued ten mo of the said
chalengeoures, of the which if I should write all the apparel and
circumstau^ce of their cundite unto their place assigned, it would ask a long
tracte of time, but shortly to proceed to the effect of this matter. So sone
as all the defendours were come unto their place assigned. The kings grace
issued out of his pauilion and called for a spear, the which when he had
received, he ran and brake right vigorously, and so ran seven coursses more
or he would stynt, in the which at every coursse he brake aspeare or gave a
taynt. And one thing was greatly noted in him, that at every coursse that he
ran he would never charge him with his spear in the rest, till he came nere
unto the copyng. Then by exhortacio^ of such lords as were about him he
rested for a season. And when the other chalengeours had disported them a
while with such defendours as the king had not before tasted: The king then
came forth again and ran many and sundry coursses, the which he performed
to his great laud and honor. And albeit that the other chalengeours did
full knightely and well and likewise the defendours, as the lord Marquis, sir
Charles Brandon and other, yet the feats of the king so far excelled them
that none was spoken of but his alone, which so continued during the time of
their disporte till four of the clock at after none, at which season, so
sone as the defendours were co^ueighed out of the field, he called for a spear,
the which he setting upon his thigh, road with his head piece upon his head
round about the tylt, and at two times when he came over against the queen's
sta^dyng, he made as low obeysaunce as his sadle would license him, and so
road into his pauilyo^ and there unarmed him. And anon after came out of the
same pauilion sittyng upon the same spare horse which the yoman of yt horse
brought in his hand into ye feld when ye king first entered. And then he was
changed into a demi gown of clothe of gold furred with sables, the which
when they were showed defaced, so theother that sir Nicholas Vaus ware, that
they seemed matyrns in comparison of the other.

Then the gentlemenne set forward, and after followed the three chalengours
rydyng bare heded, and their three helmettes borne before them by three
lords, and last of all came the kings grace, whose helmet was borne by ye
lord of Burgeyny. And in like manner as his folowers followed him into the
feelde, so in like wise they followed him in his gooyng out, at which season
as then he stured his horse nothing, but suffered him to goo a soft trot
through all the field. And at the two times that his grace came before the
queen, his grace forgate not his humble obeysaunce, to the crudicion and
learning of all well nurtered and gentle wedded men. And thus with all honor,
joy and triumphant acts, to the principal laud of this our most excellent
and christen prince, and after to ye worship of all the other, as well
chalengeours as defendoures, and great comfort of all the beholders, ended
these most excellyng iustes that ever was before that day seen in England,
and that for two causes specially, as first ye present deed of the
excellency of the kings person, which never before that day as I think
was seen in propre person. And secondarely for the excedyng cost of apparel
which these two days was showed, with other manifold charges of pageauntes
and other sumpteous things, the which by wise men's estimations cost not so
little by the space of these two days as.xx. M. ^i. Which two marciall days
were accomplyshed by the acts of these four chalengeours, ye is to say: The
most redoubted prince Henry the eight of that name, king of England France
and Ireland. etc. Sir Thomas Kneuet, lord Wyllya^ of Devonshire, and master
Edward Neuell. And of the defendours there were.x. in nombre, whose names came
not al into my hands and therefore have I omytted them.

After these royal iustes, was made a solemn and sumpteous banquet, the order
of which I ouerpasse because it would be to long to reherce.

The.xxiii. day of Februarij next foloyng dyed at Richemounte Henrye the
kings soonne which was borne there, upon new years day last past as before is
shortelye touched.

In the third year of his reign, about the months The.iii. year.
of June and Iulij, the Scotts made sondrie entres upon the borders of
England, and had out certain ships well manned and vitayled and kept with
them the narowe sees, to the great displeasure of the kings grace and hurt
of some of his subjects, specially of his merchauntes, the which rouers were
named to be bannyshed men. But the kings highness, consyderyng the daily hurt
that they did unto his subjects and friends as taking of vitaile at Sandwich
and other places upon the sea coasts, and that no remedy was purueyed by the
king of Scotts to call them home. His grace in all goodly haste manned and
vitayled certain ships, and under the governance of the lord Hawarde as head
and chief capitain sent the said ships to scour the sea, the which in
short process after about the end of Iulij met with the said Scotts, and
gave unto them a sharp and fearce fight, in so much that in the end thenglyshe
men drowned one of the Scottishe ships, and took two of the chiefest
ships of that ^lote, and in them one hundredth and forty Scotts with their
hedde captain named Hob of Barton. The which Scotts with their said
captain were cast into sondrye prysonnes, and as the fame went, in the
foresaid fight was slain as many of the said Scotts as were taken
prisoners, and of thenglyshe men few or none. And upon the second day of
August were ye forsayde two Scottishe ships brought unto the black wall
within Thamys. But afterward the said Scotts were by the kings commandment
brought unto tharchbyshoppes palace beside Westmynster, and there kept at the
kings cost.

About this season or little before, the French king that had most part of
this year kept war again Julius the secound of that name bishop of Rome,
forced thesaid bishop to forsake the city of Bonony, and to fle for his
safegarde toward Rome, not without loss of some of his people. This bishop
had deputed one Iherome Bonuise a Lukener borne, and before time had been a
merchau^t and factoure for merchauntes of his nation in London, the which by
his insolency and exercysyng of dice with lords and other, he brake and came
so behind the hand that he was compelled to aduoyde the city and also the
realm. In the time of which absence he purchased such grace of the fornamed
bishop yt he made him a lord, and after sent him into this land as his
proctour, having a train after him like unto a bishop: and by the ^auourable
letters which the bishop wrote for him unto the king, his grace had him in
good favor, and daily resorted unto his grace for mattiers touching the
bishop, by mean whereof he had knowledge of the bishops council and also of
the kings.

In this time also were here certain ambassadors of the French kings, the
which lay here a long ceason for matters concerning their prince to whom this
forenamed Iherome, secretly drew by night time, and innaturally and falsely
dyscouered unto them all the bishops, and kings council. For the which he
was awaited and lastly taken in the company of one of the said Ambassadors
upon London wall about mydnyght, and so brought unto the counter of the
pultrye, from whence by the kings commandment on the morrow he was removed
unto the Tower, where he remained still as a prisoner.

In this time also was wonderful war between the bishop of Rome Julius the
second of that name, and the French king, in so much that he wanne from the
said B. the city of Bonony, and put the B. to flight, and laid such articles
again him yt he ente^ded to put him down and make another bishop, ye
circu^staunce whereof I pass over, co^syderyng ye manyfolde tales and writings
sent unto the merchau^t strangers of the same, in the which letters were
variable and diverse reports.

In the later end of this year, the Scotts before taken by the knyghtly
prowes of the lord Hawarde and sir Edward his brother were delivered fre and
frank, to whom the king of his bou^teous largess gave unto every of them
compete^t sommes of money, to co^ueigh them home to their own country.

In this year also was holden a parlyament at Westmynster the.iiii. day of
Februari^, wherein were made and ordained diverse statutes and ordynaunces.
During the which parlyament a servant of the kings and yomanne of the croune
and one of his guard named Newbolt slew within yt palayce of Westmynster a
servant of one master Willoughby, in the beginning of the month of March.
For the which offense, notwithstanding that the king had him in his synguler
favor for that he was a special archer of all other, yet for yt ^eynous and
detestable murder, the kings grace commanded a new pair of galoes to be set
up in the same place, where the said servant left his life, and upon the same
shortly after was there put to death, and to ye fear of other, suffered him to
ha^ge there by the space of two days and two nights af^^r for which
judgment the king wanne great honor and favor of his commons.

By the autoryte of this parlyament was granted unto the king two fyftenes of
the temporaltee, and by the conuocacion holden by the clergy two dismes. Upon
good friday, which this this year fell upon the.ix. day of April was a cruel
and stern battle between the bishop of Romes host and the French kings
party, which continued from the said fridaye by sundry encou^tres and
metinges, by occasyon whereof, much people on both parties were distressed and
taken prisoners, and above the nombre of thirty. M. slain.

In the.iiii. year was Edmond de la Poole behedded, The.iiii. year.
and about the month of Auguste Sir Thomas Kneuet being chyefe capytaine of
the kings great ship called the regent, and a few ships mo, set upon a
great Caricke and other ships of the French kings, liyng then nere unto a
town of Britain named Breast, where after a long and cruel fight, thesaide
Caricke and regent being clasped together with hooks and cheynes (as the manner
of fyghtinge upon the sea between enemies is) suddenly thesaied ships with
other were set on fire, and brent so fervently, that before they might be
losed or disseuered, ye ships with the men upon both parties were consumed
with violence thereof, so that few escaped which were of the poraill. But
thesaide sir Thomas Kneuet with many other gentlemen of this land and also of
france were brent, on whose souls Jesus have mereyt.

This year also after harvest, wheat roase sobeinly The.v. year.
of price, for where for the more part of the year it was not sold above six
shilli^ges.viii. d. a quarter. After harvest for so much as wheat was so sore
blasted and stricken, and was of so small yield, it was sold for.xii. s.
and.xiii. s.iiii. d. a quarter.

In the.v. year the king besieged Turwin and discomfited the power of France
at Boemy, and took the citees of Turwyn, and Turney.

But in the mean season, the king of Scotts espiyng his time, invaded
England with an host of an hundred thousand men, with whom the Earl of
Surraye, being the Kings Leuetenaunte encountered, and by the help of the
Lord Hawarde his soonne, slew the said king with a leven Earls, and wanne
the field. For the which noble fact, the king created him afterward Duke of
Norffolke, and his soonne Earl of Surrey.

In the.vi. year a peace was concluded between England and France. And on
saint Denis The.vi. year.
day the French king married the Lady Mary ye kings sister. And he died on
new years day after. And therefore the king sent for her again by the duke
of Suffolk and other.

In this year, in the month of Februarye was (...).
borne Lady Mary ye kings daughter at Grenewiche.

In April, the French Queen came in to England, and was married to Lord
Charles duke of Suffolk.

This year Lady Margarete queen of Scotts and sister to the king fled into
England, and lay at Harbottell. And she was delivered of a daughter named
Margaret. And came to London in May, and tarried there a hole year.

In this year was such a froste, that all men (...)
might pass with carts between Westmynster and Lambeth.

This year on May even was an insurreccyon of young persons against Aliens,
of which diverse were put to execucion, and ye residue came to Westmynster
Halle with halters about their necks, and were pardoned.

And the.xviii. day of Mayeyquene of Scotts, returned into her country
again.

This year in Octobre. the admiral of France The.lx. year.
came into England, and Tourney was delivered to the French king.

In this year at Frankforde Charles the fyfte The.x. year.
was chosen Emperor.

And the Earl of Surrey was sent to Ireland

In this year, the king and the French king met at the camp between Arde and
Guines, where The.xi. year.
were great triumphs. And after the king and the Emperor met, and the
king went to Graueling with the Emperor. And the Emperor came to Caleys
with the king, and had great chere and the king returned.

This year the duke of Buckyngham was beheaded The.xii. year.
at the toure hill the.xvii. day of May. And in June, the Cardinal went to
Calays to entreat a peace between themperoure and the French king, and ^aried
there to Decembre, without any thing concluded.

This year the fridaye before Penthecoste, that The.xiii. year.
is to wytt the sixte day of June, Charles the emperor was honorably
received into the Cytee of London of the Maire, Aldermenne, and cominaltye,
our said sovereign Lord acco^paignieng him. And fro London he went to
Windesore and sat in his stall of the Garter. And from thens went to Hampton,
and sailed into Spain.

Duringe which time, the Earl of Surrey Lord Admiral brent Morleys in
Brytaine, and after landed at Caleys, and entered Picardye, and brent tounes and
castelles, and besyeged Hesdyn, but because of winter he raised his syege and
returned.

This somer, the duke of Albany was entering England with a great army, but
when he heard that the Earl of Shrewisburye was coming to fight with him,
he took a truce for, vi. months.

In this.xiiii. year, Christian King of Denmark The.xiiii. year.
came into England in June.

Also the Earl of Surrey brent Iedworth and many other towns in Scotland.

This year also the Turk besieged the Rhodes and on Christmas day he took it.

The Duke of Suffolk went into France The.xv. year.
with ten thousand men, and passed the water of Som^e without battle, and
took and destroyed many towns, and in Decembre returned.

The same year the duke of Albanye besieged ye castle of Warke, and hearing of
therle of Surreys coming, with a great army he cowardely sledde.

In the.xvi. year, there came out of Scotland (...)
the bishop of Dunkell, and other ambassadors unto yt kings majesty. And on
saint Mathews day was the French king taken by the emperor. A mutyng in
Norffolk and Suffolk for payment of money. A peace concluded between England and
France. And the French king was delivered in March. This year was the coin
enhaunced.

In the.xviii. year, the city of Room by the (...)viii
viceroy of Naples, and the duke of Burbon (the same dake being first slain)
was taken and almost distroied. And Clement the.vii. than bishop of Rome and
diverse Cardinals there found were taken and brought in captiuitee, and under
the rule of Charles the Emperor. This year also ye Cardinal went into
France with great pomp In October the great master of France came to London
with great triumph. The.xix. year.


In this xix. year, was the sweatyng sickness for ye which cause there was no
watch at midsomer

In the.xx. year, was the Cardinal deposed of ye The.xx. year
chauncellourshyp, and a peace between the Emperor and the king concluded.
The.xxi. year


In ye.xxi. year, was holden a parlyament where was reformed diverse enormitees
of the clargye

In the.xxii. year, was a man boiled in Smith The. xxii year
feeld for poisoning. The cardinal dyed on saynct Andrews even. The.xxiii. year


In the.xxiii. year, Gryffeth Rice was behedded for treason. In October the
king went over the sea, and met the French king at Caleis.

In the.xxv. year, in Apryll was a Nonne called The. xxv year.
the holy maid of Kent, ii. Monks and two Freers hanged and behedded for
treason, blasphemye, and ypocrysie. This year a peace was concluded with
Scotland.

In this xxvi. year was holden a Parlyamente at Westminster, wherein among other
most godly The. xxvi year.
and necessary statutes, it was there decreed and enacted that the kings
majesty should be from thensforth according to the law of God, taken and
reputed as supreme heed of this his realm, next and immediately under Christ.
This year the earl of Kyldare died in the Tower, and his son rebel led and
slew the bishop of Dubelyn, wherefore ye king did send sir Wylliam Skeuynton
thither This year was granted to the king the first fruits, and the tenthes of
all spiritual possessions. In June was the bishop of Rochester and sir
Thomas Moore behedded, for deniyng the king to be supreme head of ye church of
England. This year, were.iii. Monks of the Charterhouse executed for the same
offense.

In this.xxvii. year, in January dyed lady Katheryn The. xxvii year.
princess dowager, and is buried at Peter borowe. This year, queen Anne was
attaynted of treason, and was beheded. And the king married lady Jane Seymer.
And in October began a fololyshe commocion in Lyncolnshyre, and another in
York shyre, by ye means of Lord Darey, lord Husey sir Robert Constable, and
Robert Ask. Which only by the kings wisdom and his discrete counsel were
appeased without blood shedynge.

In this.xxviii. year, the Thamis was over fro(...) in December, wherefore the
king and the queen rode throw London with a goodlye company. (...) xviii (...)
This year also, sir Fraunces Bygot, lord Darcy, sir Robert Constable, and
other, began a new co^spyracie, and they were attaynted, and put to death
in June. In February was Thomas Fytzgarred, and five of his uncles hanged,
drawn and quartered. And on saint Edwardes even Prince Edward was borne at
Hampto^ court. The. xxiii day of October dyed queen Jane, and is buried at
Wyndsore.

In this.xxix. year, in May was Friar Foreste hanged and burnt in Smithfeelde
for treason and (...) xxix. year.
heresy, with the Image of Daruell Gathern. In this year, all ydolatry was
forbydde^. And diverse images that had engynnes to make their eyes, and other
lymmes to styre, with many other disceates were destroyed. And all Freers and
Monks changed their garments.

In this.xxx. year in Dece^ber was the Marquis of Ereter, the Lord Montacute,
and sir Edward Neuell behedded for high treason duly proved. In The. xxx year.
May the cytesyns of London mustred al in bright harneisse, with coats of
white clothe, and white sylke, with chains of gold, in three great armies, to
the great wonder of strangers.

Now for a fynal co^clusio^ as touchi^g this most noble and exelle^t prince
and for the closing up of this present work. If yt his highness had by all ye
space of his reign heretofore, which has been.xxxiiii. years, done no more
but only these three things (as in deed his grace has done a great and
infinite no^bre of most prudente and beneficial things, both for the
quietness of his realm and wealth of his subjects) yt is to say: the
extirpyng and abholyshyng of the usurped authoritee of the B. of Rome out of
all his dominions, and restoring unto us the holy and most blessed word of God
ye is to say the whole scripture in our Englishtongue, to thentent chiefly
that we might know our duty to almighty God, our obedyence to our prince
and his successors kings of this realm, and live a godly and Christen life
one with another. Secondarely, in taking a way all supersticion and ydolatrye
which was a thing most detestain* the sight, of God. And thirdlye and last
of all the dissoluynge of cloisters and suppressynge all counterfeit and false
religion, which so long as they continued, were not only teachers and preachers
of false and supersticious doctrine, but also were ever the autours and
begynners of all mischiefs and commocions. For reformacion I say of which
things, who is hable to render worthy thanks and praises to his highness? And
therefore to conclude, infinite thanks be given to almighty God yt so has
wrought by his special grace, in the heart and mind of his hihgnes, and let
earnest prayers and supplicacio^s incessantly be made of all his faithful
subjects for the preseruacion of his highness in most triumphant honor and
wealth and over us long to reign and rule. And that when nature shall give
place to death in his grace, that then the same gifts of prudence, pollecie,
and godly judgment yt his highness is so plentifully endewed with, may yet be
planted in ye person of that goodly ympe and most flory shyng brau^che
prince Edward, that the same may finishe and maintain that which his noble
father and our sovereign lord king Henry ye eight has most graciously
bego^ne. To this all true English hearts say

Amen.
LONDINI. In officina Richardi Graftoni, Cmm priuilegio ad imprimendum solum
per septennium.


