THE Repentance of John HAREN Priest, and his return to the Church of God;
publicly by him recited in the French Church at Wezell, in the presence of the
Senate, composed of the Ministers and the people assembled together upon the
7. day of March, Anno. 1610.

Likewise, The Recantation of MARTINE BARTOX, at Rochell, sometimes Doctor of
Divinity in Spain, Vicar Provincial and Visitor of the order of the holy
Trinity for the redemption of Prisoners in the Kingdoms and Crown of Arragon.

Ezeckiel Chapt. 33. Verse. 11. J am living, says the eternal God, and I take
no pleasure in the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should return from
his wickedness and live.

Apocalips Chap. 18. Come forth of Babylon my people, least you be partakers
of her sins, and so be punished with her: for her sins has mounted up
unto Heaven, and God has determined to punish her iniquities.

Translated out of Latin and French, into English.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rockit at S Mildreds Church in the Poultrie, and N.
Bourne at the Royal Exchange. 1610.

The Repentance of John Haren, and his return to the Church of God, publickely
by him recited in the French Church at Wezell, in the presence of the Senate,
composed of the Ministers and the people assembled together upon the 7. day of
March, Anno. 1610.
To the faithful Christians of the Netherlandes, that have abandoned the
abuses of the Church of Rome, to live in purity and sincerity of conscience,
JOHN HAREN wishes health and prosperity.
Dearly beloved Breathren in the Lord, This Treatise which I imbolden my self
to present you withal, belongeeh truly and directly unto you, in regard of
the subject and matter therein contained: for although that by my fall, and
beastly Apostacy, I have offended all the world, nevertheless I know and am
assured, that the Churches, in the middle whereof I have been nourished from my
youth upwards, and whom I served many years in the work of the Lord, have
been most afflicted: if you will vouchsafe to read it, you shall therein see,
and manifestly behold most great effects of the providence of God toward his
elect, who for a certain time being seduced by the malice and practice of the
Devil, fell not only into great tempests and shipwrackes, but into horrible
and scandalous laborinthes of troubles: but yet not so low, but that falling
into the arms of their nourse, (which is the Church of God,) they have been
relieved and comforted again: For the fall of the Mich. 7. 8.
Elect, is not eternal.

You shall also therein perceive how that in things which seem most doubtful
and wholly desperate; and when in outward appearance we are as it were at the
point of death and utter destruction, our Lord has used, and is always ready
to put forth his hand to defend and Exodus 2.
preserve those that are his. Who would ever have thought, that Moses, being
abandoned by his Mother, and put into the Water in a Basket, should have been
the Deliverer of Gene. 39.
the people of God? And that Joseph, sold, by his breathren* mourned for by his
father for dead, and cast into a miserable Prison, should save his Father and
Breathren from most great Famine, and place them in the best part of Egypt? Who
Jonas. 2.
would have thought that Jonas, cast into the Sea, and swallowed; yea and as it
were buried in the belly of the Whale, should have been the sauer of the great
city of Niniue, and a figure of the Messiah? And that I, being cast into a
sorrowful and miserable Prison, wherein I remained for the space of 8. years
and more, wholly without hope of deliverance from thence; wherein Antechrist of
Rome, had caused me to be thrown at the instance and motion of his Legate
Coriolanus (the Plague of all Germinie,) for having bindred his cruel purposes
and desseignes against the Churches on this side. God moststrong, powerful,
and good, by his most mighty arm, and contrary to all humane expectation,
having broken my Bands, and delivered my soul out of the danger of death, yea
of eternal death, should charitably deliver me into the hands of his Church;
to the end I should serve him the rest of my days, justly and holily: For the
which, while I live, I will never cease to yield praise and thanksgiving unto
God.

You shall likewise know by this Discourse, the great virtue, force, and
efficacy of Prayer made in Faith, whereby we obtain of God much more good,
then we dare ask or demand at his hands. What could the Mother of Moses
desire more, when her Child was put into the Water, but Exodus 2.
only that God would preserve it from death? But by her Prayer she obtained
much more; for he being found by Pharaos Daughter, he was not only delivered
out of danger, and committed to his own Mother to be noursed, but waxing
great, he was adopted for the Son of the Kings daughter. What could the
people of God (cruelly Exodus 12.
afflicted by the Egiptians) desire more, but that God haueing touched the heart
of Pharao, he should permit and suffer them to depart out of Egypt, to serve
him in the land of their Fathers? But he did more for them; for, delivering
them out of the miserable servitude and tirannie of Pharao, he enriched them
with the spoils and riches of the Egiptians; whom afterward he drowned and
utterly overwhelmed in the Sea; thereby declaring his Justice in punishing of
those that afflict his people. What could lacob likewise Genesis 33.
when he left the house of Laban his Father in law, have desired more, when he
prayed unto God to deliver him from the fear which he had of his brother Esau,
but that he might pass freely and safely on his way? but God not only
granted him that, but much more: for when his brother met him, he not only
received and entertained him courteously, but offered to bear him company on
the way. And what could Joseph (being a Prisoner) more desire Genesis 41.
of God, but only his enlargement and deliverance from thence? which at last
he obtained, and much more; for he was made Lieutenant and Governor of all
Egypt. But I for my part, have received more grace and favor, then all they;
for the billows of the tempests of the sovereign God, had not only
subjected my life to a miserable temporal captivity, wherein not only the
Pope and his supports, determined to destroy me, and to make me unprofitable
unto the world during the rest of my days: but Satan, enemy to my Soul, had
made and seduced me to become one of the most filthy Apostates that ever was
heard of: and for that cause my heart was continually vexed with most cruel
troubles: mine own corruption made war against me, and my torments put me in
fear and doubt, that God had wholly rejected and barred me out of the Kingdom
of Heaven. I found my self to be in continual fear (for want of Faith and
repentance,) thinking in that abusiue of troubles, that by incredulity, I
should utterly be cut off from the love and favor of God. Yet I was not
destitute of the Spirit of Prayer: for in my greatest troubles and aflictions,
lifting up mine eyes unto Heaven, I often times said, Has the Lord cast me off
for ever? Is his loving kindness withdrawn for evermore? Has the most
merciful God forgotten to be pitiful; has he (by reason of his anger) shut
up his compassion? And often times sighing and speaking unto my soul, I said:
Oh my soul! Why art thou abashed, and why do thou tremble within me? Repose
thy trust in God, and hope in him, he shall yet be praised and magnified in
thee, when with a benign countenance only, he eases thy torment. The Father
of mercy, the God of all consolation, did not reject my prayer: he received my
request, and heard me in Heaven: He brake my bands, and of a Captive, set me
free and at liberty: He dealt not with me as I deserved, nor rewarded me
according to my iniquities: For that as far as the Heavens are distant from
the Earth, so much has his mercy been abundant unto me. With the same
affection that a Father is moved toward his Child, with the same has the
Lord been moved toward me. Let my Soul bless him, and all the parts and
members of my body praise his holy name: He has saved me out of the Pit, and
withdrawn my life from death: He has pardoned all my Iniquities, and healed
my Inf^^^^ties. The Lord does right and justice unto all those (...) injuries
and persecutions. I will not therefore do (...) who sailing in the middle of
the Seas, and after a th^^sand dangers safely arriueth at his desired Haven,
without considering or marking the hand of the Pilote that stirred the Ship;
I will diligently acknowledge in this my deliverance, the hand of God, the
providence of the Lord, and (...)

THE Repentance of JOHN HAREN, and his Conversion from the Church of Rome to
the true Church of God, openly published and made by him in the French Church,
remaining in Wezell, in the presence of the wise and discreet Senate of the
same place, the 7. day of March. Anno. 1610.
MY Lords, and loving Breathren in the Lord, at my coming out of my
sorrowful Prison, wherein I have been violently holden for the space of eight
years and vpwardes, for suckering your Churches: passing by this town of
Wezell, to go (...) friends, I have imboldned my self to salute you, and to
give you to understand many things which concern the honor and glory of God,
the edification of his Church, and the salvation of my soul.

Truly, if it were not for the assurance that I have of your piety toward
God, and Christian charity toward your Neighbors, I durst not have been so
bold, as I am at this present, to certify you of the miserable estate,
whereinto my sins have brought me; but assuring my self, that you will be
imitators of the Mercy of God, and of the Grace of his Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ; who desires not the death of a Sinner, but that he should convert and
be saved; it makes me do that unto you, which the diseased person does unto
the Physician; which is, to discover the Griefs of my heart, and the Wounds of
my soul.

Beloved breathren, in me you see and behold the pattern and spectacle of the
just Judgment of God upon man, who having acknowledged Jesus Christ for my
Savior, trod his Word under my feet, and made no account of his holy
Ordinances; and therefore God as a just Judge, set me upon the scaffold of his
Wrath and Indignation; because I would seem to be Wise in my self, forgetting
the indignity and misery of my estate, I have grieved the holy Ghost, which
had registered me in the Cathalogue of the blessed; certainly I had been most
happy, if at the issuing forth of my Mothers Womb, I had been buried,
without ever seeing the light of this World, seeing that by my sins, I have
subjected my uncertain days, unto so many outrages and griefs: For* is there
any man that has received more benefits at the holy and liberal hands of
God our Father, then I? Who from my youth vpwardes, was brought up and
nourished in the most excellent Schools that are in Christendom; having had a
Father, that spared no thing to bring me up in Learning, Virtue, and Piety,
and that showed me an example of Constancy and Fidelity; having suffered
death for professing the name of the Lord. But, as if God had done me wrong, to
continue his graces and great mercies unto me, I became the most filthy and
beastly Apostate that ever was in the World; I say the most filthy: for,
consider I pray you, the Apostacies which were in times past in the ancient
Church, specially during the ten great Persecutions from Nero to Constantine
the great; and the eleventh, which was under Iuhan that wicked Apostate, which
caused so many Reuoltes in the Church, and when so many great persons made
shipwreck of the Faith.

Consider also the Apostacies that have been committed in our days, and you
shall see, if you can sinde the like to mine? That a Servant of God, nourished
and brought up at the feet of true Doctors, the Son of a Martire, one that
preached the Gospel 17. or 18. years, and that with edification in the time
of Persecution, when the Swords of Tirantes made all public places in the
Netherlandes red with human blood, I reputed my self not only happy to
believe and anounce Jesus Christ; but with the loss of my goods to endure all
sorts of oprobyes and slanders for his name; in, and by whom I believed and
spoke. And yet nevertheless afterward, with so great scandale, having made my
self a Disciple of Antechrist, Who would not be abashed, and abhor such an
offense?

And therefore it is, that I openly cry out and confess, that my Sin is not
like unto other men's sins; for if any man sins by ignorance or
infirmity, he shall find a Mediator which will pray for him, and it shall
be pardoned: but who shall be my Mediator? I have offended God and all his
Servants; I have scandalized his people, and have made my self unworthy of
the commiseration of honest men: Therefore the dolors of death eternal have
compassed me about, and the tempests of my iniquity have abashed me; for the
Arrows of Almighty God have wounded my soul in such manner, that no part of
my Flesh, nor any of my Veins are whole, so much my mischief increases: my
Heart pants and beats in my breast with grief, my Bones are weakened by
reason of the great distress, which I endure by means of my wicked action.

Behold how those that abandonate themselves unto Vanities, are forsaken of
God, and of their own gravity. It is a horrible thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, and to abjure his Truth, once known.

What shall I do? shall I despair? Must I at my departure out of this life,
attend and expect the reward of Cain and ludas, and say with those miserable
Apostates; My Sins are greater then the Mercy of God? No, I will not
despair; for I know, the eternal God is good; that his Mercy surmounteth all
the Heavens, that he desires not the death of a Sinner but rather that he
should repent and be saved; and that incessantly he pardons and forgiueth his
elect.

He pittieth true repentant sinners, be they never so miserable and great
offenders: and where Sin abounds, his Grace super-aboundeth.

I have met with my Mediator the Son of God, my sovereign Sacrificator, who
can and will have compassion of my infirmities: but more then that, his voice
and his example sommon, induce; yea and lead me to approach Math 11 28.
near unto him. Come unto me (says he) all you that are heavy laden and
weary, and I will refresh you. And Esa. 1. 18.
again, Come now (says the Eternal,) if your Sins were as red as
Scarlet, I will make them as white as Snow: and if they were as red as
Vermilion, I will make them white like Wool.

When a man of credit speaks, we believe him: how much more then ought we
to believe the mouth of him that can not lie? It is he that sanctifies my
afflictions, to the end that they should not be the entry unto eternal pain.

I have likewise set before mine eyes, an infinite number of examples of his
piety toward Sinners. The poor Publican casting down his eyes to the
ground, craving Ioh 12. 3.
mercy of Jesus Christ, returned home justified. The sinful woman washed our
Saviors feet with her tears; and having wipt them with her hair, obtained
pardon of her finnes. The poor Thief being hanged upon the Cross, desiring
to be saved, and calling upon Jesus Christ, assended from the Cross into
Paradise. S. Peter having three Luke 22.
times denied his good Master, after he had bewailed his sins with humility
and repentance, lost not the grace of an Apostle, but was reestablished in his
estate and vocation Gal. 2. 11.


I call to mind great and inorare sins, cruelties, and wicked Apostasies
committed against God, and his Prophets by King Manasses, who never the less
being Prisoner in Babylon, and finding his Conscience to be much pressed with
the feeling of his wickedness, after he had confessed his faults unto God, he
was received into mercy. Jonas flying away from the face of God and from his
presence in Tarsis, because he would not follow his vocation, was cast into the
Sea; and after being miraculously delivered out of the Whales belly, went to
Ninine to declare his Commission.

All these examples have made me know, that God is exceeding good to those that
seek him; who pardons all our infirmities: he is so good, that he will
never reward us according to our sins, for he is prompt to Mercy, and slow
to Anger; and he is the perfection of all goodness.

Up then my soul, and praise God: and thou Satan my adversary, present no
more unto me the inormitie of my apostacy, thinking to astonish my
conscience, for the merciful God of my continual complaints, has heard my
voice, he has received my request, and has granted me more then I asked him:
All my enemies shall be ashamed and confounded, neither could Satan be Luke 15.
both my Judge and my Accuser, for it was God whom I had offended, who only is
my Judge: If therefore he is my Judge, who dares take upon him to condeme me?
If he be with me, who can be against me? and if my Judge will be my Advocate
and my Intercessor, why should I fear the power and force of the Devil, and
Tirants, although they sought to assail me?

And therefore being in this sortresolued, I determine to do two things: The
one following the example of Luke 15.
the Prodigal Child, to return to my Country, and my Fathers house again,
I know he is merciful, and that although by my sins I have lost his favor,
yet he will never leave nor loose his bounty. I will willingly forsake the
company and fellowship of those filthy Beasts* with whom I have so long time
conuersed, which is the Kingdom of the Roman Antechrist the Son of
perdition, that lifts and opposes himself against the Kingdom of the son
of God; and that under a false title of Piety, at this day tiraniseth over all
the world, desiring to satisfy his covetous humor with cruelty and ambition.
I will willingly abandon that sorrowful habitation, so odious and infamous,
and will put on the Roabe of Humility, to present my Father with a true and
sinceere contrition and confession of my faults and offenses. My contrition
shall be a disliking and detestation of my sins committed, a trouble of
Conscience, apprehending and feeling in my Soul, the wrath and anger of God,
which I have incurred and deserved by my offenses, which would cause me to
despair, if I were not strengthened an other way; which is by a true and lively
faith in the mercy of God; by the which after I have truly and duly confessed
my sins, I depose my self by faith to mount up unto the throane of grace, to
obtain one drop of the Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Secondly, I have said within my self, I will seek the face of God: But where
shall I find it, but there where his Word is faithfully preached, and the
Sacraments truly administered? This Church so well marked, was once my Mother;
she conceived and brought me forth to Christ my Savior: she had given me many
fair and great prerogatives; for she had committed unto me the keeping of her
Spouses Flock; but I was one of those foolish Shepheardes, (of whom the
Prophet Ezecheel in his 13. Chapter of his Revelations speaks,) which follow
their own fantasies, and have no care to execute their Offices and Vocations;
and therefore God, the just Judge, was angry with me; he dispoyled me of his
favors, which were the singular gifts and graces wherewith he had endowed me
in my youth; and has made me eat with Beasts, as he did the Prodigal Child:
Yet I can not forget the love which once she bore me; and therefore I have
aproched unto her again, hoping that she will be a follower of the bounty of
God to wards me asking two things of her: The one, that she will vouchsafe to
pray unto God for me; for as issue of all enterprises depends upon the favor
of God, (without the which we can do nothing,) it is reason and very fit to
begin so holy a work, with the invocation of his holy name: The other, that in
this great perturbation of Spirit whereunto my intemperaunce has brought me,
she will vouchsafe to give me counsel and advise, for that from hence-foorth I
will no more be wise in mine own conceit, but only in God; in whom
consists the spring of Life and Wisdom.

I was then in an obscure and black Prison, wherein Antechrist of Rome had
caused me to be cast without any hope ever to come out again. My Accusations
were; That being Servant to the Duchess of Cleave, I had been a Fauteur and
Mediator for the Churches which our Lord had assembled in the Dukedomes of
Inlyers, Cleave, and Bergh, hindering diverse sinister enterprises pretended
against them. The rigor which they used against me was great, and my life was
in danger, if the hatred of the Ecclesiastical persons, which were the cause
of my mischief, had had as much place and force, as the benignity and prudence
of the noble Princess of Lorraine had power to defend and preserve me from
their cruelties.

Being in my sorrowful Prison, abandoned of all the World, when it seemed that
I was at the point of death; and that Heaven and Earth had conspired together,
and agreed to work my overthrow and destruction, I desired my God, to let me
know the cause of his wrath and anger conceived against me; who sufficiently
made me understand by his holy Spirit, that my apostacy was the only cause
thereof. I lamented my evil; I fainted under the burden of my anguish; I
washed my Bed with tears, and watered my Couch with weeping; and without
longer delay, I made a Vow agreeable and pleasing unto God: which was, that if
he would vouchsafe to deliver me out of Prison, and to restore me to my
friends again, that in the first reformed Church, according to the word of
God, which I should come unto, I would certify unto it my affliction, and my
desire; which was, to cry God mercy, and to extirpe the Scandale proceeded of
my Apostacy, by the way of humility and repentance. The Lord which does all
things justly, heard my Prayer, he received my request, he granted my desire,
he brake my bands, and of a Prisoner, made me free. It is reason therefore that
I perform my Vows: I have not done like Jonas, who in stead of going to
Niniue the great City, took the way to Tarsis: nor Luke 19:
like the wife of Lot, who looking back when she went out of Sodoma and
Gomora, was turned into a Pillar of Salt. Our Lord also says, That he which
puts his hand to the Plough, and looks back, is not good for the kingome
of heaven: therefore I esteemed the things of this world, hurtful and a
hinderaunce unto the couers of my vacation: and taking my way straight to this
Church which had engendered me in Christ, with tears in my eyes, and grief of
heart, not so much with the feeling of my temporal afflictions, as for that I
have offended: I asked two things of her; the one, if that the way of
Repentance should yet be open unto me? and the other, what penance I deserved,
or should submit my self unto, to deface the evil which I had committed? She
made me answer; that God never shuts the Gate of his Church against any
man, truly repenting: and having considered my tears and complaints, and the
effects of my contrition, she did charitably comfort and instruct me.

I am with joy and gladness of spirit come out of Babylon, Mother of
Confusion, which had lifted me up in pride against God and his Church; which
fostered in my foul, not only a perpetual dolor and anguish, but an
executioner which never let me rest in peace night nor day. For the which,
infinitely I thank my God, that in my old age, and before I go down into the
Sepulcher, after he had fatherly punished me with so long and horrible
Imprisonment; he has this day restored me to my Mother his Church, to be a
Temple and Habitation of his Spirit: in the virtue whereof, I beseech him to
bless and sanctify my steps to his glory, and to make me capiable to be,
and continue his most humble and obedient servant.

Oh happy Prison, which has delivered my soul from destruction! and taking
me by the hand, to lead and conduct me by the paths of Justice, to the Peace
of the Elect: Who would not admire the great effects of the providence of God,
who in most desperate things, can withdraw the shadow of darkness, to
illuminate and direct our uncertain steps, to follow his will? Behold how it
happens many times, that that which we think would be most hurtful unto us,
turns unto our great profit.

For the Prison, out of the which I am delivered, without any blot of mine
honor, has done that in me, which the Prison in Babylon sometimes wrought in
King Manasses: So that I will not cease every day to give thanks unto our good
God, who even in the multitude and greatest force of my afflictions, did
always support and uphold my Soul in such liberty, that it seems that how
strong and great soever my troubles were, they had power only to overcome and
master my particular Passions, and to eleuate my Spirit to Heaven; to make me
so much the more capiable to obtain of God the assurance of his mercy, by
dispoyling me of the transitory and corruptible things of this world, to the
end to eleuate and stir me up to things glorious and eternal. For as much
trouble and disquietnesse as my imprisonment procured unto my body, so much
and more force and resolution it added unto my soul. It is true that Piety is
weakened, by too great Felicity: but the Cross and Persecution accompanied
with a good Conscience, makes it become an assured Bulwark against all the
effortes and forces of the Devil. And in truth we see, that those whom God
punishes grievously in this world, for the most part are they, whom he
instructs most favorably; in such manner, that to speak properly, the evils
which God sent me, and which I endured patiently, were no evils unto me, but
sharpened and stirred up my spirit to sovereign good.

Certainly that which Plato says, is very true; That those that are in
griefs and anguishes, have the functions and faculties of the Soul more
excellent, then in time of prosperity. But that which makes me most to
wonder, is, that as much as my afflictions separated me from the House of God,
and the company of the Faithful; so much it seems, that they augmented and
increased the former affection which I had, to reunite my self thereunto, and
to leave Papistrie.

A good man, can not shun adversities; but he may well surmount and vanquish
them: and Although he seems unto men, to be wholly abandoned and rejected; so
it is, that in the middle of his troubles, he always enjoys a perfect
felicity, the which has sworn to be so loyal unto him, that whatsoever
happens unto him, she is always with him, she is always within him, and
maintayneth his Soul in such an estate, that in what condition soever she
finds her self to be, she is always like unto her self, being so highly
elevated above the accidents of human things, that she can not receive any
hurt or disgrace.

Seeing then that the word of God teaches us, that he which has publicly
offended the Church, ought to confess and acknowledge his fault openly; and
for that the Order of Ecclesiastical discipline in the Church of God
practices the same: I have desired that my return into the House of God,
should be publicly made, and in the middle of this notable congregation of the
Children of God, in this Town of Wezel^; and that not only because of the
knowledge which I have of so many Prerogatives which our Lord has given it, as
being the ancient receptacle of poor afflicted Christians; having purged it
from the darkness of errors and ignorances of the Romish Wolf, for the
space of 70. years and more; and miraculously defended and preserved it from a
thousand and a thousand outrages, ambuscadoes, and sinister enterprises of
Tirantes; whereof I am partly an eyewitness. And thus much more, for that I
know that at this present, and in this notable company, there are yet many of
you that know, that the subject and ground of the anger of those that
persecuted me, proceeds from this; that duering the time of my continuance
in the service of the noble House of Cleave, I did charitably succor the
afflicted Churches, which Antechrist and his supporters sought and enforced
them selves to ruinate and overthrow. Knowing then, that with the cause of my
afflictions, the cause of favoring of your Churches (and particularly of that
which our Lord has assembled in this Town,) was joined: I assure my self,
that you will have compassion of the griefs which I feel at my heart, for
having offended God, that in respect of me, you will do as God presently does;
who having opened the eyes of my understanding, has taken my sins and cast
them behind his back: he has thrown them into the deep Sea, that he might
not lay them any more to my charge: whereof not only the holy Ghost bears me
witness, but by the ordinary ministry which it has pleased him to
establish in his Church, gives me evident and manifest assurances, beseeching
you to have pity on me; and casting from before your eyes the scandale which
I have committed: restore me to that alacrity of spirit which in times past
my heart enjoyed, when holding each other by the hands, we ascended with joy to
the Mountain of the Lord, seeking the God of lacob, with Songs and
Thanksgiving, because he had made us members of his Son Christ Jesus;
whereby in this temporal life you shall do that which God does in the
spiritual life, in comforting the afflicted, and such as are truly stricken
with unfeigned sorrow and remorse of their sins: for as by his goodness and
bounty he relieueth and strengthens them; so he that loves clemency and
mercy, makes himself worthy and capiable both of the Joue of God, and the
world.

Let your hearts then be moved with my sigthes, and by bereauing your selves
of the remembrance of my faults; therein show your selves as strong as my
wickedness is great: my bruised bones shall rejoice, my tongue shall openly
sing the praise of the Lord; my closed lips shall open again, highly to
thunder forth his Justice: I will teach his ways to those that transgress,
to the end that such as have done, as I have done against the Lord, may
willingly convert.

I am assured that you will grant my request, for I perceive your bowels to be
moved and proane to mercy; your countenaunces are witnesses unto me of your
charitic; and your tears, of the grief you have in your hearts. I likewise
will never believe that there is any man in this holy assembly, that will be
an Imitator of the rudenes and inhumanitie of the brother of the Prodigal
child, that Luke 15.
murmured at the liberality used by his father, when he received his brother
home again. The House of God is great and wide and his Tablemost rich, to
receive and nourish us all. Our Lord says, that the Shepherd rejoiced to have
found his lost Sheep. The Woman that had lost her Groat, rejoiced with her
friends for the finding of it again: and the good Father for his Son, which
had offended him so many and so often times. And will not you rejoice with the
holy Angels, for the honor which God has done unto me, this day to have
received me into his Church; from the which Satan, enemy to Justice and
truth, had separated me, and almost destroyed me, if God had not bin merciful
unto me? But he has lost his prey, he has spent his time in vain, he
remembered not that God is my Father, that his Christ is my Mediator; he knew
not that the holy Ghost had registered me in the book of Life, and in the
cathalogue of the Elect; whose fall is not eternal.

Therefore that I may no more fall into those snares and nets, I have
withdrawn my self into the house of God, into the fort of the Lord, to be
made his household Servant, and a member of his Son, willingly forsaking the
reign of the Pope; whose doctrine and religion, to say truth, is no other
thing but ancient paganism, mixed with Iudisme, and covered with the cloak
of Christianity; which treads under foete the knowledge of the sovereign
God, and the mercies of his son Christ Jesus.

For when men make the simple people believe, that the Son of God (in whom
consists the wel-spring of life) has not fully satisfied the Justice of God
his Father, but has only obtained the first grace for us; that is to say, the
occasion or cause of Merit; and that it rests now in us to be careful not
to lose the occasion, to obtain the rest. Is it not a most impudent boldness,
to dispoyle Jesus Christ of his virtue, seeing the Scripture witnesses for
him; that all those that believe in him, are justified? And those hel-houndes
teach, that there proceeds no other benefit unto us from him, but only that
he has made us an ouerture and way to be justified; contrary to the John. 5.
12. John. 5. 24. Romans 3. 24. John. 3. 13. Ephe. 2. 6. Col 1. 13.
express word of God, which teaches us; That whosoever has the Son of God,
has life also: Whosoever believes, has past from death to life; is placed in
Heaven with him; is already transported into the kingdame of God, and has
obtained salvation. And these miserable abused Papists, not contenting
themselves therewith, bereave God of a great part of his Praises, to transfer
them unto men.

But tell me I pray you, What thing is more agreeable to the Christian faith,
then to acknowledge and confess our selves to be destitute of all virtue, to
be clothed therewith by God: void of all goodness, to be filled therewith by
him: slaves to sin, to be delivered by him: blind, to be illuminated by him:
weak, to be sustained by him: to bereave our selves of all manner of glory,
that he only may be glorified, and we in him? Further, what is more proper
unto Faith, then to assure our selves that God is our benign and loving
Father; when Christ is acknowledged to be our Brother and Mediator, then to
expect all good and prosperity from him, whose love and favor is so much
showed and extended unto us, that he spared not his Son, but exposed him unto
death for us: then to rest in a certain assurance and hope of salvation, and
of life eternal, when we know that Christ has been given us by the Father; in
whom such treasures are hidden? But these things are repugned by the Papists,
who say, that such certainty of assurance, cannot be without arrogancy and
presumption: But as we must not presume of any thing to be in our selves; yet
we must presume of all things in God, for in truth we are not for any other
cause bereaved of all vain glory, but only to the end that we should be
glorified in him. On the other side, behold and see with what affection those
miserable and ignorant persons (I speak specially of Ecclesiastical persons)
are moved and led: they easily permit both them selves and others, to be
ignorant, negligent, and careless of the true Religion, which is taught us by
the holy Scriptures, and which ought to be resolutely and firmly held among
all men; and think that it is no great matter what Faith every man holds;
nor whether he holds with God or Christ: so that with an inueloped or imposed
Faith (as they term it) they submit their censures to the judgment of the
Church, and care not though the glory of God be poluted by evident Blasphemies,
so that no man speaks a word against the authority of our Mother the holy
Church; that is, (according to their meaning,) the Sea of Rome: And therefore
they fight and contend with such rigor and boldness for the Mass,
Purgatory, Pilgrimage, and such trifles, in such manner that they deny, that
true piety can be observed, if all those things be not believed and holden
for infallible rules of our salvation; although they prove nothing by the word
of God: Wherefore I pray you, but only because their Belly is their God, the
Kitchen their Religion, and the World their Paradise; which being taken away,
they are not only persuaded that they can be Christians, but which is more, no
men: and although some of them live delicately and in great abundance, and
others live barely and votarely in poverty gnawing of Crustes, nevertheless
they live all by one Pot: which without such aids, would not only wax cold,
but wholly be frozen up: And therefore he which among them, has most care of
his Belly, is the most zealous in their Faith. To conclude, they have all one
selfsame purpose and intent, either to maintain their Kingdom, or their
Bellies: and there is none of the^ that shows the least apearance in the
world of true zeal, and yet they cease not to Slander, and with Fire, Sword,
Water, and all other mischiefs, to pursue and persecute the doctrine of
Truth; either to make it odious, or suspected. But if we were permitted to
speak as boldly and as well as they, I am perfwaded that their hotnesse,
wherewith they boil so terribly against us, would be somewhat cooled: for to
say truth, that which the blind world at this day honors in those idle
Bellies, is only a feigned vizard of Hipocrifie, which under the shadow of the
Church, would hide their covetousness, to bear rule; seeking for the Church
of God, in the beautifulness of Houses, and other exterior ornaments;
thinking that the union of the Faithful, consists and is contained in those
exterior things, which are transitory and corruptible; and not rather in
righteousness and truth. Wherefore according to the word of God, we hold the
Sea of Rome to be the Seat of Antechrist, which eleuateth and opposes it
self against that of the Son of God, which under a false title of Religion,
at this day tiranniseth over all the world, lively representing Dan. 9.
that Seat of Impiety whereof the Prophet Daniel, 2. These. 2.
and the Apostle S. Paul have spoken; whereof we say, the Pope is the Captain,
which has profaned the Holy Temple of God by horrible abominations, in such
sort, that therein there rather appears an Image of Babylon, then any show of
the holy City of God.

But some men will object, and ask me; Did not you before your revolt, know
these great impieties and mischiefs, viz. that all the Roman sect is but a
King dome of Untruths, where the name of the eternal God is villanously
profaned, and the Lords honor impudently given unto Idols?

I answer, that I knew it, having a hundred and a hundred times published and
preached it unto the World* but in truth I confess, that I never did so
pertinently understand, nor mark so well the horrible Sacrileges of
Antechrist, as I did while I conuersed familiarly with them in Rome, where
every man attends his own profit and pleasures, and not the service of
Jesus Christ.

We must not then fear that by leaving the Church of Rome we divorce our
selves from the Church of God; for the communion of the Church was not ordained
to that end, that it should be a place for to draw us to idolatry, impiety,
ignorance of the true God, and other wickedness: but rather to retain us in the
fear of God* and in the obedience of the truth. We do truly withdraw our
selves from Popery, and not from the Church; we shun and fly from idols, but
not from the true Church; we will withdraw our selves from the tyranny of the
Pope, and not from the true Christian common wealth; from the plague, and not
from life: ready to reunite our selves with them, when Antichrist, and the
mischief which he has brought into it, shall be driven away. In the mean
time the house of God shall be my habitation, the Lord my portion, and his
Son my Pastor: he will cause me to rest in his parkes of assurance, he will
restore my afflicted soul, and will preserve me, if it pleases him, from the
bloody hands of those that seek my utter ruin and overthrow.

All you that have done as I have done, and have suffered your selves to run
headlong into mischief, and which as yet live in the kingdom of Antichrist,
with a contaminated and defiled conscience, and unquietness of spirit (for I
think and believe certainly that it is impossible for a man that has known
the impieties of Papistrie, where the blood of Christ is bought and sold, where
his only propitiatory sacrifice offered for our sins, is esteemed to be
insufficient to deface them; where the merits of men are equalized with the
merits of Jesus Christ: I believe that his soul is always in pain, and that
if he stays long there, in the end he will feel an executioner in his
conscience, which will never suffer him to live in peace night nor day:) I
beseech you most humbly in the name and favor of Jesus Christ, to abandon and
leave the synagogue of Satan, and to reunite and join your selves to this
Church of God, united and conjoined in faith with the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, in the word of God; which is faithfully preached, and the Sacraments
duly and purely administered. It is into his lap that I yield my self, it is
unto the guard of his piety that I have recourse: beseeching him with all
humility to receive and admit me into the communion of his children, having
determined to live with them (by the power of my God) all the days of my life.
I likewise desire those, on whom God has powered his grace (having miraculously
preserved them in his Church, with constancy and perseverance, without having
divorced themselves, or committed apostacy as I have done:) to praise God with
all their hearts, and continually to give him thanks; for it is a most great
miracle, which proceeds not from their own force and virtue, but from the
holy and liberal hand of God our Father. Wherefore let them persevere in
loving of God, and fly from finne and vices; and being of a good courage, the
kingdom of Antichrist will fall, and that of Jesus Christ shall be
established: but before that happens, the devil will enforce himself more
then ever he did, to make war against the Church.

Behold wherefore, if ever the children of God have had need of prudence and
wisdom surely to direct their uncertain paths according to the word of God,
it is now in this pitiful and sorrowful time, wherein Satan, enemy unto all
righteousness and godliness, seems to have so much authority even over the
elect, that if they were not miraculously aided and defended by the holy and
liberal hand of God our Father, they should not only be utterly cast down,
but the earth would soon be reduced unto the same state that Sodom and
Gomorra was in times past. Let prayer therefore, accompanied with true
repentance, be our refuge unto him, who will never forsake his inheritance, and
that will cause the assaults of Antichrist to perish, as he once drowned
Pharaoh in the sea.

To make an end, I beseech you pray unto God for me; and if any one among you
have any books, which in times past have been printed in my name, in diverse
languages, books full of jests, lies, and false suppositions; I desire they
may be burnt and consumed to ashes. I will not likewise pass over in silence,
that in the confutation of those books, and in some histories, wherein mention
is made of my fall, there are some clauses ignorantly set down; which I impute
not so much to the inconsiderate zeal of the Authors, as to mine own fault,
which God would justly punish and correct, having placed me upon the scaffold
of his wrath and indignation, as I had most justly deserved.

If you aid me with your prayers unto God, and if you be imitators of that
great mercy which he has showed this day unto me, which I beseech you bear in
mind; I will praise God for your piety, and pray unto him to continue his
mercy toward you and yours, with long life and happy days.

The prayer of king Manasses when he was prisoner in Babylon.
O Lord Almighty, God of our fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of all the
righteous seed of thine elect; which have made heaven and earth with all their
ornaments, which have bound the sea by the word of thy commandment, which have
shut up the deep, and sealed it by thy terrible and glorious name, whom all do
fear, and tremble before thy power: for the Majesty of thy glory cannot be
borne, and thine angry threatening toward sinners is importable, but thy mercy
is unmeasurable and unsearchable; for thou art the most high Lord, of great
compassion, long suffering, and most merciful, and repentest for man's
miseries. Thou, O Lord, have promised of thy great mercy, to give grace of
repentance and mercy unto those that have sinned against thee, and have
appointed repentance unto those that are sinners, that thou might save them
by the greatness of thy compassions. Thou therefore, O Lord which art the God
of the just, have not appointed repentance unto the just, as to Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob; nor for those that have not sinned against thee; but for me that am
a sinner, for I have sinned above the number of the saud of the sea; my
transgressions are exceeding many, and I am not worthy to behold and see the
height of the heavens. For the multitude of mine unrighteousness, I am bowed
down with many and great sins, and cannot lift up my head, neither have any
release, but only in thy free mercy: for I have provoked thy wrath, and done
evil before thee, I have not done thy will, neither kept thy commandments,
but have most wickedly committed sin and iniquity in thy presence, and
wilfully multiplied sin upon sin. Now therefore, O Lord, I bow the knees
of my heart, beseeching thee of grace and mercy. I have sinned, O Lord, I have
sinned and done evil before thee; but I humbly beseech thee forgive me, O
Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not in the multitude of mine unrighteousness,
be not angry with me for ever by reserving evil for me, neither cast me into
the bottomless pit of hell: for thou art the God, even the God of them that
repent. And in me, I beseech thee, show forth thy goodness, in saving me that
am unworthy, in the multitude of thy great mercy: and I will praise thee all
my life long for ever; for all the powers of heaven praise thee, and thine is
all glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The Conversion of a Doctor in Spain.
SEeing Almighty God, who is the chiefest goodness and felicity, and makes
his grace and goodness communicable to other things, has participated
himself in things we see not and touching the Divinity, to the Son by
generation (contrary Atha. in Symb. Psalm. 2. 7. Hebr. 1. 3.
to the opinion of Arrius, and Samosatenus,) and to the holy Ghost by
proceeding (contrary also to Macedonius, and Eunomius, arch-heretiques) even
according to his infinite Essence, without any distinction or dividing of the
same, and to be equal with him in deity stance.

Ioh. 1. 15.
Therefore the Son, begotten of the Father, and not made, and the holy Ghost
which proceeds from the Father, and the Son, (as from one beginning) have
the same essence in number, and inseparable nature with the Father, (contrary
to the opinion of the Valentines, which feign more then one:) yet his Persons
(viz.) of the Father, of the Atha. in Symb.
Son, and of the holy Ghost, are in number distinguished and divided,
(contrary to the Sabellians, who dream Idem. in Symb.
they are all but one Person.) For the Person of the Father is one, of the Son
another, and of the holy Ghost another: But of the Father, the Son, and the
holy God, there is but one Divinity, one equal glory, and one coeternall
Majesty. Number. 23. 19.


Malac. 2. 6. Gen 1. 1. Hebr. 1. 2. and 11* 3. Ioh. 1. 3
God himself is immutable in his counsels, neither can he be any way hindered
or deceived in the same. By reason whereof it comes to pass, that whasoeuer
happens, the same he has determined from eternity: who in things that we
see, by his word (as he saw good) has created all things of nothing, and made
and disposed in order, the heavens, the earth, the sea, and whatsoever is
therein contained, by his everliving Son, working with the Father: who also
by his infinite and consubstantiall power and virtue, viz. by the holy Ghost,
administers all things in his divine Providence. In this participatio^ God
remains in himself, imparting his Essence to other Persons, but not his
Person; that he cannot communicate: for if it were to be communicated, the Luk*
18. 19* Tho 1. q6* Ar. 2. 2. in Aug. vt supra. Hebr. 2. 16. Mat. 1. 16. Luke 2.
1. Dio de. di* no. Ioh. 1. 14.
distinction of persons would be taken away. But God (who is only good) did
participate himself unto men, when he communicated his word full of grace and
truth. He took not upon him the nature of Angels (as Paul says) but humane
nature. In this first communication God is in himself, but in his second
(after a sort) without himself. Such a one did Dionysius Areopagita regard him
to be, when he said. This we dare speak for truth, that almighty God suffered
on earth by the power and force of charity, viz. he was not in himself. Of
this participation S. John writes, and the other Evangelists.

Math 1. 16. Luke 2. 1. Ari. 1* de coel. text 32 and 2. text. 17 tom* 2. Gal 4.
5. Genesis 3. 6. 1. Cor. 15* 22.
And seeing God made nothing in vain, this communication also was made for
some purpose. For it was to take away the sin committed by our first parents,
and by propagation (Christ accepted) past over and transmitted unto mankind. By
reason whereof (as Paul says) we are all borne the sons of wrath, because we
all sinned in Adam.

Wherefore the right which we had to the inheritance of eternal life before
the fall of Adam, we afterward lost; as the Lawyers teach. But God, that (as a
father) loves us the Romans 5. 12. Quisquis P. filij ver^ P. ad l. i^. Gal. 4.
5. Ioh. 3. 16. Romans 5. 9. Luke 19. 10. Math* 18. 12.
sons of adoption, decreed in his unchangeable counsel, to send forth his
Son, made of a woman, and made under the law (for what love exceeds the love
of a father?) that we might receive the adoption of the sons. And (as John
witnesses) God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
by whose coming, and participation Saint Paul says, We are saved from wrath,
and redeemed.

The Son of God is also communicated unto us, that he might instruct us in
his holy wisdom and understanding; Col. 2. 3.
because in him are had all the treasure of wisdom and knowledge. For he was
the chief Master, and teacher, when he was appointed by God the Father, that
all should receive and understand from him the doctrine of truth: for thus God
spoke of him: This is my wel-beloued Son in whom I am well Math. 17. 5.
pleased, hear him.

Besides; Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, etc.
By which it manifestly appears, that it continues to be bread. And the very
Priests of Rome themselves after consecration of the Sacraments (which
according to their opinion is eue^ the body of Christ, and not bread) use the
signs of the cross upon the same Sacrament, calling it an holy Sacrament, a
pure Sacrament, an undefiled Sacrament, the sanctified bread of eternal life,
and the cup of everlasting salvation. So that they name it bread, and yet are
contrary to themselves. The same truth teaches that holy father Irenaeus:
saying. Now it is no common bread, but the Eucharist, Irenaeus cap. 34 lib. 4.
aduers. here is.
consisting of two things: that is, earthly, and heavenly. In which words he
expressly teaches, the bread to remain there still. Moreover the form of the
body of Christ is the soul; for Aristotle says, that Anima est actus corporis
Lib. 2. anim^ text. 4. and 6. 10. 2.
physici potentia vitam habentis. But it cannot be said that the substantial
form of bread is converted into the soul. Therefore the same substance of the
bread remains. Further, if the substantial form of bread be converted into
the body of Christ, it would then follow, the body of Christ to consist of two
forms, which is most false. Also the Accident without the substance cannot be
ministered or given; but there the Accidents are seen, tasted, smelt etc.
Therefore the substance is given. The refuge of the Papists is to make it a
miracle, by which the whiteness of the bread continues, and other accidents
thereunto belonging. But it is a false reply; for it is not found in the holy
Scriptures, neither was it needful that Christ should work such a miracle.
Saint Augustine says: These things may be honored, as religious but Aug. de
Trini. lib. 3. cap. 10.
to work wonder or astonishment they cannot, as miraculous. Also the accidents
are always destroyed by the corruption of the substance. But (as I will make
manifest hereafter) the very accidents of bread are destroyed in time,
therefore transubstantiation of the bread is not given.

By reason whereof the Papists at their times renew such sacrifices, reserved
in their Vestries, or other places appointed to keep their holy things, and
relics: that is, every week in Summer time: but in the Winter time at 15
days. And this is done to take away the scandal of their corruption:
Therefore Transubstantiation is not given.

In a matter so plain, and evident, I neither desire to spend much time, nor
to be too tedious, or troublesome to the readers. Chr. P^ze. P. 8. in disp.
coen^ Domini Ioh. Call. lib. 4. cap, 17 Sect 12. and 13. vsque ad 20. Ft in
eodem lib and ca. Sect. 18.
But if any shall be desirous to read more concerning this point, let them
look upon Christophorus Pezeline, and John Calvin, who very manifestly and
learnedly teach the truth, and make it clear and apparent to the eyes and
understanding of such as are blind and ignorant.

Of the Corporal absence of Christ in the Sacrament.
The 4. cause of his separation.
BEcause it is the ground and foundation of the tyrannical monarchy of the
Papists, to blind the eyes of the faithful, which (according to their
enchaunting speeches) believe the body and blood of Christ to be really in the
consecration of many sacrifices, and (as they say) in every one of them, and in
the cup, and chalices; I will speak somewhat by the way against their false
opinions, not to the satisfaction of them that read, (for of this matter, they
may peruse the Institutions of Doctor Calvin,) etc. but to express Call. lib.
4. cap. 17. a Sect. 14. us. ad 50.
mine own mind* I say first: The Papists do add and detractmany times from
the words of the true text to confirm and establish their own inventions; as
it is to be seen by the Inquisitors, who add to the Gospel of Christ what
may*serue their own purpose.

For Christ does thus admonish us by Math. Chap. 18. Math. 18.
(before cited:) If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee, and him alone: etc. If he hear thee not, t^ke yet with
thee one or two witnesses: If he will not vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto
the Church.

The Church of Rome to these words of Christ, adds (praeter causam fidei, but
for faith or religions sake:) so that they take away and cut off the meaning of
the Gospel, and contradict Christ himself, so charitably admonishing, and
exhorting. So do they contradict Saint Hierome, Saint Ambrose, and many other
holy Fathers, and many times add and detract from the very words of the holy
Scripture: as manifestly appears in that unchristianlike book entitled, the
Index expurgatorius.

But now to return to our purpose: The Church of Rome to the words of Christ:
saying, This is my body, adds (for) which Christ never pronounced, nor Saint
Peter, whatsoever Tho. 3. p. q. ^8 Ar. 2. 5.
Thomas affirms. And if the Priest pronounce not (for) among the Papists he
sins hainously. Also the Church of Rome adds, that the bread of
consecration ought to be unleavened: which precept was neither delivered by
Christ nor his Apostles. The Greek Priests do use leauened bread. Therefore it
may be said, that if they be various in the matter, there can be no truth found
in the form. For the determinate matter, has her determinate form; and the
determinate form also her determinate matter. But they add and diminish at
their pleasures, contrary to the rules and commandments of God: who says, You
shall not add to Deuteronomy* 1. 9. and 12. 32.
the word that I speak unto you, nor take from the same. And moreover, What I
command thee that only do, neither add thou any thing, nor diminish. God
reprehends such as are bold and audacious in this behalf: saying, I protest
unto every Rcu* 22. 18*
man, that hears the words, etc. If any man shall add, etc. See how God
reproues the bishop of Rome and all his Popish Priests and accomplices that walk
against Gods co^mandeme^rs; for the word of the Lord endures: and he himself
says, Luke. 21. 33.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass aaway.
Therefore that God, that true and everlasting God, will send unto them sudden
ruin and destruction.

Amongst other ceremonies which the Papists do use, one is after consecration
of the bread, to bless the same bread with the sign of the cross, and
certain words, etc.

Now I demand of them, if it be lawful for the creature to bless the Creator?
For benediction (as Saint Paul says) is always from the greater to the
lesser, The lesser is blessed of Hebr. 7. 7.
the greater, as he affirms in express words. Hebr. 7. 7 For the father
gives his blessing to the sons, as Isaac did to Jacob, Genesis 27. 27. 40. 48. 15.
and Esau, and Jacob to the sons of Joseph his son. And it is commonly
observed, that the father at the very point of death gives his blessing to his
sons: but the sons (which are the lesser) although they reverence and honor
the father, do not yet give him benediction. By which I conclude, that the
Papist Priests (as inferior) ought not to bless Christ their superior: and
if they do it in their Mass (as they term it,) they bless not Christ the
Creator, but the bread the creature; and so they worship the creature, not the
Romans 1. 25.
Creator: as Saint Paul says, They have turned the truth of God into a lie,
and worshipped and served the creature much more then the Creator.

Neither ought we to believe that Christ is in their hands, when the words are
pronounced by them. For many are consecrating the Sacrament at once, and the
body of Christ being but one in number, is not in many sacrifices. For the body
of Christ is natural, and keeps a place, and is not given in many places at
one time. But the Papists reply to this, saying; that the body of Christ is
there sacramently, not Tho. 3. P. q. ^6. 5 5.
totally. But this is a very idle distinction, and a slanderous boldness: to
say they have Christ (in that manner) in their hands at the Sacrament. For if
(as they confess) Christ have a chief place in heaven, and yet is in the
Sacrament with the same really as he is heaven, it would follow.

God in times past who was figuratively in the Arc, was Exodus 25. 10. Vsque ad
25.
covered with a Table of gold, and so the Arc was honored and had in
admiration, that the Priests might with fear come unto it. For when Vzzah, as
the Ark of God was carried out of the house of Abinadab, with a godly zeal 2.
Sam. 6. ^6. vsque ad 11.
put his hand to the Arc, The Lord was very wroth, and smote him in the same
place for his fault, and there he died by the Arc. Therefore David that day
feared the Lord, and said, How shall the Ark of the Lord come to me? and durst
not bring the Ark of the Lord to himself.

If this be so, how dare the Romish Priests pronounce Christ himself with his
Divinity and Humanity to descend into their hands? Or if the true body of
Christ were in the sacrifice, or the sacrifice it self were the true body of
Christ, how comes it that brute beasts have place there? For many times the
flies goes upon it, and other insensible creatures, as is daily seen and made
manifest. And I my self often celebrating the Mass, have seen flies upon the
Sacrament consecrated, and made holy. Therefore we may not believe the true
body of Christ to be there. Sometimes also by negligence of the Priests, part
of the sacrifices have fallen upon the ground, and been trodden under foot. And
I am a faithful and true eye witness, that in the year of our Lord 1595 in a
Church, which the Order of the most holy Trinity has at Turol, whereof I was
chief, a certain religious man (as they call him) celebrating the Sacrament,
turned the chalice vpside down, and the consecrated wine (as they say) was
part sprinkled on the earth, and part shed upon the Altar. And for these
mischaunces there are certain rules set down in the Missall of Rome,
ordaining punishments to such Priests by whom they happen or befall. Also in
the Emperors Cathedral Church of S. Paul, in the year of our Lord 1580. the
thieves stole away a silver Casket, where the consecrated Sacrifices were
usually kept, and threw the sacrifices themselves upon the ground and upon the
Altar. In the year of our Lord 1586, in the Monastery of S. Savior at Fraga,
thieves also took away the chest where the Sacrifices were kept, and they were
thrown up and down. Therefore we may not believe the body of Christ to be
there. For if (as they grant) the body and blood remain under those forms, so
long as they continue vncorrupt; and if also laid upon the ground (as is
aforesaid) they be vncorrupt, and so are trodden under foot; then Christ must
likewise be trodden under foot, which is a most gross absurdity. Sometimes
also as I have seen) worms have bred in those their sacrifices. If then we
hold their opinion, it must needs be that they beingendred out of the body of
Christ, not out of the bread, because there (as they say) the bread is not.
Haec de Accidentibus. Because if by miracle (as they hold) they continue and
abide of themselves, then they ought to be kept by miracle without any
corruption; for there is no greater reason for the one, then for the other: nor
of the body of Christ. Otherwise the body of Christ should change the form,
and the very worms should partake of the body and blood of Christ, and from
thence have original beginning; which is most false and unworthy. Therefore it
is to be said, that nothing is there more then the bread it self.

Moreover, let there be two sacrifices of bread put together, sod, and made at
one time, of one meal, fire, and water; and let the one be consecrated and
made holy, and the other unconsecrated, and we shall see their corruption to be
alike. It therefore follows, that the one has no more in it then the other,
neither is the body of Christ more in the consecrated form of bread then in
that which is unhallowed. Sometimes also poison (as they say) is put into that
Sacrament, that so men may be bereaft of their lives; as it is read of the
Emperor Henry the 7, and of Pope Victor the third, whereof the first loss his
life by the Sacrament of bread poisoned by his Consessour: the last, by wine
transsubstantiate. Therefore we must conclude, that the body of Christ is not
there, or otherwise the body of Christ to be the instrument of sin, and the
means of evil; which is blasphemy.

This corporal absence, Christ has manifestly shown, Ioh 12. 3 Isa 66. 1.
Act. 1. 11.
saying, The poor you shall have always with you, Me you shall not have
always. Christ also speaks of the absence of his humanity, (for his Divinity
fills both heaven and earth:) in which humanity he shall not come unto us till
the day of judgment. Moreover the Papists affirm, that the matter of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, ought to be determinate.

They are also possessed with many mad imaginations, saying, this is a true
Proposition, Out of bread becomes the The. 3. 75. 8.
body of Christ. And this also is false: Of bread becomes, or is made, the body
of Christ. These are words of exceeding folly and dotage, and are differing and
repugnant to themselves, although Thomas expound them supernaturally. In
conuersions also, that which is converted is corrupted, and that into which the
conversion is had, is begotten and engendered: Thus after their opinion we must
say that Christ is so begotten and engendered; which is an heresy.

The Devil gets much, and enlarges his power and number by the idolatry of
the Church of Rome, which he still persuades them to maintain; and so they
will, until it shall please God of his infinite goodness and mercy to open
their eyes, and make their understanding perfect, that they may truly see and
read the book of God, for they yet live in error and darkness. But if they
would look upon, and hear the book which Hilkiah the high Priest found in
the house of the Lord, they would do as that godly king Josiah did in the 18.
year of his Monarchy: who as 2. Kin. 22. 10. 11. 12.
soon as Shaphan the Chancellor had showed it, and read it to the king, and
that he had heard the words of the book of the Law, he was so moved therewith,
that he rent his clothes, and wept before God; and craving pardon at Gods
hands, humbled himself, destroyed the idols, and walked according to the will,
and word of the Lord.

The fifth cause of his separation. Luke 1. 36. 1. Pet. 2. 22.
I was also much troubled in mind about the power of the Pope, when he does
those things which almighty God neither does, or can do. For although God be
omnipotent, and nothing is impossible with him, he yet works no sin or
evil, neither is there any guile found in his mouth; neither can he do that
which is wrapped or encombred with controversies and contradictions.

But the Pope takes upon him to do this; for if any come unto him, and desire
the relics of some Saint, as of Hermolaus, or any other, he will answer that
he has none, because his bones are dispersed: But he takes the bones perhaps
of some reprobate and wicked person, and blesses them, and baptized in the
name of Hermolaus, he delivers them to him that makes suite for the same; and
then the bones of him are worshipped, whose soul in hell is cruciated. And
thus it begets scandal and contradiction, that the bones of any wicked or idle
persons, are the bones of some Saints or others, at his pleasure.

I observed the power, covetousness and tyranny of the same Pope: I beheld his
exceeding pomp and pride, and with these things, and many more of this nature,
my mind was much tormented. For seeing Christ is the fullness of all grace, in
that he endues the Church with spiritual grace and understanding; we ordain
him to be the head thereof, Ioh. 1. 15. Ephesians. 1. 22. Colos. 1. 18.
with S. Paul, saying: He has made all things subject under his feet, and
has appointed him over all things to be the head of the Church. And seeing
both Men and Angels are ordained to Colos. 2. 10.
enjoy Gods glory; even as of men, so also of the Angels he may rightly be
called the head. For the mystical body of the Church does not only consist of
men but of Angels. But of all this multitude and number Christ is the head, for
that his seat is near unto God, and does partake of his gifts not only more
absolutely then men, but more perfectly Ephesians. 1. 21.
also then the very Angels: so that from his influence Psalm. 8. 8.
both men and Angels receive their benefits. As Saint Paul witnesses, saying:
He has set him at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality, and power, and Ephe. 1. 21.
might* and domination, and every name that is named not in this Math. 4. 11.
world only, but also in that that is to come, and has put all things under
his feet. And so S. Matthew says, Behold the Angels came and ministered unto
him. And albeit the Angels themselves lack faith (Quia non per fidem sed per
speciem ambulant) and the Church is the congregation of the faithful,
nevertheless Christ is their head.

There fore besides that divine wisdom which Christ had from the beginning,
he had also a humane knowledge Sexta Synod.
(notwithstanding the position ofsuch as deny, that there be two sorts of
wisdoms in Christ, which in the sixth Synod Ambr. l. de incar. Dom. ^ap. 7.
is held a thing damnable:) for as S. Ambrose says, God did assume the
perfection of humane nature in the flesh, took upon him the sense of man, but
not the pride of carnal sensuality. But to the sense of man appertains an
humane knowledge created. Therefore in Christ is given that experimental Luk 2.
knowledge of which S. Luke speaks. So did loel prophetically see him taught,
saying to the people, Rejoice Joel. 2.
in the Lord your God, for he has given you the rain of righteousness, etc.
And the spouse says, I will lead thee and bring Cant. 8. 2.
thee into my mothers house, and there thou shall instruct me. And Isaias, I
have given him for a Prince, and a master unto Isa. 55. 4.
the people, comprehending these two things, namely, that he was a Redeemer and
a Master: for whereas he terms him a Prince, he means him to be a Redeemer;
but calling him Master, he signifies him an instructor or teacher. Christ
therefore is endued with all these sciences, by which me^ were instructed by
him; as out of Matthew, opening his mouth, he taught his Disciples, and out of
John, Jesus ascended into Math. 5. John 7.
the Temple and taught the people, and as it is written in Luke, They found him
sitting in the Temple, etc. By two ways then he taught the people, that is, by
example, and Luke 2. Act. 1.
words. For Jesus began to do, and afterward to teach, the true and simple
doctrine without any kind of commixtion.

Seeing therefore Christ came to teach mankind, and to 1. Cor 6. The first
cause of his separation from the Romish Church.
redeem them with his most precious blod, my self being one among the rest to
be redeemed and taught through his universe and exceeding goodness, was at the
length called to the true knowledge of his divine will and pleasure, and by his
assistance I began to open the eyes of my understanding, and to purge and
seclude my self from those mists and errors of the Romish Church, by which my
mind before was too much carried away and obscured. I observed again that from
time to time there was a continual mutabilitie and various changing of
opinions among the Prelates: for what was one day received and allowed by
authority, was the next day prohibited, and utterly disanulled: as it is
plainly to be seen in Indice expurgatorio. For whatsoever seemed to tax the
errors of the Priesthood, the same by commandment of the Inquisitors, and of
the Church of Rome, was forthwith razed out and extinguished.

The second cause of his separation.
Secondly, because if the Bishops at any time gave power and authority to any
for the preaching of the word of God* they did not grant him free liberty of
speech, but prescribed him a form of preaching; as my self can witness by
their Commissions granted to me in that behalf: which is manifestly known to
be a thing repugnant to the truth. For as Paul says, The word of God is not
tied or limited: but 2. Tim. 2.
they limit the same, saying, We give you authority for the preaching of the
word of God, so far forth, as you do it according to the opinions of the holy
Fathers, and to the decrees of the most holy Council of Trent. When as
notwithstanding neither the opinions of the Fathers or of the Councels agree
amongst them, neither are they always true. But if they do agree, and are
true, they are (as is aforesaid) every where altered by them and changed. And
if according to their judgments the word of God should be expressed, the truth
would sometimes be made more manifest and apparent. But in this they are
contrary to them selves, as that most learned man John Calvin has rightly Io.
Calvin in ini. tio Institut. Ep. ad Regem. Fran.
and learnedly set down. I am an eye witness (says he) of the tyranny of the
Bishops, and Inquisitors; for I have often heard very learned men preach
amongst them: but because those things that have bin preached, were displeasing
to the tyrannous Inquisitors and Bishops, the same preachers and learned men
have been compelled even in the same Church (and that against their own
consciences) by their commandments and authority to speak against
themselves, and to preach another doctrine, contrary to the truth. For instance
whereof, Father Lobo, a famous preacher, whose name is well known in Spain
and Italy, at Rome in the beginning of Pope Gregory the 13, in his Sermon was
heard to utter these words: It is of more weight and efficacy, and of greater
profit and vtility with God, to hear his word, then the Mass. But the same
preacher forthwith by the commandment of that great beast (the Pope) was
compelled to make his public recantation; and yet for all this, he was
deprived of his authority of preaching, and enjoined to other penances. Let
God arise, and judge his cause, who says, Viuus est sermo meus, My word is a
living word; and David (lest he should fall) did place the word of God, A
Lantern unto his feet: by which also the heavens were Heb. 2. Psalm. 118. 105.
Psalm. 32. Psalm. 108. Luke 15. Idem. Wild 9. Eccles 1. 5. 16. 14. 37. Luke 1117.
framed, and which endures for ever. To hear the same word by which all
things were made, and is the fountain of wisdom, the publicans and sinners
assembled themselves together, and the people preassed upon Christ to hear the
word of God, of which all things were made; for it is the fountain of
wisdom. Ezekiel admonished the sons of Ammon, the mountains of Israel, and
the dry bones, to hear the word of the Lord God: by mediation whereof the
bones came together, bone to his bone, and behold the synewes and the flesh
grew upon them, and the skin covered them.

Christ also calls them happy and blessed, that hear the word of God. What
the word of God makes loose and free, that these tyrants do bind and tie to
limits and compass. When John Baptist was in prison, he preached the Math 1.
1. Eccles 4. 30.
same word, which (as the Lord says) we ought not any way to oppugn or resist.

In the year of our Lord 1597. Valentine Cortazer being Inquisitor, the
twentieth day of June coming to visit the city of Liria, entered the same in
his accustomed pomp and vanity, and did impose upon me the charge and duty of
preaching a Sermon of Faith. And upon Sunday the 22 day of the same month and
year, Aderat Inquisitor Ecclesiae pro Tribunali, sitting in great majesty,
and (as the manner is) Lecto mandato praeceptorum de accusatione, I ascended
the place of preaching, and having saluted the Inquisitor began my Sermon.
After I had past over many things in praise and commendation of the Inquisitors
and Inquisition, I spoke thus to the Auditorie. Remember (dear brethren) and
be mindful of those words which I spoke unto you in Lent time, in a Sermon
touching brotherly correction (for two Lents I was their Preacher.) You are
bound (as I then told you) every one of you to correct, and admonish your
brother secretly between you and him. But if after Luke 17. 3. Math* 18. 15.
16. 17. Leuit* 19. 7.
admonishment he continue still in his wickedness, then tell and acquaint the
Church therewith. Yet before brotherly correction you are not tied to denounce
him. Mark this well. This I speak unto you, in the name, and behalf of the
living God.

Having made an end of my Sermon, I was invited by the Inquisitor with all
kindness and courtesy to take my dinner with him; which being ended, he began
to fall into commendation of my Sermon, but utterly to condemn that brotherly
admonition, saying, That it is not admitted in matters of faith, with which the
Inquisition has to do, and takes notice of. I replied with the very words of
Christ in defense thereof, but was compelled to hold my peace, and the Sunday
following constrained to preach of him that they hold and term accursed, in
the presence of the Inquisitor, and lay open his mind and pleasure against Gods
word, and to say that brotherly correction had no part or place in such
matters, as were contained in the Edict. Do but see, and behold how the word of
God is tied, and bound by these people of Antichrist. And this whilst I was
one of their number, and company, drew my mind into diverse and sundry
distractions.

Of Transubstantiation.
MY soul also was grievously troubled about Transubstantiation The third cause
of his separation. 1. Cor. 11. 26. and per totum cap.
of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ: for this among other
things always seemed unto me a matter of much difficulty. And Saint Paul
teaches the contrary, speaking of the Lords supper, he always names bread,
saying, As aften as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this drink,
etc. Again, Whosoever shall eat of this bread, etc. Also by this it follows,
that the Pope does falsely intrude himself to be the head of the Church, as is
proved by this reason. The Primitive Church, and that which flourished for many
years, knew no other head but Christ, nor had any universal Bishop. But the
Primitive Church (even according to the opinion of the Papists) was the true
Church: Therefore the true Church ought to know or acknowledge no head but
Christ, nor any universal Bishop. It is also thus proved by authority.

Gregory Bishop of Rome wrote against John Patriarch of Constantinople, saying:
He that shall name himself the universal Bishop, may be called the forerunner
of Antichrist. And the Council of Carthage forbids the Bishop of Rome to be
called the universal Bishop (as Gratianus witnesses) in these words: But now,
no not the Bishop of Rome may be called universal. What should I speak of the
Synod of Chalcedon? whose arguments are so many and so evident against the Sea
of Rome, that the same must either needs fall from her high pride and dignity,
or the whole authority of her Council be utterly suppressed; as here
manifestly appears, in that the same Synod is held and celebrated, only by
the Emperors command, without either the presence, or authority of the Bishop
of Rome: as in those times even unto the year of our Lord 900 (as Cusanus
witnesses) their Councels were not usual to be assembled but by the direction
of Caesar. And Pope Leo (as Thomas affirms) following the same custom, The.
3. 2. 67. ar. 1. ad. 1.
submitted himself to the opinion and judgment of the Emperor.

Christ the true Bishop, as in this world he took upon him Math. 18. 4. Idem
20. 26. Mark 10. 43. Luke 22. 25.
no person of state, so he appointed no dominion or Empire among his Apostles,
but with grave words pacified them (muttering somewhat among themselves of
principality) so that he drew their thoughts and cogitations unto another form
of life far differing from the Princes of this world; and openly affirmed,
that such as would be the first, and greatest in the kingdom of heaven, must
humble John 13. 15. Luke 22. 26.
themselves amongst men. And whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
servant. Christ ever taught and exercised humility, saying, I have left you an
example, even as I do, so also do you.

Christ had not where to lay his head, and will not one Palace suffice the
Bishop of Rome? Christ refused the condition of Regal dignity, being offered,
and will not one Crown content the Bishop of Rome? Is it not enough that he
possesses Italy, unless with his triple Crown he command the world? Christ
departed away into a mountain himself alone, that they should not make him a
king, declaring John 6. 15. 18. 46.
his kingdom not to be of this world. And shall this glorious Vicar, in the
name of Christ, with such honor and superfluity possess his kingdom in this
world? Or shall he think men will continue so besotted, and miscarried in this
difference, and vnlikelinesse of things, as to be persuaded that he bears the
place and office of Christ here upon earth, or rather not of Antichrist?

Boniface the third was the first that took upon him the name of universal
Bishop, about the year 600; which name was neither given him by Christ, nor
from heaven, but by that tyrant and parricide Phocas the Emperor. From that
troublesome fountain did arise the great flood of Papistrie, and that proud
name had first beginning. And yet in those days the Popes did not, as now they
do, presently ascend to the top and height of dignity, but by degrees did
steal into rule and dominion. For Boniface the 8 Plat. in his Pon^
after he had by cunning and sedition crept into the Papal place, made
Emperors and Kings to fear him, going about to depose, and raise up to
authority, whom he pleased. So he thought himself both King and Emperor: in
so much as when the Iubilee was first granted, he showed himself openly the
first day to the people, attired in his Pontifical vestments; and the day
following in his armor, and coat of male; and in the presence of all the
people with a loud voice he commanded himself to be proclaimed Caesar. Which
vanity Baldus Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, Salo, and many others, do
maintain by their false doctrine, saying* that Emperors and Kings are but the
Popes substitutes, and that the Bishops of Rome had both the power of
spiritual and temporal government.

They ground their false opinion upon the power of Christ, which power they
pretend to have as his Vicars: for Christ says, All power is given unto me,
both in heaven and in earth: Math. 28. 18. Ioh. 17. 2. Hebr. 2 8. Ezec. 37 22.
Ioh. 18. 33. Math. 2. 2. Mar. 15. 26.
and so by consequence, both the swords: for he is named King of Kings, Lord of
Lords, and in diverse places of the Scripture is called King and Emperor.
Ezechiel gives him both names, and the Magicians and Pilate call him King.

But I demand this of these Antichrists; that if they imitate Christ in this,
why they do not follow him in humility? For although Christ had the power of
rule and command, yet he in respect of his humility used them not, but rather
affirmed his kingdom not to be of this world. But if the Pope do not imitate
Christ, he is not his Minister, his Vicar, nor successor. As the jews boasted
before Christ, that they were of the seed of Abraham, so the Pope glories in
the succession of Christ, and of Peter. But the same answer that Christ gives
unto the Jews, he gives also to the Pope* as you may read in John 8. Chap. the
37 verse, to the very end Ioh. 8. 37.
of the same Chapter.

But the Pope says, they are called the Servants of servants, and so named for
their humility. So that may suffice. To this I answer, that under a fair show
lie hid foul inte^ts. He carries the name of humility, but his deeds are
clean contrary. Is he the servant of servants, that holds his foot forth
for Kings and Emperous to kiss, and do reverence to? Is he the servant of
servants, that is carried upon men's shoulders? Is he the servant of servants
that makes such daily boast of his kingdom and authority? Is he the servant ^.
Decret. Greg. tit. 7. can. Lib. 1. decret Greg. tit. 33.
of servants, that says he has authority from heaven, and the fullness of
power to make justice of injustice? Is he the servant of servants, that says
he is like unto the Sun, and the Emperor like the Moon? No, but he is rather
to be called an Harpy crowned, or a devouring Hiena, that under a feigned show
of humility, works death and cruelty.

Sedition and controversy oftentimes troubles the minds of such as aspire unto
that vain dignity, and contend for the Papal seat and authority and the place
in which stands much scandal, when schisms, and deuisions arise in the
Church, in the very act of election.

Many times this false out, for proof whereof read Plato Plat. and Illescas in
vitis Pa^r.
and Illescas in the History of the Bishops.

If then the election of this present Pope, Clement the 8. be diligently
examined, it was in like manner very irregular, and the people did much murmr
at it. By reason whereof (unless I be deceived) the Divines are very doubtful
concerning his election, For at Vall-Solet. a (place where the king of Spaines
Court is) in the year of our Lord 1602. Theses Theologicae apparuerunt,
teaching Pope Clement the 8. not to be held a true Bishop, which doctrine
(amongst many other) father Bazquez maintained, being one of the society of the
Jesuits: which coming straight way to the ears of the Bishop, he caused both
him and them to be presently called beforehim.

And because amongst many other reasons that have moved me to this separation
from the Church of Rome, this of the usurped power of the Pope has of long
time been the chiefest, I thought it my part to say something of his tyranny,
and of his name and hypocrisy.

But for that this little labor has been only undertaken by me to satisfy
mine own mind, and to make some declaration thereof unto others; lest I
should be tedious and troublesome to the Readers, I will for this time
pretermit the further handling of these things, yet (God willing) in their
place and time shall they be particularly expressed more at large; imitating
the doctrine of Saint Paul, who after his own conversion did convert his
brethren; which Christ also our heavenly Schoolmaister does teach us: saying to
Peter: Now thou art at length converted, strengthen thy brethren. And I my
self converted, am bound in duty to do the same, yet in the mean time read
Doctor Calvin, li. 4. Institut. Cap. 6 7. and 11. Call. cap. 6. 7. 11.


Of Purgatory, and the Sacraments.
INsomuch as I am now determined to embrace the truth of the reformed Church, I
do with steadfast resolution, The 6. cause of his separation
look into the sentences thereof, being consonant and agreeable unto the
Gospel of Christ; lest the words of the Lawyers may be inferred against me,
who hold this opinion, That it is a foul and dishonorable thing for any that
lives in the commonwealth, to be ignorant of that law, in which he is
conversant. And so there is no other Church allowed of more then the Church
militant and triumphant: But amongst the Papists Purgatory is ordained, the
third Church, which I utterly deny and abjure. For (as Saint Paul says) Christ
is the purger of our sins, and sits at the right hand of the Majesty in
the highest Hebr. 1. 3.
places.

Besides hell and heaven, there is no middle place found in the holy
Scriptures, where our souls should rest, or be detained. The opinion which the
Papists hold of Venial sins, and the ceremonies, by which the same is
absolved, I wholly disalow, as vile, and excreable; nor is there any other then
mortal sin, which is only washed away Heb. 9. 14. Ephe. 1. 7.
by true contrition of heart, by the mercy of God, and the shedding of the
blood of Christ; as Saint Paul says. The Sacrament also of extreme unction, by
mediation of which (as the Papists dream) the relics of sins mortal are
taken away, is a very idle, and ridiculous matter, and no Sacrament. For if it
were a Sacrament, the redemption of Christ were imperfect, and in vain; which
is against the truth of Psalm. 116. 5. 6.
Gods word, which says The Lord is merciful, and righteous: and our God is
full of compassion. The Lord preserves the simple: I was in misery and he
sauedme. I reject also the Sacrament of Confirmation, and the rest which the
Pope has ordained, and only reverence and embrace the Sacraments of Baptism,
and the Lords Supper, instituted by our Savior. By this I am instructed in the
rules of Christ, and by this I am more and more strengthened, and confirmed in
him.

Of Auricular confession.
AVricular confession, (which the Papists call the Sacrament of Penitence) is
very foolish. For this tyrannical confession, is neither found in the law of
nature, nor in the Law of God: but in the devil and the Popes kitchen, to
increase their fare, and delicacies. Neither did the Apostles Call. lib. 3. Cap.
4. Chrysoft.
teach the same, or Saint John Baptist: as Calvin directly proves. And
Chrysostom also maintains: whose words (Con. 3. t. 2. Page 1371.) are these:
Why do thou blush and art ashamed to tell thy sins? Take heed thou reveal
them not to any man, lest he vpbraid thee; nether confess them to thy fellow
servant, lest he publish them: but unto him which is the Lord, who has care
and charge over thee. And again, Tell thy faults only unto me privately, (God
here speaks,) that I may heal thy disease, and deliver thee from sorrow.
Which words (because they are repugnant and contrary to that great beast) are
by the commandment of the Inquisitors taken away and blotted out in the book,
called Index expurgatorius.

Many in the same manner of confession have revealed their sins willingly to
their Confessors, and the Confessor to the Judges, and others.

A certain Bishop of Girona in the time of James the second king of Arragon
(being his Confessor) revealed his confession to the Pope, and the king
forthwith cut out his tongue. I my self can faithfully witness, that being
many times present at the talk and communication of Confessors, they have so
foolishly behaved themselves, and so openly in their talk revealed the sins
that have been confessed unto them privately by the penitents; that their names
and persons have easily become known to me, and perhaps to many others, that
have heard the conference. And although there be diverse laws ordained by the
Pope to punish Confessors thus offending; they yet commit this crime of
revelation, and (which is worse) without a sum of money, the Penitents have
no grant of absolution, as appears in the books of Taxes, etc. By which
fear, many even in the very act of confession do conceal the truth, till they
be compelled to confess the same. I could speak much of this matter, and
point it out with my very fingar, but I will observe my oath, and with good
advice forbear to relate it.

In this matter of auricular confession, the Confessors are wont to seduce,
and auert the minds and affections of women from God, and to turn and convert
them to their own lusts and filthiness. To prove this true, I present (as
witnesses) those Confessors that have been punished by judgment of the
Inquisition, for such abhorred and abominable wickedness; and such as have
been adiuged to punishment, and by sentence of the Prelates and others, for
being found guilty of the like misdemeanors. For by auricular confession, many
monstrous enormities arise, and are begotten.

To avoid the imputation of tedioulnesse, I will not continue to make any
longer discourse, or discovery of the errors of the Church of Rome. But with
all my heart, with all my mind, and with all my soul, I reverence and
confess all things whatsoever our new reformed Church does allow and embrace.
And if any of the Church of Rome, shall vpbraide me that I have falsely and
perfidiously fallen Amb* Ca 9. in Lucan, lib. 6.
from the same.; I answer with Saint Ambrose, In leaving it I forsake not
Christ: Him only no man ought to forsake, or change: to whom it is worthily
said, Lord to whom shall we fly? Thou have the words of everlasting life. For
the faith of the Church is commanded chiefly to be sought for, in which if
Christ have habitatio^, it may undoubtedly be chosen and followed: But if the
people be perfidious, and the master an heretic, and deforme and dissigure
the dwelling place; the fellowship and communion of such heretics is to be
abandoned, and such a Synagogue to be avoided. We must shake off the dust from
our feet, lest the drought of our barren unfaithfulness prepare and make the
way sandy, and hard to the true progress and passage of our minds and
understandings. So if there be any Church (as he says afterward) that
renounceth the true faith, and does not keep and observe the foundation, and
ground of the Apostles preaching, it is to be left and forsaken* that it beget
not the corruption of untruth.

Seeing then I have found Christ only, and his doctrine dwelling in the
reformed Church, and have seen that erroneous teachers do deforme and disgrace
the habitation of the Church of Rome; I have deservedly left the one, that I
may cleave to and embrace the other: and that according to the commandment
Ephesians. 5. 10. and. 1* ca. 5. 11. and 10.
of the Apostle: saying, Do not company together with idolaters. And again:
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove
the rather. And what more unfruitful work is there, then to embrace false
doctrine, and heresy? In another place: We command you a. These. 5. 6.
brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves
from every brother that walks inordinately, and not Tit. 2. 10. 11.
after the instruction which he received from us. And to Titus, Reject him that
is an heretic, after once or twice admonition. And the Apostle moreover says
thus. If any preach the Gospel unto you otherwise then you have heard and
received it, let Gal. 1* 8.
him be accursed. And a little before that: Although any, yea an Angel from
heaven should teach you any other doctrine then that we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. But I will no longer stay upon those places of the
Prophets, wherein the people is oftentimes exhorted to leave, and go out of
Babylon, which I know the Church of Rome both imitates and follows.

Let it not be objected unto me by any adversary, that I have denied my
baptism by which I am consecrated to almighty God: for I only renonunce the
vain ceremonies used therein by the Bishops, without authority of holy
Scriptures. The virtue whereof I know to depend on God, and not in man that
administers the same unto me. Seeing the^ it is the part of a loving mother,
not only to bring up her children in the obedience and fear of God, but to
instruct them also, and nurse them up with the food of his heavenly word* and
so unite them to Christ: as I have been consecrated to God by baptism in the
Church of Rome, so in the same I have been seduced from Christ by humane
inventions. I have therefore worthily, and of right, made choice of that
Church, in which the true baptism is sincerely administered, and the sound
doctrine thereof is faithfully delivered to such as are baptized, through the
whole course of their lives. Besides I persuade my self (and that truly) that
I am more deeply bound to God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost,
(being three Persons yet only God) then the Church of Rome, which has
forsaken and rebelled against that faith which the Apostles in times past so
highly commended in her, and against whom that imputation of reproach may
worthily be had, which was once laid upon the Church of the Jews in these
words: And their Ezech. 23. 31.
sons whom they bear unto me, they have offered to Idols, to be devoured.
And again in the same Prophet: They have played the whores, and blood is in
their hands, and with their idols have they committed adultery And what is it
else to comme^d the invocation of souls? the adoration of images? the
observation of Purgatory? and of Pardons? They glory of the works of
Supererogation, the rules and examples of men that are sinners: as Francis,
Dominicke, Bruno, Celestine, Ignatius, Loyola, and others, and especially to
thurst young men and women against their wills into a monastery? What is this
else (as I say) but to be consecrated to idols, and to superstitious Idem 16.
20. 2. Cor. 6. 17. Apoc. 18. 4. Isa. 52. 11.
worshipping, and in the end to the devil himself, and damnation?

And because (as it is well known unto me) the Papists think we walk not
after the right decrees and determinations of the true Church, neither believe
those things, which are to be believed: I will therefore, seeing (as God has
commanded) I am separated and come from among them, relate those things, which
we faithfully hold and Romans 1. 16.
embrace: For as Paul says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it
is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. Before all
things we believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and
in his Word, begotten of the Father; and in the holy Ghost, proceeding from
them both, to whom their due and distinct properties are to be attributed: in
which (according to Essence) we neither separate the Son, nor the holy Ghost
from the Father: nor (contrary to the opinion of the Manicheys) divide the
Father from the Son, or from the holy Aug. in Manich.
Ghost: but we believe that they have one unity of Essence, and Trinity of
Persons, without any confusion.

Which unity and trinity (as Hilary, Ambrose, and many Hill. 1. lib. Trin. P.
5. a principio. Amb. lib. 1. ad Great* ca. 5. 7. antemedium.
others teach) cannot perfectly be comprehended by natural reason; but is
apprehended by faith, as many other hidden mysteries of God, of which S. Paul
speaks: Oh the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? All
honor be given to the blessed Trinity, being one God, and to whom is equal
glory in three Persons, contrary to the opinion of Arrius, that blasphemously
takes away the Leg. disput. Atha. and Artij in con. Ni^^.
equality of Persons, holding the Son to be inferior, and the holy Ghost to
be servant to God the Father.

Of Christ the Son.
Ioh. 3. 17. and 4. 25* Act. 3. 19. Hebr. 2. 19. Genesis 1. 1. Ioh. 1. 3. 1. Col.
16. Pro. 8. 22. Apoe. 3. 14. Psalm. 32. 9. Ioh. 3. 4. Luke 2. 11. Idem. in eod.
Mat. 3. 5. Luke 3* Acts 10. Ioh. 11. 1. S. Hierome lib. contra. Helui. de
perpe. virgi. Mar. Amb. sup. Luc. li. 2. ca. 1. S. Aug. in Sermon. 14. de not.
Do. S. Tho. 3. p. q. 28. ar. 1. 2. 3. 4. 1. Tim. 6. Acts 3. 13. Romans 4. Phil.
2. Ephe. 4. Acts 2. Apoc. 1. Acts 13. Ioh. 10. 18. Romans 8. 11. Acts 2. 24. Mar.
16. 19. Luke 24. 51. Psalm. 109. 1. Ephe. 4. 9. Luke 21. 21. Ma.. 25. 31. Romans
2. 6. Apoc. 22. 12.
WE believe in Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son, the Redeemer and
Mediator of mankind: through whom in the holy Ghost he created all things in
the beginning; not that he redeemed mankind without the Father, which sent his
Son to be the Redeemer of the world; or without the holy Ghost, by whom man
is conceived and anointed: but because the only person of the Son took upon
him humane nature, and by his death and passion paid the price of our
redemption; and is but one person (contrary to the opinion of Nestorius, that
maintained two.) We believe also that Christ was borne of the virgin Mary,
according to humane nature it self, by the inspiration of the holy Ghost; and
we believe (with the Catholic Church) that she was a virgin before the birth,
in the birth, and after the birth, against Heluidius, whom S. Hierome utterly
disallowes, so does S. Ambrose, S. Augustine and S. Thomas.

We believe also that Christ our Lord, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried, and descended into hell, and the third day rose
again: not by another means, as Lazarus, and others, but by his own proper
power and virtue; because he was God, which according to Divinity was cause of
his resurrection, as John says: No man takes it from me, but I lay it down
of my self. I have power to lay it down, and have power to take it again.

We confess also that he ascended into heaven, and sat at the right hand of
his Almighty Father, which ascension Christ made not according to his divine
nature (which was never out of heaven) but as he was man, for so he entered into
heaven, and by his own power ascended.

We confess further, that with great Majesty and glory he shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead: and to reward every man according to his works:
which are all matters of faith, and to be believed, and are taught in the
reformed Church. With true faith we embrace the Apostolic Creed, the Creed of
Nice, and Athanasius: And so to that Church, whose confession I find to be
agreeing and conformable to the holy Scriptures, I wholly yield and subscribe
unto.

But lest any man should think, that either for want, and necessity, or for
any horrible offense committed, and so for fear of punishment, I have left,
and separated my self from the Church of Rome, I will make short repetition of
what has befallen unto me, through the whole course of my life, even from my
infancy: not led by ostentation, or vain glory, but that in remembering the^,
I may be the more drawn to give humble and hearty thanks unto almighty God,
who has had such pity and compassion on me.

I was borne at Caesar Augusta (which is the chiefest place of the kingdom of
Arragon.) The day before the Calends of February, at two of the clock in the
afternoon, and in the year of our Lord 1567. of honorable parentage both by
father and mother, as is well known in my country, and by Gods providence
without any impediments or defects of nature: I was baptized in the parish
Church of Saint Giles, and confirmed by that excellent Prince Ferdinand Viceroy
of Arragon, and Archbishop of Caesar Augusta. From my infancy with my parents
great care and industry I was trained up in the doctrine and religion of the
Church of Rome, and with my years my knowledge thereof was much increased, and
I did reverence the same with such honor and ardency, as no other religion
appeared unto me so profitable or pleasing.

My father departed out of this life when I was but 16 years of age; but my
mother as she was careful I should be brought up and instructed after the
customs of the Romish Church (for she was full of zeal and devotion,) so was
I taught Music and Military discipline, and other exercises of body, to my
age best fitting and agreeable. I was still sollicitous to read books of
Christian Religion, and to take counsel and be conversant with such men as
seemed to me to be honest, and learned: So that desire of further knowledge
daily increased in me. The respect therefore of all temporal goods being laid
aside, I wholly applied my self to be in the number and society of them, whom
they of Rome call and account Religious: and contrary to my mothers mind, or
the good will of my brethren and kinsfolks, I followed the Religion of S.
Francis, and with all alacrity and willingness of heart, I entered the
Monastery of Jesus. Which when my mother heard of, she was moved with much
sorrow, and both by her words and deeds showed that I had greatly displeased
her. Yet she loved me dearly, and always hoped of me to be a refuge and
succor to her age. Having therefore taken counsel, accompanied with a Noble
woman (her sisters daughter) she came to the Coue^t, with an intent to alter my
purpose, and both of them Ad conuentumm
labored byall that prayers or entreaties, or fair promises, might effect, to
draw me from that vndertake^ resolution. But I was so constant in my devotion
of that Monasticke life, as neither my mothers lamentations, or large gifts
proffered unto me, could work alteration of my mind. So for that time she
departed, but upon further counsel and advice taken, she came thither again
with a great troop attending her, with purpose in deed to have taken me away
by force and violence. Which when I and the religious men of the Monastery
perceived, we hindered their determinations, so as my mother by no means could
obtain her purpose. But she took it so grievously, that for the space of many
days she fell into an extreme frenzy.

Having recovered her health and senses again, she still continued her means
and devices to change my mind, and used the same almost a whole year, so that
at length she compelled me to forsake the Monastery. Nevertheless I promised
such as I left behind me, to return again with what speed I might possibly.
But I became somewhat forgetful of my promise, by reason that at that time, my
country presented unto me many objects of pleasure and delectation. For there
were great triumphs and solemnities for the celebration of the marriage of
Katherine daughter to king Philip the second, with Charles Duke of Sabaud: with
which my mind was much carried away and distracted.

But my former purpose and my continued devotion urging me, I performed my
promise, and with great joy of those Religious men that expected me, I returned
back to the Monastery, where I lived a while in much gladness and
contentment. But after a certain time I left the Monastery again, by some
occasion of business, and retaining my first religious purpose, I be took my
self to the Religion of the holy Trinity, and was received in the Convent of
Caesar Augusta in the year of our Lord 1585. I made choice of this Order, for
the singular devotion thereof. The Prelate and other religious men of the same
Monastery for many causes were desirous of my continuance amongst them. I
therefore began to apply my studies to humanity, till at Valence by the
diligence of my Tutor, and my own great labor, I attained to some perfection
of Logic and Philosophy. Afterward I was sent to that famous university of
Illerd: where I wholly dedicated my self to Divinity, and having passed the
several terms and courses of Disputations, Exercises, and Lectures, I was
commended to be one of the best in Theology. For which I gave God hearty
thanks: for these beginnings broughtme in the end to know those things which
my soul ever thirsted after.

These foundations laid, I was so well esteemed of, that I was called to the
Ministry, contrary to their own orders and institutions, which forbid any man
that dignity under the age of 33 years. But the Provincial did willingly
dispense with me, and so I was made Minister of the Monastery of Liria: About
three years after, I was made Minister of another monastery of higher
dignity, called Nuestra senora de las sogas, in which time by occasion of some
contrary occurrents that befell concerning our Order, by certain learned
Prelates, and very great men, I was chosen Ambassador to the Reverend General
of our Order, abiding then at Paris: which I discharged, by Gods assistance,
though with great danger of my life. After I had obtained the presence of our
General, he lent such attention to the complaints delivered by me, that he
dispatched me with expedition and order for such as were troublesome and
ignorant of obedience: and gave me full power, and orders, for the reading of
Divinity.

Graced with all these titles, and additions of dignity, and preferment, I
returned again into Spain: But I had not long stayed there, when upon
instance of other weighty occasions that concerned our Order, I was sent again
to the General, with two other grave Ministers in my company. Him I found so
kind, and loving, and so respective of me, that whatsoever belonged to the
government of the Province, I obtained at his hands. He created me at that time
both Master and Doctor (which with us is a matter of much honor and
commodity.) But after my return into the Province (which contains under it
the kingdoms of Arragon, Valence, Catalonia, and Mallorica) by commandment
which I had received from the General, there was a Convocation had for the
election of the Provincial; and the choice fell to M. Stephen Bertiz, a Noble
man, of very great learning, and my especial good friend. He for the love he
bare me, made me chief Secretary of the Province. A little while after the
religious men of our Monastery of Dertasa, made me Minister (which in the Order
of the holy Trinity, is as high a place as theirs is, who in the orders of
other monasteries are called Priors, Wardens, Abbots, Prelates, etc.) and
created me also the chief of the house. That I might not seem unthankful, I
took upon me that charge, and in the College of the same City I was made
Doctor. Afterward (unknown to me) both by the Church and Citizens of
Vernauen, far enough distant from my house, I had the charge given me of
their Church, and of the preaching of the Lent sermons. And that I might wholly
consecrate my self to preaching and reading, and not be hindered by any other
care of rule or government, (which is much contrary to the profession of
learning) I left the monastery of Dert, and resigned my office of ministry.

In the monastery also of Valence, which is the chiefest monastery of all the
Province, where are resident to the number of 50 Preachers, Doctors of
Divinity, and others most approved men for learning, there was an assembly had
for the election of one that should be Minister and Head of that monastery;
and the 26 day of April, in the year 1601, that lot fell to my share. So
consequently all the goods and riches of the monastery were put into my hands
and possession, as well of silver and gold-plate, as of other precious
ornaments, treasure, and sums of money, with which the same monastery is richly
furnished: For it has yearly to be laid forth and distributed by the Minister
4000 crowns a year. In the time that I was Minister of Valence, I was often
created visitor of the houses, and with the fullness of power made Vicar
Prouincial of all the four kingdoms. And lastly, the 8 day of November in the
year 1602, with general and Apostolic power was constituted visitor of
certain monasteries within the limits of the Province. I was greatly beloved
of the General, and other Prelates and Religious men of that Order which in
times past I professed, and was well accepted with Ecclesiastical governors.

Gal. 6* 14.
But as S. Paul says, God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. In the knowledge whereof, and in the glory of the cross of Christ, I
would not delay, but pay my first fruits unto the Lord, who says, Thou shall
not be Exodus 22. 29.
slack to pay thy first fruits. Which is nothing else, but to auert and turn
from the way of wickedness, and to follow and embrace the way of the Lord.

If for this alteration of my estate, I should make any reckoning of this
world: alas, how many should I see to rise against me* my friends are become my
enemies, my kinsfolks strangers, all leave and forsake me, all despise me, and
call me heretic: but I will answer with the Prophet David, My Psalm 26. 10.
father and mother have for saken me, but the Lord has taken me up. I will not
strive to please them, as Paul says, If I should Gal. 1. 10.
yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ. I had rather displease men,
then follow lies and untruths with them, seeing the Prophet David does
encourage us, saying: O ye Psalm. 4. 3*
sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame, loving vanity, and
seeking lies? I now desire to continue in this truth, that the curse of God may
not be laid upon me, who says, Cursed is every man, that continues not in all
things, which are Gal. 3. 10.
written in the book of the Law, to do them: And so with the Prophet, I rather
choose to be an abject in the house of my God, where his Gospel is sincerely
taught, then to dwell in the tabennacle of sinners, where the Gospel is
obscured, and made Psalm* 83. 11.
dark with fables, and false interpretations.

For even as the sundry and various expositions of the law make the law
doubtful and obscure; so the Gospel is dark, and made intricate by many
intepretations. I now therefore love, and embrace the truth. Now God has made
me partaker of his goodness, and his passion was not in vain for me. Now has
his goodness extended it self to communicate those things unto me, as were
determined for me in the beginning. In times past I was Saul, a persecutor of
Act. 11. 2.
the true Church; and as he went about to destroy the true doctrine of Christ,
so did I likewise both in my private and public Sermons and Exercises endeavor
to put down and annihilate that sound doctrine of the true reformed Church.
But now through the infinite mercy of God, I have (as Saul did) fallen to the
earth; and as he at Damascus, so have I at Rupell found Ananias, who has
taught me what to do, and removed the scales from mine eyes that hindered my
sight and understanding.

I look to be persecuted, and expect false censures and judgments to be
passed upon me: but what do I respect them? Did not Aaron speak against his
brother Moses? Number. 21. 1.
And did not God himself admonish Hieremiah to take heed of his kinsfolks,
saying: For even thy brethren, and the Hierem* 12. 6. Acts 11. 3.
house of thy father shall deate unfaithfully with thee? Did not Peter's friends
also contend against him, because he went in to men uncircumcised, and did eat
with them? So (me thinks) I see how they contend and cry out against me. (...)
God, who (as David says) is the father and helper of orphans and fatherless,
will not rest to defend and protect me. Oh my Lord God, of whom the Prophet
has said, that thou will save, and preserve them, that put their trust in
thee, My whole hope and confidence is in thee, and I stand in need of thy aid
and defense. Be unto me (oh Lord) as a shield, and buckler against those
roaring Lions that go about to Exodus 14* 30. and 15. 4. Dan. 13. 63. and 14. 39.
devour me. And as thou did deliver Moses out of the hand of Pharaoh,
Susanna from false judgment, and Daniel from the Lions den: so deliver me
from their hands. Give unto my soul the grace and gift of perseverance; and
grant that they who are yet blind may have their eyes opened, and at length
attain to the knowledge and wisdom of the truth, made known in thy Gospel.
In respect of thee (oh my God) I make account of nothing: I leave and forsake
all things* and hope not for any thing but thy glory. The honors which I had
in mine own country, I utterly despise; the dignity which I have hitherto
possessed, I am quite forgetful of; and forgo my quondam Provincial, who
ordained me to be his successor. My friends and all my kindred for thee I
contemn, and willingly reject for ever.

Phi. 3. 7.
For those things that were advantage unto me, the same I account loss for
Christ's sake, and do judge them to be dung: that I might win Christ, and be
found in him, with S Paul. And I will follow the true doctrine of Christ:
saying, If any man Luke 41. 26. Math* 10. 37.
come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife, and children, and
brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple.

I confess unto thee my Lord and my King, and I give praise unto thee my God,
and Savior* for that thou have delivered me from perdition, and from the
tongues of them that speak lies. Be a succor unto me, and a tower of defense
in the face of mine enemies, that I may constantly abide the slanders and
backbitings, wherewith I know they swarm and are full. Wherefore oh most
merciful God and loving Father, who in the multitude of thy mercies do put
out of thy remembrance the sins and iniquities of such as confess unto thee*
by the grant of thy pardon make void the imputation of all former offenses.
Look favorably upon thy servant, and give unto me that with true confession,
and contrition of heart, beg remission of my sins. Refresh and renew in me
(oh Father) whatsoever the devilish fraud and deceit of the Church of Rome
has distained and corrupted; and win a member of thy redemption, to the body
and unity of the true reformed Church.

We the Pastors, Seniours, and Deacons of the Church of Rochel, whose names
are here underwritten, do witness and make it known, that Martin Bartox has
made a summary confession of our faith, and publickely discovered* and utterly
renounced the errors of the Romish Church, before a great company of Gods
faithful servants, being then present, rejoicing and congratulating his
conversion: we witness further, that we have seen and heard to be performed,
whatsoever is herein made mention of, or set forth. From this City of Rochel:

Pastors I. Merlnius H. Colomozius S. Loumaeus L. Cerclerus
Seniors. Chalmotius Cl. Heralts I. Farnoulius I Bodierus I. Dournes Durantius.
Deacons. I. Agrestsns. A. Maquinus



FINIS.

